The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 5 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1910)
==========================================================
Vol. 5 of the Warner Shahnama. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Ld i i ee ee E 


Mi a a 


-——L --— 2 oe A il. 


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA | 

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA | 

ARCH AOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 


————— ooo 


| ACCESSION NO. 2544-9. 
| CALL No. Sa an 


i 
ae 


TRÜBNER'S 
ORIENTAL SERIES. - 


alAUlOOpX AIDE AIT 
otra tees (es PAAA 
THE e 


" 
7 


a 
Pe Wa bebe 


SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÉ 


a ve a 


DONE INTO ENGLISH BY 
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A. 
ARD 


EDMOND WARNER, B.A. 
11035449 


"The homes that are the dwellings of to-day 
Will sink ‘neath shower and runshine to decay, 
But storm and rain shall never mar what 1 
Havre huali—the palace of my poetry." 


DRYDEN € HOUBE, GERRARD STREET, W, 
1910 


"NTRAL ARCHATCLOGICAL 
LIBRARY, NEW DELHI. 
ioo. No. o DIANE eanas 
Datë. ..-...... g.: le . [269. ida saa ese 


Ql No s doma S 


The righta of translation and of reproduction 
on are reserved 


Printed by BattaxTrNE, HANSOM £& Co 
At tbe Ballantyne Press, Edinburgh E 


$?Y,; CONTENTS 


ABBREVIATION®@ . I l Pr o ! 
NOTE oN PRONUNCIATION : . ; S f : : 


THE KAIÁNIAN DYNASTY (continwed) 


(3U8HTÀSP— 


PaRT 


L Tae Comixa oF ZaARDUHSHT AND THE WAR 


WITH ARJÁSP 


zF 
=a 


j 


pe 


if. 


13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 


17. 
18. 


19. 


How Firdausi saw Dakiki in a Dream 

How Luhnisp went to Balkh and how Gush tap sat 
upon the Throne : 

How Zarduhsht appeared sud how Gushtdsp ag- 
cepted his Evangel . . . 

How Gushtásp refused to Arjásp the Tributefor Írín 


. How Arjüsp wrote a Letter to Gushtasp 
. How Arjásp sent Envoys to Gushtàsp . — , 


How Zarir made Answer to Arjisp . 


. How the Envoys returned to Arjasp with the Letter 


of Gushtisp . 5 dn 
How Gushtüsp assembled his Troops : 
How Jimisp foretold the Issue of the Battle to 
Guahtüsp . ; ; 
How Gushtisp and Arjiap My ed their Hosts : 


. The Beginning of the Battle between the Irdnians 


and Türánians, and how Ardshir, os and 
Shidasp were slain . . 
How Ginimi, Jiimaisp's Son, and Nivzàr were sikh 
How Zarir, the Brother of Gushtásp, was slain by 
Bidirafsh . : i 
How Asfandivir ae of the Slaying of Zarir 1 
How Asfandiyàr went to battle with Arjisp . . 
How Nastür and Asfandiyür slew Bidirafsh . 4 
How Arjisp fled from the Battle : 
How the Turkmans received EE finm A» 
fandiyir . `: : ; : : 


Li 


rA Y 


FAGE 


3I 
33 
37 
42 


43 
47 


48 
54 


i 


vi CONTENTS 


Part I. THE CowrxG or ZaRDUHSHT AND THE Wank wWiTH 
AnRJÀsP (contimueT) 
SECT. PAGE 
20. How Gushtisp returned to Balkh .  . 74 
21. How Gushtisp sent Asfandiyir to all the Provin, 
and how the Folk received from him the good 


Religion . . : . 976 
22. How Gurazm spake Evil ol Aende. I . "B 
23. How Jümisp came to Asfandiyár . v, I . 80 
24. How Gushtisp imprisoned Asiandiyir . —. 82 
25. How Gushtisp went to Bistin and how Ap 

arrayed his Host the second Time . . 85 


26. The Words of Dukiki being ended, Firdausi 
resumeth, praising Shih Mahmúd and criticis- 


ing Dakiki . ; : B7 
27. How the Host of Arjisp marched to Balkh and 

how Luhrásp was slain — . 89 
28. How Gushtásp heard of the Slaying of Lührüm 

and led his Army toward Balkh : : - 93 
29. How Gushtásp was pnt to Flight by Arjisp . . 96 
30. How Jümüsp visited Asfandiyir . , . 98 


31. How Asfandiyiir saw his Brother Farshidward . 103 
32. How Asfandiyár came to the Mountain toGushtásp 106 
33. How Gushtüsp sent Asfandiyár the second Time to 

fight Arjisp — . . : . ef | = H4 


Pant II. Tug Story or THe Seven STAGES 
L. The Praise of Mahmúd the great King . : E. 


Tur SgevES SraGES OF AsFANDIYÁR— 
2. The First Stage. How Asfandiyár slew two Wolves 119 
3. The Second Stage. How Asfandiyürslew two Lions 124 
4. The Third Stage. How Asfandiyár slew a Dragon 125 
$. The Fourth Stage. How Asfandiyir slew a Witch 128 
6. The Fifth Stage. How Asfandiyir slew the 


. Simurgh . 131 

7. The Sixth Stage. How isnat EE through 
the Snow . ; 134 

8. The Seventh Stage. How Asfandiyár crossed the 
Rivor and slew Gurgsir . . 139 

9. How Asfandiyür went to the Brazen Hold ii in the 
Guise of a Merehant . — . . 143 


10. How tho Sisters of Asfandiyár recognised him » 47 


CONTENTS 


Part II. THE Srory or THE Seven Sraces (continued) 


12. 
i> 


13. 


How Bishutan assaulted the Brazen Hold 
How Asfandiyir slew Arjasp . 
How Asfandiyir slew Kuhram 


14. How Asfandiyir wrote a Letter to Gushtésp and 


his Answer . : I : 
How Asfandiyir dires to Gushtásp 


vii 


PAGE 
150 
152 
155 


159 
161 


Part I. Tae Stony or AsraxprvAr’s Ficut wira Resta 


I. 


M 


L4- 


15. 


16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20, 
Z1. 
22. 


RRG 


How Asfandiyir ambitioned the Throne and how 
Gushtásp took Counsel with the Astrologers . 

How Asfandiyir demanded the aoe from his 
Father . . . 

How Gushtisp anawered hia Bon : | i 

How Katdyin counselled Asiandiyir 

How Asfandiyár leda Host to Zibul — . 

How Asfandiyir sent Bahman to Rustam 

How Bahmancameto 4il =. 

How Bahman gave the Message to indem 

How Kustam made Answerto Asfandiyir . — 

How Bahman returned . : 


. The Meeting of Rustam and Asfindivit : 
. How Asfandiyir summoned not Rustam to the 


Feast : 

How Asfandiyár iux himself for not i 
Rustam to the Feast ; 

How Asfandiyir spake Shame ot the Race of 
Rustam . 

How Rustam anawered Asfandiyér, HAGUE hi own 
Race and his Deeds .  . Eve 

How Asfandiyár boasted of his As 

How Rustam vaunted his Valour 

How Rustam drank Wine with Asfandiyar 

How Rustam returned to his Palace 4 

How Zál counselled Rustam ; : 

How Rustam fought with Asfandiyár — . 

How the Sons of Asfandiyir were slain by Zawira 
and Farimarz . : : : ; 

How Rustam fled to the Heights . : 

How Rustam took Counsel with his Kin 


. How the Simurgh succoured Kustam — . í : 


How Rustam went back to fight Asfandiyir . — . 


167 


170 
173 
175 
177 
179 
182 
184 
187 
Too 
192 


196 
198 
a 


207 
204 
210 
215 
218 
pea 


225 
229 


^ 


235 


Vili CONTENTS 


Pant Ill. Tue Srony or AsraxprrAr’s Ficat wirn 
Restau (continued) 
SECT. 
27. How Rustam shot Asfandiyir in the Eyes with an 
Arrow : ‘ 
28. How Asfandiyir told his last Wishes to Rustam È 
29. How Bishütan bare the Coffin of Asfandiyür to 
Gushtásp . A a . 
3o. How Rustam sent Bahman back to dun ets 


Part IV. Tae Story or Rustam AND SHAGHÀD 

1. The Prelude . 

2. How Rustam went to Kabul on i behalf of hia Brother 
Shaghid ` . CT ME 

3 How the King of Kabul dug Pits i in n the Bunting 
ground and how Rustam and Zawira fell therein 

4. How Rustam slew Shaghid and died 

5. How Hil received News of the Slaying of Rustam 
and Zuwira, and how Farimarz brought their 
Coffins and set them in the Charnel-house . 

6. How Farimarz led an Army to avenge Rustam and 


slew the King of Kibul . , 
7. How Ridiba lost her Wits through Morro for 
Rustam. 


8. How E: wave the Kingdom to Bahman sid 
died 


È $ Li = = 


Bauman, Son or AsFANDIYÁR 

1. How Bahman sought Sene for the Death of 
Asfandiyár ; JM are : 

2. How Bahman put Zál in Bonds 
3} How Farimarz fought with Bahman and was a pub 
to Death . a A : 
+ How Bahman released Zál and A to İrin . 
- How Bahman married his own daughter Humii 


and appointed his Successor . . . , 

Ht ar 
1. How Humíi cast away her son Dáráb on the River 
Farát in an Ark ; i ; 


2. How the Launderer brought up Dáráb EA E 
3 How Dárib questioned the Launderer's Wife about 


his e UN NA how he fought against the 
HRümans . . : z7 qa 


243 
247 


251 
256 


263 
268 
271 
273 
276 
278 
279 
283 
285 


287 
288 


290 


294 
gh 


f 


4. How Rashnawád learned the Case of Dirib . 


5. How Düráb fought against the Host of Rim . 
De eet ec, cae ees 


ABBREVIATIONS 
C.—Macan's edition of the Shahndma, 
L.—Lumsden's do. 
P.—Mohl's do, 
á T.—Tihrán do. 
V.—Vullers’ do. 


BGDF. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, 
By Edward Gibbon. Edited by J. B. Bury, M.A. 

BLHP. A Literary History of Persia. By Edward G. Browne, 
M.A. 

DZA. Professor Darmesteter's Trans. of the Zandavasta in the 
Sacred Books of the East. References to Parts! and 
pages. 

GYZ. Geiger: Das Yitkir-i Zaririn und sein Verhiltniss zum 
Bühnüme, Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-philolo- 
gischen und historischen Classe der k. b. Akademie der 
Wissenschaften zu München. 1890. Bd. IL. Heft I. 
p. 43. 

HEP. Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion 
of the Parsis. By Martin Hang, Ph.D. Edited and 
enlarged by E. W. West, Ph.D. 

HLP. The Legend of Perseus. By E. 5. Hartland, 

HEYVP. Veterum Persarum .,. . Religionis Historia. Ed. 2nd, 
By Thomas Hyde. 

JZ. Zoroaster. By A. V. Williams Jackson, 

MHP, History of Persia. By Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B, 

MM.  Magoudi: Les Prairies d'Or. Texte et Traduction par O, 
Barbier de Meynard et Pavet de Courteille, 


O —————S——————— M AMT E E 
1 The second edition of Part L is referred to unless otherwise 


¢ As 


NIN. 
NT. 


RR. 


RP. 
SM. 


WPR. 


WPT. 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Nildeke. 

Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden. 
Aus der Arabischen Chronik des Tabari übersetzt und 
mit ausführlichen Erlauterungen und Ergänzungen 
versehn von Th. Nildeke. 

The Koran: Translated from the Arabic. By J. M. 
Rodwell. Second edition. 

Records of the Past. First Series. 

History of the Early Kings of Persia. ... Translated 
from the original Persian of Mirkhond . . . By David 

. 

The Dabistón ... translated . .. by David Shea and 
Anthony Troyer. 

In the Land of the Lion and Sun. . . . By O. J. 
Wills, M.D. 

The Pársi Religion. By John Wilson. 

Dr. E. W. West's Trans., of the Pahlavi Texts in the Sacred 
Books of the East. Reference to Parts and pages. 

Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo'hammed-Ben-Djarir-Ben- 
Vezid Tabari. "Traduite sur la version Persane d'Abou- 
'Ali Mo'hammed Bel'ami par M. Hermann Zotenberg. 


NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 


as in “ water.” 

asin “pique.”  - 

as in “rude.” 

as in “servant.” 

as in " sin," 

w as in "foot." 

ai as in "time." 

crit ng ow in “cloud.” 

g is always hard as in “give.” 
kh as ch in the German * buch." 
zh as sin “agura,” 


t 


on ? $« ] l 


8-1 P e Á 
US ILL " 


CE y "LUN Tw Ty iT — mem 5D - -— 
} re 1 Lr "- ios A um» , i 


XV 
GUSHTÁSP 


HE REIGNED ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 
YEARS 


ARGUMENT 


Tho advent of Zarduhsht is described. Gushtisp is converted, 
and war ensues between him and the Türánian king Arjüsp. 
Gushtásp is helped out of many straits by his valiant son, Asfan- 
diyir, who is incited to exertion by the promise of the kingship. 
Gushtásp, however, always finds fresh excuses for delaying his 
own abdication, and at length, being much pressed by Asfandiyar, 
sends him to bring Rustam in chains to court, with tragic results 
to ull parties concerned. Gushtisp bestows the kingship on 
Bahman, the son of Asfandiyár, and dies. 


NOTE 


The reign of Gushtísp falls naturally into four Parts. It is 
not, however, ao divided, as indicated by the independent num- 
bering of the couplets of each Part, either in the Vullers-Landauer 
text, from which our translation is made, or in that of Mohl. In 
Macan's edition the couplets are not numbered. The division 
into Parts is a convenient arrangement. We have adopted it 
in the present instance, and propose to do so in future cases when 
the reign is long and the subject-matter lends itself to such 
treatment. 

To the student of the Sháhnáma the reign is one of much interest 
for many reasons, It contains a fine example of poetie justice, 
inasmuch as Gushtdsp, having embittered the life of his own 
father,’ now finds himself, owing to rash promises, placed in 
a similar quandary with regard to his own son, Asfandiyár. 
There is the question, too, as to the position that he occupies 


1 Soe Vol, iv. p. 318 s. * Bee pp. 66, 97, 107, 114. 


- -— 


fo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


from the standpoint of history. We have the account of the 
&dvent of Zarduhsht (Zoroaster), his preaching and the conse- 
quent conversion of Gushtüsp, and, what renders this still more 
interesting, not in Firdausi's own words but in those of his con- 
temporary Dakiki, whose untimely death gave Firdausi the great 
opportunity of his lite—one of which he was prompt to avail 
himself, Here, too, for the first time, we are enabled to comp 
the Shihnima with an extant Pahlavi version of the same subject- 
matter, and can see for ourselves how closely Dakiki followed his 
authorities, just as later on we shall be enabled to compare 
Firdausi's own work with a similar extant Pahlavi version, when 
wa come to the Ashkinian dynasty and the account therein given 
of the rise to power of Ardshir Pipakin, the founder af, the 
Básinian dynasty. Here, too, the great champion of priestly tradi- 
tion—Asfandiyir—is introduced and brought face to face with 
the great hero of popular tradition—Rustam. In this reign, too, 
the long life of the latter hero comes to an end, and Firdausi 
tells us whence he obtained the information that enabled, him 
to include his account of that end in the poem. We havo diso 
in his continuation of Dakiki what we may regard, not, indeed, 
ns the earliest of his literary efforts, but the earliest in intentional 
connexion with the Shihnima It is interesting, too, to compare 
the styles of the two poets, though that is rather for the student 
of the original than for the reader of the translation. 

For Gushtásp, see VoL ii p.9. We may, however, add a few 
words on the way in which some of the more salient features of 
the historical epoch associated with the names of Cyrus and 
Darius Hystaspis are indicated in the legendary accounts of Kai 
Khusrau, Luhrásp, and Gushtásp. The Achmmenids, as is well 
known, ruled in a double collateral line—an elder and a younger. 
With the death of Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, the elder line 
came to an end. The rightful heir, so to speak, was the head 
of the younger line—Hystaspes—a man, as later events showed, 
not lacking in vitality and courage, for ns Governor of Parthia 
he maintained the cause of his house energetically during the 
troublous times that followed the accession of hia more famous 
son, Darius L, to the throne. Why Hystaspes stood aside in 
favour of his son it is difficult to see, but the facts, if we leave 
out of account the reign of Cambyses, seem clearly reproduced 
in legendary form in the Shihnáma. Kai Khusrau, before his 
passing, appointed a distant, little-known Kaiinian collateral— 
Luhrisp—to succeed him, but Luhrisp was overshadowed com- 
pletely by his more famous son, Gushtüsp, in whose favour 
ultimately he retired. In a time of stress later on, however, he is 


represented as fighting gallantly. Again, the period ushered in 


LAU QE 4 uie eee) 
a - 1 " v. : I 


~ o a bi 


GUSHTASP tt 


by the death of Cambyses was one of great religious and political 
disturbance. Magism became very prominent in the person of 
the false Smerdis, and, whatever interpretation we put upon tho 
statement in the Bihistün inscription, that ho destroyed the 
temples of the gods and that Darius restored them,’ it is evident 
that some grave religious question was at stake. Further, the 
accession of Darius was the signal fora series of revolts extending 
over several years and involving nearly the whole empire. It was 
only after a most desperate struggle that the genius of Darius 
triumphed. Among his other enemies, he had to contend against 
a the northern foe— the Scythians—and later on led a famous expe- 

dition against them to the banks of the Danube. These three 
features of his reign—the religious question, civil war, and wars 
with the Scythians—are all indicated in a legendary form in the 
reign of Gushtisp. The religious question is very prominent, the 
civil war is represented by the fact that the leaders on both sides 
have Persian names,’ while the wars themselves are waged ugainst 
a northern foe, Again, the information that we possess seems to 
indicate that Darius was the Constantine the Great of his time, 
and changed his religion in the course of his reign? just as 
Gushtásp is represented as doing in the Sháhnáma. Zarduhsht 
“came” to Darius in a spiritual sense just as he came in the 
flesh, traditionally, to Gushtasp. Lastly, Darius married the: 
widow of Cambyses—Atossa. There is no trace of this in the 
Shihnima, where Gushtdsp is represented as marrying Cmsar's 
daughter, Katdyiin, but it is worth mentioning with a view of 
connecting him with Darius Hystaspis that, as West has sug- 
gested,‘ the name of Gushtdsp's wife in the Zandavasta—Hutaosa 
— bears a striking resemblance to that of Darius wife. 

Many of the chief characters of this reign appear in the Zanda- 
vasta, with the exception of Zál and his descendants, who were 
either not known to, or were ignored by, its compilers. Luhrásp 
appears as Aurvat-aspa, but is mentioned merely as the father of 
Gushtdsp. 

Gushtásp, who appears as Vistaspa, had one of its Books—the 
Vistisp-xist—named after him. It dealt with his conversion by 
Yarduhsht (Zoroaster) and his subsequent war with Arjasp. It 
is partly extant. Gushtasp has the distinction of appearing in 
the Gáthas—the oldest part, as generally is held, of the Zanda- 
vasta. Elsewhere in it he is represented as praying that he may 


t Bae Vol. L p. 58. ® fd. ii. 9. 
3 H.i. $9. t WPT, ¥. 71, note. 
è DZA, i, xxxvi, ii, 324 #7- 


d d y me T 
1 y=- 


| WE 


uv J^ TUTTA 


12 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


overcome and put to flight Arjisp and others! His triumph over 
them also is recorded.* 

Zarir, Gushtásp's brother, appears as Zairi-vairi, and is repre- 
sented as offering up sacrifices that he may overcome Arjásp." 

Asfandiyár, the most famous of Gushtásp's sons, appears as 
Spentó-dita. He is not nearly so much in evidence as one would 
expect in view of the important place that he occupies in later 
tradition, where he becomes a sort of Zoroastrian Khalid, spreading 
the Faith with fire and sword. The chief credit is given to Gush- 
tisp himsdélf. | 

Bishütan, Asfandiyir's brother, appears as Peshó-tanu, and is 
described as exempt, like Kai Khusrau, from sickness and death." 

Gurazm, probably another brother, though the Sháhnáma leaves 
the exact relationship indefinite, appears as “the holy Kavirazem."* 
In the Sháhnáma, however, he has an evil reputation as the 
slanderer of Asfandiyir, who in consequence is imprisoned by 
Gushtásp. 

Hurmdái, Asfandiyár's sister, appears ns Huma.' 

Nastür, Zarir's son, seems to be the same as "the holy Basta- 
vairi"* [If so, we should read Bastür for Nastür, 

Jümüsp, Gushtásp's chief minister, is mentioned in the Gathas 
as well as elsewhere in the Zandavasta. He married one of 
Zarduhsht's daughters" wrote down the Zandavnasta,^ and suc- 
ceeded the Prophet as high priest of Irin."! Further mention 
will be made of him, Gushtásp, Asfandiyár, and Bishütan below. 

Arish, who is merely referred to, appears in the Zandavasta as 
Erekhsha khshwiwi-ishush, and in Pahlaví as Arish Shívütir, i.c. 
* Árish of the swift arrow." He was a famous Irinian archer, and 
after a war, not mentioned in the Shühnáma, between Minüchihr 
and Afrisiyib, was deputed to settle the frontier between Trin 
and Türán, by shooting an arrow from the top of Mount Damui- 
wand, the boundary to be wherever the arrow fell. He shot 
accordingly. The arrow flew eastward from dawn till noon, and 
then dropped on the banks of the Jíhün (Oxus).'* 

In the Zandavasta, as we have seen already, the foes of the 
Trinians, eg. Zohhik “ and Afnisiydib," offer sacrifices and pray for 
boons in just the same way as tho Irinians themselves do, and to 
the same divine beings. Similarly we find Arjisp and his brother 
Andarimán, who appear in the Zandavaapa ns ia and 


1 DZA, i. 79,117. * Jd. 306. 3 Id. So. 
4 Id. 207. 5 Id. 329. © Id. 207. 
* Id. 124. * Id, 207 and note. * JZ, 21. 
9 Id. 117. a Jd. 136. " DZA, ii. 95 and note. 


" Vol. i, p. 142. 8 JH, iv, 137. 


GUSHTASP 13 


Vandaromaini respectively, praying for victory over Gushtisp and 
Zariri It should bè mentioned, however, that Arjisp is not 
called a Tuürínian, as Afrásiyib is, but a Aryaona.’ Who the 
Hvyaonas were is a disputed point. Their name has suggested 
both the Hiong-Nu of Chinese records, who may or may not have 
been the Huns,‘ and the Chionitie of Ammianus Marcellinus, who 
refers to their political relations with the Sisinian Shih Sapor IL 
im the middle of the fourth century 4.0." The identification of 
the Hryaonas—the Khyóns of the Pahlavi Texts and of the 
Nütkür-i-Zarirín *—with the Chionitm is a very probable one, and 
bears out the view adopted in this work that the legends of the 
Bháhnáma originated, and its chief scene of action lay, at least 
during most of the mythical period, west of the Caspian.’ The 
Chionitee are associnted with the Gelani or people of Gilin, by 
Ammianus Marcellinus,’ and Gushtisp is represented in the 
Zandavasta as praying behind the river Düitya for victory over 
them." It is certain that the Düitya, which has been identified 
with the Aras,’ the Kur, and the Safid Rid," is to be looked for 
to the west of the Caspian. It is true that in another passage 
. .Gushtísp is represented as praying by Lake Frazdinava for 
victory over Arjisp and other foes, and that in the Pahlavi 
Texts this lake is described as being in Sagastdn (Sistán)," but 
the tendency at present seems to be in favour of identifying it 
with the Armenian river Hrazdin," which will bring it into line 
with the other passages. It is only natural that the Chionite 
should leave their traces in Persian tradition, as they came on the 
arene at the epoch when the Zandavasta was being compiled.” 
They are not mentioned by numo in the Shihndima, but in Dakikl's 
portion a peculiar word, “ Paighü," not found elsewhere in the poem, 
or at all events not in the texts used in the present translation, 
is occasionally employed with reference to the northern enemy. 
Zarduhsht or Zardusht, as the name is varyingly spelt in 
the Sháhnüma, but more familiarly known to western renders as 
Zoronster, naturally dominates the Zandavasta, of which he is the 
traditional author, His name therein appears as Zarathushtra, 
and many scholars have exercised their ingenuity as to its meaning. 
Perhaps the best interpretation divides the word into "rar" and 


| DZA, ii. 8o. 3 Eqs dd. E14. 3 fd. 117- 


4 BGDF, iii 493. — à Bk. xvi. c. 9, xvii. 5, xviii. 6 seg. 

* Bee p. 24. 

* Bee Vol. L pp. 16 seg, 71, 1i. p. 336, iv. p. 135. 

* Bk. xvii. c. 5. * DZA,ii 117,280. !9 fd. i, 4, mote. 

1'JZ, 197 and note. "* DHA, il 79. 5 WFT, i. 86. 

ii JZ, 211 and note, 220, 221. 1 See Vol i. p. 63. 
= 


2.2 & he 74 Tq "Figs 


14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


"ushtra." The reader may be reminded, that Sim, on recover- 
ing his outcast son, gave him the name of Zál-i-zar or Zál the old.! 
5 Dahtra" is the ancient form of the modern “ ushtar,” camel. 
Zarathushtra therefore seems to mean “Old Camel,” or “ He whose 
camels are old." For reasons sufficiently weighty at the time 
when the Shihnima was written, the account given of him in that 
poem is of the briefest, and it is proposed therefore to amplify 
it from other traditional sources. According to these he was 
born in Ec, 66o0—the year of the accession of Sháh Gushtásp.* 
His fathers name was Pourushaspa,! his mother's Dughdhivi" 
His father's home seems to have been situated in a valley* on 
the upper bank of the river Dareja, best identified with the 
modern Daryni Rüd, also known as the Kara su, or “ Blackwater,” 
which flows from Mount Savalin, northward to the Aras,’ His 
mother, Dughdhova, seems to have been a native of the city or 
district of Rai, near Tihrin. Being the highly favoured among 
women as the destined mother of the Prophet, the divine Glory 
rested on her in a visible form from her birth. The demons, in- 
stinctively aware that it would not be to their interests to ignore 
this portent, smote the district where she lived with three 
plagues—excessive cold, pestilence, and oppressive enemies—and 
then suggested to the inhabitants that the girl was a witch, and 
therefore the cause of the trouble. Pourushaspa did his best to 
defend his daughter, affirming that such a radiance as proceeded 
from her was too brilliant to be accounted for on the score of 
witchcraft, but, owing to the pertinacity of the demons, thè inter- 
ference of the Karap and Kavig of tho district, and the secret 
purpose of Providence to confound the wicked by their own 
devices, the girl was sent away to the house of her future father- 
in-law, thus directly bringing about the very result that the 
demons were most anxious to avoid.". The Karaps and Kavigs, so 
called in the Pahlavi Texts, appear in the Zandavasta as Karpans 
and Kavis. The Karaps seem to have been the orthodox witch- 
doctors, or medicine-men, of a time when the separation, still m- 
complete, of the crafts of the priest, the leech, and the witch, not 
even had begun, and naturally they are held up to execration by 
the later orthodox Zoroastrian clergy. The Kavigs, equally repro- 
bated, perhaps represented tho lay official element." The village 
to which the maligned maiden was exiled was the home of a 
family or clan called, from their eponymous ancestor, “ Spitimas.” 
Zarduhsht thus became known to future times as Zarathushtra 


i Vol. L p. 248. : WPT, Woy) MELE ? DZA, 1. 211. 

t WPT, iiL 302. 5 Fd. v. at. * DZA, i. 211. 

7 Jd. xlix.; rst. ed. JZ, 194. * Id. 193. 

, WPT, V. 18 p. m Id. I9, nage, 
.* 


GUSHTASP I5 


Spitàma. Urmuzd,it should be stated, had begun, in consultation 
with the ameshaspentas, to make arrangements for his birth 5970 
years before it occurred.! The procedure involved being some- 
what complex,” it will sufice to say that the maiden Dugh- 


dhóvá was in due course espoused to Pourushaspa," that for three . 


days before the Prophet came into the world the village was all 
luminous with the divine Glory to the great terror of the inhabi- 
tants,'and that the babe was born laughing, to the discomfiture of 
the seven midwives that were in attendance.’ Dughdhivi was 
fifteen years old when her son was born, and from that moment 
the divine Glory, which had encompassed her from her birth, 
passed to him.* The situation seems to have been altogether too 
much for Pourushaspa, who appears to have felt and acted just as 
Sim did on the occasion of the birth of Zál' Especially, he was 
perturbed at the laughter of the babe at birth, and was only too 
eager to be rid of his uncanny offspring. Accordingly, he called 
in the most famous medicine-man of the district, by name Duürás- 
róbó, who at once attempted to lay violent hands upon the babe, 
but they became so twisted that he never could feed himself 
again." He, however, so wrought upon the father that the latter 
tried several times to put the child to death. He made a pyre 
of wood and laid Zarduhsht thereon; placed him on a narrow 
path and drove cattle along it; set him beside a pocl and brought 
horses to water there; but all his endeavours proved fruitless. 
The fire would not burn the babe, while the foremost ox and horse 
stood over him till the rest of the herds had passed. "The child 
was then left in the den of a wolf, whose cubs just before had been 
slaughtered, but on each occasion the babe was recovered unhurt 
by the devoted mother, who indignantly informed her spouse that 
he was worse than the wolf! * Durisréb6 then brought upon the 
scone a malignant disciple of his own named Brüdrók-résh, a sort 
of Balaam, who, though willing to injure Zarduhsht, yet was im- 
yelled to proclaim his future greatness. These two and the father 
i rued, but all their plans were frustrated and their argu- 
ments ndi by the growing child. At length Dürásróbó eame to 
a bad end,'* but Brüdrók-résh lived to be the slayer of the Prophet. 
Zarduhsht had four brothers, two elder, of course by another wife 
of his father's, and two younger." When he was fifteen years old, 
he and his brothers asked their father to bestow portions upon 
them, and he did so. Part of what was divided consisted of 


ee: 


1 WPT, v., xxviii. * fd. 17, 18, 21; JZ, 24. : WPT, v. 25, 


i Id. 30. * fd. 35. * JZ, 24. 
T Bee Vol i p. 239 «cq. * WPT, v. 36. S Ta. 36 aeq. 
fd. 40 seq. a fd. 126, 13 Jd. tag. 


x = Y rm 


= vo Rt UNT MP V A 
, à' » 


16 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


raiment, and from this Zarduhsht selected and assumed the girdle 
—ü symbolical act like that of the assumption of the sacred cord 
by the twice-born in India. At the age of twenty he left his 
parents' house without their permission, and began the years of 
preparation that was to end in divine illumination later on. Of 
this period little is recorded except that he went about doing 
good, helping the weak and nged, and in times of scarcity giving 
his father's fodder to feed other men's cattle, which were so hungry 
that, as the original record puts it, they constantly ate oif each 
other's tails! He is said also to have abandoned worldly desires, 
but this did not prevent his marrying, partly, as it would seem, 
to please his parents, He showed, however, his good sense by 
asking to see the face of the proposed bride before espousing her. 
Also he attended the assembly of the wise, and asked them ques- 
tions.* On the day Dai pa Mihr of the month Ardibihisht, or, 
in our prosaic modern equivalent, on May 5th, Bc, 630, when he 
was thirty years old, the Revelation came to him. The ame- 
shaspenta Vohu Manau (Vohüman, Bahman)? met him in the 
neighbourhood, probably, of the Safíd Rüd, or White River, in 
Arzarbáijin, and bore him to the presence of Urmuzd and to 
the other five ameshaspentas — When Zarduhsht arrived within 
twenty-four feet of them, he ceased to see his own shadow on the 
ground owing to the universally diffused radiance that proceeded 
from*them. In the conference with Urmuzd that ensued, Zar- 
duhsht was informed that the three perfections of the embodied 
world were good thoughts, good words, and good deeds; that to 
recognise the ameshaspentas as such, 1.«. as immortal benefactors, 
was good ; that to behold them was better; and that to obey them 
was best of all He was instructed also in the doctrine of 
Dualism. The vision occurred thrice on that day, and Zarduhsht 
underwent three ordeals— wulking on fire, having molten metal 
poured on his chest and holding it in his hand, and being wounded 
with a knife and healed by the passing of hands over the place, 
so that in time to come the faithful also might be enabled to 
endure the like for the glory of the good religion," Inspired 
by this revelation, Zarduhsht began his missionary labours, 


! Cf, "the animals were so hungry that they bit one anothgr's 
tails. . . . One horse had actually not a bair left on his tail.” Sven 
Hedin, Trana- /imalaya, p. 160. 

1 WPT, v: 151 &q. ? Bee Vol, iii, p. 271. 5 JZ. 4t, 197. 

* WPT, ¥. 154 #¢g. In the reign of BShápür, son of Urmuzd (Sapor II. 
A.D, 309-379), the saintly Adartedd, son of Mahraspand, underwent the 
ordeal of having molten metal poured upon his breast and came out 
of it triumphant. DZA, L, xIvL ; WPT, iii. r71, and note. 


GUSHTASP 17 


attempting in the first instance to convert tho assembled Kavigs 
and Karaps. He appealed to them to accept the religion of 
Urmuzd, to forego demon-worship, and to adopt the principle of 
next of kin marriages, With regard to this last article, it is difi- 


| ult to rise superior to inherited taboos and not feel a certain ‘ae 
| sympathy with Zarduhsht's hearers when we read that at this y^ 
point they rushed upon him and strove to put him to death.! pe! 
We may, however, nequit Zarduhsht, or a£ least the Zarathushtra > 
of the Githas, of ever having advocated such a doctrine, first on ny 
the general principle that it never would have occurred to one ty 
who not yet had made a single disciple, it being a device far more T 
suitable to a Faith in exíremis, and secondly, because it ia not Zu 
advocated in the Gáthas themselves. Next of kin marriages, of s^ 
course, occurred in ancient times between exalted, almost divine, "x 
personages regarded ns being above the customary taboos, but TE 


— 


a’ E $ 


such marriages were not peculiar to Zoroastrians.? Other at- 
tempts of Zarduhsht to spread his evangel are recorded, in the 
course of which he is said to have journeyed as far enst as Sistån,’ 


büt all proved fruitless. It was not till ten years after his receipt d 
of the Revelation that he made his first convert—his cousin a 
Maidhyó-maungha, the son of Arásti, who was Pourushaspa's «n 


brother During these ten years Zarduhsht appears to have 
returned from time to time to his own home, apparently for the 
winter months, and to have received at such seasons a series of 
further Revelations from each of the six ameshaspentas in turn.^ 
Time, however, was slipping by; ten years had passed, only one 
convert had been made, and in despair the Prophet again appealed 
to Urmuzd, received the complete Revelation, the sacred formula 


-wherewith to smite the fiends—the formula known as tho Ahuna Et 
Vairya, beginning, “ The will of the Lord is the law of righteous- 3 yi 
ness,"—and was warned that he would be assailed by the demona,’ 


The warning was needed. He was attacked at the moment of his 
greatest spiritual exaltation. The demon HBüiti made the first 
assault, but was repulsed. Next came the evil counterpart of the 
ameshaspenta Vohu Manau—Akem Manau (* Bad thought ")'— 
with his malignant riddles ; but Zarduhsht pelted him with stones. 
Lastly, Ahriman came on the scene in person, All that was 
required of the Prophet was that he should worship as his mother 
worshipped—a very subtle form of temptation. Let him but 
renounce the good religion, and the sovereignty of the whole 
world should be his : but Zarduhaht refused, chanted the Ahuna 
Vairya, and foiled the tempter." Another trial, against which 


1 WPT, v. 50. * Bee on the whole subject WPT, il. 389. 
8 d. v. $7. 5 Hd. v. 163; DZA, ii. 203. * WPT, v. 159 seg. 
* JZ, 51. * Cf. Vol iii. p. 271. : * DZA, i. 209 seg, 
E VOL. v. B 
e 


18 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Urmuzd had warned him, was still to come. One of the medicine- 
men of the old religion assumed the form of the female ame- 
shaspenta Sapandirmad, and accosted him. Now Zarduhsht had 
had opportunities of secing the true Sapandármad, and knew that 
she was in all respects well formed and lovely while her imper- 
sonator would be fair in front but hideous behind. He therefore 
bade the temptress turn herself round. After protesting vainly, 
she did so; her falsity became evident, and the phantasm was 
annihilated.’ Inspired by Urmuzd, Zarduhsht now determined on 
a bold step—that of attempting to convert Shih Gushtisp to 
the Faith. The “terrible conflict,” as tradition calls it, that 
ensued lasted two years,” for the Evangelist was opposed c 
perately by the medicine-men whom he found in possession at 
that monarch’s court." We may Iny the scene at Balkh. The 
first interview between Zarduhsht and Gushtásp seems to have 
taken place on the riding-ground. At first, as the expression 
"terrible conflict" implies, the Prophet came off badly. The 
king, it is true, was inclined to give ear to him, but his 
opponents, fearful lest he should prevail with Gushtásp, induced 
the latter to imprison him and leave him to starve to death." 
At this moment, however, Providence intervened with regard to 
à transaction, the account of which exists only in fragments and 
allusions in the older authorities, Here, therefore, we have to 
turn for a consecutive narrative to the Zartusht-mima, a poetical 
version of the life of the Prophet, written by one of the faithful, 
Zartusht Bahrím Pazhdü by name, apparently at Rai, near 
Tihrán, and finished on August 12th, ap. 1278." We learn from 
this that Zarduhsht’s opponents, worsted by him in argument 
at a three days’ conference held before the king, concealed abomi- 
nations in his house and then accused him of sorcery. Gushtasp 
ordered search to be made, the incriminating articles were found, 
and Zarduhsht was cast into prison. Now, while he was lan- 
guishing there, a mysterious and unprecedented event occurred. 
The legs of the king's favourite black horse were drawn up 
into the animal's body, and king, court, and people were all in 
eonsternation. Zarduhsht heard of the matter through the 
keeper of the prison, and offered to heal the steed on four con- 
ditions, Gushtisp accepted them seriatim, and, as ho did so, Zar- 
duhsht drew forth from the body of the horse its four legs one 
by one, The conditions were, that Gushtisp should acknowledge 
er I EE DEM. 


| WFET, v. 62. * Fd.73. 3 Jd. 64. * dd. 64 seg. 

` Jd, xx. seq., where a summary is given of the work, the whole of 
which, translated by Eastwick, is to be found in Wilson's “ Parsi Re- 
ligion,” referred to as WPR 


des- * 


4 


Mera 


"M 


GUSHTASP 19 


Zarduhsht to be a true prophet ; that Asfandiyár should become 
the champion of the true religion ; that Zarduhsht should have 
facilities for converting the queen; and that his falso accusers 
should be punished. It need hardly be added that with the re- 
storation of the fourth leg the steed became as well as ever.’ We 
learn from the same authority that Gushtdsp, eager perhaps to 
avail himself to the utmost of such a unique opportunity, made 
in his turn four requests of Zarduhsht. These wero, that the 
king's future doom should be revealed to him ; that he should 
become invulnerable; that he should know both the past and the 
future; and that he should be undying till the Resurrection. 
farduhsht said that he would pray that these boons should be 
granted, but that the king must be content to ask only one of the 
four, whichever he preferred, for himself, and leave the other three 
for others. Gushtásp agreed to this; Zarduhsht withdrew to his 
own abode, and spent the night in prayer. The next morning 
a great marvel happened. Four heavenly messengers, two of 
them being ameshaspentas, sent hy Urmuzd, arrived at court and 
exhorted Gushtisp to be firm in the Faith proclaimed to him 
by Zarduhsht, to cherish that Prophet, and to obey him in all 
things, The king swooned on his throne, but on hia recovery 
promised full obedience to the divine injunctions, and the angelic 
band departed. Zarduhsht then prepared to perform the Darin. 


In the present day this is a ceremony held on behalf of some - 


particular person, who is mentioned by name in the course of it, 
at the end of which the ceremonial wafer-bread the Darün-—ia 
broken into pieces and partaken of first by the celebrant and the 
other priests present, and then by the rest of the congregation,” 
. Zarduhsht, however, on the oecasion of which we write, prepared 
four things—wine, perfumes, milk, and a pomegranate. Gushtásp 
drank of the wine and slept. In his sleep he had a vision of 
Paradise, and saw his own place therein—the boon that he had 
desired. Bishitan drank of the milk, and became immortal. 
Jimisp smelt of the perfumes, and immediately became possessed 
of all knowledge. Asfandiyir ate of the pomegranate, became 
invulnerable, and thus acquired the title of “the brazen-bodied.”? 
From this point, as easily may be imagined, the cause of the good 
religion hegan to prosper; but the serious opposition. known as 
"The War of the Religion" was still to come, and this we shall 
find set forth in the Shühnüma itaelf.* 


. 1 WPR, 499 seq. * HEP, 396, 407. * WPR, 509 aeq. 

* The reader that desires farther information about the Prophet 
of Inin should consult Professor A. V. Williams Jackson's * Zoroaster,” 
referred to in the notes as JZ. 


tr: Sd Qs eee erf 7T 


PART I 


THE COMING OF ZARDUHSHT AND THE WAR 
WITH ARJASP 


ARGUMENT 

Firdausi describes how Dakiki appeared to him in a dream, and 
begged that the thousand couplets which he (Dakiki) had.composed 
might be incorporated in the Shíhnámn. Firdausi accordingly gives 
Dakiki's couplets. They deal with the advent of Zarduhsht 
(Zoroaster), the conversion of Gushtdsp, the religious war with 
Túrin, which ensued, tho defeat of Arjisp, king of Turin, by 
Asfandiyür, Gushtüsp's heroic son, the differences that arise 
between Asfandiyir and his father, the temporary disgrace and 
imprisonment of the former, and Arjásp's preparations for a 
fresh campaign. At the conelusion of Dakiki's couplets, Firdausi 
proceeds to criticise them, and then takes up the thread of the 
story himself. Arjisp again invades Írin, storms Balkh, slays 
Luhrisp and Zarduhsht, and carries off Asfandiyür's sisters. 
Gushtisp is forced to appeal for assistance to Asfandiyir, who at 
first refuses, but finally assents, in order to avenge his brother 
Farshidward, who has been slain in battle by the Türánians, and 
on the understanding that his father will resign the throne in his 
favour, Arjisp is defeated, but Gushtisp refuses to carry out his 
part of the bargain till Asfandiyir has rescued his sisters from 
captivity. 


NOTE 


$$ 1-26. This passage, with the exception of the preface in § 1 
and the postecript in § 26, which were written by Firdauai and will 
be referred to later, is by another poet—Dakiki—of whose life, as 
Professor Nüldeke says, we know very little, and nothing with 
certainty, The name Dakiki, lke Firdausi, is a mere nom de pluma, 


! NIN. 8 16. 
E 


GUSHTASP 


He appears, however, to have flourished during the reign of the 
Sámánid ruler, Mansur L (A.D. 961-976), to whom and to his 
successor, Nuh IL (A.D. 976—997), he wrote enlogies still extant." 
Doubtless]y he was a Persinn by birth, and, if we can trust his 
own statement, a Zoroastrian as well? He had a considerable 
reputation, not undeserved, as a poet in his own day," and died: 
murdered by one of his own slaves, early, it would appear," in 
the reign of Nuh IL The similarity of the work of Dakiki and 
Firdausí is remarkable. They use the same metre and pretty 
much the same vocabulary, have a similar style, and affect the same 
figures of speech. In fact, it might be maintained that in most of 
the above respects Firdaust carefully copied his predecessor; but 
the better opinion seems to be that the features above mentioned 
were the common property of the poets of the time, and would be 
used by them as a matter of course when dealing with similar 
subject-matter. Still it is possible to detect differences and 
discrepancies in the work of the two poets. With regard to the 
former, for instance, Professor Noldeke points out that the 
presentation is more formal in Dakikis hands. When a new hero 
enters, and when he falls, the account is given in the same manner, 
almost in the same words, and is not varied as Firdausi knew how 
to vary such things; and further, that the treatment of the' 
subject-matter is less adroit, Gushtásp, for instance, being repre- 
sented as twice on the point of joining in the fray and each time 


easily dissuaded from so doing.” Again, Dakíki uses certain words * 


that apparently, though this is stated with all reserve, Firdausi 


‘does not. With regard to the discrepancies, an attentive reader 


even of the present translation might note some. For instance, 
when, in the reign of Kai Khusrau, we heard last of the political 
relations between Írán and Türán, the latter, loft kingless by the 
destruction of Afrisiydb and all his house, was represented as 
being in a state of complete subjection to the former. Then 
comes the reign of Luhrisp, in which we hear nothing on the aub- 
ject, alter which, at the of that of Gushtisp, an entirely 
new political situation is sprung upon us? Irin is represented 


i They may be found translated, with others of Dakiki's short poems, 


3 Jed. 459. Beo too Vol i p. 69. 3? BLHP, i. 460, ii. 127. 
i See Vol i. p. 28. ! NIN, 817. Bee pp. 64, 68. 


|. * Eg, ' Paighü" z Turkman, and * tigin" — brave. 

? Can it be that a legend now lost dealt with the fortunes of some 
viceroy, appointed by Kai Khusrau to administer Tinin, and the 
descendants of such viceroy! He or they in the days of Luhrásp may 
have obtained the predominance and been handed down by tradition 


22 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


as tributary to Túrin, and the latter is under the rule of a power- 
fnul king. This wasall right from Dakiki's point of view, because he 
started on that assumption, but it is hard to believe that Firdausi, 
looking before and after as he must have done, would have ren- 
dered no explanation of, or made no reference to, the new state of 
affairs if he had been the author of this part of the poem, Again, in 
Dakiki, who doubtlessly follows his authorities, Asfandiyir marries 
his sister Humidi. Firdausi ignores this, and deliberately prefers 
to make a fine scene of his own less convincing in consequence. 
Gushtásp, having imprisoned Asfandiyir owing to the charge made 
against him by the envious Gurazm, is defeated and hardly pressed 


by Arjisp He sends Jámásp to persuade Asfandiyár to forget | 


his ill-treatment and furnish much needed help. Jümüsp urges 
various pleas, and among them the captivity among the Tarkmans 
of Asfandiyir's sisters—Humai and Bih Afrid—but the resentful 
captive remains obdurate till Jámásp falls back upon the case of 
Farshidward, who is represented as being the only member of 
Asfandiyár's family that felt concern for him in his disgrace. The 
plea of the captivity of Humii—his wife as well as sister—wus 
ready at hand to be put into Jümiüsp's mouth had Firdausí so 
desired, but he refrained, and in this portion of the Shühnáma 
represented the brother and sister as being wholly indifferent to 
each other. Again, the formal introduction of Rustam,! after all 
that has gone before, might strike the reader as somewhat curious, 

If the fact of Dakiki’s authorship had been unknown, it is not 
impossible that some critic might have based a theory of difference 
of authorship on some such considerations as those mentioned 
above; but it would have been sufficient to reply that Firdausi's 
own style is not uniform throughout the Sháhnáma,! and that the 
passage in question reads like a first draft, which, owing to some 
accident or oversight, had been left unrevised. This is precisely 
what it is, and for the best of reasons in Dakiki's case, inasmuch as 


‘death approaching unexpectedly 
Imposed its gloomy helmet on his head," 


as Firdausi put it on another occasion.” Lack of opportunity 
for revision, too, is the best answer to Firdausi's somewhat severe 
criticisms of his predecessor's work, Why, then, did ha insert it ? 


— a 


as "Arjisp." This would account for the Írínian character of that 
word, and explain and justifr the outbreak of the War of the 
Religion. 

! Bee p. 85. * Cf. VoL iii. p. 235. ? Id. 1 109. 

* Bee p. 87. 


2 

he 

^ 
1 
i 


GUSHTASP 23 


Several reasons may be given. First, by so doing he paid off 


his debt :— 
* He was my ploneer, and he alone." ! 


Secondly, it got Firdnusí himself out of a difficulty. The 
epoch of the advent of Zarduhsht was a dangerous one to 
treat in those days of fanaticism. The dead poet was beyond 
the reach of offended Muhammadan orthodoxy, so his work, the 
insertion of which was justified on the plea of a dream—a portent 
not lightly to be disregarded in those days—was substituted for 
what the living poet would have had to write or leave a serious 
omission in the poem,  Thirdly, Firdausi's real opinion of Dakíki's 
literary ability was in all probability higher than he thought it 
politic to accentuate in close proximity to such a dangerous topic. 
When he wrote the Prelude to the Shihnima he expressed himself 
much more favourably. Fourthly, Dakiki’s alleged inferiority 
might serve as a foil. If his feeble strain won him honour and 
emolument from the great, whose praises he sang, how much more 
should the fluent and refined work of his successor gain substantial 
recognition." Lastly, the ostensible reason after all may have been 
the real one. To havea vivid dream ia not uncommon ; toact upon 
it is rarernodoubt; bat instances have been known, and Firdausi's 
ease may be one in point ; at all events, he says so. Like other great 
poets he was, we may assume, highly strung ; and Dakiki's death, its 
tragic suddenness, and the vista that it opened, cannot fail to have 
impressed him. Be this as it may, he adopted Dakiki's literary 
orphan, but, having provided permanently for it, did not allow it to 
interfere further with his own poetical progeny. Without dis- 
paraging Dakiki, we may congratulate ourselves, on the whole, upon 
the course that events took, Whatever he may have been, he was 
not a Firdausi. Apart altogether from the literary side of the 
question, there must have been a regularity of life, a steadfastness 
of purpose, and a moral elevation in the latter's case which seem 
to have been only too lacking in the former's. Had Dakiki's life 
been prolonged for a season, he might, unintentionally of course, 
have played the part of the dog in the manger, obstructing 
Firdausi without having the needful qualities or opportunities for 
the accomplishment of a task of such magnitude himself. The two 
poets, however, par nobile fratrum as they were in genius and in 
enthusiasm, had one other excellent point in common. They 
followed their authorities in all essential particulars, and did not 


i op. 88, è qd. 


* 


ee 9-949 1o ——————S— -—" EM =] ic sw — A* ~~). Lo NE 4 4 
* * i - M*a a 


24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


invent on their own account. So far as Dakiki is concerned, this 
will be shown in what follows. 

The Shihmima may be described as a great river—the outcome 
of many tributaries. The greatest of these undoubtedly is the 
prose compilation of ancient legend known as the Bistin-mima, or 
Khudai-mima, of which some account has been given already.’ 
This in ita turn had its affluents, some of which we may conceive of 
as passing into it in their primitive form while others entered it in 
an already mingled stream. Some affluents again wholly merged 
and thus lost their independent existence entirely, while others 
only partially did so and thus preserved their own identity, Of 
these latter again one at least passed out of sight for a time only 
to reappear in a somewhat altered but still recognisable form 
later on. ln the interval, however, between its disappearance 
and reappearance, it is evident that ite contents became tinged 
with that of other sources. The result, as we now possess it, is a 
little Pahlavi Text known as the Yatkir-i-4arinin, "This gives us 
a very good notion of what the original affluent must have con- 
tained, and as it deals with the same matters as are dealt with by 
Dakíki in $$ 2-19, we are in a position to check his work. It should 
be understood clearly that the Ydtkár-i-Zarirán was not the actual 
authority followed by him, but stands collaterally related to the 
version of the original affluent which, mingled with the Bistin- 
nima, passed, after further vicissitudes and centuries liter, into 
his hands. The following is a summary of the main points of 
resemblance and difference between the Yitkir-i-Zaririn and 
Dakiki, the former being referred to as Z and the latter as D. 
First, for £he resemblance. Most of the names appear in both, 
the only difference being that in Z wo hava some of them in the 
Pahlavi, and in D all of them in the modern Persian, form. Thus 
in Z we have Vishtásp and in D Gushtisp, in Z Spand-dát and in 
D Asfandiyir, in Æ Garimik-kart and in D Girimi. In both, 
Arjisp hears that Gushtdsp has adopted the Faith of Zarduhsht, 
and sends envoys to bid him recant or take the consequences, 
The envoys’ names are Vidrafsh and Náüm-khást, son of Hazir, 
in Z; Bidirafsh and Nimkhist, son of Hazirán, in D. In both, 
Zarir, the captain of the Írinian host, obtains Gushtdsp's per- 
mission to answer Arjásp's letter, and does so, accepting the 
arbitrament of war; the envoys return to Arjásp, and the monarchs 
prepare for battle. In both, Gushtásp ealla upon Jidmisp, his 
chief minister, to foretell the issue of the coming fight; under 
protest Jámásp does so, and the king is so perturbed that he 


! VoL i. p. 65 aeg. 


Tm. . 


Ms 1 


= 


GUSHTASP 


announces his intention of not allowing his nearest and dearest 
to go upon the battlefield; but when Jimisp points out the ills 
which in that event will befall frin, he resigns himself € tha 
inevitable. In both, Arjísp and Gushtásp take up their posts of 
survey, and the fight begins ; Zarir displays great valour; Arjisp 
in alarm offers his daughter's hand and high office to any one who 
will fight Zarír; Bidirafsh volunteers, and kills Zarir from behind. 
In both, Gushtásp on the hill-top forebodes the death of Zarir, and 
offers his daughter Humdi in marriage to any one that will avenge 
him; Zarir's son (Bastvar in Z, Nastir in D)* obtains a steed 
from the master of the horse, goes forth to the battlefield, finds 
his father lying dead, laments over him, fights and returns to 
Gushtdsp, who equips and sends him forth again. In both, he 
fights so bravely that Arjdsp compares him to Zarir, dispatches 
Bidirafsh to encounter him, and Biídirafsh is slain. In both, 
Asfandiyir and Nastür totally defeat the enemy, and Arjásp gets 
back to his own realm. 

In addition to these general points of resemblance, thore are 
others in matters of detail, as where, both in Z and D, Girimi 1s 
represented as fighting while holding the royal standard between 
his teeth, but these need not detain ns, It remains to point out 
the difference, In Z Arjásp is the ruler of the Khyéns;* in D 
of the Turkmans and of Chin. In D the war begins with Gush- 
tásp's refusal, prompted by Zarduhsht, to continue the payment 
of tribute to Arjásp. This is not in Z. Except for the mention 
.of the death of Zarir, and the defeat of Arjisp by Asfandiyár, 
Jimisp’s prophecy differs in Z and D. In 4 Zarir begins the 
battle; in D there is fighting for two weeks, during which several 
of Gushtásp's sons distinguish themselves, and are slain, before 
Zarir takes the field. In D Asfandiyár hears of Zarir's death. 
He also hears his father swearing to surrender the crown to him 
if the Turkmans are defeated—an important addition, and the 
keynote of the whole reign. In D it is Asfandiyir, and not 
Nastiir, that kills Bídirafsh. In Z all the Khyóns are slain with 
the exception of Arjásp himself, whom Spand-dit takes prisoner, 
mutilates, and sends back on a docked nes to Túrin. In D 
Asfandiyir makes a great slaughter, puts Arjásp to flight, and 
gives quarter to the rest of the Turkman host. In general, 
we may say, Z is on a much smaller scale than D, by whom 
letters, speeches, &nd descriptions of battles are given at much 
greater length. The differences in matters of detail also are 
important and suggestive, For instance, in Z Jimisp, after 


— 90 O— RO— —Í € l——————M———— —— S — 


! Cf. p. 12. ! Bee p. 13. 


= & » 
LI 


~ 

(og 

Ta 

" ^ d SN 
P5 EL 


ix x 


T E E = 


Bal -:'718 Ter 


a 


T "m 


i: amet 


-— I hil Bs 


nan i " |. 


4:1 aa^ A o 


25 c THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


prophesying that Zarir will be killed by Vidrafsh, adds that 
Nám-khást will slay Pit-khusrau, another brother, and Frashókart, 
a som, of Gushtisp's,and further, that twenty-two of his other 
sons and brothers will perish, Im the account of the actual 
fighting, however, only the death of Aarir is recorded. In D, 
though all reference to Püt-khusrau and Frashókart is omitted, 
Jáümasp's prophecy is considerably expanded. He tells of the 
prowess and death of three of Gushtásp's sons—Ardshir, Shidasp, 
and Niveir—and of his own son Girimi, who does not die in 4, 
as well as of the success of Zarir's son Nastür, before dealing 
with Zarir himself. All these heroes are mentioned again in the 
description of the fight, and mostly at greater length than in the 
prophecy; while the exploits of another of Gushtisp's sons—Shiri 
—are commemorated between those of Ardshir and Shídasp. It 
seems, therefore, that fragments of another legend, and those not 
the same fragments, must have found their way by different routes 
both into Z and D. That legend must have been one comme- 
morating collectively and in detail the prowess of the lránian 
heroes, especially those of the royal house, in the War of the 
Religion. This is the more likely because in the cireumstances 


they would be regarded as martyrs and confessors of the Faith. | 


In addition to a collective commemoration, some of the more 
important of these heroes must have had their own separate 
nima or legend. Even if Z wero not extant, we should be 
justified in assuming the existence of such a nima in Zarir's 


case, and this must havo had at least two branches—a Love-. 


story and a Death-story. The account given of him in the 
Shihnima, and elsewhere under the name of Zariadres,! is suf- 
ficient to show this, In later times he overshadowed 
partly by Gushtásp and partly by Asfandiyir. The Love-story 
from which he was ousted by Gushtdsp will be found in the reign 
of Luhrisp. As regards the Death-story, even in Z we find 
Spand-dát already dominant, and in D he is still more so. He 
and Jümásp are associated with Zarir in the reply to Arjísp'a 
letter, the promise of bestowing the kingship upon him is made 
by Gushtisp, and it is he, and not Nastür, who avenges Zarir. 
To account for this predominance, therefore, we must assume still 
another source—an Asfandiyir-nima, or, as it would be called 


- in Pallavi, a Spand-dit-nima—with at least three branches, all 


represented in their latest forms in the Sháhnáma. To sum up 
and illustrate what has been said above, a diagram is appended, 


TS" "Aem e ped eam + a DC 
ad — a | =, ee AT ! 
Mm cya GUSHTASP 
s v- m. CAS CRRG S ^ 
e a k 


eee 
r4 WV ii - M » y i E r i 
Ex whieh, however, in view of the ravages wrought by time, must vx» 


nimas of Irdnian 
heroes in the War 
of the Religion 


s 


? ny 


War of the en Fight with RS 
Religion Stages Hustam er 


ae 
» LA 
* -— 
a 
i 
p ĵ 
f p gt 
OX! f £ i 
> i € y 
/ é 4 
Pi JE 
à - 
, 
Lu 


8 h ih 1i ui 


— 8 43. For Zarduhsht (Zoroaster) see p. 15 seq. Whether the plant- 

ing of a cypress at Kishmar by him was an actual fact, or whether 
J t is an instance of a people being misled by one of their own | 
metaphors, it is impossible to say. To plant a tree to comme- = 

morate some important event is not unusual. Metaphorically to "D 

= plant s tres, in the sense of instituting some new custom or | | 
» i 
= L gee on the Yátkír-i-Zaririn generally, GYZ, without the help of "e 


which the latter portion of this note could not have been written. . mE 


a 2. 


28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


making a new departure in policy, ec. is common enough in the 
Sháhnüma. We have an instance at the beginning of this section, 
At all events, the Cypress of Kishmar rivals Gushtásp's Black 
Horse' in fame, and, after living for some fourteen centuries and 
a half, is said to have been cut down by the orders of the Khalifa 
Mutawakkal (4.p. 846-860) The following is the account of it 
given in the Dabistán:—" The professors of the excellent faith 
and the Moslem historians agree, thatin . . . Kashmar...2a 
dependency of Naishapur, there was formerly a cypress planted by 
Zardusht for king Gushtasp, the like of which was never seen 
before or since, for beauty, height, or straightness: mention of 
this tree having been made at the court of Mutawakkal when 
he was engaged in building the Sarman rai, or Samarah palac 

in the Jáafriyah, the Khalif felt a great desire to behold it : and 
as it was not in his power to go to Khorasan, he wrote to Abdallah 
Táhir Zavalimin, *possessor of happiness, to have the tree cut 
down, fastened on rollers, and sent to Baghdád. When intelli- 
gence of this came to the people of the district and the inhabi- 
tants of Khorasan, they assembled at the foot of the tree, im- 
ploring for mercy with tears and lamentations, and exhibiting 
a scene of general desolation. The professors of the excellent 
faith offered the governor fifty thousand dinars to spare the tree, 
but the offer was refused, When the cypress was felled, it 
caused great detriment to the buildings and water-courses of the 
country; the birds of different kinds which had built their nests 
on it issued forth in such countless myriads as to darken the 
air, screaming out in agony with various tones of distress: the 
very oxen, sheep, and other animals which reposed undor its 
sheltering shade, commenced such piteous moans of woe that it 
was impossible to listen to them. The expense of conveying the 
trunk to Baghdad was five hundred thousand dinars; the very 
branches loaded one thousand and three hundred camels. When 
the tree had reached one station from the Juafriah quarter, on 
that same night, Mutawakkal the Abasside was cut in pieces 
by his own guards, so that he never beheld the tree,”? According 
to other accounts, Zarduhsht brought down two cypress-ahoota 
rom Paradise, one of which he planted at Kishmar and the other 
in the neighbourhood of Tis.” The statement in the text that 
Gushtisp raised over the Cypress of Kishmar a lofty palace has 
been interpreted to mean that he built himself n s r-house 
among its boughs, or rather that Zarduhsht built it for him: "in 
hujus Arboris summitate erexit Aestivarium."* In villages in 


Č —— 


* Bee p. 1&— * STD, 1. 306 seg. * HRVP, p. 332. * Jd, 324. 


— "PN ~ Ji w—:1 ey > - To ww? De 
s s M. m hy D WEE 1-4 T i d. Ü LL x | —_ = ` 4 ee ", E 
2 L 4^ 5 Le. " y Se - L 7h JU «. æ i 7 ps FP 


GUSHTASP 29 


Persia at the present day a semi-sacred character is attached to 
some of the large trees, which have platforms built round them 
where the villagers sit and smoke in the evenings." 

§ 8. Tho Kuhram mentioned here and in § 11 is no doubt 
the same person, though variously described as the brother and 
son of Arjásp. Firdausi makes him the latter. A Kuhram and 
an Andarímán appear among the Türánian heroes as far back 
as the reign of Kai Kétis,* and are among those slain in “The 
Battle of the Twelve Rukhs"" Probably the same legendary 
characters are intended throughout. Death is no bar to the 
reappearance of a hero in the Sháhnáma.* 

88 r1-19, 27-32. The War of the Religion between Gushtüsp 
and Arjisp is divided into two campaigns, separated by a con- 
siderable interval, during part of which Asfandiyár was a prisoner 
in the stronghold of Gumbadin. In the first campaign the fight- 
ing consisted of a series of engagements extending over two weeks, 
and in the end the lránians were completely victorious, but we 
have no very definite information as to where it took place. In 
the Yütkár-i-ZJaririn the lránian reply to Arjisp's ultimatum 
proposes the neighbourhood of Marv as the meeting-ground, 
“where there is no high mountain, nor any deep ravine, but 
where on the plateau of the steppe horses and the valiant men-at- 
arms can move freely.”* "The Shühnáma, in partial accord to this, 
makes Gushtásp advance to the Jíhün (Oxus),^ but we do not hear 
of the river being crossed by either host. In the'second campaign 
Arjisp, taking advantage of Gushtásp's absence in Sistin, suddenly 
invaded İrin, Several distinct battles were fought. In the first, 
outside the walls of Balkh, Luhrisp, the ex-Sluih, was dofeated 
and slain, and the city stormed. In the second, Guahtisp was 
defeated and beleaguered on a mountain, and in the third he was 
rescued from his dangerous position by Asfandiyár. It would 
seem from the Sháhnáma" that the second and third battles were, 
like the first, fought in the neighbourhood of Balkh, but other 
tradition paints to a different locality. According to this view, 
we must imagine the opposing hosts encountering in the region 
about Nishipir, Arjisp advancing westward from Balkh and 
Gushtisp northward from Sistin. The scene of the conflict there- 
fore would lie about and between the Binalüd and Jagatai ranges, 
some part of which was known in old times as “the Ridge of 
Gushtásp " ; and there is a tradition that when the Irinians were 
hard pressed they were helped by a land-slip from one of the 


i WLS, p- 364- 2 Vol. ii. pp 264 349- 9” Jd. iv. 104, 105. 
© fa. ti. 119, ^ GYZ, p. 50. * p. 48. 
7 Bee p. 94- 


3o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


adjacent mountains which received in consequence the name of 
" Madófryát " or " Come-to-help." ! 

8 21. The Gloom, or Land of Darkness, here referred to, will 
be met with again in the next volume under the reign of Sikandar 
(Alexander the Great), who entered it in quest of the Water 
of Life. 

$ 24. The stronghold of Gumbadiin, in which Asfandiyir was 
imprisoned, appears to have been situated on a mountain which 
became known in consequence as Mount Spentó-dita in the Zan- 
davasta * and as Mount Spendyád in the Pahlaví Texts? It seems, 
moreover, to be identical with Mount Sipand—the seene of one 
of Rustam's youthful exploits*—and with Mount Sapad which 
comes into prominence in the story of Farüd. Mount Spentó- 
dita has been located in the neighbourhood of the Bir Mountains 
to the north-west of Nishápür. This is, of course, inconsistent 
with Malcolm's identification of the stronghold on Mount Sipand 
with the “ White Castle,” of which he gives a description already 
quoted? According to Mirkhond Asfandiyár was confined in the 
fortress of Girdkuh in the district of Ridbir" This was situated 
in the neighbourhood of Kaswin, and in later times was one of 
the strongholds of "Umar Khayyim's contemporary and fellow- 
student, Hasan Sabbih, better known as “The Old Man of the 
Mountain," to whom we are indebted for the vogue of the word 
assassin.” 


8 1 


How Firdaust saw Dakiki in a Dream 


V.1495 Thus was it that one night the poet dreamed :— 


He held a cup of wine whose fragrance seemed 
Rosewater-like. Dakiki from his stead 
Appeared and, speaking of that wine-cup, said 
Thus to Firdausí: “ Quaff not save thou choose 
The fashion of the days of Kai Kaus, 

For he that is the monarch of thy choice, 

In whom crown, throne, and fortune all rejoice, 
Mahmúd, the king of kings and conqueror, 


1 JZ, p 216. 3 DZA, iL 289. 

| WPT, i. pp. 34, 39. * Vol. i. p. 330. 

* fd. lii. pp. $2, 54, 58, ete. ; NIN, § 30, nnd note, * JZ, p. 215. 

T Vol. i, p 236. * BM, p. 290 and note, 
= 


* 


GUSHTASP 31 


Who giveth all a portion of his store, = 
Shall from today for fourscore years and five 
Behold his travail wane, his treasury thrive, 
Shall lead to Chin hereafter his array, 
And every chief shall ope for him the way. 
He will not need to speak an angry word, 
All crowns will come to him with one accord. 
If o'er this story thou hast somewhat striven 
Now all that thou didst wish to thee is given. 
I too told somewhat of this history, 
And if thou findest it be kind to me. 
I sang a thousand couplets of Gushtisp, 
Before my day was done, and of Arjásp, 
And if my work shall reach the king of kings V. 1495 
My soul will soar o'er sublunary things." 

So now the verses that he wrote I give, 
For he is gathered to the dust; I live. 


82 
How Luhrásp went to Balkh and how Gushtdsp sat 
upon the Throne 
Now when Luhrisp, descending from the throne 
Resigned it to Gushtásp, he made him ready 
To go to Naubahár in cherished Balkh, 
Because he had become God's votary, 
And men then held that fane in reverence, 
Just as the Arabs reverence Mecca now, 
He reached the fane, the Sháh, that man of God, 
Dismounted there, and there at last he died. 
He shut the portal of that glorious fane, 
And let no alien enter it, assumed 
The woollen raiment of a devotee— 
The garniture wherein to worship wisdom— 
Put off his armlets, let his hair grow long, 


Y. 1497 


32 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


And set himself to serve the all-just Judge. 
Upstanding in His presence thirty years, 
Such is the way that men should serve the Lord, 
He offered supplication to the sun, 
According to the eustom of Jamshíd. 

Gushtásp, succeeding to his father's throne, 
His Grace, and fortune, donned his father's gift, 
The crown, fit ornament of noble men, 
“Tam,” he said, “a Shah that serveth God, 
And holy God hath given me this crown 
That I might keep the wolves apart the flock. 
Toward God's way will we stretch forth our hands, 
And to the noble straiten not the world, 
But, as hath been the custom of the Shahs, 
Convert ill-doers to the Faith of God.” 

He spread abroad his justice in such wise 
That wolf and sheep drank of the stream together. 
At length Nahid, illustrious Cresar's daughter, 
She whom the noble Sháh named Katáyün, 
Bare him two sons, each like the moon in splendour, 
One, famous, glorious Asfandiyár, 
À warlike prince and doughty cavalier, 
The other, Bishütan, the valiant swordsman, 
A famous prince, a shatterer of hosts. 

The new Shah, when acknowledged by the world, 
Was fain to be another Faridun, 
All other kings paid tribute, and the heart 
Of every liege was well disposed to him, 
Save King Arjásp, the ruler of Türán, 
Who had the divs for servants and admitted 
No claim for tribute, would not hear advice, 
And since he would not hear was doomed to chains, 
He took too tribute from the Shah each year, 
But why should one pay tribute to his peer? 


GUSHTASP 13 


$3 
How Zarduheht appeared and how Gushtdap accepted 
his Evangel 
Thus passed a while, and then a Tree appeared 
On earth within the palace of Gushtisp, 
And grew up to the roof—a Tree whose roots 
Spread far and wide, a Tree with many branches, 
Its leafage precept and its fruitage wisdom: 
How shall one die who eateth of such fruit ? 
A Tree right fortunate and named Zarduhsht— 
The slayer of malignant Abriman. 
Thus said he to the monarch of the world :— 
“T am a prophet and thy guide to God.” 

He brought a censer, filled ‘with fire, and said :— 
“This have I brought with me from Paradise. 
The Maker of the world said: ‘Take thou this, 
And look upon the heaven and the earth, 
Because I made them not of dust and water: 
Behold herein how I created them. 

See now if any one could do this thing, 

Save I that am the Ruler of the world ? 

If thou acknowledgest My handiwork 

Thou must acknowledge Me to be the Lord.’ 
Receive His good religion from the speaker, 
And learn from him His usage and the way. 
See that thou do as he directeth thee, 

Choose wisdom, recognise this world as vile, 
And learn the system of the good religion, 

For kingship is not well when Faith ts lacking.” 

When that good Shah had heard of that good Faith, 
And had accepted it and its good customs, 

His valiant brother, glorious Zarir, 

Who used to vanquish mighty elephants; 

The Shah, his father, now grown old at Balkh, 
VOL. V. C 


V. 1498 


. 
| 


"2. wu. c.» a 
3 A J 
a 


V. 1499 


34 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


To whose heart worldly things were bitterness; - 
The mighty chiefs from all the provinces, 

The wise physicians and the men of war, 

All gathered to the monarch of the earth, 
Assumed the cincture and received the Faith. 
Then was the Grace of God made manifest, 

For evil left the hearts of evil men, 

The charnels were fulfilled with light divine, 

And seeds were freed from all impurity. 

Then mounting to his throne high-born Gushtásp 
Dispatched his troops throughout the provinces, 
Distributed archmages through the world, 

And set up Fanes of Fire. He first established 
The Fire of Mihr Barzin: consider well 

The system that the realm received from him. 
Zarduhsht then planted him a noble cypress 
Before the portal of the Fane of Fire, 

And wrote upon that noble, straight-stemmed tree :— 
" Gushtásp is convert to the good religion " ; 

Thus did he make’the noble cypress witness 
That wisdom was disseminating justice. 

When in this manner many years had passed 
The cypress-tree increased in height and girth, 
Until that noble tree had grown so great 

That e'en a lasso would not compass it. 

When it had sent aloft full many a bough 
Gushtásp raised over it a goodly palace, 

Whereof the height and breadth were forty cubits ; 
He used no clay or water in the building. 

When he had reared the palace of pure gold, 
With silvern earth and dust of am bergris, 

He painted there a picture of Jamshid, 

Engaged in worshipping the sun and moon, 
Commanded too a picture to be drawn 

Of Faridün armed with the ox-head mace, 

And limned there all the potentates. Consider 


a 


Ee GUSHT ASP = gf x * x 

ts If other ever had such puissanee. . | EN 

E When that famed hall of gold had grown thus goodly ba 

[^ He had its walls inlaid with precious stones, M. 

| | And set an iron rampart round about. EN 

| / The king of earth made it his home. He sent 42 
This message through the realm : * In all the world a 

i What equalleth the cypress of Kishmar ? ^ 
God sent it down to me from Paradise, ES. 
And said: ‘Ascend to Paradise therefrom: oe 


Now hearken, all of you, this rede of mine: 

Go to the cypress of Kishmar afoot: 

Adopt ye all the pathway of Zarduhsht, 

And, turning from the images of Chin, 

Gird round your loins the cincture in the Grace 


And greatness of the monarch of Írán. n 
Heed not the usance of your predecessors, Y. 1500 TO 
Trust in the shadow of this cypress-tree, E^ 
* And fix your gaze upon the Shrine of Fire, b 
As bidden by the Prophet of the Truth.” am 
He spread abroad his words throughout the world A 
Among the men of name and potentates, S 
And at his bidding all that wore the crown . < 
= Turned them toward the cypress of Kishmar; à 
This holy shrine a paradise was found D 
Wherein Zarduhsht the Div in fetters bound. A 
E $4 OM 
P. How Gushtdep refused to Arjdsp the Tribute for Trin 1 
Time passed. The  monarch's star was. blessed. ay 
Zarduhsht, | S" 
— "The old, said to the ruler of the world :— is 


“Tis not accordant to our Faith for thee 
To pay a tribute to the prince of Chín, Mr 
Nor consonant with eustom and religion, » 


V. 1501 


36 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ . 


Moreover I can not assent thereto, 
For no one of our Sháhs in days of yore 
Hath yielded tax and tribute to the Turkmans, 
Who all were impotent against Iran.” 

Gushtisp assented, saying: “I will order | 
No tribute to be paid.” | 

A valiant div, 

On hearing this, went to the king of Chin, 
And said to him: “O monarch of the world! 
Throughout it all the people great and small 
Agree in executing thy commands, 
And not one cometh forth against thy spearpoint 
Excepting Shih Gushtasp, son of Luhrasp, 
Who leadeth out a host against the Turkmans, 
Hath made his hostile purpose clear, and wrought 
His devilry against a king like thee. 
More than a hundred thousand cavaliers 
Are mine, and I will bring them if thou wilt. v; 
Go to then, let us follow up his doings; 
See that thou fear not to contend with him." 

Arjásp, when he had heard the dív speak thus, 
Descended from the royal Turkman throne, 
And, having summoned all the priests, announced 
What he had heard to them. “Know ye,” said he, 
“That God's Grace and pure Faith have left Írán, 
Where some old dotard hath appeared who claimeth 
To be a prophet, and his words are these :— 
:I have come down from heaven, I have come down 
From Him who is the Master of the world. 
I have beheld the Lord in Paradise, 
And all the Zandavasta is His writing; 
I saw, moreover, Ahriman in Hell, 
But dared not venture near; the Lord then sent me 
To teach the monarch of the earth the Faith. | 
The chief among the nobles of Irin, | 
The most illustrious son of Sháh Luhrásp, | 


GUSHTASP 
He whom the Ininians call Gushtisp, hath bound 
The cincture round his loins, as hath withal 
His brother, that courageous cavalier, 
The general of Irin, Zarir by name. 
All gather to Zarduhsht to be instructed, 
And are befooled by that old sorcerer. 
All have with one consent embraced his Faith: 
His cult and ritual fulfil the world. 
By such fond methods and buffoonery 
Hath he become a prophet in Iran. 
Needs must I write a letter to that rebel, 


Give him great gifts, for gifts unasked are pleasant, 


And say to him: ‘ Abandon this ill course, 
Be awed before the God of Paradise, 

Put far from thee that ancient miscreant, 
And hold a feast according to our customs.’ 
If then he will accept of our advice 

Our bonds will not prove galling to his feet ; 
If he reject it and revive old feuds 

We will assemble our disbanded troops, 
And, mustering a goodly host, invade 

[ran in consequence of these his doings, 
And, fearing not the pains and his resistance, 
Will bring him to contempt, before us drive, 
Put him in chains, and gibbet him alive.” 


$5 
How <Arjdsp wrote a Letter to Gushtdap 
The warriors of Chin agreed thereto, 
And chose, moreover, from themselves two envoys, 
The one a mighty man hight Bidirafsh,’ 
‘Advanced in years, a warlock stout of heart, 
The other named Namkhast *—a sorcerer— 


i ie. Without a banner. 2? Le Covetous of honour, 


V. 1502. 


V. 1503 


= ee Sad eye ed ee ee ee 
i E 2. i í J "- 


38 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS: 


Whose thoughts were ever bent upon destruction. 
The monarch wrote a fair and goodly letter 
To that illustrious sovereign and convert :— 
* First, I have written in the World-lord's name, 
Who knoweth what is manifest and hidden, 
This royal letter, worthy of a king. 
To brave Gushtásp, the monarch of the earth, 
The worshipful and worthy of the state, 
The elect, the eldest son of Shah Luhrasp, 
Lord of the world and warden of the throne, 
This from Arjásp, prince of the mighty men 
Of Chín, a world-subduing cavalier, 
And chosen hero," 
In that royal letter 
He wrote fair greetings in the Turkman! seript :— 
«O famed son of the monarch of the world, 
| Who brightenest the throne of king of kings! 
k Fresh be thy head, thy soul and body hale, 
| Thy royal loins tight-girded, I have heard 
| That thou hast taken to disastrous courses, 
And turned bright day to darkness for thyself. 
A cozening old man hath come to thee, 
Hath filled thy heart with terrors and alarms, 
And with his talk of Hell and Paradise 
Hath sown the seeds of folly in thy heart. 
Thou hast accepted him and his religion, 
Hast glorified his doctrine and his rites, 
^ Hast flung aside the eustoms of the Sháhs— 
The mighty of the world, thy predecessors— 
And wrecked the Faith professed by paladins. 
Why dost thou disregard the past and future ? 
Thou art the son of him on whom of all 
The folk the glorious Sháh * bestowed the crown, 
And he chose thee among his choicest ones 
In preference to the offspring of Jamshid, 
1 Paighi. * Kai Khusran. 


of 
, 
» ^X py 
-— —— 
LI 
n L es 
a=? 


wor? 


i GUSHTÁSP | 


So that, like Kai Khusrau—the man of vengeance— Vrso — 


Thou wast more glorious than the other Kaians 


Thou hadst, famed monarch! royal might and lustre, 


Grace, power, and magnificence, with standards, 
Vast armies, elephants caparisoned, 

And treasuries fulfilled with goodly havings, 
While every chief was well disposed toward thee, 
And thou didst shine resplendent in the world— 
Ardibihisht with Sol in Aries. 

God gave to thee the kingship of the earth, 

And all thy chieftains stood before thee. Thou 
Didst err, ungratefully, despite His care, 

While even after He had made thee Shih 

An ancient sorcerer misled thee, When 

The news arrived I saw the stars by day! 

Now have I written thee a friendly letter, 

For I am both thy friend and good ally. 

When thou hast read it make complete ablution, 
And countenance no longer that impostor; 

Put off the cincture that is round thy loins, 

And quaff with joy the sparkling wine once more. 
Cast not aside the usage of the Shahs, 

The mighty of the world, thy predecessors. 

Now if thou wilt accept this goodly counsel 

Thy life shall not be injured by the Turkmans, 
Their territory, with Kashán and Chin, | 
Shall be to thee e'en as Írán itself, 

I will bestow on thee the boundless treasures 
That I have gotten me by mine own toils, 


— Fair-coated steeds! bedecked with gold and silver, 


And trappings all inlaid with gems, and I 

Will with the treasures send to thee boy-slaves 
And handmaids—pictures all—with crispy locks. 
But if thou wilt accept not this my counsel, 
Then shalt thou feel my heavy iron bonds, . 


1 des chevaux aux couleurs de bon augure " (Mohl). 


te Wool WW e a 


Y. 1503 


V. 1505 


40 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


For I will follow in a month or twain 

This letter and will desolate thy realm, 

Lead from the Turkmans and from Chin a host, 
Whose tents the earth itself will not support, 
Will fill the channel of Jíhün with musk, 

And stanch therewith the waters of the sea, 
Consign thy pictured palace to the flames, 

And raze thee utterly, both root and branch, 
Will set your land on fire from end to end, 

And skewer you all together with mine arrows. 
Those that are old among the [rinians 

Will I make prisoners, will behead the worthless, 
And carry off the women and the children 

As slaves to mine own land; I will lay waste 
Your country and uproot the trees. So much 

DI had to say. See that thou do thy part, 

And lay this letter's counsel to thy heart." 


§ 6 

How Arjásp sent Envoys to Gushtdap 
Now when the monarch's minister had finished 
The letter, all the captains being present, 
Arjásp rolled, sealed, and then delivered it 
To those old sorcerers, instructing them :— 
" Be prudent, go together to his palace, 
And, when ye see him on the throne of state, 
Both bow yourselves forthwith, and proffer him 
The worship that pertaineth unto kings, 
With eyes upon the ground. When ye are seated, 
Look steadfastly upon his shining crown, 
Deliver mine enlightening embassage, 
Attend to what he sayeth in reply, 
And, having heard the answer every whit, 
Kiss ye the ground before him and depart.” 


AX: . a Pe) T S E B^ n 
PY | GUSHTASP 41 
Then Bidirafsh, the vengeful, left the presence, 
And bare his banner forth toward famous Balkh, 
While with him fared Nimkhast, his headstrong com- 
rade— 
One to be shunned by all that seek for fame. 
Arrived at Balkh they went toward the court 
Afoot and, drawing nearer to Gushtasp, 
Bowed down themselves before him on the threshold. 
When they beheld his visage o'er the throne, 
As though it were the sun above the moon, 
They did obeisance, such as slaves would do, 
Before the Shih—the monarch of the happy— 
Then gave to him the letter of the king, 
The letter written in the Turkman! script. 
‘The Shah, on opening the letter, raged V. 1507 
And writhed. He called his counsellor Jamasp, 
The chosen chiefs, the captains of the host, 
The experienced magnates and the archimages, 
Then spread the Zandavasta out before him. 
He called his Prophet and archmage, he called 
Zarir, his well beloved, his general, 
Who was his brother and the chief of all 
The warriors, and then world-paladin 
Because Asfandiyár, the cavalier, 
Was still a youth. Zarir was leader, warden, 
The refuge of the world, the horsemen's stay : 
"Iwas his to elear the earth of evil doers, 
And couch his lance in battle. Said Gushtásp :— 
" Arjásp, the ruler of Türán and Chin, 
Hath written unto me in terms like these!" 
And he informed them of the scurrile words 
Addressed to him by the Turinian king. 
“What are your views herein,” he said to them, 
“What do ye say? How will the matter end ? 
How very ill-advised was amity 
1 Paight. 


rE 1 
KE 
PE ue. en 


| 


mend 


! bal " d B I 
aM. aoe Tad S àdedfvg a f "a 
E Y 5 Cou Pe eT "f" te 
Wi "e ae i ! 


LN 
E a 
B r 


á FaF 


P ] E = a a 
| EE Wo EJ Pn aM LC "AES 


No -— e E) 
i er 
n ed 


Tey, 


42 THE SHÁHNÁMA OP FIRDAUSÍ 
With one who hath so small a stock of wisdom! 
My race is from Iraj of holy birth, 

While he is sprung from Tur, the sorcerer. 

How then can there be peace betwixt us twain, 
Although I used to deem it possible ? 

And now let him that is the most possest 

Of reputation speak before the rest,” 


$7 
How Zarir made Answer to Arjdap 


Whenas the sovereign had spoken thus, 
Zarír, the leader, and Asfandiyár 
Unsheathed their scimitars forthwith, and cried -— 
“Tf there be any one in all the world 
Who holdeth not Zarduhsht to be a prophet, 
Is disobedient and approacheth not | 
The courtgate of the glorious Shah, nor girdeth 
His loins before the splendid throne, rejecting 
The way and good religion, and refusing 
To be a slave thereto, his life will we 
Part from his body with our scimitars, 
And set his head upon a lofty stake.” 

He that was hight Zarir, the Íránian leader, 
A hero valiant as the rending lion, 
Said to the world’s king: “O illustrious | 
If I may have permission from the Shah 
To give Arjásp, the sorcerer, his answer, , . .” 
And Shih Gushtisp approved thereof: “Go to," 
He said, “arise then, give him his reply, 
And make his warriors! of Khallukh like gleeds,” 

Zarír, with glorious Asfandiyár, 
And with that prosperous minister, Jáimásp, 
Departed with stern hearts and frowning looks, . 

1 tigin. i 


E" 


N AT 
« A et p -— 
E a par S 


. GUSHTÁSP- 
And wrote a eter to Arjsp the foul— 
S esponse, Zarír, chief of the host, 

» Took it still open, bare it to the Shah, 
j And read it out to him. The world-lord marvelled 
At that sage general and cavalier, 
And at Jámásp, and at Asfandiyár, 
Then fastened up the letter, wrote thereon 
His name, and called to him the ambassadors. 
" Take this," he said, *and bear it to Arjásp. 
Henceforth perchanee ye will not tread my roads. 
Were not safe-conduct for ambassadors 
. . Enjoined expressly in the Zandavasta, 

I would have wakened you from drowsihead, 

And hung you all alive upon the gibbet, 

In order that yon worthless one might learn 
That he may not exalt his neck with kings." 

He threw the letter at them, saying: “Take it, — 

_ And bear it to the Turkman sorcerer. 
— Bay: * Thy calamity is drawing nigh, 
-. . The need for blood and dust hath come upon thee. 
Be thy neck smitten and thy spirit wounded, 

_ And may thy bones be scattered on the ground. 
— A Next Dai, God willing, I will habit me 
—  — [n heavy iron mail, lead forth the host 
— Against the country of Türán to war, 
And ruinate the realm of the Gurgsár. "! 


^ MS 


88 
How the Envoys returned lo Arjisp with the 
Letter of. Gushtásp 


_ The monarch of the earth, when he had ended 
mc His speech, sent for his general, greeted him, 
EE Pat i in his chargo- H the ambassadors, and said :— 


1 Of the Wolf-heads—the name of a tribe. 


V. 1510 


44 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


" See them beyond the borders of Írán." 

The envoys left the presence of Gushtásp, 
And went their way with dust upon their heads, 
The Shah dismissing them with ignominy. 
From glorious Írán they reached Khallukh, 
But in Khallukh were still inglorious. 

As soon as they perceived the monarch's palace 
Afar, surmounted by the sable standard, 
They lighted from their proudly pacing steeds, 
Their hearts were broken and their eyes were dim. 
They went afoot before their sovereign, 
With souls all darkness and with livid cheeks, 
And gave to him the letter of the Shah— 
The answer of Zarir the cavalier. 
The letter was unfolded by a scribe, 
Who read it to the king of Turkman * race, 
The writing in the letter of the prince, 
The leader of the brave, the warrior-horseman, 
Ran: “Thine insulting letter to the Shah 
Arrived, and I have listened to and marked 
Words that were not becoming thee to utter, 
Words that should not be written or divulged, 
Not fit to be read out and hearkened to. 
Thus spakest thou: ‘I will lead forth anon 
A host against that jocund land of thine.’ 
For my part I need not four months or twain 
Ere I lead forth my Lions of the fray. 
Bring not upon thyself increase of toil, 
Because I shall unlock my treasury, 
And lead a thousand thousand warriors, 
All men of name, all veterans in fight, 
All offspring of Íraj, the paladin, 
Not of Afristyab, or of the Turkmans,’ 
All moon-faced men, all kings to look upon, 
All upright in their stature and their speech, 

1 Paighü. 2 Ibid. 


ee en Bie 


All worthy of the empire and the throne, 
The leaders and the shatterers of armies, 


All worthy of the earring and the armlet. 


_ Upon the elephants their horses’ hoofs 
Lay low the heights, and when they arm for battle 


_ Firm as a mountain are they in the saddle, 
The hill-tops shatter at them, while among them 


— Before the host thou must perforce observe them. 


! The monarch had two brothers—Ahrimans— V. 1512 


i AEs 13 9g" / E i isi , : -— £ w * » F ; ul í oe 
= - P^ "i > eri SUA. p l 
! - a € E " å : "a x 
CIIM n  GUSHTÁSP. 45 E 


All worthy of the treasure, crown, and host, 
All spearmen and all swordsmen, all of them 


All brandishing their lances as they ride, 
All with my name inscribed upon their signets, 
All converts to the Faith, all men of wisdom, 


When they are ware that I have bound the drums V. 1511 
They send the dust-clouds flying to high heaven. 


For choice there are two warrior-cavaliers— 

Zarír, the leader, and Asfandiyár— 

Who, when they don their iron panoply, 
Bestride the sun and moon, and, when they shoulder 
The crashing mace, their Grace illumineth 

The Grace and form of others. As they stand 


They with their crowns and thrones are like the sun, 
Their countenances shine with Grace and fortune. 
The other troops and chiefs are like myselfi— 
Approved and chosen of the archimages— 
So never fill up the Jíhün with musk, 
For I will open thy parched treasuries, 
And, if it pleaseth God, will trample down 
Thy head in fight upon the day of battle." 
Arjásp descended from his throne, amazed 
At reading this, and bade his generals :— 
“Call out the whole host at tomorrow's dawn." 
The warriors! of the army, chosen men 
Of Chín, came to Türán from every quarter. 


- 


V. 1513 


46 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I 


One hight Kuhram, Andarimin the other, 

Who both received drums, elephants, and standards, 
Bedecked with yellow, red, and violet. 

He gave to them three hundred thousand men, 
Selected and courageous cavaliers. 

He oped the treasury-doors and paid the troops, 
Bade blow the trumpets and load up the baggage. 
He had Kuhram, his brother, called in haste, 
And gave him charge of one wing of the host. 

He gave the other to Andariman, 

And took his own position in the centre. 


" There was an agéd Turkman named Gurgsár, 


To whom the king gave the command in chief: 

Thou wouldst have said : “ He knoweth naught but ill.” : 
To Bidirafsh, the brother of this man, 

He sent a banner blazoned with a wolf. 

There was a valiant man by name Khashash, 

Who fought afoot with lions; him the king 

Made leader of the scouts and of the vanguard: 

They bore his flag as champion of the host. 

There was a Turkman who was named Hiushdiv; 

The monarch sent him to the rear, and said :— 


" Keep guard behind the army and if thou 


See one deserting slay him on the spot, 
And take good heed herein.” 
Thus in fierce wrath 
He fared with full heart and with eyes all tears. 
He ravaged as he went, he set on fire 
The palaces, and razed trees, root and branch. 
That king of infidels led forth his host, 
With vengeful heart, against the Íránian coast. : 


GUSHTASP 47 


$9 

How Gushtásp assembled his Troops 
As goon as tidings came to Sháh Gushtüsp :— 
" The ruler of the Turkmans and of Chín 
Hath made his preparations and set forth, 
Dispatching to the front the brave Khashásh," 
He bade his general: “ At dawn tomorrow 
Array the elephants, lead out the host.” 

He wrote a letter to his marchlords thus :— 
"The Khán hath left the pathway of the great. 
Come to my court-gate, all! because my foes 
Are at the border.” 

When the letter reached 
Those nobles with this news: “There hath appeared 
A foeman who ambitioneth the world,” 
Troops gathered at the portal of the Shah, 
Out-numbering the grass-blades on the ground. 
The warriors of the world girt up their loins 
To aid the Kaian Shih, the world-possessor, 
And, as he had commanded, all the marchlords 
Set forward to the court-gate of the king. 
Anon a thousand thousand gathered round 
The Shah, that famous and benignant Kaian, 
Who visited the camp, reviewed the troops, 
And chose the fit, It joyed the glorious Shah, 
Whose heart was all astound at such a host. 
Next day Gushtásp went with the archimages, 
The chiefs, the great men, and the army-captains, 


a Unlocked the treasures hoarded by Jamshid, 


Gave to the soldiers two years’ pay and then, 

When he had given mail and rations, sounded V. 1514 
The drums and trumpets, loaded up the baggage, 

And ordered to be borne before the host 

The conquering standard of the glorious Shahs. 


"vm M 
I Ved 4 


48 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


He led the troops to battle with Arjasp— 

An army such as none had ever seen. 

None could discern the daylight or the moon 

For murk of flying dust-clouds, troops, and steeds 
Whose neighing and the war-cries drowned the drums. 
A multitude of banners were displayed, 

And spearheads pierced the clouds like trees that grow 
On mountain-tops or like reed-beds in spring. 

Upon this wise by Sháh Gushtásp's command 

The army made its way from land to land. 


8 IO 
How Jámásp foretold the Issue of the Battle to Gushtdsp b 
When he had reached Jíhün from famous 
The captain of the army made a halt. 
The Sháh departed from among the troops, 
Alighted from his steed and, having mounted 
Upon the throne, called unto him forthwith 
Jámásp his counsellor, the chief archmage, 
The first among the nobles, and the lustre 
Both of the great men and the generals. 
So pure in person was he, so devout 
Of soul, that mysteries were revealed tohim. 
He was a mighty reader of the stars, 
And who in point of knowledge had his standing ?' 
Of him the Shah inquired: “God hath endowed thee 
With honest counsel and the good religion. 
There is none like thee in the world; in short 
The Ruler of the world hath given thee knowledge; 
So make thy calculations of the stars, 
And tell me all the aspect of affairs. 
How will the battle go from first to last, 
And which of us will meet disaster here ?" 
l See p. 19. 


GUSHTASP 4D 


The old Jámásp was grieved, with rueful looks V. 1515 
He said: “I would to God that He, the Just, 
Had not bestowed on me this skill and wisdom, 
For then the Shih would not have questioned me ; 
Yet will I speak for, if I answer not, 
The king of kings will have me put to death." 
The world-lord answered : * By the name of God, 
By his—the holy bringer of the Faith— 
And by the life of that brave cavalier, 
Zarir, and that of great Asfandiyár, 
I will not ever do thee injury, 
Myself, or bid another so to do. 
Say what thou knowest touching this affair, 
For thou canst give, and I am seeking, help.” 
The sage made answer: “ O illustrious Shih! 
May thy crown flourish everlastingly. 
Know, Kaian warrior, seeker of renown! 
When fight shall bring the heroes face to face, 
When they shall raise their shouts and battle-eries, 
And thou wouldst say: ‘They tear up all the moun- 
tains,’ | 
The mighty men of valour will advance, 
And air grow pitchy with the dust of battle; 
Then will the world be darkened in thine eyes, 
Fire will fulfil the earth and reek the air, 
While mid the blows struck and the massive maces, 
Descending like smiths’ hammers on the steel, 
The twang of bowstring will oppress the brain, 
And air re-echo with the charger’s neigh ; 
The heavens will be broken, spheres and vaults, V. 1516 
The standards drenched with gore, Full many sons 
Wilt thou see fatherless and fathers sonless ! 
First will Ardshir, that Kaian, the king's son, 
The famed and gallant, urge his charger forth, 
And fling whoe'er opposeth in the dust, 
Unhorsing of the Turkman cavaliers 
VOL. V, D 


Ez 


d 


- 3 45 aci E7 TU d m TS, A 
" T 3 i i 


sa THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


A number greater than the tale of stars, 

Yet in the end be slain and his good name 
Erased. The monarch’s son, the great Shidasp, 
In vengeance then will urge his sable steed, 
Rage, draw his sword, and charging slay full many 
A horse and man, but in the end his fortune 
Will be abased, and his crowned head be bare. 
Then my son will come forward with his loins 
Girt with my girdle for Shídasp's avengement, 
And go, like Rustam, in between the hosts. 
How many men of name and warriors 

Of Chin will that brave Lion bring to earth, 
And undergo much travail in the fray! 

I tell the king of kings that Girdmi, 

What time the Íránians drop the glorious flag 
Of Kawa, will behold it from his charger, 

All dust and blood, and leaping to the ground 
Will raise it bravely, with the scimitar 

In one hand and the standard in the other— 
The violet standard—and while thus bestead 
Will overthrow the foe and root the life 

Out of those Ahrimans; then suddenly 

An enemy vindictively will strike 

One hand off with the trenchant scimitar, 

And Girimi will seize the violet flag 

Between his teeth and hold it therewithal, 
While with one hand he maketh foes to vanish: 
No man hath seen a feat more wonderful; 

Yet will a Turkman with an arrow sinite 

His breast and bring his head and crown to dust. 
Next nobly born Nastur, son of Zarir, 

Will urge his charger forward like a lion, 

And when at last he shall return in triumph, 
With hands that have been stretched out o'er the foe, 
Nivzir, the chosen horseman, will go forth, 

The world-lord’s son, will overthrow three score 


= Pee. a 
a’ 


Of foemen, and display the mastery 
Of paladins; but in the end the Turkmans 
Will smite him with their arrows and will fling 
His elephantine body to the dust. 
Next to advance will be that valiant Lion, 
That warrior-horseman who is named Zarir. 
He will go forth, a lasso in his hand, 
Upon his Arab bay, arrayed in breastplate 
Of gold resplendent as the moon. The troops 
Will be astonied at him. He will take 
A thousand warriors of the Turkman host, 
Put them in bonds, and send them to the Shah, 
And wheresoe’er that prince shall turn his face 
He will pour forth his foemen’s blood in streams, 
No one will take that royal paladin, 
Who will confound the monarch of the tents? 
Then will Zarír see great Ardshír o'erthrown V. 1518 
With livid eheeks and form like turmeric, 
Will bitterly lament him and, grown grim, 
Urge his bay Arab onward and will set 
In bitter wrath his face ugainst the Khan: 
Thou wouldest say : ' Ne'er hath he looked on flight !' 
When he shall see Arjásp among the host 
He will proclaim the praise of Sháh Gushtásp, 
O'erthrow the battle of the enemy, 
And, looking not to any one on earth, 
Proclaim the Zandavasta of Zarduhsht, 
And put his kingly confidence in God ; 
But in the end his fortune will be darkened, 
The chosen Tree be felled, for there will come 
One, Bidirafsh by name, and make his way 
Toward the spear that hath the violet standard, 
But, daring not to face the chosen champion, 
Will lie in wait for him upon the road, 
And bar it like a maddened elephant, 

! ^*]e rol du peuple qui demeure s0us des tentes" (Mohl]. 


35449 


GUSHTÁSP | ire rem 


ote 


V, 1519 


52 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


While grasping in his hand a venomed sword. 

As prince Zarir returneth from the fight, 

And thou wouldst say: ‘He cometh from a feast, 
That Turkman will let fly at him an arrow, 

Not daring to assail him openly, 

And thus the chief of nobles will be lost 

Through loathly Bidirafsh, who will bear off 

His charger and his saddle to the Turkmans. 
What man will then be foremost to avenge him ? 
Anon this famous, mighty host will close, 

Like wolves and lions, on the foe, and earth 

Will in the mellay blush with warriors’ blood, 
Their faces all be wan, the bravest tremble, 

The army's dust will hide the sun and moon, 
While flashes from the spearheads, swords, and arrows 
Will glisten as the stars among the clouds. 

Then Bidirafsh, that valiant miscreant, 

Will go forth like a wolf that raveneth, 

And, holding in his hand the envenomed glaive, 
Will urge his steed like some mad elephant. 

By his hand will a multitude of troops, 

And those the choicest of the Shah's, be slain. 
Then will the glorious Asfandiyár, 

With troops behind and God to succour him, 

In blood-stained raiment and with soul fulfilled 
By hate bring Doomsday down on Bidirafsh, 
Smite with an Indian sword a single blow, 

And hurl down half his body from the saddle. 
Then with his iron mace in hand the prince 

Will illustrate his Grace and majesty, 

Will break the foemen with a single charge, 

And shall he let them go when they are broken ? 
Nay, with a spearpoint will he gather them, 

And seatter them abroad in utter ruin, | 
While in the end the king of Chin will flee | 
Before Asfandiyár, that glorious Kaian, 


k Ll hd He | 
* r EI ni 
[] "- as i ai E a LI ê 
' , . b r i m - À a 


Bem rr GUSHTÁSP 53 


— And in his flight will make toward Türán, 
Heart-broken and in tears, and cross the waste 
With but a scanty following, while the Shah 
Will be triumphant and the foe destroyed. 

Know, O thou chosen chief of sovereigns! 

What I have said will not be otherwise. 

From me thou wilt hear nothing more or less; 

Regard me not henceforth with louring looks. 

I have not said the things that I have said 

Save at thy bidding, O victorious Shih ! 

And as for what the glorious Shah hath asked 

Of that deep sea and dark abysm of fate, 

I have not kept back aught that I have seen, 

Else why should I have told the Shah these secrets?” 
Now when the Shih, the master of the world, 

Heard this revealed he sank back on his throne, 

And dropped thegolden mace; thou wouldst have said :— 

* His Grace and majesty alike are gone.” 

He fell upon his face and swooned away, 

He spake no word and uttered not a sound. 

The monarch when his sense returned to him 

Descended from his throne, wept bitterly, 

And “ What to me,” he said, “are throne and kingship 

When all my day shall have been turned to gloom, 

My Moons, brave cavaliers, and princes gone? 

What need have I for empiry and fortune, 

For puissance and host, for crown and throne, 

When those that I love best, the most renowned, 

The chosen of the host, shall have departed, 

And from my body pluck my wounded heart ?” 
Then to Jámásp he said : * Since things are so, 

When it is time to go forth to the battle, 

I will not call upon my valiant brother, 

I will not burn mine agéd mother's heart. 

I will forbid his going to the fight, 

And give the host to glorious Gurazm. 


E 
"AA, 
Ta 
a d 


54 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Those of blood Kaian with my youthful sons, 

Who all are as my body and my soul, 

Now will I call before me, will prevent 

Their arming and will seat them in my presence. 

How can the points of poplar arrows reach 

These rocks and mountains higher than high heaven ?” 

The sage replied : * Most gracious, glorious Sháh ! 

If these be not before the army, helmed, 
Who will dare face the warriors of Chin ? 
Who will retrieve the Grace and holy Faith? 
Rise from this dust, be seated on the throne, 
And ruin not the Grace of sovereignty, 
For 'tis God's purpose which no shift can stay ; 
The Maker of the world is not a tyrant. 

v. 152: Thou wilt not profit by mdulging grief, 
For that which shall be is as good as done. 
Distress thy heart no more then but acknowledge 
The justice of the Maker of the world.” 

He gave much counsel while the Shih gave ear, 
Grew like the sun, and mounted to his throne, 
And as he sat his purpose was contirmed 
To fight the ambitious monarch of Chigil ; 
Oppressed with thought he gat no sleep that night, 
And was all eagerness for war and fight. 


S rr 

How Gushtásp amd Arjásp arrayed their Hosts 
Gushtásp, according to Jámásp's advice, 
When morning breathed and starlight disappeared, 
Led down his chosen warriors to the field, 
And, at the season when the scent of roses 
Is wafted houseward by the breath of dawn, 
Dispatched according to the Iranian custom 
His scouts on every side. A cavalier 


" - LIEU y > 

4 * 9 P| e n3 ^ a Ta ze Y E "T. " oe ll Y 
Te — = weg Se T mw d 
p^ Et c j " 


Bor GUSHTÁSP. 
Approached and said: “O monarch of the world! 
The enemy is nigh. So great a host 
Ne'er eame before from Turkistan or Chin. 

They have encamped hard by and pitched their tents 
On mountains, dales, and plains. Their general 
Hath sent out scouts, and his and thine have met.” 
Thereat high-born Gushtásp, the valiant Shih, 
Called for his general—glorious Zarír— 
And gave to him the standard, saying: “ Haste : 
Array the elephants and arm the troops.” 
The general went forth and ranged his host, 
All fain to battle with the king of Chin. 
Gushtásp gave one wing to Asfandiyár, 
With fifty thousand chosen cavaliers, 
Because he had an elephantine breast 
And lion's heart. Upon the other wing 
He stationed a select and goodly band, 
And gave it to the cherished warrior, 
Who was the son and equal of the Shah, 
The high, exalted, and exultant prince, 
To whom the Shih had given the name Shidasp ; 
While fifty thousand valiant cavaliers 
He gave to glorious Zarir, the leader, 
Assigning him the centre, for he was 
A savage Lion and the Sháh's own equal. 
The rearguard he entrusted to Nastür, 
Of glorious race, the Lustre of Zarir. 
The army thus arrayed, the Shah, o'ercome 
With grief and spent with labour, sought the height, 
Sat down upon his fair, resplendent throne, 
And thence surveyed the army. 

2 Then Arjásp, 
The monarch of the cavaliers of Chin, 

In like wise ranged his forces and dispatched 
A hundred thousand horsemen of Khallukh, 
All brave and tried, to Bidirafsh, who had, 


V. 1523 


56 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


As general, the drums and golden standard, 
Entrusting one wing of the host to him, 

Whom not a lion loose would face. He gave 

The other to Gurgsár, and gave withal 

A hundred thousand chosen cavaliers. 

In like wise in the centre of the host 

He posted a select and goodly band, 

And gave them to that stubborn sorcerer, 
Námkhást by name, the son of Hazárin.! 

With chosen horsemen five score thousand strong, 
Whose prowess was renowned throughout the world, 
He took his own post rearward in reserve, 
Ü'erlooking every portion of his powers. 

He had one son, a man of high repute, 

A veteran and pre-eminent in war, 

A noble cavalier by name Kuhram 

Above whose head much heat and cold had passed ; 
This son of his he set to oversee 

The army and direct the strategy. 


| § 12 
The Beginning of the Battle between the Iranians and 
T'üránians, and how Ardshtr, Shiri, and Shidasp were 
slain 
Now when that night had passed and it was day, 
And when the world-illuming sun shone forth, 
The troops of both hosts mounted on their saddles, 
While Shih Gushtásp observed them from the height. 
What time the glorious Sháh saw from the mountain 
The warriors in their saddles he desired 
Bihzád, his sable charger, to be brought : 
Thou wouldst have said : *"Tis surely Mount Bístáün !" 
They put the bards thereon, and then he mounted, 
1 Reading with P. 


E 


pdt E , x "T4 . 
i 2v 
x ] L] 


* GUSHTÁSP Urs U 
Whenas they set the battle in array, j «CENE 
And champion challenged champion, first they sent ta 
_ A shower of arrows like a springtide hail, E 
' Such that the sun's course was invisible! E 
Who will believe that hath not seen that marvel ? - 70 
The fountain of the sun was garnitured V 
With javelin-heads that sparkled like a river! eS 
One would have said : * The sky is overcast, A 
And from the clouds are raining diamonds," 1 a 
While through the mace-men and the javelin-men, a 
Who charged on one another, all the air TM 
Assumed the hue of night and all the earth ^ CE 
. Was inundate with gore. First came Ardshír, LZ 
That goodly horseman and the world-lord's son, E 
Like some mad elephant upon the field ; ^ 
Thou wouldst have said: “Can it be Tus the chief?” Es 
Thus wheeléd he before the host, not knowing E 
What sun and moon decreed. An arrow struck him d 
Upon the loins, transfixed his Kaian mail, “= 
And that prince tumbled headlong from his bay, -i 
His stainless form defiled and smirched with blood. m 
Woe for that fair face radiant as the moon, — : E 
Which never more the wise Shih looked upon! - TO 
Then came like flying dust high-born Shiri, V. 1524 E 
Whose heart was full and visage wan, before 
The line of battle, bearing in his hand 
A venomed sword; he roared as 'twere a lion, | 
Brought down like onager full many a foe, e 
And in his vengeance for that royal horseman ; 


Slew fifty score of hostile cavaliers ; E 


But as he was returning from the fray, 2 
When thus he had incarnadined the earth, 5 
There came an arrow at his nape; the prince * 
Fell. Woe for that brave, noble warrior, 4 
Who died and nevermore beheld his sire ! - 
The next to sally forth was prince Shidasp, h^ 
"C 


"n. ae Lis 3 
ea? Lo "an ^ 4 me m AU 
S AS Pa FX. ABB 
s. VT OSa S UERS prm 
, " " a Ww E Á 


- A" e 


58 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA usi 


One like the moon, a man of royal mien. 
He, seated on a steed like indigo, 
Fleet as gazelle and huge as elephant, 
Rushed on the field of battle, whirled and brandished. 
His lance as ‘twere a twig, held in his steed, 
And shouted, saying: * Which is bold Kuhram, 
Whose look is as the look of wolf and tiger?” 

A div advanced, exclaiming: “I am one 
To bite the famished lion,” 

Then they wheeled 
With lances, and the Shih’s son speared the Turkman, 
Dismounted him, and, cutting off his head, 
Flung down his goodly girdle to the dust: 
Then wheeled before the warriors of Chin, 
As though he were a mountain on the saddle, 
In sooth eye never saw a man so goodly; 
His beauty drew all eyes, Howbeit a Turkman 
Let fly at him an arrow, and that prince, 
That offspring of the Sháh, went to the winds. 
Woe for that lost one reared so daintily, 
Whose face his father was no more to see ! 
* 


§ 13 

How Girámé, Jámdap's Son, and Nivsdr were slain 
Then of the leaders of the host went forth 
The brave son of Jámásp the minister, 
A valiant horseman, Girámí by name, 
Like to the son of Zál, the son of Sám. 
Upon a chestnut charger fleet and trusty 
He stood before the battle of the men 
Of Chín, and, having prayed to God the Judge, 
“Who of you," said he, * is of lion-heart 
To come against my life-destroyir g spear ? 
And where is that o'erweening sorcerer, 


» Bree | GUSHTÁSP 3 
=» — Nümkhást by name, the son of Hazárán ? "! A 
Námkhást went forth to him: thou wouldst have 2 
said :— 
“That charger hath a mountain on its back!” T 
Those two accomplished horsemen wheeled about pe 
With mace and lance, with shaft and scimitar, 
But gallant Girimi had lion's strength ;; . 
That valiant cavalier could not withstand him, NS 
And, though a man of battle, took to flight a 
On seeing that Kaian puissance and keen sword ; S 
Then Girdmi rode onward in fierce wrath, ^ 
: With heart all raging to avenge the fallen, T 
s And fell upon the centre of the foe. H 
Anon a blast rose from the mountain-skirt 1 
As those two armies mingled in the mellay x 
And sent the dark dust flying. In the turmoil Ke. 
That followed ‘twixt the hosts, amid the strokes c 
Of scimitars and sable clouds of dust, P 
Fell from the Irinians’ hands the splendid standard 7 
; Of Kawa. Girmi beheld that flag, I 
| All indigo of hue, which they had flung E 
From elephant-back, dismounting lifted it, JA 
Shook off the dust, and cleared the soil away. i 
Now when the warriors of Chin beheld him « ¥ 
— Raise from the ground that flagstaff famed and dear, i 
= And, after håving cleansed it, bear it off, ; 
Their bravest warriors surrounded him, E 
| And, thus assailing him on all sides, struck T 
One hand off with a scimitar. He seized | 
The flag of Faridün* between his teeth M 
And, strange to tell, plied with the other hand 
His mace! At last they slew him wretchedly, V. 1526 Te 
And flung him vilely on the burning dust. i 
Alas for that brave, warlike cavalier ! a 
$ That ancient sage* beheld him not again. ! 
P ' Reading with P. ! Cf. Vol. 1. p. 157. ! Jámásp. 4 
I 
s. X 4 


wu ^ cL. 
RSEN TENON 
E THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi E 


Immediately went forth Nastür, the Lion, 

A warrior, Kaian-born, son of Zarir. 

He slew a countless multitude of foes, 

For he had learned to battle from his father, 
And in the end returned victorious 

And glad, and stood again before his sire.) 
Next there went forth the chosen cavalier, 
Nivzir, son of the monarch of the world. 

He rode a charger fleet of foot—a steed 

Of thousands—came to that dark battlefield, 
And shouted, saying : * Chosen warriors! 
What man of name is there among you all, 
What valiant, veteran wielder of the spear ? . 
Let him confront me now with lance in hand, 
Because a man of mettle fronteth you." 

The cavaliers of Chín rushed forth at him, 
And strove to overthrow him. Brave Nívzár, 
Who was the finest horseman in the world, 
Like some wroth elephant and rending lion, 
Kept wheeling round the warriors of Chin: 
Thou wouldst have said : * He rolleth up the earth!" 
He slaughtered sixty warriors world-renowned, 
And nurtured all upon the dust of battle, 

But in the end an arrow from a bow 

Struck him as it had been a flash from heaven. 

He fell from that fleet steed of goodly hue, 

And died. Behold the end of combating ! 

Alas! that noble cavalier and Lion, 

Who fell in vain—the image of his sire— 

And woe is me for that fair face and form! 

Now when that goodly cavalier was slain 

The myriad warriors that were around 

Engaged in every quarter of the field, 

And raised the dust-clouds from earth's face, Two se'n- 
nights 

Passed in that fight for not a horseman slept, 


| e. - : ss a 
F P " a + y uL. z " en LI 
^4 E E I g 
Ww J _  - ee a : "o x d hi i & - 13 P 
á — i s 
d s i s , ET RAS 


IX RIUTTWTTGDSHTÁSPA e T "Sore 
‘The earths! were filled with slain and wounded men, 
The passage of the wind was barred by dust, 

The dales and deserts were in tulip-dress, 

And blood flowed over waste and wilderness. 


$ 14 
How Zarír, the Brother of Gushtdep, was alain by Bidirafsh 
In these encounters two weeks passed away, 
And all the while the fighting grew more fierce. 
| Then brave Zarír advanced before the host, 
E Bestriding his huge chestnut, threw himself 
Upon the encampment of the enemy, 
Like blazing fire and wind amid the grass, 
Slew, and dispatched them to their last repose: 
None that beheld withstood him. Then Arjásp, 
Perceiving that the prince had slaughtered many 
Of name, cried loudly to his warriors :— 
: “What! will ye let Khallukh go to the winds? 
We have been fighting for two weary weeks, 
And still I see no prospect of the end. è 
The warriors of Shah Gushtasp have slain 
Full many a man of name among our troops, . 
And now Zarir is in the midst of you, 
As 'twere a fierce wolf or a rending lion, 
And he hath slaughtered all my followers, 
My noble Turkmans and my men of war! 
We must devise a remedy for this, 
Or trudge back to Turan, for if this man 
Continue thus he will not leave Áyis, 
Khallukh or Chin, What man of you in quest 
Of fame will show among the troops, go forth 
Man-like, alone, and compass world-renown 7 
I will bestow on him my daughter's hand, 


f 1 Qf. Vol. ii. p. 15 and note. 
à 


62 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


And give to him the conduct of my host.” 

The soldiers answered not a word, for all 
Feared that Wild Boar. Immediately Zarir 
The chief, the paladin of paladins, 

Advancing as he were a furious wolf, 

Fell on them like a maddened elephant, 

Or lion, slaughtering and overthrowing, 

Arjasp, beholding this, was so astound 

That day turned dark to him. Again he said — 
" O great, brave princes, warriors of Chin ! 
Regard ye not your kindred and allies, 

Nor yet the wounded groaning ‘neath the feet 
Of one who is as a consuming fire, 

With Sám's mace and the arrows of Árish, 
Whose flames e'en now are burning up my host, 
And scorching all my kingdom? Who is there 
Among you all, one puissant of hand, 

To go against yon maddened Elephant ? 
Whoever will attempt yon warrior-slayer, 

And hurl him from his steed, upon that man 
Will I bestow a treasury full of gold, 

And raise his helmet higher than the sky." 

Still no man answered him a word. Arjásp 
Was in amazement and his cheeks grew pale. 
He spake the third time to the troops, but when 
No answer came to him he held his peace, 

At last the lusty Bidirafsh advanced— 

The foul, that dog, that warlock, that old wolf— 
And spake thus to Arjisp: “O mighty Sun, 
In root and stem like to Afrásiyáb! 
Thee have I brought my life and I have made it, 
Sweet as it is, thy shield. I will confront 
Yon raging Elephant. IfI shall seize, 
And fling him to the dust before the king, 
Let me be leader of this countless host.” 
1 tigin. 


"T PN 


‘et ese 


VEU Gomis" " 


son Arjásp oed, praised Bídirafsh, 
Gave his own steed and saddle to that chief, 
And therewithal a keen two-headed dart 

| Of steel that would have pierced an iron mountain. 
That foul enchanter with the loathly form 
Went toward Zarír, the leader of the folk, 
But seeing from afar his fearsome fury, 
His beard besoiled, his eyes fulfilled, with dust, 
À mace like Sám the hero's in his hand, 

_ And slain before him heaped up like a mountain, 

_ Adventured not to face him openly, 
But skirmished round him stealthily and hurled 
Unseen at him the double-headed dart. 

= His royal mail was pierced, his kingly form 

J Bedrenched with blood. He tumbled from his steed. 

= Woe for that youthful, royal cavalier ! 
Foul Bídirafsh alighted, stripped the prince, 
And bare off to the king the horse and girdle, 
The standard and the goodly, jewelled crown, 
While all the army shouted and paraded 
The standard on an elephant. Gushtasp, 
What time he looked forth from the mountain-top, 
Saw not amid the dust that Moon of chiefs, 
And said: “I fear me that the full-orbed Moon, 
That ever gave a lustre to the host— 
My valiant brother, glorious Zarír, 
Who used to overthrow the angry lion— 
Hath been dismounted, for the warriors 
Have ceased from charging and the prinees shout not ! 
Perchance that chief of nobles hath been slain. 
Speed to the battlefield à mounted man V. 1530. 
Toward yonder sable standard and discover 
My royal brother's ease, because my heart 
Is full and seared for him." 

Thus fared the world's king 

Till one, whose eyes poured blood-drops, came and said :— 


i c 
à A i i . iu o! P 
P" sit us » F 


V. 1531 


64 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


“The Turkman horsemen wretchedly have slain 
Thy Moon, the guardian of thy crown and host, 
Him that was paladin of paladins— 
Zarir the cavalier—for Bídirafsh, 
The chief of all the warlocks of the world, 
Hath overthrown him and borne off the standard." 
The world's king, hearing of that slaying, felt 
Death visible Down to the feet he rent 
His robe, strewed dust upon his jocund crown, 
And said to sage Jámásp: " What shall I say 
To Sháh Luhrásp? How can I send to court 
A messenger? How tell mine ancient sire? 
Alas! that royal warrior! Alas! 
Gone like the bright moon midst the clouds! Bring 
hither 
Luhrásp's Gulgün and set thereon my saddle.” 
He made him ready to avenge his brother, 
And carry on his Faith and precedent, 
But “ Pause!” said his experienced minister, 
“Thy going to revenge is ill-advised,” 
So, as that prescient minister enjoined, 
The Shah alighted and resumed the throne, 
Thus saying to his troops: “ What Lion-is there 
To take revenge for glorious Zarír, 
And, urging forth his steed with that intent, 
Retrieve my brother's saddle and his charger? 
I swear before the Master of the world— 
The oath of upright and of noble men— 
That whosoe'er shall go forth from the army, 
On him will I bestow Humai, my daughter.” 
But not a man came forward from the host, 
And not a single warrior left his post. 


" 7 


ge saM TTET TERN ee 
tore tis le a^ ^ Pa , 
GUSHTÁSP 65 : 
§ 15 1 
How Asfamdiyár heard of the Slaying of Zarír $ ' 
Thereafter tidings reached Asfandiyár :— uM 
" Zarír, that princely cavalier, is slain, Dp. 


Thy father, overeome by grief for him, 
Now purposeth to take revenge himself." ‘= 
The famous hero wrung his hands, and said :— 7M 


= “ What ill doth fortune spare us? When I saw 4 

Zarit in fight I ever feared this day. i 

| Woe for that horseman, warrior, and chief, A 

| Whom fortune hath diserowned ! Who slew that prince, a 

| That valiant Elephant? Who plucked from earth a 

| That iron Mount?“ | 

| Resigning to a brother Esc 

| Flag, troops, and his own station, he advanced ig 
Himself and reached the centre, girt his loins, “da 
And seized the royal standard. Now he had A 

| Five brothers, the adornments of the throne, E 

All men of high renown, the Sháh's compeers. "A 
They held Asfandiyár in reverence, S 
Because it was his wont to shatter hosts, E 


That Mainstay of the troops said to those nobles ;— 

“Ye men of name and scions of the Shih! 1 
Attend to what I say, observe it well, - 
And trust the Faith of God, the Lord of all. | 
Know then, ye princes! that this ts the day | 
Which will discern the false Faith from the true. d 
See that ye fear not death or anything, i 


For none will die but at his fated time, 1 
And if so be that fated time hath come, " 
What is more glorious than to die in battle? > 
Heed not the slain, seek not for further help, uu 
And count not heads, Put not your trust in flight, 5 
And be not terrified at combating, D 
| VOL, V. _ 8 u 
z b. 


b 
5 z 
x. | : | 
£! is 
ENT ^m A p» 


a 
= 
" m 
* * L3 r^" Uà 
- r 
m E -l 
» 
>i 


Ap: 4 TX c d. 


$ 


66 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ — | 
V. 1532 In battle let your lances’ points be low, 

Strive for a space and quit you manfully, 

If ye will do as I have bidden you 

My soul will still be stayed within my body, 

Your name will be renowned throughout the world, 

And all the host of yon old Wolf will perish.” 
While matters fared thus with Asfandiyár 

His father shouted from the mountain-top :— 

" Ye men of name and warriors of mine, 

Who are as mine own body and my soul! 

Fear ye not arrows, swords, and javelins, 

Because there is no fleeing from our fate, 

By God's Faith and by brave Asfandiyiir, 

And by the soul of that loved cavalier, 

4arir, alighted now in Paradise, 

Luhrisp the Shah hath written unto me, 

And I have pledged me to that ancient man, 

That, if good fortune giveth me the day, 

I will bestow, when I shall quit the field, 

The crown and throne upon Asfandiyár; 

I will bestow the royal crown on him 

Just as my sire bestowed the realm on me, 

While Bishütan! shall have the host, and I 

Will erown him with a erown of royalty." 


8 16 

How Asfandiyár went to battle with. Arjásp 
Asfandiyár, the elephant-bodied hero, 
Lord of the throne and terrible of form, 
Heard what his father shouted from the mountain, 
And hung his head for sorrow. Spear in hand 
He came, bent modestly before his sire, 
And then, as 'twere a dív escaped from bond, 


» f 
{ lera) LEX 


GUSHTÁSP e a. - 
Bestrode a stately grey, like blast on rose-leaves iE 
Fell on the foe, slew, and beheaded them, Ju 
While all that saw him died of fright. Nastür, E. 
Son of Zarír the horseman, left his tent, - 
Went to the keeper of the steeds and bade | 
Of buttock, like a caracolling mountain. 
He set a golden saddle on its back, 6 
And harnessed it and put the bards thereon. E 
He bound a Kaian lasso to the straps, - 
Then mounted, after he had armed himself, 
And spear in hand rode to the battlefield. A 
Thus faring till he reached the scene of strife E 
He sought to light upon his slaughtered sire. y 
He hasted, put his charger to its speed, ; 
Exacting vengeance, slaying as he went, 
And when he saw one of the Íránian race 
Would ask that noble of the host, and say :— 
" Where was it that Zarír, my father, fell— y 
That warrior, that doughty cavalier ? " 1 
There was a certain man, Ardshír by name, á 
A horseman, one of worth, a hero-taker, 
Of whom the youth inquired. That warrior 
Directed him to where his slain sire lay. 
“ He fell,” so spake Ardshir, “amid the host, 
Hard by yon sable standard. Thither haste, 
And thou mayst look upon his face once more,” 
The prince urged on his steed and as he went j 
He slaughtered foes and dealt destruction round. * 


He rushed along until he reached his sire, 3 
And, when he saw the corpse upon the dust, 
All heart and reason left him. From his saddle 
He threw himself upon his father's body, 7 
And thus addressed it: “O my shining Moon, ME 
The lustre of my heart and eyes and soul ! "A 
What toil and trouble hadst thou in my nurture, : 
d 
" 


V. 1534 


68 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


And whom didst thou commit me to in dying? 
Since Shih Luhrisp bestowed the host upon thee, 
And gave Gushtásp the throne and diadem, 
Thou hast administered the troops and realm, 
And battled with a will Thy fame on earth 
Is bright as thou eouldst wish, yet thou art slain 
While still unsatisfied ; but I will seek 
Thy brother, that auspicious Shih, and say :— 
‘Deseend thou from that goodly throne of thine. 
Thy conduct is unworthy of my father; 
Go forth then and avenge him on the foe.’ ” 
Long while he mourned, then mounted, With exclaims 
He sought the Shih upon the goodly throne. 
* Life of thy father,” said the king of kings, 
“Why hast thou filled thine eyes with tears?” 
Replied 
The Kaian-born: *O monarch of the world! 
Gro and avenge my sire, because my lord, 
His black beard musk-perfumed, is left to lie 
Upon the arid dust!” 
Now when the Sháh 
Heard, daylight blackened to him and the world 
Loured on its lord; his elephantine form 
Shrank, and “ Bring forth,” he said, “ my sable steed, 
My battle-mail, and casque, because today 
In wreak for him will I pour warriors’ blood 
In many a stream and light a fire whose reek 
Shall reach to Saturn |" 
When the warriors 
Saw from the field—the hosts’ dark scene of strife— 
Their sovereign arming, and that he would go 
To seek revenge, they said: “The king of kings, 
And master of the world, will not go forth 
To battle, seeking wreak, with our consent, 
Else what need is there to array the host?" 
The noble minister addressed the Shih, 


a Af “we N h 
=! LI Li 2 
AT i EI ! "A 


And said: “Thou shouldst not go upon the field. 
Give to Nastur the steed that thou wouldst mount, 
And send him forth to battle with the foe, 

For better than thou canst will he require 

The vengeance that is owing for his sire.” 


z " | 
§ 17 
How Nastár and. Asfandiyár slew Bidirafsh 
The Sháh then gave his steed Bihzád, his helm 
Of steel, and sable breastplate to Nastür, 


The slaughtered prince's son who, armed and mounted, 


Rode forth between the opposing hosts and, halting 
Before the battle of the enemy, 
Heaved from his breast a deep, cold sigh, and cried :— 
* Nastür am I, the offspring of Zarífr: 
The lion dareth not encounter me. 
Where is that warlock Bidirafsh who holdeth 
The fiag of Kawa?” 

As no answer came 
He urged along night-hued Bihzád, and slew 
Full many a valiant warrior of the host, 
While no one went forth to encounter him ; 
On this side too the brave Asfandiyár 
Slew of them past all counting and compute. 
Whenas the king of Chin beheld Nastir— 
That youthful paladin of Kaian race— 
He cried out to his troops: “What man is this, 
This spearman so accomplished, who hath slain 
My chiefs in numbers numberless, unless 
“arir, the cavalier, hath come to life— 
He that came out against me at the first, 
And urged his charger in this selfsame way ? 
Where is the chosen warrior Bidirafsh ? 
Ho! summon him before me, and right soon." 


GUSHTÁSP 69 


V. 1536 


70 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Then Bidirafsh went forth at once, he bare 
The violet flag, was mounted on the charger 
Of prince Zarír, and wore the prince's mail. 
Advancing in his pride toward Nastür, 
That royal youth, the lustre of the host, 
He grasped the selfsame sword of watered steel 
Wherewith he had o'erthrown Zarir1 They wheeled— 
Zarír's son and that chief of Turkman warlocks— 
Contending with their scimitars and arrows. 
Men told the glorious Asfandiyár, 
The Sháh's son, of their combating, who made 
All haste to go to them. Now when that chief 
Of sorcerers beheld this, and perceived 
What man now was advancing to assail him, 
He urged his charger from amid the fray, - 
And hurled his baneful weapon at the prince 
To darken if he might that radiant face; 
It missed the prince, who caught it in his hand 
And pierced—a hero's stroke—his foeman's liver, 
So that the point came out the other side, 
Thus Bidirafsh fell from his steed and perished, 
Experiencing the might of Kaian birth. 
Asfandiyir dismounted from his steed, 
And stripping off the armour of Zarir— 
The noble hero—from that ancient warlock, 
Whose head he severed from its trunk withal, 
He carried off the prince's glossy charger, 
The flag, and head of worthless Bídirafsh. 
The Kaian army raised a shout, all sent 
Their clamour through the skies: “The prince hath 

triumphed, i 

Hath overthrown the foe, gone forth, and brought 
The dun steed back!” 


! The sword is mentioned in Jámásp's prophecy (p- 52), but elsewhere 
we are told that Zarir was slain by a double-headed dart (p. 63). The 
discrepancy may be due to lack of revision (p. 22). | 


M 


- GUSHTÁSP. : n COT 
| The prince, that valiant horseman, oe 


Brought to the Shah Zarir’s horse and presented 
The head of that old warlock. Thus he slew 
The slayer as by law and wont is due. 


$ 18 | 
How Arjdsp fled from the Battle y 
When great Asfandiyár had taken vengeance, x 
And saddled him the charger of Zarir, 
He rode back proudly to the battlefield, V. 1537 — 
Formed three divisions of the Kaian host, ^ 
And gave one to the warrior Nastür - 
Of glorious birth—the lustre of the troops ; E- 
The second—all Íránian warriors a 
And chieftains—he entrusted to his brother, 4 
And kept the third beneath his own command, K 
Whose voice was as it were a thundering cloud. A 
Nastür of stainless birth, the exalted chief, = 
And Nush Azar, the valiant pale ol 
Both bound themselves together solemnly : — 
* Although the foeman's sword shall cleave the earth : 
We will not come back from the fight alive, 3 
And let those misereants eseape our grasp." " 
When they had spoken thus and made secure ui 
Their saddle-girths they went forth to the battle. E 
Now, as they urged their chargers from the lines, 4 
The heroes and the young men of [rin 3 
All eame on too and decked the world with mail. uw 
They slew so many horsemen that they cramped 4 
The battlefield. The mill-wheels turned in blood a 
That streamed from hill and plain. Arjásp, beholding, J 
Advanced with his own chiefs and warriors. P. 
Asfandiyár, the hero-slayer, couched | 7 M 
His lance against those divs of Turkman race, | ` - 


-— 


í at " Y i 
E a 
babu ds wa T., 


72 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


And sewed them breast to back till he had slain 
Full many a haughty chief, Although the Khán 
Saw none to aid, and none who dared oppose 

V. 1538. Asfandiyár, but that his troops withdrew 
Demoralised, he kept his post till eve 
Amid the rout, then fled toward the waste. 
The Iranians pressed the countless troops of Chin, 
And slaughtered them in numbers everywhere, 
For, strange to tell! not one showed pity there ! 


§ 19 
How the Turkmana received Quarter Jrom Aafandiydr 

The Turkman troops saw that Arjásp had fled, 

That swords were flashing on all sides of them, 

And all the chiefs, alighting from their steeds, 

Came to the presence of Asfandiyár, 

The hero, flung away their Turkman bows, 

And doffed their mail. "They said to him in anguish :— 

| “If now the prince will give his servants quarter 

| We will accept his Faith, will seek instruction 
Therein, and all do worship to the Fires,” 

M. The Íránian soldiery regarded not 

b Their words and smote and slaughtered till the world 

Shone with their blood, but when Asfandiyár 
Had heard the Turkmans' cries he granted quarter 
For life and limb. That elephantine hero, 


4 That princely scion of the royal race, 
B ps Made proclamation to his glorious host :— 
^ " Íránian nobles ! spare the men of Chin, 


Now that our enemies have been o'erthrown 

Restrain your hands from further massacre. 
Give these dogs quarter, for they have enough 

| V. 1539. Of anguish, scorn, and strait, make no more prisoners, 
Put none in bonds, and let all bloodshed cease ; 


r " 4 D 0 j 
n Ae Ea E 1 A a$ d 
> 


UU 


oe. 


GUSHTÁSP 73 


. whee 


Charge not, nor trample on the slain. Go round 
And reckon up the wounded. By Zarír's soul, 
Make no more prisoners, and tarry not 
For long upon your battle-steeds." 
The troops, 

On hearing what their leader said to them, 
Gave themselves up to tendering the wounded. 
They went back to their camp, beat kettledrums, . 
Because they had returned victorious, n 
And all that night slept not for joy, for Rustam | 
Himself might own to such a victory. = 
When night had passed away, and blood still ran 
On wilderness and waste, the famous Kaian, 
Escorted by the captains of the host, 
Went forth to look upon the battlefield. 
He wandered midst the slaughtered, shedding tears 
O'er any known to him, but when he saw 
His brother's corpse lung vilely on the field 
He rent the royal raiment that he wore ^ 
And, lighting from his glossy steed Shilak, E 
Clutehed at his beard with both his hands, and eried :— 
* Prince of the warriors of Balkh! by thee 
My whole life hath been turned to bitterness. 
Alack! O gracious form ! O chief! O prince! 
O warlike cavalier! O chosen hero— b. 
My column and the curtain of the realm, ug 
The Kaian lustre and the army's crown!" | 

He eame near, raised the body from the dust, 


â ml 


And with his own hands wiped the dead man's face; P 
Then placed the body on a golden bier: yu 
Zarír, thou wouldst have said, had ne'er been born, cs 
The Íránian nobles and his own young kinsmen 3 
He laid upon their biers, and gave command A 
To count the slain and carry off the wounded. CX 
They searched the battlefield, the plains, and moun- 4 
E 


Y. 1540 


74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 


The waste and ways, Of soldiers of Iran 

Were thirty thousand slain; of men of name 

Eleven hundred and three score and six 

One thousand and two score of name were wounded, 
And ‘seaped the trampling of the elephants. 

A hundred thousand of the enemy 

Were slain, eight hundred of them chiefs and nobles; 
The wounded were three thousand and ten score. 
Shun, if thou canst, such ill scenes evermore. 


§ 20 


How Gushtdsp returned to Balkh 
The famous Kaian, the triumphant Shah, 
Went from the battletield toward his throne, 
And bade Nastur: “ Tomorrow at the dawn 
Conduct the army toward our glorious realm.” 

That chosen chieftain had the tymbals sounded 
At daybreak, and the army packed the baggage. 
They turned back to the country of iran, 
Stout-hearted and prepared to fight again. 

They passed by no one either killed or wounded, 
But bore the wounded to Írán and gave them 
To skilful leeches. Now on his return 
The monarch of the world bestowed Humái, 
His glorious daughter, on his eldest son,’ 
And gave illustrious Nastür the host, . 
According to the usage of the Persians, 
Gave him ten thousand of that noble race, 
World-questing horsemen, wielders of the lance, 
Gave him command, and said: “O gallant spearman! : 
Go forth against the monarch of the Turkmans, 
Pass through Áyás and through Khallukh, and slay 
All that thou takest to avenge thy sire." 
* Fe. Asfandiyár. Cf, p. 22. 


- 


GUSHTASP 


The Sháh supplied whate'er Nastür required, 
Not taking either count or reckoning, 
And thereupon Nastür led forth the host, 
While Sháh Gushtásp sat on his throne and state, 
And, placing on his head the Kaian crown, 
Gave audience unto all the host. He opened 
His treasury and decked the troops with wealth, 
Gave cities to the chieftains, sovereignties 


And dignities to those deserving them ; 


He passed none over, gave to each his due, 

And after that dismissed them to their homes. 
Then mounting on his throne for secret conclave, 
And sitting on the seat of king of kings, 

He bade inaugurate a Fane of Fire, 

And use for fuel Indian aloe-wood. 

They made the floor thereof pure gold throughout ; 
The dust was ambergris, the fuel aloe. 

He fashioned all by rules of art, he called 

The place * The Mansion of Gushtásp," and made 
Jámásp its arehmage. To his governors 

He wrote: “The Lord hath not abandoned us, 

For He hath turned our night’s gross murk to day, 
And given us conquest to our full content. 

Arjásp was shamed, we triumphed. Who can know 
To do this save the Maker of the world? 

On hearing of the victory of your Shah 

Present your tribute to the priests of Fire.” 

When Cesar, King of Rim, received the news :— 
“The Shih hath conquered and Arjásp is worsted,” 
He sent an embassy with precious gifts 
Of slave-boys and of steeds caparisoned ; 

The king of Barbaristán and kings of Hind 


. Sent tribute too as did the kings of Sind. 


M} 
TN S E e 


i " — 
( i 1 e" - - d 
ate " f - 4 1 l A i í 
"T Vei Ts d [vu hd n = " 
í + ] i i é e "3 v a a i " "ud " - 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


$2 | 
How Gushtdsp sent Asfandiyár to all the Provinces, and 
how the Folk received from him the good Religion 
V. 1542 One day the illustrious and fair-fortuned hero, 
When seated on the glorious Kaian throne, 
Gave audience to the elect of all his realm, 
The magnates, and the princes of birth royal. 
Asfandiyár, the hero, came before 
The presence, ox-head mace in hand and wearing 
A Kaian casque above that shining moon, 
His face, He stood before the presence, slave-like, 
With head depressed and folded arms. Gushtásp 
Saw and esteemed his face o'er life and world, 
And smiling said: “O brave Asfandiyár ! 
Dost thou not long for fight ? " 
That gallant swordsman 
Replied: “’Tis thine to bid because thou hast 
The kingship and the world.” 
The famous Kaian 
Gave him a golden crown, unlocked for him 
The treasures, and committed to his charge 
The conduct of Írán, because he had 
The might of paladins, gave standard, wealth, 
And host, and said : * Thy season for the throne 
Is not yet. Mount thy saddle and convert 
All nations to the Faith.” 
The Shah's son went— 
A hero-slaying swordsman—with his host 
To all the nations, Over Rum he passed, 
And Hindüstán, passed ocean and the Gloom, 
And published the evangel by command 
Of God, the All-provider. When folk learned 
About the good Faith they received its rites, 
Adorned themselves therewith, and sought instruction. 


i: Pegs = eee ee 
pe"  GUSHTÁÀSP 77 


They burned the idols on their thrones, they kindled 
The Fire in stead thereof, and all dispatched 
This letter to the Shih; “ We have accepted 
The Faith delivered by Asfandiyár, 
And donned the girdle! He hath ordered all, 
Thou shouldst not now ask tribute of us, we 
Have been converted and profess the Faith, 
Send us the Zandavasta of Zarduhsht." 

When he had read the letter of the kings 
He sat upon his throne and called his peers. 
He sent the Zandavasta to each clime, 
To every man of name and every chief, 
And ordered that the famous paladin 
Should go to all four quarters of the world, 
Now no one, wheresoe'er that prince appeared 
Dared to go forth to meet him in the fight, 
But all folk placed themselves at his command, 
While evil-doers vanished utterly. - 
Asfandiyár, when all had recognised ; 
His sire, loosed from his loins the golden girdle, 
Sat like a monarch on the royal seat, 
And for a season rested with his host, 
But called to him his brother Farshídward 
And, having summoned troops and warriors, 
Bestowed on him dínárs and drachms in plenty, 
Gave Khurásán to him and so dismissed him. 
Now when a while had passed, and when the world 
Had grown all pure and convert to the Faith, 
Asfandiyár thus advertised his sire, V. 1544 
And said : “ Illustrious and vietorious Sháh ! 
By God's Grace I have purged the world, and spread 
The shadow of the eagle through the climes ; 
Moreover men no longer fear each other, 
And no one is in lack of gold and silver, 
The world hath grown as bright as Paradise 

i See p. 16. 


ae E ] D 


i Li s 
“we 


LP 
Ar 


V. 1545 


78 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


And populous, and all the fields are tilled; 
Our cavaliers have made it-all their own, 
The husbandmen are at their husbandry.” 
The world wagged on awhile with matters thus, 
And evil was no longer obvious, 


§ 22 
How Gurazm spake Evil of Asfandiydr 
Mine author saith that when the Shih bestowed 
A royal crown upon Asfandiyár 
There was a certain noble hight Gurazm, 
A famous war-worn warrior, who cherished 
A secret enmity against the prince, 
I know not why it was, but I have heard 
That this man was a kinsman of Gushtásp's, 
And always ill-disposed toward his son,! 
And, when that prince's fame was noised abroad, 
Was wont to slander and belittle him. 
Once at the dawn of day the famous Shih, 
While sitting in the banquet-hall at ease, 
Gave audience to the chosen of his host, 
The magnates, kings, and others of high birth, 
Gurazm sat, his visage passion-pale 
And heart all black with hate, before the Shih, 
The glorious one, Now mark the villain's conduct 
What time the converse turned upon the prince, 
For thereupon he wrung his hands, and cried :— 
“A wicked son is like an enemy, 
And, being such, should win advancement never. 
An archimage, a holy man, hath told us :— 
‘A puissant son, if he becometh great, 
Will alter for the worse his sire's estate ; 
A slave that is disloyal to his lord, 
Should be beheaded as his just reward.’ ” 
! Qf. p 12. 


P 


i 


Ms X Tow 
"Om " i ur: H [o t. p L3 
à à (umma - 
WT wi d " , r ` 
b F » 


aj 


E 


a mE 
| y 0 oe." 4 wA oL 
j é j ) [ 3 P m y 


"an aT SENT PS 


3USHTÁSP - 79 
Gushtásp asked what the riddler meant, and said :— 

“What is this riddle? Whọ doth know the answer?” 
The slanderous Kaian said : * "'were indisereet ' 

To tell it now." 

The great king cleared the hall, 

And said to that deceiver: “Come to me, 

Reveal the whole to me and what my son, 

That man of serpent faith, concealeth from me,” 
Gurazm, the ill-disposed, made answer thus :— 

“To do the right thing is the part of wisdom. 

The Shah hath satisfied mine every wish, 

And I must keep no secrets from the Shih. 

I will not keep my counsel back from him, 

E'en though it proveth unacceptable, 

I vill in no wise keep it from my lord, 

Though he should let me never speak again, 

Because for me to speak, although he hear not, 

Is better than to hide from him the secret. 

Know then, O world-lord! that Asfandiyar 

Is clearly bent on battle, troops have flocked 

In multitudes, and all men turned, to him. 

His purpose is to put thee into bonds; V. 1546 

He cannot bear that thou shouldst be the Shah, 

And, when he hath laid hands on thee and bound 

thee, 

Will make the whole world subject to himself, 

Thou knowest that Asfandiyár is one 

That hath no peer in battle, and when he 

Hath coiled his lasso up the sun itself 

Will not dare meet him. I have told thee truly 

What I have heard ; so now be well-advised ; 

To counsel and take action are for thee.” 
Now when Gurazm spake thus before the Shah 

That famous warrior was all astound, 

And said: ‘ Whoever saw a thing so monstrous ?” 
In dudgeon he began to hate his son; 


UC MERSAM uw 
è ù a 


ss = |.) e T 


V. 1517 


8o THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI 


He quaffed no wine withal, forwent his pleasures, 
Refused the feast, and heaved deep, chilling sighs ; 
He could not sleep for thinking all that night, 
Possessed by wrath against Asfandiyar. 
As soon as dawn breathed from the mountain-tops, 
And starlight disappeared, he called to him 
Jámásp, that man of much experience, 
His minister in chief, and said: “ Approach 
Asfandiyar, call him forthwith, conduct him 
To me, and say: ‘A great affair is toward, 
And therefore come, O leader of the realm ! 
Thy presence is required, and for my part, 
When thou art absent, nothing prospereth. " 

He wrote an urgent letter in these words :— 
" O noble, glorious Asfandiyar! | 
I have dispatched the old Jamasp to thee, 
Who can remember to have seen Luhrásp. 
When thou beholdest him gird up thy loins, 
And come with him upon swift-footed steeds. 
If thou art lying down spring to thy feet, 
And if thou shalt be standing tarry not.” 

Charged with the letter of the Shah in haste 
That wise man crossed the hills and trod the waste. 


§ 23 

How Jümdásp eame to Asfandiyár 
Asfandiyar was in the desert hunting 
When some one shouted that the Shih had sent 
Jamisp. He mused and laughed uneasily. 
He had four noble sons, all fair of face 
And doughty cavaliers, the eldest hight 
Bahman, the second Mihr-i-Nüsh, the third 

! The future Sháüh. 


"ow 


f nA - d 
TM I ‘ £ 
d DS ba DI. Uv! fj 


|J GUSHTÀSP. a B 


jm Afriz—a wary warrior— 


The youngest Nush Azar; ‘twas he that built 
The Fane of Fire. Bahman said to his father, ~ 
That king of earth: “ May thy head flourish ever! 
My lord was laughing with a hollow laugh, 
I know not why." 
Asfandiyár replied :— 

“My son! one cometh to me from the Shah, 
Who is displeased with me and hath some grudge 
Against his slave.” | 
The noble youth said: "Why? 
What hast thou done against our sovereign lord ? " 

Asfandiyar made answer: “O my son! 
I know of no offence against my father, 
Unless it is that I have taught the Faith, _ 
Have lighted sacred Fires throughout the world, 
And purified it with my trenchant sword. 
What can have made the Sháh's heart wroth with me? 
In sooth the Div must have seduced his heart, 
For he is mad enough to wish to bind me!” 

Now while Asfandiyár was thus engaged 
The dust of the advancing troops appeared, ' 
He saw it from the mountain-top afar 
And, knowing that the messenger had come, 
Went forth at once to meet him. When they spied — V. 1548 


. Each other on the way they both alighted 


Down from their prancing steeds, and warrior 
And elder fared afoot. The glorious 
Asfandiydr inquired ; “ How is the Shih, 
That hero-king ? " 

| The sage Jamasp made answer :— 
“He is both well and happy.” 

Then he kissed 

The prince upon the head and gave the letter, 
Informing him with frankness of the case, 


And saying: “The Div hath led the Shih uag 
VOL, V. 


Y " Dv. °- = 


ea. ts. wA xzt 


Y. 1549 


82 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Asfandiyár said to that man of wisdom :— 
* What seemeth to thee best for me herein ? 
If I set out with thee to go to court L 
My father will entreat me seurvily, 
And if I go not with his officer 
I shall no longer be a loyal liege. 
Devise some remedy, thou ancient sage ! 
I may not rest in this bewilderment." 
The sage replied: “O prince of paladins, 
So young in body and so old in knowledge! 
Thou knowest that the best love of a son 
Is not so tender as a father's wrath, 
Thou must set forward, that is mine advice, 
For, whatsoe'er he doth, he is the Shih,” 
This they agreed upon and went their ways, 
The messenger and the exalted prince, 
Who inade Jámásp alight when they had reached 
A goodly seat whereafter both drank wine, 
Next day Asfandiyár sat on his throne 
And, when he had brought forth the muster-roll, 
Entrusted all the army to Bahman, 
And setting forth with certain warriors, 
His girdle girt, his erown upon his head, 
Back to the court-gate of the great Shah sped. 


§ 24 

How Gushtdsp imprisoned Asfandiydr 
The Shah on hearing that Asfandiyár, 
His son, had come, crowned with the Kaian casque, 
Called to his presence high and low alike, 
And spread the Zandavasta out before him. 
He seated all the arehmages and then summoned 
The royal swordsman. With extended hands 
The hero came, approached the presence, did 


GUSHTASP ; 83 


Obeisance, and stood slave-like with bent head 
And folded arms, The king of kings addressed 
The archmages, chiefs, and leaders of the host. 
“Suppose,” he said, “that any noble man 
Shall rear a son with pains, provide him nurses 
While needing suckling, crown him with a crown 
Of gold, and guard him till he waxeth lusty, 
Teach him till he becometh yenturesome, 
And undergo no little pains to make 
That son a cavalier expert in war: 
Suppose that noble youth attaineth manhood, 
And is as bright as new gold from the mine, 
That all that seek for favours ask of him, 
And that he is the theme of every speaker, 
Shall prove a good, victorious cavalier, 
And foremost when folk meet for fight or feast, 
Shall place the whole world underneath his feet, 
And well deserve the royal diadem, 
Shall, when victorious, spread forth limbs and boughs, 
The while his father, then grown old, shall sit 
Within his palace, keeping but one crown 
And throne, and stay at home to mind the goods ; 
Suppose that son with world and flag and host 
Shall grudge his sire e’en one gold crown and throne! 
Hath any of you heard of such a thing 
As that the son for that one throne and crown 
Should purpose to eut off his father's head, 
Should make an insurrection with his troops, 
And whet his heart to fight against his sire ? 
What say ye, ancient men? What is the course 
The father well may take with such a son?" 

The chosen chiefs replied: “O monarch! never V. 1550 
Have we to take account of such a case— 
The father living and the son attempting 
His throne! Call nothing more preposterous,” 

The world-lord answered : * Here there is a son 


V. 1551 


= Zz * Pa - Y T jm — a : m 


te ` EE TY, a HAVERS 


ss 


n 


E THE RY OF "PIRDA Usi 


Who hath designs upon his father's life. 
Him will I bind as well he hath deserved, 


And on such wise as none hath bound another." 


The son exclaimed: “O Shah of noble race: 
How ever could I hanker for thy death? 
I do not know, O Shah! of any wrong 
That I have done to thee at any time. 
By thine own life, imperious sovereign ! 
When ever did I harbour such designs ? 
But thou art Shah; ‘tis thine to order; I 
Am thine, and bonds and prison rest with thee, 
Bid them to bind or slay me as thou wilt ; 
My heart is honest and my mind submiss.” 


The king of kings exclaimed : “ Bring hither chains 


They brought in blacksmiths, 
Yoke, chains, and heavy shackles, and then bound him, 
Both hand and foot, before the king, the world-lord, 


Bind him, and falter not.” 


So straitly fettered him that all beholding 
Wept bitterly. They brought an elephant, 
Like indigo, and set Asfandiyár 


Thereon. They bare him from his glorious sire, 


With dust upon his head, to Gumbadan, 
That stronghold on the mountain-top, conveyed 


Four iron columns thither and there bound him 
With rigour. They dethroned him; fortune changed. 


The Shih set many to keep guard upon him, 
Lived for a space in straitest custody, 
And ever and anon wept bitterly. 


lute 
t m 


e. 


vents 


GUSHTASP | i * 85 


§ 25 
How Gushtdsp went to. Sístán and how Arjdsp arrayed 

his Host the second Time 
Thus many days o'er Asfandiyar, 
The while Gushtásp departed to Sistan 
‘To make the Zandavasta current there, 
And archimages testify thereto. 
As soon as the illustrious Shah arrived 
There went to him the captain of the host, 
The ruler of Nimriiz, whose name was Rustam, 
A veteran cavalier, another Sam, 
In company with agéd Zal, his sire, 
With mighty men and those about the court. 
They carried minstrels in their train withal, 
And posted them with harps along the route. 
Thus went they forth to greet the glorious Shah 
Right jubilantly, and it liked him well. 
They brought him to Zábul to be their guest, 
And stood before his presence as his slaves, 
From hiim they learned about the Zandavasta, 
Adopted it, and lighted sacred Fires. 
Two years passed thus in hospitality; 
Gushtásp kept feasting with the son of Zal. 
Throughout the world, wherever there were kings 
That heard about the doings of the Shah :— 
“He hath confined Asfandiyár in bonds, 
Hath galled his elephantine form with iron, 
And gone to preach the gospel in Zábul 
To blast the idols with the Cult of Fire," 
They one and all refused to do his bidding, 
And brake with him completely. 

When Bahman 

Heard that his sire was prisoned by the Sháh, 
And for no fault, Asfandiyár's brave meiny 


kh 


V. 1553 


TE j j 

Ks Sp Vee Le, ea | 

i N TNES 3 * a -— y 
, E "A i P v ys P y v; - e. «T * x T 


* 


86 * THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ CO HE. 


Came grieving to him with the Kaian princes, E 

Fulfilled with tribulation and dismay, P 

And raised his spirits with their minstrelsy, 

Not letting him be lonesome in his prison. 

Then tidings reached the king of Chín: * The Moon 

Hath fallen from the Archer into ambush. 

The Sháh, wroth with Asfandiyár, dispatehed him, 

Dishonoured, to the hold of Gumbadán, 

And started for Zábulistán himself 

From Balkh to stay with Rustam, son of Zál, 

Whose guest he now is at Zábul, and thus 

Two years have passed away. Of all the Ininians 

And soldiery none, saving Sháh Luhrásp 

With seven hundred devotees of Fire, 

Is left at Balkh.” 

The monarch of Chigil 

Called out his chiefs and heartened them to fall 

Upon Luhrisp. “Know ye,” 'twas thus he spake, 

" That Sháh Gushtásp hath marched with all his host 

Sístán-ward and abideth at Zábul : 

No cavalier is left in all his realm. 

Now is the time for us to seek revenge; 

We must take order and prepare ourselves. 

His son, illustrious Asfandiyár, 

Is fast in heavy bonds. What man is there— 

A searcher out of mysteries—prepared 

To undertake the long and arduous road, 

And, choosing bypaths, shunning public ways, fis 

Obtain full tidings of the Íránians ? " M. 
There was a sorcerer, by name Sitüh, | 

À rover and explorer. "I," he said, B 

" Àm one of taet and used to travelling. 

What shall I do? Command me as thou wilt.” 
The king of Chin said: “Go thou to fran, 

Take heedful note, and roam through all the land.” 
The spy set forth upon his way and went 


gi n J | 
) m Iu us, 


KT ACTES SEn IV T ot Dr ea dei 
GUSHTÁSP  . PRIM d 
To chosen Balkh, the dwelling of the Sháh. x ? | 


He saw not Sháh Gushtásp therein but found 

Luhrásp, the devotee; he thereupon 

Returned and, having done the Khán obeisance, 

Told all. Arjásp grew joyful at the news, 

And freed from longsome care, called all his chiefs, 

And : “Go, muster our disbanded host.” 3 

The chieftains of the army went their way 3 

To mountains, desert-tracts, and pasture-lands, Im 

And summoned to the king his soldiery, 
_ The chosen horsemen of his sovereignty. 


§ 26 
The Words of Dakiki being ended, Firdausi resumeth, : 
praising Shah Mahmid and criticising Dakikt M. 


aan JA 


Now, man of eloquence and shrewd! again V. 1554 

Take up the story in thy proper strain, 

Dakíkí to this point had brought hisilay _ 

When fortune put a period to his day, 

And, having dealt with him right grievously, i 

Bare off his spirit from this Hostelry, 

So that these fleeting words of his are all d 

That now remain as his memorial. 

He stayed not to complete the tale, he penned ‘ 

It not from its beginning to its end, | 

Now give attention to Firdausi’s part, ig 

Whose words are chaste and pleasing to the heart. N 

What time within my hands this story fell : 

My hook was angling for the fish as well! 

I scanned the verses and esteemed them weak ; 

In many couplets there was much to seek, 

But here have I transcribed them that the king 

May know how inartistic verses ring. . 
! Lorsque ce livre tomba entre mes mains, il me manquait un mois 

peur avoir soizante ans" (Mohl). E 


i uc 
f ^. 
ul! * " 
* ^ | 
n c 
a UE D 


w La NE. 
. A Pm , F 


Yom T 


jê 
ô 


V. 1555 


"rii. 


A a F (d i. 1 es T JJ) t ] E P "m 
pee al WYR ; C— 


88 THE SHAHNAMA OF 


u? rw" "T "EN 


-2 


PIS CES i | 
FIRDAUSE ea 


"n 


Both jewellers have each a gem to sell ; UT 
Now let the Sháh give ear to what they tell. ae 
If thou canst speak but in Dakiki's vein 

Speak not at all and spare thy nature pain, 

And, mindful of the bondage and the toil, 

Ne'er dig in mines whence thou wilt win no spoil. 
Unless thou art as fluent as a stream Stree 


Lay not thy hand upon this royal theme; zi 
Tis better that all food should be abjured | 
Than that thou shouldest spread a tasteless board. R 
A book fulfilled with legends met my view, DN: 
Its Words possessed of character and true, ine 


Its stories very ancient and in prose ; 

The wits had never thought of rhyming those, 
No one had thought of linking line to line— 

A fact that struck this gladsome heart of mine. n. 
Two thousand years had passed the story o'er, pu 
Two thousand years and haply countless more, 

And I began his praises to rehearse, | 

Who showed the way to turn it into verse. 
Although he only rhymed the veriest mite— 

One thousand couplets full of feast and fight— 

He was my pioneer and he alone, 

In that he set the Sháhs upon the throne. 

From nobles honour and emolument 

Had he; his trouble was his own ill bent. 

To sing the praises of the kings was his, 

And crown the princes with his eulogies, 

But still he uttered but a feeble strain, 

And eld through him could ne'er grow young again. 
I took the story for a lucky-sign ; 

For many a year the travail was all mine, 

Yet found I no great patron of mine own 

To shed a lustre on the royal throne— 

A matter of much discontent to me, 

But silence was the only remedy, 


Y y ] E 
f (L8 y - 
WAS - ^ oe : 


UE 
"3 


I had before mine eyes a garth of trees, 
A dwelling-place for such as live at ease, 
But not a portal opened on that same, 
Save only what was royal but in name. 
Fit for my garden must the portal be; 

. One that was narrow would not do for me. 
For twenty years I kept my work till I 
Should find one worthy of my treasury, 
Until Mahmud, the master of the earth, 
Endowed with Grace and bounty, he whose worth 
Both Moon and Saturn praise (Abu'l Kasim! 

The crown of king of kings is fresh through him), * 
Till he, the world-lord, eame and sat him here | 
Upon the throne of justice. Find his peer. 

His name hath erowned my work, his Grace divine 
Like ivory made this darkened heart of mine. 
He passeth all the Sháhs that went before, - 
And counteth not as ill the breath of yore. 
Dínárs to him are dust, and him dismay 
Betideth not in festival and fray, 

For he from one that seeketh doth withhold 
Not sword in war-time nor at feast-time gold. 
May his throne flourish ever and still be 

The rapture of the spirits of the free! 


§ 27 
How the Host of Arjisp marched to Balkh and how 
Now will we tell the warfare of Arjasp 
Afresh and by our insight clear the garth 
Of weeds :—Arjisp had tidings that the Shih 
Had set forth with his host toward Sistan, 
And gave commandment that Kuhram, the swordsman, 
* Should lead the troops before him, for Kuhram 


a0 


) 
> 
2 

al * 
t? 


2 = Ji | : . z 
E. WT 


r  GUSHTÁSP 89 


V. 1556 


coy ese z 6L :1 "n" T 


Y. 1557 


Go THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Was eldest-born to him and raised his head 
Ü'er radiant Sol. Arjásp said: “Choose thee horsemen 
War-worthy from the host and haste to Balkh, 
Which hath embittered and o’ercast our days. 
Those of our foes, those worshippers of Fire, 
Those Ahrimans, whom thou shalt take, behead, 
Burn up their homes, and turn their day to night. 
Smoke from the palace of Gushtásp must rise 
And lick the azure sky. If thou shalt find 
Asfandiyár with fetters on his feet 
Put thou an end to him; part instantly 
His body and his head, and make the world 
Re-echo with thy name. Throughout Írán 
The cities have been left at thy disposal, 
The foe—the seabbard—left for thee—the sword. 
I shall not loiter in Khallukh but follow 
Apace, recall our scattered troops, and lavish 
My hoarded wealth." 
Kuhram replied: “Thy bidding 
Will I perform and pledge my life thereto,” 

When from its waist the sun drew forth its sword, 
And darksome night drew back its skirts therefrom, 
There gathered five score thousand of Khallukh 
About Arjisp—choice cavaliers and swordsmen. 
Kuhram led forth the army to fran, 

While earth grew like an Ethiop’s face for gloom, 
And coming to those marches spread his hands, 
And overthrew whome'er he saw. ‘The Turkmans 
Had set their hearts on vengeance, were prepared 
To pillage and to slay, and as they drew 

Anear to Balkh spake much and bitterly, 
Luhrisp heard of Kuhram, was grieved, and fared 
With travail. Thus he prayed: * Omnipotent ! 
Thou art supreme o'er time's vicissitudes, 

Thou art almighty, wise, and merciful, 

The Master of the shining sun. Preserve 


GUSHTASP | gt 


My Faith, my person, and mine energies, 
My watchful heart and intellect withal, 
So that I may not perish in their hands 
A thrall, or in dismay ery out for succour.” 
There was no chief or mace-armed cavalier 
At Balkh. A thousand came from the bazar, 
But all unfit for war. Luhrásp assumed 
His mail what time the Turkman host drew nigh, 
He left the oratory for the field, 
And donned the Kaian easque. Old as he was 
He roared out like a maddened elephant, 
Bare in his hand an ox-head mace, and dashed 
To earth therewith a warlock of the chiefs 
At every charge till all folks said: “This noble 
Is dealing buffets like Asfandiyár!" 
Where'er he spurred he mingled dust with blood ; 
The galls were split of all that heard his voice. V. 1558 
Kuhram said to the Turkmans : * Fight no longer 
Against him single-handed, strive amain, 
Surround him, and roar out like mighty lions." 
Arose the crash of bills, the shouts of horsemen 
All eager to monopolize the fray, 
Whereat Luhrasp, abandoned midst the foe, 
Invoked in his resourcelessness God's name, 
For old age and the burning of the sun 
Oppressed him, and his fortune went to sleep. 
That veteran, that worshipper of God, 
Fell headlong, smitten by the Turkmans’ arrows ; 
The head that wore the crown came to the dust. 
Then many cavaliers surrounded him ; 
They hacked his Kaian harness into bits, 
His body piecemeal with their scimitars. 
They took him for a youthful cavalier, 
But when they raised the helmet from his head, 
And saw his ruddy cheek, his camphor hair, 
And heavenly visage livid now with iron, 


ir 
i Lir o a ee” aw i 


V. 1559 


L ue 


i 
å 


THE SHÅHNÄMA OF FIRDAUSİ 
All marvelled at the miracle, exclaiming :— : 

" To think that one so old should sword it thus! 

Had but Asfandiyar himself come hither 

Our host would have been busy on this plain! 

Why have we come here with such puny powers, * 
For we haye come but as a flock to pasture?” 

Then to his comrades said Kuhram: “The toil 

And travail in the fight was due to this, 

That he who wore the crown was Shih sp 

Sire of Gushtásp, the master of the world. 

As king of kings he had the Grace of God, ? 
And passed his life in feasting and the field, a 
But in old age became a devotee, "A 
And plucked his heart away from crown and throne, 
Now will Gushtásp, whose throne is thus bereaved, 


- 


92 


Quail for the diadem of king of kings." 3 E 
The host reached Balkh, the world was wrecked with 
sack 
And slaughter. . Making for the Fane of Fire, 


For hall and palace decked with gold, they gave 
Them and the Zandavasta to the flames. 

The fane had eighty priests, God's worshippers, 
And all before the Fire the Turkmans slew, 
And swept that cult away. The Fire, that erst 
Zarduhsht had litten, of their blood did die; | 
Who slew that priest himself I know not L* 


P. 93. 
* Rear with P. cf. p. 15. Zarduhsht is said to have been 
Seventy-seven at the time of his death on the day Khurshid of the E 
month Ardibihisht, i.e, on May 1, 553 B.C. WPT, v. 165, and xxx, EM 


- PN 


| cusnTÁsP. 


I$ 28 
How Gushtásp heard of the Slaying of Luhrásp and 
led his Army toward Balkh 
Gushtásp possessed a wife—a prudent dame, 
Wise, understanding, and high-minded, She, 
When she had dight herself in Turkman guise, 
And mounted on a fleet steed from the stable, 
Departed from the palace and set forth, 
Aghast at what had happened, toward Sístán. 
She tarried not to sleep at any stage, 
And ran a two-days' journey into one. — 
Thus she continued till she reached Gushtásp 
In grief with tidings of Luhrásp, and said :— 
^ Why hast thou tarried this long while and why 
Didst thou depart from famous Balkh at all? 
An army from Türán hath reached the city, 
And turned its people's day to bitterness. 
All Balkh is full of sack and massacre ; 
Thou must return forthwith.” 
Gushtásp replied :— 

" What grief is this? Why mourn a single raid? 

When I march forth all Chín will not withstand me." 
She answered thus: “Talk not so foolishly ; 

Things of great charge confront usnow. The Turkmans 
Have slain at Balkh Luhrásp, the king of kings, V. 1560 
And turned our days to gloom and bitterness, 
Proceeded thence to Nüsh Azar and there 
Beheaded both Aarduhsht and all the archmages, 
Quenched in whose blood the radiant Fire expired, 
An outrage not to be accounted lightly. 
Thereafter they led off thy daughters captive ; 
Take not so grave a matter easily, 
If there were nothing but Humái's dishonour 
"would stir a sage's heart, and furthermore 


F " " 
F. 
= 


V. 1561 


-94 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


There is thine other daughter, Bih Afrid, 

Till then kept hidden from a breath of air, 

Whom they have taken from her golden throne, 

And plundered of her bracelets and her crown.” 
Gushtasp, on hearing this, was filled with anguish, 

And showered from his eyelids gall of blood. 

He called to him the great men of Inin, 

And told before them all that he had heard, 

Called for a scribe, put by his crown, avoided 

His throne, sent cavaliers to every side 

With letters to his paladins, and said :— 

“Wash not your heads from soil, distinguish not 

"Twixt up and down, and come ye all to court 

In armour and with mace and Riiman casque.” 
They bore the letter to each paladin 

That was a mighty man within the realm, 

And, when from all the Sháh's realm there had gathered 

The troops and valiant horsemen of his host, 

He gave out pay and, marching from Sístán, 

Proceeded on his road toward famous Balkh, 

ArJásp, on hearing that, Gushtásp, the world-lord, 

Had come with army and with crown and throne, 

Assembled from Ttiran so vast a host 

That sun and moon were darkened with the dust. 

From sea to sea that host extended, none 

Could see the surface of the waste for troops, 

And when the dust-clouds of the armies met 

The earth grew dark and heaven azure-dim. 

The opposing hosts drew up for battle, armed 

With spears and swords and double-headed darts. 

Upon the Íránian right prince Farshídward 

Was posted—one that challenged rending lions: 

Upon the left the warrior Nastür, 

Son of Zarir—the chief; while at the centre 

Gushtásp, the world-lord, overlooked his powers, 

Kundur was stationed on the Turkman right 


là 


Ur AMD RENT er ae > Sv ausHT ASP” 95 . — 29 

—. With infantry behind him with the baggage: * 
Kuhram, the swordsman, on the left; Arjásp x 
Was at the centre with the main. The din cx 
Of trump and drum ascended from both hosts, E 
Earth turned to iron, air to ebony. "- 
Thou wouldst have said: * The heavens flee away, c 
And earth is cracking underneath the weight!" s 
The heights of flint bowed at the chargers’ neighs M 
And crash of axes; all the waste was full K 
Of heads laid trunkless in the dust and battered "m 


By massive maces; swords flashed ; arrows rained; = ss, 
The heroes shouted i in the fray; the stars .-—7 ^ | 


Sought flight; the troops grew rruaigai of life; * 
Shafts fell around like hail; the wilderness f 
Was all a-groan with wounded trampled down 5 
In multitudes beneath the horses" hoofs, V. 1562 > 
The lion's maw their shroud and blood their bier ; B. 
The trunks were headless and the heads were trunkless ; 
The horsemen were like elephants a-foam, 
And fathers had no time to mourn for sons. A 
Thus for three days and nights the heavens revolved, a 


All onslaught and reprisal, war and strife ; 5 
The moon's face reddened with the splash of blood, M 
Such was that battlefield! Then lion-like ~ 
Strove Farshidward against Kuhram, the swordsman, 


And was so sorely stricken that the life C 
Passed from his lion-body. Multitudes 2q 
Were slain amidst the Irinians, the land - 
Was wet with warriors blood. Now Sháh Gushtásp RB" 
Had eight and thirty sons, bold mountaineers E. 
And horsemen on the plain; all were laid low; E 
The Sháh's good fortune darkened at a blow. | 
ti 
A r 


Ta 

E- E 

Ü- a . 

i 
31 à . | 
à k i 

is " R n n 

"AE à s n ' 


"— 
. 


96 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


$ 29 

How (Fushtdsp was put to Flight by Arjdep 
At length Gushtásp, when fortune had become 
So ruggéd, showed his back. The enemy 
Pursued him for two stages and were instant 
To take him captive. In the way before him 
There lay a mountain full of pasturage, 
Wherein there were a mill-stream and a mill, 


ing WWI bom 


V. 1563 


- "ine in its whole | ir "s / 
And hire c, - e circumference 


But one sole path: thes”! Gushtásp was ware, 
And heart-seared sealed the mountain wit his troops, 
But left a force upon the road behind him. 

Arjasp, arriving with his host, went round 
The mountain, but discovered not the path. 
On all sides they laid leaguer. When the Shih, 
That noble man, was left without resource 
His troops lit fires upon the mountain-top, 
And burnt thorns on the flints;! each leader slew 
A steed and pondered on his helpless plight. 

The proud Shah, compassed thus, was sore dismayed, 
And called to him Jámásp, the veteran, 
Held talk at large about the stars, and said :— 
“ Declare whate’er thou knowest of heaven's will, 
And wait not to be asked. Thou needs must tell 
Who is to succour me in this distress,” 

Jamisp, on hearing, rose and said: “Just king! 
If now the Shah will hearken to my words, 
Confiding in the process of the stars, 
I will discover to him what I know 
If he will recognise my truthfulness.” 

The Shah replied; “ Whatever secret thing 

* There is a play of words in the original between khár (thorns 
and khürá (flint). 


.GUSHTÁSP 97 
Thou knowest, tell it to me and be brief; 
_ My head may touch the clouds, but heaven’s changes 
I cannot ‘scape.” 
Jámásp replied : * O Sháh ! 
List to my words and let me have thine ear. 
. Asfandiyár, the glorious, by thy bidding 
. Is wearing chains in this his evil day. 
— If he were set at liberty the Shah 
= Would not be left on this high mountain-top.” 
Gushtásp replied : " O trusty counsellor, 
= Who art a man of truth and of resource! — 
— When in my wrath I put him into bonds— V. 1554 
The heavy chains by blacksmiths riveted— 
I was remorseful all the time and sought 
With aching heart to find a remedy 
For having bound him in the audience, 
Though he was guiltless, at his foeman's charge. 
I, if I see him on this day of battle, 
Will give him crown and throne and signet-ring ; 
But who will dare to go to that beloved one, 
And free the innocent ?” 
Jámásp said: “I 
Will go, O king! because the case is urgent.” 
Gushtásp rejoined: “O thou fulfilled with wisdom ! 
Thy virtues are as music to my soul; 
Depart forthwith by night, greet him at large 
From me, and say: ‘The man that did the wrong 
Hath left this world with anguish in his heart, 
While I, who acted as that little-wit 
Desired, repent that I have done amiss, 
And will prepare a goodly recompense. 
Now if thou wilt put vengeance from thy heart, 
And shalt bring down our foemen's heads to dust, 
For else the realm and throne have reached their end, 
And foemen will uproot the Kaian Tree, 
On thee, if thou shalt. come, I will bestow 
VOL. V. G 


* 
" p 
^ A 


Y. 1565 


98 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Crown, treasure, and whate'er I have amassed 
By toil, and will devote myself to prayer 
Thenceforth as did my sire Luhrásp, the world-lord. 
God is my witness to these words of mine, 
As is Jámásp who is my counsellor” 

Jámásp attired him in Türánian mail, 
And came down from the heights without a guide. 
Whenas that man of wisdom reached the plain 
He passed the army of the foe by night; 
To Gumbadán, the hold, he made his way, 
Preserved from ill hands and his evil day. 


§ 30 
How Jdmasp visited Asfandi yar 

One of Asfandiyár's exalted sons, 
Whom he named Nish Azar, was on the ramparts 
To see who came forth from the Íránian host, 
And advertise his sire. At sight of any 
He used to hurry from the walls forthwith. 
When he perceived Játnásp upon his way, 
And on his head a fair Türánian helm, 
He said: “ A horseman from Turin hath come: 
I will descend and tell Asfandiyár." 

He hastened downward from the castle-rampart, 
And spake on this wise: * Noble paladin ! 
I see a horseman coming in the distance, 
And on his head there is a sable helm. 
I will go see if he is from Gushtásp, 
Or from Arjásp, a foe. If he shall prove 
A Turkman then will I cut off his head, 
And fling his feckless body in the dust,” 

Said great Asfandiyér: “The traveller, 
Since he is unattended, is but lowly. 
In sooth he is a warrior from [rin, 


GUSHTÁSP. 


And cometh unto us with some dispatch ; 
My sire hath put that helmet on his head 
In apprehension of our valiant foes.” 

When Nash Azar, the paladin, had heard 
He went in haste upon the castle-rampart ; 
He recognised Jámásp when close at hand, 
Descended, and informed his glorious sire :— 
" Jümásp is at the gate." 

He had it opened, 
The sage came in, did reverence and, coming 
Before Asfandiyár, repeated to him 
The message of Gushtásp, his sire, in full. 

Asfandiyar replied: “O Memory 

Of this world's heroes, wise, courageous, 

And of exalted rank! why bow to one 

In chains, for one in irons, hand and foot, 

Is not of man's seed, but an Ahriman ?. 

Thou givest me greeting from the king of kings, 
So that thy heart is not informed by knowledge, 
Since it is for Arjisp to greet me now, 

Because the plain is all Iranians’ blood. 

They bound me innocent. Gurazm forsooth 
Must be the Sháh's son, I be fettered thus! 
Mine irons are my witnesses to God 

That I have had injustice from Gushtásp, 

And that Gurazm's words pleased Áhriman. 
Such was the recompense of all my toil, 

While for my treasury 'tis stocked with irons. 
Oh! may I ne'er forget this injury, 

And stultify my wisdom through thy talk." 

Jimisp replied: “ O speaker of the truth, 
World-taker, lion-thrower, bent on fame ! 

If thou art thus heart-wearied of thy sire 

His throne is overturned; yet for the sake 

Of pious Shah Luhrasp, slain by the Turkmans 
In battle, and of those God-fearing priests, 


V: 1566 


* s: 
" T 


es ee m om 
m i 


mas H Twy wae YT: -— 1*1 ww 


LAB $67 


jas THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Who had the Zandavasta in their hands, 
Of whom four score were slaughtered—archimages 
And sages pure of heart, quenched in whose blood 
The sacred Fire hath died within the fane— 
Such ill deeds cannot be accounted lightly. 
Possess thy heart with sorrow for thy grandsire, 
Rise in thy wrath and let thy cheeks be pale, 
For if thou art not stirred up to avenge him 
Thou art not worshipful and well advised." 
Asfandiyár made answer to him thus :— 
“O famed, high-starred, heroic, and prevailing ! 
Reflect that for the old Luhrasp—that man 
Of piety, the father of Gushtásp— 
The son that sought erewhile his father's throne, 
And his prerogative, will best seek vengeance." 
Jámásp replied : ^If thou wilt not'avenge 
Thy grandsire thou art void of principle. 
The wise Humái and Bih Afrid, whose faces 
No breath of air had seen, are in Turan 
As prisoners, all misery and anguish, 
And foot it wan of mien.” 
Asfandiyár 
Thus answered: “ Did Humii at any time 
Remember me in my confinement here ? 
And, further, as for noble Bih Afrid, 
She never looked on me, as thou mightst say ! 
Why now should I distress myself for them ? 
No one from them hath ever come to me, 
A father well may see to his own daughters, 
A sire the better undertake for them.” 
Jámásp replied to him: “O paladin! 
Thy sire, the world-lord, with his soul all gloom, 
Is now upon a mountain with his chiefs, 
With tearful eyes and unfed lips; the Turkmans 
Beleaguer him; henceforth thou wilt not see 
His head and crown. The Maker will condemn 


M l v 
a NWN y DA 
spe PN rq 


" -— n * be $ "z^ 
| / 2234 É bs! 20S * é go ] - P E n «i - é r E Y ] FU 
f WU 7 Ue te 
 — GUSHTÁSP > 101 * 


Thy disregard of love and Faith. Thy brethren, X 
For thou hadst eight and thirty—Mountain-pards, v.i1568 — — 
And Lions of the plain—all couch in dust * d 
And briek, because the foe let none escape." 
Asfandiyár rejoined : " I used to have 
Full many a noble brother, and while I 
Lay bound they all made merry! No one thought 
Of wretched me! IfI take action now 
What profit, seeing that the foe hath raised 
The reek from them?” 
Jamasp, on hearing this, 

And noting how the captive's heart was seared, d 
Rose to his feet in sorrow and in anger, + 
With anxious heart and eyes fulfilled with tears, E 
And said to him : " O chief of paladins ! a 
Although thy heart and mind are darkened thus, EC 
What sayest thou of the case of Farshidward, = 
Who went so heavily on thine account? 
Where'er he was, at fray or festival, Ey 
He was all pain and curses on Gurazm ; 
His body hath been slashed with scimitars, 
Helm and cuirass are cloven, and his soul 
Is breaking with his love for thee! Oh! pity -« 
His weeping eyes." | 

When Farshídward was named V.1969 | 
Asfandiyár wept blood, his heart was grieved, I 
He cried: “O wretched, valiant warrior ! 


O lion-hearted hero, chieftain, prince! ' z 
I have been wounded by those wounds of thine, Pe 
And I have bathed my cheeks in my heart's blood.” T 
When he became composed he asked Jámásp :— 1 
* What was thy purpose in concealing this? UM 
Give orders that some blacksmiths shall be brought, A 
And let them file the fetters from my feet." 
Jámásp fetched blacksmiths, and they brought with i 
them E- 


ee ee M 


Y. 1570 


[o2 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Their heavy hammers and their files of steel. 

They filed the rings, the rivets, and the chains, 

And all thé bridge-like fetters made in Rüm. 

The bonds took long to file; the captive’s heart, 

Remiss no longer, grew impatient, 

He said thus to a smith: “Thou awkward lout! 

Thou bindest but thou canst not break the bonds!” 
He drew his hands away, arose in dudgeon, 

And, stretching out the chains to their full length, 

Strained with his feet and struggled with his hands, 

And brake in pieces fetter, rmg, and chain. 

The breaking of his bonds exhausted him, 

The anguish overcame him and he swooned. 

That reader of the stars who saw the marvel 

Was full of praises of the noble prince. 

Whenas the lusty hero had regained 


His wits he ranged the bonds and chains before him, 


And said: “ These presents given by Gurazm 
Have severed me from fight and festival.” 
With aching body galled and stiff with bondage 
He went off to the bath. He then demanded 
The raiment of a king and therewithal 
The armour of a paladin, and bade :— 
“ Bring my fleet charger, helm, and scimitar.” 
Now when his eye fell on his steed he called 
Upon the Giver of all good, and said :— 
“If I did wrong I have been vexed with bonds, 
But what hath this my prancing Barbary 
Done to be starved? Go groom and feed him up.” 
He sent for smiths, the prowest in their trade, 
Who came, repaired his arms, and hauberks made. 


GUSHTASP / ; 103 
E 3 
How Asfandiyár saw his Brother Farshidward | 
Night came like vengeful Áhriman, the bells p 
Clanged at the gate, and Indian sword in hand Yis > 
Asfandiyár bestrode his royal steed. ~ 
He with Bahman and noble Núsh Azar M 
Went forth on their long journey while Jámásp, E 
The minister of great Gushtásp, went first q 
As guide. Now when these warrior-cavaliers 
Had come outside the walls, and reached the plain, 


Asfandiyir, the chieftain, looked toward heaven, 

And said: “O Judge whose words are true! Thou art Ñ 
The Maker, the Almighty, and illumest Ae 
The spirit of Asfandiyár. If I | | 
Prevail and make the world strait for Arjasp, 
Take vengeance on him for Lubrisp, the Shah, 


And for the blood of all those blameless chiefs, x 
My very eyes—mine eight and thirty brothers, W 
Whose blood hath dyed the dust upon the plain— 

I swear by God, the just Judge, to forego 


Revenge upon my father for my bonds, 

To build a hundred Fanes of Fire, and weed 

The world of tyranny. None shall behold 

A carpet ‘neath my feet till I have built 

A hundred hostels in the wilderness. 

In parched wastes that no vulture traverseth, 

And where no onager and other game 

Set foot, will I have dug ten thousand wells, 

And plant their mouths with trees. Out of my treasure . 
I will bestow a hundred thousand drachms E- 
Upon the poor and every one that asketh. e 
I will convert the erring to the Faith, 

And will lay low the heads of sorcerers, 

While in God's presence vill I stand and worship; 


V. 1572 


pne 


€T 


"Y. 
, "X "A 
* 


104 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


None ever shall behold me take mine ease." 

He spake thus and urged on his battle-steed 
Until he came to Farshidward, beheld him 
Stretched on the dust in miserable case, 

His prostrate form confounded by its wounds, 
And, pouring from his eyes so many tears 

As filled the wise physician with amazement, 
Exelaimed: “O Lion, seeker of the fray! 

From whom hath this disaster come upon thee f 
On whom shall I avenge thee in the battle, 

On Lion of the fray or Crocodile ? " 

Thus Farshidward replied: “O paladin! 

It was Gushtásp that wounded me to death. 
Could Turkmans, if he had not fettered thee, 
Have wrought this scath and likewise overthrown 
Luhrásp, the hoary-headed, and. all Balkh ? 
None ever hath beheld or heard of ills 
Such as Gurazm's words have brought upon us ; 
Yet murmur not, accept thy lot, and prove 
A fruitful tree, for I shall pass away, 
But needs must thou abide for evermore. 
Hemember me when I have gone, and glad 
My spirit by thy bounty. So farewell, 
Thou chief of paladins! For ever live, 
And be of ardent soul.” 

He spake and wanned; 
That noble Lion, Farshidward, was gone. 
Asfandiyár clutched at his own cuirass, 
Marred all the painted silk, and cried: “O Lord 
Supreme and holy! lead me to take vengeance 
For Farshídward, to send the dust-clouds flying 
From stones and water, from Arjásp to set 
The blood a-stream, and give Luhrásp's soul peace," 

With heart all vengeance and with head distraught 
He laid his brother's corpse upon the saddle, 
Then mounted to the heights, his brother’s body 


VE Lb A a " 
: nz F “<x a” é 


Bound,on the bay, and said: “What at this present 
Can I achieve for thee, how raise thy charnel 
I have no gold, no silver, and no gems, 
No bricks, no water, none to build a wall, 
Nor any tree where I may lay thee down, 
O noble chief! to slumber in the shade." 

He stripped his brother's armour off and used 
His turban and his jerkin as a shroud, 
And thence departing eame where Sháh Gushtásp 
Had fared so ill. He saw İránians slain à 
In numbers that concealed the dust and stones, 
And bitterly bewept those hapless ones 
Whose fortunes were o'erthrown, There where the 


Ew 
= ^ 
1 


razm B pale face, 
His steed o'erthrown beside him where he lay 
O'erstrewn with dust, and thus Asfandiyár 
Addressed the slain: * O fool and of ill fortune: 
Mark what a wise man of Írán once said, 
When giving utterance to his secret thoughts :— 
‘A foe that’s wise is better than a friend 
Albeit in both their wisdom we commend, 
For wise men think within their powers nor fret 
Their souls by seeking what they ne'er can get. 
Thou soughtest my position in Inin, 
And broughtest this destruction on the world. 
Thou hast deprived this kingdom of its lustre, 
Hast practised artifice and uttered lies, 
And all the blood poured out in this contention 
Will be upon thee in the other world.", 

He turned his head, still weeping, from the waste, 

And came upon the main of Turkman troops. 
He saw the host extending seven leagues, 
And such that heaven was aghast thereat. 
A trench had been constructed round about, 
More than an arrow’s flight in width, This ditch 


V. 1574 


106 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


maged with a hundred shifts to cross, 
And reined his steed toward the level ground. 
The Turkman outpost of some eighty men 
Were on their rounds about the battlefield. 
They came upon him with disordered ranks, 
Came challenging and shouting, and inquired :— 
“O lion-man! what seekest thou by night 
Upon the battlefield ? " 
He answered them :— 
“All that ye care for on the battlefield 
Are sleep and feast. When tidings reached Kuhram :— 
"Asfandiyár hath made his passage through you,’ 
He said to me: ‘Take thy sharp scimitar, 
And bring the Day of Doom upon their souls.” 
Then, mindful of the battle with Gushtásp, 
He drew his scimitar and laid about him, 
Ü'erthrew full many of them on the road, 
And thence departed toward the Shih’s abode. 


$32 
How Asfandiyár came to the. Mountain to Guahitáap 


Asfandiyár climbed that high, flinty mountain, 
And did obeisance when he saw his father, 
Who seared at heart, arose, kissed, and caressed 
His son's face, saying: “I thank God, my boy! 
That I have seen thee happy and still ardent. 
Regard me not with anger and dislike, 

And be not slow to take revenge. Gutrazm, 
Malignant misereant that he was, obseured 

My heart toward my son, and ill hath come 
Upon him for his calumnies, since evil 
Befalleth evil men for their ill deeds. 

Now by the Ruler of the world I swear, 

Who knoweth all things open and concealed, 


D - 
" — i E 
Ld p 


my VE, ES € y i et 
GUSHTASP i AN 
That if I prosper and o'greome the foe =D 
I will bestow the realm, the crown, and throne E A 
On thee, establish many a shrine, and give thee "C 
My secret hoards,” ‘= 
Asfandiyár replied :— E 
“Let me find favour in the monarchs sight ; a 
Tt will be treasure, throne, and crown to me $ 
If he shall be content with me, his slave. E" 
The monareh knoweth that when I beheld V.i1525 —— 
Upon the field the face of slain Gurazm 
I shed tears o'er that slanderer and burned 
To what anguish he had caused the Sháh. l 
Our past mishaps are now but wind to me. r 
Hereafter when I draw my vengeful sword, ^d 
And set my face to quit this rocky height, - 
I will not leave Arjásp, Áyás, or Chín, P. 
Kuhram, Khallukh, or country of Turin.” TA 
The soldiers, hearing that Asfandiyár " 
Was freed from heavy bondage and ill-fortune, 
Pressed on, troop after troop, upon the mountain 
Before their chieftain, while the mighty men, d 


The alien, and akin bowed down to him. / 
Thus spake high-starred Asfandiyár: “ Famed swords- . A 
men ! i 
Draw ye your watered blades, advance to vengeance, 
And slay the foe." 2 
The chieftains blessed him saying :— E 
“Thou art our crown and falehion of revenge ! A 
We all will pledge our lives for thee and make 
The sight of thee the rapture of our souls.” A 
They spent the night in ordering the host, n 
And getting ready coat of mail and spear. 1 
Gushtásp held further talk of fortune's ills A 
With glorious Asfandiyár and set 4 
His eyes a-stream in telling of the blood 
Of all those valiant youths that had been slain 


EUN Tre Hm IE 


Y. 1576 


* Mud. jas - ram! 
a l " 6$ 
n m j 
uo Wn un taf M 
a,” p _ 4 I i T 0 = , 
= ^ - - UNTERWEGS ne e A Rs 


re L " 


198 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 
Upon the battlefield, whose prineely heads 
Were now encircled by a crown of gore, 
That very night the tidings reached Arjasp:— 
“The son of Shih Gushtasp hath come to him, 
He hath slain many scouts upon the way, 
And those that were not slaughtered showed their 
backs.” 
He was in dudgeon, called to him the magnates, 
Held converse with Kuhram at large, and said :— 
" Our thoughts were other of this war what time 
The host set forth. I said: ‘If we can catch 
That div still chained the world will‘issue scathless, 
I shall obtain the Íránian throne, and all 
Wil offer me their homage everywhere,’ 
Now, since that div-begotten hath broke loose, 
We deal in grief and sighs. None of the Turkmans 
Can match him in the fight, so let us march, 
Still blithe and yet unworsted, to Tirin ` 
While crown and throne are ours.” 


—A. |, 
AE im B 


Eon o # 


| He bade to bring 

The treasures and the steeds caparisoned— 

The booty carried off from famous Balkh— 

And charged Kuhram therewith. Arjásp possessed 

Four sons, all younger than Kuhram, and these 

Packed, and then loaded up a hundred camels, 

Which went, each with a guide, by divers roads, 

The king was full of terror and of haste, 

He could not eat or take his ease or sleep. | 
There was among the troops a Turkman named 

Gurgsár who came before the king, and said :— 

“O monarch of the Turkmans and of Chin! 

Fling not away thy glory for one man, 

Yon host is smitten, beaten, and in flight, 

Its fortune all astound, the Shih himself 

Is all consumed with grief, his sons are slain, 

And who hath come except Asfandiyár 


e ] | = h » , s a Pi 
StS ee eee ee fa PET e 


, Per = a. "m 
| - GUSHTÁSP | 19 — 


To help him? Yet thou break’st thy soldiers hearts, . 

And woundest by thy words without a battle! 

Wise kings fear not, poltroons cause ruin. No mace 

Hath fallen on a helm nor arrow struck 

A barded steed, I will encounter him, 

If he come forth, and fling him to the dust." 
Arjásp, on hearing what he said and marking 

His courage and wise counsel, made reply :— 

* Q warrior eager for the fray! name, birth, — 

And parts are thine. If thou make good thy words, 

And prowess the corrival of thy tongue, 

All from this tent fp to the sea of Chin, 

And all the treasures of Iran, will I 

Bestow on thee; thou shalt command my host, 

And never will I swerve from thine advice.” 
Forthwith he gave the army to Gurgsár 

With lordship o'er the more part of the world. 
Whenas the sun took up its golden shield, 

And dark night did obeisance, putting off 

Its musk-black raiment while the world's face grew 

All ruby-like in tint, a mighty host 

Descended from the heights. Asfandiyar, 

The ruler of the world, the valorous, 

Led on the troops himself. An ox-head mace 

Depended from his saddle, Shih Gushtisp 

Was at the centre of the host, his soul 

Full of revenge upon Arjasp. Moreover, 

The offspring of Zarír, Nastár, at whom 

The lion wont to flee the wood, assumed 

His station on the right as general, 

And ordered all the battle under him. 

Gargwi, the warrior, upon the left 

Came forth as bright as Sol in Aries. 
Arjásp on his side ranked his troops; the stars 

Saw not the plain for spears and blue steel swords ; 

The air was full of silken flags, The centre, 


TA K MESE- N BN 


3 Kawiri LP, i st C. "i i Mi a P += ^ 
E IX = ; Y Tw N 1 
Ito THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Where was Arjásp, seemed ebony; Kuhram " 
Was on the right with trumpets and with tymbals, 
And on the left the monarch of Chigil, 


Dv From whom a lion might take heart in fight. 
E When king Arjisp beheld the mighty host 
E. Of chosen, lance-armed cavaliers he went, 
; Chose out a height, and thence surveyed the armies 
5 On every side. The forces of the foe 
k. Frayed him, the world turned black before his eyes. 
4x Anon he bade the cameleers to bring 
a A hundred strings of camels from the waste, 
ae And said in private to the men of nftme:— 


" If this affair prove long, if vietory, 
Success, and glory show not on our side, 
I and my friends will need for safety's sake 
To take the road upon these rapid beasts,” 
Now when between the lines Asfandiyár, 
Like some fierce lion with his lips afoam, 
Was wheeling like the turning firmament, 
And brandishing in hand the ox-head mace, 
V. 1579 Thou wouldst have said: “The whole plain is his steed ; 
His soul is greater than his skin can hold.” 
Arose the war-ery and the clarion’s blare ; 
The warriors of the host advanced. “The waste,” 
Thou wouldst have said, “hath grown a sea of blood, 
And all the air is Pleiad-like with swords,” 
Then brave Asfandiyár rose in his stirrups 
And shouted, brandishing his ox-head mace 
Of steel, then, gripping it still tighter, slew 
Three hundred Turkmans of the central host, 
Exclaiming: “In revenge for Farshidward 
This day will I raise dust-clouds from the sea.” 
Then letting his swift charger have the reins 
He charged against the right wing of the foe, 
And slaughtered eight score of the warriors. 
Kuhram, when he beheld it, showed his back. 


P 


"A WS TAS REET I "TER 
 GUSHTÁSP 111 


Asfandiyár exclaimed: “Thus I avenge 

My grandsire whom my father loved so well,” 

Then turned his reins toward the left, and all 

The earth became as ‘twere a sea of blood. 

He slew of mighty men eight score and five, 

All men of name possessed of crowns and wealth. 

" Thus," said he, “I revenge my noble brothers, 

Those eight and thirty who have passed away.” 
Arjásp, on seeing this, said to Gurgsár z=- 

" Our warriors in numbers numberless 

Are slaughtered all; not one of them is left ; 

Not one remaineth*still before the line. 

I know not wherefore thou remainest silent, 

Or why thou hadst so much to say before.” 
The words aroused the spirit of Gurgsar, 

And he advanced before the line of battle. 

Within his hand he bare a royal bow, 

And poplar arrow with a point of steel. 

As soon as he was near he aimed his shaft, 

And struck the paladin upon the chest. 

Asfandiyár hung over on his saddle 


So that Gurgsár might deem: " The shaft hath piereed 


His breastplate, and the prince's radiant form 
Is wounded," and Gurgsár accordingly 
Unsheathed his flashing falchion, purposing 

To smite the head off from Asfandiyar ; 

But he, all fearless of disaster, loosed 

The coiled up lasso from the saddle-straps, 

And in the Maker's name, the Omnipotent’s, 
Flung it about his foe whose head and neck 
Were taken in the toils. Asfandiyár 

Then hurled Gurgsir all quaking to the ground, 
Secured, firm as a rock, his hands behind him, 
And, having set a halter round his neck, 
Dragged him along the ground before the lines, 
With blood-foam on his lips, toward the camp, 


V. 1580 


En 


j 

v 
- EET L] 
T 


m 
W- - 


«od b. 4 9 aW L a i) 


V. 1581 


112 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS] 


Dispatched him to the Shih’s safe custody— 
That conquering monarch of the golden helm— 
And said: * Keep this man in the camp-enclosure 
In bonds and no wise think of slaying him 
Till we shall see how fortune will incline, 
And whieh side gain the day.” 
Departing thence 
He led his whole host onward to the fray, 
And shouted to the troops: “ Where is Kuhram, 
Whose flag is seen no more upon the right ? 
Where is Kundur, the swordsman, too—that taker 
Of Lions who was wont to pierce the mountains 
With spears and arrows?” 
They informed Arjásp:— 

“ Asfandiydr, the hero, hath encountered 
Gurgsir in fight and ta’en him prisoner, 
Bold Lion though he was, The atmosphere 
Is violet-dim with swords of Warriors, 
The banner blazoned with the wolf hath vanished,” 

That portent grieved Arjisp. He bade to bring 
The camels and then tock the desert-route. 
He and his courtiers rode those lusty beasts, 
And led their chargers. Thus he left behind 
His army still upon the battlefield, 
While with his lords he fared toward Khallukh. 
Asfandiyár sent up a battle-shout, 
The mountain-top re-echoed at his voice. 
He shouted to the [ranians: “Brandish not 
Your scimitars of battle fruitlessly, 
But sheathe them in your foemen's hearts and blood, 
And pile on earth a mount Karun of slain.” 

The troops, inspired with vengeance, gripped their 

saddles, 

And host encountered host. Dust, stones, and grass 
Were saturate with gore, and had a mill 
Been standing there the blood had driven it. 


Ake 


pu 


P » -— -- — 
ERS NX RT * 


The plain was all bestrewn with feet and trunks, 
With severed heads and fists still grasping swords, 
While still the cavaliers of war charged on, 

And gave themselves no time for pill 
Now when the Turkmans heard : * Arjásp hath fled,” 


- The skins upon their bodies burst with grief ; 


Those that had steeds betook themselves to flight, 
While all the rest threw down their casques and mail, 
And came in sorrow to Asfandiyár, 

Came with their eyes like spring. That mighty one 
Accorded quarter and then ceased to slay. 

He set a chief to guard them, and thenceforth 
Grieved not his grandsire's death. He and his troops 
Came to the Shah, breast, sword, and Rüman casque 
All blood ; it glued the falchion to his hand, 

And his cuirass had galled him, chest and shoulder. 
They washed his hand and scimitar in milk, 

And drew the arrows from his mail, and then 


. The atheling, triumphant and unharmed, 


Went forth and bathed him. Afterward he called 
For raiment meet for worshippers and sought 
The all-righteous Judge. Gushtasp, all fear and awe, 
Made for a week thanksgiving with his son 
Before the just Creator of the world. 
Upon the eighth day, when Asfandiyar 
Had come again, Gurgsir appeared before him, 
Despairing of sweet life and all a-quake 
With terror like a willow in the wind, 
And said: “O prince! my death will not renown thee: 
I will attend thee as a slave and ever 
Guide thee to good, abate all future ills, 
And show thee how to reach the Brazen Hold.” 

The prince- bade take Gurgsir bound hand and foot, 


Just as he was, back to the camp-enclosure, 


And went to the encampment of Arjasp— 


1 ui pour le séparer“ (Mohl). 
VOL. V. = 


v4 e i 
a 
an^ * 


— GUSHTÁSP ns 


Y. 1582 


Y. 1583 


MW 
= 


114 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 
The slayer of Luhrásp—distributed 


The spoils midst horse and foot, committed all 


The captives taken to his chiefs, and slew 
Those that had given the army cause to rue, 


$ 33 
How Gushtásp sent Asfandiydr the second Time to 
fight Arjdap 
Asfandiyár, on his return to camp, 
Took counsel with the Shih about Luhrasp, 
And the revenge for Farshidward and all 
Those men renowned upon the day of battle, 
To him Gushtásp said: " Thou, O mighty man ! 
Hejoicest while thy sisters are in bondage. 
Oh! happy they that died upon the field, 
Not frantic with dishonour from the Turkmans ! 
When men behold me sitting on the throne 
What will my subjects say? So long as life 
Endureth I shall weep for this disgrace, 
And burn within my brain. By most high God, 
The Omnipotent, I pledge myself—if thou 
Shalt go without disaster to Turin, 
Courageously confront the Dragon's breath, 
And free thy sisters from the Turkmans, I 
Will yield to thee the crown of empire, treasure | 
Which thou hast earned not, and the throne of great- 
ness," | 

Asfandiyár replied : “May none behold 
A time devoid of thee. I am a slave 
To thee, my sire! I do not seek the kingship, 
And hold my soul and body as thy ransom, 
I am not fain to sit upon the throne 
And rule in person, I will go in quest 
Of vengeance on Arjásp, spare neither field 


m E v 


han TUN ed 


L ah 


7 


^J vu 


r 


GUSHTÁSP- 


Nor fell within Türán, and will restore 
M sisters from their bondage to their thrones 

All through the fortune of the exalted Shah, 
The master of the world." 

Gushtásp invoked 

A blessing on him, saying: "Now may wisdom. 
Be with thee ever, in thy going forth * 
May God protect thee, and the throne be thine 
Ün thy return." 


He called the host together 

From all parts where were warriors or archmages, 
And from among them chose twelve thousand men, 
All skilful cavaliers of high renown, 
Distributing to them a donative 
That well contented them. He furthermore 
Bestowed upon Asfandiyár a throne, 
And such a jewelled crown as monarchs use, 
Then from the portal of the royal court 
A shout rose: “ Bring the princes’ noble steeds," 

They bore the tent-enclosure to the plain, 
They bore the eagle-standard, and the host 


Marched out mid dust that gloomed the radiant sun. 


From palace plainward went Asfandiyár, 
And saw an army ready dight for war, 


a ~ 


Am 7 


PART II 
THE STORY OF THE SEVEN STAGES 


The poct, after inditing a Prelude in praise of Malmid, tells 
how Asfandiyár set forth with his host to rescue his sisters from 
the Brazen Hold; how he met with divers adventures by the 
way, captured the Brazen Hold by a stratagem, delivered his 
sisters, slew Arjisp, defeated the Tirinians, and returned in 
triumph to his father, 


NOTE 


, In this Part the rivalry between the two greatest heroes of 
Irinian legend proper, the priestly and the popular hero— 
Asfandiyir and Rustam—may be said to get fairly undor way. 
For the present it is a rivalry of achievement only. In Part III. 
it is a personal contention in which every faculty of mind and 
body is exerted to the utmost in a desperate struggle that results 
tragically for both protagonists. This rivalry in legend may be 
said to have commenced even in Part L, where, just as Rustam 
delivered Tis and the Irinian host when beleaguered by the 
Turkmans on Mount Hamiiwan,! so Asfandiyir delivers Gushtásp 
and his army in similar circumstances from Arjisp.? In the 
present Part, however, the rivalry becomes more Pronounced. 
As Rustam went alone to release Kai Kiiis from imprisonment in 
Mizandarin and encountered seven adventures on his way, s0 
Asfandiyár govs to Túrán to rescue his enslaved sisters and has 
a similar series of difficulties to overcome, Again, just as Rustam 
twice donned merchant's garb, on one occasion to get possession 
of Mount Sipand,! and on another to rescue Bizhan when captive 
in the pit," so Asfandiyir assumes a like disguise to win the 
Brazen Hold.* We should notice further that though the parallel 

xpeditions of Rustam and Asfandiyür pass under the same 
* Vol. iii. p. 132 ey. Poba 9 Vol. i P. 329 seq. 
! d. dii. 334 seg. * p n3 eg. 

115 


== —_ 
e 


GUSHTASP 117 


name," yet the priestly redactors of the latter's legend hava 
taken care that his achievements should be attended with more 
pomp and circamstance than his rival's, Thus Rustam goos alone 
to Mázandarin,* but Asfandiyár, whose princely rank has to be 
recognised, makes his expedition to Turin accompanied by his 
brother and minister—Bishitan—and an army. This, however, 
is not allowed to militate against the merit of his exploits. 
When an adventure has to be achieved, the hero sets forth alone, 
while Bishütan and the troops remain at a respectful distance 
in the rear till all is over, and then come up to offer their con- 
gratulations, Again, Rustam sleeps through his first adventure 
—the killing of a lion—and only wakes up to find that his steed 
Rakhsh has done the business for him.* Asfandiyir slays suc- 
cessively and single-handed two monstrous wolves and a lion and 
lioness. The third adventure of both is the slaying of a dragon.’ 
Rustam succeeds with the help of Rakhsh, Asfandiyir with the 
assistance of a break and pair of horses! In the next adventure : 
both, after an interlude of wine,lute, and song, put to death a 
witch;* Ghül, however, whom Aetandiyár slays, is represented as 
belg. the more formidable of the two beguilers. Finally, the 
taking of the Brazen Hold and the slaying of Arjásp by Asfan- 
diyár" evidently is intended to eclipse Rustam's capture of Mount 
Sipand' and his encounter with the White Div in the cave, We 
may add that both heroes have a prisoner to guide them during 
part of their respective expeditions, Rustam. rewards Ulid, 
Asfandiyir slays Gurgsár." The champion of the Faith must 
not show a mistaken mercy to infidels! Evidently, however, from 
what we have seen above, it was not considered enough that 
Asfandiyir should be merely a great religious hero; it was de- 
sired that he should be a great popular hero as well, and surpass 
Rustam on the latter's own ground, for Rustam's Haft Khwin 
obviously is the original one. There seems also to be a malicious 
hit at Rustam in Asfandiyár's fifth. adventure, that in which 
he kills the Simurgh, the traditional guardian of the race of Zl. 
Popular legend, however, stood firm on behalf of its great hero; 
it refused to supersede him or to acquiesce in the death of the 
Simurgh; on the contrary, it kept the great bird alive so that 
it might compass indirectly its own revenge by providing Rustam 
with the means of vanguishing Asfandiyir. Worsted in this 
world, and to redress the balance, priestly tradition called ine 


! Haft Khwán. See VoL ii. p. 29. Jd, ii 44, iv. 296. 

3 Jd, ii 45. ‘pp. £22, 124. * Vol. ii, p. 48. and p. 125. 
* Id. 5o, and p. 128. * p. 152. * Yol. i. p. 330. 

"Fd. ii 59. M fd. 36, a pP. t41. 1*-n. r3r. 


V. 1884 


V. 1585 


' @ QS - s 
E " i j », d " a 
| "ma « 1 A. e \ $ T 
à "s ' T 
a 


i ~~ Vr 
THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ - T PUB 


aid the next, and declared Rustam's lot therein to be an unhappy 
one. This conflict between the legends of the two heroes is — 
typified in the story of their personal encounter in Part IIL, 
and we shall gather from Firdausi’s splendid version of it, “the 
deepest conflict of soul in the poem and one of the profoundest 

in all national epics,” as Professor Nildeke justly calls it," that 
after centuries probably of unconscious give and take the con- 
flicting claims of the two protagonists were compromised, and 
their combined legend settled down into the marvellous equi- 
librium which now characterizes it. 


: S 


$t 
The Praise of Mahmúd the great King 

The Seven Stages will I next set forth? 
In words both novel and of dainty worth, 
Oh! may the world’s Shih live for ever, may 
Its potentates be slaves beneath his sway ! 
He showed his visage like bright Sol above, 
And graced the surface of the earth with love. 
Sol was in Aries when first he wore 
The crown, and East and West rejoiced therefore. 

The thunder-peal is rolling o'er the hills, 
And tulip and narcissus throng the rills, 
The patient tulip, arch narcissus, yea 
And awesome spikenard and pomegranate gay, 
The clouds have hearts of fire and tearful eyes, 
And bursts of anger mix with melodies, 
The levin flasheth and the waters leap 
Till at the din thou rousest from thy sleep, 
Thus wakened look abroad and call the scene 
Brocade or painted by Mani in Chin 
A scene that, bright in sunshine, having spied 
‘The tulip and narcissus still wet-eyed, 
Will laugh and cry : “Ye minxes! thus again 
I weep for love of you, not wrath or pain.” 

‘NIN, § 35. Cf. too, 8 30. * Cf. Vol. ii, p. 19 note, 


- b a » - ` 
» 7 y j S B 
ere or i EEE a a 


7 7. + : = 
^ X4 . » 


GUSHTASP 
Earth hath no laughter while the heaven is dry. 

I do not call our great king's hand the sky, 
Which only giveth forth its rains in spring, 
For such is not the usance of a king. 

As Sol, when it ariseth gloriously 

In Aries, such shall the Shah's hand be, 
For whensoe'er there cometh to his hand 

A wealth of pearls or musk from sea or land, 
The radiance that is his he doth not scant 

To proud-necked monarch and to mendicant. 
Abi’l Kasim! our great Shih’s hand is still 
Thus generous alike to good and ill. 

He never slackeneth in bounteousness, 

And never resteth on the day of stress, 
Delivereth battle when the times demand, 
And taketh heads of monarchs in his hand, 
But largesseth the humble with his spoils, 
And maketh no account of his own toils. 

Oh! may Mahmud still rule the world, still be 
The source of bounty and of equity ! 

Now list to what an ancient sage hath told, 

And learn the legend of the Brazen Hold. 


THE SEVEN STAGES OF ASFANDIYÁR 
52 


THe First STAGE 
How Asfandiyár slew two Wolves 
A rustic bard hath spread the board and there 
Set forth “The Seven Stages” as the fare. 
He took within his hand a cup of gold, 
And of Gushtasp and of the Brazen Hold, 
And of the doings of Asfandtyar, 


A is 7 B. m-— us — a = 
" LA a 4. i A b 24 A : — 
' a » LI à i ian 7 1 


v.56 


E. 


V. 1587 


120 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


His journey and the counsels of Gurgsir, 
Spake thus:—Now when embittered, tongue and soul, 
Asfandiyar reached Balkh he left his sire, 
And set out with Gurgsir toward Tinin. 
He marched until he came where two roads met, 
And camped there with his host, bade spread the board, 
And furnish wine and harp and minstrelsy, 
While all the captains of the host drew near, 
And sat at table with the king of men, 
By whose directions presently Gurgsdr, 
In miserable plight, was brought before him, 
And furnished with a golden goblet filled 
Four times successively. Thereafter said 
Asfandiyar to him: “Thou luckless one ! 
I will advance thee to the crown and throne, 
Will give thee all the kingdom of the Turkmans, 
And will exalt thee to the shining sun, 
As soon as I return victorious, 
If thou wilt tell me truly what I ask, 
Nor will I harm thy children, kith or kin: 
Eut if thou go about to utter lies 
In any way they will not pass with me, 
My sword shall cleave thee, and the hearts of all 
Shall tremble at thy fate.” | 
Gurgsár replied :— 
“O famous, glorious Asfandiyár ! 
From me the king shall hear naught but the truth, 
And be it thine to act the kingly part.” 
“Where is the Brazen Hold,” Asfandiydr 
Said, “ for its marches march not with fran? 
What roads are there to it? How many leagues? 
How can it be approached without mishap ? 
Say too how many troops there are within it, 
And tell me what thou knowest of its height.” 
_ “O kind and glorious Asfandiyár ! " 
Gurgsár replied, “ three roads lead hence to what 


fe Arlisp hath tiued ' Battlestead.’ One rout 
= Will take thy troops three months, the second two. 
E The first hath water, grass, and towns, and chiefly 
r Pertaineth to the chieftains of Turan. 
t The second road, that which will take two months, 
5 Will furnish for the troops but little provand ; 
E There is no grass or water for the beasts, 
And thou wilt find no camping-grounds, The third 
| Will oceupy but seven days; the troops 
z Will reach the Brazen Hold upon the eighth, 
—. . gut that road is all lions, wolves, and dragons, 
E And none can scape their claws; yet mightier 
BT Than lion, wolf, and savage dragon are 
A witch's charms, who raiseth from the deep 
= One to the moon and flingeth to the abyss 
E Another headlong. There are wastes, símurghs, 
And bitter frosts which rise like blasts and eut 
P The trees. Then will appear the Brazen Hold, 
j And none e'er saw, or heard of, such another, 
| It toppetlr the dark cloud-rack. Arms and troops 
Abound within it. Waters and a river— | 
A sight to cheer the soul—environ it. 
= The monarch crosseth to the plain by boat 
= When he vill hunt, but should he stay within 
For five score years the plain could furnish naught 
That he would need, because inside the hold 
— — Are tilth atíd pasture, fruit-trees and a mill." 
— — Asfandiyár, on hearing this, was troubled 
— Awhile and sighed, but said: “There is no way 
For us save this; the short road is the best 
- In this world," and Gurgsár retorted thus :— 
(king! none e'er by puissance and pains 
—  Hath made the passage of the Seven Stages 


Without foregoing life.” 
The chieftain answered :— 
If thou art with me thou shalt see the heart 


» 


122 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ —  — 


And strength of Áhriman. What, sayest thou, 
Will meet me first? What must I fight for passage?” 

Gurgsir replied: “O famed and fearless man ! 
Two wolves, each like a lusty elephant, 
A male and female, having horns like stags 
And all a-gog to make a fight of lions, 
Broad in the neck and breast and thin of flank, | 
With monstrous elephants’ tusks, first will confront 

thee.” 

Asfandiyár then bade lead baek Gurgsár 
Bound as he was in miserable plight, 
And blithe himself assumed his Kaian casque, 
And held his court, 

When Sol displayed its erown 

On high, and heaven showed earth its mysteries, 
The din of drums rose from the royal tent, 
Earth turned to iron, air to ebony, 
While in high spirits and with fair array 
The prince set forward toward the Seven Stages, 
And toward Tiirin. When he approached the First 
He chose a veteran among the host, 
A watchful man, hight Bishütan, who guarded 
The army from the foe, and said to him:— 
" Maintain good discipline among the troops. 
I am disturbed by what Gurgsár hath sald, 
And will go on. If evil shall befall me 
It must not come upon my followers," 


He went and armed; they girthed his night-hued 
steed, 


The chief, when he had drawn anigh the wolves, 
Sat firmly like a mighty elephant, 

The wolves beheld his breast and neck, his waist, 
His warrior-handgrip, and his iron mace, 

And like grim elephants and keen for fight 
Made at him from the plain. The hero strung 
His bow and, roaring like a rending lion, | 


ee ae f 


| 


ee et eee m LUC wes 


‘J 


a 
€ 
> 
p 
-T 


M 


And hardily employed the horsemen's sleights.! 
The steel-tipped shafts disabled both the beasts, 
And neither could approach unscathed. With joy 
Asfandiyár perceived them growing weak 
And sore distressed, unsheathed his watered glaive, 
And charged. He hacked;their heads and made the 
dust 
Mire with their blood, lit from his noble steed, 
Acknowledging his helplessness to God, 
And washed the wolves’ gore from his arms and person, 
Then sought a spot that had not been defiled * 
Upon the sand and turning toward the sun, 
With troubled heart and cheeks besmirched with dust, 
Exelaimed: “© righteous Judge! Thou hast bestowed 
Upon me strength, Grace, prowess. Thou hast laid 
These beasts upon the dust and to all good 
Art Guide.” 
When Bishütan came with the host 
They saw the hero at the place of prayer. 
The warriors were astonied at his exploit, 
And all the troops thought : ** Shall we call these wolves 
Or lusty elephants? May such a heart 
And sword and hand live ever! Never may 
The throne of kingship, majesty, and feast, 
And host lack him." 
The wary warriors _ 

Approached and pitched the tent-enclosure round him ; 
They set a golden board whereat to dine, 
Partook of victuals and called out for wine, 

1 “et se précipita dans le danger qui jusque-là avait accablé tous les 
cavaliers " (Mohl). 

?* Un endroit pur de sang " (/d.). 


/ GUSHTÁSP 124 . 
Rained arrows down upon those Áhrimans, 


. 1590 


V. 1591 


124 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


§ 3 
Tue Seconp Stace 
How Asfandiyár slew two Lions 


As for Gu rear his portion was chagrin 
About those fierce wolves and Asfandiyár, 
Who bade the prisoner be brought before him. 
They brought him quaking, with his face all tears, 
The prince bestowed on him three cups of wine, 
And asked: “What wonder shall I next behold 
By thine account ?” 
He answered thus the chief :— 

“O monarch crowned and leonine of heart ! 
Upon the next stage lions will assail thee, 
Such as no crocodile would dare encounter ; 
The lusty eagle, valiant though it be, 
Will fly not in their path." 

Asfandiyár 
Laughed with light heart, and said: “O feckless Turk- 

man ! 

Tomorrow thou shalt see a valiant man 
Address the lion with the scimitar” 

When night grew dark the monarch gave command, 
And they resumed the march, Hoe led the host 
Apace amid the gloom, blood in his eyes, 

Despite at heart, and when the sun had doffed 
Its dusky cloak and donned brocade of gold 

He reached the station for the brave—the plain 
Where he must fight the lions. He commanded 
That Bishütan should come to him, advised him 
At large, and said : "I go to fight in person, 
Committing this exalted host to thee,” 

He went his way, and drawing near the lions 
Turned all the world to darkness in their hearts. 


E There were a lion and a lioness, 
And bravely both came forth to fight with him, 
The lion first. He smote it with his sword ; 
Its face grew coral-hued ; 'twas cloven from head 
To midriff, which appalled the lioness, 
Yet, like her mate, she came on savagely, 
The chieftain smote her on the head, which fell 
| And rolled upon the sand. Her paws and breast 
à Were tulip-hued with blood. He bathed himself 
— . And, looking to all-holy God alone 
As his Protector, said : * O righteous Judge! 
Thou hast destroyed these creatures by my hand." 
Meanwhile the troops came up, and Bishütan 
Surveyed the lions’ breasts and limbs while all 
Acclaimed Asfandiyir, That valiant leader 
Thereafter went to his pavilion where 
They served to that pure prince delicious fare. 


? $4 

| THE THIRD STAGE 

4 How Asfandiyár slew a. Dragon 
E Asfandiyár then ordered to his presence 

: The luckless and malevolent Gurgsár, . 


— A Gave him three goblets filled with rosy wine, 
And, when the wine had cheered that Áhriman, 
Addressed him thus and said : * Ill-fated wretch ! V. 1592 
Tell what thou knowest of tomorrow's sight." 
Gurgsár returned reply: * Higzh-minded king ! 
May evil-doers ne'er approach to harm thee. 
Gone hast thou into battle like a fire, 
And made a shift to over-pass these bales 
But know'st not what will come on thee tomorrow. 
Have mercy then upon thy wakeful fortune, - 


] P^ at Sa e a ? € a 


~~ 
- 


í 


V, 1593 


126 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


For when tomorrow thou shalt reach the stage 
A greater task by far confronteth thee, 
There will encounter thee an awesome dragon, 
Whose breath doth draw forth from the deep the fish, 
A flame of fire proceedeth from its maw; 
Its body is a mountain made of flint. 
Now if thou wilt retrace thy steps ‘tis well; 
My very soul is pleading in this counsel. 
Thou hast not any pity for thyself, 
And by that token came thiwhost together.” 

Asfandiyár replied : * Thou evil one ! 
I mean to drag thee in thy chains with me 
To be a witness that this sharp-clawed dragon 
Escapeth not my trenchant scimitar,” 

At his command some carpenters were fetched, 
And therewithal some long and heavy beams, 
He had a goodly wooden carriage built 
All set about with swords and with a box, 
Framed by a clever carpenter, whereon 
That seeker of the diadem sat down, 
And harnessed to the break two noble steeds 
To put it to the proof. He drove awhile 
In mail, armed with a falchion of Kabul, 
And helmed for fight. Or ever all was ready 
For battle with the dragon night grew dark, 
As ‘twere a negro's face, while Luna showed 
Her erown in Arie& — Asfandiyár 
Gat on his steed Shilak; his noble host 
Marched after him. Next day when it was light, 
And night's black flag was furled, the heroic world-lord 
Assumed his breastplate and resigned the host 
To glorious Bishütan, had break and box, 
Wherein he sat, brought forth, attached two steeds 
Of noble stock, and sped toward the dragon, 
Afar it heard the rumble and beheld 
The prancing of the battle-steeds, It came, 


! t. 


OOP = ee 


t 


GUSHTASP ; se 


Like some black mountain, and thou wouldst have 


“The sun and moon are darkened.” Its two eyes 
Seemed fountains bright with blood, while from its 
gullet 
Fire issued, and like some dark cavern gaped 
Its jaws. It bellowed at Asfandiyár, 
Who, seeing the monster, drew his breath and turned 
To God for help. The horses strove to ‘scape 
The dragon's mischief, but it sucked them in, 
Them and the break, and in his box dismayed 
The warrior. In the dragon’s gullet stuck 
The sword-blades, and blood poured forth like a sea ; 
It could not free its gullet, for the swords 
Were sheathed within it. Tortured by the points 
And chariot the dragon by degrees 
Grew weak, and then the gallant warrior, 
Arising from the box, clutched his keen glaive 
With lion-grip and hacked the dragon’s brains 
Till fumes of venom rising from the dust 
O’erpowered him; he tumbled mountain-like, 
And swooned away. Then Bishütan and all 
His mighty host came up in tears and grief 
Lest ill should have befallen Asfandiyár, 
The troops all wailed, dismounted, and advanced 
Afoot while Bishútan came hurrying, V. 1594 
And poured rose-water o'er the hero's head. 
Now when the atheling had oped his eyes 
He thus addressed the exalted warriors:— 
“The venom’s fumes o’ercame me, for the dragon 
Ne'er struck me.” : 
Rising from the ground like one 
Awakening from a drunken drowse he sought 
The water, plunged therein, and bathed, bespeaking 
A change of raiment from his treasurer. 
Then in the presence of all-holy God 


V. 1595 


— a= M B "m "Ru 5 
Cu ae Wee ey, ee | e. 


128 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


He wallowed in the dust and wept, exclaiming :— 
" Who could have slain that dragon if the World-lord 
Had not assisted him ? " 

His soldiers too 
Bent to the earth and praised the righteous Judge; 
But thus to find alive Asfandiyár, 
Whom he thought dead, was grievous to Gurgsár. 


$5 
Tre Fourtu Stace 
How Asfandiyir slew a Witch 
Asfandiyár pitched by the water-side 
His tent-enclosure while the troops camped round him. 
He set forth wine, called boon-companions, 
Rose to his feet, and drank to Shih Gushtisp, 
Commanding too to bring Gurgsir who came 
Before him, quaking. Then Asfandiyir 
Gave him to drink three cups of royal wine, 
Spake laughingly with him about the dragon, 
And said: “Thou worthless fellow! now behold 
How with its breath that dragon sucked us in! 
When I go forward for another stage 
What greater toils and troubles are in store?” 
Gurgsir replied: “O conquering prince! thou hast : 

The fruit of thy good star, When thou alightest 
Tomorrow at the stage a witeh will come 
To greet thee. . She hath looked on many a host, t 
But quailed at none, She turneth waste to sea 
At will and maketh sunset at mid day. -i 
Men call her Ghül, O Sháh! Face not her toils 
In these thy days of youth. Thou hast o'ereome 
The dragon; now turn back; thou shouldst not bring 
Thy name to dust." 

The atheling replied .— 


"H4, a" 


ECT J.  GUSHTÁSP 129 


RU “ Tomorrow, knave! thou shalt recount my prowess, 
E For I will break the warlocks' backs and hearts, 
n So will I maul that witch, and trample down a 
Their heads by might of Him, the one just God." | 
When day donned yellow weeds, and this world's : 
Lustre d 


Sank in the west, he marched on, packed the loads, : 
d With prayer to God, the Giver of all good, | 

— . . And led the army onward through the night. ‘d 
in When Sol had raised its golden casque, begemming : 


The Ram's face, and the champaign was all smiles, 
The prince gave up the host to Bishütan, i 
And took a golden goblet filled with wine, 
Called for a costly lute and, though he went 
To battle, dight himself as for a feast. 

He had in view a wood like Paradise ; 


Thou wouldst have said: “The sky sowed tulips = 
there.” | 
" The sun saw not within it for the trees, 
E And streamlets like rose-water flowed around. | 
He lighted from his steed as seemed: him good, y 


And, having chosen him a fountain's marge 

Within the forest, grasped the golden goblet. 

Now when his heart was gladdened with the wine | 
The hero took the lute upon his lap, m 
And out of all the fulness of his heart 1 
Began to troll this ditty to himself :— 

“Oh! never is it mine to see . 


Both wine and one to quaff with me, 
But mine ‘tis ever to behold 


The lion and the dragon bold, i 
And not, from bales’ clutch, liberty. A 
Tis not my lot to look upon ^ 
Ün earth some glorious fay-cheeked one, ^ 

Yet now if God will but impart Y. 1596 

A winsome breaker of the heart | = 
The longing of mine own is won." 5i 

1 ' 


130 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Now when she heard Asfandiyár the witch 
Grew like a rose in springtide, saying thus :— 
“The mighty Lion cometh to the toils 
With robe and lute and goblet filled with wine.” 

Foul, wrinkled, and malevolent she plied 
Her magic arts amid the gloom and grew 
As beauteous as a Turkman maid, with cheek 
As ‘twere brocade of Chin and musk-perfumed, 
Of eypress-height, a sun to look upon, 

With musky tresses falling to her feet. 

Her cheeks like rosaries, she drew anear 
Asfandiyar, with roses in her breast. 

The atheling, when he beheld her face, 

Plied song and wine and harp more ardently, 
And said: “O just and only God! Thou art 
Our Guide upon the mountain and the waste. 
I wanted even now a fay-faced maid 

Of beauteous form as my companion; 

The just Creator hath bestowed her on me, 
Oh! may my heart and pure soul worship Him." 

He plied her with musk-scented wine and made 
Her face a tulip-red. Now he possessed 
A goodly chain of steel which he had kept 
Concealed from her. Zarduhsht, who brought it 

down 
From Paradise for Sháh Gushtásp, had bound it 
About the prince's arm.  Asfandiyár 
Flung it around her neck; her strength was gone; 
She took a lion's form. The atheling 
Made at her with his scimitar, and said :— 
“Thou wilt not injure me though thou hast reared 
An tron mountain, Take thy proper shape, 
For now the answer that I make to thee 
Is with the scimitar.” 

Within the chain 

There was a fetid hag, calamitous, 


7 D = 
u LJ 


GUSHTÁSP 


With head and hair like snow, and black of face. 
With trenchant sword he smote her on the head, V. 1597 
Which with her body came down to the dust. 
Sight failed, so loured the sky when that witch died, 
While blast and black cloud veiled the sun and moon. 
The atheling clomb to a hill and shouted 
As 'twere a thunder-clap. Then Bishütan | 
Came quickly with the host, and said: “Famed prince! 
No crocodile or witch, wolf, pard and lion, 
Can stand thy blows, and by that token thou 
Wilt be exalted still. Oh! may the world 
Desire thy love!" 

The head-piece of Gurgsár 
Flamed at these triumphs of Asfandiyár. 


$6 
THE FirrH STAGE 
How Asfandiyár slew the Simurgh 


The atheling laid face upon the ground 

Awhile before the Maker of the world, 

Then pitched his camp-enclosure in the wood. 

They spread the board in fitting mode and then 

Asfandiyár gave orders to the deathsman :— 

“ Bring hither in his bonds that wretch Gurgsir.” 
They brought him to the prince who, seeing him, 

Gave him three cups of royal wine. Now when 

The ruddy wine had gladdened him thus said . 

Asfandiyár: * Thou wretched Turkman! mark 

Upon the tree the head of that old witch, 

' Who turneth,' so thou saidst, ' the plain to sea, 

And doth exalt her o'er the Pleiades,’ 

And now what marvel shall I see next stage, 

* 


132 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Judged by the standard of this witch?” 
He answered :— 
* () Elephant of war in battle-time! 
Upon this stage thou hast a harder task : 
Be more than ever cautious and alert. 
v. 1598 Thou wilt behold a mount, with head in air, 
And thereupon a bird imperious, 
One like a flying mountain, combative, 
And called Simurgh by merchants. With its claws 
It beareth off the elephant at sight, 
The pard on land, the crocodile from water, 
And feeleth not the effort. Weigh it not 
With wolf and witch. Upon its mountain-home 
It hath two young, their wills to hers affined, 
And when it flieth the earth is impotent, 
The sun is put to shame. ‘Twill profit thee 
To turn back for thou canst not strive against 
Simurgh and mountain-height.” 
The hero laughed. 
“A wonder!” he exclaimed. “TI will sew up 
Its shoulders with mine arrows, cleave its breast 
With Indian scimitar, and bring its head 
From height to dust.” 
When bright Sol showed its back, 
Which ruffled all the bosom of the west, 
The chief of warriors led the army forth, 
And pondered that account of the Simurgh. 
Thus he and host fared onward all the night, 
Whenas the shining sun rose o'er the mountains 
The Lamp of time gave freshness to the earth, 
Transforming dale and plain. Asfandiyar 
Gave up the army to its chief? and took 
To steed and box and break. He sped along, 
Like an imperious blast, and spying in air 
A peak stayed in its shadow break and steed, 
t “Ila deux petits qui sont grands comme lui" (Mohl). 3 Bishütan. 


Ld 


TF 


n. GUSHTASP 133 i 
A Absorbed in contemplation. The Símurgh 
Marked from the mount the box, the troops behind it, 
* And all their trumpeting, and, swooping down 
Like some dark cloud obseuring sun and moon, ; 
| Essayed to seize the ehariot with its talons, E: 
As leopard seizeth quarry, but transfixed 4 
Ls Its legs and pinions with the swords, and all À 
c. Its might and glory passed away. It beat 
Awhile with claws and beak while strength remained, v. 1599 
And then was still. On seeing this its young 
x Flew off with screams and weeping tears of blood 
= Down from the eyry, blurring every eye 
= Beneath their shade. When the Simurgh thus sank 
J With all its wounds and bathed steeds, box, and break f 


In blood, Asfandiyár, all armed and shouting, | 
Emerged and hewed to pieces with his sword | 
That bird now mastered, once so masterful ; 

Then prayed thus to the Maker who had given 

Such mastery to him in good and ill, 

And said: “O righteous Judge! Thou hast bestowed 

Upon me wisdon, puissance, and prowess, 

Hast driven out the sorcerers and been 

My Guide to every good.” 


= 


With that arose 
The sound of clarions, arid Bishütan 
Set forward with the host. None could behold 


The desert for the bird, but only saw , 
Its form and talons bathed in blood which covered d 


The earth from range to range, and thou wouldst say : 

“The plain was lost in plumes!" Men saw the prince 
Blood-boltered, ‘twas a sight to fray the moon, 

And all the captains, cavaliers of war, 

And mighty men applauded him. Anon ` 
Gurgsir heard tidings of that famed chief's triumph, i 
Quaked, paled, and fared with tears and heart all 


134 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


The world’s king had the tent-enclosure pitched, 
His joyous warriors round him. Then to dine 
They spread brocade, took seat, and called for wine. 


37 
THE SIXTH STAGE 
How Asfandiyir passed through the Snow 


Asfandiyar, the illustrious prince, then bade 

Gurgsár to come and gave him in succession 

Three cups of wine whereat his cheeks became 

Like bloom of fenugreek, and then the prince 

Addressed him: ‘‘ Miscreant in mind and body! 

Observe the doings of this whirling world! 

Evanished are Simurgh and lion, wolf 

And dragon sharp of claw and valorous !" 
Gurgsár then hfted up his voice and said :— 

"O famous, glorious Asfandiyir ! 

God is thy Helper, O most fortunate! 

The royal Tree hath come to fruit; howbeit 

Tomorrow there confronteth thee a task 

That none in war expecteth. Thou wilt take 

No thought of mace or bow or sword, and see 

No opening for fight, no way of flight, 

For snow, a spear's length deep, will come upon thee, 

A crisis will confront thee, thou with all 

Thy famous army wilt be lost therein, 

O glorious Asfandiyár! No marvel 

If thou turn back, nor need my words offend thee; 

Thou wilt be guiltless of this army's blood, 

And quit this road for other. Sure am I 

That earth will rive beneath a mighty blast, 

The trees be levelled. E'en if thou shalt make 

At last thy way through to the plain beyond 

The ngxt stage will be thirty leagues across, 


pred GUSHTÁSP 135 UM 
3 ` An arid wilderness of dust and sand, V. 1601 " 
+ Which birds and ants and locusts traverse not. OX 
b ; Thou wilt not see a drop of water there ; SE 


Its soil is ever seething with the sun. 
A lion cannot pass that sandy waste, 
Nor swift-winged vulture fly across the sky. 


Y No herbage groweth in the arid soil, 
^ And that is tutty-like, all shifting sands. | 
= Thus wilt thou fare along for forty leagues ; Y 
t. Men's souls will fail and horses lose all heart. E. 
i Thy host then will approach the Brazen Hold, 4 
n. Which thou wilt find upon n@fruitful spot, 5 
i : Its soil is in the maw of poverty ; 
h } Its summit holdeth conclave with the sun, 
ae Outside the castle beasts look not for food, 
N The army will not have a horseman left. 
* Though there should come a hundred thousand men, 
is Sword-wielders from [nin and from Türán, 
E And should beleaguer it a hundred years, i] 
) And shower arrows there, it recketh not L. 
1 How many enemies or few there be; j = 
zi They are but as a knocker on the door." i 
=- The Íránians heard Gurgsár, were pained, and said :— 
s “O noble prince! forbear with all thy might N 
To compass thine own ruin. If things are A 
As said Gurgsár we cannot blink that we US 
Came hither to our death and not to wreck & 
The Turkmans. Thou hast traversed this rough road, am 


And 'scaped disaster from wild beasts, Not one 
Of all our warriors and heroic Sháhs 

Can reckon up so great a tale of toils / 
As thou hast met with in these Seven Stages, 

So thank the Maker for it all, and since L 
Thou wilt return victorious thou mayst go | 
Light-hearted to the Shah, while if thou marchest | 
! An impalpable powder used for the eyes, e 


ne 3 . 


= E 
4 meg c q 
S — Aus TW E P 
a ` m | 
Jii de i — " 
ag. LI il 


136 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


P To war elsewhere the whole state of Írán ' 

Ic V. 1602. Will homage thee. So, as Gurgsár saith, hold not 
| Thy person cheaply and involve not all 

A host in slaughter, for this ancient sky 

Will play new tricks. Now that we are triumphant T 

And glad there is no need for thee to fling 

Thine own head to the winds,” 


= On hearing this 
E That young, heroic paladin replied :— . 
“Why fray me thus and open for yourselves 


The door of terror? Came ye from Inin 
To counsel then and not for high renown ? 
If this was then the mind of all of you 
Why did ye gird yourselves to fare with me 
Since at this miserable Turkinan’s words 
Ye tremble like a tree? Where then are all 9 
The counsels and the presents of the Shih, 
The golden girdles, thrones, and diadems, 
Where all your oaths, your bonds, and covenants 
By God ‘neath favouring stars that now your feet 
Should falter thus and one march wreck your plans? 
Turn back then happy and victorious, 
But as for me may I seek naught but fight. 
The World-lord is my conquering ally, 
And fortune's head reclineth on my breast. 
Now by my manhood I will none of you 
EC As comrades whether I am slain or slay, 
And by my manhood, might of hand, and triumph 
Will show the foe what prowess is. Withal 
F Ye shall not lack for tidings of my Grace 
E Imperial, famed, and that which I have wrought 
In His name, who is Lord of Sun and Saturn, 
A Upon this stronghold by my might and manhood.” 
$ The Íránians looked upon Asfandiyár, 
EX Beheld his eyes all wrath, and went before him 
V. 1603 To make excuses: “Let the prince forgive | 


ee eee 

E GUSHTASP | a ee 

Our fault if he see fit. Oh! may our souls "- 

And bodies be thy ransom, such hath been, 

And will remain, our covenant with thee. " 

We grieve for thee, O prince! Our toil and strife $ 

Have not reduced us to extremities, d 

And, while a chief surviveth, none of us » 

Will shrink from fight." Y 
Their leader, hearing this, E 

Grieved for his words and praised the Iranians. ; 

“ Prowess,” 

He said, “ will show itself. If we return 

Victorious we shall enjoy the fmuts 

Of our past toil; it will not be forgotten, 

And your own treasuries shall not be void." 

The prince took counsel till the world grew cool, 

imd zephyrs wafted from the mountain-top, 

Then trump and clarion sounded from the court-gate, 

And all the host set forward, sped like tire, 

And called upon the Maker. When the dawn 

Rose o’er the mountain-tops, and night drew o'er 

Her head her filmy wimple as a veil 

Against the blazing sun which pressed behind, 

That mighty host—all mace-men clad in armour— 

Reached their next stage. It was a glorious day | f 

In spring, à day to gladden heart and world. 3 

The prince bade pitch the tent and tent-enclosure, 

Then had the board spread and the wine brought forth, 

With that there came a fierce blast from the mountains, 

And sore dismayed him. All the world became 


Like ravens’ plumes, and none knew plain from upland. ‘ 
From that dark cloud descended showers of snow; ` r 
The earth was filled with snow and raging blast, -3 


And o'er the desert for three days and nights 

The fury of the wind was measureless, 

The tents and tent-enclosure were soaked through, V. 1604 
And not a man could stand or stir for cold. 


138 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


The air was woof, the snow was like the warp ; 
The chief, resourceless, called to Bishütan:— 
“ This plight of ours is one with misery. 
I met the dragon's fumings like a'man, 
But strength and manhood now avail us not. 

. Make supplication, all of you, to God ! 
Call ye upon Him, offer to Him praise, 
That He may cause these ills to pass from us, 
Else we are naught henceforth.” 

Then Bishütan 
Made prayer to God, who is the Guide to good, 
While all the soldiers lifted up their hands, 
And offered supplications numberless. 
Thereon a gentle breeze arose which bare 
The clouds away and heaven became serene, 
And when the lass had taken heart e 
They offered thanks to God. They stayed three days 
And, when the world's Light shone upon the fourth, 
The leader called the officers to him, 
And spake to them at large and graciously :— 
“Leave baggage here and take but gear of war. 
Let every chief that hath a hundred beasts 
Load half of them with water and supplies, 
The other half with means of serving them. 
Leave all the other baggage here, for now 
The door of God is opened unto us. 
When any man hath lost all hope in God 
His portion of success is small indeed : 
But we by help of God shall overcome 
That evil-doer and idolater, 
While ye shall be the richer for yon hold, 
And all have crowns and treasures.” 
V. 1605 When the sun 

Drew o'er its head its yellow veil, and when 
The west became like flower of fenugreek, 
The warriors, having loaded up the beasts, 


' 

» i P " A 

0 7 a 
- 
A " Li H * 4 g o = 
" ms LI LJ h E —: 
^ E zi E aoe E E 
- y Fa 


GUSHTÁSP 139 
Marched with the king of men. Now in the night 
A sound of cranes came from the sky above. 
nd was wrathful at the sound, 
Mad sent this message to Gurgsár: " Thou said'st :— 
‘ There is no water for thee on this stage, 
Nor rest nor sleep withal.’ Yet cranes give note 
d Why didst thou make us dread a drought ? " 
7 ysir replied: “The baggage-beasts will get 
But brackish water here, and thou wilt find 
The fountains poisonous, though birds and beasts 
Use them." 
The chief said: * In Gurgsár have I 
. A hostile guide.” 


He bade the host proceed. 
| ir God they hurried on at speed. 


THE SEVENTH STAGE 
| How Asfandiydr crossed tha River and slew Gurgedr 


When one watch of the darksome night had passed 
^ There rose a clamour from the plain in front. 

The young prince, smiling on his charger, rode 
^ Forth from the centre of the army vanward. 
R When he had ridden past the troops he saw 
| A deep, unfathomed river. Now a camel, 

One of the caravan whose cameleer 

Had kept it in the front, had tumbled in. 
. The chieftain seized and dragged it from the mud, 
f And that malignant Turkman of Chigil 
n Quaked. At the bidding of the prince he came— 
That fell Gurgsir—both seared of heart and fettered. 
“ Base villain!” said the prince, “why hast thou used 
E This snake-like subtlety? —Didst thou not say :— 


"€ 1 " e 
i E b ~ P E n 
E = "I. P a4 T € ^ > - ) 
Y p = ) 4 g’ - —* 
p d e "ad. c Ls = - ~v i 
= ' v - i TTE 
^1 |" 


4o —— THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


‘Here thou wilt find no water, and the sun ! 
Will burn thee up’? Why didst thou make out water 
Tojbe but dust and wouldst have wrecked the host, 
Thou misereant ? " 
He said: * Thy host's destruction 
Would be as bright to me as sun and moon. 
I get from thee but fetters; what should I 
Wish but thy bale and loss ? " | 
The chieftain laughed, 

Stared, was amazed at him, but showed no wrath, 
And said: “Gurgsdr, thou man of little wit! 
When I return victorious from the fight 
Thou shalt be captain of the Brazen Hold : 
Far be from me to harm thee. All the realm 
Is thine if thou wilt give me honest counsel. 
I will not hurt thy children, kith, or kin." 

Gurgsár grew hopeful at the words, In wonder 
He kissed the ground and asked to be forgiven. 

The prince replied : * Thy words are passed, but water 
Hath not been turned to land by thy wild talk. 
Where is the ford? Thou must direct us right.” 

Gurgsir rejoined: “No arrow plumed and pointed, 
When ironed thus, can find its way across, 
Thou shalt work magic with the mighty stream 
If thou wilt but unfetter me.” 

The hero 

Astonished bade to loose him, and Gurgsár, 
When he had seized a camel by the halter, 
Descended to the stream and at a spot 
That was within his depth essayed the passage. 
The soldiers followed him in single file. 
Inflating at Asfandiyár's behest 
Their water-skins forthwith, and binding them 
Along the barrels of their beasts of burden, 
They all plunged in. The host and baggage reached 
Land, and reforming to the left and right 


-D 
uc 


, 


b, 
E. 
A 

- 
: 
s 
E 
i: 
m t 
E 


‘7 at, 


n - NT "WE = 2X " " EM 
GUSHTÁSP 141 
Marched till the Brazen Hold was ten leagues off. 

The captain of the host sat down to meat, V, 1607 
The slaves attended him with cups of wine 

And, at that mighty Lion's bidding, brought 

His tunie, helmet, coat of mail, and sword. 

In merry pin the hero gave command, 

And when they brought Gurgsár thus said to him :— 

“ Now that thou hast escaped calamity 

Good words and truthful will become thee well. 

When I behead Arjisp and make rejoice 

The spirit of Luhrisp; when I behead 

Kuhram, who slaughtered Farshidward and troubled 


_ My soldiers’ hearts ; behead Andariman, 


Who slaughtered eight and thirty of our chiefs 

When he prevailed; when for my grandsire’s death 

I take revenge in all ways; when I make 

The lions’ maws their tombs and gratify 

The [fdnian warriors’ lust; when I stitch up 

Their livers with mine arrows and take captive 

Their wives and children, shall I call thee glad 

Or grieved thereat? Tell all thy heart to me.” 
Heart-straitened, hostile both in speech and soul, 

Gurgsir retorted; “ How long wilttthou use 

Such converse? Be accursed and justly so. 

May every evil star control thy life, 

Thy waist be cut asunder with the sword, 

Thy gory body flung upon the dust, 

The earth thy bed, the grave thy winding-sheet.” 
Roused by his words, and raging at the oaf, 
The prince smote with an Indian sword his head, 

And clave him, crown to midriff. To the river 
They flung him presently, and that malignant 

Grew food for fishes. Then Asfandiyár 
Gat on his steed, girt up his warrior-loins 
In wrath, and mounted on a height to view 
The hold. He saw a mighty iron rampart 


* . * 
» At we "2 


- But saw not any earth or water there. 


. With spear in hand he unhorsed both the Turkmans, 


LG "dot ‘a 
CA M "TES -— 
1 i Ww am - ^ 


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE  —— 
Extending over forty leagues by three, 1 


The wall was broad enough for cavaliers 
To gallop round upon it four abreast. 


Whenas Asfandiyár beheld that wonder 
He heaved a sigh, and said: “I cannot capture I 
A place like that! I suffer for my sins, $ 
Alas for all my fighting and my toil! 
Repentance is the only fruit thereof.” i 

He looked around upon the waste and saw i 


Two Turkmans coursing with four hounds. Descending 


Brought them upon the heights and questioned them :— a 
“ What is this splendid hold? How many horsemen 
Are there within?” E 
They told about Arjásp E 
At large and of the hold. “Observe,” they said, 
“ How long and wide it is! One gate is toward ' 
Írán and one toward Chin, while in it are 
A hundred thousand swordsmen— all renowned, 
Exalted cavaliers—yet all of them 
Are slaves before Arjásp and bow the head 
To his command and counsel. There is provand 
Past all compute with stores of grain in case 
Fresh food should fail, while if the monarch closed m 
The gates for ten years there is food enough, E 
Great though his host is, while, if he so willed, * 
A hundred thousand noble cavaliers 
Would come to him from Chin and from Machin. 
He hath no need of aught from any one, 
For he possesseth provand and defenders.” 

‘They spake. ; His Indian sword the chieftain drew, 
And put to death the simple-minded two. 


nV "wu 


p ww 
md 
A. j 
" 


"T 


l T L 
- = MiS, KL 
» r 


$9 


How Asfandiyár went to !he Brazen Hold in the 
Guise of a Merchant 

Thence he departed to his camp-enclosure. 
They cleared the place of strangers, Bishtitan 
Came to Asfandiyár, and they discussed V. 1609 
The war. That warrior said: “ We might assail 
This hold in vain for years unless indeed 

I take upon me to demean myself, 

And try a stratagem against the foe. 

Be thou upon the watch here night and day, 

And guard the army from the enemy. 

A man, I ween, is held in high esteem, 

And worthy of a realm and lofty throne, 

Who feareth not a host of enemies 

In battle, pard on mount or crocodile 

In water, but proceedeth now by craft 

And now by force, whiles mounting, whiles descending. 
I shall approach the hold in merchants’ guise, 
And none will know me for a paladin. 

All eraft will I employ and con all lore. 

Dispense not thou with watchmen and with seouts, 
And never let thy vigilance relax. 

If in the day the watch shall spy a smoke, 

Or in the night a bonfire like the sun, 

The Lustre of the world, then be assured 

That ‘tis my doing, not my foeman's ruse; 

So order thou the army and march hence, 

With coat of mail, with helm, and massive mace ; 
Set up my flag without delay and take 

Thy station at the centre of the host ; 

Charge with the ox-head mace, and bear thee so 
That folk will hail thee as Asfandiyár." 
He called the head-man of the cameleers, 


¥. 1610 


| COPI EOE 
THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ ——— 
Caused him to kneel to Bishütan, and said:— - 
" Bring me a hundred beasts with ruddy hair, 
Beasts fit to carry burdens, sound and strong.” 
Ten of these beasts he loaded up with gold, 
Upon five more he put brocade of Chin, 
Another five had various kinds of gems, 
A golden throne and massive crown. He brought 
Forth eighty pairs of chests, whose fastenings 
Were all concealed from sight, and therewithal 
Made choice of eight score of his mighty men— 
Such men as would not make his purpose known— 
And, having hidden them within the chests, 
Bound on the baggage and set forth. He bade 
Some twenty of his nobles skilled in sword-play 
To take the conduct of the caravan, 
And turned these nobles into cameleers. 
With slippered feet, a blanket thrown about him, 
And freighted with the jewels, gold, and silver, 
The chieftain went in haste toward the hold, 
And journeyed in the guise of chafferers, 
He led the way, and when the sound of bells 
Rose from the caravan the chiefs inside 
The hold grew ware of it, held talk at large, 
Were all a-gog, and said : * A merchantmar 
Who selleth a dínár's worth for a drachm,! " 
Hath come."t 
The dealers and the nobles: went i. 
To buy, and asked the owner: “ What hast thou 
Of use within these bales?” 
He made reply :— 
" The first thing is for me to see your king, 
And show my wares to him. When he commandeth 
I will display them to your eyes." 
He loaded 
dure Who will give us an opportunity of baying at a lower price than 


GUSHTASP 


One of the camels and himself proceeded- 
To see how he could make his market quickly. 
He took a goblet filled with royal gems, 
And many a piece of gold to give in largess, 
Some signets set with ruby and with turquoise, 
A steed, and ten bales of brocade of Chin, 
He draped the goblet in a piece of silk, 
Perfumed throughout with musk and spicery, 
He donned a dress of beautiful brocade, 
Sought for an introduction to Arjásp, 
And at the interview strewed gold, and said :— 
“May wisdom mate with kings! A merchant I: 
My sire was Turkman and my mother Persian. 
I purchase from Türán, bear to Írán, 
And also to the desert of the brave. 
I have with me a caravan of camels, 
And deal in stuffs, in clothes, and furniture, 
In jewels, crowns, and other valuables. 
I left my goods outside the hold, assured 
That all are safe with thee. If thou wilt let 
The cameleers conduct the caravan 
Within the hold thy fortune will protect me 
From every ill, and I shall sleep beneath 
The shadow of thy love." 

Arjásp replied :— 
“Be happy and secure from every ul; 
No one shall do thee hurt within Türán, 
Nor when thou goest to Machin and Chin.” 

At his command they gave Asfandiyár 
Within the Brazen Hold a spacious dwelling— 
A warehouse with a mansion at its back — 
And thither brought the baggage from the plain 
That he might make the warehouse a bázár, 
And keep his goods in safety. They departed, 
And led the camels, after loading them. 


! "nn magasin aux approches du palace" (Mohl). 
VOL. V. K 


145 


* Ei 
^ -———É as dod nn o 


V. 161I 


V. 1612 


146 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


A shrewd man asked: “ What is inside the chests?” 
A cameleer replied: “ Our wits, for we 
Must carry them themselves,” 
Asfandiyar 
Prepared the warehouse, decking it to look 
Like flowers in spring. On all side buyers sprang up, 
And there was busy trafficking within it. 
The night passed by. At dawn Asfandiyar 
Went to the palace to the king, there kissec 
The ground before him, praised him much, and 
said :— 
“T and my cameleers have made all haste 
To bring the caravan and baggage 1n, 
And there are erowns and bracelets suitable 
For an exalted king, so let him bid 
His treasurer inspect my stock, for all 
The warehouse is in order. I shall be 
Content if he will take what seemeth best ; x»: 
The king's part is acceptance and the merchant's 
Excuse and praise." 


Arjásp smiled, showed him favour, 
Assigned him a more honourable seat, 
And asked : * What is thy name?" 
He said: “ Kharrad, 
A merchant, traveller, and well to do.” 
The king replied: “O noble man! concern not 
Thyself with more excuses, Ask no longer 
For audience through the chamberlain, but come 
Before me when thou wilt,” 
He then inquired 
About the labours of the road, Írán, 
The Shah, and host. Asfandiyár replied :— 
* My journey hath been five months’ pain and toil.” 
The king said : “In Írán what tidings were there 
Both of Asfandiyár and of Gurgsár ? " 
He said: “ My gracious lord! folk speak of them, 


< 


ua 
Ls 


rary 
Per 


e $04 
(x) RN 
6 £5 


Each as his faney is: ' Asfandiyár, 


GUSHTASP 


Said one, ‘is in revolt for injuries 

Inflicted by his sire.’ Another said :— 

‘He is advancing by the Seven Stages 

In haste to fight Arjasp; he will attempt 

War with Türán and boldly seek revenge.” 
Arjásp replied with smiles: "No man of age 

And knowledge of the world would talk like that ! 

If vultures e'en approach the Seven Stages V. 1613 

Then call me Ahriman and not a man." 
The warrior heard and, having kissed the ground, 

Came from the palace of Arjásp rejoicing, 

Then opening the noted warehouse-doors 

He filled the hold with din of chaffering, 

And seemed so occupied that he deceived 

The eyes of all. Scarce for dinars took he 

The worth of drachms and traded recklessly. 


§ Io 
How the Sisters of Asfandiydr recognized him 


— Now when the bright sun set and buying ceased 


The sisters of Asfandiyár descended 

Lamenting from the palace to the street, 

And bearing water-jars upon their shoulders. 
They came heart-broken and in deep dejection 
Toward Asfandiyár who, when he saw 

That monstrous spectacle, concealed from view 
His features from his sisters, for his heart 
Misdoubted how they might comport themselves, 
And so he hid his face behind his sleeve, 

They both drew near him and the cheeks of each 
Were running with the torrents from their eyes. 
The hapless ones began to question him— 

That wealthy man of merchandise—and said :— 


a LM = “@ E — 
EO íi: o 
m 
7 


*. 1614 


148 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ  — 


“ May all thy days and nights be prosperous, 


. The nobles be before thee as thy slaves! 


What tidings hast thou from Írán, brave chief! 
Both of Gushtásp and of Asfandiyár ? 

We twain, the daughters of the king of kings 
Are captives in the hands of wicked men, 

And carry water, bare-foot and unveiled. 

Our sire hath merry days and peaceful nights, 
While we fare naked in the throng. How blest 
Is she that hath a shroud to cover her! 

The tears that we are shedding are of blood : 
Be our physician and relieve our pain. 

If thou canst tell us aught of Sháh and home 
Our bane here will be changed to antidote.” 

He gave a ery beneath his robe that made 
The damsels shake with terror: thus he said :— 
"I would that there were no Asfandiyar, 

And no one in the world to care for him. 

Would there were no Gushtisp, that unjust Shah: 
May crown and girdle never see his like! 

Perceive ye not that I am trading here, 

And toiling that I may support myself?” 

When glorious Humái had heard his voice 
She recognised him and took heart again, 

But, though she recognised his voice, she kept 
The knowledge to herself and stood before him 
Às stricken to the heart as theretofore, 

And pouring down the tear-drops on her cheeks, 
Her feet and countenance were foul with dust, 
Her soul was filled with terror of Arjásp. 

The gentle warrior saw that Humái 

Had recognised him and he thereupon 
Revealed his countenance, his tearful eyes, 
His heaving breast, and visage like the sun. 
The process of the world astonished him, 

He bit his lips in dudgeon and addressed 


P IUE. A. wu * 
- E "- D E -» UCA + 
S Pit eA eo x 


- 
m 


: GUSHTASP ^ 345 


His sisters thus: “ Restrain your tongues awhile, 


For hither have I come to war and win 


Renown by toil. Can any's sleep be sweet 
Whose daughter is a water-bearing slave ? 
May heaven father, and earth mother, her : 
This lot I praise not I.” 

The young man left 
The warehouse, hurried to Arjisp, and said :— 
“QO king! be happy, master of the world, 
And live for ever. While upon my journey 
I chanced upon a deep sea all unknown 
To merchantmen. A whirlwind rose thereon ; 
The boatman said: ‘I mind me of no like’ 
On board we all were wretched and in tears, 
Consuming for our persons and our lives. 


I swore by God, the one and only Judge :— v. 


‘Tf I escape from this with life to shore 

Then will I hold a feast in every realm 

That hath a monarch to rule over it, 

Invite all cordially to be my guests, 

And pour my very soul out for their sakes. 

I will give more or less to all who ask, 

And hold the mendicant exceeding dear.’ 

Now let the monarch show me special favour, 

And honour this request of mine today; 

I have arranged to make his army's chiefs— 

Those whom the world's king honoureth—1iy guests, 

And by so doing set my mind at ease.” 
Arjasp, that witless man, was well content 

On hearing this; his head was filled with folly. 

He bade: “ Let every one of high degree, 

And all the noblest of the army, visit 

The dwelling of Kharrád today as guests, 

And, if he giveth wine, bemuse yourselves,’ 
Then said Asfandiyar: “ King, hero, sage 

The high-priest and the ruler of the world! 


1615 


* 


LT eat 


di 


- 


Y, 1616 


150 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


My house is small, thy palace 1s too grand. 
The rampart of the hold will do for us; 
"Tis early summer. I will light a fire, 
And glad the nobles’ hearts with wine.” | 
Arjasp 

Said: “Go the way that pleaseth thee; the host 
Is king at home." 

The paladin rejoicing 
Conveyed a mass of firewood to the ramparts. 
They slaughtered steeds and sheep, and carried them 
Up to the summit of the hold. The wood 
Sent up a smother that obscured the sky. 
He brought forth wine and, when they had partaken, 
Each reveller became a slave thereto. 
The chiefs all left bemused ; to steady them, 
While in their cups, each clutched a narciss-stem.’ 


$ 11 
How Bishilan assaulted the Brazen Hold 
The night came and a conflagration blazed, 
Whose burning seorched the sky. When from the 
look-out 
The watchman saw the flames by night, and day 
Made thick with smoke, he left his post and came 
Exultingly, and “ mated to the wind,” 
Thou wouldst have said. On reaching Bishütan 
He told what he had seen of fire and fume. 
Said Bishütan: "A valiant warrior 
In eourage passeth elephants and lions." 
He sounded corn-pipe, flute, and brazen eymbal ; 

The blare of trumpets went up from his door. 
The army from the plain approached the hold, 
And bright Sol gloomed with dust. The troops were all 
In mail and helm, their livers seethed with blood. 

1" c'est-à-dire le bras d'un page" (Mohl). Cf. p. 164. 


- 4a es. tr =r" a 
i bi À 
z e ô 


TE ——-—- -—- vm 
b EE ÉL 


, A 


wm, ° 
a t 


M 
ae 


' 


oe @! " 
- 


WES 


HK. 
e 
LLEN A 


| ^ J í I = 
GUSHTASP I51 


When news spread in the hold: “A host hath come, 
And all the world is hidden by dark dust,” j 
The place rang with the name “ Asfandiyar” ; 
The tree of bale was bearing colocynth. 

Arjisp armed for the fray and rubbed his hands 
Together vehemently, “Let Kuhram, 
The lion-cateher," thus he bade, “take troops, - 
Mace, scimitar, and shaft.” 

He told Turkhán :— 

«Exalted chief! speed forth with troops for fight. 
Take thou ten thousand of the garrison, 
All men of name and battle-loving swordsmen, 
Discover who are our antagonists, 
And why it is that they attack us thus.” 

Turkhan, the chief, with an interpreter 
Went in all haste to that side of the hold. 
He saw a host equipped with arms and armour, 
Their flag a leopard on a sable ground. 
Their leader Bishuütan was at the centre, V. 1617 
And all his troops' hands had been bathed in blood. 
He held Asfandiyár's own mace and rode 
A noble steed; he seemed to be none other 
Thari brave Asfandiyár, and there was none 
But hailed him monarch of Írán, He ranked 
The troops to right and left till none saw daylight. 
Such were the blows of spears with flashing points 
That thou hadst said: “Blood raineth from the clouds,” 
The forces on both sides advanced to battle, 
All who were men of war and loved the fray. 
Then Nish Azar, the swordsman, galloped forth, 
And offered combat to the enemy. 
The noble chief Turkhan went out to him 
To bring his head down trunkless to the ground. 
When Nüsh Ázar beheld him on the field 
He clapped his hand upon his sword and drew it ; 
He cut Turkhán asunder at the waist, 


"V LH 
«P m 


LCS 
Lo IT 


Y. 1618 


152 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


And filled Kuhram's heart with dismay and anguish ; 
Then in like fashion fell upon the centre, 
Where great and small were all alike to him, 
Thus those two armies battled, each with each, 
While dust collected in a cloud above them. 
In full flight from the host the chief Kuhram 
Made for the hold, and said before his sire :— 
“QO famous monarch, glorious as the sun! 
A mighty host hath come forth from [nin ; 
Their leader is a doughty warrior, 
Who by his stature is Asfandiyár. 
None like him hath approached the hold before. 
He beareth in his hand the spear which thou 
Beheld'st him grasping at fort Gumbadán." ! 

The words distressed the heart of king Arjásp, 
Because the old feud had revived again. 
He gave the Turkmans orders: “Go ye forth 
Upon the plain in mass, surround the foe, 
Roar like great lions, let none live, and name not 
[rin again.” 

The soldiers marched away 

With wounded hearts and eager for the fray. 


$ 12 
How Asfandiydr slew Arjdep 

Asfandiyár, when night was growing dark, 
Arrayed himself again in fighting-gear, 
Undid the chest-lids that more air might come 
To those inside, and brought kabáb and wine 
With other provand, battle-mail, and raiment. 
When they had eaten he supplied to cach 
Three eups of wine, which gladdened them, and said .— 

' Le. at the battle fought in that neighbourhood, when Asfandiyár 


delivered Gushtisp from his perilons position on the mountain, where 
he was beleaguered by Arjisp, See p. 106 seg. 


à 


E 
1 

=. 
"P 


GUSHTÁSP "T RESP 


“This night is one of bale. Hence we may well 
Win fame. Put forth your powers. Quit you like men, 
And from calamities make God your refuge.” 

Then of those warriors adventurous 
He formed three troops, one in the stronghold's midst 
To combat any that they met, the second 
To move upon the gate and take no rest 
From strife and bloodshed, while he told the third :— 
* | must not find hereafter any trace 
Of those that revelled with me yesternight, 
So take your daggers and behead them all." 

He went with twenty valiant men of war 
In haste, committing to them other work, 
Went boldly to the palace of Arjasp, 
Arrayed in mail and roaring like a lion. 
Humai, when these shouts reached her in the palace, 
Came rushing with her sister Bih Afrid, 
Their cheeks all hid by tears, to meet the chiefs. 
Asfandiyár perceived that spring-like pair 
As he approached. “Like flying dust-clouds speed," ^ v. 1619 
Thus spake that lion-man, * to my bázár 
With all its wealth, for 'tis upon my way, 
And wait till in this fight I lose my head 
Or win a erown." 

This said, he turned from them, 

And vengeful sought the palace of Arjasp. 
He entered with an Indian sword in hand, 
And slaughtered all the nobles that he saw. 
The audience-chamber of that famous court 
Was blocked, its floor was like a billowing sea, 


_ So many were the wounded, stunned, and slain. 


Arjisp awoke, was troubled at the din, 
Arose in fury, donned his coat of mail 
And Rüman helm, a bright glaive in his hand, 
The war-cry on his lips and rage at heart. 
Asfandiyár rushed from the palace-gate, 


—— = 


+ 


: m qutt =". ne 


P 


154 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


And, clutching with his hand a glittering sword, 
Cried to Arjasp: “ Now will this merchantman 
Supply thee with a sword that cost dinars. 
I give it as a present from Luhrisp, 
Ànd on it is impressed Gushtásp's own seal. 
When thou shalt take it thine heart's blood will flow, 
And thy next stage will be beneath the dust." 
They closed in strife outrageous, foot to foot 
With sword and dagger, striking whiles at waist 
And whiles at head. Arjisp failed ‘neath the blows; 
He was a mass of wounds; his huge form sank, 
And then Asfandiyár beheaded him. 
Such is the fashion of life's ehangeful day ! 
Thou hast by turns its sweetness and its bane. 
Why dote upon this Hostel by the Way? 
Grieve not, thou canst not, as thou know’st, remain. 
Asfandiyar, freed from Arjisp, commanded 
To kindle torches and to fire the palace: 
He raised its reek to Saturn. Having charged 
The eunuchs with the womenfolk he carried 
Them all away—the Lustre of the place— 
And set a seal upon the treasury-door, 
No one opposing him. He sought the stables, 
He mounted there with Indian sword in hand, 
And of the Arab horses bade his men 
To saddle such as liked him. There went forth 
A cavalcade of eight score warriors, 
Approven horsemen on the day of battle. 
He furnished mounts, moreover, for his sisters, 
And marched forth from the court-gate of Arjásp, 
But left a few lranians, men of name, 
With noble Sáwa in the hold. * When we,” 
He said, “have gone outside the walls, have gone, 
I and my noble warriors, to the plain, 
Secure the gate against the Turkman troops, 
And may my good star aid me. When ye think 


T 
| 
p' 
| 
; 


p—' t" 


GUSHTASP 155 


That I have joined our noble troops outside, 
Then let the watchmen from the look-out ery :— 
‘Blessed be the head and crown of Shah Gushtasp. 
And when the Turkman troops come toward the hold, 
In flight retreating from the battlefield, 
Then ye shall throw the head of king Arjisp 
Before them from the tower of the watch.” 

The valiant hero rushed upon the plain, V. 1621 
And slaughtered all the Turkmans that he found. 
As he approached the troops of Bishütan 
‘They saw and praised him in amaze that he, 
Who was so young, should show such bravery. 


§ 13 
How Asfandiydr slew Kuhram 


Whenas the moon had left her silvern throne, 
And when three watches of the night had passed, 
The watchman shouted lustily, proclaiming :— 
* Gushtásp, the Sháh, hath gained the victory, 
And may Asfandiyár be ever young. 
May heaven, moon, and fortune be his helpers, 
Who hath in vengeance for Luhrásp beheaded 
Arjásp and, adding lustre to our Grace 
And customs, east him down from throne to dust, 
And made the name and fortune of Gushtásp 
Resplendent,” 

Hearing such a cry the Turkmans 
All listened while Kuhram grew dark of heart 
By reason of that watchman, was astonied,- 
And spake thus to Andarímán: * How clear 
This cry is in the night! What, sayest thou, 
Can be the cause? Let us consult, for who 
Would dare to bawl thus by the monarch’s couch 
And after dark? What tricks might such an cne 


V. 1622 


156 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Play in the day of battle and thus bring 
Our nobles into straits! So send and have 
His head cut off, whoever he may be. 
If one of our own household is our foe, 
And he is backing up our enemies 
With evil words and evil presages, 
Then will we brain him with an evil mace.” 

Now when the ery went on persistently 
Kuhram was stricken to the heart with anger 
Against the watch whose utterance, spread abroad 
In such a fashion, filled the nobles’ ears. 
The soldiers said: “The shouts increase, beyond 
À watehman's! Let us drive the foemen forth 
And after take! this host.” 

Kuhram was straitened 
At heart about that watchman, writhed, and frowned. 
He told the troops: “These men have filled my 
heart 
With dread about the king. We must return 
At once, past question. What may happen after 
I know not.” 
So that night they left the field, 
Whereat Asfandiyár, with ox-head mace 
And mailed, pursued them. When Kuhram had 
reached 

The portal of the hold, and saw the Íránians 
Pursuing, “ What is left us,” he exclaimed, 
" Unless to fight with brave Asfandiyar? 
Unsheathe and send your message by the sword.” 

But fortune frowned and those famed chiefs fared ill. 
The two hosts raged and smote each other's heads 
Till morning came, and then the chiefs of Chin 
Had had their day. Ascending to the ramparts 
The warriors of Asfandiyár inside 


* In the sense of “ No fairy takes nor witch hath power to charm.” 
—Hamlet, i. 1. | 


GUSHTASP | 157 
— "The hold flung down therefrom the severed head 
Of brave Arjásp—the king that slew Luhrásp. 
- . The Turkmans fought no longer, from their host 
/ A Arose a ery, and all the troops unhelmed. 
The two sons of Arjásp wept and consumed V. 1623 
As in fierce fire, while all the army knew 
What they must weep for on that evil day. 
They said: “Alas! thou gallant heart, thou prince, 
Thou chief of lions, hero, warrior ! 
. May he who slew thee perish on the field 
A Of vengeance, may his day be gone for ever! 
To whom shall we intrust our families ? 
Whose standard shall we have upon our right ? 
= Now that the dais is bereaved of king 
— Let crown and host not be." 
er The soldiers longed 
__ For death, and from Khallukh up to Taráz 
= Was universal anguish. In the end 
= ç Theyall of them advanced to certain death, 
y Advanced in armour with their helms and casques. 
— Rose from the battlefield the sound of strife, 
"The air above was like a dusky cloud. 
The slain lay everywhere in heaps, the plain 
Was thick with trunkless heads and limbs; else- 
where 
Lay hands and maces, while a wave of blood 
Rose at the. portal of the hold, and who 
Could tell left hand from right?  Asfandiyár 
Advaneed ; Kuhram, the captain of the host, 
‘Opposed him ; and those warriors grappled so 
That thou hadst said: “They are one!” The peerless 
chief 
Took by the waist Kuhram, whirled him aloft— 
A wondrous feat—and dashed him to the ground 
While all the [ranian army roared applause. 
They bound his hands and bore him off in shame, 


"alii. 
< X 


à "i 


T É $ * a e» 


hi 158 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE 
And all his splendid armament dispersed. 
Then maces fell like hail, the earth was full 
Of Turkinans, and the air was charged with death ; 
Heads showered beneath the swords like leaves from 
LTees ; J 
One side lost all, the other gained a throne; S. cM 
Blood dashed in billows on the battlefield ; er "i 
Here heads were trampled and there heads were - 
crowned, 1 
V. 1624. The world is fain to keep its seeret still, 
And no man really wotteth of its will. 
Those that had noble chargers fled the field, 
Those in the Dragon’s gullet strove in vain. 
I Few of Türán or Chin were left and none  - 
Of name. Allflung away their mail and helms, 
And all had blood-drops in their eyes. They made 
All haste to come before Asfandiyár 
With eyes like early spring. "The general 
Shed blood unmercifully, and the host 
Approved the want of mercy that he showed ; 
He gave no quarter to a warrior, 
And had the wounded slaughtered past account ; 
No noted warrior of Chin remained, 
No prince was left surviving in Türán. 
They moved the camp-enclosure and the tents, 
And left the whole field to the slain. He reared 
Before the palace-gate two lofty gibbets 
Whence twisted lassos fell. From one he hung 
Andarimin head-downward, from the other 
His brother! living, sent out troops on all sides, 
And when they lighted on some chieftain's seat 
His orders were that they should burn it down: 
They wrecked thus all the cities of Turin; 
No man of name was left in any place, 
And not a horseman in Turin or Chin. 
! Kuhram, 


* 


eS oa or Oe 


è 


ae. ene, 


E "t x) P P y =e "m A S : j 7 » P m ! "" k . LA " uper 
mmm | GUSHTÁSP | T 
3 . "Thou wouldst have said : “ There rose a murky cloud, 4 
And poured down fire upon the battlefield.” ‘i 
ITA The atheling, with matters in this trim, a 
eS Brought wine and gathered all the chiefs to him. o 
£ : 
e 814 y 
—— How Asfandiyár wrote a Letter to Gushtásp and his Answer ^: 
Asfandiyár called for a seribe and told I 
The story of his stratagem and fight. F 
The illustrious scribe sat on the throne and bade V. 1625 ^ 
His Turkman slave to bring him silk of Chín e 
And pen which having inked, he lauded first j " 
The Master of the Moon, the Lord of Saturn, Ia 
Of Venus and the Sun, of elephant, e 
Of ant, of victory, and Grace divine, - 


The Lord of the imperial diadem, 3 
The Lord of right direction and good gifts, | 
The Lord of place and counsel: * May the name 
Of Sháh Gushtásp for ever live through Him, 

Luhrásp have all his will in&Paradise ! i 


I reached Türán and by a road which I P 
Shall never praise. If I narrated all g 
Youth’s locks would age with grief, but when the Shah 4 
Is so disposed I will expound the plan » 
Of my campaign ; his sight will gladden me, . * 
And I shall revel in these longsome toils. ^ E. 
The Brazen Hold, by means of the devices x3 
That I employed to compass my revenge, 3 
Is void both of Arjásp and of Kuhram, $- 
Is void of all save wailing, grief, and mourning. t 
I have spared none; the herbs upon the plain 2 " 
No longer bear; the lion and wolf devour o 
The brains, and lusty pards the hearts. of men. : s 
Oh! may the crown of Shih Gushtisp illume s 
f 


T or ENT O22 2 9 
160 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS  — | 
The sky, and Shih Luhrásp make earth a rosebed.” 

They set the signet of Asfandiyár ; 
Upon the letter and made choice of riders, 
Whom that young ruler sent forth to Iran 
On beasts that went apace with lips afoam. 

He tarried till he should receive the answer, 
Repressing all a self-willed man’s impatience, 
And in a little while the answer came, 

A key whereby his fetters were unlocked. 

Ít opened thus: “Established may he be 

That seeketh good. The rightly minded sage 
Will compass in adversity God's praise,” 

It further said: “I pray the one just God 

That He may guide thee ever. I have planted 
In Paradise a Tree that is more bearing | 
Than any set by Faridün. Its fruit 

Is gold and rubies and its leafage beauty 

And Grace. Its summit chafeth on high heaven; 
Its roots withal are precious. May this Tree 
Abide for ever, flourishing of stem, 

And glad of heart—the favourite of fortune! 

As for thy words: * By craf# and subtlety 

I sought for vengeance for my grandsire's death, 
And then for thy description of the bloodshed, 
And of thine exploits in the fight—the persons 
Of kings are precious though renown may come 
Frdém strife and travail. Guard thy person well 
And wisdom too, for wisdom nourisheth 

The mind with knowledge. Thirdly thou hast said : 
"Of all these thousands I have spared not one,’ 
Be thy heart ever warm and merciful, 

Be temperate in soul and soft in voice, 
,Let it not be thy business to shed blood, 

Or fight with chieftains, saving for revenge, 
Because the bloodshed hath surpassed all bounds 
In this thy wreak for eight and thirty brothers. 


B 
IE. mJ eal 


= oy a 
å 


ys. T 
, ^ 


V 


cwm RENT el 


è Py dr SS , 
GUSHTASP. 


But in that, though thy grandsire in old age 

Had banished craft and ill will from his heart, 

Since they shed his blood thou hast shed theirs too, 
And closed with them like lions when they fight, 

For that be ever fortunate and happy, 

And do the dictates of thy soul and wisdom. 

I long to look upon thy face and mind 

So doughty and so shrewd. On reading thi 

Bid thy troops mount, and come back with thy chiefs 
To court.” 


The speedy dromedaries went, V. 1627 
And all Iran re-echoed with the news. 
Now when they had returned the eameleers 
Came to the exalted chief who had no peers. 


$ 15 

How Asfandiyér returned lo Gushtásp 
Asfandiyár, when he had read the letter, 
Distributed dínárs and made an end, 
Heserving but the treasure 5f Arjásp, 
While lavishing the treasures of his kinsmen : 
The troops were all enriched beyond compute. 
On plain and mountain there were steeds and camels, 
All brand-marked by the monarch of Turan. 
Ten thousand head of these Asfandiyar . 
Collected from the plain and mountain-top, 
And bade his men to load of them a thousand 
With gold out of the royal treasury, 
Three hundred with brocade and thrones and casques, 
Five score with musk, with ambergris, and jewels, 
Five score with crowns and splendid diadems, 
One thousand with brocaded tapestries, 
Three hundred with the native stuffs of Chin, 


With hides both raw and tanned and painted hs 
VOL. V. 


¥, 1628 


" LI 
» rl s " 


62 THE SHÁHNÁMA 

He furnished litters with brocaded curtains, 

And carried off from Chín two troops of girls, 

With cheeks like spring and tall as cypress-trees, 

With reed-like waists and pheasant-like in gait. 

A hundred ladies, beautiful as idols, 

Went with the sisters of Asfandiyár. 

Five ladies of the kindred of Arjásp— 

His mother, his two sisters, and two daughters— 

Toiled on in misery and wretchedness, 

In pain and grief and stricken to the heart, 

And, finally, he fired the Brazen Hold; 

The tongue of flame ascended to high heaven. 

He razed the castle-ramparts to the ground, 

And sent the dust up from the land of Chin. 

He gave his three young sons a force each, saying :— 

“Take various roads, and fortune be with you. 

If any shall insult you on your way 

Cut off the head of such remorselessly. 

March ye in haste toward the desert-track, 

And raise your spear-points to the shining sun. 

I shall myself go by the Seven Stages 

To hunt the lion. Make what speed ye may, 

But I shall take my time, shall oceupy 

The road's end, and expect you in a month.” 
Asfandiyár went with his famous troops 


To hunt along the Seven Stages’ route. 


As soon as he approached the frozen stage 
He saw his baggage lying all about. 
The air was sweet, the earth was beautiful : 


Thou wouldst have said: “’Tis spring in summertime! 


He gathered all the goods that he had left, 

And marvelled that he was so fortunate. 

As he was drawing nearer to Írán— 

The land of Lions and of warriors— 

He whiled away two weeks with hawks and cheetahs, 
Distressed with travail and the longsome road, 


OF FIRDAUSE 


b T ei Si Th- 4i AT EE Le ; 


"S ` “a Y ii 


GUSHTASP 163 


And kept a watch for his three noble sons, 
Whose long delay in coming angered him, 
But when the armies and the sons arrived 
Ho smiled on all, and said : * My journey done, 
I was anangered at your tarrying." 
The three sons kissed the ground and made reply :— 
= Who hath a father in the world like thee?” 
He went thence toward Írán and bare off all 
The treasures to his valiant countrymen. 
The folk decked all the cities of the land, 
And called for wine, for harp, and for musicians, 
They draped the walls with hangings and showered 
musk 
And ambergris from overhead. The air 
Resounded with the voice of minstrelsy, V. 1629 
And earth was full of horsemen armed with spears. 
Gushtásp made merry when he heard the news, 
And pledged the tidings in a cup of wine. 
At his command all that were with the host, 
And all the great men of the provinces, 
Assembled at the palave-gate with drums. 
The chiefs went out to meet Asfandiyár. 
His sire, moreover, with illustrious sages, 
The great, the wise, and the archmages, went 
With beaming countenance toward his son, 
And all the city talked of little else. 
Now when the prince beheld his father's face 
His heart grew merry and his spirit bright. 
He urged his black steed forward from the ranks, 
That steed which set a-blaze the flames of war, 
And, having lighted down, embraced his sire, 
Who, wondering at his exploits, praised him much, 
Thus saying: "Ne'er may time and earth lack thee.” 
Thenee went they to the palace of the Sháh 
In popularity with all the world. 
Gushtásp prepared the palace and the throne ; 


V. 1630 


"1 "WWE 

E e — 

= PE m M a 3 E 
va E - 


164 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS! 


His great good fortune made his heart rejoice. 
They spread the banquet in the halls. The Shah 
Said to the chamberlain: “ Invite the lords.” 
The boon-companions came from every side 
To that imperial Shah. The royal wine 
In crystal goblets gave to those that quaffed 
A lustre like the sun's; upon their cheeks 
The flush of wine was burning, and the hearts 
Of evil wishers died and were consumed. 
The son drank modestly his father's health, 
The father in like manner pledged his son, 
And asked him how he passed the Seven Stages. 
Asfandiyár replied : * Nay, ask me not 
Such questions in the banquet-hall. Tomorrow 
Will I relate the story in thy presence, 
Wise king of men! Tomorrow thou wilt hear 
In soberness and own that God hath triumphed.” 
Each one among the guests that grew bemused 
Went homeward clinging to a moon-faced page.! 
Told is the story of the Stages Seven, 
Peruse it in His name—the Lord of Heaven, 
Lord of the sun and of the shining moon, 
Him who alone hath power for bale or boon. 
If this tale please our conquering monarch’s eye 
I set my saddle on the circling sky. 
The time to quaff delicious wine is now, 


For musky scents breathe from the mountain-brow, 


The air resoundeth and earth travaileth, 

And blest is he whose heart drink gladdeneth, 
He that hath wine and money, bread and sweets, 
And can behead a sheep to make him meats. 
These have not I. Who hath them, well is he. 
Oh! pity one that is in poverty! 


The garth is strewn with rose-leaves and each hill 


With tulip and with hyacinth, and still 
* Cf. p 150, 


Before the imperious sun. Who shall expound 


a, 


m A bel ie oa 
GUSHTASP 


The nightingale complaineth im the close, 
And at its plaining burgeoneth the rose. 

At night it never ceaseth to complain ; 

The rose is overcharged by wind and rain. 

I see the cloud’s sighs and its tears, but why 
The narciss should be sad I know not I. 

The nightingale bemocketh rose and cloud ; 
Perched on the rose it carolleth aloud. 

I wist not which of them it holdeth dear, 
But from the cloud a lion's roar I hear. 

The cloud’s robe sundereth and from its form 
Fire flasheth, and the tear-drops of the storm 
Bear witness for themselves upon the ground 


V. 1631. 


The descant of the nightingale, disclose 

The purport of its quest beneath the rose ? 

But mark it at the dawning of the day, 

If thou wouldst list to its heroic lay, 

Bewailing dead Asfandiyár, for he 

Surviveth only in that threnody. 

A-nights the cloud with Rustam's voice doth flaw 
The heart of elephant and lion's claw. 


PART III 
THE STORY OF ASFANDIYÁR'S FIGHT 
WITH RUSTAM 


ARGUMENT 


Asfandiyár, finding that his father still is disinclined to abdi- 
cate, makes a formal application to him to do so, Gushtdsp, 
having ascertained his son’s destiny from the astrologers, sends 
him to bring Rustam in chains to court. Asfandiyár sets forth 
very unwillingly. Long negotiations with Rustam follow, 

At length the two engage in single combat, and in the end 
Rustam, by the help of the Simurgh, is victorious. He brings up 
Asfandiyár's son, Bahman, at his own home,  Gushtásp sends for 
Bahman, and appoints him to succeed to the throne. 


NOTE 


“A man there is,” ssid Muhammad in the Kuran, “who buyeth 
an idle tale, that in his lack of knowledge he may mislead others 
from the way of God, and turn it to seorn :—For such is prepared 
a shameful punishment ! "'! 

The reference is to a certain merchant, Nadr the son of Hirith 
by name, who had brought back from the banks of the Euphrates 
the story of Rustam and Asfandiyir, and recited it to the inhabi- 
tants of Mecca, where it became for a time much more popular than 
Muhammad's own deliverances. The Prophet never forgave Nadr, 
who was one of the two prisoners put to death by him after the 
battle of Badr, ap. 623. It is evident, therefore, that the story 
contained in this part was well established at the beginning of 
the seventh century of our era. Reference already has been made * 
to the compromise arrived at in Íránian legend between the con- 
flicting claims of Rustam and Asfandiyir, and the reader will find 
it fully set out in the following pages. 

§ 22. The Alwi slain by Nish Agar is identical probably with 


! RK, 234. S 1 p. TIG aeg. 
I 


TS SFN a > T" 
= Tw anit LE 


GUSHTASP 
the Alwi previously recorded to have been slain by Kümüs.! 
Thay are both warriors and natives of Zübulistün, and the function 
of both is the same—to give the enemy & temporary triumph 
which is counteracted by the intervention of a stronger champion. 
Alwü teappears as we are dealing with a different legend. 


a 


Tr 


——- a 


A p 
e be 


$1 
How Asfandiylr ambitioned the Throne and how 
Gushtdap took Counsel with the Astrologers* 


I heard a story from the nightingale, 
Which it reciteth from the lays of old, 
How, when Asfandiy&r bemused with wine 
Came forth in dudgeon from the royal palace, 
His mother, Ciesar's daughter, Katáyún, 
Took him to her embrace. When midnight came 
He wakened from his drowse, called for the wine-cup, 
And babbled to his mother, saying thus :— 
«The Sháh is treating me injuriously. 
He said: ‘ When by thy valour thou shalt take 
Revenge on king Arjisp for Shah Luhrásp, - 
Shalt free thy sisters from captivity, 
And win us high renown throughout the world, 
Shalt weed it utterly of malcontents, 
And renovate it by thy labours, then 
The whole realm and the army shall be thine, 
And therewithal the treasure, throne, and crown.’ 
Now when the sky shall bring again the sun, 
And when the Shih shall wake, I will recall 
His words to him; my rights must be asserted. W.1633. 
If he shall give to me the crown of kingship t 
I will adore him to idolatry ; 
But if he will not and his face shall frown 
I swear by God, who stayeth up the sky, 
! Yol, iii. p. 188. 
3 This heading Is not in the original, which has merely “ The Begin- 
ning of the Story." 


IER THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ — — 


' 
E J 
v Be Md Mi 


That I will place the crown on mine own head, 
And give the land and treasure to the people, 
Will make thee lady of Írán and do 
'The deeds of lions with my strength and eourage." . 
His mother sorrowed at his words. The silk 
Upon her turned to thorns, The famous Shih, 
She knew, would give him not throne, crown, and treasure, 
And said to him: “ What would thy princely heart 
Require yet of the world, my toil-worn son ? 
The treasure, rule, and conduct of the host ^ 
Thou hast already : seek for nothing more ! "E 
Thy sire, my son! hath nothing but the crown, | 
While thou hast all the troops and all the realm. 
How better were it for the savage Lion 
To stand before his sire with girded loins! 
When he departeth crown and throne are thine, 
Thine greatness, fortune, state.” 
Asfandiyar 
Replied : “ How goodly was the sage's saw ! 
‘Thy secret unto women ne'er confide, 
For thou wilt find it in the street outside ; 
Moreover do not as she biddeth thee, 
For woman good at rede thou ne'er wilt see.” 
With frowning face and all abashed his mother 
Repented of her words. Asfandiyár, 
Howbeit, went not to Gushtásp but spent 
His time with minstrelsy and boon-companions. 
He drained the wine-cup for two nights and days, 


And took his ease among his moon-faced dames. E. 
Gushtásp upon the third day was informed Er 
About his son's pretension to the state, ^ 
That he was growing more resolved and needs E 
Must have the Kaian crown and throne. Forthwith M 


He called Jámásp and all Luhrásp's diviners. 
They came, their tablets on their breasts, and he 
Inquired about the brave Asfandiyár :— 


eee es EA ee ae 
GUSHTÁSP | zi 


«Is he to have long life? Will he abide 
In peace, prosperity, and all delights ? 
Is he to wear the crown of king of kings, 
And will the good and great rely on him ?” 

The wise man of Irán, on hearing this, 
Looked at his ancient astrologic tablets, 
While sorrow filled the lashes of his eyes : 
With tears, and knowledge all his brow with frowns. 
He said; “Ill are my days and ill my stars, 
And knowledge bringeth ill upon my head. 
Would fate had cast me to the lion's claws, 
Preventing glorious Zarír; then I 
Had not beheld him flung upon the ground, 
All dust and blood; or would that mime own gire 
Had slain me ere ill fortune reached Jamisp! 
Although Asfandiyár in combat now 
May rend a lion's heart by his attack ; 
Though he hath cleared the world of enemies, 
And knoweth neither fear nor dread in fight ; 
Though he hath made the world to fear no foe, 
And cloven the dragon's form in twain, hereafter 
We shall have reason to lament for him, 
And taste enough of woe and bitterness.” 

The Shih exclaimed: “O admirable man! 
Speak out and turn not from the path of knowledge. 
If he shall fare as did the chief Zarir 
To live will be henceforth an ill to me. 
Come tell me instantly, for bitterness V. 1634 
Hath come upon me from my questioning, 
Whose hand will slay him and so cause the pang 
For which I needs must weep?” 

Jámásp replied :— 

"Will not ill fortune reach me too, O king? 
His death will be within Zibulistin, 
And at the hands of Zal’s heroic son!” 
| Jámásp. 


V. 1635 


170 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


The Shah replied: “Give this affair due weight. 
If I resign to him the imperial throne, 
The treasure, and the crown of majesty, 
He will not even see Zübulistán, 
And none will know him in Kabulistan ; 
He will be safe from every turn of fortune, 


. And favouring stars will be his monitors.” 


The astrologer rejoined : “ Who can escape 
The process of the sky? None can avoid 
By courage or by might the sharp-clawed Dragon 
Above our heads. What is to be will be 
Past doubt, the when the wise seek not to know. 
Although Surish be lying at his feet 
The prince will perish by a great man’s hand 1" 

The monarch mused, his mind a brake of thoughts; 
He pondered on the processes of time, 
Which in their turn instructed him in crime, 


52 

How Asfandiyir demanded the Kingdom from iia Father 
When night had gathered up its reins and gone, 
And when the dawn had raised its shining spear, 
The Shah sat down upon the throne of gold, 
And glorious Asfandiyar approached. 
He stood before the presence of his sire 
In deep concern, slave-like with folded arms, 
And when the throng of warriors and nobles 
Had gathered round the Shih, and when the archmages 
Were ranged in line before his throne, and when 
The captains of the host stood ranked before him, 
Asfandiyár, the elephantine chief, 
Began to vent his grievances, and said :— 
‘QO Shah! live evermore. Upon the earth 
The Grace of God is thine. Through thee are love 


' * a T ") =) , ^ i J r n " Ww " m 

a mmp AS ruS ` a £3- . £ le P 
] e "" P MY , | 7 A : " "4 n 
E GUSHTÁSP. 171 ve 


And justice manifest, and crown and throne 
Adorned. A slave am I to thee, my sire! 
And run to do thy will. Thou knowest how 
Arjásp came hither for religion's sake 
With cavaliers from Chín, while I had sworn 
A mighty oath e'en as God prompted me :— 
‘Whoever shall make wreckage of the Faith, 
And give his heart to idol-worshipping, 
Him will I smite asunder and fear none.’ 
So when Arjisp came forth to war I shrank not 
From fighting that fierce Leopard; yet didst thou 
Disgrace me at the instance of Gurazm, 
X When quaffing royally upon a feast-day, 

Didst put my body into heavy bonds, 

A And blacksmiths riveted my chains and fetters ; 

Didst send me to the hold of Gumbadiin, 

And give me up to strangers in contempt. 

) On quitting Balkh thou wentest to Zábul, 

D Regarding warfare merely as a feast, 


... And though consigning Sháh Luhrásp to death 
, Beheldest not the falehion of Arjásp. 


= Jámásp, when he arrived, saw me in bonds, 

m 7 And seathed thereby, assured to me the realm V. 1636 
And throne, and pleaded much. I said to him:— 

‘These heavy chains, these columns, and these shackles 

By blacksmiths riveted, will I display 
To God upon the Great Day of Account, 
And ery to Him against the evil-doer.’ 

$ He said to me: * The blood of all our princes— 

Men of high rank and armed with massive maces— 

Shot down by arrows on the battlefield ; 

Thy sisters carried captive ; Farshidward, 

The noble warrior, o'erthrown and wounded 

Upon the field of battle; and the Sháh 

Himself in flight before the Turkmans, writhing 

At having put Asfandiyár in bonds— 


> 42m 
Pu EXEC ~~ 
"T" 9) T = 
i P = am. 


172 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 
Is not thy heart on fire at things like these, 
And all this travail, grief, and misery ?' 


He added much—words fraught with grief and anguish. 


I burst my yoke and bonds, and came apace 
Before the ruler of the flock. I slew 
Unnumbered foes; the Shih approved my deeds, 
If I should speak about the Seven Stages 

Good sooth! I ne’er should end. I glorified 

The name of Shih Gushtasp, I took the head 
Off from Arjásp and brought his wife and children, 
His crown and throne and treasure, to this court. 
The goods thou placed'st in the treasury ; 

My capital was blood, my profit toil. 

Thou wast so full of promise, oath, and pledge 
That I more readily performed thy bidding. 

Thou said’st: ‘If I shall look on thee again 

I will esteem thee dearer than my soul, 

And give thee diadem and ivory throne, 

Because thy courage meriteth the crown.’ 

Now I am shamed before the mighty men, 

Who say : ‘Where are thy treasures and thy host ?' 
What pretext hast thou? What is my position? 
For what end have I gone through all the toil ? 
It is the part of Sháhs to keep their word ; 

They do not break their bonds and covenants. 
Now therefore set the crown on thy son's head 
As thine own father erowned thee in his stead." 


$3 
How: Gushlásp ansicered his Son 
The Shih replied: “’Tis ill to turn from right. 
Till now thou hast been better than thy word : 
The Maker of the world be thine ally. 
I see not at this present anywhere 


= 


a) IY» 7. P4 
Maple 


=, 


 GUSHTÁSP 

A public or a private foe, What man 

Shall catch thy name and shall not writhe thereat f 
Did I say writhe? Nay verily not live! 

Thou hast no peer except the worshipful 

And famous son of Zál, who hath for life 
Zábulistin, Kübulistán, Ghaznín 

And Bust, and is exalted o'er the sky 

In valour, but accounteth not himself 

A subject and transgresseth my commands 


“And counsels, stooping not to league with me 


Although he was a slave to Kai Kaus, 

And was devoted unto Kai Khusrau, 

But sayeth of the kingship of Gushtasp:— 

‘He hath a new crown while my crown is old.’ 

Now thou hast not a rival in the world 

Midst Rümans, Turkmans, or our own free folk, 

And must set forward to Sístán forthwith, V. 1638 

And put in practice colour, force, and guile, 

Lay bare the sword and mace, and bring me Rustam, 

The son of Zal, Zawira, Faramarz, 

In bonds and suffer none to mount the saddle. 

Then by the Judge of all the world, the Source 

Of strength, who kindleth star and moon and sun, 

Then by the Zandavasta and Zarduhsht, 

The good religion, and by Nush Ázar, 

The Fire and Grace divine, as soon as thou 

Accomplishest these things thou shalt not hear 

Of further opposition at my hands, 

But I will give thee treasure, throne, and casque, 

And seat thee crowned upon the state myself." 
Asfandiyár replied : * O worshipful 

And noble Shah! thou quitt’st the ancient rule; 

Thou shouldst speak measured words. Fight with the 

king 
Of Chin and send dust from his warriors, 
But wherefore fight against an aged man, 


V. 1639 


174 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Whom Kai Kits dubbed * Lion-capturer ‘7 
From Minüchihr as far as Kai Kubád 
The whole state of Írán rejoiced in him. 
Men called him: ‘Lord of Rakhsh,’ ‘ World-conqueror, 

‘ King-maker, ‘Lion-queller. He is great; 
His fame is not a new thing in the world; 
He hath his patent from Shah Kai Khusrau, 
And if the patents of the Shahs are void 
One should not seek for patents from Gushtásp !" 

The Shah replied : * My famed, illustrious son ! 

Whoe'er hath turned him from the way of God, 
His patent is as is the desert-wind. 
Thou surely must have heard how Shih Kats 
Went erring at the bidding of Iblis 
And, having scaled the sky on eagles’ wings, 
Fell vilely into water at Sari! 
He brought a dív's child from Hámávarán, 
And made her mistress in the royal bower. 
By her malpractice Siyawush was slain, 
The day departed from his family." 
It is not well to pass the gate of one 
That turneth from his fealty to God. 
If thou art eager for the crown and throne 
Lead forth the host and hie thee to Sistan. 
Upon arriving there bind Rustam's hands, 
And bring him with the lasso on thine arm. 
As for Zawüra, Faramarz, and “al, 
See that they set no traps upon thy way. 
Bring them afoot and running to my court, 
And bring them so that all the troops may see; 
Then none hereafter will revolt from us 

However he may wish it and repugn.” 

The chieftain frowned. “Go not about,” he said, 
“To compass such designs, for neither Zál 
Nor Rustam is in question here, but thou 
! Bee VoL iip. 1025eg. — * Id.p.S6 seg. — ? Id. p. 200 8&4. 


a Lay 
= “a e 
= » E n i 
t" - - - 4 PI a = 
) 


[ 
L2 Mea 
4 v 


GUSHTÁSP 

Wonuldst rid thee of Asfandiyár; thou art 
Concerned about the throne of empiry, 

And wouldst be quit of me. Let crown and throne 


- Of chiefs remain thine own, for me the world 


Hath nooks enough, yet I am still thy slave, 
And bow my head to thy command and will." 
Gushtisp said: “Be not angry. Thou shalt have 
This greatness yet and therefore be not downcast. 
Choose from the army many cavaliers— 
All veterans in war. At thy disposal 
Are implements of war and troops and money ; 
"Tis for thy foemen to despond. Without thee 
What are the treasure and the host, the throne 
Of kingship and the golden casque, to me T” 
Asfandiyár replied : “No host will serve; 
The world-lord, if my fate is drawing nigh, 
Will not withhold it with his troops!” 
He quitted 
The presence of his sire with indignation 
Both for the erown's sake and his father's words, 
And entered his own hall in doleful wise, 
His heart all sorrowful, his lips all sighs. 


§ 4 

How Katiyiin counselled Asfandiydr 
Much moved and weeping sun-cheeked Katayin 
Went to the glorious Asfandiyár, 
Her son, and said to him: “O thou that art 
'The memory of the heroes of the world ! 
Bahman hath told me that thou wouldest go 
From this Rose-garden to Zábulistán, 
And wilt put Rustam, son of Zál, in chains, 
That master of the mace and scimitar ! 
Now hear of all things what thy mother saith :— 


V. 1641 


V. 1642 


| 4 J E i S 
" å 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 
Rush not to evil and endeavour it not, 
That cavalier of elephantine might 
Disdaineth battle with the river Nile, 
Dis-sundereth the White Dív's liverstead, 
And maketh with his sword the sun to stray. 
He slew the monarch of Himiavaran 
Withal, and none is bold to chide with him. 
When he took vengeance on Afrisiyab 
For Siyáwush he made earth like a sea 
With blood. But if I were to talk for ever 
I could not tell the tale of his good deeds. 
Give not thy head for crown's sake to the winds, 
For no one yet was born already erowned. 
Thy father is an old man; thou art young— 
A mighty man of hardihood and valour. 
The whole host's eyes are on thee; plunge not then 
Thyself through anger in calamities. 
Sistan is not the sole place in the world, 
Act not the youth and be not masterful. 
Make me not sad in this world and the next, 
But hearken to thy loving mother's words." 
Asfandiyár replied : * O loving mother ! 
Heed what I say: thou knowest Rustam well, 
And what thou say'st of his accomplishment 
Is true as Zandavasta. Thou mayst search 
At large throughout Írán but wilt not find 
A better man; 'twould be a shame to bind him. 
Such ill, not good, proceedeth from the Shah ! 
But still there is no need to break my heart, 
Though if thou dost so I will tear it out. 
How can I disobey the Shih’s command, 
Forego a state like this? Grant that my life 
Shall finish in Zibul; ‘tis Heaven's process 
That draweth me thither, and if Rustam yieldeth 
He ne'er will hear unfriendly words from me." 
His mother’s eyes rained blood, she tore her hair, 


176 


eon 4 = 


T 


= pee 
DI. ur 


we .= 
i 
T E a 


A^ f 
c 


ie 


: 
p. 


GUSHTÁSP 
And cried: “O mighty, raging Elephant! 
Strength maketh thee too prodigal of life. 
Thou art no match for elephantine Rustam, 
And therefore go not hence without a host. 
Take not thy life, on thine own shoulders merely, 
To that fierce Elephant; thy will to go 
Is also misereant Ahriman’s for thee. =, 


' Oh pause! Take not thy children into Hell, 


Or no wise man will call thee well-advised." 
The warlike prince made answer: “Not to take them 
Would be unwise, for while a youth remaineth 
Within the bower his spirit is repressed, 
His mind is dark, and, O my prudent mother ! Y. 1643 
I want their help on every battlefield. 
There is no need for me to take a host, 
Just kith and kin and certain chiefs at most.” 


$5 

How Asfandiydr led a Host to. Zábul 
At dawn, at cock-crow, from the court-gate rose 
The din of drums, the elephantine chief 
Gat on his steed and led his powers like wind. 
He marched until he came where two roads met ; 
Then prince and army halted in dismay. 
One road led toward the hold of Gumbadán, 
The other toward Zibul. The leading camel 
Lay down, thou hadst said “ wedded to the ground.” 
The camel-driver smote it on the head, 
But for the while the caravan was stayed. 
It seemed ill-omened to the atheling, 
Who gave commandment to behead the beast 
So that the harm might come upon itself, 
And he himself not lose the Grace of God. 
The warriors cut its head off on the spot, 
VOL. V. M 


3 : " 
m. = ae =< te x" 2 € uu : 
v »7 d M Emm H 
; "T E * > = 


,  - 2 1 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI 


And turned forthwith the presage on the camel. 
Though vexed about the beast, Asfandiyár 
. Affected to disdain the evil omen, 
And said: “When one hath triumphed, and illumed 
Earth by his fortune and his eminence, 
He ought to smile since good and ill alike 
Derive from God." Ne 
He then fared toward the Hirmund, — 
E But fearful of mishap, As they were wont | 
i They pitched the tent-enclosure while the chiefs 
k 


Chose their own camping-ground. The prince set up 
Throne and pavilion; thither fared the favoured. 
Asfandiyár provided wine and minstrels, 
And he and Bishtitan sat down together, 
p V. 544  Rejoicing his own heart with song and filling 
E His nobles’ hearts with bluster. When old wine MS 
Had made the faces of the warrior-king i 
And of his lords to blossom like the rose e 
He said thus to his friends: “I have abandoned 
The Shah's injunctions and his way withal. 
He said : * Get this affair of Rustam's over: 
Bate naught of bondage and humiliation,’ 
I have not acted as my father bade me, 
Because the brave and lion-hearted Rustam 
` Hath many toils in other chieftains’ stead 
To his account and with his massive mace 
Reformed the world. The whole state of [rin 
From Shah to slave surviveth to this day 
Through him. I need a valiant messenger, 
Instructed, wise, and of retentive mind, 
A cavalier of Grace divine and lustre, 
A man that Rustam will not over-reach. 
If Rustam will come hither and illume 
My gloomy soul, by graciously allowing me 
To bind him, he shall not experience 
For his discretion any harm from me, 


1, =F » - P. ' i^ 
i - 


TTE. 
9^ 4 


ait d 


^ 


FM - 


ia at 


T 


& f à. 
ó | E M — 
T4 A AUI 


we 4-3 t eh "en m 7 CEA 
y e | GUSHTÁSP | 179 


— I wish him well if he will think no ill.” 


“That is the proper course,” said Bishitan, 
“ Hold thereunto and seek the hurt of none.” 


§ 6 

How Asfandiydr sent Bahman to Rustam 
Asfandiyár then summoned to his presence 
Bahman, held talk with him at large, and said :— 
* Array thee in brocade of Chín and mount 
Thy sable steed, wear too a royal crown, 
Bedecked with jewels fit for paladins, 
So that whoever seeth may discern thee 
Among the notables and, recognising 
That thou art one of royal race, invoke 
The Maker's blessings on thee. Take five steeds 
With golden trappings, and ten reer V. 1645 
All men of reputation and degree, 
Proceed to Rustam's house, and do thine errand 
With right good will Greet him from us, be kind, 
Address him, adding compliments, and say :— 
‘Let him that groweth great and keepeth all 
The world unscathed give thanks to God that He 
At all times recogniseth excellence ; 
Howbeit one that is both great and good, 
And keepeth his own heart from frowardness, 
Will find his might and riches all the more, 
Be happy in this Hostel by the way, 
And, by renouncing every sordid aim, 
Hereafter compass Paradise. With us 
Both good and evil are but transient things 
As all of wisdom know. Dark dust at last 
Will be our couch, our spirit wing to God. 
Those that know Him will toil to serve the Sháhs. 
And now let us appraise thee faithfully 


-— heal aT = = p TUR = 
* k i y 
EL " a zm P a = P 
e pra 
r E 


~- 
jl 


Va? (>. 
Py 


J TOC 
t à 


i] 


1 
>" E 
E 
i 
af 


FOR ee TRI 


Y. 1646 


180 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Without exaggeration or default, 

For thou hast lived through countless years and seen 
Full many a king on earth. Thou know’st that ‘tis 
Unseemly to hark back from wisdom’s way 


For thee who hast such greatness, troops, and treasure, 


Such noble horses, crown, and throne, all which 
Thou hadst from my forefathers for prompt service; 
Yet for how long did Shah Luhrasp possess 
The world and yet thou never cam'st to court ! 
And since he gave the kingdom to Gushtásp 
Thou hast not recognised the Sháh, not written, 
Or paid to him the eustomary service, 
Hast never gone to court to do him homage, 
Or hailed him as thy Shih, Yet from Hushang, 
Jamshid, and Faridún who won by valour 
The kingship from the offspring of Zahhak, 
Until we reach the time of Kai Kubád, 
Who set the erown of greatness on his head, 
There hath not been a monarch like Gushtásp 
In fight, in feast, in counsel or the chase. 
He hath received the pure and good religion, 
Both error and injustice are no more, 
For when the Lord's way shone forth gloriously 
Bad doctrine and the Dív's way disappeared. 
Thereafter when Arjásp came forth to fight, 
With troops like pards and chiefs like crocodiles, 
And no one knew the number of his host, 
Our famous sovereign encountered him, 
And made a graveyard of the battlefield, 
Till no one could discern the face of earth, 
In sooth until the Resurrection Day 
The tale will ne'er grow old among the great. 
He is the man to break a lion's neck, 
And everything is his from east to west, 
His from Turin as far as Sind and Rim: 

* Reading with C and P. 


* 
n Ds 
r . = 


GUSHTASP 
The whole world is a bit of wax to him. 
Among the spearmen of the desert too 
Full many cavaliers come to his court ; 
They send him toll and tribute from their realms, 
Because they have not strength to fight with him. 
This have I said to thee, O paladin! 
Because his soul is vext on thine account 
In that thou hast not come to his famed court, P 
Nor recognised his nobles, but hast chosen 
A nook wherein thou hid'st thyself; yet how, 
Unless they ban all feeling, ean our chiefs 
Cease to remember thee who hast done good 
In all things alway and hast raised thy head 
To do the bidding of the Sháihs? If any 
Should reckon up thy toils they would exceed 
Thy treasures; yet no Shih could acquiesce 
E In what is told of thee. Gushtisp said: “Rustam, 
Because of much goods, province, and stored treasure, v. 1647 
Hath tarried at Zibul and grown bemused 
With drink, and none hath profit from a drunkard. 
Though wanted he is absent from the field, 
And doth not see me even at festivals.” 
The Shah was wroth and sware an oath one day 
By bright day and the azure dim of night :— 
“None of this chosen host shall look on him 
Here in the court unless in bonds.” And now 
A Upon this matter have I left Iran; 
The Shih would not allow me time to breathe. 
Be cireumspect and shun the monarch’s wrath: 


e yy 
WIS a 


Hast thou not seen the fury in his eyes ? 
i If thou wilt come, obeying my command 
Y And mourning thy remissness in the past, 
M, Then by the sun, the bright soul of Zarír, 
i And by that noble Lion my father’s life, 
1 I swear that I will make the Shih repent, 
~ 


And cause the moon and stars to shine again. 


"3 


f 
e 


V. 1648 


“hee WIPMMP EU y 
t um Pw 


182 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Moreover Bishütan will bear me witness 

That, having mind and wisdom for my guides, 

I oftentimes have tried to pacify 

The Shah, though seeing that thou wast to blame. 
My father is the lord; I am the liege, 

And never will I swerve from his command. 

A conclave of thy family should sit, 

Consult, and take this matter well in hand. 

Allow Zawára, Farámarz, und Zál, 

As well as noble and discreet Ridaba, 

To hear what I advise in all respects, ` 
And recognise the goodness of my words. 

This house must not be wrecked and be the den 
OF pards and lions. When I bear thee bound 
Before the Shih I will set forth to him 

Thy many faults, then rise and bring him back 
From wrath and wreak, let no wind blow on thee, 
But act as native worth would have of me.” 


$7 

How Bahman came to Zál 
Bahman, or ever he had heard the words 
Of that illustrious prince, went on his way. 
He donned a robe of royal cloth of gold, 
And placed the crown of greatness on his head, 
Then set forth proudly from the eamp-enelosure 
With standard raised and fluttering behind him. 
The atheling went over the Hirmund— 
A noble youth upon a mighty steed. 
Immediately the watchman sighted him, 
And sent a ery toward Zábulistán :— 
“A gallant, warlike cavalier hath come 
Upon a sable steed with golden trappings. 
Behind him are attendant cavaliers, 
And he hath passed in safety o'er the stream.” 


HE ‘ 1 Ld E y y E - 
ite, ) ar Ms aa ee | i à E 
y LE T - pP s r tw - - * P n P . a x p 


GUSHTASP 183 


Zál mounted on his saddle instantly, 

With lasso in the straps and mace in hand, 
Then coming to the watch-tower saw Bahman, 
And from his liver drew a deep, cold sigh. 

| He said: “This is a famous paladin " 
Of neble rank clad in a royal robe. 
In sooth he is a kinsman of Luhrasp, 
And may his advent prove our country's weal.” 

Departing from the watch-tower he approached 
The gate and paused distracted on his saddle. 

It was not long before Bahman, whose head 
Was higher than the turning sky, appeared 
And, having no acquaintance yet with Zal, 
Waved with his royal arm, and then approaching 
Cried : “Noble thane! where is the son of Zàl, 
This people's lord, the backbone of our times, 
For great. Asfandiyár hath reached Zübul, 

And pitched his tents upon the river-bank ? " 

Zl said to him: “O mine impetuous son! 
Dismount, take wine, and rest, for Rustam now 
Is coming from the chase with Farámarz, V. 1649 
Zawüra, and their retinue, Come then 
With these thy cavaliers as honoured guests, 


"S And cheer thy heart with many a draught of wine.” 
‘le Bahman made answer thus: “ Asfandiyar 

| Enjoined not minstrelsy and boon-companions. 
is Give me a guide to take me to the chase.” 
s Zal said: “ What is thy name? Thou art in haste! 
[2 What is thy will? Methinketh that thou art 


A scion of Gushtasp or Shah Luhrasp.” 
t I Bahman replied to him Eu I t mm Bahman, 
E Son of the world-lord of the brazen body." 
t Then noble Zál dismounted and did homage. 
= Bahman alighted smiling, and the twain 
P Exchanged their greetings. Earnestly Zál pleaded :— 
‘Wait here, there is no colour for such haste.” 


DÀ AT 
Ew Pn 
. , 
-— p . 


i84. — — THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ | 
Bahman rejoined: “Not thus must we delay, 


And slight the mission of Asfandiyár." E 
Zil chose a warrior that knew the road, a 
And sgnt him with Bahman forth to the chase. ewe 


That veteran, hight Shírkhün, went first as guide, 
Just pointed to the spot und homeward hied. 


88 
How Bahman gave the Message to Rustam 


A mountain lay before the youth who urged 
His gallant charger thither, then looked down 
Upon the chase. The captain of the host 
Appeared in sight—a man like Mount Bístün. « 
He held a sapling in one hand whereon 
An onager was spitted. By his side 
Were placed his iron mace and other gear. 
Within his other hand he held a goblet 
A-brim with wine; his son was in attendance; 
Rakhsh roamed about the meadow. There were trees, 
Grass, and a stream withal. 

“Tis either Rustam,” 
Bahman said, “or the rising sun, for none 
In all the world hath looked on such another, 
Or heard of such from famous men of old. 
I fear me that the brave Asfandiyár 
Will not stand up to him, but quit the combat. 
So let me kill him with a crag and make 
The hearts of Zál and of Rúdába writhe.” 

He loosed a flinty boulder from the height, 
And sent it downward from the lofty peak. 
Zawüra from the hunting-ground beheld it, 

And heard the rumble that it made withal. 
He shouted : * Paladin and cavalier ! 
A stone is rolling from the mountain-top !” 


J^ 5 
a: 
iE e 


a E 
-UD 
TS 


MU E ra is J oa r 1 TET P "3 2 
GUSHTASP 185 
But Rustam to Zawira’s wonderment 
Ne'er moved nor laid aside the onager ; 
He waited till the stone was elose to him, 
While all the mountain darkened by its dust, 
Then with a kick dispatched it far away, 
Whereat Zawára praised him joyfully. 
Bahman was sick at heart at Rustam's deed 
And, marking both his majesty and mien, 
Said: * If the glorious Asfandiyár 
Should fight against a man of such renown 
He would be vanquished vilely. It were better 
For him to deal with Rustam courteously, 
Who, if he overcame Asfandiyár, 
Would seize on all the country of Írán." 
He gat upon his wind-swift steed and quitted 
The mountain in a muse, informed the archmages 
About the wonder that he had beheld, 
And quietly proceeded on his way. 
When he was hard upon the hunting-ground 
The peerless Rustam spied him as he came, 
And asked an archimage: “ What man is this ? V. 1651 
I take him for a kinsman of Gushtásp." 
Then Rustam with Zawára and the rest, 
Both great and small, went forth to meet Bahman, 
Who swift as smoke alighted from his steed, 
Exchanging greetings and all courtesies, 
And Rustam said to him: * Until thou tellest 
Thy name thou wilt not get thy will of me.” 
The youth replied: “Renowned Bahman am I, 
Son of Asfandiyár, that upright prince." 
The paladin embraced him on the spot, 
And made excuses for his tardy coming. 
Then both with their respective retinues 
Set forth for Rustam’s camp. Now when Bahman 
Was seated he gave greetings for himself 
And for the Shih and the Ininians. 


" P 
an Pa 
j aag 


" LI 
"Y 


M 
^ WES 


I 186 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ- z " | 
m | " Asfandiyár," he then went on to say, s 
P * Hath journeyed from the court as quick as fire ON 
E And, as the Shah, victorious and exalted, a 
E Enjoined him, pitched his camp on the Hírmund. t 
EN Now if the noble cavalier will hear me v. 
iS. I have a message from Asfandiyár." v 
T- “The Shåh's son,” Rustam answered,“ hath endured — | 3 

r Much and hath travelled far; so first of all | 
% Let us partake of what we have, and then 
E The world is at thy bidding." | 
n On the board a 
P. He laid new bread and hot roast onager; * 
E Slaves helped Bahman and matchless Rustam parled. . 1 
3 He placed his brother by the prince but summoned 
b No other nobles to the feast. He put 1 
E A second onager before himself — V 
a His customary portion at each meal. 4 
m. He sprinkled salt, cut up the meat, and ate; E 
E- Meanwhile the exalted prince could not but gaze. E 
E v. 16532 He ate a little of his onager, 3 
| But not a hundredth part of Rustam's meal, ^ 
P While Rustam smiled upon him, saying: “Shahs $ 
E Possess the state in order to enjoy. f t 
h If thou art such a feeble trencherman x 


How ever didst thou pass the Seven Stages ? 
E In what sort dost thou wield the spear in battle 
A Who hast, O prince! so little appetite ?" 

» Bahman said : “God forbid a prince should talk 
Or cat much. Eating little he is great 


A : In war and ever hath his life in hand." 
E Then Rustam smiled and eried : * One should not veil 
D. One's manhood from mankind." 
E Then he filled up 
5; A golden bowl with wine and drank “The free.” 
E He gave another to Bahman, and said :— 
3 “Take this and drink it unto whom thou wilt.” 


TTA P ^ ^" T "me T TU p 
"np Y , - ! NOT 
USHTASP 7 


Bahman was frayed thereat, and so Zawáira 
First took a draught thereof and said to him :— 
“O scion of the Shih! may wine and drinker 
Rejoice in thee.” 

Bahman took back the bowl 


At once, but that sweet youth was temperate, 


And Rustam’s appetite, neck, arms, and shoulders 
Astounded him. Both mounted, and Bahman 
Set forth with noble Rustam and then gave 

The message of the prince fair-famed and brave, 


$9 

How Rustam made Answer to Aafandiyar 
When he had heard Bahman the ancient hero 
Mused and replied: “ Yea I have heard the message 
And joy to see thee, Bear Asfandiyár | 
This answer from me: ‘ Lion-hearted chief 
And famed ! the man whose soul is tenanted V. 1653 
By wisdom seeth matters in the gross, 
And when he hath both valour and success, 
Possessions, hoarded treasures, majesty, 
With heroism and a lofty name, 
And is the favourite of noble men, 
As thou art at this moment in the world, 
Should not be evil-minded. Let us worship 
God and the right, not grasp the hand of ill. 
A word when uttered inexcusably 
Is but a tree that hath no fruit or scent, 
And if thy soul shall tread the path of greed 
Thy travail will be long and profitless. 
"Tis well a prince should weigh his words, and well 
To have no wish to utter aught amiss. 
Thy servant used to joy in all that said :— 
* No mother's son is like Asfandiyár. 


LP 


Y "s e 


V. 1654 


188 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


In courage, wisdom, enterprise, and counsel | 
He will be greater than his ancestors," ` 
How famous is thy name in Hindüstán, 

In Chin and Rim and in the land of warlocks | 
I thank thee for thy counsels and give praise 
By day and in three watches of the night. 

I sought of God, what now I joy to find 
Accorded me, that I might look upon 

Thy cherished face, thy greatness, manhood, love, 
That, seated side by side in joy, we twain 

Might drain a goblet to the king of kings, 

And now I have attained my whole desire— 
The wish that I was instant to achieve. 

I will appear before thee unattended 

To hear from thee the Sháh's behest and bring 
To thee the patents granted by just Sháhs 
From Kai Khusrau right back to Kai Kubád, 
Now, matchless hero! look upon my case, 

My pains and actions, on the goodly deeds 

That I have done, my hardship and my travail, 
And how I have been servant to the Sháhs 
From this day backward to the days of old. 

If chains are to repay me for these toils, 

And ruin from the monarch of Irán, 

Tis well for none to look upon the world, 

Or only just to look and tarry not. 

I will tell all my secrets when I come, 

And speak in tones that all the world may hear. 
Then if there should appearja fault in me— 

A fault for which I ought to lose my head— 
Then I will set a yoke on mine own shoulders, 
And come afoot clothed in a leopard-skin ; 

But inasmueh as I am he that brake 

Fierce elephants’ necks and flung them to the Nile, 
Forbear unseeinly words to me and keep 

Thy mischiefs to afflict the Diy’s heart. Say not 


b 


P | 


= 
ST 


What no one e'er hath said, use not thy courage 


E LI E LU 

] » E Peur T 
Ad um : 
s ¥ _ 


GUSHTÁSP. I g 


To encage the wind. The mighty cannot pass 
Through fire at all, nor, save they swim, through water, 
Thou canst not hide the shining of the moon, 

Or mate the fox and lion. Pour not then 

Contention o'er my path, who am myself 

Adept therein. None hath beheld me fettered, 

No savage lion ta'en my post. Act thou 

As princes should. Consult not with the Div, 

Put from thy heart wrath and revenge for trifles, 

And look not on the world with boyish eyes. 

Rejoice then, cross the stream, and may God bless thee. 
Do honour to my mansion at a feast ; 

Keep not aloof from me who am thy slave. 

Just as I was a liege to Kai Kubád, 

8o now I joy, both heart and brain, in thee. 

If thou wilt come to me with all thy host, 

And pass two months with me in merriment, 

Both man and beast shall rest from toil, foes’ hearts 
Grow blind with envy. Beast on land, and fowl 
On*water, wait thee if thou wilt but stay. | 
I shall behold thy warrior-might, and thou V. 1655 
Shalt with thy scimitar o’erthrow the lion 

And pard. When thou art fain to lead the host 
Írinward to the monarch of the brave, 

I will unlock the ancient hoards which I 

Have here collected by my scimitar, 

And place at thy disposal everything 

That I have gathered by my might of hand. 

Take what thou wilt and give the rest away ; 

Make not a day like this a grief to me. 

Then when the time shall come for thee to go, 

And thou art anxious to behold the Shah, 

I will not separate my reins from thine, 

And we will go to him in company. 

By asking pardon I will soothe his wrath, 


Y, 16556 


190 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


And kiss him on the head and feet and eyes. 

Then will I ask the great but unjust Shah -— 

" Why should these hands of mine be put in bonds ?"' 
Hetain my words in each particular, 

And tell them to the great Asfandiyár," 


8 10 
How Bahman returned 

Bahman, when he had heard what Rustam said, 
Departed with the holy archimages, 
But Rustam—peerless chieftain—stayed awhile 
Upon the road and, haying called Zawára 
And Farámarz, said thus: ^ Depart to Zál 
And to the fair Moon of Zübulistán;! 
And say to them: “One who ambitioneth 
The world hath come—Asfandiyár, Set up 
Within our halls a golden throne, and place 
For him apparel such as monarchs wear, 
As on the occasion with Shih Kai Kits, . 
But let the audience-hall be grander still. 
Prepare ye somewhat too by way of food : 
There must not be a lack of things to eat, 
For the Sháh's son hath come to us, hath come 
In a revengeful mood intent on war. 
He is a famous warrior and brave prince, 
And heedeth not a wilderness of lions. 
I go to him, and if he wil] accept 
Mine invitation there is hope for all. 
If I shall find him well disposed toward me 
I will present him with a crown of rubies, 
And not withhold from him my treasures, jewels, 
Bards, mace, and sword. If I return despondent, 
Because I have not a white day with him, 

' Le. Ridtha, * VoL ii, p. 83. 


F AI" » , 


"PTT b MY. ies n dh 
GUSHTASP if > 


"Thou knowest that my twisted lasso bringeth 


The heads of savage elephants to bonds.” 

Zawára said to him : “ Have no such thought: 

Men do not seek to fight without a cause. 

I know not any king in all the world 

For rede and courage like Asfandiyár; - 

Ill deeds proeeed not from a man of wisdom, 
And he hath not received à wrong from us." 

Yawara went to Zil. For his part Rustam, 
Bestirred himself and hurried to the Hirmund, 

His head all dazed with fear of coming ill, 
Drew rein and waited for Bahman to greet him. 

Now when Bahman had reached the tent-enclosure, 
And stood before the presence of his father, 
The glorious Asfandiydr inquired :-— 

" What answer did the famous hero give thee? 

Bahman, on hearing, sat before his sire, 
Narrated all his tidings point by point t; 

And, having given Rustam’s greeting first, 
Told all about the message and reply 
Before his father, told what he had seen, 
Or noted privily. "I never saw, 
He said, “in any company a man 
Like elephantine Rustam. He possesset 
A lion's heart, the bulk of elephant, 
And haleth from the Nile the crocodiles. 
He now is on the bank of Hirmund, 
Without his armour, helmet, mace, or lasso, 
And fain would see the Shih, Ido not know 
His purpose as to thee." 
Asfandiyar, V. 1657 
Wroth with Bahman, disgraced him in full court, 
And said to him: “Men of exalted rank 
Should not confide in women; furthermore 
The employ of children in affairs of moment 
As messengers is neither brave nor valiant, 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÉ — — 
Where ever hast thou looked on warriors, 
Who hast heard not a charger's tramp? By making 
An elephant of war of Rustam thou 
Wilt break the spirit of our famous host." 

In private he spake much to Bishütan, 
And said : * This noble Lion of the fight 
Will act the youngster and, I will engage, 
Hath not a wrinkle yet in spite of age!” 


$ m 
The Meeting of Rustam and Asfandiydr 
The glorious Asfandiyiir bade set 
A golden saddle on his sable steed ; 
Then from his famous troops a hundred horsemen 
Set forth with him. His charger neighed on one hand, 
And Rakhsh upon the other. Matchless Rustam 
Lit from his steed, advanced to greet the hero, 
And, greeting over, said: “I prayed to God— 
The only God—that He would be thy Guide, 
And thou with thy great men and troops withal ' 
Hast reached us safe and sound. Come let us sit, 
Use gracious terms, then give a good reply. 
My witness, be assured, is God himself, 
And wisdom is my guide in what I say, 
For I shall gain no glory from this matter, 
Nor will I tell a lie in any case, 
That now were I to gaze on Siyáwush 
I should not look so happy as I do, 
For thou resemblest nobody but him, 
That wearer of the crown, that world-bestower. 
Blest is the Shih who hath a son like thee ! 
Thy sire may glory in thy height and face. 
Blest are the people of Írán, the slaves 
Of thine unsleeping fortune and thy throne. 
Ill-starred is he who seeketh thee in fight: 


d d 
pa pt 


! 
"Des. 


mau 1s 


ve a 
P 


ARRIR S 


T 
^ 


Fein Ene 


À 


ê 


A , L 
2 Eel ic 4mm l "s 


LI L] g 
» ^; A 


aa a a agg a 


From throne and fortune he will come to dust, 
May all foes’ hearts be filled with fear of thee, 
And thine ill-wishers’ riven, may thy fortune 
Prevail through all thy years and thy dark nights 
Be as the day to thee.” 
Asfandiyár 

Thereat alighted from his royal steed, 
Embraced the hero's elephantine form, 
Called many blessings down on him, and said :— 

“Thank God, O chief of paladins! that I 
Behold thee glad and bright of mind. ‘Tis well 
That we should praise thee and that this world’s heroes 
Should be as dust before thee. He is blest 
That hath a son like thee, for he beholdeth 
A fruitful Branch, and blest is he that hath 
A stay like thee, for he will be unscathed 
By evil fortune! When I looked on thee 
I called to mind that leader of the host, 
That cavalier and Lion—Zarir.” 

Then Rustam :— 
“Thou paladin and world-lord shrewd and ardent ! 
I have one wish, O prince! a wish which granted 
Would make me well content, and ‘tis that thou 
Shalt visit me in state and make my soul 
Bright at the sight of thee. Though there be naught 
Worth thine acceptance we will do our best,” 
Asfandiyár replied : * Thou memory 

Of this world's heroes! he that hath a name 
Like thine will prove a joyance to iran 
As one whose counsel must not be transgressed, V. 1659 
His land and home not slighted. Ne'ertheless, 
I may not swerve in public or in private 
From what the Shah commanded, and he did not 
Instruct me to abide within Zábul, 
Or with the nobles of that warlike land. 


Act so that thou mayst take of fortune's fruit ; 
VOL, V. N 


-— 


y - - ^d Ma? 7 
r < 


Go thou the way the monarch biddeth thee, 
Delay not thou to put thy feet in fetters ; 
Those of the king of kings are no disgrace, 
And when I bear thee bound before the Shih ~ 
The evil will recoil on him. Meanwhile 
Thy bondage will have hurt me to the soul, 
I shall have waited on thee like a slave. 
I will not leave thee in thy bonds till night ;1 
No harm at all shall come upon thy life. 
Dost thou suspect foul play, O paladin? 
Beyond all doubt the Shah will do no wrong, 
And he hath told me: ‘I will give to thee 
Mine ivory throne, my treasures, and my crown.’ 
When I shall set that crown upon my head 
I will entrust the whole world to thy hands. 
Before the all-just God I do no wrong, 
Nor shall I shame in presence of the Shih. 
When thou returnest to Zábulistán, 
What time the gardens blossom with the rose, 
Thou shalt receive such precious gifts from me 
As will adorn thy land.” 

“O noble man!” 


Said Rustam, “I have prayed the almighty Judge 


That I might glad my heart by seeing thee, 
But how can I give ear to these thy words? 
We both are men of rank, one old, one young, 


Two paladins both wise and vigilant ; 


But I am fearful of the evil eye, 


And that our heads will wake from pleasant dreams. 


The Div is making way betwixt us two 


To warp thy heart by means of crown and throne. 


A thing like this would be a shame to me, 
One that would last for ever, that a leader, 
One high-born and a chieftain such as thou art, 


! The night of the day on which Rustam should be brought before 


the Shab, 


RW ZW o" a A p — adt. a Vd 


Mm 


"Zz 


: Is cogni 


A => se 
“> Í 
n 


GUSHTÁÀSP 


A noble Lion and a mighty man, 
Should come not for a while to mine abode, 
Or be my guest within these coasts. If thou 
Wilt banish this contention from thy thoughts, 
And do thy best to exorcise the Div, 
I will adorn my soul by sight of thee, 
And do whate’er thou biddest save these bonds, 
For they are utter shame, defeat, and outrage. 
No one shall see me bound while I survive : 
My life on that. Enough!" | 
Asfandiyár 
Replied : * O memory of this world's heroes ! 
Thy words are truth, not falsehood, and men gain 
No lustre from deceit; still Bishütan 
sant of all the Sháh's commands 
When I set forth. ' Bestir thyself, he said, 
‘As touching Rustam. Be thy whole concern 

To fight or bind him.’ If now I shall go, 
A blithe, triumphant guest, to visit thee 
In thine own home, and from the Shah's commands 
Thou turn thy neck, ‘twill mar mine own day's lustre. 
For one thing I shall fight thee and employ 
The leopard's instinet in that fight, forget 
The bond of bread and salt, and cast a slur 
Upon the honour of my lineage; 
While if I disobey the Sháh the fire 
Will be my dwelling in the world to come. 
Yet, since thou wishest, let us pass one day 
With wine in hand. Who knoweth what may chance 
Tomorrow, so we need not talk thereof ? " 
` Said Rustam: "I will do so. I will go 
And doff my road-dress. For a week have I 
Been hunting and been eating onager 
Instead of lamb. When things are ready call me, 
And sit down with thy kinsmen at the board." 

Hurt and concerned he mounted, hurried home, 


y = NS 


VO . 


raw Ni 


a 
n 


o , J 
i Ld E bl " “hy E 
" L B e ; As i ri | + 


196 


^M P 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


A 
Beheld the face of Zal, the son of Sam, E 
The son of Narímán, and said: “ Famed chief! ATI 
I have been visiting Asfandiyár, s 
And seen a horseman like a straight-stemmed cypress, : 
A man of wisdom, dowered with grace and Glory. e 
Thou wouldest say: 'Sháh Farídün, the hero, ~ 
Bequeathed to him both might and understanding.’ í 
His presence bettereth hearsay : there doth shine M 
From him the Grace imperial and divine." < 
. 
§ 12 ] 
How Asfamdiyár summoned not Rustam to the Feast 
When Rustam left the bank of the Hirmund 
The great Asfandiyár sat lost in thought, / 
And Bishttan, his counsellor, anon A 
Came to the camp-enclosure, Said the hero :— | 
“We have dealt lightly with a grave affair: `; 
I have no business in the house of Rustam, ; 
And he for his part should not look on me, 
If he come not I will not summon him ; Si 
Else, should one of us die, the other's heart Ia 
Would burn with anguish for the slain, his head 
Shed tears for friendship's sake." 
Said Bishütan :— 
* Who hath a brother like Asfandiyár, 
Famed chief? By God, when first I saw you two, : 
And neither of you tried to make a quarrel, 
My heart became like early spring thereat, E 
Às much for Rustam as Asfandiyár ; 2 | i 
But as I looked more deeply I perceived E 
The Div controlling wisdom's path, Thou knowest 
What Faith and honour bid, the laws of God, 4 


And thine own sire’s intent. Restrain thyself, 
Do life no hurt, and hear thy brother’s words. 


A 


GUSHTÁSP 


I heard what Rustam said: his greatness matched V 1662 
His courage, and thy fetters will not gall him. 
He heedeth not thy Grace divine and state. 
The chief of cavaliers, the son of Zal, 
Will not put his head lightly in the net. 
The matter, as I fear, will be prolonged 
For evil, being 'twixt two haughty men. 
Thou art a great man, wiser than the Shah, 
And abler both in skill and bravery. 
If one would feast, the other strive for vengeance, á 
Consider which the more deserveth praise,” 
The prince replied: “If I shall not obey 
The Shah I shall be censured in this world, 
And God will call me to account hereafter. | 
I would not sell both worlds for Rustam's sake ; 
No man will sew up his own eyes and heart." 
The other said: “ The outeome of good counsel, 
Will profit thy pure body and thy soul. 
I have said all. Now choose thee which is best; 
A prince's heart should be above revenge.” e 
The chieftain bade the cooks to spread the board, 
But saidjto no one: “Summon Rustam hither.” 
The eating done he took the cup in hand, 
Spake of the Brazen Hold, of his own manhood, 
And drank in honour of the king of kings, 
While Rustam stayed within his palace-walls, 
Remembering his promise to eat bread. 
Now when a long while passed and no one came, 
Though Rustam often looked along the road, 
And when the time for feasting had gone by, 
The hero's dignity could brook no more. 
He smiled and said: * My brother! deck the board, 
And summon to the feast the men of birth, 
If "tis the custom of Asfandiyar 
To treat us with such superciliousness 
As to invite and then not summon us, V. 1663 


t ] E - P T [1 
a E LE ^ i» â E s 4 P - 
* 


ha 
| ak 


E? T» OS E Lir. pra 
198 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE = 
E Hope for no good from him." A 
a He spake, They decked 
I The Board and, having eaten, rose. Then said j 
The heroic paladin to Farámarz :— 
E " Bid saddle Rakhsh as they would do in Chín. J 
E I shall go back and tell Asfandiyár :— z 
T. ‘Prince though thou art, remember: he that breaketh ' 
= His plighted word hath in himself effaced 
E The pathway that the great and good have traced,’ " 1 
E $13 HN 
How Asfandiydr exeused himself for not summoning i 
>i Rustam to the Feast 4 
Es Then like an elephant he mounted Rakhsh, 1 
e Whose neighings eould be heard two miles away, | 
F And hurried to the river, where the troops | i 
| Pressed eagerly to see him, while the hearts Y 
E Of those that saw him loved him. All exclaimed :— 1 
: * "This noble chief resembleth none but Sám, AS 
The cavalier. An iron hill is he | 
Upon the saddle and thou wouldest say | 
That Rakhsh is Áhriman's own mount, and were 1 
A mighty elephant his opposite = 
Then splash its head with mourning hues. The king 
Must have a witless pate to give up one 
That is possessed of Grace divine and prowess— 1 
A moonlike chieftain like Asfandiyar— 4 
To slaughter for the sake of crown and throne. Us 
He groweth greedier with age and fonder 
Of signet and of diadem.” 2 
When Rustam 
Drew near, Asfandiyár went forth to meet him. 


Said Rustam : * Paladin and glorious youth, 
But of new-fangled manners ! so thy guest 
V. 1664 Was thought unworthy of the summoning ! 


"m" - 


—- p 


GUSHTASP 


Thy promise is a promise and no more. 

Attend to what I say, and be not hasty * 
Without a cause with one advanced in years. 

Thou thinkest far too highly of thyself, 

And art too haughty to the chiefs. Good sooth! 
Thou holdest me but light in point of courage, 
And slight in counsel and in understanding. 

Know that I am the Rustam of the world, 

The lustre of the race of Nariman. 

I make the Black Div gnaw his hand, I lay 

The heads of sorcerers low. The mighty men 
That saw mine iron corslet, and that great 

And roaring Lion that I rode, abandoned 

The field without a blow and on the plain 

Threw down their bows and arrows—valiant horsemen 
And fighters like Kamas, the warrior, 

Or like the Khin of Chin, whom with coiled lasso 
I haled from saddle and bound head andifoot. 

The warden of the Sháhs am I, the stay 

Of brave men everywhere. Mistake me not 
Because I begged a boon, nor deem that thou 

Art higher than heaven. Thy royal Grace and state 
Led me to seek thy rede and fellowship, 

And I desire not that a prince like thee 

Should have his fortunes ruined by my hand, 
Because heroic Sim is mine ideal, 

At whose approach the lion fled the wood, 

And I am his memorial on earth, 

O valiant, royal prince Asfandiyár ! 

Long have I been the chief of paladins, 

But never spent a day in evil-doing, 

Have purged the world of foes and undergone 
Abundant toil and stress. I thank my God 

That in these latter days I have beheld 

My peer—a glorious Shoot who will take vengeance 
On infidels amid the world's applause." 


ES. v. 1665 


- P V, 1666 


y n 
F h 


" O lion-hearted chieftain of renown ! 


>| 


200 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ- ^ ERN 
= 
Then smiling on him said Asfandiyár:— E 
“O son of Sim, the horseman! thou wast hurt + 
In that no summons came whereas I took A 
Some credit to myself. Be not displeased ` M 


Because I spared thee on so hot a day 
So long a journey, for I said: ‘At dawn 
I will set out to offer mine excuses; 
Then shall I have the joy of seeing Zál, 
And be for once quite happy!’ But since thou 
Hast of thine own self undergone the toil, 
Hast left thy home and come across the plain, 
Sit down to rest thyself, take up the cup, 
And make no show of wrath and bitterness.” 
Asfandiyar placed Rustam on his left, 
Such was the way in which he did the honours! 
Then said the veteran: “This is not my place; 
Let me have that to which I am entitled.” 
The prince said to Bahman upon his right :— 
“Give him the seat as he demandeth it” - 
Then Rustam in his wrath said to the prince :— 
“Look on me fairly and with open eyes; 
Regard my prowess and illustrious stock, 
For I am of the seed of valiant Sam. 
Though thou hast no seat that befitteth me 
I have the Grace, my triumphs, and my prudence.” 
Thereat the prince gaye orders to his son 
To place a golden seat upon the dais, 
And with a scented orange Rustam came, 
And took his seat but he was all aflame. 


§ 14 
How Asfandiyár spake Shame of the Race af Rustam 
Then thus to Rustam spake Asfandiyar :— 


GUSHTASP 201 


Now I have heard a tale from archimages, 

The mighty men and sages wise of heart, 

That Zál is one of evil race, a dív 

By birth, and hath no better origin. 

They kept him for a while concealed from Sám, 
And thought the child a Doomsday to the world. 
His head and hair were white, the rest was dark. 
Sám at the sight of him was in despair, 

And bade them take the young child to the sea 
That birds and fish might have him for their prey. 
Then the Simurgh came with spread wings but saw 
That 'twas no proper child with Grace divine. 

She bore him off to where she had a nest, 

She carried him away to serve as food, 

And threw him in contempt before her young 
That they might finish him at feeding-time. 
When they attempted to devour the child 

They were afraid and would not batten on him, 
But passed him over as he was so vile, 

And turned away; though ravenous the Simurgh 
Could not quite stomach such a thing as Zál, 

But made him free of the nest though nobody 
Was pleased to see him. He ate carrion 

That she rejected, and his wretched body 

Was raimentless. She came to love the child, V. 1667 
And thus the heaven turned o'er him for a season. 
When he had fared on carrion for a while 

She carried him all naked to Sistan, 

Where Sam, who had no child, adopted him 
Through folly, dotage, and stupidity. 

The Sháhs and glorious, great men of my race, 
My benefactors and mine ancestors, 

Then took him up and furnished him withal. 
Thus many years passed o'er him ; he became 

A Cypress, one whose head was out of reach ; 

It put. forth branches and its fruit was Rustam, 


Who by his manhood, skill, and mien thus scaled 
The sky, in such wise seized on royalty, 


is 

Haee and his Deed 
Then Rustam answered, saying: “Hold thy peace! 
Why speak’st thou such provocatory words ? 
Thy heart is growing into frowardness, 
The utterance of thy soul is that of divs, 
Speak what befitteth the great kings; the Shah 
In speaking swerveth not from what is right, 
The world-lord knoweth that the son of Sim 
Is great and hath both knowledge and fair fame, 
Again, Sám was the son of Narímán, 
Which hero was the son of Kariman, 
And thus they run back to Garshisp, while all 
Are scions of Jamshid. Thine ancestors i 
Obtained the crown through us, else none had named 

them. 
Twas I who brought Kubád, the chosen one 
Of all the people, out of Mount Alburz,! 
And but for that he had remained a subject, ? 
Not having treasure, host, or puissance. 
In sooth thou must have heard reports of Sam, 
Who had the fairest fame of all his time : 
First, how there was a dragon once at Tus, 
A dragon from whose clutches none could ‘scape ; 
A crocodile in water and a leopard 
On land, its breath would soften mountain-flints, 
Would broil the fishes’ heads in water-ways, 
Would scorch the vultures’ feathers in mid-air, 
1 Sea Vol. i. p. 382 ay. ® Reading with C. 


ua Peor 


GUSHTÁSP 


And suck in elephants with its breath. 
Were saddened at the thought thereof.) And Dt 
There was a fearful and malicious dív, 

Whose body was on earth and head in heaven, 
Beenuse the sea of Chin reached but his middle ; 
The sun itself shone with diminished lustre. 

He used to take up monsters from the deep 

And, towering o'er the orbit of the moon, 

Broil them upon the sun while turning heaven 
Was all dissolved in tears. These two great Pests! 
Were rendered lifeless and consumed before 

The sword of Sim, the hero. Then again, 

My mother was the daughter of Mihráb, 

Who made the realm of Sind so prosperous, 

And was the fifth descendant from Zahhák, 

Who raised his head above all other kings. 

Who hath a nobler origin than this ? 

A wise man will not turn from truth: the honour 
Of all the world is mine, and other heroes V. 1669 
Must seek to win it back from me. Arai 

Mine earliest patent is from Kai Kats; 
Thou vanst not fnd a pretext on that score. 

I have one too from righteous Kai Khusrau, 

Like whom no Kaian ever girt his loins. 

My wanderings have covered all the earth, 

And many an unjust monarch have [ slain. 
Whenas I crossed the waters of Jihin 

Afrasiyib fled from Turin to Chin; 

When Kai Káüs went to Mázandarán? 

My father Zál had much to say thereon. 

Thou knowest how that Sháh fared with the dívs, 
And in his blindness cried out from:his soul. 
Alone I journeyed to Mázandarán ; 

The nights were gloomy and the leagues were long. 
I did not spare the White Div or Arzhang, 

1 Seo Vol, i. pp. 172,296, 7 Id. il 356. ? Jd. so aeg. 


a 
j 

b 
has. 
v 


: ee i (ans e 1 T I 7 z 
204 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ = — 


Pülid; son of Ghundi, or Bíd or Sanja. 

Moreover for our monarch's sake I slew 

My wise and valiant boy.* There hath not been 
Another warrior like Suhráb in strength, 

In courage, and approof in war. In sooth 
Above six hundred years have passed away 
Since I was severed from the reins of Zál ; 
I have been always paladin in chief, 

In public or in private 'twas all one. 

Just as it was with noble Farídün, 

Who set the erown of greatness on his head, — - 
Dethroned Zahhák and brought him, head and erown, 
To dust; and secondly, as Sám, my grandsire, , 
Engrossed the craft and knowledge of the world; 

50, thirdly, since I girded up my loins 

The person of the monarch hath had rest, 

There never were such days of happiness, 

The wanderers’ feet were never so secure, 

As when my will prevailed throughout the world, 

And I used scimitar and massive mace, 

I speak in order that thou mayst know all, 

For thou art prince and nobles are thy flock ; 

Yet in respect of age thou art a youth, 

Though with the Grace of Kai Khusrau. Thou seest 
None but thyself and know’st not secret matters. 
Now, having talked much, turn we for relief 

To wine and hunt therewith the soul of grief." 


§ 16 
How Asfandiydr boasted of hia Ancestry 
Asfandiyár, on hearimg Rustam's words, 
Smiled and his heart began to beat with joy. 
He answered: “I have listened to thy toils, " 
Thy pains, thy combats, and anxieties. 


* Ulád in the text, but cf. Vol. iv. p. 296, mote. ? Jd. ii. 173. 


m 


"FA 


= Y è 
Lo E à i 1 

P ë 
* Lyr "v" a 7 


$ 


D y *w 
SABER S Do i 
óa "N'S y” " 4 


GUSHTASP 
Now hearken to the gests that I have done, 
Whereby I raised my head above the noble. 
"Twas for the Faith that first I girt my loins, 
And cleared the earth of idol-worshippers : 
Our warriors could not see the world for slain. 
Gushtásp was mine immediate ancestor, 

Who was himself begotten by Luhrasp; 
Luhrásp again was son of king Aurand, | 

Who at thafftime possessed both fame and rank. 
Aurand was of the seed of Kai Pashín, 

Blessed by his father who was Kai Kubád— 

A Sháh of wisdom and of upright heart ; 
Pursue my race thus to Sháh Farídün, 

The root of kings and glory of the throne. 

My mother is, moreover, Ciesar's daughter, 
Who is the erown upon the Rümans' head 
And sprung from Salm—a glorious lineage, 
Instinct with justice, precedent, and Grace. 
Salm was the son of valiant Farídün, 

Who carried off the ball from all the kings 
For valour. I assert what none gainsay, 
Though many quit the way and few are in it, 
That in the presence of mine own forebears, 
Those mighty men devout and glorious, 

Thou and thy grandsire were but servitors. 

I do not seek to best thee but thou hadst 

Thy kingship from the Shahs, who were my sires, 
For zealous service. Wait while I tell all, 
Then if there be a falsehood point it out. 


' Since Sháh Luhrásp gave to Gushtásp the throne 


I have been girt with valour and success, 

And I have slain the perverts from the Faith 
Upon the plains of Chin and of Turan, 

Then later on, when through Gurazm's words 
My father bound and banned me from the feast, 
Ill reached Luhrásp by reason of my bonds: 


205 


Y. 1673 


-—— wu" pys E UN s A adi b E "X 
» " "y M vd i | e N I 
i sv E » ) 
t w 


204 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


The Turkmans hid the earth. Then to the hold 
Of Gumbadán the veteran Jámásp 
Came with a message and in soldier's garb. 
When he arrived and saw how I was bound, 
Saw how my mind and heart were pierced by care, 
He sent for blacksmiths to deliver me 
Out of my heavy bondage, but their work 
Was far too slow for me because my heart 
Yearned for the scimitar. My heart was stfaitened 
I shouted at them, wrenched me from their grasp, 
Rose to my height from where I sat and brake 
My bonds with mine own hands, then sought the field 
Whereon the fortunes of Gushtasp were lost; 
And when Arjisp fled with his famed array 
Before me I girt up my loins with manhood, 
And went like raging lion in pursuit. 
As for the Seven Stages thou hast heard 
Of mine adventures with the lions there 
And with that Ahriman, and how I entered 
The Brazen Hold by guile and quelled a world, 
Hast heard about my doings in Turan, 
And all the toil and hardship that I bare. 
Good sooth, no onager e'er hath endured 
Such from a pard, nor maw of crocodile 
From sailors angle. Ona mountain-top, 
Sequestered by its height from all the throng, 
There was a hold. I found the people all 
Idolaters and dazed like men bemused. 
Since Tur, the son of valiant Faridun, d 
No man had robbed the hold of its repute, 
I took that fortress by my bravery, 
I cast the images upon the ground, 
And set alight the Fire there that Zarduhsht 
Brought in a censer out of Paradise.! 
Victorious through the just, the only God, 

! Cf p. 33- 


A 2 E ES N GUSHTASP 
_ IT came again in such case to Írán 
—. That we had no foe left in all the world, 
And not a Brahman in his idol-house, 
In all my battles I have fought unaided ; 
No one hath shared with me the cares of war. 
- —. Now, seeing that we have so long converst, 
Tilt up the wine-cup if thou art athirst.” 


* 

; ^n $17 t 
A. How Rustam vaunted his Valour 
Then Rustam spake thus to Asfandiyar :— 


den “My deeds remain as my memorial ; 
e So now in simple justice hear the words 


we Of one whose name is known—an ancient man: 
= [fI had gone not to Mázandarán;! 
= And borne my massive mace upon my shoulder, 
____ Where would have been blind Giv, Gudarz, and Tas, 
__ And our exalted Shih—that sport of grief ? 
— — Who had torn out the White Div’s heart and brain? V. 1673 
— . Who had sufficient trust in his own arm ? 


— — Who would have rescued Kai Kétis from bonds, 
i3 .. And have restored him to the lofty throne 


_ + Whereto from heavy chains I carried him— 
à The fortune-favoured darling of Iran? 
v I cut the heads from off the sorcerers ; 
— They saw no bier, no shroud, no burial, 
— . . Mine only helpers in those fights were Rakhsh, 
_ — And my sharp sword which meteth out the world. 
— "hen when Káüs went to Hámávarán,t 
£g Where they made fast his feet in heavy fetters, 
I took an army of [ranians, 


rt Drawn from wherever there were prince and chief, 
— — Blew in the fight that folk's king, and made void 
* Yol ii, p. 44 aeq. * Hi. 88 seq. 
As d 


208 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI = 
Their famous throne. The monarch of the world— — —— 
Katis himself—was captive and his heart = 
Was stricken by anxiety and travail. 
Meanwhile Afrásiyáb was in [ran 
Together with his host and famous chiefs, 
Then it was I who reseued Kai Kaus 
As well as Tis, Giv, and Gidarz, and brought them 
Back to Írán out of Hámávarán, 
Brought all the paladins and men of name, 
One dark night as I went before the troops 
In search of fame, not rest, Afrásiyáb 
Discerned my fluttering flag and heard Rakhsh neigh : 
Abandoning iran he made for Chin, 
And justice and thanksgiving filled the world. 
Had blood come from the neck of Kai Kaus 
How could he have begotten Siyawush ? 
Had saintly mother not borne Kai Khusrau, 
Who would have named Luhrisp for Shih? Why vaunt 
About his crown, the armlets and the throne 
Of Shah Gushtasp! who saith: ‘Go, bind the hands 
Of Rustam’? Not high heaven itself shall bind them! 
From boyhood up to now in mine old age 
I have not borne such words from any man. 
To make excuses and beg off would shame me; 
To speak thus mildly is a degradation.” 

Asfandiyár smiled at his violence 
And, reaching out and gripping Rustam's hand, 
Said; “Rustam of the elephantine form ! 
Thou art what all have represented thee; 
Thine arm is mighty as a lion's thigh, 
Thy breast and limbs are like a lusty dragon's, 
Thy waist is fine and slender as the pard's, 
And such a chieftain beareth off the day." 

He squeezed the hand of Rustam as he spake, 
But yet the youth made not the old man writhe ; 

| 1 Reading with P. 


"Though gall exuded from his finger-nails 


"Famed Rustam! drink today. In fight tomorrow 


. Then will I bind thy hands, bear thee before V. 1676 


ah - 
I » 
. ^ T ("Y 


GUSHTASP 209 


Good sooth the hero writhed not with the pain. 
Then Rustam grasped the prince's hand in his, 
And said; “QO prince and worshipper of God! 
How blesséd is the famous Shih Gushtdsp 
To have a son such as Asfandiyár ! 
How blest is he who getteth one like thee : 
He addeth to the glory of the world |” 

He spake and grasped the other's hand until 
The prince’s face became as red as blood, 
Till blood and water oozed out from his nails, 
And he was frowning, though he laughed and said :— 


Thou wilt have pain and think no more of feasting. 
Or ever I shall saddle my black steed, 

And place the royal helm upon my head, 

I will unhorse thee with my spear: thereafter 
Thou wilt not seek for battle and revenge. 


The Shih, and say: ‘I saw no fault in him, 

Will intercede for thee and urge all pleas, 

Will set thee free from sorrow, pain, and travail, 

And thou shalt have instead both good and treasure,” 
Then Rustam, smiling at Asfandiyar, 

Said: “Thou shalt have enough of combating. 

Where hast thou seen the fights of warriors ? 

Where hast thou felt the wind of massive maces ? 

If such then be the aspect of the sky ^ 

Love will be veiled between two men at least ; 

We shall have war instead of ruddy wine, 

Use lasso, bow, and strategy, require 

The roar of drum instead of voice of harp, 

And greet each other with the sword and mace. 

Then shalt thou, glorious Asfandiyar! 

Behold the rush and pulsing of the fight. 

Tomorrow when I come upon the field, 

VOL, V. o 


a 


ae fg P<” 


V. 1677 


— 
eo 


210 THE sHAHNAMA OF FIRDA usi | 
And in the battle man opposeth man, 

I will unhorse thee with a firm embrace, 

And carry thee away to glorious Zal, 

Then seat thee on the famous ivory throne, 
And crown thee with the heart-rejoicing crown, 
Which I myself received from Kai Kubád, 

And may his soul rejoice in Paradise! 

I will unlock my treasury fulfilled 


With precious things and lay my hoards before thee, 


Put all thy troops past want and raise to heaven 
Thy crown, then seek the presence of the Sháh 

In state rejoicing, boldly set the crown 

Upon thy head as thanks to Shah Gushtasp, 

Then gird me as I have been girt erewhile 

Before the Kaians, renovate my heart 

With joy, and make the Garden’s surface weedless. 
Men's bodies will not keep their souls within 
When thou art Sháh and I am paladin 


$ 18 

How Rustam drank Wine with Agfandtydér 
Asfandiyár replied: “ More talk is useless. 
My belly craveth, half the day is over, 
And we have had much talk of combating. 
Bring ye the table and what food ye have, 
But summon nobody that talketh much!” 

Now when the board was spread, and Rustam ate, 

They were astonied at his appetite. 
Asfandiyir and all the other heroes 
Set lambs in front of him on every side. 
He ate them all, whereat the prince and people 


Were lost in wonder. Then the prince commanded :— 


“ Bring cups and ruddy wine for him, and we 
Will note how he will hold forth in his cups, 
And prate of Kai Káüs. " 

The drawer brought 


—— Loo m DN 


had ls 


A goblet filled with wine of ancient vintage, 
And Rustam drank it to the king of kings ; 
| He drained that golden fountain dusty-dry. 
| The young eup-bearer brought the cup again— 

a. The same with royal wine replenishéd— 

| And matchless Rustam whispered to the boy :— 
a 


“We want no water on the table here. 
Why dost thou mingle water in the cup, 
And weaken this old wine?” 

Said Bishútan 
Thus to the server: “ Bring a bowlful neat." 


- He had the wine brought, summoned minstrelsy, 

ie And gazed astound on Rustam. 

)3 At departure, V. 1678 
e When noble Rustam was all flushed with wine, 


y Asfandiyár said thus to him: “ Live happy 
MÀ. While time shalllast. May both the wine and meat 
1 e Agree with thee, and right be thy soul's provand.” 
To him said Rustam: “Prince! may wisdom ever 
Be thine admonisher, What wine soe'er 
I drink with thee is good and nourisheth 
My prudent soul. If thou wilt ban this strife, 
Wilt magnify thy majesty and wisdom, 
Wilt leave the plain and come to mine abode, 
Wilt for a season be my joyous guest, 
I will accomplish all that I have said, 
And set before thee wisdom as a guide. 
Pause for a while and strive not after ill; e 
Show courage and regain thy common sense," 
Asfandiyár, the hero, thus rejoined :— 
“Sow not a seed that ne'er will grow. Tomorrow 
- Thou shalt behold the accomplishment of heroes 
What time I gird my girdle for the fray. 
Moreover do not glorify thyself; 
Go home and fit thee for tomorrow's work. 
Thou shalt perceive that in the ranks of war 


"De 


Lr I am the same as in my revelry. Mi 
| Attack me not upon the battlefield ; E 
M Hear mine advice; go not about to fight, 

Es Thou shalt see prowess greater than my words; 
! [ Let it not prove a cause of grief to me. 
— Accept of all the counsel that I give: 

B Submit to fetters at the Sháh's command 

| What time we quit Zibul and seek Írán, 

Vi And come before the monarch of the brave." 


i Then grief made Rustam ponder, and the world 
T Was like a wood before his eyes. He thought :— 
Vv. 1679 “For me to give my hands up to his bonds, 


à il 


E Or rise up in my might and injure him, 

E Are courses both inglorious and bad, 

h Both novel and ill precedents. Moreover, 
1 My name will suffer from his bonds while I 

i By slaying him shall end but ill myself, 

p And all that tell the tale throughout the world 

s Will never let my blame grow obsolete, 

Y Thus saying: ' Rustam 'scaped not from a youth / 
E Who went forth to Zibul and bound his hands.’ 


Then all my fame will turn to infamy, 
I shall be smirched and be in evil odour; 
| While if he shall be slain upon the field 
[ My face will pale in presence of all kings, 
And men will say: ‘He slew the youthful prince 
\ For speaking harshly. Ishall be accursed, 
} When I am dead, and called ‘ old infidel.’ 
Again, if I shall perish by his hand 


Zibulistan will lose both hue and scent, 1 
: Zil’s seed will perish and no Zabuli 
D- _ Gain fame thenceforth. Still men at least shall quote A 
I * Good words from me when I have passed away, | 
^ And if I left but one good word untried, | 


Past doubting, wisdom's self would take my life." 
Then to that haught man thus he spake: “ Concern 


bd t 
a Low 
i 


GUSHTASP 


E 
| 2 Hath made my visage wan. Why speak so much 
* Of bonds? I fear that thou wilt suffer hurt 
: Therefrom unless the will of heaven be other : 
— The swift sky's purpose is above surmise. 
Thine are dívs' counsels, thou wilt not receive 
Wise words. Thou art a man of simple heart 
| And versed not in the world. Know that thy hurt 
= ls aimed at secretly, for while Gushtásp 
ae Hath crown and throne he will not grow aweary 
W Of life and fortune, but will keep thee running 
E About the world and make thee face all dangers. 
| He hath examined all the earth, and made 
Sy k An ax of wisdom and a bill of wit, 
—  — — To find a chief that will not quail to fight thee, 
That thou mayst perish by that hand, and he 
Still may retain the crown and lofty throne. 
Shall imprecations be upon the crown, 
And by that token shalt thou couch in dust ? 
Wilt thou expose my soul to obloquy ? 
| Why wilt thou not consider in thy heart ? 
|... Thou art the source of trouble to thyself 
Though injured not at heart by any foe. 
Act not, O prince ! act not so boyishly, 
Delight not so in ill, our hearts aggrieve not, 
Nor bring calamity on both our souls ; 
Have some respect for God and for my face, 
And act not as a traitor to thyself. 
There is no need at all for thee to fight, 
To struggle or contend or strive against me, 
Tis Destiny that hath been driving thee 
With this thy host to perish by my hand, 
While I shall leave an ill name in the world. 
Oh! may Gushtisp’s own end be also ill !” 
When proud Asfandiyár had heard these words 
He thus returned reply: “O noble Rustam! 
Mark well the saying of a sage of yore, 


y. iLa Pz -I 
> a H 


T THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ. 


What time he married wisdom to his soul :— 
‘An aged deceiver is a fool indeed 
Howe’er successful and possessed of rede.’ 
Thou practisest upon me so to keep 
The collar from thy neck, and wouldst that all 

v 168: Who hear this should believe thy specious words, 
Call me a man whose purpose is;malign, 
Call thee a wise man and beneficent, 
And say thus: ‘Rustam came in all good will, 
With invitations, and held out great hopes, 
But still the chief rejected what he said, 
And would consent to nothing but a fight ; / 
He treated Rustam's wishes with contempt, 
And kept his own tongue charged with bitterness. 
Know that I will not disobey the Shih, 
Though 'twere to win the crown and diadem. 
My good and evil in this world depend 
On him; he is my Hell and Paradise. 
May that which thou hast eaten nourish thee, 
And may it work destruction to thy foes. 
Go home in safety, tell what thou hast heard, 
Prepare for fight, and bandy not more talk, 
Come forth at dawn, use every ruse of battle, 
And make an end. Tomorrow thou shalt see 
The world turn black before thee on the field, 
Know how the heroes fight, and what a day 
Of battle and contention really is." 

Then Rustam said: “ O seeker after fame ! 
Since such a wish as this hath come to thee, 
Upon swift Rakhsh will I perform the part | 
Of host and physie thee with elub and mace. E 
Thou hast heard people saying in thy land, Ld 
And grown self-confident because of it :— 4 
‘The swords of warriors on the battlefield 
Will ne'er avail against Asfandiyár. e 
Tomorrow thou shalt see my pointed spear, | 


. c r 


- 


GUSHTASP 


As well as somewhat of my horsemanship, 
And afterward thou wilt not seek to fight 
Upon the battlefield with men renowned.” 

The valiant youth with laughter on his lips— 
A laughter that humiliated Rustam— 
Replied : “O thou that seekest after fame! 
Thou hast been angered quickly by our talk. 
Tomorrow, when thou comest on the field, 
Thou wilt be more informed about the doings 
Of men that are men. I am not a mountain, 
Nor is my steed. I shall not be attended, 
And, saving for the name of God, shall have 
No help from blow of shaft and scimitar. 
Thy mother, should thy head go down the blast 
Through mace of mine, will weep for pain of heart, 
And, if thou art not slain upon the field 
Of battle, I will bind and carry thee 
Bound to the Shih that such a slave as thou 
May seek not fight with him as thou dost now.” 


§ 19 
How Rustam returned to his Palace 

As Rustam went forth from the tent-enclosure 
He stood before the entry for awhile, 
And thus addressed the tent: “O house of hope! 
Blest were the days that saw Jamshid within thee. 
Great wert thou in the time of Kai Kaus, 
And in the days of favoured Kai Khusrau ; 
But now the door of Grace is shut upon thee, 
For one unworthy sitteth on thy throne." 

Asfandiyár, the hero, heard the words, 
Strode forth to noble Rustam, and spake thus :— 
“Why art thou angry with the tent-enclosure, 
Thou well-advised ? Well might a man of sense 
Bestow upon Zábulistin the name 


». 


he) “La 


216 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ —— 
Of * Babblestead' Why need a guest abuse 
His host because the guest is weary of him ? 
V.1683 Time was,” he went on to the tent-enclosure, 
‘When thou hast held Jamshid in thine embrace, 
Who left the way of God and forfeited 
Good days on earth and jocund Paradise! 
The day too was when thou for Shah Kaus 
Didst serve as veil and shelter for the troops, 
Kaus who sought to know God's mysteries, 
And hankered to investigate the stars !* 
The earth was all convulsed on his account, 
And filled with depredation, sword, and arrow. 
Gushtásp is now thine owner, and Jámásp 
Is standing in his presence. At his side 
Is seated on one hand Zarduhsht who brought 
The Zandavasta out of Paradise ; 
Upon the other Bishütan, the brave 
And good, not seeking this world’s weal and woe: 
In front is glorious Asfandiyár, 
The man in whom the wheel of fortune joyeth, 
In whom the hearts of good men live; the bad 
Turn slaves through terror of his scimitar.” 
The valiant eavalier passed through the gate. 
Asfandiyár looked after him and, when 
He had departed, said to Bishütan :— 
“I must admit his manliness and prowess. ` - 
[ have not looked on such a horse and horseman, 
And know not how this combat will result, 
A mighty elephant upon Mount Gang 
Is he if he doth come forth armed to battle. 
His Grace and comeliness surpass his height, 
Yet will he see, I fear, a fall tomorrow. 
The Glory of his countenance inflameth 
My heart, but still I will not sever it 
V. 168 From our just Sháh's behest, When Rustam cometh 
‘ * Beo Vol. L pp. 134, 133. * Bee Vol, ii. p. 102 seq. 


» P Ys. v^ Lj "wq Wh P = M" 
E -X v - i Y = 
Tols D D » " d Í k 


ls GUSHTASP 
Upon the tield tomorrow I will dim 
His day.” 


Said Bishütan: * List to my words: 
Isay to thee, my brother! do not so. 
I said to thee before, I say again, 
And will not purge my heart of what is right, 
Aggrieve not any, for a noble man 
Will not submit to injury and wrong. 
Take rest tonight and at tomorrow's dawn 
Go unattended to his palace, there 
Let us enjoy some days of happiness, 
And answer every question that he raiseth. 
Among the mighty and among the mean 
No good is done that is not done by him. 
He will not turn away from thy commands, 
For I perceive that he is true to thee. 
Why struggle so in vengeance and in wrath ? 


Wash vengeance from thy heart, ire from thine eyes.” 


Asfandiyár returned this answer: “ Thorns 
Are growing in the corner of the Rose-bed."! 
He said moreover: “Surely these thy words 
Become not a professor of the Faith! 
If thou art minister of all Írán, 
The heart, the ears, and eyes of valiant men, 
Canst thou approve a course however wise 
That bringeth injury upon the Shah? 
Then all my cares and toils have turned to wind, 
And all the doctrine of Zarduhsht is wrong, 
Which teacheth us that those who disobey 
The Sháh's commands shall have their place in Hell, 
Thou bid'st me oft: * Be disobedient, 
Reject thou the commandment of Gushtásp.' 
Thou sayest it, but how can I convert 
Yea into nay through any words of thine? 
If thou hast fears about my person I 


1 Of the court, iw. my own people are turning against me. 


P 
ctm 


P n jet "- | 
J N = 


218 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ — D 
! Now will relieve thee of them. No one dieth 7 a 
— V.1685 Save at his fated time, and wholly then t 
D One that hath made no name. Tomorrow thou ^ 
E Shalt see my dealings on the battlefield 
nw. With this brave Crocodile," e 
| n Said Bishütan :— : i 
, * Thou talk'st so much of fight, O chief! because * 
Ke The foul Iblis! hath ceased to wish thee ill | | 
a" Since thou cam’st hither with the sword and mace. T 
A Thou hast given the Div an entry to thy heart, > 
UN And hearkenest not to me, thy counsellor, | 
B- I see thy heart obscured, thy head fulfilled n 
E With strife, and rend my clothes, Oh! how can I E 
K Relieve my heart of terror once for all ? | A 
ES Of two such men, such warriors and brave Lions, 
m How ean I know which body will go under?" i 
k Still vapouring though full of misery M 
E. The noble prince returned him no reply. "d 
ü $ 20 
Now Rustam coming to his palace saw r 
k No remedy but fight. Zawára came A 
i And found him wan and gloomy. Rustam said :— $ 
E “Go? bring mine Indian sword, cuirass, and helm b 
E Of battle, bring my bow and massive bards, | 
p My lasso, mighty mace, and tiger-skin," 2 
E € Zawira bade the treasurer produce v 
: What Rustam named, who, seeing his fi¢hting-gear, 
Cried with a sigh and with dejected head :— 
^O war-cuirass! thou hast had rest awhile 
n From fight; but now a fight confronteth thee. 
Y. Prove strong and lucky wear for me at all times. 
Ve ! Cf. Vol. L. p. 70. * Reading with C and P. 


A Es! D 


GUSHTÁSP. 
Oh! what a battlefield is this, for roaring 
"Two Lions, valiant both, will meet in battle! 

And how now will Asfandiyár proceed, 

And show what sport amid the blast of war?" 

When Zál heard Rustam's words the old man's brain. v. 1686 

Grew anxious, and he said: “Famed paladin! 

What words are these that make me dark of soul ? 

Since first thou mounted'st on the battle-saddle 

Thou hast been single-hearted and sincere; 

It hath not irked thee to obey the Sháhs. 

I fear me that thy day is near its close, 

And that thy star is falling into sleep, 

That this will overthrow the race of Zal, 

And cast our wives and children to the dust, 

If thou art slain in battle by the hand 

Of such a youth as is Asfandiyár, 

Zábulistán will have no land or water 

Left, and our eminence will be engulfed ; 

While if mishap through this befalleth him 

Not o'en thy fame exalted will be left thee, 

For they that tell hereof will shatter it, 

And say : *"Twas he that slew the youthful prince 

For having spoken to him seurvily.’ 

Now either stand before him as his liege, 

Or, if thou wilt not do so, quit thy home. 

Seek some obscure retreat unknown to him 

That no one in the world may hear thy name, 

For such an evil act would gloom thy soul. 

Beware then of this monarch of the world, 

Buy back again thy words with toil and treasure, 

Prefer brocade of Chin to battle-ax, 

Prepare gifts also for his troops, and use 

Thy riches to redeem thyself from him. ^ 
As soon as he departeth from the Hírmund 5 
. Mount lofty Rakhsh and, feeling no misgivings, 
Attend Asfandiyár upon his journey 


"i-is Mw* 4 
b ' : 4 P d A »" [ 
i< aa 


OF FIRDAUSE 


220 THE SHAHNAMA 
That thou mayst see the Sháh's face once again. 
How shall he aet ill when he seeth thee ? 

Will wrong become the monarch of Írán ?" 


“O ancient hero!” Rustam answered him, 
“Take not such things so lightly. Now have I 
Been long a man and known much good and ill. 
I reached the dívs within Mázandarán, ! 

I fought the horsemen of Hámáüvarán, * 

| fought, Kámiis too* and the Khán of Chín, * | 
Although earth trembled underneath his steed. 
Now if I flee Asfandiyár do thou 

Resign the flowers and palace of Sistan. 

With God, the Fosterer, to aid shall I 

Quail at Gushtasp and at Asfandiyár ? 

Old as I am yet on the day of battle | 

I will bring down the orbed moon's head to dust. 
What are a hundred mighty elephants, 

Or fields of men, when on the battle-day 

I don my tiger-skin? Thou speak'st of prayers: 
I have not spared them and have read to him 
Subjeetion's roll. He doth misprize my words, 
And turneth from both wisdom and my counsel ; 
But now if he will stoop his head from Saturn, 
And give me salutations heartily, 

I will not grudge him gems or other treasures, 
Or mace and sparth and coat of mail and sword is 
But all that I can say hath no effect, 

And in our talk we merely clutch the wind. 
Tomorrow, if he is resolved to tight, 

Have not thy heart in pain about his life, 
Because I will not grasp my trenchant sword, 
But with my lasso take his noble head : 

I will not wheel about upon the field ; i 
He shall not feel my sparth or spear-thrust; I 


! Vol. ii, p. 57 aeg. * HM. 95 seq. 
= Jd, iii. 188, * Id. 230, 


‘aos 


ig 
si — ER 


; B e ^ n. b» Bes t E f - E "T x + = ‘ T - [^w M LJ 
wc AP tim » e er a T " 4 
e 7 a 7 d f GUSHTÁ 5 7 i » EH aS r à 


Will eut off his retreat, eluteh him amain 
About the waist, and hug him from the saddle, 
Bestow on him the kingship of Gushtásp, 
Will bring and set him on our splendid throne, V. 1688 
And afterward fling wide the treasury's door. 
When he hath been my guest three days and when, 
Upon the fourth, the Lustre of the world 
Hath doffed the robe of lapis lazuli, 
And when the Cup of Topaz showeth, forthwith 
In company with him will I regird 
My self, set face toward Gushtásp, will set 
‘The prince upon the famous ivory throne, 
Will crown him with the heart-delighting crown, 
Gird mine own loins before him as a slave, 
And only seek to carry out his will. 
Thou knowest, thou rememberest my brave deeds 
Performed before the throne of Kai Kubád, 
Yet now thou biddest me to skulk away, 
Or yield me unto bonds if I am bidden !” 
Zál smiled to hear the words that Rustam spake, 
And shook his head awhile in meditation, 
Then answered Rustam, saying: “O my son! 
These words of thine have neither head nor tail, 
And only lunatics on hearing thee 
Could give assent to thy distempered speech. 
Thou art Kubád when seated on a mountain 
In dudgeon, lacking throne, crown, wealth, and treasure. 
= Oppose not then the Sháh, a chief and one 
i With rede and ancient treasures, or one like 
Asfandiyár, whose name Faghfür of Chín 
Inseribeth on his signet. ‘I will take,’ 
Thou sayest, ‘from the saddle to my breast 
Asfandiyár and bring him to Zál's palace '! 
d No man advanced in years should speak like that; 
22 Haunt not the portal of thine evil star. 
— Now have I told thee what my counsel is, 


jen S, 


M 


æ A | 


222 — — THE SHÁHNÁMA OP FIRDAUSE ` 
As thou dost know, O leader of the people [^ 7 s T n 
He spake, stooped to the earth, praised the Almighty, — 
And said: “Thou Judge supreme! avert from us - 
The ills of fortune!” 
Thus he made request 
Until the sun rose o'er the mountain-crest. 


j 21 

How Rustam fought with. Asfandiyár 
When day came Rustam donned his coat of mail 
With his protecting tiger-skin withal, 
He tied his lasso to the saddle-straps, 
He mounted on his elephantine steed, 
And, having bidden Zawára come, held talk 
At large about the troops, and said : ^ Depart, 
Be marshal of the host, and take thy station 
On yonder sand-hills,” 

So Zawára went, 


And mustered all the troops on the parade 

To lead them to the field. When matchless Rustam 
Came from his palace, spear in hand, they all 

Blessed him, and said : * May charger, sparth, and saddle 
Ne'er lack thee." 


Rustam followed by Zawára, 
His second in the state, went to the Hírmund : 
The soldiers vaunted but his soul was sad. 
His brother and the troops both halted there, 
But he advanced toward the Íránian host, 
First saying to Zawára privily :— 
" E'en at this present I would stay from battle 
The hands of that beguiling reprobate, 
And make a pathway for his soul to light, 
But still I fear that we shall come to blows, 
And after that I know not what will be. 
Remain thou here and keep the troops in hand ; 


- They both went forth to battle in such wise 


GUSHTÁSP.- 
I go to see what fortune will bring forth. 
If I shall find him wroth then by that token 
I shall not call chiefs from Zábulistán, 
But shall engage with him in single combat ; 
I would not have one of the army injured. 
Victorious fortune always favoureth ^. X. 1690 
The man whose heart is on the side of justice. " 
He passed the river, mounted on a height, 
And marvelled at the process of the world ; 
He called and said: “O brave Asfandiyar! 
Thine opposite hath come; prepare thyself.” 
Asfandiyür, when he had heard the words 
Which that old, battle-seeking Lion spake, 
Laughed and replied: “Behold I made me ready 
Or ever I arose from sleep.” 
. . . He bade 
To bring helm, breastplate, spear, and ox-head mace. 
These brought, he clothed his shining breast and donned 
His Kaian easque, then bade his sable steed 
Be saddled and led forth, which when he saw 
He in the might and puissance that he had " 
Stood on the ground the butt-end of his spear, 
And vaulted to the saddle as a leopard 
Will leap upon the back of onager 
And madden it. The soldiers marvelled at him, 
And called down blessings on their noble chief, 
Who went and, drawing nigh to peerless Rustam, 
Saw him upon his charger unattended, 
And spake thus from his steed to Bishütan :— 
“T want no friend or mate in fighting him, 
For since he is alone I too will go 
Alone and mount upon yon lofty height." 


That thou hadst said: “The world hath done with 
feastings.” 
As they drew near, the old man and the young, 


"A "a 


- Pe 


m 


Both noble Lions nnd both paladins 


Their steeds neighed; thou hadst said:“Thefieldisrent!” 


And Rustam shouted: “ Happy, prosperous prince ! 
Be not so wroth and fierce, but hear for once 

A wise man’s words: if thou desirest fight 

And bloodshed, and such stir and strife, permit 
That I lead forth the horsemen of Zibul 

With hauberks from Kibul upon their breasts, 
And do thou likewise bid the Irdnians, 

That men may know the jewel from the mite. 

Let us bring them to battle on the field, 

And for our own parts tarry for a while ; 

Thus there will both bloodshed and fierce fighting 
According to thy wish." 


Replied: “Why talk so much to no avail? 

Thou camest from thy palace at the dawn, 

And from this lofty hill didst challenge me. 

Why now hast thou befooled me? In good sooth 


Thou hast perceived that thine own fall is near. 
Why should I fight against Zábulistán ? 

Why should Írán fight with Kábulistán ? 

May no such disposition e'er be mine. 

It is not in accordance to my ereed 

That I shall give Iranians to be slain, 

Or crown myself. I go forth first in battle 
Albeit to leopard’s claws. If thou hast need 

Of helpers send for them; such help not me. 
will help me in fight and fortune smile 


. Upon mine undertaking. Thou dost challenge, 


And I am willing; let us fight it out 

Between ourselves unhelped, and we shall then 
See if the charger of Asfandiyár 

Will go toward the stable riderless, 

Or if the charger of the challenger 

Will turn toward Rustam's halls without its lord.” 


E I! JA > t E E 2 m i d 2 
- P LU D E " rs - A »" 
LI em E E - 1 g H a t + - E l | a) jJ a: j B rd "rw "n 
^ a g "wr wr S bs - H e a 
m 1 - p i n Ao = x a. > 
p E f 
* 


D Ad | | GUSHTASP aas 


The combatants agreed that none should aid. 
Long while they fought together with their spears, 
And from their breastplates poured down blood amain. 
__ Thus they continued till the spear-points brake, 
— And they were forced to use their scimitars ; 
_ They grew more instant, wheeled to left and right, 
- And, when their stout swords shivered with the 
strokes, 
n Reached out and, drawing sparth from saddle, showered 
a Blows as stones shower a-down a precipice. 
Wa 
" 
* 


Y. 1692 


Wroth as two lions raging they belaboured 
Each other. When the hafts brake, and their hands 
Were weaponless, they clutched their leathern girdles 


— A While both their speedy chargers strove to fly. 
—  — Asfandiyár grasped Rustam’s belt, and Rustam 
Asfandiyirs. Those two exalted heroes, 
— — Both men of elephant-body, tugged amain, 
Yet neither Lion budged. Both cavaliers 
Were all distraught, both steeds fordone, with fight. / 


. — Within their mouths the blood and dust were blent 
. ... In foam, on man and horse the mail was rent. 
NU | 
=- 3 Ts 
" 
u § 22 
M How the Sons of Asfandiydr: were slain by Zawára 
p amd Fardmarz 


When Rustam, son of Zal, had tarried long, 

Because the heroes fought no little while, 

Zawira led his troops across the river— 

An army seared of heart and keen for strife. 

He cried to the Íránians: * Where is Rustam ? V: 1603 
Why should we hold our peace on such a day? 

It was to fight with Rustam that ye came, 

Came to the gullet of the Crocodile, 

E I. * Reading with P. 

| YOL. V. P 


b. 
L A" 


CS Om aat a 


- 
f 
~ 


226 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


Ye would bind Rustam's hands! No sitting still 
For us on such a field!" 
He cursed and spake 
Unseemly words, A famous cavalier, 
Son of Asfandiyár, was full of wrath 
Thereat. He was a youth hight Nüsh Ázar, 
A leader of the host and masterful. 
This noble raged against the Sigzian,! 
And loosed his lips to utter foul abuse. 
* Fool of a Sigzian!" said he, “ know’st thou not 
That every one that cherisheth the Faith 
Rejecteth all self-seeking manfully, 
And liveth on the bidding of the Sháhs ? 
Asfandiyár, the hero, ordered us 
Not to engage in battle with you dogs. 
Who then will disobey his hest and counsels, 
And who be bold to break his fealty ? 
But if ye will commit this wickedness, 
And take upon you to provoke a fight, 
Ye shall behold for once what warriors are, 
When armed with swords and spears and massive 
maces.” 

Zawira gave his troops command : “ Lay on, 
And crown yon chieftains with a crown of blood.” 

Forth to the front he went, the din of war 
Rose, and they slew Íránians numberless, 
While Nüsh Azar, on seeing this, made ready, 
Bestrode his noble dun and, Indian sword 
In hand, advanced. Upon the other side 
A warrior came—the refuge of the host, 
A chief. That famous one was named Alwá— 
À dashing eavalier and masterful. 
Him Nuüsh Azar espied, drew sword, and smote 
His foeman's head, who came from steed to dust. 
Aawira spurred his warhorse, neared, and cried 

! Bee Vol, il. p. 100, nate, 


LJ i e Pe " p. 1 E 
» $ 4 = 


GUSHTASP 


To Nash Azar: “Him hast thou slain and now 
Stand fast thyself! I do not call Alwá 
A horseman.” - 


With his spear he smote the head 
Of Nush Azar, who tumbled to the ground. 
The day turned 'gainst his host when he was slain. 
His youthful brother Mihr-i-Nush, a swordsman, 
In tears, with troubled’ heart, in dudgeon spurred 
His elephantine steed and from the centre 
Advanced before the lines with lips a-foam 
Through anguish, while for his part Faramarz, 
Like maddened elephant, came, Indian sword 
In hand, and closed with noble Mihr-i-Nüsh 
While both hosts shouted. Both antagonists 
Were noble youths—a prince and paladin ; 
They were as fierce as lions combative, 
And with their swords belaboured one another. 
Though Mihr-i-Nüsh was active on the field 
He had not strength to fight with Farámarz. 
The young prince raised his sword and hoped to lay 
His famous foeman's head upon the dust, 
But struck the blow upon his own steed's neck 
So that it eame down headlong to the ground, 
And Farimarz dispatched him thus unhorsed ; V. 1695 
The battlefield was reddened with his blood. 
Now when Bahman beheld his brothers slain, 
And all the soil beneath them turned to mire 
With gore, he came up to Asfandiyar, 
When he was in the hottest of the fight, 
And said to him: “O ardent sire! a host 
Of Sigzians hath come forth to strive with us! 
Thy two sons—Nùúsh Ázar and Mihr-i-Núsh— 
Have yielded wretehedly their lives to them. 
Thou fightest here while we are in distress, 
Our youths and princes shrouded by the dust. 

1 Reading with P. 


rs 


TE TTE "e 
5 M CUM T" TERES 1 
228 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ A + oe 
~ © NS 
Eternal shame will rest upon our race D 
Through what these fools have done." uA 


The shrewd chiefs heart — 


Was full of rage, his lips were full of sighs, a 
His eyes of tears. “O offspring of the Div!” = / 
He said to Rustam, “ wherefore hast thou left x + 


The common path of right? Didst thou not say :— 

‘I will not bring the army to the fight’? 

Thou hast no sense of honour and of shame. 

Hast thou no reverence for me or God? 

Dost thou not dread His Day of Reckoning? 

Dost thou not know that they who break their pledge 

Will have no worship with their fellow-men ? 

Two Sigzians have slaughtered my two sons, 

And still they turn not from their blind misdoings.” 
When Rustam heard it he was sorely troubled 

And, trembling like the branches of a tree, 

Swore by the Shah's own life and head, by sun, 

And by the scimitar and battlefield :— 

“I never gave commandment for this fight, 


Nor do I praise the doer of this thing, mi ; 
Now will I bind my brother's hands, who showed A 
The way to ill, and bring too Farimarz a 


In manacles before the pious Shah. 

Slay them in vengeance for thy noble sons, 

And be not wroth for this insensate act!” 
Asfandiyár replied: * For me to shed 

A snake's blood for a peacock's is not well 

Or seemly, and it hath no precedent 

With mighty Sháhs. Thou villain! guard thyself 

Because thy time hath eome, and I will mix 

Thy thighs and Rakhsh's body with mine arrows, 

As milk is mixed with water, that no slave 

Henceforth may dare to shed his master's blood. 

If thou survivest I will bind thy hands, 

And carry thee forthwith before the Shah ; 


PN 


reat" = 


— —— 
pm 


GUSHTASP "TW "ass 


. But if thou diest by mine arrow-points 


Take it in vengeance for my noble sons." 
Then Rustam: “ What availeth all this talk 

Unless it be to make our glory less? 

And now to God, to every good the Guide, 

Turn thee for shelter and in Him confide.” 


$ 23 

How Rustam fled to the Heighte 
They took their bows and shafts of poplar wood ; 
The sun's face lost its lustre ;! but, while Rustam 
And Rakhsh both suffered injury whenever V. 1697 
A shaft was loosened from the prince's hand, 
The shafts of Rustam injured not the prince, 
And noble Rustam, in bewilderment 
At such a contest, said: “The warrior, 
Asfandiyár, hath got a form of brass !"* 

When Rakhsh was growing weak beneath those 
arrows, 
And neither horse nor warrior were whole, 
The rider lighted wind-like from his steed, 
And set his noble face toward the heights, 
While wounded Rakhsh went on his homeward way, 
And so became a stranger to his lord. 
The blood was pouring down from Rustam’s body, 
That Mount Bístün was weak and all a-tremble. 
Asfandiyár laughed out at seeing it, 
And cried : * O famous Rustam ! why hath strength 
Departed from the maddened Elephant ? 
Why is the iron Mountain pierced by arrows ? 
Oh! whither have thy mace and manhood gone, 
Thy Grace divine and eminence in war? 
Why hast thou fled away and scaled the heights 
* Six couplets omitted. * Bee p, 19. 


* Asfandiyár abode awhile, then cried :— 


vat "ZU E z [m P 
THE hy OF FIRDAUST 


Because thou heard'st a mighty Lion's voice? 

Art thou not he that caused the divs to wail, 

And singed wild beasts with flashes from his sword ? 
Why hath the elephant of war turned fox, 

And grown thus impotent in fight ?” 


Zawüra 
Perceived the step of glossy Rakhsh, who eame y 


From far all wounded, and the world grew dark * 
Before his eyes. He went forth to the scene P 
Of strife, lamenting, and beheld the form tes 


Of elephantine Rustam wounded thus, "m 
With all the wounds undressed, and said to him :— ; 

* Up, mount my steed, and I will don for thee E 
The breastplate of revenge.” „i 


He answered : * Go 
To Zál and say: ‘The glory of Sám's race 


Is gone, Look to the remedy therefor, Y. 
And for these grievous wounds. If I survive A 
Tonight the arrows of Asfandiyár b- 
It will, I wot, O Zàl! be even so e 
As if my mother gave me birth today!’ 
When thou hast gone let Rakhsh be all thy care, P 
And I will follow though I tarry long.” t 
Zawara turned away intent on Rakhsh. ws 


" Famed Rustam ! wherefore standest all this time 
Upon the heights? Who will direct thy steps? 
Fling down thy bow, put off thy tiger-skin, 

And loose the girdle from thy loins. Repent, — 
And yield thy hands to bondage ; so shalt thou 
Receive from this time forth no hurt from me. 

I will conduct thee wounded to the Shah, 

And not impute thine acts to thee as crimes ; 
But if thou wilt fight on then make thy will, 
Appointing somebody to be the marchlord, 

And ask God's pardon for thine own ill-doing : 


1 ian > 
- Sa d "A 
E " Le 
Th h A iw 


f E ~ s 
ym 


t 4 i = - " 
e 
"i 


í a E 
P URN 


Ana | 
*d 1 à V, g 
4 m ie , RA 


a 


J T. 


> et ey 
. & v 4 
Y 


À rum 


"M 
le 


JT 


Ec TE may be that He will forgive thy faults, 
And guide thee when thou quit'st this Wayside Inn." 


P 


Lr UM 


yer p x “ers 
p 


tem m n E 
GUSHTASP 


* 


But Rustam made reply: “It is too late, 
Our hands are shortened both for good and ill; 
Go back to thine own troops, for none is fain 
To fight when it is night, and as for me 
I will return to mine own palace now, 

Refresh myself and slumber for a while, 
Bind all my wounds and call some of my kin— 
Zawüra, Farámarz, Zál, and the others 


- Of name—and now I will perform thy hest, 


For loyalty to thee is righteousness,” 
Asfandiyar, the brazen-bodied, said :— 
" Old, self-willed reprobate! thou art a man, 
À great and strong one, knowing many shifts, 
And charms and counsels. I have marked thy false- 
ness 


All through, and long to see thine overthrow, 


But still I give thee quarter for this night ; 
Thou shalt go home; but dally not with guile. 
Do as I bid and never bandy words 
With me again,” 
Then Rustam answered him :— 
“I will make shift to charm my wounds away,” 
He left the presence of Asfandiyár, 
Who watched to see how Rustam would proceed. 
Sore wounded as he was he crossed the river ; 
Those arrow-wounds enforced him to disp 
When he had crossed the riverilike a boat 
He prayed to God for succour for his body, 
And said: “O Thou, the just and holy Judge ! 
If I shall perish by these wounds of mine 
What noble will avenge me, who take up 
My rede, my courage, and my precedents ? " 
Asfandiyár was gazing after him, 
And, having seen him reach the farther bank, 


Y. 1699 


Da 


Pas 


din. 


z " . "4 » 
» a i E w i e E x 


‘aye THE Sd OF TED Us Y 


Exclaimed: “They say that he is not a man ! 
He is a mighty, raging Elephant!” 

Then added in amaze: “Almighty Judge! 

It was Thy will to make him of this sort, 
Who art the Author both of earth and time.” 

He went his way, and from his tent-enclosure 
Rose wailings. Bishútan came out lamenting 
For gallant Nish Ázar and Mihr-i-Nüsh. 

The prince's camp-enclosure was all dust, 

And every noble had his raiment rent. 

Asfandiyár, alighting from his steed, 

Clasped to his breast the heads of those two slain, 

And said: " Alas ye two young warriors ! 

Where have your souls gone from these forms of yours ? " 

Then said he unto Bishütan: “ Arise, 

And weep no more the slain. I see no good 

In pouring blood. We should not cling to life. 
We all are born to die, both old and young, 

And when we pass may wisdom succour us.” 

: On teaken litters holding golden coffins 

He sent those corpses to the Shih, his sire, 

The master of the crown, and with this message :— 
" This branch of thy design hath borne its fruit. 
Thou didst launch forth the boat upon the water 
By seeking for the servitude of Rustam, 

When thon behold'st the bier of Nish Azar 

And Mihr-i-Nüsh be less intent on wrong. 

The bull Asfandiyár is in his hide: 

I know not what the future may bring forth." 

He sat upon his throne in grief and mourning, 
And'pondered Rustam’s words. Then spake he thus 
To Bishütan: " The Lion cowereth 
Before the brave man’s grip. Today when I 
Saw Rustam like an elephant in stature 
And mien I offered praise to holy God, 

The Author of our hopes and of our fears, 


La » 
^ ^ 
4 po? 
= j 
h > 
1 * 


ba 


i 
— 4 4 
tt 
-r è 
1 "^e. 


Lig ee 
ved: 


Lad = 
å i 


EAR 


4 


P 
TE 


— 


* 


a es 
+ 4 9 Pe. 


in» 


Who in His providence had formed him thus, 
Praise be to Him, the Maker of the world! 
What actions once were Rustam's, he that used 
To drop his fish-hook in the sea of Chín 

And land the crocodile, and with his breath 
Suck in the leopard on the waste!! Yet I 
Have wounded him with arrows till the ground 
Hath come to be a puddle with his blood, 

He left the field afoot, he scaled the heights, 
And armed and armoured hurried to the river. 
He made the passage, wounded as he was, 


With all his body full of arrow-heads ; 
But still methinketh, when he reacheth home, 
His soul will quit it and to Saturn roam." 


! The same eollocation of consonanta means *' breath " and “ tail" 
in Persian. Mohl renders "qui a saisi sur la plaine la queue des 
léopards.” Rustam, however, seems to be compared to a dragon 
drawing in its prey with its breath. Cf. p. 127 for a similar passage, 
where Mohl translates " Les chevaur cherchaient h se soustraire à 
lattaque du dragon; mais il nsplra avec son soule et les engloutit 
ainsi que le chariot," and where the same expression is used of 
Asfandiyür himself in the preceding couplet: “ He drew his breath,” 
Similarly in Gurgsír's account of the same dragon (p. 126), Mohl trans- 
lates *qui attire aveo son haleine le poisson de la mer." When. 
however, Asfandivir subsequently speaks of his adventure with this 
dragon to Gurgsir (p. 128), Mohl translates: * O homme vil de corps 
et sans valeur, regarde oe vaillant dragon qui enveloppait aes victimes 
avec sa queue,” and in the passage referring to the dragon of Tis 
(p. 203): IL nttirait avec sa queue l'éléphant.” Again, in the account 
of Gushtásp's encounter with a dragon (vol iv. p. 346), he translates: 
“Quand le dragon vit s& haute stature, i] essaya de l'attirer vers Ini 
aveo sa queue." Mohl therefore wavers. The mode of defence adopted 
by the two heroes—a long sword in one case and a chariot bristling 
with sword-blades in the other—seems intended to counteract what 
appears to be somewhat a characteristic of the eastern dragon. “ Brom 
Candahar is reported a Mussulman legend, which relates that in pagan 
times the king of Candabar found himself compelled to promise a young 
girl every day to n dragon. Accordingly à maiden mounted on a camel 
was daily sent to the monster. As soon as the camel arrived within 
a certain distance of the cavern where the dragon dwelt, the latter 
inhaled its breath with such force that its prey was inevitably drawn 
into its throat." —HLP, iii. $6. 


4 "T. E i 


Y. 1702 


"AC Au ee 
ETT te» ASTE 


s ^ 
234 THE SHARNAMA OF FIRDA UST 


$24 
How Rustam took Counsel with his Ain 

Now Rustam for his part regained his palace 

Where Zil beheld him in his grievous plight. 

Zawüra too and Farámarz shed tears, | 

And were consumed by sorrow for his wounds. 

Rüdába, when she heard the others' cries, 

Began to pluck her hair and tear her face. 

Zawára eame and, loosing Rustam’s girdle, 

Removed his armour and the tiger-skin, 

While all the skilful gathered at the door, 

But Rustam bade to take them first to Rakhsh. 

Shrewd Zél plucked his own hair and laid his cheeks 

On Rustam's wounds, and cried: “ That I should live 

Hoar-headed to behold my dear son thus!” 

Then Rustam said : “What booteth to bewail ? 
That which hath happened is by Heaven's decree. 
The matter now confronting me is harder, 

More fearful to my soul, for ne'er have I 
Beheld the equal of Asfandiyár, 
The brazen-bodied, for courageousness 
In time of battle. I have roamed the world, 
And wotted both of sights and mysteries. | 
I took the White Div by the waist and hurled him 
Down to the ground as 'twere a willow-branch.* 
My poplar shafts were wont to pierce an anvil, 
And scorn a shield. I often hit with them 
The armour of Asfandiyár, but they 
Proved thorns 'gainst stone! Again, the pards on 
seeing | ; 
My sword would skulk beneath the rocks and yet 
It. will not cleave the breastplate on his breast, 
Or e'en a bit of silk upon his head! 
! Reading with P. * Vol. ii, p. 60. 


J 
es 
L4 E 
Ae # 


“23° 
> 
nm E 
i 


"du ‘oj dicit ^ a 
pela aes EA 


€ u—————" 
anA 2. -— * 
ba ie 


- 
ie 


-I 


> 


d 


i 


4 


A 


Uo 
ym 7^ d , 
r4 


— e 
"E 
í 
: l 
y 4 
b è 
y . 
| 
-| " + 
NE r 
B 
> 
Sn e 


à 4 ‘a 


However oft too I excuse myself, 


3 4 ue — A 7 " 
Ld B 


GUSHTASP 


That I may warm that stony heart of his, 
He only seeketh to disgrace me more 


‘By words and actions full of arrogance. 


Thank God! night came, and when he could not see 
I 'scaped this Dragon’s claws. I know not how 
To seek release. Mine only course, methinketh, 
Tomorrow will be to abandon Rakhsh, 
And fare to where the prince will find me not. 
Let him strew heads within Zibulistan : 
He will grow weary of the work in time, 
Though not soon sick of ill.” 

“al said: “ Alas! 
My son! give ear and, talking done, grow calm. 
There is a way from all contingencies 
On earth save death which is itself a way. 
I know of one resource; use it, for I 
Herein will summon the Simurgh to aid. 
If for the future she will be my guide 
Our lands and borders will be saved for us; 
Else by Asfandiyár that brave knave's hand 
Will utter ruin come upon our land." 


$ 25 

How the Simurgh suecoured Rustam 
When both were set on this bold project Zil, 
The well-beloved, went to a lofty height, 
And carried from the palace censers three 
Containing fire. With him went three brave sages. 
Now when the wizard reached the top he drew — * 
Forth from brocade a plume of the Simurgh 
And, having raised a flame within a censer, 
Consumed therein a portion of the feather.’ 
Whenas the first watch of the night had passed 

* Cf. Vol i. pp. 246, 320. 


V. 1703 


Ra T "t 


g " " A à 


236 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE - : e 
T Thou wouldst have said: “The face of air is darkened!” — | 


And gazing from the eminence Zal saw it 

Filled with the fluttering plumes of the Simurgh. 

Just then the bird, surveying from the air 

And seeing fire ablaze with Zal before it 

Set seared and sad, swooped down upon the dust. 

Beholding the Simurgh he praised her greatly, 

And did obeisance, filling up the censers 

With incense in her presence and surcharging 

His cheeks with his heart's blood. Said the Simurgh :— — 

"What wast, O king! that made thee need these 

fumes ? " ji 

Zil answered : “ May the ills that miscreants ` 

Have brought upon me fall upon my fees. 

The body of the lion-hearted Rustam 

Hath been bewounded, and my care for him 


Hath fettered me. In short his injuries 2M 
Raise fears about his life; none hath beheld 


A man so stricken; thou wouldst say withal EE 
That Rakhsh is dying, he is writhing so | 
With anguish from the shafts. Asfandiyar : 
Hath come against our land and knocketh only =e 
Upon the door of war. He asketh not 
For land or crown or throne, but he would have -ES 
The tree yield root and fruit!” 1 
Said the Simurgh - 
“© paladin! be not distressed hereat, 
But let me presently see Rakhsh and him, 


Then Zil sent one to Rustam with these words :— 
" Make shift, I prithee, to bestir thyself, 
And give, moreover, orders that they bring 
Rakhsh instantly to the Simurgh.” 
When Rustam 
Came to the height to that sagacious bird 
She said: “O mighty, raging Elephant ! 


>» T 


GUSHTASP 


By hand of whom hast thou grown thus distressed ? 
Why didst thou seek to fight Asfandiyar? 
Why kindle thine own breast ?” 
Zál said to her:— 
" () queen of love! sinee thou hast shown to us 
Thy holy face, say where shall I take refuge 
If Rustam be not healed? They will lay waste 
Sístán, will turn it to a lair for leopards ` 
And lions, and our race will be uprooted. 
Now in what manner shall we deal with Rustam ?” 
The bird surveyed and sought to heal the wounds, 
Sucked them and, drawing forth eight arrow-heads, 
Stroked with her feathers on the wounded parts, 
And Rustam was restored to might and Grace. 
She said: “Bind up thy hurts and for a week 
Shun danger, moisten one of these my feathers 
With milk and stroke therewith inside the wounds.” 
She in’ like manner having called for Rakhsh 
Employed her beak on him to make him whole, 
And drew out from his neck six arrow-heads— 
All that there were. Rakhsh neighed. The crown- 
bestower 
Laughed for delight. 
"O elephantine one!” 
Said the Simurgh, “thou art most famed of folk. 
Why didst thou seek to fight Asfandiyar, 
The brazen-bodied and illustrious ?” 
He made reply: * He talked of binding me, 
Else I had not been vexed, but I prefer 
Death to disgrace if in my present straits 
I shun the fight." 
She said: “"Tis no disgrace 
To stoop to dust before Asfandiyár, 
Because he is a warrior and a prince, 
A holy man who hath the Grace of God. 
If thou wilt make a covenant with me, 


V. 1705 


" rn » 
à — re 
"i 4 ^ » E 


ad LÀ LÍ! 
-2 Ww A H 


M £r oA M CE "nm T WAA vi _ - 
A OF FIRDAUSE = = = = — 


238 THE SHÁHNÁ! 
Be penitent for having sought the fight, 
And seek not triumph o'er Asfandiyár, 
The work of war or moment of revenge, 
But make submission to him on the morrow, 
And proffer soul and body for his ransom, 
Then if his time be coming to an end 
No doubt he will regard not thine excuses. 
For such an issue I will furnish thee, 
And sunward thy head.” 
When Rustam heard 

He joyed and put away all thought of strife; 
He said: “I will not disobey thy words 
Although the air rain swords upon my head." 

Said the Simurgh to him: “I will declare 
In love to thee the secret of the sky: 
Whoe’er shall shed that hero's blood will be 
Himself pursued by fortune. Furthermore 
Throughout his life he will abide in travail, 
Find no escape therefrom, and lose his treasures, 
Be luckless in this world and afterward 
In pain and anguish. If thou art content 
With this, and present triumph o'er thy foe, 
I will reveal to thee this night a wonder, 
And bar for thee the lip from evil words." 

"I am content,” he said to her, “and now 
Say what thou wilt. We leave the world behind 
As our memorial and pass away, 
And there is nothing left of any man 
Save the report of him. If I shall die 
With fair fame all is well with me, but fame 
I must have for the body is for death,” 1 

"Go and mount Rakhsh," she said, *and choose a 

dagger, 
A bright one,” 
When he heard he girt his loins 
' Rustam’s speech is inserted from C. Both Y and P omit it. 
a 


E - , - Te 4 " ACA PA A | - , e 
E / GUSHTÁSP 239 


| <2 e _ And, mounting, fared until he reached the sea,’ 3 


= And saw the air all dark with the Simurgh. 
pS When Rustam had arrived beside the waters 


1. ja That noble bird descended, and he saw, — 
| . . Sprung from the soil and with its head im air, : 
a. A tamarisk, and on it perched that fowl 

— Amperious. She showed him a dry path, 
| E The scent of musk exhaling from her breath, 

JY — — "Then bidding him come near to her she stroked 


X The feathers of her wing upon his head. 
“ Choose out the straightest, longest, slenderest bough,” 


= She said to him, “ because this tamarisk "^ 
— — — Ts fatal to Asfandiyár; so hold not 
TE This wood of small account. Let it be straightened 
= Before the fire, choose good, old arrow-heads, 
Y And fit it with three feathers and two points. 
—  ^Now have I shown thee how to work him woe." 
When Rustam had cut off the branch he went i 


Back from the sea toward his hall and hold 

With the Simurgh still acting as his guide, V. 1707 
And, as she kept above his head, she said :— 

" Now when Asfandiyár shall seek to fight thee 
Petition him, ask him to do thee right, b 
And knock not at the door of loss. Perchance E 


Soft words may turn him, and he may recall E 
Old times, for thou hast lived so long in toil Fi 
And hardship for the great. If he reject 2 
All that thou canst advance, and if he treat thee A 
As one of little worth, string up thy bow, 

And set thereon this shaft of tamarisk, | 


! Of Chín, according to C; or the legend may owe somewhat to 
Zoroastrian mythology (see Vol. i. p. 235) ; or the lake of Sistán may 
be intended. Asfandiyir's fate lay in Sistan, and it seems fitting that 
both the fatal shaft and the user of it should come from that neigh- a 
bourhood, The tamarisk, with its long, slender branches, grows there, 
and is the only shrub that aspires to be called a tree in that other. 
wise treeless region, 


Y. 1708 


240 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


This fosterling of bane. Aim at his eyes, 
Straight, with both hands as one that worshippeth 
The tamarisk, and Destiny will bear 
The arrow thither straight. He will be blinded, 
And fortune rage at him.” 

Then the Simurgh, 
Embracing Zal as woof embraceth warp 
In bidding him farewell, took flight content, 
While Rustam, when he saw her in the air, 
Took order to prepare a goodly fire, 
And straightened out thereby the tamarisk wood. 
He fitted arrow-heads upon the shaft, 
And fixed the feathers to the finished haft. 


§ 26 
How Rustam went back to fight Agfandiyar | 
When dawn brake from the heights, and dark night's 
waist 

Arched, Rustam armed himself and much invoked 
The Maker, When he reached the famous host, 
For war and vengeance on Asfandiyár, 
The hero, good at need, eried in reproach :— 
"O lion-heart! how long wilt slumber thus, 
For Rustam hath already saddled Rakhsh ? 
Arouse thee from thy pleasant sleep and close 
In fight with Rustam eager for the fray.” 

Now when Asfandiyár heard Rustam's voice 
All earthly weapons seemed of no avail, 
And thus he said to Bishütan: * The Lion 
Adventureth not against a sorcerer, 
I did not think that Rustam would bear home 
His coat of mail, his tiger-skin, and casque, 
While as for Rakhsh, his mount, its breast was hidden 
By arrow-heads! Now I have heard that Zal, 
The devotee of sorcerers, extendeth 


» i | | ^. t us | at 
M GUSHTÁSP 241 


_E’en to the sun his practices, surpasseth 
All warlocks in his wrath, and sorteth not 
With wisdom.” 
Bishütan replied 1n tears :— 
“Be care and wrath thy foe's. What hath come o'er 
thee 
That thou art wan to-day? Thou must have passed 
A sleepless night! What in the world can ail 
These heroes that they must increase such toils ? 
Whose fortune hath gone halt I know not I 
In that it ever bringeth feud on feud!” 
Asfandiyár, the hero, donned his mail, 
Advanced toward famous Rustam and, on seeing 
His face, exclaimed: “ Now may thine honour perish! 
Perchance thou hast forgot, thou Sigzian! 
Thy foeman’s bow and breast? Thou hast been healed 
By Zál's enchantments ; otherwise the charnel 
Had sought for thine embrace. But thou hast gone, 
Hast used unholy arts, and hastenest thus 
To fight with me. Today will I so maul thee Y, 1709 
That Zál shall see thee living never more." 
“© Lion never satiate of fight!” 
Said Rustam, “reverence holy God, the World-lord, 
And fling not heart and wisdom to the abyss, 
I have not come today for fighting’s sake, 
But for excuse, for honour, and for fame. 
Thy whole contention with me is unjust, 
And thou art closing both the eyes of wisdom, 
By just Zarduhsht and by the good religion, 
By Nush Azar, the Fire, and Grace divine, 
By sun, by moon, and by the Zandavasta, 
I prithee turn thy heart from mischief's path. 
Keep not in memory the words that passed, 
Though they would cause a man to burst his skin. 
Come then and see the place of mine abode, 
For thou hast lost all power upon my life. 
VOL. V. Q 


b 


deal ui. 


i 
, m i 
E N T ASi M < 
* 


in 


2413 


I will unlock the door of ancient treasures, 
Which I have gotten me,in my long day, 


And load them on mine own beasts, Give thou them 


All to thy treasurer to drive before him. 

Moreover I will travel by thy side 

And, if thou biddest, go before the Shih. 

Then if he slayeth me I am content, 

Content too if he biddeth me be bound. 

Consider what the wise man said of old :— 

‘May none be wedded to a luckless star.’ 

I will try all expedients in the hope 

That fortune may distaste thee with this strife.” 
Asfandiyir replied: “I am not one 

To use deceit in time of war or fear. 

Thou pratest much of hall and house, much lavest 

The face of peace. If still thou wilt live on 

First wear my chains.” 


Then Rustam loosed agai 


His tongue, and said: “O prince! renounce injustice. | 


Blast not my name, degrade not thine own soul, 
For ill alone can come of this contention. 

A thousand royal jewels will I give thee, 

As well as erown with armlet and with earrings ; 
Will give to thee a thousand sweet-lipped youths 
To minister to thee by day and night ; 

Will give a thousand damsels of Khallukh 

To be the glorious graces of thy crown; 

I will unbar for thee the treasury 

Of Sim, the son of Nariman, and Zl, 

O peerless one! amass thee all their wealth, 

And from Kabulistin bring men withal 

To do thy will and chase thy foes in fight. 

Then like a bond-slave will I go before thee, 

Go to the presence of the wreakful Sháh ; 

But, O my prince! put vengeance from thy heart, 
Make not thyself an ambush for the Div. 


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ = = 


big eh er TCU" 


E 
A 


— GUSHTÁSP 243 


€ 
m =a 


— — Thou hast another power than that of bonds; 3 

~ Thou art my monarch and thgu servest God. $ 

o Doth ill become thee, for thy bonds would shame me s 
-= Forever?” i 
"T But Asfandiyár replied :— 
* “ How long wilt thou talk idly? ‘Quit; thou sayest, T 
vm ‘God's path and what the veteran Shah commandeth.’ 

— — Put he that goeth from the Shah's behest i 

: Defraudeth God. Choose either fight or bond, d 


E 
= And cease to utter words that are but fond.” 


AA d 
= | § 27 : » 
ET 3 ux 
p How Rustam shot Asfandiydr in the Eyes with an Arrow 


When Rustam knew that humbleness availed not V. 1711 
Before Asfandiyár he strung his bow, 
And set therein the shaft of tamarisk 
With baneful points, and said : * O Lord of sun 
And moon, who makest knowledge, Grace, and strength 
To wax! Thou seest my mind pure in intent, 
My soul, and self control, for much I toil 
To turn Asfandiyár from strife. Thou knowest HE 
That his contention is unjust, and how V. 1712 
His traffic with me is all fight and prowess; * 
So visit not my crime with retribution, A 
O Maker of the moon and Mercury!" 

Asfandiyár perceived him tarrying long 
From strife and said to him: “O famous Rustam ! 
Thy soul is satiate of fight, but now | * 
Thou shalt behold the arrows of Gushtásp, 
Luhrásp's own arrow-heads and lion-heart," ` 1 

Then Rustam quickly fitted to his bow b 
The tamarisk-shaft as the Símurgh had bidden ; b 
He struck Asfandiyar full in the eyes, 1 
And all the world grew dark before that chief ; 


o 


V. 1713 


244 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


The straight-stemmed Cypress bent, intelligence 

And Grace abandoned him. The pious prince 

Fell prone, his bow of Chách dropped from his hands, 

He clutched his black steed by the mane and crest ; 

The battlefield was reddened with his blood. 

Said Rustam; “Thou hast brought this evil seed 

To fruit! Thou art the man who said’st: ‘My form 

Is brazen, and I dash high heaven to earth.’ 

Yet through one arraw hast thou turned from strife, 

And fallen swooning on thy noble charger. 

Moreover now thy head will come to dust, 

And thy fond mother's heart will burn for thee." 
Meanwhile the famous prince had tumbled headlong 

Down from his black steed's back and lay awhile 

Till he recovered consciousness, sat up 

Amid the dust, and-listened. Then he seized 

The arrow by its end and drew it ont, 

Drew it out soaked in blood from point to feather. 
When presently the tidings reached Bahman :— 


“The Grace divine of empire is obscured,” 


He went to Bishütan and said : “ Our war 
Hath wedded woe, the mighty Elephant's body 
Hath come to dust, and this distress hath turned 
The world to an abyss for us.” 
They both 

Ran from the army to the paladin, 
They saw the warrior with his breast all blood, 
And with a gory arrow in his hand. 
Then Bishütan cast dust upon his head 
And rent his raiment, uttering loud cries; 
Bahman rolled in the dust and rubbed his cheeks 
Upon the yet warm blood, 

Said .Bishütan .— 
“ What chief or noble knoweth this world’s secrets 
Since an Asfandiyir, who for the Faith 
So bravely drew the scimitar of vengeance, 


I GUSHTÁSP 
Who purged the world of foul idolatry, 
And never set his hand to work injustice, 
Hath perished in the heyday of his youth ? 
The head that wore the erown hath come to dust, 
While o'er the bad man's head, who bringeth anguish 
Upon the world and harroweth the souls 
Of noble men, unnumbered seasons pass, 
Because he seeth not mischance in war." 
The two youths took his head pon their breasts, 
And wiped away the gore, while Bishütan, 
With cheeks all tears of blood and heart all anguish, 
Made lamentation over him, and said :— 
^ Alack, O warrior Asfandiyar, 
The world-lord and the progeny of kings! 
Who tore this warrior-mountain from its place? 
Who overthrew this furious Lion? Who drew 
The tusks redoubted of this Elephant, V. 1714 
And flung him to the waters of the Nile? 
Is our race blasted by the evil eye, 
For evil surely is for those that do it? 
Where are thy courage, thine intelligence, 
Thine usages, thy strength, thy star, thy Faith ? 
Where is thy splendid equipage in war? . 
Where is thy gracious voice at festivals ? 
What time thou purged'st all the world of foes 
Thou feared'st not the lion or the div, 
And now, when thou shouldst profit by the work, 
I see thee bite the dust!” 
Asfandiydr 
Made answer wisely: “Shrewd and prosperous man! 
Distract not thou thyself before me thus, 
For sky and moon allotted me this fate. 
Dust is the dead man's couch ; bewail not then 
So grievously my slaughter. Where are now 
Hüshang, Jamshíd, and Farídün? They came 
From wind and vanished in a breath! Thus too 


Y, 1715 


i} 
re i 
"—- 


A— mr 


/ A — ae eee run 

246 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ | 

Have mine own ancestors, pure-born, eleet, 

And high and holy, gone and left their room 

Tous. None stayeth in this Wayside Inn, 

In this world have I toiled exceedingly 

In public and in private to establish 

The way of God and wisdom as the guide 

Thereto, but when through me the enterprise 

Had grown illustrious, and when the hands 

Of Ahriman were barfed from wickedness, 

Fate stretched its lion’s claws and brought me down 
As though an onager! And now my hope 

Is that in Paradise my heart and soul | 
May reap what they have sown. The son of Zál 24 
Hath slain me not by prowess. Mark what I 
Have in my hand—a shaft of tamarisk ! 

That wood hath closed my lifetime by the practice 
Of the Simurgh and of resourceful Rustam, 
While Zál himself, the adept in grammarye, 
Performed the sorceries,” | 

Spake of that matter Rustam writhed and wept 
For agony and, coming to the prince, 
Stood pierced by grief and very sorrowful, 
Then spake to Bishiitan and said in anguish :— 
“One should acknowledge prowess in a man, 
"Tis as he said; he did not change from prowess 
To guile. In sooth 'twas through some felon diy 
That fate assigned to me this grievous.lot, 
For since for prowess’ sake I girt my loins, 
And sought to fight with chiefs, I have not seen 
Arrayed in hauberk and with war-cuirass 
A cavalier like to Asfandiyar, 
When, after trial of his bow, his breast, 
And grip, I left the battle in despair 
I sought a shift in mine extremity 
To save my head from him for good and all. 


‘Had fortune been with him how could a shaft 


Et: 
— ud 


pants T 


I set his destiny upon my bow, 
And when his day had come I shot the arrow. 


Of tamarisk avail me any whit ? 

We all shall have to leave this darksome earth ; 
No caution will prolong our lives one breath. 
Good sooth, for this I shall be marked for ill, 
And live in story with the tamarisk still!” 


§ 28 
How Asfandiyir told hia last Wishes to Rustam 


Then thus to Rustam spake Asfandiyar :-— V. 1716 
* My time is at an end. Avoid me not, 
Arise and come to me, since all our schemes 
Are changed, that thou mayst hear my last reque:ts 
Upon my son's behalf—my chiefest, Pearl. 
Use all thine efforts to establish him, 
Endowing him with greatness as his guide." 
The matchless Rustam hearkened to his words, 


_____ Dismounted, wailing, and approached on foot. 


He poured down tears of blood for very shame, 
And muttered to himself lugubriously. 
When Zil gat tidings of that battlefield 
He set forth from his palace, like the wind. 
Zawára too and Farámarz went forth, 
Like madmen, toithe indicated spot. 
A wail ascended from that scene of strife :— 
* The faces of the sun and moon are darkened.” 
Zál spake to Rustam, saying: “O my son! 


— — I weep for thee betimes in pain of heart, 


For I have heard from readers of the stars, 
From archimages, and the men of lore :— 

* The slayer of Asfandiyár shall be 

The prey of fortune, while he liveth see 
Both pain and stress, and pass to misery :' " 


V. 1717 


OMISIT REALE 
! å 4 v a 5 


248 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSi 


Thus spake Asfandiyér to Rustam, saying :— 
“Thou art not author of mine evil fortune. 
This was my fate; what was to be hath been ; 
None knoweth the secrets of yon azure vault, 
Not Rustam or Simurgh or bow and arrow 
Have robbed my body of its life in battle, 

For that hath been the doing of Gushtásp, 

And little blessing hath my soul for him. 

He said to me: *Go and burn up Sístán ; 

From this time forth I would have no Nímrüz.' 
He laboured that the army, crown, and treasure 
Should stay with him, and I abide in toil ; 

And now do thou with loving heart receive 
From me the charge of this my noble son, 
Bahman, wise, watchful, and my minister, 

And what thou hearest from me bear in mind. 
Keep him in gladness in Zdbulistan, 
Remembering what evil men may say, 

Instruct him to array the host and order 

The chase, the combat, and the festival, 

The revel, minstrelsy, and polo; make 

A great man of him both in deed and word. 
Jámásp, once famed, and may he prosper never ! 
Said that Bahman would keep my name alive, 
And be a greater king, and that his seed 

Would be illustrious and deserve to reign.” 

The matchless Rustam, hearing, stood and laid 

His right hand on his breast in acquiescence, 

" E'en if I die I will not fail herein,” 

He said, “but bring thy words to pass, will set 
Bahman upon the famous ivory throne, 

And crown him with the heart-illuming crown." 

Asfandiyár, on hearing Rustam's words, 
Replied to him: “O ancient paladin! 

Know this, and God Himself will bear me witness 
Who is my leader to the good religion, 


Ec 
| b T ME 
SPEM 
| vi T 


af wo 


GUSHTÁSP 249 


That in despite of all thy noble acts, 

And of thy head exalted by brave deeds, 

Thy fame now hath been turned to infamy, 

And earth grown clamorous for me. Herefrom 

Crooked grew thy spirit's lot; so willed the Maker.’  — V. 17:8 
Then spake he thus to Bishütan: “ A shroud 

Is all I need of this world. When I quit 

This Wayside Inn take order for the host, 

And lead it home. When thou hast reached Írán 

_ Say to my sire: ‘Since thou hast gained thine end 

Dissemble not; the age is all thine own; 

Thy name is written now on every signet. 

I had some hope of better things from thee, 

Though such a crime befitted thy dark soul, 

Reformed by me and by the sword of justice 

The world was purged of miscreants’ villainies, 

And, with the good Faith stablished in Írán, 

Both majesty and kingship called for me; 

But thou didst speak me fair before the nobles, 

And privily dispatch me to be slain. 

Now thou hast gained thy hearts desire herein; 

Take order then and sit with heart at ease, 

And, since thou art secure, ban death itself, 

And hold high revel in thy royal halls, 

The throne is thine, the stress and toil are mine; 

Thine is the crown and mine are bier and shroud. 

What said the rustic minstrel old and tried ? 

“Death followeth hard upon the arrow-point." 

Trust not in treasure, crown, and throne. My soul 

Will have its eyes on thy career, and when 

Thou comest, and we go before the Judge 

Together, we will plead and hear His sentence.’ 

When thou hast left Gushtasp say to my mother :— 

* This time 'twas Death that challenged me to fight, 

And mail is only wind before his-arrows, 

For they would penetrate a mount of steel. 


V. 1719 


I PEE E " F 
Ee- E O 


250 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 
O loving mother! follow me with speed ; 
Grieve not for my sake nor aggrieve thy soul. 
Show not thy face unveiled before the folk, 
Or lift the winding-sheet to gaze on mine, 
For such a sight will but increase thy woe, 
And men of wisdom-will commend thee not,’ 
Say likewise to my sisters and my wife, 
Those wise and noble dames who shared with me 
My private hours : ‘ Farewell for evermore! 
Ill hath befall'n me through my father's crown; 
To him my death hath been the key of treasures. 
Behold I have sent Bishütan to him 
To shame his gloomy soul.' " 

He spake, then gasped :— 
" This wrong hath come upon me from Gushtásp." 

With that his pure soul parted from his body, 
Which lay shaft-stricken on the darksome dust, 

While Rustam, with his head and face besmirched 
With dust, rent all his raiment o'er the prince, 
And cried: “ Alack! O valiant cavalier, 

Whose grandsire was a warrior Shah, whose sire 
A king! I had a good name in the world, 

But through Gushtásp mine end is infamous." 

Long while he wept and then addressed the slain :— 
“O monarch peerless, matchless-in the world ! 
Thy soul hath passed to Paradise above, 

And may thy foeman reap what he hath sown.” 

Zawára said to him: “Make not thyself 
Dependent on the mercy of this prince, 

Hast thou not heard this adage fromthe sage, 
Who quoteth from the sayings of old times :— 
‘If thou shalt take a lion's whelp to rear 
‘Twill grow ferocious when its teeth appear, 
And, soon being set on prey and waxen tall, 
Will fall upon its feeder first of all' ? 

Both sides will be perturbed by evil wrath, 


Í m 
P NE aS 


Hr 


BE. 


vr 
i 


$ 
a « d d oe =~ ane dd 


, Ls 
i bul m D " 
r- - 
» P A "Y" d 


T "- 
3 
NE 


4 
i 


* fI 
er 


-- 
"bo 


Whence first the ill will come upon Írán, 


Since such a monarch as Asfandiyár 


Was slain; then thou wilt see thine ownjill day, 
Zübulistin will suffer from Bahman, 


MN" The veterans of Kábulistán will writhe. 


Mark this, that, when he cometh to be king, 
Forthwith he will avenge Asfandiyár." 

. To him said Rustam: “ No one, bad or good, V. 1720 
Can strive with heaven. So will I choose my course 
That wisdom, seeing, will restore my fame. 
Fate will avenge if he doth wickedly, 

But do not thou provoke the evil eye." 


$29 
How Bishitan bare the Cojin of Asfandiyir to Guehtdsp 


Then! Rustam made a goodly iron coffin ; 
He draped the outside with brocade of Chin, 


_ And smeared with pitch the inside, sprinkling it 


With musk and spicery, He made withal 


_ The winding-sheet of gold-inwoven brocade, 


While all that noble company lamented. 


= = When he had shrouded that resplendent form, 
. And crowned it with a turquoise coronet, 
— "They sealed the narrow coffin and the Tree 


So fruitful and so royal was no more. 
Then Rustam chose him forty camels, each 
Clad in a housing of brocade of Chin. 

One of the camels bgre the prince's coffin 


— — With camels right and left, and guards behind 


With hair and faces rent, One theme alone 
Possessed their tongues and souls—Asfandiyár. 
Before the cavaleade went Bishütan. 
Asfandiyir’s black chargerjhad been docked, 


— — Both mane and tail, its saddle was reversed, 


V. 1721 


252 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


And from it there were hung his battle-mace, 
His famous helm withal, surtout and quiver 
And head-piece. They set forward, but Bahman 
Stayed at Zibul and wept with tears of blood. 
Him matchless Rustam carried to the palace, 
And tendered as his life, 
News reached Gushtásp :— 
" The famous prince's head hath been o'erthrown ! " 
He rent his robes, his erowned head came to dust, 
A bitter wail rose from Írán, the world 
Rang with Asfandiyár. Throughout the realm, 
Where'er the tidihgs came, the nobles doffed 
Their erowns, Gushtásp exelaimed : *O pure of Faith! 
Time and the earth will not behold thy like, 
For ever since the days of Minüchihr 
There hath not come a chief resembling thee 
Who fouled the sword and fulled the Faith, and kept 
The world on its foundations." 
In their wrath 
The nobles of Írán put off all awe 
For Shih Gushtisp, and cried ; “Thou luckless one ! 
To save thy throne thou sentest to Zábul, 
For slaughter there, the great Asfandiyár 
That thou mightst don the erown of all the world. 
May thy head shame to wear the crown of Sháhs, 
Hot-foot thy star desert thee!” 
In a body 
They left the palace, and the monarch's crown 
And star were in the dust, 
Now when the mother 
And sisters of Asfandiyár had heard, 
They came forth from the palaee with their daughters, 
Unveiled, with dust-fouled feet, and raiment rent. 
When Bishütan came weeping on/his way, 
And after him the coffin and black steed, 
The women hung on him, wept tears of blood, 


‘And cried: “Undo this narrow coflin’s lid, 


P 4 "m d E 

i a bl ror 15. 

E T "s j bL d P 
i ’ 


GUSHTASP 


Let us too see the body of the slain.” 
He stood among the women, full of grief, 
Mid groans and sobs and beatings of the cheeks. 
Then said he to the smiths: “ Bring sharp files hither, 
For this isi Resurrection Day to me.” 

He oped the covering of the narrow coffin, 

And gave fresh cause for weeping. When the mother 
And sisters of Asfandiyar beheld 

His visage steeped in musk, and sable beard, 

The hearts of those chaste ladies crisp of lock v. 
Filled to o'erflowing, and they swooned away. 
Revived, they prayed to glorious Surüsh, 

Departed from the pillow of the prince, 

And went with wailing to his sable steed, 

Whoselneck and head they fondled lovingly, 

And Katáyün flung dust thereon. The prince 

Had ridden that charger on the fatal day, 

And perished on its back. The mother said :— 

* () thou of luckless feet ! the Kaian prince 

Was slain on thee. Whom wilt thou bear to battle 
Henceforth and yield up to the Crocodile?” 

They clasped its neck and strewed its head with dust, 
The host’s cries reached the clouds, and Bishütan 
Approached the palace. Coming to the throne 
He kissed it not, nor did the Shih obeisance, 

But cried : * O chief of chiefs! the sign hath come 
Of thine undoing. Herein thou hast done ill 

To thine own self by robbing kings of breath. 

Both Grace and wisdom have abandoned thee, 

And thou wilt suffer chastisement divine, 

Thy.main support is shattered, famous Shah! 

And henceforth thou wilt grasp but wind alone. 

To keep thy throne thou giv'st thy son to slaughter, 
And may thine eye behold not crown and fortune, 
The world is full of foes and evil men, 


V. 1723 


^ 3 bl m 
5 


ita 


+ 


254 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE 


Thy crown will not endure eternally, 
Abuse will be thy portion in this world, 
And inquisition at the Judgment Day.” 

This said, he turned his face toward Jámásp, 
And cried: “O impious wretch and ill of rede! 
Thou never speakest aught but lying words, 
And thou hast made thy fame by!knavery. 
Thou art the cause of feud between the Kaians, 
And settest them the one against the other. 
Thou canst not teach them aught but wickedness, 

To break away from good and take to ill. 

In this world thou hast sown one seed, and thou 

Wilt reap the fruits in public and in private. 

A magnate hath been slaughtered through thy words: 
Thou-saidst: ‘ The lifetime of the great is over.’ 

Thou didst instruct the.Shih in evil ways, 

Old ill-adviser and malevolent ! 

Thou saidst: ‘ Asfandiyar the hero's life 

Is lying in the grasp of famous Rustam.’ ” 

This said, he loosed his tongue and weeping told 
The counsel and last wishes of the dead, 

And told too how the prince had given Bahman 
To Rustam's keeping. Bishütan told all. 

The Sháh, on hearing those last words, repented 
About the matter of Asfandiyár. 

The nobles having gone forth from the palace, 
Humái and Bih Áfríd approached their sire, 

And in his presence tore their cheeks and plucked 
Their hair in sorrow-for their brother, saying :— 
“O famous monarch ! heed’st thou not at all 
Asfandiyir's decease, who was the first 

To venge Zarir and take the Onager 

Out of the Lion's claws, exacted vengeance 
Upon the Turkmans and restored thy sway ? 
But thou didst bind him at a slanderer's words 
With heavy yoke and iron bars and lasso, 


Bee o eUa 
— While he was in his bonds Luhrásp was slain, 


Se... “My up um s T 
f fii = , 

A x54, " 
= a m ES 


re 


A een 
b ad dud 


- 
E 
ø 


. Our lives were rendered bitter by distress, 


.. Thou sawest what thy son achieved by valour; V. 1724 
He made thy foes breath, vapour, flying dust, 


— But thou.didst send him to Zábul and give him 


- Tt was not the Simurgh or Zál or Rustam 


“Why mourn him sleeping well and happily, 


n B ai A» 
Pr PCIE Ly . Ht ‘ 
' oe Sd. "NE 


dy 


5 
x 
- -J 


And all the army’s fortune overthrown. 
When from Khallukh Arjásp arrived at Balkh 


Us, who had ne'er. appeared unveiled, he bore 
Uncovered from the palace to the street, 
Quenched Nish Azar established by:Zarduhsht, 
And laid his hand upon the sovereignty. 


Restored us to thee from the Brazen Hold, 
And guarded both thine army and thy realm; 


No lack of counsel and of parting words 

With the intent that he should perish there 

To win the crown. The world was grieved and mourned 
him. 


That slew him ; it was thou, so do not weep! 
May thine own hoary beard cry shame upon thee, 
Who, merely in the hope of reigning on, 
Hast slain thy son. There hath been many a world- 
. lord | 
Before thee, worthy of the royal throne : 
They gave not child nor any of their kin, 
Or their allies or household, to be slain." 
Thereat the Sháh spake thus to Bishütan :— 
" Rise and fling water on my daughters’ fire.” 
Then Bishütan departed from the palace, 
And took-the ladies, saying to his mother :— 


Tired of the land and of the lord thereof? 

Why is thy heart in grief on his account, 

For now his conversation is in Heaven ? " 

The mother took her son's rede and therewith 
! Bee p. 92 and note, 


Y. 1725 


256 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Resigned her to the justice of the Lord. 

For one year afterward in every dwelling 
Were wailing and lament throughout Írán ; 
Both morn and eve the folk mourned bitterly 
The tamarisk arrow and Zil’s sorcery, 


§ 30 

How Rustam sent Bahman back to från 
Bahman stayed in Zábulistán, enjoying 
The hunting-field and wine among the roses, 
While Rustam taught that enemy of his 
To ride, to quaff, and play the monarch’s part, 
In all things holding him above a son, 
And, night and day, embracing him-with smiles. 

Now when performance was allied to promise, 
And when Gushtasp had no door of revenge 
Still open, Rustam wrote in deep distress 
Of all the matter of Asfandiyár, 
The letter first called blessings down on those 
Who take excuses and forego revenge, 
Then * God is witness" he went on to say, 
“And Bishütan herein hath been before me, 
How much I pleaded with Asfandiyár 
That so he might abandon thoughts of fight. 
I offered ! him my treasure and my realm, 
But he preferred all trouble for himself. 
His fate was such that when it stood revealed 
My heart was filled with pain and love withal. 
Heaven turned above us to the destined end, 
And Destiny regardeth none, Bahman, 
The atheling, is with me now and he 
Outshineth even mine own J upiter, 
I have instructed him in kingly parts, 
! Reading with P, 


TEM S 


b 


- And paid the debt of thy son's last request 

With wisdom. If the Shah will undertake 

To pardon me, and to forget the past, 

All—soul and body—that I have are his, 

Both crown and treasure and both brain and skin.” 
Whenas this reached the monarch of the world 

He was perturbed in presence of his lords, 

And Bishütan came forth to testify, . 

Repeating all the words that Rustam used, 

His grief, his counsel, and his last appeal, 

And goodly offer of his realm and treasure, 

The famous Sháh was reconciled to Rustam, 


b ld 
"A 


AX" 
i dunt, 


A. 
d 


= 


NA 


mien 


He wrote forthwith a letter in response, 

He set a tree within the garth of greatness, 

And said thus: “ From the circle of high heaven 
‘What time calamity is imminent 

Can any keep it back by circumspection 
_ Though much inclined to wisdom? — Bishütan 
Hath told me what thy real intentions were, 
_ And by thy goodness thou hast touched my heart; 
But who escapeth from the turning sky ? 
— A wise man dwelleth not upon the past ; 
_ Thou art as ever thou hast been or better; 
— Thou art the lord of Hind and of Kanniij. 
Ask whatsoever thou desirest more 
_ By way of throne and signet, sword and casque." 
— As bidden by Gushtásp the messenger 
_ Conveyed that answer quickly. It rejoiced 
_ The famous paladin who felt his heart 
Meanwhile young prince Bahman 

Grew into lofty stature ; he was wise, 

Instructed, masterful, and shone with more 
Than royal Grace and state. Jámásp, aware 
That both for good and ill the sovereignty 

YOL. V. R 


E TT GUSHTASP T 


And ceased thenceforth to inflame his heart with sorrow. 


V. 1727 


v "w^ F 
~~ x à l LI 
» Í » 


258 Usi " | 


Would come upon Bahman, said to Gushtüsp :— 
“() Shih most worshipful! regard Bahman. 
He hath the teaching that his father wished, 
And hath arrived at man’s estate with lustre ; 
But he hath tarried long abroad, and none 
Hath read to him a letter from thyself. 
Thou shouldest write to him a letter like : 
Attree within the garth of Paradise. 
What other memory is left to thee 
To banish sorrow for Asfandiyár ? " 
This thing seemed good to Shih Gushtasp who gave 
Command to glorious Jámásp, and said :— 
" Indite me now a letter to Bahman, 
And one to glory-loving Rustam, saying :— 
‘Thank God, O paladin of paladins! 
That thou hast made us glad and cleared our mind, 
Our grandson, who is dearer than our life, 
Is more renowned for wisdom than Jámásp, 
And hath acquired with thee both skill and counsel, 


Send of thy favour home. 


TRO ^ S. TWR 
THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA 


That to Bahman 

Ran thus: “ When thou hast read this quit Zábul, 
For wo desire to see thee; so make ready, 
And tarry not.” 

Shrewd Rustam, when the seribe 
Had read the letter to him, was rejoiced, 
Of what he had within his treasury— 
Surtouts and daggers made of watered steel, 
Bards, bows and arrows, sparths and Indian hangers, 
Fresh aloes, camphor, musk, and ambergris, 
Gold, silver, jewelry, brocaded stuffs, 
With raiment in the piece, slaves of ripe age 
And unripe, golden girdles, silvern bridles, 
And two gold cups a-brim with precious stones, 
All these he gave Bahman, and they that bore them 
Accounted for them to his treasurer. 


E 
PW IW he A R mJ 
Lj " , 
e-P “vo 7 "Vw TUM v 
i * 


| GUSHTÁSP "SS 
^ The matchless Rustam journeyed with Bahman "E 


? — 'Two stages, then dispatched him to the Shih. 
s The face of Sháh Gushtásp was dim with tears 
What time he gazed upon his grandson's face. 
He said: “Thou art Asfandiyár himself, V. 1728 » 
Thou art like no one in the world but him." 
| The Shah bestowed on him the name Ardshir, q 
On seeing what great courage he possessed.' 
—. He was a stalwart warrior, strong of hand, 
À wise man, well-instructed, and devont, Sp 
And with his fingers dressed beside his legs 
His fists extended lower than his knees? 
The Sháh awhile made proof of him and marked j 
His bearing. On the field, at feast, and chase * 
He proved a warrior like Asfandiyár, e. H 
And never tried the patience of Gushtásp, | 
Who ever gazed upon him with emotion, 
And said: * The World-lord gave him unto me, | 
Gave him to me because I was in trouble. . Ag 
May my Bahman live evermore since I "3 
i Have lost my noble, brazen-bodied son." 
e The conflicts of Asfandiyár are o'er; 
— May our Sháh's head live on for evermore, | 
His heart from travail ever be at rest, ng 


" À 
"-Am - 
e" ilá a 

C | 


dec M Are t 
| x x J” y e 2 p rA d 


me 


— And may the age conform to his behest, " 

— Glad be his heart, his erown uplifted high, 3 

— And round his foe's neck may his lasso lie, 

= | Ardashir is a shortened form of Artakhshathra, ic, “ great king,” 

© but in native etymology was explained to mean “angry lion,” 

a, i). * Ben p. 281. " 

i E - Li 

| i 

y 
rr ? 


* 
PART IV 
THE STORY OF RUSTAM AND SHAGHÁD 


The poet tells how he came to hear the story of the death of 
Rustam, which is as follows :—Zil had by a female slave a son 
named Shaghid and, as his horoscope was pronounced to be an 
unfavourable one by the astrologers, sent him to be educated at 


Kábul. There he married the king of Kibul's daughter, in con-- 


sequence of which event the king anticipated that Rustam would 
remit the yearly tribute due from Kabul, but as this did not prove 


to be the case, the king and Shaghád plot together to bring about: 


the death of Rustam, who perishes accordingly with his brother 


Zawüra, They are avenged by Rustam's son Farimarz. The 


Part concludes with the death of Gushtisp and the succession 
of Bahman as Shih, 


NOTE 


One might gather from Firdausi's aecount of the provenance of. 
this story that he received it personally from the authority whom 
ho calls Ázid Sarv, ùe. Noble Cypress. This, however, does not 
seem to be what the poet meant by his statement. He tells us 


that Ázád Sarv shed lustre on Sahl, son of Mihin, who was no 


doubt his patron, and that, after Sahl's death, we may presume, 
he occupied a similar position in relation to Sahl's son Ahmad.! — 
Ahmad was sometime lord of Marv, and died A.D. 919-920,? about 
twenty years before Firdausí was born. Chronology therefore 
renders it highly improbable, though not impossible, that Firdausi 
and Ázád Sarv ever mot, It is worth noting that the name of 
the king of Yaman, whose daughters married the sons of Faridin, | 
was Sarv, which is clearly fictitious ; also that when Nishirwin, 
whose reign will appear in a later volume of this translation, had 
on one occasion an unpleasant dream, and dispatched agents to 
various regions to find an interpreter, one of them was named è 


pp. 263, 261 * NIN, § 15. 4 See Vol. i. p 178, 
a 


= 
j 


y 


a 


fend ere 
P EU GUSHTÁSP 261 UN 
Asia Sarv, who went to Mary and was the means of introducing 3 
__ Bixurjmihr, the future chief minister, to the notice of the Shih, B 


Tt is not at all unlikely that Firdausi, having on the present w 
occasion to refer to a tradition emanating from Marv, used Sarv, 
as a convenient rhyme word." The poet's meaning is that, instead 
of following on this occasion his usual authority—the modern J 
Persian prose version of the Bastin-nima*—he went elsewhere A 
for his account. In the Bástán-náma, probably, Rustam remained 
. alive till the next reign, and then was slain with all his house by f 
— Babman? Tabari tells us that Bahman, urged on by his mother, . 
— invaded Bistán to avenge on Rustam and his kin the death of E. 
Asfandiyár. Bahman killed Farimarz, Zál, and Zawürna, but Rustam E 
himself was already dead. Mas'üdi says that Bahman made war £a 
on Rustam, and killed him and his father Zil^ With two or more E. 
versions of Rustam's death before him, Firdausi evidently chose 
the most romantic. It was better for the great hero to perish by 
treachery than in the stricken field against such a puny antagonist A 
as Bahman.' Rustam and Zawára therefore are disposed of finally b ¢ 
during the reign of Gushtásp and before Bahman's expedition to 
Sístán takes place, 

We have had already several instances of the enmity between 
brothers so characteristic of Oriental life. We have seen how 
Purmáya and Kaiinüsh attempted the life of Faridtin,’ how Salm 
and Tür slew Íraj and we have probably another example in the 

ease of Gurazm and Asfandiyir! Now we have the fatal enmity 
of Shaghdd against Rustam. It is only fair to add, however, that | 
there are signal instances of brothers dwelling together in unity Um 

 —tg- Rustam and Zawira,” Gushtdisp and Zarir," and Asfandiyár z 

and Bishdtan.™ t 


P 


I 


uu o e 
= 
i 


$1 N 
The Prelude ^ 
The tale of Rustam's slaying I present V. 1729 A. 
. In mine own words but based on document, 
There was an ancient man, hight Ázád Sarv, 


ee 


>$ 


marts 


T Who erst lived with Ahmad, Sahl's son, at Marv. - : 

43 1 Vol. i. p. 74. ? fd. p. 66 seg., but e. NIN, § 15. 7 HM. | 

i | t ZT, L 207. 5 MM, li. 127. * (Cf. p. 186. " 
b T VolL p.160. —* ld. 199. ? p. 78. and ef. p. 12; JZ, 117. 

e " Vo]. ii pp. 11O, 115. 4 Vol. iv. pp. 321, 462, and p. 65. " 


13 Parta II. and III. 


V. 1730 


A n 
"^ bs 
i men 


d ER 
262 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 
À paladin in form and face was he, 
And storied in the royal legendry. 
His head was full of speech, his heart of lore, 
His tongue of phrases of the days of yore. 
From Sám, the son of Narímán, he drew 
His line and many a fight of Rustam's knew. 
What I received from him I will rehearse, 
And interweave it, word with word, in verse, 
If in this Wayside Inn I still shall bide, 
With mind and wisdom acting as my guide, 
I will complete this story of the past, 
And then on earth my record too will last. 
In his name then who hath made earth his own— 
Mahmud, that glory of the crown and throne, 
Lord of Írán, Türán, and Hind, through whom 
The world hath grown to be like silk of Rim! 
He lavisheth his treasures which will be 
Replenished by his fame and policy, 
And he is mighty and in future ages 
Will live upon the lips of all the sages. 
The world is full of his memorials— 
Wars, bounties, huntings, lore and festivals— 
But they among mankind are blest the most, 
Who look upon his crown, his court, and host. 
Mine ears and feet begin to fail at length; 
Old age and want have robbed me of my strength ; 
Misfortune hath so fettered me that I | 
Mourn stress of years and evil destiny ; 
Yet am I ever instant in the praise 
Of our Just, world-lord all my nights and days, 
And all the folk are one with me in that, 
Though faithless and malign, for since he sat 
Upon the royal throne he hath subdued 
The hand of evil and the gate of feud, 
Restraining him that doth presumptuously, 
However overweening he may be, 


| NN 
, m 


E GUSHTÁSP- 

— While bountifully largessing the sage 

— — "That heedeth the prescriptions of his age. 
= [raise him in this world a monument, | 
Which, while men live, shall be still evident Pl 
In this my story of the Sháhs of old, / 
Of bygone horsemen and the great and bold, | 
Compact of feast and fight, of ancient lore + 
And rede, of many a gest of days of yore, p 

Of knowledge, Faith, of scruple and advice, 1 

And guidance furthermore to Paradise. 

Of all the things that earn our monarch’s praise, 


The things of chiefest profit in his days, "d 
This best will serve to keep his memory rife, 1 
And live as part and parcel of his life, E 
And I am hoping.to live too till I D 
Receive his gold that, when I come to die, " 


I too may leave my monument with things 
Drawn from the treasury of the king of kings. 
And now I turn back to the words of Sarv, 

The Light of Sahl, son of Máhán, at Marv. 


§ 2 
How Rustam went to Kedlul on behalf of his 
Brother Shaghdd 


hus saith the ancient sage, that storied man 

Of parts and eloquence :—Behind Zal’s curtains 

There dwelt a slave—a harpist and reciter— 

And this handmaiden bore to him a son 

As radiant as the moon, a horseman Sam 

In form and aspect, and a cause of joy V. 1731 

To all that noble house, The astrologers 

And men of science—chosen cavaliers | 

Both from Kabul and from Kashmir, alike ! 
"The worshippers of God and of the Fire— d 
Went with their Rüman tables in their hands, a 


2 r . i | 
FIRDAUSI —— 


And each one took the aspeet of the sky 

As to its favour toward the little child. 

The gazers found a portent in the stars, 

And looked at one another. Then they said 
To Zál, the son of Sám, the cavalier :— 

" O thou remembered by the stars of heaven! 
We have explored the secret of the sky : 

Tis unpropitious to this little child, 

For when this pretty infant shall grow up, 

And reach the days of strength and hardihood, 
He will destroy the family of Sám, 

The son of Narímán, and wreck their sway. 
Through him Sístán will be fulfilled with uproar, 
Írán embroiled, and all folks' days embittered, 
But afterward his tarriance will be brief.” 

Zil, son of Sim, was grieved thereat, invoked 
The Judge of all, and prayed: “O Guide of men, 
Sustainer of the turning sky, my Refuge 
And Stay in everything, who showest me 
What rede to follow and what way to go, 

And madest heaven and the stars withal, 
Have we misdoubted of such excellence ? 
Be ours contentment, rest, and happiness.” 

The chieftain gave his son the name of Shaghad. 
He kept the child till he was weaned and grew 
Observant, full of charm, and talkative ; 

Then, when the boy was growing strong of limb, 
Dispatched him to the monarch of Kabul, 

Now when Shaghad became a lofty Cypress 

In height, a horseman puissant with the lasso 
And mace, that potentate took note of him, 
Esteemed him fit for royal crown and throne, 
Rejoiced to look on him and on account 

Of his high birth bestowed on him a daughter, 
And with that noble daughter sent besides 

Fit presents from the spacious treasury, 


RÀ 
u 
- - 
17S 
Ww 
t 
M O 


"d 


Tf? 


OSS 


i 
se d doi 
~ d 


LAT 


= 
f 


| 
wl ae 


GUSHTÁSP | 

And guarded him, as he were some fresh apple, 
That ill might not befall him from the stars. 

The nobles of Írán and Hindüstán 
Had much to say of Rustam, for he took 
An ox-skin full of money from Kábul 
Each year as tribute,’ wherefore when the king 
Had made Shaghid his son-in-law he thought 
That Rustam of Zibul would heed no more 
The money from that time; so when ‘twas due, 
And taken as before, Kabulistan 
Was deeply moved. His brother's conduct vexed 


Shaghád who spake not of it publicly, 


But told the king in private: “I am weary 
OF this world’s doings. I can not respect 
A brother who hath no regard for me. 

Not recking whether he be wise or mad, 
An elder brother or an alien, 

Let us concert a plan of snaring him, 

And win us in the world a name thereby." 

They plotted till they soared above the moon 
In their imaginations. Hear the sage:— 
* The evil that men do they live to rue." 

One night until the sun rose o'er the mountains 
Sleep came not to the twain, and thus they said —— 
“We will destroy his glory in the world, 

And fill the heart and eyes of Zál with tears." 

Shaghád said to the monarch of Kábul :— 
“If we would do full justice to our scheme 
Prepare a festival, invite the nobles, 

And call for wine and harp and minstrelsy. 

! Mohl's view is that the tribute was merely a nominal one—an empty 
ox-skin, worth one drachm—but in the latter part of the poem at all 
events ox-skins of coin frequently are mentioned in connexion with the 
payment of tribute, and it seems on the whole more likely that this par- 
ticular ox-skin resembled the others and was not an empty one. Mohl's 
“de ln valeur d'un dirhem" is hardly justified by the original, which 
rather means “in the matter of the money,” i+. of the tribute, 


X “a V. 1733 


- e 
"NX » ir , 

z t - lu 

T da 7 pex e - " - H 


266 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE 


While we are in our cups speak coldly to me, 

And then insult me. I, dishonoured thus, 

Will set forth for Zábulistán, complain 

About the monarch of Kábulistán 

Before my brother and before my sire, 

And call thee both diseourteous and ill-natured. 
Then Rustam will be wroth on mine account, 

And come to our famed city. Then do thou 

Select upon his route a hunting-ground, 

And there dig divers pitfalls large enough | 
To take both him and Rakhsh, and plant long swords, 
With spears and blades of steel with double edges, 
The handles downward and the points erect, 

About the bottoms of the pits. Of these 

It will be better to make ten than five 


- If thou desirest to be freed from care. 


Employ a hundred cunning workmen, dig 

The pits, and keep the seeret from the wind ; 

Then make the surface good and hold thy peace." 
The monarch went, put prudence from his mind, 

And made a feast as that insensate said, 

Invited great and small throughout Kabul, 

And seated them before a well-spread board. 

When they had eaten they prepared for revel, 

And called for wine and harp and minstrelsy. . 
Now when folks’ heads were flown with royal wine 

Shaghád designedly grew insolent, 

And spake thus to the monarch of Kabul :— 

“Tam exalted over all the folk ; 

With Rustam for my brother, Zal for father, 

What nobler strain can any one possess ?” 
The king seemed wroth and said: “Why do I keep 

This matter so long hidden? Thou art not 

By race from Sim, the son of Nariman, 

And neither Rustam’s brother nor his kin. 

Zál, son of Sim, hath never mentioned thee ; 


P n 
gt 
s 


GUSHTÁSP 


How then shall such an one be called thy brother ? 


Thou art slave-born, a menial at his gate, 
And Rustam's mother would not own thy claim." 

Shaghád, as angered at the monarch's words, 
Departed in a passion to Zübul 
With certain of Kabul in company, 

Revenge at heart and sighs upon his lips. 

He reached his glorious father’s court, his heart 
All machination and his head all vengeance. 
Zal at the instant that he saw his son, 

So tall and stately, with such Grace divine 

And thews received him kindly, questioned him, 
And sent him on to Rustam presently. 

That paladin rejoiced at*seeing him, 

To see him sage and of an ardent soul, 

And said to him: “The seed of Sam, the Lion, 
Produceth only strong and valiant men. 

How do things stand betwixt Kabul and thee ? 
What doth he say of Rustam of Zabul?” 

Shaghád replied : * Nay, speak not of the king. 
He used to treat me kindly and to bless me 
Whene'er he saw me; now he seeketh a quarrel 
Against me in his cups and holdeth high 
His head o'er all. He humbled me in public, 
And showed his evil bent. He said to me :— 
How long shall we submit to pay this tribute ? 
Are we unable to resist Sistan ? 
Henceforth I will not mention Rustam ; I 
Am equal to him both in strength and parts.’ 
He further said: ‘Thou art no son of Zal, 

Or if thou art so he himself is naught.’ 


My heart was pained because of those chiefs present, 


And so with pallid cheeks I left Kabul.” 


When Rustam heard it he was wroth, and said :— 


u No matter lieth hidden for all time. 
Have no more thought of him or of his realm, 


+ 1734 


+ 
' 


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSİ 
And may his crown and sovereignty both perish. 
I will destroy him for his words and wring 
His heart and eyes, will seat thee on his throne 
In joy, and lay in dust his head and fortune.” 
He entertained Shaghád for many days, 
Assigned a stately palace for his use, 
And from his army chose the fittest men— 
Those famed in battle— bidding them prepare 
To leave Zábul and occupy Kábul. 
When all was ready, and the paladin 
Freed from anxiety, Shaghid approached 
That man of war, and said: “Think not of fighting 
The monarch of Kabul. Were I to limn 
Thy name on water merely norie would rest 
Or slumber there, for who would venture forth 
To strive with thee, or who abide thy coming ? 
Sure am I that the monarch is repentant, 
That he would fain atone for my departure, 
And even now is sending from Kabul 
Picked chiefs in numbers-to apologise.” 
Then Rustam answered him: “That is the way. 
Against Kábul I need no host of men ; 
Zawira with a-hundred cavalry 
And infantry of name will do for me.” 


$3 
How the King of Kábul dug Pits in the Hunting-qround 
and how Rustam and Zawdra fell. therein 

Now when ill-starred Shaghád had left Kábul 
The monarch hurried to the hunting-ground, 
And took a hundred sappers, men of note 
Among the troops. They honeycombed the chase 
With pits, arranging them beneath the rides, 
And in them set haft-downward hunting-spears, 


D y ati " T 
j ê 


ue 


FONTE "S Cams Ww ca 
GUSHTASP 

Swords, double-headed darts, and scimitars, 

And made a shift to mask the openings 


That neither man nor eye of beast might see them. 


‘When Rustam had set forward in all haste 
Shaghid dispatched a rapid post to say :— 
“The elephantine hero hath come forth 
Without an army. Come to him and ask 
To be forgiven." 

The monarch of Kabul, 

Pleas on his tongue and poison in his soul, 
Came from the city and, on seeing Rustam, 
Alighted from his steed, advanced a-foot, 
Took off the Indian turban that he wore, 
And clasped his naked head between his hands, 
Drew off his boots and in his deep abasement 
Made his eyelashes drip with his heart's blood. 
He laid his cheeks upon the dusty ground, 
Excusing his behaviour to Shaghad, 
And saying: “If thy slave was drunk or crazy, 
And seemed rebellious in his senselessness, 
Vouchsafe to pardon this offence of mine, 
And let me be anew as once I was.” 

Bare-footed, dust on head, his heart all guile, 


> He went before the chief, who pardoned him 
His fault, increased his standing, bade him cover 


His head and feet, mount saddle, and proceed. 
There was hard by the city of Kabul 

A pleasant, fertile spot with wood and water, 

And there they willingly encamped. The king 

Provided provand lavishly and furnished | 


A pleasant banquet-house, brought wine, called minstrels, 
And placed the chiefs on royal thrones. Thereafter 
He spake to Rustam thus: “ When thou wouldst hunt 


I have a district where on plain and hill 
Game throngeth. Wild sheep, onager, gazelle 
Fill all the waste. One with a speedy steed 


V. 1736 


b 


d LI 
LT g'* 
] = bd r 


- 
v. - 


V. 1737 


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE 


Will capture there gazelle and onager; 
One should not overlook that pleasant place,” 

Now Rustam grew excited at his talk 
Of watered plain, of onager, and game, 
For, when one’s fate approacheth, anything 
Will lead the heart wrong and pervert the mind. 
This whirling world of ours behaveth thus, 
And will not make its secrets known to us. 
The crocodile in water, pard on land, 
And battle-braving Lion deft of hand, 
Are in death’s clutch no less than ant and fly; 
To tarry here transcendeth subtlety. 

He bade to saddle the steeds and fill the waste 
With hawks and falcons, cased his royal bow, 
And rode out to the plain, he and Shaghad. 
Zawára too was of the company, 
And many another of their noble friends, 
The retinue were scattered in the chase, 
But all to quarters where no pits were digged, 
While Rustam and Zawira took the path 
Among the pits because Fate willed it so. 
Rakhsh sniffed fresh earth, spun like a ball, and shied, 
Suspicious of the smell, and tore the ground 
To pieces with his iron shoes, Howbeit 
That fleet steed picked his steps right warily 
50 as to make his way between two pits; 
But Rustam's heart. was filled with wrath at Rakhsh, 
And fortune veiled diseretion from his eyes. 
He raised his hunting-whip and in his dudgeon 
Lashed Rakhsh though lightly and thus flurried him 
Just as, environed by the pits, he sought 
To 'seape Fate's clutch. Two of his feet went through; 
He had no purchase; all below was spear 
And sword ; no pluck availed; escape was none; 
And so the haunches of the mighty Rakhsh, 
And Rustam’s legs and bosom, were impaled ; 


^ ^ 


T 
Pw 


Ww 


Ls 


det ~~. i E. an $ n — — & 
* um m MP EM. “un, i. 7. A 
é 1 


7 


ae oa 


^ 


a 
@ 


t^ Sa ^ *v, 


» B E P 
Ah. LR mh 
, "Ti 

- v9 


^ I" 


= 


tE r 


7 m, Tu hos ! , la Tu 


And saw the hostile visage of Shaghád, 

He recognised the author of the plot, 

And that the traitor was his foe, and said :— 

* Q man of black and evil destiny ! 

Thine action hath laid waste a prosperous land ; 
But thou shalt yet repent thee of this thing, 
Writhe for this wrong, and never see old age.” 

The vile Shaghid replied: “The wheel of heaven 
Hath dealt with thee aright. For what a while 
Hast thou engaged in bloodshed, strife, and pillage 
On all sides! Now thy life shall end, and thou 
Shalt perish in the toils of Áhriman." 

With that the monarch of Kábul came up 
Upon his way toward the chase, beheld | 
The elephantine warrior thus wounded, 

With all his wounds unbound, and said to him :— 
u O thou illustrious leader of the host! 

What hath befallen thee on the hunting-field ? 

I will depart forthwith, bring hither leeches, 

And weep in tears of blood on thine account; 

No need to weep though if thou art made whole.” 

But matchless Rustam answered : “Crafty villain! 


- The time for leech is passed. Weep no blood-drops 


For me. Though thou liv’st long the end will come; 
None can evade the sky. My Grace divine 
Surpasseth not Jamshid’s, and he was sawn 
Asunder by a foe," or Faridin’s, 

! Yol i. p. 140. 


GUSHTÁSP PRO MN aZ T 
Lu "UL ! ^ J Tu 
Yet in his manhood he uplifted him, i 
And from the bottom bravely gained the brim. a 
t - 
§4 f 
How Rustam slew Shaghád and died a 
When Rustam wounded as he was looked forth, = 


V. 1738 D 


a LE 
i B * uA is — 


/ ‘a 
THE SHAHNAMA OF 


FIRDAUST 
Or Kai Kubdd's—those mighty, high-born Shah: 
And when had come the time of Siyáwush 
Gurwi, the son of Zira, cut his throat. 
k- Kings of Írin and Lions in the tight 
; Were they, and they have gone. We have outstayed 
them, . 
And loitered like great lions on our way; 
l V- 173 But Farámarz my son—mine Eye— will come 
E And will require my vengeance at thy hands,” 
k He said to foul Shaghád : * Since such an ill 
: Hath come on me unease my bow for me, 
E And let it serve as mine interpreter. 
String it and lay it by me with two arrows, 
Tt is not fit that lions on the prowl, 
And coming on the plain in quest of quarry, 
Shall see me fallen here and sorely wounded, 
For evil will betide me, and my bow 
Will stay their rending me alive. My time 
Is come, I lay my body in the dust.” 
Shaghad drew near, uncased the bow, and strung it. 
He drew it once, then laid it down by Rustam, 
And laughed exulting at his brother's death. 
The matchless hero clutched it lustily, 
Though tortured by the anguish of his wounds, 
What while Shaghád in terror at those arrows 
Made haste to shield himself behind a tree— 
An ancient plane still boughed and leaved but hollow— 
And there behind it skulked the misereant, 
When Rustam saw this he put forth his hands, 
Sore wounded as he was, and loosed a shaft. 
He pinned his brother and the tree together, 
And gladdened in the article of death. 
Shaghid, when he was stricken, cried out “ Ah!" 
But Rustam had not left him time to suffer, 
And cried: “Now God be praised, and I have known Him 
* Vol. ii. 321. 


GUSHTASP 273 


Through all my years, that even when my soul 
Hath reached my lips day hath not turned to night 
O'er my revenge, but He hath given me strength 
Before my death to wreak me on this traitor.” 

He spake, his soul departed from his body, 
And all the folk bewailed him bitterly. 
Within another pit Zawára died ; 
Remained no horseman high or low, beside ? 


35 
How Ad! receive! News of the Slaying of Rustam and 
Audra, and how Farámarz brought their Cojlina and set 
them in the Charnel-house 


One of those noble cavaliers escaped, 

_ And made his way on horseback and a-foot. 

When he had reached Zábulistán:he said : — 

“The mighty Elephant is with-the-dust, 

So are Zawiira and the escort too, 

And not another horseman hath escaped !” 
Rose from 4ibulistin a cry against 

The foe and monarch of Kabulistan, 

4al scattered dust upon his shoulders, tore 

His breast and face, and cried: “ Alas! alas ! 

Thou elephantine hero! would that I 

Were in my winding-sheet! Zawára too, 

That noble warrior, that valiant Dragon, 

That famous Lion! Luckless, cursed Shaghad 

Hath dug up by the roots that royal Tree. 

Who could imagine that a wretched Fox 

Would meditate revenge in yonder land 

Upon a Lion? Who can call to mind 

Such a misfortune, who could bear to hear 

From his instructor that a Lion like Rustam 

Had died in dust and through a Fox's words ? 
YOL. V. 5 


V. 1740 


PA > La ND XP " 1 
" D Wu LN Á >g i B 
" g CE 
a ? T? g4 m 


^ Ls " " i X fw f " S 
274 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSİ 


Why died I not before them wretchedly ? 
Why am I left as their memorial ? 
VY. 174" Why need I life and fame now that the seed 
Of me, the son of Sam, hath been uprooted? 
O chieftain! lion-taker! hero! lord! 
Ù man of valour and world-conqueror !” 
He sent an army under Farámarz 
Against the monarch of Kábul forthwith, 
To gather those slain bodies from the dust, 
And give the world good aguse for sorrowing. 
When Farámarz arrived before Kübul 
He found no man of name within the city. 
They all had fled, the people were in tears, 
And seared with grief for world-subduing Rustam. 
Then Farámarz went to the hunting-ground— 
The plain wherein the pitfalls had been dug. 
He ordered that a stretcher should be brought, 
And to lay out thereon that noble Tree, 
Unloosed that belt which marked a paladin, 
And stripped the body of its royal raiment. 
Then first of all they layed in tepid water 
The bosom, neck, and beard right tenderly, 
Burned musk and ambergris before the corpse, 
And sewed up all the gashes of its wounds, 
Poured o'er the head rose-water and disposed 
The purest camphor over all the form. 
Then, when they had arrayed it in brocade, 
They requisitioned roses, musk, and wine. 
The man who sewed the shroud shed tears of blood 
On combing out that beard of camphor hue, 
Two stretchers scarce sufficed to hold the body ; 
Was it a man’s trunk or a shady tree's? 
V. 1742 They fashioned out of teak a goodly coffin 
With golden nails and ivory ornaments. 
The apertures were all sealed up with pitch, 
Which they o'erlaid with musk and spicery. 


— | GUSHTASP - 275 


a 


SJ Ae uw 


$, 


VAM 


l4 


sa 


Hw 
LRU") 


, 
q 
b 
A 


Am 


- 


m > b 

Fifi s 

E > 
- 


** 
w 


w à 
ys -— 
è 
fp 


y 


- 


T 


z 


L7 


They drew Zawira’s body from the pit, 
Washed it, sewed up the gashes that they found, 
— And placed it in a shroud made of brocade. 
They sought about to find an elmtree-trunk, 
And skilful carpenters went forth and cut 
Some mighty planks therefrom. They drew the body 
Of Rakhsh out of the pit—that steed whose like 
None had beheld on earth—a two days’ task, 
And then they hoised it on an elephant. 
Kübulistán up to Zábulistárms 
Was like a place of public lamentation, 
And men and women stood there in such throngs 
That none had room to move, and so they passed 
The coffins on from hand to hand and thought, 
Such were their multitudes, the travail wind. 
They reached Zábul in two days and a night, 
And neither bier was seen to touch the ground. 
The death of Rustam filled the age with wailing; 
Thou wouldst have sail: “The very waste is moved ! " 
They made the charnel-house within a garden, 
And raised the summit of it to the clouds. 
They set two golden thrones there face to face; 
It was the blesséd hero's place of rest. 
Then all of those who were his servitors, 
The free by birth and honest-hearted slaves, 


_ When they had mingled musk and roses poured 


them 
Out at the elephantine hero's feet, 
And every one exclaimed : “O famous man! 
Why need'st thou gifts of musk and ambergris ? 
Thou hast no part in sovereignty and feast, V. 1743 
No longer toilest in the battle-tide, 
No longer lavishest thy gold and treasure. 
In sooth such things are worthless in thy sight. 
Be happy now in jocund Paradise, 
For God compacted thee of manliness 


V. 1744 


276 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE 


And justice.” 
Having closed the charnel’s door 

They left him there. That famed, exalted Lion 
Had passed away. Beside the door they made 
A tomb for Rakhsh as of a horse upstanding. 

What wouldst thou with this Wayside Inn—this gain 
Of treasure first but in the end of pain ? 
Serve God or Áhriman yet still thou must, 
Though made of iron, erumble into dust, 
Yet lean to good while her@thou shalt abide, 
Elsewhere perchance thou wilt be satisfied. 


§ 6 
How Farámarz lel an Army to avenge Rustam and 

&ew the King of Kábul 
When Faramarz had made an end of mourning 
He led his whole host onward to the plains, 
And having opened Rustam's dwelling-place 
Provided pay and outfit for the troops, 
At dawn the noise of clarions arose, 
Of kettledrums withal and Indian bells. 
Kábul-ward from Zábul he led a host 
That veiled the sun. The ruler of Kabul 
Heard of those chieftains of Zibulistin, 
And massed his seattered troops. The earth grew iron, 
Air azure-dim. He marched 'gainst Farámarz, 
And light departed from the sun and moon. 
When those two hosts confronted, and the world 
Rang with the shouting of the warriors, 
Within the woods the lions lost their way 
Frayed by the throng of steeds, the dust of troops 
A wind arose, the azure dust-clouds whirled, 
And earth seemed one with heaven. Farámarz 
Came forth and charged the centre of the foe, 
The world was darkened by the horsemen’s dust, 


ALS 


GUSHTASP 277 


The monarch of Kabul was taken captive, 
And all his mighty armament dispersed. 
The warriors of Zábulistin like wolves 
Attacked the enemy on every side, 
Pursuing those that fled away, and slaying 
So many warriors and haughty chiefs 
Of Sind and Hind, that all the field turned mire, 
And all the troops of Hind and Sind were scattered 
They gave up land and home, abandoning 
Both wife and child. The monarch of Kabul, 
All bathed in-blood, was flung within the tower 
Upon an elephant, and Farámarz 
Led on his army to the hunting-ground 
Whereon the pits were dug. He bare with him 
The foe in chains and two score more withal— 
Kin to the king and idol-worshippers. 
He tore the monarch's back to strips until 
The bones showed bare, then hung him, foul with dust, 
His mouth all blood, head-downward in a pit, 
And burned his forty kin; then sought Shaghád, 
There made a conflagration mountain-high, 
And burned him with the plane! and ground beneath. 
The troops returning to Zábulistán 
Took all the ashes of Kábul to Zál. 
When Farámarz had eut the tyrant off 
He made a Zabuli king in Kabul, 
Where no one of the royal stock remained 
That had not read the patent of his sword. 
He came back from Kábul all seared and smarting 
The brightness of his days was overcast. 
Zabulistin and Bust lamented loudly, V. 1745 
And no one wore a robe unrent. The folk 
All came to welcome Farámarz again 
With bosoms lacerate and- full of pain. 


! See p. 272. 


V. 1746 


7 ww P mu "Ty 
CP PECIA 


" T 


278 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


57 
How Riidéba lost her Wits through Mourning for Rustam 
For one year there was mourning in Sístán, 
And all the folk were clad in black and blue. 
Upon a day Rüdába said to Zl :-— 
“Lament and wail because of Rustam's death, 
For surely since the sun hath:lit.the.world 
No man hath seen a darker day than this.” 
“O foolish woman!” Zal replied to her, 


‘The pain of fasting passeth that of grief.” 


Rüdába was enraged and swore an oath :— 
“ Henceforth my body shall not sleep or eat. 
It may be that my soul will see again 
The soul of Rustam midst yon company.” 

She fasted for a week that she might hold 
Communion with his soul. Her eye grew-dim 
Through abstinence, her noble body pined. 

For fear of harm slaves followed her abont. 

Ere that week ended she had lost her wits, 
And in her frenzy sorrow turned to feasting. 
She went forth to the kitchen in the night, 
And saw a serpent lying dead in water. 

With trembling eagerness she seized its head, 
And was about to eat. The attendants snatched it, 
And clasping her withdrew her from that place 
Of unclean hands, bare her to her apartments, 
And, having set her in her wonted seat, 
Brought forth a trencher and set food thereon. 
She ate of all till she was satisfied, 

And then they spread soft garments under her. 
She slept and rested from her care and trouble, 
From grief at death and sorrows of possession. 
As soon as she awoke she asked for food, 

And they provided her abundantly. 


GUSHTASP 279 


When sense returned to her she said to Zál :— 
“That word of thine consorted well with wisdom; 
Grief at a death and feast and festival 
Are one to him that eateth not nor sleepeth. 

Our son hath gone and we shall follow him. 
Trust we the Maker's justice.” | 
She bestowed 

Her treasures on the poor, and prayed to God :— 
“O Thou who art above both name and place! 
Cleanse from all fault the soul of matchless Rustam, 
Assign him Paradise for his abode, 

And joyance of the fruits that here he sowed.” 


88 

How Gusahidep gave the Kingdom to Bahman and died 
Since matchless Rustam's life hath ceased to.be 
I will present another history. 

When fortune's face grew louring to Gushtásp 
He called Jámásp before the throne, and said :— 
“Time hath inspired in me so much remorse 
About the matter of Asfandiyar 
That all my days are passed unjoyously, 

And I am troubled by the vengeful stars. 
Now after me Bahman will be the Shih, 
With Bishütan as confidant, Reject not 
Bahman's behests, but serve him loyally, 
And be his guide in every circumstance, 
For he is worthy of the crown and throne.” 

The Shih then gave Bahman the treasury-key, 
And, sighing deeply, said: “My work is over; 
The floods have overtopped me. I have sat 
As Shih for six score years and never seen 
My peer; and now do thou bestir thyself, 

Be just to every one and, being just, 


T" ME -— wr = å -— t "WT |). 9 MA. C P" au y, gmn "UB 
i” IN 24 | co Pe “PoP U 
A : "uM only P LR S el 
‘e - 9 1 z 


280 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Exempt from grief. Make glad and keep the wise 
Near thee, but make the world dark to thy foes, 
And follow right for that ne'er causeth loss. 

V. i1747 I who have undergone much pain and travail 
Resign to thee throne, diadem, and treasure,” 

He spake, his lifetime ended, and’his past 
Bare! no more fruit. They made a charnel-house 
Of ebony and ivory, and hung 
His crown above his throne. He had his share 
Of treasure and of toil, and, after joying 
In sweet and antidote, found bane at last. 
If such is life whence do its pleasures spring ? 
Death equaleth the beggar and the king. 
Enjoy thy having, shun ill-enterprise, 
And hearken to the sayings of the wise. 
My fellow-travellers have gone while I 
Remain and tell at large of days gone by. 
Each traveller hath reached his place of rest, 
And, if he sought the good, achieved his quest. 
Let virtue, virtue only, grasp thy hand 
That thou mayst list to those that understand. 
The doings of Bahman I now essay, | 
And will recount thee things long passed away. 
! Heading with P. 


XVI 
BAHMAN, SON OF ASFANDIYAR 


HE REIGNED NINETY-NINE YEARS 


ARGUMENT 


Bahman, on ascending the throne, announces his purpose of 
taking vengeance on the family of Rustam for the death of 
Asfandiyir. He marches against “ibulistin, takes “il and 
Farimarz prisoners, pardons the former but executes tho latter, 
He then returns home, marries his own daughter Humüi, arranges 
the succession to the throne, and dies. 


NOTE 


Originally Bahman appears to have had no connexion with the 
historical Artaxerxes Longimanus (mc. 464-424), with whom. he 
has been identified by various writers Artaxerxes, howover, was 
a familiar name in its Persian form in Sáüsánian times owing to 
the fact that another Artaxerxes had overthrown the Parthian, 
and founded a native Ininian, dynasty. The compilers of the 
Büstin-náma, who seem to have become acquainted through some 
Syrine writer, who drew his material from a Greek chronographer, 
with the first Artaxerxes, readily identified him with Bahman !— 
the only traditional frdnian ruler available, Luhrisp and Gush- 
tásp on one side, and Dirib and Dini on the other, were alike 
out of the question, while Humái was a woman. Accordingly 
received the name and distinguishing title of the Ache- 
menid, and became known as Ardshir—a form of Artaxerxes—and 
as Dirizdast—a translation of the Greek Maxpoynp. The expres- 
sion “of the long hand” or “the long handed” is well illustrated 
by a passage in Tennyson's “ Princess.” 

u But my good father thought a king a king; 
He cared not for the affection of the house; 


' NIN, § 12. 
ni 


mn——————— 


U " r 
NS; d Mardy 
1g 


THE RIET OF SEDAN: s 


He held his sceptre like a pedant's wand U 
To lash offence, and with long arms and hands 

Reach'd out, and picked offenders from the mass 

For judgment." 


In time, as so often happens, the metaphor was taken literally, 

and we find Firdausi saying of Bahman :— E?" 
“And with his fingers dressed beside his legs 
His fists extended lower than his knees." ! 

How Artaxerxes obtained his title expressive of far-reaching 
power does not seem to be known. He may have assumed it- 
himself, or received it from his subjects or from the Greeks. The- 
earliest mention of it is by the Greek writer Dinon, or Deinon,- 


in the days of Alexander the Great, The view which identifies 
Bahman with Artaxerxes Longimanus has been supplemented by 


the further identification of Artabanus with Rustam and Xerxes 


with Asiandiyir.* If this is accepted we may trace in the con- 
tention of Rustam with Asfandiyür, the former's patronage of 
Bahman, Bahman's accession to the throne and his subsequent 
vengeance on the race of Zál, a poetical version of the palace — 
conspiracy whereby Artabanus, the captain of the guard, leagued 
with Artaxerxes, slew the latter's father Xerxes, and placed 
Artaxerxes on the throne only to be destroyed himself sheriy 
afterward with all his house by the Shih whom he had set up. - 
If, however, the view expressed at the beginning of this note is- 
correct, and it is'substantially Professor Nóldeke's, that epi title 
of the Long-handed was derived through the Syriac from Greek 
sources and bestowed on a wholly mythical personality, we may 
conclude that other events of the reign of the Long-handed were — 
borrowed from the same foreign source and reflected back in the 
like manner, in which case of course the above identifications ara 
historically valueless. In the translation we always speak of 
Bahman, not Ardshir, 

& 5. We have here one of the fictitious genealogies by which | 
it was striven to connect the Sásánian with the Kaiánian dynasty. 


Another will be found in the next volume in the portion dealing 
with the Ashkínian dynasty. 


P. 239. * NIN,8 13, note, 
EE i 523 arg. Cf. too JZ, 133, 160. 
* Bee too YoL il. p. 3. 


l 
"RS 
d 


BAHMAN 283 


§ 1 
How Bahman sought Revenge for the Death of 
Asfaned ripir 
Whenas Bahman sat on his grandsire's throne “1748 


He girt his girdle round him, oped his hands, 
Bestowed a donative upon the troops, 
And granted many a march and many a province. 
He held a conclave of the men of wisdom, 
The great men, and the officers of state, 
And thus he said: “ Ye all, both old and young, 
Whoever hath an understanding mind, 
Wot of the slaying of Asfandiyar, 
Of fortune's changes both for good and ill, 
Of Rustam’s deeds while yet he lived and those 
Of Zal, the sorcerer, that ancient man. 
Now Farámarz in publie and in private 
Desireth naught but vengeance on ourselves, 
While my head acheth and my heart is full, 
And I too think of nothing but revenge« 
Two warriors—Nush Azar and Mihr-i-Nüsh— 
Have given up their lives so wretchedly !! 
By that same token too Asfandiyar— 
A man without a peer in all the world— 
Was slaughtered in Zibulistan. The beasts V. 1749 
Of prey and chase went wild with grief for him. 
' "Yea, for the slaughter of Asfandiyár 
The pictures in the palace weep for woe, 
And for the blood of those our noble ones, 
Our youths and gallant eavaliers withal. 
No man that springeth from pure stock will leave 
His finest jewel lying in the ditch, 
But will come forward, like Shih Faridin 
(And while such men exist all will be well) 
! Bee pp. 226, 227. 


V. 1750 


284 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Who made Zahhák, in that he slew Jamshid, 

To cease among the warriors of the world. ` 

For vengeance Minichihr led from Amul 

À mighty host 'gainst Tür and valiant Salm, 

Invaded Chín, took vengeance for his grandsire, 

And levelled earth up to the hills with slain.! 

When Kai Khusrau escaped Afrásiyáb 

He made the world run river-like with blood. 

My sire avenged the slaying of Luhnisp, 

And like achievements should be told of me. 

In vengeance for his father, Farámarz 

Exalted to the shining sun his head, 

Marched on Kábul, required revenge for Rustam, 

And levelled to the dust its fields and fells. 

No man could recognise the land for blood: 

They made the horses trample on the slain, 

More call have I to take revenge who urge 

My steed against the elephant and lion, 

Because thou wilt not see amongst earth's heroes 

Another horseman like Asfandiyár. 

What are your views? What answer do ye give 

In this regard? Strive to advise me well.” 
Thereat the assembled loyal lieges eried :— 

" Thy slaves are we and have fulfilled our hearts 

With love toward thee. Thou art more.instructed 

Than we about the past and mightier. 

Do whatsoe'er thou wilt so long as fame 

And Grace divine acerue to thee thereby. 

No one will disobey thee; who will dare ? " 
Bahman, thus answered by his host, grew keener 

For vengeance and made ready to invade 

Sístán. This settled, the assembly rose. 

At dawn the drums beat and the sky grew ebon 

With dust of troops whereof there marched along 

Sword-wielding horsemen five seore thousand strong. 

t Vol f. p. 215 aeq. 


JA €" UL 
US | =<. - P. 
E TE ~ 
v 
"e ’ 


| BAHMAN 


$2 
| How Bahman put Zád! in Donda 
— Now when Bahman.was drawing nigh the Hirmund 
— He choose him out an envoy, one of rank, 
— Entrusted to him various messages, 
And sent him on to Zál, the:son.of Sam, 
"To say: * My lot is bitter in the world 
Through what hath happened to Asfandiyar, 
And through the vengeance owing for Nüsh Zád! 
_ And Nish Azar—two loved and high-born princes. 
_ I mean to ease my heart of this old grudge, 
And make the rivers of Zibul run blood." 
— . The messenger arrived and gave the message 
To Zal, whose heart grew wed to pain and grief, 
— And he returned this answer: “If the Shih 
= Is thus concerned about Asfandiyar, 
— — "Then let him know that what was was to be, 
— And that the matter filled my heart with anguish. 
Thou wast thyself exposed to good and ill, 
And hadst from me all profit and no loss. 
E- Now Rustam swerved not from thy sire's commands, 
But, as thou sawest, bare a loyal heart. 
Thy sire, that great and noble prince, was fey, 
And thereupon waxed over-bold. The lion 
E And dragon of the wood can not escape 
‘The clutch of Fate. Thou must have heard, good sooth, 
— What deeds of valour Sim, the cavalier, 
| E- — Aecomplished in the past, and thus persévered 
- Down to the days of Rustam, who then drew 
E The trenchant scimitar and wrought with valour 
_ Before thine ancestors in times of strife.* 
— Withal he was the humblest of thy nurses V. 1751 
As well as of the mightiest of thy host. 
1 Nüsh Zád seems to be variant of Mihr-i-Nüsb. — * Reading with P. 


Y, 1752 


TZ x. ATE Vu eae Fl M CREE te 
E d: rs ad bee gm 
r E E *4 4i «T» ! 
= Py i 


286 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST 


Now miserably hath he passed away, 
And all Zibulistan is full of tumult. 
If now thou wilt-forbear to war with us, 
Wilt think upon our case considerately, 
Wilt eome and, putting vengeance from thy heart, 
Enchant our land with lovingkindliness, 
I vill present to thee upon thy coming 
Sim's wealth, brocade, dinirs, his golden girdles, 
And golden harness, for thou art the Shih: 
The nobles are thy flock.” 

He gave the envoy 
A steed, dinirs, and many other gifts. 
Now when the noble envoy reached Bahinan, 
He told what he had heard and seen with Zl. 
Bahman, the fortune-favoured, when he heard, 
Rejected the excuse, was very wroth, 
And reached the city with an aching heart, 
With vengeful thoughts and sighs upon his lips. 
Then al, the son of Sim the cavalier, 
Attended meanly by two horsemen, went 
To meet Bahman and, coming to the presence, 
Alighted from his roadster, did obeisance, 
And spake thus, saying : “ Wise and prudent Shah! 
Deign to regard us with the eye of wisdom. 
By all the services that we have paid, 
And by our care for thee when thou wast young, 
Forgive us, speak no more about the past, 
Be great and seek not vengeance for the slain,” 

Enraged with Zál, whose hopes were foiled, Bahman 

Put him forthwith in fetters, heeding not 
What minister or treasurer might say, 
Then from the halls of Zal, the son of Sim 
The cavalier, they loaded up the camels 
With money and with jewels in the rough, 
With:thrones and tapestries, whate'er there was, 
With golden tissue and with golden crowns, 


BAHMAN 287 


With silvern tissue and with belts and earrings. 
They took the Arab horses trapped with gold, 
The Indian scimitars with golden sheaths, 

The prisoners and sacks of drachms, of musk, 
And camphor, and the treasures more or less 
That Rustam had collected by his toil 

From Sháhs and chiefs. Bahman delivered all 
Zübulistán to pillaging and then 


Gave crowns and purses to his mighty men. 


$3 
How Farámarz fought with Bahman and was put to Death 
At Bust, upon the frontier, Farámarz, 
In dudgeon for his grandsire, steeped his hands 
In vengeance, gathered troops, marched 'gainst Bahman, 
And oft recalled the wars of matchless Rustam. 
When news of this had reached the monarch’s ears 
He raged upon the throne of king of kings, 
Packed up the baggage, called the troops to horse, 
Marched to the burial-place of Rustam's race, 
And tarried there two weeks, Then with the din 
Of trumpets and of Indian bells the mountains 
Shook to their cores, heaven bathed the world in pitch, 
And from that pitch the arrows showered like hail, | 
While at the clash of ax and twang of bow 
The earth out-quaked the sky, Three days and nights 
Upon that field steel swords and maces rained, 
And clouds of dust collected overhead, 
Upon the fourth day there arose a storm : 
Thou wouldst have said: “ The day and night are one.” 
The blast was in the face of Farimarz. - Y. 1753 
The world-lord joyed and, following up the dust 
With trenchant sword, brought Doomsday on the foe. 
The men of Bust, the warriors of Zabul, 
The gallant swordsmen of Kabulistan, 


V. 1754 


BN i hg RB c7» V € ww 
t "Tarte wo 


288 THE SHÁHNÁMA IOF FIRDAUSÍ 


Had not a horseman left upon the field, 

No chief was left of all those men of name, 

For one by one they turned their backs in flight, 
And shamefully deserted Farámarz, 

The battlefield was heaped up mountain-like 

By slain struck down pell mell from both the hosts, 
Albeit with a paltry band of heroes 

Right bravely Farámarz still faced the foe, 
Himself a lion and a lion's whelp, 

With all his body hacked by scimitars, 

Until at length that noble warrior 

Was ta'en by brave Ardshir who carried him 
Before Bahman. That vengeful monarch gazed 
Upon him for a while but would not spare, 

Bade rear a gibbet and hung Farámarz 

Alive thereon, his elephantine form 
Head-downward. "Then in wreak, with arrow-rain, 
Bahman,' that famous Kaian, had him slain. 


84 
How Bahman released Zl and returned to. Irán? 
Now noble Bishütan, the minister, 
Was sorely troubled by this butchery, 
And rising in the world-lord's presence said :— 
“Just monarch! if revengement was thy due, 
And ‘twas thy heart's desire, that wish of thine 
Is perfected in loss. Cease to enjoin 
Raid, slaughter, turmoil, strife. Approve them not, 
Refrain thyself, fear God, and think of us, 
Consider well the turns of fortune’s wheel, 
How it exalteth this man to the clouds, 
And putteth that man into sorry plight. 
Thy sire, that world-lord and the army's Lustre, 
Did he not go Nímrüz-ward for a bier, 
' Ardshirin the original. See p.282.  * Heading with C and P, 


å T 4¢ “A 4 


Fa 4 


BAHMAN 289 


And did not Rustam too when at Kabul 
Go to the chase and perish in a pit? 
While thou dost live, O king of pure descent ! 
Vex not a man of birth, for if the son 
Of Sam, the son of Nariman, shall ery 
Against his bondage to the great All-giver, 
Thou wilt be pinched, successful as thou art, 
When he appealeth to the Omnipotent. 
To Rustam, warder of the Kaian throne, 
Who used to gird his loins for every toil, 
Thou wast indebted for this crown and not 
To Sháh Gushtásp or to Asfandiyár. 
Trace downward froin the days of Kai Kubád 
To those of Kai Khusrau of holy rede; 
All owed their greatness to his *eunitar, 
-And held the mightiest his inferiors. 
If thou art wise release Zal from his bonds, 
And turn thy heart back from the evil way.” 
The Shih repented of those deeds of his 
When he had heard the words of Bishütan. 
A proclamation issued from his eourt :— V. 1755 
“Ye paladins, ye just and upright men ! 
Make preparations for returning home, 
And keep from pillage and from massacre.” 
He bade them to release the feet of Zál 
From bonds and give him much good counselling. 
They built a charnel-house to hold the slain, 
Such was the rede of righteous Bishütan. 
When Zal returned from prison to his palace 
His noble spouse wept o'er him bitterly, 
And criet: “ Alack thou brave, heroic Rustam, 
Thou scion of the hero Nariman! 
When yet thou wast alive who recognised 
Gushtisp as Shih? But now thy hoards are sacked, 
Zal hath been captive, and thy son slain vilely 
By showers of arrows! Oh! may none e'er see 
YOL: V. T 


Y. 1256 


* 


290 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Another day like this, and may the earth 

Be void of offspring from Asfandiyár." 

* Now tidings of this matter reached Bahman, 

As well as glorious Bishútan, who grieved 

For her; his cheeks grew wan at her complainings, 
He spake thus to Bahman : “(O youthful Shah, 

As ‘twere a new moon in the midst of heaven! 

At daybreak lead thy host forth from this land, 
For matters here are grave and troublesome, 

May evil eyes be distant from thy crown, 

And may thy whole time be a festival, 

The king of kings should stay not long beneath 
The roof of Zál, the son of Sám the hero." 

* Whenas the hills became like sandarach, 

And when the sound of drums rose from the courtgate, 
The monarch led the army from Zabul | 
Toward Írin—the country of the brave. 

He rested, sat rejoicing on the throne, 

And ruled the world by precedent and justice. 
Great was the largess that the poor received, 
And many men rejoiced in him or grieved, 


$5 
How Bahman married his own daughter. Humái and 
appointed his Successor 


Bahman! possessed one lion-taking son, 
On whom he had bestowed the name Süsán ; 
He had withal a daughter naméd Humii, 
Considerate, accomplished, and discreet, 
They used to call her by the name Chihrzád.: 
Her father's greatest joy was seeing her. 
He took her for his wife, which in the Faith 
! Bee p, 288, mote, 
* The name may mean *' Born of the seed " or if —Chihr Azdd, “OF 
noble seed" or " Of noble mien." 


BAHMAN 291 


That thou call’st olden was a goodly deed. 
Humái, that heart-refreshing shining Moon, 
In course of time grew pregnant by the Sháh. 
Now when six months had passed &he 'gan to ail, 
And he, at seeing this, fell sick himself, 
And, prostrated with suffering, summoned her. 
He summoned too the nobles and the. magnates, 
And, seating them where great men use to sit, 
Thus said: “This chaste Humai hath had small joy 
Of this world, and I leave her crown, high throne, 
The host, the treasure, and preeminence. 
She shall be my successor in the world, 
She and the babe withal that she shall bear, 
For, whether it shall prove a son or daughter, à 
It shall succeed to erown and throne and girdle." 
Sásán, on hearing this, was all astound : 
His heart was darkened by his father's words, 
And, like a pard, in three days and two nights 
He journeyed from [rin abroad in shame, 
And reached in haste the town of Nishápür 
In dudgeon and an alien from his sire. 
He asked a lady of high rank in marriage, 
But kept himself down level with the dust, 
Withheld the secret of his Kaian birth, 
And spake to no one of his quality. 
His chaste wife bare to-him a holy son, 
Whose steps were happy and whose birth was blest, 
A son to whom he gave the name Sasan, V. 1737 
And died anon. Whenas the child grew up, 
And saw his home a prey to poverty, 
He tended for the king of Nishápür 
The herds that roamed at will o'er plain and mountain, 
And was for long the herdsman of the king : 
His dwelling was on height and wilderness. 
Now turn I to Humut to tell her case 
When she, Bahman deceased, assumed his place. 


) ô 


XVII 
HUMÁI 
SHE REIGNED THIRTY-TWO YEARS 


ARGUMENT 


Humii, in order to keop the throne for herself, casts away her 
son, when an infant, in an ark on the Euphrates. The babe is 


found by a launderer, adopted by him and his wife, and named 
Dirib, Dáráb's kingly qualities early assert themselves, and, re- 
fusing to follow his foster-father's trade, he enters the Persian 
army. A portent calls the general's attention to him. He dis- 
plays great valour in war against the Rimans, and is re aed 
by Hunuli, who owns him as her son and resigns the throne in his 
favour, 


NOTE 


The goddess of love, worshipped in many lands and under many 
names, had one of her oldest seats at Ascalon.! Beside her dove- 


haunted temple was a lake, abounding in fish, to which at stated 


times the image of the goddess—a woman to the waist and a fish 
below—was borne in procession, Her local name was Derketo, 
The cult of the goddess gave rise toa legend that Derketo origi- 
nally was a girl who, as the result of a love-affair with a Syrian 
youth, gave birth to a daughter whom she exposed to perish 
among rocks in a desert, throw herself into the lake, and was 
changed into a fish, Her abandoned babe was cared for and fed 
by the doves till about one year old, when it was found by the 
herdsmen of Simmas, the keeper of the flocks of Ninus, king of 
Assyria. Simmas, who was childless, brought up the babe as his 
own, and gave her the name of Semiramis, In after years Onnes, 
the viceroy of Syria under king Ninus and his chief counsellor, 
saw, fell in love with, and married her, She bore him two sons, 
Hyapates and Hydaspes. "Then Ninus himself became infatuated 


* Herodotus, Book I. c. 105. 
gx 


` | Ww T0949 a 7» O7. 28 ^ue "Iw TEE pe P pue. * - » 
eae CPU EET AIT dre SETA EF I 
j a7 [| t v " - N n j 2 ^" - , 

» . f at . 


HUMAI 293 


with her, Onnes hung himself, and Semiramis became queen. By 
Ninus sho had a son named Ninyas, When Ninus died he left 
her the throne. Her career as supreme ruler was magnificent 
rather than moral, She governed all Asin as far eastward as 
- the Indus, and was the reputed builder of Babylon, its hanging 
gardens, and the temple of Bel. In fact all great achievements 
of building or engineering in those parts were attributed to her. 
After a reign of forty-two years, and at the age of sixty-two, she 
resigned the throne to her son Ninyas, and either made away with 
herself by suicide or else turned into a dove and flew off in com- 
pany with a flock of those birds. Such in brief is a legend that 
was much in vogne in the days when Ktesias was court physician 
in Persia between the years B.C. 417 and B.c 398. Ho recorded it 
in his Persia, Diodorus epitomised it in his Bihiothea, Books 1 
and IL, and through his epitome it has come down to us. The 
legend has been given here because it seems not unlikely that in 
Humiüi we have a reminiscence of Semiramis Theo two legends 
certainly have much in common, We have two queens, both of 
whom, after the death of their husbands and by their express 
sanction, oust—to employ a convenient phrase—the rightful heir ; 
both of them have a foundling story connected with them, and both 
in the end resign their thrones to their sons. Both too are repre- 
sented in legend as having been great builders; Humái is credited, 
though not in the Shihmima, with the edifices whose ruins still 
exist in the neighbourhood of Istakhr (Persepolis) in Pirs." 
Moreover Mas'üdi tells us that Humii's mother was a Jewosa, Le 
a Syrian.” Two attempts seem to have been made to connect 
Humii with the old legendary line of kings, and both charac- 
teristically Fersian, In one she is the daughter of Gushtisp 
and marries her brother Asfandiyüir; in the other she is the " 
daughter of Bahman and marries ber father. Tho. foundling 
legend is transferred from her to her son Dárib. Several such 
legends are in existence. The oldest probably is that of Sargon L 
of Agani, an ancient Babylonian king. “My mother,” he says, 
"placed me in an ark of bulrushes: with bitumen my door she 
closed up: shé threw mè into the river,” which did not enter into 
the ark to me. The river carried me: to the dwelling of Akk1 
the water-carrier it brought me. AKKI the water-carrier in his 
goodness of heart lifted me up from the river. ARKI the water- 
carrier brought me up as his own son,"* Similarly Romulus and 
Remus, the twin sons of the Vestal Sum were set afloat on the 


1 ZT, i. 510, NT, p. 8 and note, . MM, iv. 76. 
* MM, ii. 125. ? The Euphrates. 
* RP, v. 3. 


V. 1758 


THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


294 
Tiber in a trough, and afterward brought up by a shepherd and 
his wife! There is too the ease of Moses and of others, 

Humii appears in the Zandavasta as “the holy Huma,"* She 
is the earliest of the three queens or female Sháhs that, according. 
to the partly legendary, partly historical dynastic scheme of the 
Shihnima, ruled in ancient times over Írán. She is also by far 
the most important of tha three. The other two— Pürindukht 
and Azarmdukht—reigned in succession for six and four months 
respectively during part of the troublous period (A.D. 628-633) 
that intervened between the deposition of Khusrau Parwiz and 
the accession of Yazdagird III. 


$r 
How Humái cast away her son Düárdh on the River 
Farit in an Ark 
Bahman died of his malady and ceased 
To be concerned about the crown and throne. 
Humai came, set the crown upon her head, 
And ordered things anew, admitted all 
The army to her court and, opening 
The portal of her treasures, gave dinars, 
In rede and justice she excelled her sire: 
The whole world prospered through her equity. 
She said: “ Be this crown glorious, our foes’ hearts 


Uprooted, our profession every good, 


And may none see distress and care through us. 
I will enrich all mendicants and those 
Who earn their own subsistence by their toil, 


Whenas the time.of her delivery came 
She kept it from the people and the host, 
Because she loved the throne of sovereignty, 
And found it profit to possess the world. 


| \ She bare a son in secret, kept it cloge, 


And had the little Treasure hid away, 
Procured for nurse a woman of free birth, 
\ ! Livy, Book I. c. 4. * DZA, ii. 224. 


HUMAI 295 


Pure, full of modesty, and other virtues, 

And privily made o'er to her the babe, 

That Shoot so flourishing and full of promise, 

And, when they asked Humiii about her son, 

She used to say: * The noble child is dead." 
Moreover she assumed the royal erown, 

And held the throne in triumph and in joy. 

She sent her hosts where'er were hostile chiefs, 

And was apprised of everything that passed 

For good or evil in the world around. 

She only sought for what was just and good, 

And ordered all the world aright; her justice 

Safeguarded it; it spake of her alone. 

Thus eight months passed away, but when the boy 

Began to favour the departed Shah 

She ordered that a skilful carpenter 

Should choose material for fine joinery, 

And make a goodly ark of seasoned wood. 

They smeared it with a coat of pitch and musk, 

And lined it softly with brocade of Rim, 

Bedaubing it without with lime and wax. 

She placed within a pillow for a bed, 

And filled it full of pearls of splendid water. 

They poured in quantities of ruddy gold, 

Mixed with cornelians and emeralds. 

They bound one jewel, such as kings might wear, 

Upon the arm of that unweanéd child 

And, when the little one was fast asleep, 

His nurse, so deft of hand, went wailingly, 

Disposed him tenderly inside the ark, 

Enwrapped him warmly in fine silk of Chin, 

And then they made the cover water-tight 

With lime, pitch, wax,and musk. When midnight came 

They carried forth the ark, without a word, V. 1760 

And, hasting from Humai, set it adrift 

Upon the stream of the Farat. Two men 


ym 


m —X 
24 
[ wn 


296 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


Ran after it to notice how the suckling 

Fared on the stream. The ark went like a boat, 
And those that watched had to bestir themselves. 
Now when the morning rose above the mountains 
The ark brought up beside a watercourse, 

Where was a laundering-place; the workers there 
Had made with stones the channel's inlet narrow. 
A launderer beheld the little ark, 

Ran up, and drew it from the laundering-place. 
When he had oped the ark, and had removed 

The eoverings, he stood in wonderment, 

Wrapped it in heaps of clothes and hurried off, 
All eager expectation and delight, 

Whereat a watcher ran to tell the mother 

Of ark and launderer. Said that shrewd queen :— 
“Thou must keep hidden that which thou hast seen.” 


$2 
How the. Lawnderer. brought up. Dáráb 

Now when the launderer came back from the stream 
At that untimely hour his wife exclaimed :— 
"Is this thy husbandry to bring the elothes 
Half dried? Whoe'er will pay thee for such work?” 

The launderer, heart-withered then by grief 
Because his own.bright little one was dead, 
For whom his wife was all disconsolate 
With lacerated cheeks and darkened soul, 
Replied: “Cheer up! Henceforth for thee to wail 
Will be but scurvy, for if my good wife 
Can keep a secret I will tell a thing : 
Upon the watercourse, against the stone 
Whereon I beat the clothes and rinse them out 
When I have finished cleaning them, I spied 
An ark, and hidden in it was a babe— 


HUMAI 207 


A little one that thou wilt love at sight V. 1751 
As soon as ever I uncover it. 
"Tis true that we have had one of our own, 
Though for a little while and he is dead, 
But now thou hast one unawares—a son 
All furnished with dinars and jewelry !" 
With that he set the clothes upon the ground, 
And lifted up the cover of the ark. 
The launderer's wife beheld and in her wonder 
Exclaimed: “ God bless it!” for she saw a cheek 
Aglow amid the silk—Bahman's own image ! 
His pillow was all pearls of finest water, 
With emeralds and cornelians for his footstool ; 
Upon his left hand there were red dinars, 
And on his right hand jewels in profusion. 
The woman suckled him immediately, 
Rejoicing over that entrancing babe, 
Whose beauty and whose wealth consoled her heart. 
The launderer said to her: * We must be ever 
Prepared to give our lives up for this child, 
Because he is the son of some great man, 
May be a king himself." 
The launderer’s wife 
Cared for the child as it had been her kin, 
As it had been her very son indeed, 
And on the third day named the babe Dáráb, 
Because they found his cradle in the streain.! 
It happened that one day the careful wife 
Was talking to her lord of many things, 
And said to him: * How wilt thou use these gems ? 
Let wisdom be thy counsellor therein.” 
“Good wife |" the launderer answered, “ hoarded jewels 
1 Dar db=in water. According to Tabari (ZT. i. 509) Humii, hear. 
Ing that her son had been found by a miller, sent for the latter, inquired 
about the babe, and sald, “Dir,” ie. “Take bim.” Hence the form 


“Ikini.” Both forms occur in the text, and both etymologies are of 
course worthless. The ancient form of the word was “ Dirayarahush." 


V. 1762 


298 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


And dust are one to me, "Tis best for us 
To quit this eity, move out to the plains, 
Relieved from straits and hardship, and reside 
Within some city, where folk know us not, 
Content and affluent." 
At morn he packed, 
Departed, and forgot those fields and fells. 
They bore Dáráb with them and carried naught 
Beside except the gold and jewelry. 
They journeyed from the place for three score leagues, 
They made their home within another city, 
And there within that alien city lived 
Like wealthy folk. A famous magnate dwelt 
Therein, and unto him the launderer sent 
One of the jewels, taking in return 
‘Apparel, gold, and silver. Thus he did 
Until he had exchanged them nearly all, 
And there remained one ruby in the house 
Of what the ark had held for good or ill. 
One day the wife, who was the manager, 
Said to her master: “ We need work no longer. 
Since thou hast made thy fortune give up trade." 
He answered her: *Good wife and guide! thou 
speakest 
Of trade. Well, what is better? Trade is ever 
The first concern. Tend well Dáráb and mark 
What time will yet produce for thee through him." 
They cherished him so dearly that he felt 
No ill from any blast. When heaven had wheeled 
Above him for some years he grew to be 
A youth of stature and of Grace divine, 
And wrestled with his playmates in the street, 
Where none could match him as to bulk and strength, 
ea, all combined against him and were worsted ! 
The launderer grumbled at these esenpades, 
Which made the outlook gloomy for the shop, 


e 


v 
a f 


PE ECEE hes ee S y AER 


HUMAI 299 


And said: * Now beat these clothes upon the stone ; 
‘Tis no disgrace to thee to learn a craft,” 
And when Dáüráb, as usual, left the work, 
And ran away, the launderer used to weep 
In tears of blood and wasted nearly all 
His time in searching countryside and city, 
And coming on the boy with bow in hand, 
His breast extended and his thumbstall on, 
Would seize the bow and cry indignantly :— 
“ thou destructive and pugnacious Wolf! 
Why dost thou hanker after bow and arrows? 
Why art thou set on evil while so young!” 
Thereat Dáráb would answer: “O my father! V. 1763 
Thou turn'st the brightness of my life to gloom. 
Provide me first of all with men of lore, 
That I may get by heart the Zandavasta, 
And then command my toils for trade and stream, 
But do.not yet require this drudgery.” 
The launderer, having often rated him, 
At last consigned him to the care of teachers. 
He learned accomplishments, grew masterful, 
And wholly past fault-finding and reproach. 
“ My father,” said he to his foster-sire, 
* This laundry business is not fit for me; 
Be not at all concerned on mine account, 
But bring me up to be a cavalier." 
The launderer thereupon selected one 
Of good repute and skilled in horsemanship, 
And long committed to his charge the youth, 
Who learnt from him whate'er was requisite— 
The way to handle rein and lance and buckler, 
And wheel his charger on the battlefield, 
To play at polo, shoot with bow and arrow, 
And outwit foes, till he attained such might 
That leopards would not close with him in fight. 


V. 1764 


300 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ- 


$3 | 
How Dåráb questioned the Launderer's Wife about his 
Parentage, and how he fought against the Riimans 
One day Dáráb said to the launderer -— 
“ Albeit that I never mention it 
Affection stirreth not in me for thee, 
Nor is my face like thine. I feel astounded 
Whene'er thou eall’st me son and seatest me 
"Beside thee in the shop." 
The launderer said :— 
“ What words are these? Alack for all the pains 
Bestowed on thee! If thou out-classest me 
Seek for thy sire; thy mother hath thy secret.” 
It happened that the launderer one day ` 
Went from the house and hastened to the stream. 
Dáráb made fast the door and then approached 
The goodwife, took in hand his scimitar, 
And said to her: “ Attempt not to deceive me, 
And to obscure the issue; speak the truth 
In answer to my questions, How am I 
Related to you both and wherefore dwelling 
Thus with a launderer ?” 
In fright the woman | 
Begged for her life and called on God for succour. 
She said: “Seek not my blood, and I will tell thee 
All as thou biddest.” 
| She recounted all, 
With neither reticence nor subterfuge, 
About the ark, the infant yet unweaned, 
About the golden coins and royal jewels, 
And said: “We were but simple working-folk 
Quite unrelated to the quality. 
What wealth we have is all derived from thine: 
Through thee we rose from low to high estate, 


HUMAI Ex 


We are but slaves and thine is to command : 
What wilt thou? We are thine both soul and body.” 
Dáráb stood in amaze on hearing this, 
Plunged in profound surmise. He said to her :— 
“Doth anything remain of all that wealth, 
Or hath the launderer spent the whole of it ? 
Is there enough still left to buy a horse 
In this our day of lowliness and want?” 
The woman said: “There is and more than that, 
And there are money, land, and fruitful gardens.” 
She gave him all the money that she had, . 
And showed to him the precious uncut gem. 
He spent the money on a noble steed, 
A lasso, mace, and saddle of low price. 
There was a prudent marchlord, one of weight, 
A magnate well approved and well advised, 
To whom Dáráb betook himself with soul 
O'erclouded and perturbed. The marehlord held him 
In highest estimation; no disaster 
Befell him any whit. 
| Now as it chanced 
An army marched from Rüm to levy war 
Upon that prosperous land, that frontier-chief 
Was slain in battle and his army worsted. Y. 1765 
In those days when the tidings reached Humái :— 
"The Rüman hath set foot upon our border," 
There lived a warrior hight Rashnawid— 
A captain of the host and sprung from such. 
She ordered: “Let him lead a host toward Rim, 
And waste the country with the scimitar.” 
To that end Rashnawád assembled troops, 
Assigned the mustering place and gave out rations ; 
Dirib heard, joyed, went, and enrolled his name. 
When many troops had gathered, and the muster 
Had been completed, glorious Humai, 
Accompanied by well affected chiefs, 


eo 


V. 1766 


Nr PUT C 


302 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUST 


Came from the palace to review the host, 
To count the numbers, and go through the names 
Upon the registers, She tarried long 
On that broad plain while many troops marched past, 
And when she spied Dáráb, his Grace divine, 
His bearing, and the steel mace on his shoulder, 
When thou hadst said: “ He filleth all the plain, 
And earth is subject to his prancing steed,” 
When too she marked his breast and lovesome face, 
The mother's milk stirred in her, and she asked :— 
" Whence is this cavalier who is possessed 
Of such great limbs and is so tall and straight ? 
Me seemeth that he is a man of name, 
Discreet and yet a warlike cavalier, 
A gallant heart, illustrious and mighty ; 
But his equipment is not worthy of him." 
When narrowly she had surveyed Dáráb, 
And had approved of all that host, she chose 
A favourable season by the stars 
Upon the captain of the host’s behalf, 
As was the fitting course. What time the leaders 
Were of one mind they led the army forth 
And left Humai. She sent out watchful spies 
To keep her well informed and certified 
About the army's case for good and ill, 
And cut short all surmises of mishaps, 
Thus stage by stage the army marched on Ram; 
Its flying dust-clouds filled the heavens with gloom. 


$4 
How Rashnawdd learned the Case of Dáráh 
It happened that one day a mighty tempest, 
With thunderings and lightnings, rain and turmoil, 
Brake o'er the host and troubled Rashnawád : 
The earth was flooded and the welkin roared ; 


a" a E P. (r e e a 
wa, " Tet T 
c JC e E 


HUMÁI 303 


Men everywhere were fleeing from the downpour, 
And making for some shelter on the waste. 
Daráb, like others, was discomfited, 
And sought to escape the storm. He looked around, 
Beheld a heap of ruins, and observed 
A lofty vault, though old and ruinous, 
One that had borne the brunt of wind and weather, 
Still standing in their midst. He slept perforce 
Therein for he was all alone and friendless, 
The general was going on his rounds, 
And passing by the vault, when from the waste 
A voice fell on his ear and made him quail 
For his own life; it was a voice that said :— 
“O ruined vault! be very circumspect ! 
Be careful of the monarch of Írán. 
He hadinot any shelter, friend, or mate, 
And so he came and slumbered under thee.” 
Thought Rashnawád : *'Tis thunder on the blast." 
Then from the desert came the voice again : 
“© vault!” it said, “ close not the eye of wisdom, 
For ‘neath thee is the son of Shih Bahman. 
Fear not the rain and keep these words in mind." 
Ae A third time that same voice came to his ear: V. 1767 
His heart was strangely straitened at the sound. 
He asked a counsellor: * What thing is this ? 
Some one must needs go thither. Ascertain 
Who is reposing there in such concern 
About himself.” : 
They went and saw a youth 
OF prudent aspect and heroic mien, 
His charger and his garments wet and worn, 
And he was couching on the darksome dust. 
They told the general, whose heart was stirred, 
And he commanded: “Summon him forthwith, 
And make him hear.” 
They cried : “ Awake, thou sleeper! 


X Ps eqs; €— NNACS INO PETTY 
"17x K a =< SMe 


E 


394 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Arouse thee from thy slumber on the dust.” 
He mounted, and at once the vault fell m! 

The leader of the army of the Sháh, 

On witnessing a portent such as that, 

And having scanned Dáráb from head to foot, 

Went with him quickly to the camp-enclosure, 

Exclaming: " O just Judge, the only.God ! 

None hath beheld this wonder heretofore, 

Or heard of such from the experienced chiefs," 
Then garments were supplied at his behest, 

And a pavilion got 1n readiness, 

They made a fire huge as a hill and burned 

Much aloe-wood and musk and ambergris. 
Whenas the sun rose o'er the mountain-tops 

The general made all ready for the march. 

He bade an archimage—his chief adviser— 

To bring a change of raiment, Arab steed 

With golden trappings, mail, and gold-sheathed sword. 

These he presented to Dáráb, and asked : 

* O lion-hearted man and warrior ! 

Who art thou? Of what country and what race? 

"I were well that thou shouldst tell me all the truth.” 
Daraib, on hearing this, narrated all, 

Disclosing every secret of his past ; 

Just as the goodwife had acquainted him, 

So told he everything to Rashnawad, 

About the ark, the ruby on his arm, 

The money and brocade that lay beside him, 

And of his rest and slumber in the vault. 

Then Rashnawád dispatched a man forthwith, 

And to that messenger he said: “ Bring hither, 

As swift as wind, both Mars and Venus, bring 

The launderer, his wife, and signet-ring.” 


HUMÁI 305 


$5 
How Darth fought against the Host of Rim 
This said, he broke up camp and marched on Rim. 
He made Dáráb the leader of the scouts, 
And issued to them lances tipped with steel. 
The scouts drew near to Rim, and from that side 
The warden of those marches came to meet them. 
All unawares they countered. Battle’s dust 
Arose forthwith. They mixed in fight and shed 
Blood like a river. When Darib beheld 
That warrior-host he eame like flying dust, 
And slew so many of the troops of Rim 
That thou hadst said: ‘The world hath grasped its 
sword.” 
He went forth like a lion, under him 
A Dragon, in his hand a Crotodile. 
Thus fared he till he reached the Rimans’ camp, 
And rushed upon it like an angry lion. 
Earth seemed a sea of Rüman blood ; wherever 
His falchion led him went the atheling. 
Returning from his triumph o'er the Rümans 
He eame to Rashnawád, the noble leader, 
And had from him much praise: " May our Sháh's host 
Ne'er lack thee. When we quit the land of Rim, 
And when the host is home, thou shalt receive 
Such favours from the Shah that thou wilt be 
The richer both by treasure and a crown.” 

They spent the night in ordering the troops, 
And furbishing the weapons of the horsemen; 
Then as the sun rose o'er the gloomy dales, 
And earth became as 'twere a lamp agleam, 
The two opposing armies met again, 
And darkened with their dust the rising sun; 
But when Dáráb advancing led the charge, 

VOL. V. U 


V. 1769 


7 < Ca, va F L Y 
ia^ 3B y ) r r 
ze "p a; í 4 2 i. ^ 


T 


306 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


And gave his fleet steed rein, there tarried not 

A single man before the Rüman lines, 

While of the warrior-swordsmen few survived. 

He came upon the centre like a wolf, 

And scattered utterly that great array. 

Assailing then the right wing of the foe 

He carried off abundant arms and spoil, 

And cut in pieces all the troops of Rim: 

None of their champions seemed himself at all ! 

The warriors of [rin came with a rush, 

Like lions, in his wake right valiantly, 

And slew so many of the Rüman host 

That all the field was puddled into clay. 

Dáráb slew forty of the Christian prelates! 

Among the magnates and bare off the Cross? 

At those great deeds the heart of Rashnawad, 

The paladin, swelled with delight, He blessed - 

And greatly praised Dáráb, and favoured him / 

The more while blessing him. Night came, the world 

Grew pitch-like, and the host returned from fight. 

The general rested in the Rümans' camp, 

And loosed the girdle from his loins. He spent 

The night apportioning the ample spoil, 

And all the army was enriched thereby. 

He sent Düráb a messenger to say :— 

“O man of lion-heart and good at need! 

Consider now what thou wilt please to take, 

And of this spoil what is of use'to thee: 

Whatever doth not please thee give away ; 

Thou art more glorious than the lord of Rakhsh. 
Dáráb, on seeing this, was well content, 

! Seo Vol, i, pp. 373, 378. 

* No doubt the Zabarum of the army is meant. The true Cross was , 
taken at the capture of Jerusalem by Khusrau Parwiz (Chosroes IL), 
A.D. 614, and carried off to Persia, whence it wns recovered by 
Heraclius on the conclusion of peace in A.D. 628, BGDF, ii. 300, v. 
7^ 93 


Pas v > P E mmm CE wi et E “ "WO 
| | | 
HUMAI 307 
And for form's sake retained a spear himself, 
Dispatehing all the rest to Rashnawád, V. 1770 


And said : " Mayst thou be conquering and happy." 
Whenas the sun's orb left the darksome west 

The sky donned black brocade and when one watch 

Had passed, and all the sentinels were set, 

Their challenges ascended in a roar 

As ‘twere of lions loose. 


Now. when the sun 
Took up its golden shield, and when the troops 
Awoke, the warriors of [ran girt up 
Their loins, were instant to pursue the Rümans, 
Made sparks flash from their trenchant scimitars, 
And gave up all the cities to the flames, 
They sent the dust up both from land and people; 
None e'er recalled to mind those fields and fells. 
A miserable wail went up from Rim, 


For men abandoned that delightful land, 


While Cesar had not wherewithal for vengeance, 

And all the faces of his chiefs were wan. 

An envoy came to Rashnawád to say :— 

* If thou, the just, hast not abandoned justice 

Our warriors have had enough of war: 

The head of Rüm's good fortune is brought low. 

If thou desirest tribute we will do 

Thy bidding and will make new terms with thee.” 
Moreover Cesar sent abundant gifts, 

With purses, captives, and all manner of wealth, 

And Rashnawád received them as enough, 

The money and the jewels in the rough. 


§ 6 
How Humdi recognised her Son 
Thence they departed homeward joyfully, 
Dáráb, the worshipful, and Rashnawád, 


Y. 1771 


308 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI 


Who halted when he reached the ruined vault, 

Whereunder he had seen Dáráb asleep. 

The launderer, with his goodwife and the jewel, 

Were there already, fearful of disgrace. 

The general summoned them forthwith; they prayed 

To God for succour and appeared before him. 

When Rashnawád beheld the man and wife 

He questioned them; they called the facts to mind, 

And told him all the truth about the matter, 

About the ark, about the uncut gem, 

Their toils, their nurture of the sucking-child, 

Their troubles, and the process of events. 

Then Rashnawid said to the man and wife :— 

“Success and gladness be for ever yours, 

For none on earth hath seen so strange a thing, 

Or even heard of such from archimages.” 
Immediately that man of upright mind 

Indited an epistle to Humái 

About Dáráb, the storm, his sleeping-place, 

His prowess on the battlefield withal, 

And also what the launderer had told 

About the ark, the infant, and the treasures, 

He told about the voice that he had heard, 

How he was troubled by the sound, and how, 

Just when Dáráb had mounted on his steed, 

The vault had fallen in. He told it all, 

Dispatched a courier like the blast for speed, 

Gave to his charge the ruddy gem, and said :— 

“See that thou art the waymate of the wind." 
Like wind he went and bare Humái the ruby. 

He gave the letter and repeated all 

The words of Rashnawád. When she had read 

The letter, and beheld the gem, she wept ; 

She knew that, on the day when she reviewed 

The troops, the gracious youth, whom she had marked 

Of mighty stature and with cheeks like spring, 


HUMAI 309 


Could be none other than her son indeed — 
A noble and a fruitful Branch of hers. 

Humdái said weeping to the messenger :— 
“There hath arrived a master for the world, 
I was not free from care, but was concerned 
About the question of the sovereignty. 
I quailed before the world’s Judge, having shown V. 1772 
Ingratitude to Him, for He had given me 
A son whom I renounced and cast away 
Upon the waters of Farát, ‘Twas I 
That bound this jewel on his arm, misprising 
The child because his sire was gone. Now God 
Hath given him back to me through Rashnawad, 
And with victorious fame," 

They showered a treasure 

Of gold, and mingled jewels, musk, and wine. 
Humii gave largess to the indigent, 
And the next se'nnight oped her hoarded drachms. 
Where'er she knew there were a Fane of Fire, 
The Zandavasta, and the Sada! feast, 
There she bestowed her treasure in like wise, 
And lavished gifts through all the provinces. 

Upon the tenth day, early in the morning, 
The general appeared before the Shah, 
And with him were the chieftains and her son, 
But they concealed the case from every one. 


87 
How Humái seated Dáráb upon the Throne 
The Sháh let down the curtain of the court, 
And for one se'nnight gave no audience. 
She caused a golden throne to be prepared, 
! See Vol. i. p. 123. 


V. 1773 


E" n» "- TY, c e iin 4* 
] e .—' .- a a f Kie 
, " - 


310 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSÍ 


With two seats made of lapis lazuli 
And turquoise, with a crown all royal gems, 
A pair of armlets, a bejewelled torque, 
And an imperial robe of cloth of gold 
Wherein were woven divers kinds of jewels, 
Before the Shah there sat astrologers 
To search the stars to find a lucky day. 
50 on the Shahrívar of month Bahman, 
At dawn, the Shih gave audience to. Dinib. 
She filled a cup with rubies and another 
With ruddy gold, and, when Dáráb approached 
The hall of audience, went afar to meet him, 
Did him obeisance, showered on him those jewels 
Fit for a king, and wept blood on her breast, 
Embraced him, kissed him, and caressed his face, 
Then brought and set him on the golden throne, 
And scanned him wonderingly. When he was seated 
She came, gold crown in hand, kissed him and erowned 

him, 
Assuring all men that the crown was his, 
When he was thus illustrate with the crown 
Humái began to proffer her excuses, 
And said: “ As touching what is past, know this 
That all hath turned to wind. ‘Twas -brought 

about : 
By youth, access to treasure, woman's way, 
A deceased, a Shah without a guide. 
If still she wrongeth thee yet let it pass, 
For mayst thou have no seat except the throne 
Of kingship.” 

He made answer to his mother :— 

“Thou hast the royal temperament, and ‘tis 
No wonder if thy heart be moved, but why 
Still harpest thou upon a single fault ? 
May He that made the world approve of thee, 
And anguish fill the hearts of all thy foes. 


HUMÁI - 311 


This story shall be my memorial, 
And ne'er grow obsolete upon the roll." | 
The blest Humdái did reverence, and said :— 
“Thou shall endure as long as crown endureth,” 
She gave command to the high priest to call 
The men of learning out of every province, 
And further bade that of the troops all those 
Of name, the illustrious Lions wielding swords, 
Should homage that famed world-lord as the Shah. . 
As they called blessings down upon his crown, 
And scattered jewels thereupon, Humái 
Described what she had done in secrecy, 
And all the anguish that her act had caused her, 
“Know ye,” she added, “ that of Shih Bahman 
This is the sole memorial on earth. 
Ye all must walk according to his bidding, V. 1774 
For he is shepherd, warriors are his flock ; 
His are the majesty, the diadem, 
And kingship: all must look to him for succour.” 
Then from the palace rose a shout for gladness 
Because they saw a glorious Branch sprout forth ; 
The Shah himself was hidden under jewels, 
"The world was filled with justice and with Joy, 
And no one recked of sorrow and of care. 
Then was it that Humái addressed the chiefs, 
And said: * Ye noble and accomplished sages ! 
I give my son the treasure and the throne— 
To me a toil of two and thirty years. 
Rejoice ye then, submit to his commands, 
And breathe but at his bidding.” 
| When Darab 
Joyed in the crown of majesty, and donned 
The diadem in peace, the launderer 
Came with his wife apace. They said to him :— 
* Blest be thy sitting on the Kaian throne, 
O monarch of the world! and be the hearts 


i 
E 


| WY | m : EN P . f T. 
e T. li " DM arret 
: 312 THE ‘sudunds E s 3 


Of all thy foes plucked CM | r 
j Dáráb as iene 
] Ten purses filled with gold, a goblet rich "n 
With gems, five bales of raiment of all kinds, 
ie. And gave them to the folk that had so toiled — — — 
zi For him. “O busy launderer!" he said, ^ 
E " Be still engrossed in business, It may be | 
s Thou yet mayst light upon another ark, 


A And on another infant like Dáráb !" 

ani They went away invoking with their lips 

S God's blessing on the monarch of Íråin. 

M Then set the launderer's star; he sought. again 

E. His shop and carried lye upon the plain. } 


d 
R lj D py 
i 
à - 
"3A. y” LAM Dam 
BOR ous r 
P TEL 
4 
» Tu 


un TE AP nz is " 


"v, ^ 


~ 


s 


.)| M 


s | 
x" a 
Mu T 


a a a — " 


~~? 


INDEX 


This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning af the rolume are 
complementary. References to Lhe latter are in Roman numerals, 


A 
ABREEVIATIONS, list of, 3 
Abü' Küsim, Firdnusi, 89, 119 
Achemenids, dynasty, 10, 251 


Adarbéd, son of Mahraspand, 16 | 


nota 
Afrüsiváb, ruler of Türín, 12, 
13, 21, 44, 62, 176, 203, 


208 
Agani, Sargon I. of, 293 


Ahmad, son of Sahl, lord of Marv, | 
| Archer, the, constellation, 86 


260, 261 
Abriman, the Evil Principle, or 


used metaphorically, 17, | 


33 35 45, 50, GO, 00, To: 
122, 123, 125, 147, 177^ 198, 
206, 246, 271, 270 

Ahuna Vairya, saered formula, 
5 

Akem Manau, demon, 17 

Akki, foster-father of Sargon I. of 
Agani, 293 

Alburz, mountain, 202 

Alexander the Great (Sikandar), 


30 
Alwá, Iránian hero, 166, 167 
slain by Nüsh Azar, 226 
Ameshaspentas, the, 15 seg. 
Ammianus Marcellinus, historian, 


13 
Ámul, city, 284 


Amulet, given by Zarduhsht to | 


Asfnndiyár, 130 


Andarimán, Türánian hero, 29 
Andarimán (Vandaremaini), bro- 
ther of Arpisp, 12, 46, 141, 
155 
commands one wing of the 
host, 46 
put to death, 155 
Apothegms, 78, 105, 168, 214, 
242, 240, 250, 265 
Amba, the, 31 
Aras, river, 13, 14 
Arasti, uncle of Zarduhsht, 17 


Ardibihiaht, month, 16, 39, 92 
note 
Ardshir (Artaxerxes), See Bah- 
niam. 
meaning of, 259.and note 
Ardshir, Fránian hero,' 67, 288 
tells Nastür where to find 
Zarir, 67 
takes Fanimars prisoner, 285 
Ardshir, son of Gushtdsp, ¥, 26, 
gt 
his death foretold by Jdmidsp, 
49 
sinin, $7 
Ardahir Pápakán, founder of the 
Sisinian dynasty, to 
Aregat-nspa. See Arjisp. 


| Aries, constellation, 39, 109, 118, 


119, 126 
Arish, [rinian archer, 12, 62 
legend of, 12 


1 Perhaps the son of Pew: Bee Vol. iv. 362. 


— —— ERST 


314 


Arjisp (Aregaf-aspa), king of 


Tinin, v, vi, vii, 9, 11 seqg., 
20,22, 24, 264.20, 31, 32, 36 
weq., $1 seq, 61 seg., 71, 72, 
59, 90, 98, 99, 103, 107 ang., 
116, 141, 142, 145 4g. 157, 
159, 161, 167, 171, 172, 180, 


in receipt of tribute from | 


' Gushtásp, 32 


hears of Gushtdsp’s resolve | 


not to pay tribute, sum- 
mons, and harangues his 
priesta, 36 
sends Bidimfsh and Nám- 
khist to Gushtdsp, 37, 40 
on receiving Gnushtásp's an- 
swer ealla out the host, 45 
gives one wing to Kuhram, 46 


the other to Andarimán, | 


46 
ihe chief command to 
Gurgesár, 46 
banner to Bidirafsh, 46 
vanguard to Klashásh, 46 
rear to Hüshdiv, 46 
marches against Trán, 46 
hia defent foretold by Jámásp, 
$2 
gives one wing to Bidirafsh, 55 
the other to Gurgmir, 56 
centre to Námkhást, 56 
takes the rear himself, 56 
gives Kuhram the command 
in chief, 56 
thrice offers rewards to qp 
that will fight Zarir, 6r, 62 
his offer accepted by Bidi- 


b. rafsh, 62 
| alls for Bidirafsh to fight 


Nastir, 69 


fights with the fránians, 71 


lefeated, 72 
his defeat proclaimed by 


i Gushtásp, 75 
[ieam of Asfandiyár's im. 


|. prisonment and of Guah- 
isp's absence in Sistan, $6 


I 


= 


— x 


Arisp, saxiseca hia E BE: 


sends Sitüh as spy to frin, 
Sá 

on receiving Sitüh's report 
calls out the host, 87 

sends Kuhram to attack 
Balkli, 9o 

marches ajzninst Gushtásp, 04 

commands the centre, 95 

defeats Gushtisp and bë- 
leaguers him on a moun- 

“tain, 96 | 

Asfandiyárs vow of, and 
prayer for, vengeance on, 
103, 104 

hears of Asfandiyár's arrival, 
108 


proposes to retreat, 108 

sends away the spoil of 
Balkh, 108 

his five sons, 108 

persuaded by Gurgeir to re- 
main and fight, 108, 109 

makes Gurgsdr leader of 
the host, 109 

arrays the host, t09 

commands the centre, 109 

surveys the battlefield from a 
height, 110 

prepares for flight if needful, 
110 

dismayed at- Asfandiyárs 
prowess, reproaches Gurg- 
mir, 111 

hears of Gurgsár's capture 
and flees, 112 

entertains Asfandiyir dis- 
guised as a merchant, 145 

questions Asfandiyár, 146 

allows Asfandiyár to enter- 
tain the Turkman chiefs, 
149 

prepares to attack Bishütan, 
151 

bids Kuhram prepare for 
war, 151 

sends out "Turkhán with 
troops to reconnoitre, 151 


Arjásp, 


INDEX 
hears from  Kuhram | Asfandivír, given command of one 


‘that Asfandiydr has come, 


Ta 
bids the Torkmans march 
out in force, 152 
diyår, 153 
arms himself and encounters 
Asfandiyár, 153. 154 
beheaded by Asfandiyür, 154 
his palace fired, and his 
women carried off, by 
Asfandiyir, 154, 162 | 
his head thrown from the 
ramparts of the Brazen 
Hold, 157 
his sons grieve for, 157 
Asfandiyár takes the tren- 
sure of, 161 


Artabanns, 2282 


and Rustam, 252 


Artaxerxes Longimanus, 281, 252 


and Bahman, 281, 252 


Arzhang, div, 203 
Ascalon, city, 292 
Asfandiyár (Spents-dáta, Spand- 


dit), son of Gushtásp, v, vi, 
vii, viii, 9, 10, 12, 19, 20, 22, 
24 s6g., 29, 30. 33. 47 Fed, 
45. 49. 52, bs seq. y rEg, 
JÖ sega, ga seq., 97 eg- 
258, 250, 201, 279, 281 seg., 
289, 200, 293 

his invalnerability, 19 

his sisters, vi, 20, 22 


carried off by the Turk- | 


maus, 93, 100, 171 
rescued by, 153. 162 
lament over, 252 seg. 

his marriage with Humdi, 22, 


nero by Firdausi, 22 
birth of, 32 
answers, in conjunction with 
Zarir and Jimdsp, Arpisp's 
letter, 42 
his triumph over Arjisp 
foretold by Jámásp, $2 


| 


^ 


rw NU - t = = 
| age On eS er) 1,4 
a AL E s ia 
. 


315 


wing, 55 

addresses hia five brothers, 65 

hears hís father's offer of the 
crown and throne to the 
avenger of Zarir, 66 

slays Bidiraish, 70 

presents the bead of Bidirafsh 
and the steed of Zarir to 
Gushtásp, 71 s 

divides the host, 71 

attacks with Nastúr and 
Nish Azar the Turkmans, 
71 

grants quarter tothe Turk- 
mans, 72 

made chief ruler of Trin 
under Gushtisp and sent 
by him to convert the 
world, 76 

reats from hia labours, 77 

makes Farshidward governor 
of Khurisán, 77 

reports the success of his 
administration to  Gush- 
tásp, 77 

slandered by Gurazm, 75 

recalled to court, 80 seg. 

his four sona, 8o 

resigns his host to Bahman, 
§2 

arraigned by Gushtdsp, 53 

put in bonds, $4 

sent to Gumbadán, 84 

solaced by Bahman and 
others, 85 

Jámísp advises Guahtásp to 
release, OT 

hears of arrival of Jámásp, 


98, 99 
his parley with Jámdásp, 99 


ari. 

his eight and thirty brothers, 
101, 103, 111, 160 

bids Jdmdsp send for black- 
smiths, 101 

breaks his bonds himself, 102, 
206 


Es&6 


* 
316 INDEX 
Asfandiyir, calls for his steed, and Asfandiyiir, during his adventures 
arma, 102 in the Seven Stages, leaves 


sets off with Jámüsp, Hah- 
man, and Nush Azar, 103 

his vow, 103 

laments over Farshidward, 
Poy 

prays that he may avenge 
Farshidward on Arjisp, 

* I04 


Bishütan in command, 122, 
124, 126, 129, 132 nole, 144 

praised by Bishütan and the 
host, 123, 125, 131, 133 

has a seythed chariot made, 
126 

revived by Bishütan after 
encountering the dragon, 


shrouds Farahidward, 105 127 
sees ond addresses the corpse song of, 129 
of Gurazm, 105 amulet given to, by Zar- 
passes the Turkman trenches, duhsht, 130 
and defeats the outpost, encourages the fránians to 
nod persevere, 136 


his interview with Gushtdsp, 
106 


receives the promise of the | 


crown and undertakes to 
deliver Gushtásp, 107 
arrays and lends the host, 


prays for deliverance from 
the snow, 138 

leaves the baggage 
138 ! 

reproaches Gurgsár for piv- 
ing false information, 139, 


behind, 


10€) 140 
attacks the Turkmana, 110 offers to make Gurgsár 
defeats Kuhram, tro ' captain of the Brazen Hold 
takes Gurgsár prisoner, 111 | if he will be a trusty guide, 
defeats Arjisp, 112, 206 140 


grants quarter to the Turk. 
mans, 113 


and the host, guided by 
Gurgsir, cross the ford, 


distributes the spoil, 114 | 140 
undertakes to rescue his his final questioning of 
sisters from the Turkmana, Gurgsár, 141 


115 
prepares to invade Tiarin, 


115 


rivalry in legend between | 


Rostam and, 116 
Haft Khwin of, compared 
with Rustama, 117 


quita Balkh and goes, with | 


cursed bv Gurgsár, 141 

slays Gurgsár, 141 

surveys the Brazen Hold, 142 

captures, questions, and slays 
two Turkmans, 142 

and Bishátan consult, 143 

his stratagem to take the 
Brazen Hold, 116, 143 


Gurgsir as guide, to in the disguise of a merchant 
Turin, 120 interviews Arjásp, 145 

oilers the kingdom of the assumes the name of K harrád, 
Turkmans to Gurgsár in 146 


return for faithful service, 
120 
questions Gurgsår, 120 seq., 


124, 125, 128, 131, 134, 139. 


questioned hy Arjásp, 146 

trades as a merchant in the 
Brazen Hold, 147 

meets his sisters, 147 


the Turkman chiefs, 149 
surprises the Brazen Hold, 


152 seg. | 
provides for his sisters' safety, 

153 | 
attacks the palace of Arjisp, 


153 
encounters Arjdsp, 154 
beheads Arjásp, 154 
fires ArjAsp's palace, 154 
carries off the women, 154 
quits the Brazen Hold and 
leaves Sáwa in charge, 154 
joins Bishütan, 155 


pursues Kuhram to the Bra- | 


zen Hold, 156 


encounters and takes Kuh- | 


ram prisoner, 157 
grants no quarter to the 
Turkmans, 158 
puts to death Andarimán and 
Kuhram, 158 and notë 
announces his victory to 
Gushtisp, 159 
disposes of the spoil, 161 


INDEX 


Asfandiyir, gives a banquet to | Asfandiyár, 
| 


carries off his sisters, the | 


womenfolk of Arjásp, and 
others from the Brazen 
Hold, 162 
sets fire to, and dismantles, 
the Brazen Hold, 162 
sends his sons homeward 
by different routes, 162 
returns himself by the Seven 


Stages, 162 
picks up his left baggage, 
— 162 


| 
| 


hunts while waiting for his | 


anna, ró2 
is rejoined by his sons, 163 
his welcome on his return to 
Irán, 163 
banquets with Gushtdep, 164 
his fight with Rustam, Story | 
of, vii, vill, 166 seq 


recited by Nadr, son of | 
Hirith, at Meccan, 166 | 


counselled by 


317 


complains to his 
mother of Gushtdep's treat- 
ment of him, 167 

counselled by his mother, 
168, 175 

his fate foretold by Jidimaésp, 


recounts his deeds before 
Gushtisp, 170 

promised the throne by Gush- 
tásp when he has brought 
Rustam and his kin in 
bonds to court, 173. 174 

meets with an ill omen on 
starting for Zábulistán, 177 

consulta with Bishütnn, 178 

sends Bahman on an embas- 
sage, 179 seg. 

his message lo Rustam, 179 

receives Rusiam's answer 
from, and ia wroth with, 
Bahman, 191 

converses of Rustam with 
Hishütan, 192 

goes attended to meet Rus- 
tam, 192 

parleys with Rustam, 192 seg. 

declines Eustam's invitation 
to visit him, 193 

invites Rustam to a feast, 195 

repents of having invited 
Kustam, 106 

Bishütan to 
keep on friendly terms 
with Rustam, 196, 217 

does not summon Rustam to 
the feast, 197 

his wrangle with Rustam, 
195 sey. 

does not assien Rustam his 
proper seat at the feast, 200 

remonstrated with by Rus- 
tam, 200 

bids Bahman resign his own 
sent to Rustam, 200 

vilifies Ad] and Rustam, 201 

recounts his lineage, 205 

exploits, 205 


_ lox 


318 INDEX 


Asfandiydr, recounts his capture | 


of a hill-fort, 206 
triesa handgripwith Rustam, 
208 


challenges Rustam, 209 

astonished at Rustum’s prow- 
eas nt the board, 210 

declines Hustam's overtures, 
211 aeq. 

calls Zábnlistán “ Babble- 
stead,” 216 

parodies Rustam’'s address to 
royal tent-enclosure, 216 

arn for fight with Rustam, 
213 

refuses Hustam's suggestion 


of a general engagement, 


IM 

informed by Hahman of the 
slaying of Nish Azar and 
Mihr-i-Nüsli, 227 

enraged with Rustam, 228 

wounds Rustam and Rakhsh, 
220 

jeers at Rustam, 229 

calla upon Rustam to sur- 
render, 230 

returns to camp, laments for 
Nüsh Ázar and Mihr.i- 


Nüsh, and senda their | 


corpses to Gushtásp with a 
message, 232 

converses with Hishitan of 
the fight with Rustam, 232, 


To | 
the Simurgh instructs Rus- 
tam how to overcome, 237 


seg. 

branch of tamarisk fatal to, 
239 and note 

summoned by Rustam to 
fight and becomes despond- 
ent, 240 

Rustam'’s final effort for 
peace with, 241 a4. 

Bahman and Bishütan hear 
of the overthrow of, 244 

his address to Bishitan, 245 


Asfandivir, Rustam bewnils, 246 
confides Babman to Rustam, 
8 


24 
faretells evil for Rustam, 248 
gives his Inst charge to Bi- 

shütan, 249 
death of, 250 
Rustam laments over, 250 
his corpse sent to Gushtisp 

by Rustam, 251 
his funeral procession con- 

ducted by Bishütan, 251 
the lamentations over, 252 seg. 
his corpse displayed by Bi- 

shütan, 253 
Rustam writes to Gushtásp 

to excuse himself in the 

matter of, 256 
Xerxes nnd, 282 
Bahman on the vengeance 

due for, 233 r 
referred to, 288 


| Asfandiyár - náma | (Spand - dát- 


timaj, 26, 27 
Ashkánian dynasty, 10, 282 
Asin, 293 
Assyria, 202 
Atossa, wife of Cambyses and 
Darius Hystaspis, 11 
- Hutaosa (*), 11 
Aurand, father of Luhrásp, 205 
Aurvat-aspa (Lulrásp), 11 
Ayds, region, 61, 74, 107 
Arid Sarv, Firdausi's authority 
for the Story of Rustam 
and Shaghdd, 260, 261, 263 
Ázüd Sarv, agent of. Nüshirwián, 
261 


Azür Afrüz, third son of Asfan- 


diyár, 81 
Axzarbdijan, province, 16 
Azarmdukht, Sháh, 294 


B 


| BABBLESTEAD, nonce name given 


to “dbulistin by Asfan- 
divir, 216 


Qv T2475 L 
Y 


4 7-14, 
TRF 


Lja 


INDEX 319 

Babylon, 293 Bahman, instructed by Rustam 

hanging gardens of, 293 and profits thereby, 256, 
Badr, battle of, 166 257 

Baghdad, city, 28 Gushtásp advised by Jámüsp 


BHanman (Ardshir, Artaxerxes), to write to, 258 


Shih, vii, viii, 9, 81, 166, 
248, 251, 254, 279 seg., 293. 
294, 297, 303, 310 

eldest son of Asfandiyár, Bo 


Asfandiyir resigns the host | 


to, 82 

henra of Asfandiyárs im- 
prisonment, 85 

goes with others to solace 

* him, 85 

accompanies Asfandiydr from 
Gumbadán, 103 

sent on an embassage, 179 


seq. 

crosses the Hirmund, 182 

his coming reported to Zül, 
182 

his interview with Zál, 183 

follows Rustam to the hunt- 
ing-ground, 184 

tries to kill Rustam, 154 

his interview with Rustam, 
185 seg. 

enterinined by Hustam, 186 

aatonished at Rustam's appe- 
tite, 186 

leaves Rustam, 190 


gives Rustama answer to | 


Asfandiyár, 101 
Asfandiyir's wrath with, t91 
resigns his seat at the fenst 

to Rustam, 200 
informs Asfandiyár of the 

slaying of Nish Azar and 

Mihr-i-Nüsh, 227 


hears of Asfandiyárs over- | 


throw, 244 

confided to Rustam by Asfan- 
diyár, 248 

Zawára warns Rustam agninst 
250 


remains with Rustam, 252, | 
' Balaam, prophet, 15 


256 


Gushtisp's letter of recall to, 
255 

equipped by Rustam for his 
journey, 255 

welcomed and called Ardshir 
by Gushtásp, 2590 

his long arms, 259 

appointed by Gushtisp to 
aucceel him, 379 

his historieal position in 
Persian legend, 251 

aud Artaxerxes Longimanus, 
283 

how he came to be known 
aga Ardshir, 281 

ascende the throne and har- 
angues the chiefs on the 
vengeance duc for Asfan- 
diyár, 283 

iuvades Sistán, 284 aeq. 

senis a hostile message to 
al, 255 

rejects Z4l's conciliatory over- 
tures, 256 

sacks Zál's palace, 256 

pillages Zábulistán, 287 

fights, defents, and executes 
Farámarz, 287, 288 

Bishitan intercedes for dl 
with, 288 

stops the pillage of Zábul and 
releases Zál, 289 

quits Zibul by Bishütan's 
ndvice, 290 

passes over liis son Sásán and 
nominates Humál and her 
jasue as successors to the 
throne, 291 

death of, 294 


Bahman (Vohu Manau, Vohü. 


man), ameshaspenta, 16 
month, 310 ‘ 


320 INDEX 
Bih Afrid, eseapes from Arjísp's 


Balkh, city, v, vi, 18, 30, 29, 31, | 
33. 41, 48, 73. 86, 87, 91, 
IO4, 120, 171, 255 
Kuhram sent by Arjísp to 
attack, 9o 
stormed, 92, 93 
its spoil sent away by Arjísp, 


palace, 153 


Bihzád, Gushtásp's steed, 56, 69 
Binalád, mountain-range, 29 


Asfandiyár quita, to invade | Bishütan ( Peshó-tanu), brother of 


ros | 

Türán, 120 | 
Bár, mountain-range, 30 
Barbaristán, 75 


king of, sends embassy to 
Gushtdsp, 75 
Baéstin-mima (Khuddi-nima), 24, 
27, 261 
Bastavniri (Bastvar, Nastür), 12 
Bastvar (Bastavairi, Nastür), 25 
Battlestead — Brazen Hold, 121 
Battle of the Twelve Rukhs, re- | 
ferred to, 29 | 
Bel, god, 293 | 
temple of, 293 | 
Bibliotheca, of Diodorus, 253 
Bid, div, 204 | 
Bidirafsh (Vidrafsh), Türinian 
hero, v, 24, 25, 37, 41, 51, 
52, 62 itg. 
goes as en voy to Gushtásp, 37, 
4o seq. 
returns with Gushtásp's an- 
sWer, 44 
receives banner from. Arjásp, 
at 
given command of one wing, 56 
volunteers to fight Zarir, 62 
slays Zarir, 63 
figlita Nastür, 70 
slain by Asfandivár, 70 
his head presented to Gush- 


——————— ÉEBRLBÓBM OS f GG amÁ—— ÓÀ sU 


tásp, 71 
Bih Afrid, daughter of Gushtisp, 
22, 100 | 
taken eaptive by the Turk. 
mans, 93, 04, Too 
goes with Huomdi to draw 
Water and meets Asfan- 
divár, 147 


— 


Asfandivár, vii, viii, 12, 66, 
117, 178, 179, 182, 195, 216, 
223, 232, 244 Sty, 249 sey, 
261, 288 acq. 

an immortal, 12, 19 

birth of, 32 p 

commands the host duri 
Asfandiyár's absence in the 
Seven Stages, 122, 124, 126, 
120, 132 note, 144, 150 

and the host praise Asfandi- 
yür, 123, 125, 131, 133 

revives Asfandiyir after his 
encounter with the dragon, 
127 

prays for deliverance from the 
snow, 138 

and Asfandiydr consult, 143 

sees Asfandiyár's signal and 
approaches the Brazen 
Hold, 150 

passes himself off as Asfandi- 
yür, 143. 151, 152 

joined by Asfandiyár, 155 

advises Asfandiyár, 179 

Asínndivár holds talk abont 
Kustam with, 192 

advises Asfandiyár to main- 
tain friendly relations with 
Rustam, 196, 217 

has Rustam served with nn- 
tempered wine, 211 

his despair at the situation 
between Hustam and As- 
fandivár, 218 

laments for Nüsh Azar and 
Mihr-i-Nüsh, 232 

Asfandiyür talks of the fight 
with Rustam to, 232, 240 


F 


"uc, t t JAN UY 


INDEX 325 
Bishütan, hears of Asfandiyárs | Burial-place of Hustam'srace, the 


overthrow and laments for 
him, 244 
n bewaila Asfandivár 


to, 246 
Asfandiyár's last charge to, | 
249 
heads Asfandiyár's funeral | 


truin, 251 
displays the corpse of As- 
fandiyür, 255 
reproaches Gushlitásp, 253 
Jámásp, 254 
consoles Katáyün, 235 
supports Kustam's overtures 
to Gushtásp, 257 
ihtended by Gushtásp to be | 
Balman's minister, 279 
intercedes for Zál, 285 
his intercession accepted, 289 
counsels Bahman to quit 
, Zábul, 290 
Bistün, mountain, $6, 184 
= Rustam, 229 
Bizhan, son of Giv, l'ránian hero, 
TIG 
Black horse, Gushtisp's, 15, 28 
Div. See Div. 
Brádrók.-résh, a Karap, 15 
the slayer of Zarduhsht, 15 
Brahman, 207 
Brazen Hold, the, vi, vii, 114, 
117, 119 seq. 135, I41. sey, 
159, 197, 206, 255 
route to, 120, 135 
described, 121, 135, 141 


Asfandiyár's stratagem for | 


taking, 116, 145 
surprised from within by 

Asfandiydr, 152 seq. 
captured by Asfandiydr and 

left in the charge of Sdwa, 


154 
Arjísp's head thrown from 
the ramparts of; 157 
destroyed by Asfandiyár, 162 


: Baiti, demon, 17 


Burial-place of Rustam, 287 
VOL. V. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


scene of battle between 
Bahman and Farimarz, 287 
Bust, fortress and district in Sis- 
tán, 173, 277, 287 
Büzurjmihr, chief minister of 
Nüshirwün, z61 : 


C 
CESAR, 11,32, 167 
sends embassy to Gushtásp 
on hearing of Arjásp's de- 
feat, 75 
daughter of 2 Kntáyün, 205 
sues to Rashnawiid for peace, 


307 
Cambyses, somn of Cyrus, 10, 11 
Candahar, x Kandahár. 


| Caspian Sea, 1 
| Chách (Tishicand), city in Türán, 


244 
Chigil, city in Turkistán, 54, 36, 
IIO, 139 
monarch of, 110 
eommands the left, 110 
zArjásp, 54, 86 
Turkman of z Gurgsár, 139 
Chin, country (often = Türán), 25, 
31, 37 tegy 45, 47, 50, 54, 
55, 58 #9. 72, 93, 107, 108, 
118, 142, 156, 158, 161, 162, 
171, 173, 188, 198, 199, 203. 
205, 208, 284 
images of, 35 
prince ol Arjásp, 35 
king of— Arjásp, 36, 52, 55, 
69, B6, ros 
sen of, 109, 205, 233, 239mote 
brocade of, 130, 144, 145, 179, 
210, 251 
silk of, 159, 295 
Khán of, 199, 220 
Faghfür of, 221 
Chionitm, people, 13 
Chihrzíd (Humdüi, daughter and 
wife of Shih Bahman), 290 
and note. See Humái. 
meaning of, 190 note 
X 


5 


422 INDEX 
Contents, Table of, v Danib, and the adventure of the | 
Cross, the, captured by Dáráb, 306 ruined vault, 303 

and note | receives gifts from Rashna- 
Cypress of. Kishmar, the, 27, 28, | wüd, 304 


34. 33 


Gushtisp and, 34, 35 
Cyrus, to 


D 
DABISTAN, treatise, 28 


its account of the Cypress of | 


Kishmar, 25 
Dai, month, 43 
Dai pa Mihr, day, 16 
Daityn, river, 13 
Dakiki, ps ¥, Vi, 10, 13, 20 &6q., 
30, 57 
account of, 20 
and Firdausi, 21 seg., 30, 87, 
85 
his work compared with the 
Yátkár-i-Zarirín, 24 seg. 
Damáwand, mountain, 12 
Danube, river, 11 
Dárá, Sháh, 381 
origin of name, 297 note 
Dérih, Shih, viii, ix, 281, 292, 
293, 297 sey. 
foundling legend of, 293 seq. 
Tabari's version of, 297 
note 
birth of, 204 
referred to, 394 seg. 
exposed on the Farát, 295 
found and adopted by a 
launderer, 296 seg. 
his royal birth asserts itself, 
295 
youthful escapades of, 298 


feels lack of natural affection 
for the launderer, 300 

hears of his case from the 
launderer’s wife, 300 

enlists, 301 

secn by Humiai, 302 


questioned by Rashnawád, 


394 
his prowess against the Rú- 
mans, 305, 3° 


DE the Cross, ge and 
note 

offered the spoil by Rash- 
nawdd, 306 


takes of the spoil one spear, 


307 
returns to Trin, 307 
Bashnawád hears from. the 


. Rccepts bar excuses, 310 
Humái proclaims tle acces- 
sion of, 311 
visited by, and rewards, the 
launderer and his wife, 
311, 312 
Dareja, river, 14 
Darius, Hystaspis, 10, 11 
his reign and Gushtdsp's 
compared, 11 - 
his change of religion, 11 
Darkness, Land of (the Gloom), 


30 
| Darin, religious rite, 19 
brought up as a cavalier, 299 | 


Daryai Raid, river, r4 

Deinon, or Dinon, historian, 252 
legend of, 292 

Diodorus, historian, 293 
Bibliotheca of, 293 

Dirázdast (Longimanus), 281 


INDEX 


Div, demon (Daéva), 32, 55, 66, 
71, 108, 174, 201, 202, 213, 

220, 230, 245 
riman, 35, 3t, 180, 188, 
189, 194, 195, 196, 215, 228, 


243 
a, informs Arjisp of Gush- 
tásp's resolve not to pay 
tribute, 36 
White, 117, 176, 203, 207, 
234 
Black, 199 
Sim and the, 203 
Dualism, taught by Urmuzd to 
Zarduhsht, 16 
- Dughdhióvá, mother of Zarduhsht, 
14, 15 
Dürásróbó, a Karap, 15 


E 
EuvPHEATES (Fart), river, 292 


F 


Facurir, dynastic title of the 
| princesof Chin and Machin, 
221 


Farimarz, son of Rustam, vii, | 


viii, 173, 174, 182, 183, 198, 
231, 260, 261, 272, 274, 276, 
277, 231, 283, 284 

referred to, 184 

and Zawüra sent by Rustam 
to bid Zál and Rüdába pre- 
pare to receive Asfandiyár, 


190 
alays Mihr-i-Nüsh, 227 


goes to Rostam and Asfan- 


diyár, 247 | 
marches against Kibul, 274, 
276 
takes the corpses of Rustam, 
Zawire, and Rakhsh from 


the pita, and conveys them 
tao Zábul for burial, 274 ëg- 


fights with the king of Kabul 
and puts him and his kin 


to death, 276, 277 


323 


Farímarz, makes a Zábuli king 
of Kabul, 277 
returna to Zübul, 277 
hears of Bahman's invasion 
and marches against him, 
287 
defeated and executed, 288 
Farit, river (Euphrates), viii, 294, 


309 
Dáráb cast away upon, 295 
Faridün, Sháh, 32, 34, 160, 180, 
196,204 &g., 245, 260, M 
271, 283 
flag of =flag of Kiwa, 59 


| Farahidward, brother of Asfandi- 


yar, Vi, 20, 22, 104, E10, 
114, 141, 171 
governor of Khurásin, 77 
stationed on the Tránian 
right, 94 
mortaly wounded by Kuh- 
ram, 95, IOI, 104 
Asfandiydr resolves toavenge, 
Lot 
Asfandiyir laments over, and 
prays that he may avenge, 
104 
dies, tog 
shrouded by Asfandiyár, 105 
Farád, son of Siyáwush and half 
brother of Kai Khuarau, 30 
Firdausi, v, vi, ro, 20 seg., 29, 30, 
87, 118, 232 
and Dakiki, 21 aeg, 30, 87, 


88 
references of, autobiographi- 
eal, 30, 88; 261 seq. 
to Bástán-náma, 88 
his praise of Mahmüd, 30, 
Bo, 118, 119, 262 
on the Story of Rustam and 
Shaghdd, 260 seq. 
Frasdánava, lake or river, 13 
Frashókart, son of Gushtásp, 26 


G 
GANG, mountain, 216 


| Garimik-kart. See GirimL 


-w Ww" 


ACCU ate”. Y CUTE 


324 INDEX 


Gargwi, Trínian hero, 109 
commands the lalt, 109 
Garshásp, l'ránian hero, 202 
Gdthas, the, 11, 12, 17 
Gelani, people, 13. See Gilán. 
Genealogies, fictitious, 282, 293 
Ghaznin, city in Kabulistin, 173 
Ghül, a sorceresa, 117, 128 
referred to, 121, 130, 131 
Ghundi, a div, 204 
Gikin, region in [Trin on the 
south-western shores of 
the Caspian, 13 
Girámi (Garámik-kart) son of 
Jámásp, v, 24 seq., 58 
his death foretold by Jámásp, 
50 
worsts Náàmkhást, 59 
rescnes Káwn's flaz, 59 
Girdkuh, stronghold, 30 
Giv, Fránian hero, 207, 208 
Gloom, the (Land of Darkness), 
30, 76 
Glory, the divine, See Grace. 
Grace, or Glory, the divine, 14, 


15, 32, 34 S'qa 39, 45: 52, | 


and passim 
Greeks, the, 282 
Gidarz, [ninian hero, 207, 205 
Gulgin, steed of Luhrásp, 64 
Gombadin, stronghold, 29, 30, 
86, 152, 171, 177, 306 


Asfandiyár imprisoned at, 84, 


Gurazm (Kavárazem), an relative of 
Gushtásp, vi, 12, 22, 53, 99, 
IO1, 102, IO4 46d., 171, 205, 261 
envies Asfundiyür, 78 
referred to, 97 
death of, 97 
Asíandivüár ‘addresses the 
corpse of, 105 
Gurgsár, tribe, 43 and note 
Gurgsár, Türánian hero, vi, 117, 
120 seg., 124 kg., 128, 131 
teq., 146, 233 note 
made captain of the host by 
Arjisp, 46 


Gurgsár, given command of one 

wing, 56 

persuades Arjiap to remain 
and fight Asfandiyár, 108, 
109g 

made leader of the host, 109 

taken prisoner by Asfandiyár, 
II 

offers to guide Asfandiyér to 
the Brazen Hold, 113 

goes as guide with Asfandi- 
yár to Türán, 120 

offered the kingdom of the 
Turkmans by Asfandiyár in 
return for faithful service, 
120 

describes the route to the 
Brazen Hold and the Seren 
Siages, 120 seg, 124 Mga 
128, 132, 134 

his chagrin at Asfandiyar's 
succeases, 124, 128, 131, 133 


reproached by Asfandiydr for 


giving false information, 
139, 140 

offered the captainship of the 
Brazen Hold by Asíandi- 
yar in return for trusty 
guidance, 140° 

shows the Irinians a for, 
140 

questioned by Asfandiyár for 
the last time, 141 

eurses Asfandivár, 141 

slain by Asfandiyár, 141 

Gurwi, son of Zira, Táránian hero, 


272 
Guahtisp (Vistispa, "Vishtásp), 
Shih, v, vi, vii, viii, 9 se7., 
15 seq.,24 2e9., 28, 29, 31 2eg., 
47 s6g., 61, 63, 68, 74 aeq. 
90, 92 seg. 103 ség., 119, 
130, 148, 154, 155, 150, 166 
s£9., 180, 181, 183, 205, 206, 
208 s&g., 213, 216, 220, 221, 
233 nole, 243, 248 atg., 279, 
281, 289, 293 
reign of, 9 seq. 


Gushtdsp, reign of, division of, 9 


_ pays yearly tribute to Arjasp, 


points of interest in, 9 
compared with that of 
Darius Hystaspis, 10 

legend of Zariuhsht and, 18 
the blaek horae of, 18, 28 | 
sees his place in Paradise, 19 
ridge of, 29 
suceeeds Lubrasp as Shah, 31 
his sons, 32 


31 

converted by Zurduhsht, 33 

helps to spread the Faith, 34 

establishes Mihr Barzin and 
other Fire-fnnes, 34 

and the Cypress of Ikishmar, 


34 
advised by Zarduhsht not to 
pay tribute to Arjísp, 35 
receives embassage from Ar- 
jáspand takes eounsel witii 
his chiefs, 41 
sends answer to Arjásp, 43 


seg. 
summons the host, 47 | 
marches against Arjásp, 48 


bide Jaméap foretell the issue 
df the fight, 48 

his distress nt Jámásp's pro- | 
phecy, 53 

encouraged to fight by 
Jámdsp, 54 


gives Zarir the standard and 
command of the ceutre, 55 
one wing to Asfandiydr, 
55 
other wing to Shidasp, 55 
the rear to Nnstür, 55 
takes up his position on & 
height, 55, 55, 65 
referred to, 6o, 64 s6g., 89 
hears of the death of Zarir, 


64 
wishes to avenge Zarir, 64, 68 
dissuaded by Jámásp, 64, 69 
offers his daughter Humid: to 
the avenger of Zarir,64 | 


INDEX 


335 


Gushtásp, offers his crown and 


throne to the avenger of 
Zarir, 66 

gives his steed and arms to 
Nastar, 69 

secs and laments over Zarir's 


corpse, 73 

bids Nastár lead the host 
home, 74 

marries Humái to Asfandiyár,. 


gives Nastür a command and 
bids him invade Turan, 


74 

rewards the host, 75 

builda a Fire-fane ond makes 
Jámásp its archmage, 75 

Mansion of, 75 

writes to his governers to an- 
nouncetlie defeat of Arjdsp, 
75 

receives embassies and tri- 
bute from Caesar and from 
the kings of Barbaristin, 
Hind, and Bind, 75 

makes Asfandiydr chief ruler 
of Irán and sends him to 
convert the world, 76 

sends the Zandavasta to each 
clime, 77 

Gurazm alanders Asfandiyár 
to, 78 

sends Jümásp to recall As- 
fandiydr to court, So 

convokes an assembly and 
arraigns Asfandiyár, 82 seg. 

puts Asfandiyár in bonds, 84 

sends Asfandiyar to Gum- 
badin, 84 

takes the Zandavasta to Sis- 
tán, 85 

welcomed by Rustam and 
Zál, $5 

the kings revolt from, 35 

while in Sistán hears from his 
wife of the storming of 
Balkh and the captivity of 
his daughters, 93 


336 |. INDEX 


Gushtásp, calls tozether his chiefs | Gushtiap, hears of Asínndiyár's 


and summons the host, 94 
marches from Sistin toward 
Balkh, 94 
takes command of the centre, 


hasthirty-cightsons slain, and 
is worsted, in fight with 
Arjisp, 95, 96 

takes refuge on a mountain, 
96, 1090 

consults Jimiasp, 96 

sends .Jüámásp to Asfandiyár 
with the offer of the crown 
in return for help, o7 

his interview with, and pro- 
mise to resign the crown to, 
Asfandiyr, 106 

commands the centre, 109 

makes thanksziving for vic- 
tory, 113 

promises to resign the crown 
to Asfandivár when he has 
delivered his sisters from 
captivity, 114 

summons troopa, rewards A«- 
fandiyÁr, nnd sends him tà 
invade Türán, 115 


hears of Asfandiyar's success | 


and writes to him, 160 

gives a banquet on Asfandi- 
yár'a return, 164 

consulte Jámásp and the as- 
trologers on Asfandiyár's 
future, 168 

Asfandiyár recounts his deeds 
before, 170 seq. 

promises to resign the throne 
to Asfandivár when he has 


brought Rustam and his | 


kin in bonds to court, 173, 


174 
Asiandiydr sends the corpses 


of Nish Azar and Mihr-i- | 


Nish, and a message to, 
232 

sfandiyår's last message to, 
249 


death and laments for him, 
I 253 
| the wrath of the nobles with, 
251 
reproached by Bishütan, 253 
Humaéi and Bih Afrid, 
254 
Rustam's overtures to, 255 
Bishitan testifies in Rustam’s 
favour to, 257 
is reconciled, and writes, to 
Rustam, 257 
advised by Jimisp to write to 
Bahman, 258 
writes to Rustam and Bah- 
man to recall the latter, 
258 
welcomes and gives Bahman 
the name Ardshir, 299 
tells Jámdásp of his wishes as 
to the succession, 279 
dies, 280 


SSS SS 


H 
Harr KinwAN, 117 amd note 
| of Rustam and Asfandivár 
| compared, 117 
Hinvivarin, country (Yaman), 
174, 207, 208, 220 
monarch of, 176 
J| Hamáwan, mountain, 116 
Hárith, father of Nadr (g.w.), 166. 
Hasan Sabbih, The Old Man of 
the Mountain, 30 
Hazár, Hazárin, Türánian hero, 
Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em- 
peror, 106 mote 
Hind, Hindástán, 75, 76, 188, 
257, 262, 265, 277 
kings of, send tribute to 
Gushtásp, 75 
Hiong-Nu, people, 13 
Hirmund, river in Sistán, 178, 
182, 186, 191, 196, 319, 
285 
referred to, 198, 231 


- TIC 
à 


Bl 


INDEX 327 


Hold, The Brazen. See Brazen | 


Hold. 
Horse, black, Gushtisp’s. See 
Black horse. 
Hrazdán, river in Armenia, 13 
Huma. See Humái. 
Humàái (Huma) daughter of 
Guslitásp, 12, 22, 25, 100 
her marriage with Asfandi- 
yür, 22, 74 
ignored hy Firdansi, 22 
her hand offered to the aven- 
ger of Zarir, 64 
taken captive by the Turk- 
mans, 93, 100 
goes with Bih Afrid to draw 
water and meets Asfandi- 
yar, 147 
escapes from Arjásp's palace, 


153 
laments over Asfandiyar, 252 
reproaches Gushtásp, 254 
Humdi (Chibraid), Shih, viii, ix, 
daughter and wife of Bah- 


man, 281, 290 Seg- J01 J02, | 


and her issue appointed by 


Bahman to succeed him, | 


291 
and Semiramis, 293 
genealogies of, 293 
accession of, 294 
Dáráb barn of, 294 
referred to, 29^ 


bears of Kiman invasion and | 


bids Rashnawád lead forth 
the host, 301 
reviews the host, 302 
affected on seeing Drab, 


3032 ! 
liears from Rashnawád about 

Dáráb, 303 — 
recognises that Darib is her 

son, 308 E 
her largess of thanksgiving, 


Rashnawid and Dáráb appear 
before, 309 seq. 


Humai, crowns, and excuses her- 
self to, Dxinib, 310 
proclaims Dkinib, 311 
Huna, the, 13 
Hüshang. Sháh, 150, 245 
Hüshdiv, 'láránian hero, 46 
in charge of the rear, 46 
Huítaosa, wife of Gushtasp, 11 
- Atossn (*), 11 
Hvyaonas (Kbyéns), people, 13 
Hyapates, son of Semiramis, 292 
Hydaspes, son of Semiramis, 292 
Hystaspes, father of Darius L, 
10 
governor of Parthia, 10 


I 
InLís, the Muhammadan Devil, 
174, 218 
Indus, river, 293 
l'raj, son of Faridán, 42, 44, 251 
Irán, v, vili, 12, 20, 21, 25, 29, 35 
and passim 
Tránians, the, v, 12, 29, 40, 56, 56, 
$9, 72, 86, 95, 09, 105, 112, 
136, 138, 154, 156, 185, 207, 
224 seg. 
wish to withdraw from the 
Seven Stages, 135 
encouraged to persevere by 
Asfnndiyür, 136 
provoked to combat by Za- 
wira, 225 
Istakhr (Persepolis), 293 
buildings at, attributed to 
Humái, 293 


J 
JAGATAT, mountain-ringe, 29 
Jámásp, minister of Guahtüsp, v, 
vi, 12, 22, 24 ge 4B, 58, 
Bo seq., 169 se6q., 206, 216, 
248, 257, 258, 279 
his omniseience, 19, 48 
answers, in conjunction with 
Zarir and Asínndiyár, Ar- 
jisp's letter, 42 


cor UCET 


= =~ w D 4. @, "WEN F 
ENI hr PATIT 


2 M 


» 


328 INDEX I 
Jám&sp, foretells the death in | Jiíhün, river (the Oxus), 12, 29, 
battle of— 40, 45, 48, 203 
Ardahir, 49 Jupiter, planet, 256 & 
Shidasp, 5o 
Ginimi, 50 K 
exploits of Nastür, so | 
death of Nivzár, $1 RABAB, small pieces of meat 
Zarir, $2, 70 nolé skewered together, for 
triumph of Asfandiyár, rousting, 152 


$2 
defeat of Arjisp, 52 
encourages Gushtdsp to fight, 
z4 
referred to, $9, 102 
dissuades — Gushtásp from 
avenging Zarir, 64, 68 
made archmace of Fire- 
temple built by Gushtásp, 


75 

sent to recall Asfandiydr to 
court, Bo aeq. 

advises Gushtisp, when be- 
leaguered “by Arjisp, to 


release Asfandiyár, 97 

volunteers to go to Asfan- 
diyir, 97 

reaches Gumbadáa in dis- 
guise, 98 

his interview with Asfandi- 
yür, 99 seg. 


sends for blacksmiths to 


unchain Asfandiyir, 101 

sets off with  Asfandiyár, 
Bahman, and Nish Azar, 
103 

foretella Asfandiyár's fate, 
169 

reproaelied by Bishütan, 254 

advises Gushtisp to write 
to Bahman, 257 

writes by Gushtásp's orders 
to recall Bahman, 258 

Gushtásp tells his intention 
as tO the succession to, 


279 
Jamshid, Shah, 32, 34, 38, 47, 180, 
202, 215, 216, 245, 271, 284 
Jerusalem, 306 note 


Kábul, Kábulistán, viii, 126, 170, 
173, 324, 242, 251, 260, 263 
m .O271, 273 sg 284, 


Sid sent to be brought 
up at, 264 
king of, viii, 264, 271 
daughter of, marries Sha- 


ghád, 264 | 
ani Shaghid plot 
against Rustam, 265 


aeg. 

gives a feast, 266 

pretends to quarrel with 
Shnaghüd, 266 

his treachery, 268 seg. 

grovela before Kustam, 


269 
entertains Rustam and 
invites him to hunt, 
269 
his hypoerisy, 271 
Farimare sent against, 
274, 276 
defeated and put to 
death with all his ie 
277 
tribute of, question about, 
265 
Farímarz makes & Zábali 
king over, 277 
» Kaiinian, race and dy- 
nasty, v, 7 seq, IO, 47, 
49, 52, 54. 57, 59, 60, 67 
arg, 73 seg., 70, B6, 9t, OF, 
122, 168, 205, 210, 223, 253, 
254, 282, 288, 289, 291, 
311 


| Kaidnush, brother of Faridün, 261 


T A LA Y 
INDEX 329 
Kai Kits, Shih, 29, 30, 116, 173, | Khallokh, city in Turin, 42, 44. 
174, 190, 203, 207, 205, 210, 55, 61, 74, 90, 107, 112, 157, 
215, 216 242,255 
his attempt to iy referred | Khín— Arjásp, 47, 51, 72 
to, 174 of Chin, 199, 220 | 
Rustam's patent from, 203 — | Kharrád, nonce name assumed by 


Kai Khusrau, Sháh, 10, 12, 21, 


39, 173, 188, 203, 204, 208, 


215, 284, 289 
Rustam's patent from, 203 
Kai Kubád, Sháh, 174, 180, 188, 
189, 202, 205, 210, 221, 
272 
Kámáüs, Türánian hero, 167, 199, 
220 
Kandahár, city, 233 note 
Kannáüj, city in Hindástán, 257 
Karap (Karpau), 14, 17 
meaning of, 14 
Kara su, river, 14 
Karimán, the great-great-grand- 
father of Rustam, 202 
Karpan (Karap), 14 
Kárun, mountain, 112 
Kashán, city and region iu Túrin, 


39 
Kashmar. See Kishmar. 
Kashmir, country, 263 
Kataytin (Nahid), daughter of 
Kai (Náhid), daughter of 
Cesar and wifeof Gushtdsp, 
vii, 11, 253 
her sons, 32 
counsela Asfandiyár, 168, 175 
referred to, 205, 249, 252 
her ancestry, 205 
Asfandiyár's last message to, 


oh over Asfandiyár, 252 
consoled by Bishütan, 255 
Kavirazem (Gurazm), 12 
Kavi (Kavig), 14 


Kavig (Kavi), 14, 17 


meaning of, 14 
Kawa, flag of, 59, 69 
rescued by Ginkmi, 59, 69 
Khálid, 12 


| 


Asfandivár, 146, 149 
Khashísh, Türánian hero, 46, 47 
made leader of the van, 46 
Khorasan. See Khurásán. 
Khudai-náma (Bástán-náma), 24 
Khurásán, 28, 77 
Khurshid, day, 92 nofe 
Khusrau. See Kai Khusrau, 
Khusrau Parwiz, Shàáh, 294, 306 
note 
Khydns (Aryaonas), 13, 25 


| Kishmar, place near Nishápür, 


27, 25, 35 
Cypress of, 27 
nccount of, 28, 34 
Gushtásp and, 34 
Ktesins, historian, 203 
his account of Semiramis, 293 | 
Persica of, 293 
Kubáíd. See Kai Kobdd. 
Kuhram, Türínian hero, 29 
Kuhram, brother or son of Arjásp, 
vii, 29, 46, $8, 89 seg., 106 
éga LIZ, T4T, 159 
commands one wing of the 
host, 46 
in chief, 56 
sent by Arjisp to attack 
Balkh, 9o 
his troops storm Balkh, burn 
the Fire-temple, and slay 
Zarduhsht and the priests, 


02 

stationed on the left, 95 

mortally wounds Farshid- 
warnl, 05 

appointed by Arjásp to send 
away the spoil of Balkh in 
the charge of his younger 
brothers, ro8 

commands the right, 110 

defeated by Asfandiyir, 110 


T e 


|. Launderer and his wife inform 
Rashnawaéd of the case of 
Dáráh, 308 


339 INDEX 
Kuhram, bidden to prepare for 
war, 151 
retreats to the Brazen Hold, 
153 


mistakes Dishütan for As- 
fandivür, 152 
hears tlie eries of the Tránian 
watch from the Brazen 
Hold and takes counsel 
with Andarimán, 155 
makes for the Brazen Hold 
with his troops, 156 
pursued by Asiandiyar, 156 
encountered — and 
prisoner by — Asfandiyár, 
157 
executed, 158 nnd note 
Kundur, 'T'ürínian hero, 94, 112 
stationed on the right, 94 
Kur, river, 13 
Kurán, the, 166 
quoted, 166 a 


L 
LABARUM, the, 306 note 
Land of Darkness (the Gloom), 


30 
Launderer, n, [foster-[nther of 
Dáráb, viii, 292 
finds Dáráb in the Farát, 296 
and his wife adopt Dáráb, 
297 
wife of, vill, 296 mg. 


informs Düráb of his case, | 


quits his home with his wife 


and Diråb and settica elsa- 
where, 295 

becomes wealthy but sticks 
to trade, 293 

perturbed at Dáríb's youth- 
ful escapades, 298 

brings up Dáráb to be a 
cavalier, 299 

Dáráb's lack of natural aifee- 
tion for, 300 

and his wife sent for by Rash- 
nawid, 304 


taken | 


and his wife visit Dinib after 
his accession to the throne, 
presents, 311, 312, 
Life, Water of, 30 
Longimanus (Dirázdast), 281 
Luhrásp, Sháh, v, vi. 10, 20, 21 
and nofe, 26, 29, 36, 38, G4, 
66, 68, 50, 86, 87, go seg. 
98 ség., 103, IO4, ITA, TAH, 
154, 155, 157, 159, 160, 167, 
171, 180, 183, 205, 208, 243, 
255, 281, 284 
resigns the throne to Gush- 
tisp and becomes a devotee, 


3! 
converted by Zarduhsht, 33 
his advice to Gushtásp to 
resign the kingship to 
Asfandiyür, 66 
opposes Kuhram, 9t 
slain, 9t, 93, 99 
Asfnndivár'a vow to avenge, 103 


M 
MáAcHÍN (China), 142, 145 
Madófryá£t, mountain, 30 
Magism, 11 
Máhán, l'rínian noble, 260, 263 
Mahmüd, Sultán, vi, 30, 89, 116, 
tiğ 
praise of, 30, $9, 118, 262 
Mahraspand, father of Adarbad, 
16 note 
Maidhyó-maungha, cousin and 
first convert of Zarduhaht, 


17 

Maleolm, Sir John, 3o 

Mani, heresiarch, 118 and mote 

Mansion of Gushtásp, Fire-temple, 
75 

Mansáür I., Sámünid, 21 

Marv, city and district, 29, 260, 
261, 263 


INDEX 331 


Mus'üdi, historian; 261, 293 
^ his version of the death of | 
Eustam, 261 


Mázandaráín, country (Hyrcania), | 


116, 117, 203, 207, 230 
Mecca, 31, 166 
Mercury, planet, 243 
Mihr Barzin, Fire-temple, 34 
established hy Gushtásp, 34 
Mihri-Náüxh, second son of As- 
fandiyár, So, 283 
slain by Farámarz, 227 
his death reported to Asfan- 
diydr by Bahman, 227 
his e sent to Gushtásp, 


Mihráb, mp of Kabul, 203 
daughter of = Riidilu, 203 
Mintchihr, Shah, 12, 174, 252, 284 
Mirkhond, historian, 39 
Moses, prophet, 294 
Moantsin, Old Man of the, 30 
sve the Prophet, 166 
quoted, 166 
Muta wakkal, Khaliín, 28 
and the Cypress of Kishmar, 
25 


N 
Nave, son of Hárith, 166 
recites the story of Rustam 
and Asfandiyir at Mecca, 
166 
his fate, 166 
Náhíl. Se Katáyün. 
Naishapur. See Nishüpür. 
Nümkhást, Türinian hero, 24, 26 


goes as envoy to Guahtisp, | 


37. 40 
returns with Gushtásp's an- 
swer, 44 


given command of the centre, 


ee 
worsted by Ginimi, 59 


 Nastár (Bastavairi, gent son 
of Zarir, v, 12, 25, 26 

his exploits foretold by 
Jdmisp, 50 


given command of the rear, 


55 

fights victoriously, 6o 

goes in search of Zarir, 67 

fimis Zarirs corpse and la- 
ments over it, 67 

exhorts Gushtisp to avenge 
Zurir, 68 

goes forth with Gmushtásp's 
sterd and armour, 69 

challenges Bidirafkh, 69 

fights with Bidirafsh, 7o 

attacks, with Astandigts and 
Nish Azar, the Türáninns, 
71 

leads the host home, is given 
a command and invades 
Taran, 74, 

stationed on the Tránian 
left, o4 

commands the right, 109 

Naubahdr, Fire-temple, 31 

Luhrásp retires to, 31 


| Nile, 176, 188, 191, 245 


Nimrüz, country,! 85, 248, 288 
Ninus, king, 202, 203 
Ninyas, son of Ninus, 293 
Mishápür, city in Khurisán, 28 
geq., 291 
Nivzár, son of Gushtásp, v, 26 
his death foretold by Jamusp, 
5o 
alain, 6o 
Nüldeke, Professor, 20, 21, 232 
quoted, 113 


Note on Pronunciation, 5 


KXuh IL, Sámánid, 21 

Násh Ázar, Fire-temple at Balkh, 
92 nofe, 173, 241, 235 

burnt by the Turkmans, 93 


Narimán, great-grandfather of | Nüsh Azar, youngest son of 


Rustam, 196, 199, as, 242. 
262, 264, 266, 280 


Asfandiydr, 81, 166, 226, 
227, 283, 255 


1 See Vol. i. p. 396 note. 


DRAME e ve. 


U E 
332 INDEX 
Nish Azar, attacks, with Nastir | Peshd-tanu (Bishdtan), 12 
and Asfandiyár, the Türi- | Pleindes, constellation, 110, 131 
nian host, 71 Pourusliaspa, father of Zarduhsht, 
builder of à Fire-temple, 81 L4, 15, 17 
with Asfandiyár at Gum- | Pronunciation, Note on, 5 
badán, 95 | Pálád, a div, 204 
informs  Asfandivár of Já- | Pür&ndukht, Sháli, 294 
müásp's arrival, 98, oo Purméya, brother of Fariddn, 
accompanies Asfaudivir from 261 
Gumbadán, 103 
slays Turkháün, 151 R 


wrangles with Zawüra, 226 

slaya Alwh, 226 

slain by Zawihra, 227 

his death reported to Asfandi- 
yir by Bahman, 227 

his corpse sent to Gushtåsp, 
232 

Nishirwin, Shih, 260 


Nash Zid = Mihr-i-Nüsh, 285 and | 


nite 


o 
OLD Man of the Mountain, the, 


30 | 
Onnes, minister of Ninus, 292, 


j.p aad 
Oxus, river (Jihün), 12, 29 


E 
PAHLAVI, Texts, 13, 14, 24, 30 


language (middle Persian), 


24, 26 


Paighi=Turinian, 13, 21 note, 33 | 


note, 41 mole, 44 note 
Pairs, country, 293 
Parthia, 10 
Hystaspes, governor of, 10 
Parthian dynasty, 281 


Pát-khusrau, brother of Gushtásp, 


26 
Persepolis (Istakhr), 293 


buildings at, attributed to | 


Humái, 293 
Persia, 706 note 
Persians, the, 74 
Persica, of Ktesias, 203 


Kat, city and district near Tih- 


rin, 14, 15 
Rakhsh, Rustam's steed, 117, 

184, 192, 198, 207, 208, 
214, 219, 225 acy., 254 Beg. 
266, 275, 276, 306 

referred to, 199 — 

wounded by Asfandiyár, 229 

returns home without Rus- 
tam, 229 

Kustam'& thought of aban- 
doning, 235 

healed by the Simurgh, 237 

tries to save Rustam, 270 

falls into the pit, 270 

body of, taken from pit by 
Farámarz, 275 

tomb of, 276 

lord of = Rustam, 306 


Ram, the, constellation, 129 


Kashnawüd, captain of the host 
to Humidi, ix, 301 seq. 
assembles troops, 301 
Dhinib enlists under, 301 
his host reviewed by Humdi, 


402 ! 

marches on Rum, 302 

and the adventure of the 
ruined vault, 303 

gives presents to Dhinib, 304 

questions Dirib, 304 

sends for the launderer and 
his wife, 304 

and Déáráb deíeat the Rü- 
mans, 305. 306 

praises Dáráb, 305, 306 


INDEX 


333 


Rashnawad, offersDéribthe spoil, | Rustam, Asfandiydr's fight with, 


grants peace to Cæsar, 307 

returns to [rin, 307 

heara from the launderer and 
his wife about the case of 

writes to Humdi about Dirib, 


308 
appears with Dáríb before 
Humdíi, 309 seg- 
Religion, War of the, 19, 26 
its two campaigns, 29 
Remus, See Romulus. 
Ridge of Gushtdap, 29 
Romulus and Remus, foundling 
legend of, 293 ; 
182, 184, 190 note, 278 
fasta in sorrow for Rustam, 275 
her frenzy, 273 
regains her wits, 279 
referred to, 190, 259 
Rüdbár, district, 32 
Rukhs, Battle of the Twelve, 
referred to, 29 f 
Ram, the Eastern Roman Empire, 
ix, 75. 76, 102, 180, 185, 262, 
301, 305, 307 
ravaged by Bashnawád and 
Dáráb, 307 


Ramana, the, viii, 173,205. 202. 305 


invade lrán, 301 
defeated by Hashnawid and 

Dåráb, 305 367 — 
Rustam, Iranian hero, vii, viii, 9, 
22, 30, 50, 73 95, 116 seg. 


165, 166, 173 #9- 254 T> | 


265 seg., 279, 279, 251 seq. 


287, 259 

and Zál welcome Guahtásp 
to Sistán, 85 

rivalry in legend between 
Asfandirár and, 116 

Haft Khwán of, compared 


with thatof Asfandiyár, 117 | 


Story of, vii, viii, 166 seq. 
recited by Nadr, son of 
Harith, at Mecea, 156 
referred to, 169, 17a, 306 
Gushtisp bids Asfandiyar go 
against, 173 
Asfandiydr's message to, 179 
his life attempted by Bah- 
man, 184 
his interview with Bahman, 
185 
entertains Bahman, 186 
hia great appetite, 185, 210 
jests with Bahman on his 
amall appetite, 126 
sends Zawdraand Fanimarz to 
bid Záland Rádába prepare 
to receive Asfandiyir, 190 
goes to the Hirmund, 191 
parleys with Asfandiyár, 192 
seq. 
invites Asíandiyár to visit 
him, 193 
accepts Asfandiyárs invita- 
tion to a feast, 195 
tells of his interview with 
Asfandiyár to Zál, 156 
his indignation at not being 
aummoned to the feast, 197 
seta forthtoreproach Asfan- 
diyár, 195 
his wrangle with Asfandiyár, 
198 seg. 
demands his proper seat at 
the feast, 200 
and Z4l vilified by Asfan- 
diyár, 201 
details hia ancestry, 202 
recounts Sám's exploits, 202 
his own exploits, 203, 207 
his patents from Kal Kade 
and Kai Khusrau, 203 
nged six hundred years, 204 
tries a handgrip with Asian- 
diyér,209 
accepts Asfandiydr's chal- 
lenge, 209 


gives Zawüra charge of the 
troops, 222 

goes with Zawáüra to the 
Hirmund, 222 

instructs Znwira, 222 

crosses the Hirmund and 
summons Asfandiyair to 
the combat, 223 

suggests a general engage- 
ment, 224 


his distress a death of Mésh | 


Azar and Mihr-i-Nuüsh, 223 

offers to surrender Znwüra 
and Farnimarz to Asfandi- 
yür, 228 


wounded by Asfandiyár, 229 | 


flees from Asiandiydr, 229 

senda Zawüra with a messag 
to Ad], 230 

parleys with Asfandiyár, 231 

recrosses the Hirmund, 231 

his kins grief over his 
wounds, 234 

bids the leeches to attend to 
Rakheh first, 234 

his despair, 215 

advised by Zál, 235 


Zál summons the Simurgh to | 


the aid uf, 235 seg. 

healed by the Simurgh, 237 

instrueted by the Simurgh 
how to overcome Asfandi- 
Wir, 237 seq. 

cuts the fatal branch of tama- 
risk, 239 

prepares the arrow, 240 

summons Asfandiyir to re- 
new the fight, 240 


334 INDEX 
Rustam, asks for neat wine, | Rustam, takes a final effort for 
2 peace with Asfandiyár, 241 
makes fresh overtures to | wey. | À 
Asiandiyir, 211 seg. | bewails Asfaudiyár to Bishü- 
addresses the royal tent- tan, 246 | 
enelosure, 215 Asfandiydr confides Bahman 
bids Zawira bring him his to, 248 
orms, 218 foretells an evil future 
rejects Zil's counsels, 220 for, 248 
arms for battle, 222 lamenta Asfandiyür, 250 


warned by Zawdra against 
Bahman, 2:0 

sends Asfandiyár'a corpse to 
Gushtásp, 251 | 

Bahman remains with, 252, 
256 

instructs Bahman, 256 

writes to Gushtdep to excuse 
himself in the matter of 
Asfandiyár, 256 

his overtures to Gushtdsp 
supported by Bishütan, 257 

Gushtásp aecepts the excuses 
of, and writes to, 257 


requested by Gusbtdsp to 


send back Bahman, 258 
equips Bahman for his jour- 
nev, 258 
and Shaghád, Story of, viii, 
provenance of, 260 seq. 
death of, 261, 273, 289 
versions of, 261 
and the tribute of Kábul, 
question of, 265 
Shaghid and the king of 
Kabul plot against, 265 


takes up Shaghiid's canse, 267 
with a host, 268 


persunded by Shaghád to go 
with Zawára and a small 
escort, 268 

pardons king of Kábal, 269 

ia entertained by him, 269 

goes hunting with Zawárn, 270 

falls n victim to treachery, 270 

Shazhád glories over, 271 


INDEX 


Rustam, slays Shaghád, 272 
last words of, 272 
his corpse taken from the 
pit by Furimarz, 274 
his obsequies, 274 se. 
and Artabanus, 282 
burial-place of, 287 
the scene of the battle 
between Bahman and 
Farümarrz, 257 


8 


SADA, feast of, 309 

Safid Rad, river, 13, 16 

Savashin (Sistán), 13 

Sahl, sonof Mahan, l'ránian noble, 
260, 261, 261 

Salm, eldest son of Faridán, 205, 
261, 284 


Sim, grandfather of Rustam, 14, | 


15, 58, 62, 63, 196, 198 seq., 
242, 262 seq., 205, 267, 274, 
285, 286, 289, 290 

his exploits agninst dragon 


and div recounted by Hus- 


tam, 202 

Sanja, a div, 204 
Sapud. See Spentó-dáta. 
Bapandármad, ameshaspenta, 18 
Bapor 1I. (Shápür), 13 
Sargon L of Agani, 293 

foundling legend of, 293 
Siri, city in Mizandariin, 174 
Barv, king of Yaman, 260 

= Anil BATY, q.v. 
Siain, son of Bahman, 290 


disinherited and flees from | 


court, 291 
account of, 291 
Sisinian, raceand dynasty, 10, 13, 
28r, 282 | 
Saturn, planet, 68, 89, 136, 154. | 
159, 220, 233 
Savalin, mountain in Àzarbáiján, 


14 
Sdwa, Ininian hero, 154 


335 


Sá wa, left in eharge of the Brazen 
Hold by Asíandiyár, 154 
Seythians, the, 11 
their wars with Darius Hys- 
taspis, 11 
Semiramis, queen, 292, 293 
legend of, 292, 293 
and Humái, 293 
Seven Stages, tlie, 118, 119, 121, 
135 
atory of, vi, vii, 116 sep. 
Asfandiyár returna from the 
Brazen Hold by, 162 
Shaghád, son of ZA], viii, 260, 261, 


263 aeq. 
Story of Rustam and, viii, 
260 seq. 
provenance of, 260 aq. 
birth of, 263 
the astrologers’ evil progmos- 
tic of, 264 
sent to be brought up at 
Kábul, 264 


marries the daughter of the 
king of Kábul, 264 

and the king of Kábul plot 
against Rustam, 265 seg. 

his pretended quarrel with 
the king of Kabul, 266 

goes to Zábul, 267 

his cause taken up by Rus- 
tam, 267 

persuades Rustam to go with 
Zawira and « small escort 
to Kabul, 258 

warns the king of Kábul of 
Rustam's coming, 269 

glories over Rustam, 271 

slain by Rustam, 272 

his corpse burnt, 277 


| Bháhnámmn, 9 sarq., 19, 20, 22 seg. 


27 sg., 293, 294 
editions of, 3 
[DM m son of Urmuzl (Sapor 
IL), 16 note 
ula die day, 310 
Shidasp, son of Gushtisp, v, 26, 
50, 55, 57, 58 


336 INDEX 


Shidasp, his death foretold by 
Jámásp, 50 
given command of one wing, 
55 
, Slain, 58 | 
Shirkhün, n Zábuli, 184 
guides Bahman to Rustam, 


184 
Shirt, sn of Gast, v, a 
slain, 5 
Shülak, Guahtssp 'ssteed ( Dakiki), 


73 
Asfnudivár'ssteed (Firdausi), 


126 
Bigzinn, & native of Sigz, 226 and 
note 


=Zawirn, 226 
=Zawira and Fanimarz, 228 
= Rustam, 241 

Sikandar (Alexander the Great), 


Silvin, vestal, 293 
Simmas, chief herdsman of Ninus, 


202 
Simurgh, mythical bird, vii, 117, 
132 Jeg, 160, 201, 235 #ey., 
246, 248, 255 
young of, 201 
summoned to Kustam's aid 
by dail, 235 #09. 
heals Rustam and Eakhsh, 
237 
instructs Rustam how to 
overcome Asfandiyár, 237 
sey. 


180, 203, 277 
kings of, send tribute to 
Gushtüsp, 75 
Bipand. See Spentó-dáta. 
BSistán (Sagustin), country,! vi, 13, 
17, 29, 85, B5, B9, o4, 173, 
174, 201, 220, 248, 261, 264. 
207 
lake of, 239 note 


mourning in, for Rustam, 278 | 


Sitüh, Türánian hero, 86, 87 
goes as a spy to Irán and 

reports to Arjásp, 86, 87 

Siydwush, son of Kai Káüs, 174, 
176, 192, 208, 272 

Smerdis, the false, 11 

Song of Asfandiyár, 129 

Spand-dát (Spentó-dáta, Asfandi- 
yár), 24 seg. 


| Spand-dát-níma (Asfandiyár-ná- 


ma), 26, 27 

Spendyád. See Spentó-dáta. 

Spentó-dáta (Spand-dát, Asfandi- 
Már) Ia 

Spentó-dáta (Spendyid, Sipand, 
Sapad), Eus 30, 116, 
17 = 

Spitima, name of family of which 

. £arduhsht was a member, 


15 
Stages, the Seven. See Seven 
Stages 
Sidiba, wife of Kai Kits, 174 
referred to, 174 
Suhnib, son of Rustam, 204 
Surish, angel, 170, 253 
T 
TAnBARÍ, historian, 261 
his version of the death of 
Rustam, 261 | 
on the etymology of Dáráb, 
297 mote 


| 'Table of Contents, v 
| Tamarisk, 239, 240, 243, 245, 247, 
Sind, rezion and river (Indus), 75, 6 


25 
branch of, fatal to Asfandi- 

yar, 239 and note 

| Taráz, city in Turkistán and dis- 
trict in Badakhshán, 157 

Tennyson, quoted, 251 

Tiber, river, 294 

Tihr&n, city, 14, 18 

Tür, second son of Faridün, 42, 
206, 261, 284 

Túrin, 12, 20 séj., 25, 32, 41, 43. 
45, 53, 61 and pasrim 


1 Bea Vol. i, p. 396 noie. 


INDEX 
Türánians (Turkmans), the, v, 15, | 


20, 116 
Turkhán, Táránian hero, 151 
noitre outside the Brazen 
Hold, 151 
slain by Nush Azar, 151 
Turkistán, 55 
Turkmans (Tür&nians), the, v, 22, 
25, 36, 39, 40, 44, 47, 51, 52 


GI, 72, 90 Kg GB seq, 104 | 


seq., 103, 110, 113, 114, 116, 
135, 152, 157, 155, 171, 173. 
206, 254 | 

army of, surrenders to As- 
fandiyár, 72, 113 

monarch of 2 Arjásp, 74 

led by Kuhram, storm Balkh, 
burn the Fire-temple, and 
»lay Zarduhsht and the 
priests, 92, 93 

take Guahtasp’s daughters 
captive, 93 

kingdom of, offered by As- 


Íandiyár to Gurgadr in re- | 


turn for faithful service, 120 
ordered by Arjásp to march 


out from the Brazen Hold | 


in force to attack the in- 
vaders under  Bishütan, 


152 EN 
hear the cries of the Iránian 


wateh in the Brazen Hold, | 


: 
a quarter by Asfandi- 
yür, 158 
Tis, son of Naudar, 57, 116, 207, 
208 


Tús, city in Khurásán, 28, 202 
Sam and the dragon of, 202 


U 
ULÁD, a div, 204 nofe 
Umar Khayydm, 3o 


Urmuzd, the Good Principle, 15 | 


oes 


V 


Vandaremaini ( Andarimán), 13 
Venus, planet, 159 


| Vidrafsh (Bidirafsh), 24, 26 


Vishtásp ( Vistáspa, Gushtásp), 24 

Vistáspa (Vishtásp, Gushtásp), 11 

Vistásp-sist, 11 

Vohu Manau (Vohüman, Bah- 
man), ameshaspenta, 16, 17 


| Vohüman. See Volum Manan, 


WwW 


WATER of Life, 30 
War of the Religion, the, 19, 26, 
29 
its two campaigns, 29 
West, Dr. E. W., referred to, H 
White Castle, 30 
Div. See piv. 


X 


AERXES, king, 282 
Asfandiydr and, 252 


Y 
YAMAN, region in south-western 
Arabia, 260 
Yátkáür-i-Zarirán, Pahlavi Text, 
13, 24, 27 and note 
compared with Dakiki's 
work, 24 ag. : 
Yazdagird IIL, Sháh, 294 . 
Ww 
Z 
Zíbul, Zábulistán, country,! vii, 
85, 86, 167, 169 zeq., 175, 
175 s56g.. 181 #60 193, 194, 
212, 215, 219, 223, 224, 235, 
248, 251, 151, 255, 256, 258, 
265, 266, 273, 275 seq., 231, 
283, 285 seq. 
Gushtásp goes to, 85 
Moon of-HBüdába, 198 and 
noble 


1 Sae Vol i. p. 396 nate. 


YOL. V. 


-m 


Ma | A DO Ta 


338 | INDEX 


Zübul, called *Habblestead " by | Zál, sends Farámarz against Ké- 


Asíandiyür, 216 - 
Bahman's sojourn in, 252. 256 
pillaged by Bahman, 257 
Bahman quits, 290° 


Zübuli, a native of Zábul, 212, 277 . 


a, made king of Kübul, 277 
Zahhak, Shih, 12, 180, 203, 204, 


Zairi-vairi (Zarir, Zariadres), 12 

Zal, father of Rustam, vil, viii, 
I, 14, 15, 55, 86, 169, 173 
seg., 182 atg., 196, 197, 200, 
204, 210, 212, 219 #¢y., 230, 
231, 234 4cq., 240 M9. 246, 
247, 255, 256, 261, 203 eg., 
277 seq., 281, 283, 385, 289, 


290 

and Rustam welcome Gush- 
tiap to Sistán, 85 

hears o£ Bahman's approach, 
182 

his interview with Bahman, 
183 

gives Bahman a guide to con- 
duct him to Rustam, 184 

and Hüdíba bidden by Rus- 
tam to prepare to receive 
Asfandiyár, 190 

Rustam recounts his inter- 
view With Asfandiyir to, 


196 

and Rustam vilified by 
Asfandiyár, 201 

receives a message from Rus- 
tam by Zawára, 230 


grieves over EKustam's 
wounds, 234 

summons the Simurgh to 
Rustam's aid, 235 


goes to Rustam and Asfan- | 


diyir (2M 
forebodes Rustam's future, 


247 
father of Shaghád, 260, 263 
. mend& Shaghád to be brought 
up at: Kábul, 264 
laments for Rustam, 273 
T 


bul, 274 
bids Ruüdába to cease to 

mourn for Rustam, 278 
receives and replies to Bah- 

man's hostile message, 255 
goes to meet Bahman, 256 
his palace sacked, 256 
Bishdtan intercedes for, 288 
released and returns to his 


ULAl-i-zar. See Zál. 1 
Zandavasta, 11 seg., 30, 35, 41, 43. 


51, 77; 82, B5, TOO, 173. 176, 
216, 241, 294, 299, 309 

sent by Gushtásp to every 
clime, 77 

burnt by the Turkmans at 
Balkh, 92 


Zarathushtra. See Zarduhaht. 
Zarduhsht (Zarathushtra, Zoro- 


aster), v, vi, 9 seq., 23 16g. 
27, 25, 33 seq« 42, 81, I 
173, 205, 216, 217, 241, 255 
legend of, r4 seq. 
conyerts Gushtásp, 33 
success of his Evangel, 34 
plants the Cypress of Kish- 
mar, 34 
advises Gushtiep not to pay 
tribute to Arjásp, 35 
referred to, 36, 35, 41 : 
elnin at Balkh, 92, 93 
amulet given to Asiandiyar 
by, 


130 
Zariadres (Zairi-vairi, Zarir), 26 
Zarir (Zairi-vairi, Zariadres), bro- 


ther of Guslitàsp, v, 12, 13. 
24 Méq., 37, 4] s6q., 40 MT, 
60 stg., 73. 94, 109, 169, ret, 
193, 254, 260° 
Love-story of, 26, 27. 
Death-story of, 26, 27 — 
converted by Zardulisht, 33 
answers, in conjunetion with 
Asfandiyár and Jámásp, Ar- 
jásp's letter, 42 


TT T8 4 wy —O— "V Tw 


INDEX 


339 


Zarir, his death foretold by Zawira, Kustam's instructions to, 


Jámásp, 51 222 

receives the standard from provokes the Irínians to 
Gushtüsp and the command combat, 225 
of the centre, 55 alays Nuüsh Azar, 227 


his prowess, 61 seg. 
alain by Bidirafsh, 63 
Zarir-nima, 26, 37 
Zartusht Bahrim Pazhda, author 
of the Zartusht-nima, 15 
" Zartusht-náma, poem, 18 
Yawira, brother of Rustam, vil, 
Vili, 173, 174, 182 seg., 187, 
I9I, 218, 222, 2125 y 230, 
231, 234, 250, 260, 261, 268, 
270, 273; 275 


goes in quest of Rustam, 230 

takes from Rustam a message 
for Zil, 230. . 

grievesover Rustam'swounds, 
234 | 

goes to Rustam and Asfandi- 
yür, 247 

warns Rustam against Bah- 
man, 250 

and a small escort accompany 
Rustam to Kábul, 268 


referred to, 186, 225 goes hunting with Rustam, 270 
and Farámarz sent by Rustam falls a victim to-treachery, 

to bid Zil and Hádába pre- 270, 273 

pare to receive Asfandiyár, death of, 273 

190 his body taken from the pit 
brings Rustam's armour, 218 by Farimarzand buried,275 
put in charge of the troops, 222 | “ira, Türínian hero, 272 
goes with Rustam to the Zoroaster, © See Zorduhsht. 

| Zoroastrians, 17 


n Hirmund, 222 


END OF VOL. V. 


Printed by BALLASTYSE, Hasson & Co, 
Edinburgh & London 


- A sull 


“A book that is shut is but a block" 


Jr de 
» GOVT. OFINDIA € 
Department of Archaeology © 


e A 
Ss NEW DELHI. Fi 
U 2 


Please help us to keep the book 
clean and moving. 


5. B., 148. N. DELHI,
