The Shahnama of Firdausi, Vol. 8 (Arthur George Warner and Edmond Warner (trans.), 1921)
==========================================================
Vol. 8 of the Warner Shahnama. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

- st dio ri «A


E


T"


30V ERNMENT OF INDIA


ARCHAOLOGICAL
LIBRARY


s T y
d E =
LS i
L]
q ^
i ar
um val E
' | d
F ,
i d » L
F , ut t apta
= D
i É "—
m à ' - : D
LJ j , f
, P
a *
ue LJ
5 waa
oF -
r
>= "n
"f


Tis =~


E | TRÜBNER'S
ORIENTAL SERIES


Eight Volumes now Ready. Post Svs. cloth, price 10s, Gd. each.


THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI.
Done into English by
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.
AXE
EDMOND WARNER, B.A.


The year A.D, 1016 saw the completion of the Shihniima, the grea
Persian epic, Ita author, the poet Firdausi, spent over thirty MP
ous years in its composition, only to experience, when the task hod
been achieved, a heart-breaking disappointment well worthy of In-
elusion in any record of the cilamittes of authers, His work has
survived the test of time, and by general consent ia accounted to
one of the few grout eplcs of the world. Geographically, and in some
other respects, it may be sald to stand half-way between the epics of
Europe and those of India. — In its own land it has no peer, while in
construction and subject-matter it is unique. Other epics centre
round some berole character or incident to which all else is suheer-
vient. In the Sháhnáma there is no lack cither of heroes or of in-
cients, but tte real hero ie the ancient 5 ple, and its theme
their whole surviving legendary history from the days of the First
Man to the death of the last Sdainian Shahin the middie of the seventh
century of our era. It ls the glory of the Persian moe that they alone
among all nations possess such a record, based as It Is on their own
traditions amd set forth in the words of thelr greatest poet. In another
sense, too, the Sháhnümna is unique. — The authors of the other great
epics tell us little or nothing of their own à pansonali dés or of their
sources of information. Their works are fairy uar suspended In
mid air; we see the result, but know not how it was achieved. The
nuthor of tho Sháhnáma takes us into his confidence from the first, so
that in reading it we are let into the secret of eple-makinz, amd cati
apply the Knowleder thus gained to solve the rohlem of the con-
wwilon of its est congener. To the student of comparative
mythology and folk-lore, to the lover of historie romance or romantic
history, and te all that are fond of tales of high achievements and tha
Beste of heroes, the Shühnáma ia & storehouse of rich aml abundant.
material. "To set forth à complete presentment of it with the needful
notes and elucidations is the ohject of the present translation, made
from two of the best printed texts of the orizinal—that of Vullers und


Landaner, and that of Tarner Macan.


THE


SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


DONE INTO ENGLISH BY
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A,
AND


EDMOND WARNER, B.A.


39452


The homes thot are the dwellings of to-day

Wl sink '"negth shower and meishine to d'ecuy,

Bui dorm and rain mhall meter muar ihat J

Have bwitli—the polace of my poefry.” P
FikRDAUBI.


VOL. VIII


J" =.
t p À ] =, JM l
D | d — —
a
y A. : į * aj
| ^ i, i 1


LONDON:
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., L™


BROADWAY HOUSE, CARTER LANE, E.C.


| e Libr AN pi^ | 1) : o)
v RA.


v^naAL ARCHAC LOGICAL
HER NEW DELHI.


ec Atl d es
de Jodi rs


The rights of translation and of reproduction. are reserved.


i
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE DEVONSHIRE PRESS, TORQUAY


CONTENTS


THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (continued)


NisuiawAn (continued)—
Pagr V. THE FALL AND RESTORATION TO FAVOUR OF


BUzURIMIHR, AND THE WisDOM OF
NüÜsHiRnwÁN


1. How Nüshírwán was wroth with Büzurjmihr

ordered him to be putin Ward . $

2. How the Ambassador of Caesar came to Nushirwan
with a locked Casket and how Büzurjmihr
was set at large to declare its Contents :

3. Discourse on the Responses of Müshirwán . .

4. Nüshírwán's Letter of Counsel to his Son
Hurmuzd *


5. How an Archmage questioned Nishirwin and
how he made answer — . : * 1


Part VI. Tue Suán's Last YEARS


r. How Nüshírwán made ready to war against Cæsar
z. How Nüshírwán took the Stronghold of Sakila
and how a Shoemaker had Dealings with
him : z ‘ : : : 2
3. How the Envoys of Carsar came to Nushirwan with
Apologies and Presents . à ‘ :
4. How Nüshírwán chose Hurmuzd as his Successor
5. How the Archimages questioned Hurmuzd and
how he replied ; : ; a :
6. How Nüshirwán appointed Hurmuzd as his
Successor and gave him parting Counsels — .
7. How Nüshirwán had a Dream and how Büzurjmihr
interpreted it as signifying the Appearance
of Muhammad . = å ; $


¥


FORE
ABBREVIATIONS a = 5 = = u * * xwv
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION . p : : 1 : . Xvi


4


14


28


43


46


at
54


57


Or


vi CONTENTS


Hurmuzp, Sox or NúsnÍkWwWÁN—


SECT. PAGE
1. The Prelude . : ; E a OF

z. How Hurmucrd ascended the Throne A harangued
the Chiefs l > . $4


3. How Hurmuzd slew fzid Cuitan, Zarduhsht,
Simih Barzin, and Bahram Azarmihin, his
Father's Ministers 1 : ^ D . 9 BI
4. How Hurmuzd turned from Tyranny to Justice . go
5. How Hosts gathered from all Sides against Hur-
muzd, and how he took Counsel with his


Warirs . : à i gz
6. How Hurmuzd heard of Bahrám Chübina and sent
forhim . : 7 = 96
7. How Bahrim Chübína came to Hutu and was
made Captain of the Host . . 100
8. How Bahrám Chübína went with twelve thousand |
Cavaliers to fight King Sáwa . + Iob
9. How King Siwa sent a Message to Bahrám
Chübína and his Answer . s 113


10. How King Siwa and Hahrim Chübina vet the
Battle in Array against cach other . - 415

11. How King Sawa sent another a to Bahrim
Chübína and his Answer . 117

rz. How Bahrám Chübina had a Dream in the Night,

how he gave Battle the next Morning, and
how King Sawa was slain 121

13. How Bahrim Chibina sent a Letter aGuoanoldé

his Victory, and the Head of King Sawa, to
Hurmuzd, and his Answer 129

14. How Bahrám Chübina fought with Parmuda,

Son of King Sawa, and overcame him, and

how Parmüda took est in the Hold of


Awiza . ; - 134
r5. How Bahrám Chübína ET a Message to Parmáda
and how Parmida asked Quarter ; 138


16. How Bahrám Chübina asked of Hurmuzd a War-
rant to spare the Life of Parmüda and the
Answer . ; : : : z = Iyi
17. How Hurmuzd's Letter, granting Quarter to Par-
mida, reached Bahrim Chibina, and how
Bahram Chibina was wroth with Parmida 143
“15. How Parmida came before Hurmuzd with the
Treasures sent by Bahrim Chibina . = 149


CONTENTS vii


Hugwvzp, Sow or NÜüsuigwáx (continued)—
RECT. PAGE
19. How Hurmuzd heard of the Ill-doing of Bahrám
Chibina and made a Compact with the
Khan . ; 151
20. How Hurmuzd WI. a chiding Letter to Bahrám
Chibina and sent him a  Distaff-case,
Cotton, and Women's Raiment . 151
21. How Bahrám Chübína put on the Woman's | Dress
and showed himself therein to the Chiefs


ofthe Host — . a 154
a2. How Bahrim Chübina went i hunt and saw a
Lady who foretold the Future to him . . 156


23. How Bahrim Chübína assumed the royal Style
and how Kharrid, Son of Barzin, and the
Archscribe fled : 158
24. How Hurmuzd received News of Bahram Chibina's
Doings, and how Bahrim Chibina sent a
Frail of Swords to Hurmuzd  . 160
25. How Bahram Chibina made known to the Chiefs
his Designs upon the Throne, and how his
Sister Gurdva advised him r 163
26, Bahram Chibina’s Letter to the Khan and how he
coined Money with the Name of Khusrau


Parwiz and sent it to Hurmuzd - 172
27. How Bahrim Chibina wrote to Hurmuzd and loy
Khuirau Parwiz fled from his Father . 173


28. How Hurmuzd sent Ayin Gashasp with an Army
to fight Bahrim Chibina and how he was
slain by his Comrade 177
29. How Hurmuzd grieved, refused Audience to the
Íránians, and was blinded by Bandwi and


Gustaham à 182

30. How Khusrau Parwiz héard of the "Blinding of
Hurmuzd : à : : : 184

KuHUsRAU PARWÍZ—

1. The Prelude. 196

2. How Khusrau Parwts sat upoe the Throne aud
made an Oration — . 197

3. How Khusrau Parwiz visited his F ather and cued
Forgiveness . 198


4. How Bahrim Chibina heand of the Blinding of
Shih Hurmuzd and how he led his Troops,
against Khusrau Parwiz . : z 200


~~ a? ate


"UEM M—


viii CONTENTS


KuvsRAU Pamwiz (contimued)—

BECT. PAGE

| s. How Khusrau Parwiz and Bahrám Chübína met
| and parleyed . ‘ X a . 204

| 6. How Bahrám Chübina and Khusrau Parwiz re-

turned, how Gurdya advised Bahram

Chübina, amd how Khusrau Parwiz told his
Purpose to the fránians  . n . 220

7. How Bahrim Chibina attacked the Army of

Khusrau Parwiz by Night and how Khusrau


| Parwizfled — . 226
| 8. How Khüias Puretcweptén dE ROS AR On
| Rim, and how Hurmuzd wasslain  . . 230


9. How Bahrám Chübina sent Troops after Khusrau
Parwiz and how Bandwi contrived to rescue


him from their Hands 7 à 233
10. How Bahrim, the Son of Siyáwush, took Bandwi
and carried him te Bahrim Chibina . « 237


11. How Bahrim Chibina summoned the Magnates
of Trin, how they discussed his Pretensions
to the Kingship, and how he acceded to the
Throne . ; 239
1z. How Bandwi plotted with Bahrám, the Son of Siyá-
| wush, to slay Bahrim Chibina, and how
| Bandwí fled from Bond  . A . 245
13. How Khusrau Parwiz went toward Rüm by the
Desert-route and how a Hermit told him of
the Past and Future 249
14. How a Cavalier of Caesar came to Kbusrau Parwiz
and how he sent an Answer by Gustaham,
Bálwi, Andiyán, Kharrád, Son of Barzín, and


Shápür . i $ . 257
15. How Cassar answered the Letter of Khusrau

Parwiz 260
16, How Cesar wrote to Khusau Persis declining

‘to help him, and his Answer . 261
17. How Casar wrote the second Time to Khüsras

Parwiz about giving him Aid  . 204
18. How Khusrau. Parwiz answered Cwsar about the

Alliance ; 269


19. How Cæsar made a Talisman zu deceived the
Envoys of Khusrau Parwiz, and how
Kharràd, Son of Barzin, solved the
Mystery . s à à . * , 271


CONTENTS ix


Kavsrav Parwiz (continued)—
SECT, PAGE
20. How Kharrád, Son of Barzin, expounded the

Faith of the Indians and exhorted Cæsar - 275
21. How Cæsar sent a Host and his Daughter to Khus-
rau Parwiz  . z ; è ; . 278
22. How Khusrau Parwiz led his Host to Azar
Ábádagán and how Bandwi met him on the
Way : : : ; : : à
23. How Bahrám Chübína had Tidings of the Coming
of Khusrau Parwiz and wrote to the Chiefs
of Írán, and how the Letter fell into the
Hands of Khusrau Parwiz and his Answer . 254
24. How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram
Chübina and how Kut, the Kiman, was
slain . : . : . . .
25. How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram
Chübina the second Time, was defeated,
and escaped from him by the Help of
Surüsh . ; : : : : . 292
36. How Khusrau Parwiz fought the third Time with
Bahram Chübina and defeated him — . . 300
27. How Khusrau Parwiz sent an Army under Nastuh
after Bahrim Chübína, and how Bahrim
Chibina captured him and reached the Khan
of Chin. i : : V^ ee ‘
38. How Khusrau Parwiz pillaged the Camp of Bah-
rim Chübina and wrote a Letter to Caesar,
who answered it with a Robe of Honour and
Gifts : : . : : z è
29. How Niyátüs was wroth with Bamlwi and how
Maryam made Peace between them . . 309
30: How Khusrau Parwiz gave Presents to Niyátüs
and the Rümans, how he dismissed them to
Rüm, and wrote Patents for the Nobles of
làn. jr. b i ; : . $3132
31. Firdausi's Lament for the Death of his Son . «315
32. The Story of Bahrim Chibina and the Khán of
Chin i . : + : a . 316
33. How Makátüra was slain by Bahrám Chübina — . 320
34. How the Lion-ape slew a Daughter of the Khán,
how it was slain by Bahrám Chübína, and
how the Khán gave him a Daughter and the
Kingdom of Chin : ; .


28I


288


303


x


CONTENTS


Kn PET Parwiz (continwed)—


d.


36.


37-


33.


39.


40.


41.


42.


43.
44
45.


46.


47.
45.


49.


Bl.
52.


‘How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Case of Bahram
Chibina and wrote a Letter to the Khan,
and how he replied . :

How Khusrau Parwiz sent Kharrád, Son of Barzin,
to the Khán and how he schemed to i
Bahrám Chübína i

How Bahram Chibina was slain by Kulán us Khar-
rid, Son of Barzin, had planned a


How the Khan had Tidings of Bahrim Chabina’s s


Death and how he destroyed the House and
Family of Kulin  . .

How Khusrau Parwiz had Tidings of the Slaying
of Bahrim Chibina and honoured Kbarråd,
Son of Barzin . 1

How the Khán sent his Brother to Gurdya, the
Sister of Bahram Chibina, with a Letter
touching her Brother's Death and asking her
in Marriage as his Queen, and her Answer .

How Gurdya consulted her Nobles and fled from
Marv i

How the Khán received Tidings of the Flight of
Gurdya and how he sent Tuwurg with an
Army after her, and how em slew


Tuwurg . ; a
How Gurdya wrote to Gunde : : à :
How Khusrau Parwizslew Bandwi  . à
How Gustaham rebelled against Khusrau Parwiz
and took Gurdya to Wife . :


How Khusrau Parwix took Counsel with Gurdwi
concerning Gustaham and how Gurdya,
prompted by Gurdwi, slew him . :

How Gurdya wrote to Khusrau Parwirz and hcl
he summoned and married her . P

How Gurdya showed her Accomplishment belt
Khusrau Parwiz à

How Khusrau Parwiz sent an ill-disponed March-
lord to Rai and how he oppressed the Folk
there.


. How Gurdya made Spórt before Euin Parwis


and how he gave Rai to her : i :

How Khusrau Parwiz portioned out his Realm .
How Shirwi, the Son of Khusrau Parwiz, was
born of Maryam with bad Auspices and how
Khusrau Parwiz informed Casar i :


PAGE


327


331


343


345


346


349


351
354
355
358
361
363


365


367
3608


371


CONTENTS


KnusmAU PaRWiz (continued)—


53. How Cesar wrote a Letter to Khusrau Parwiz,
sent Gifts, and asked for the Cross of Christ

54. How Khusrau Parwiz answered Cirsar's Letter and
sent Gifts s s |


a *


THe STory or KuvsmAU PARgWiz AND Suigix—


INDEX


55. The Prelude. : : i a í :
s6. How Khusrau Parwiz loved Shirin, how they
parted, how he met her again while hunting
and sent her to his Bower . ‘ : :
57. How the Nobles heard that Shirin had come to
the Bower of Khusrau Parwiz and how they
advised him and were satisfied with his
Answer . . . . . : ;
58. How Shirin murdered Maryam and how Khusrau
Parwiz put Shirwi in Bonds z : J
59. How Khusrau Parwiz made the Throne of
60. The Story of Sarkash and Bárbad, the Minstrel,
and Khusrau Parwiz : ‘ - :
61. How Khusrau Parwiz built the Palace of Madá'in
62. Discourse on the Splendour and Greatness ot
Khusrau Parwiz : z : : ‘
63. How Khusrau Parwiz turned from Justice, how
the Chiefs revolted, and how Guraz called
in Cassar ; : i : a :
64. How Cesar withdrew through an Expedient of
Khusrau Parwiz and how the Chiefs released
Shirwi from Bonds . : : : :
65. How Khusrau Parwiz was taken and how Shirwi
sent him to Taisafün . ; ` :


E * * + a


xl


PAGE
374


379


382


333


386
389
got


39%


405
407
409


418
423


4


mui qu


M^


a2
wef”


=
=
È
" p
s
I a
è
a
a 4
ë;
T
=
ø
1
, >
pto
A"!
p


es
"tn L-


pe


-Ji *


"


e
l
.-


æ


^,


»

y
«

Af v
,


THE SHAHNAMA


VOL, VIII.


BPE.


CMN,


GDF,


NIN.
AT.


RE,


RSM.


SR.
ZT.


ABBREVIATIONS


C.—Macan's edition of the Sháhnáma


L.—Lumsden's do.
P.—Mohl's do,
T.—Tihrán do,
V. —Vullers" Do,


Photius: Bibliotheca. Ex recensione Immanuelis
Bekkeri.

Magic in Names. By Edward Clodd,

Theophanis Chronographia, Ex Recensione Ioannis
Classeni.

Ihe History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Em-
pire. By Edward Gibbon, Esq. With Notes by
Dean Milman and M, Guizot. Edited, with addi-
tional Notes, by William Smith, LL.D.

Magoudi: Les Prairies d'Or. Texte et Traduction par
C. Barbier de Meynard et Pavet de Courteille.

Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Nóldeke.

Geschichte der Perser und Araber sur Zcit der Sasaniden
von, Th. Nóoldeke.

History of Art in Persia from the French of Georges
Perrot, and Charles Chipiez

The Koran: Translated . . . by the Rev. J. M. Rod-
well, M.A.

The Rauzat-us-safa: or, Garden of Parity. ..... By
Mirkhond. . . . Translated . .. by E. Rehatsek.

The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy, By George
Rawlinson, M.A. | |

The Koran. . . . Translated . . . by George Sale, Gent.

Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo'hammed-Ben-Djarir-Ben-
Yezid-Tabari, traduite . . . Par M. Hermann Zoten.
burg.


xv


IV
(Continued)


VOL. VIII.


i pur
A y mh.


PART V


THE FALL AND RESTORATION TO FAVOUR
OF BUZURJMIHR, AND THE WISDOM OF
NUSHIRWAN


ARGUMENT


Büzurjmihr, while in attendance upon the Shah during a
hunting-expedition, has a premonition of coming trouble and
immediately afterwards falls under the Shah's displeasure,
and is disgraced. Conscious of his own rectitude he refuses
to own that he is in fault and is treated with increasing rigour
till the Shah has need of his services to expound a problem
peony Cæsar, but with his sight greatly impaired by

Pia n


The rest of the Part is taken up with an account of the
wisdom of Nüshírwán as shown in his replies to questioners
and in his letter of advice to his son Hurmuzd.


NOTE


$2. We have other instances of such problems and ** hard
questions.” See Vol. vii. p. 5.

$$3 and 5. On Persian Wisdom.literature see Vol. vii.,
p. 218 seg. |

$4. It is manifest from the account in the Sháhnáma,
and it is probably true historically, that Nüshírwán did his
best to provide himself with a worthy successor. In addition
to this letter of counsel we have in Part VI. the account of
the examination that his son Hurmuzd had to pass,* and some
final exhortations.” Unfortunately


"The best laid schemes o' mice an" men
Gang aft a-gley.”


1 Cf. NT. p. 252 and note. * £5 57. t p. GI.
3 i


4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§1


How Nüshirwán was wroth with Biizurimihr and
ordered him to be put in Ward


Consider now the case of Büzurjmihr,
Who from the dust rose to the circling sphere,
Which will exalt one to the clouds on high,
Then bring him down in sorry dust to lie H
It happened in those days that Nüshirwán
Went forth from Madá'in to hunt. He chased
Along the wilderness the mountain-sheep
And the gazelles. The mountain-sheep dispersed.
The Shah was left behind with Büzurjmihr,
Who followed both from duty and from love.
Then from the waste the monarch reached a meadow,
And saw trees, grass, and shade. The weary Shah
Alighted from his steed to rest his eyes
Upon the grass. He saw no followers ;
The one of goodly face remained, no more.
The Shah reposed awhile upon the mead,
His head right lovingly upon the lap
Of Büzurjmihr. It was that wise king's wont
To wear a jewelled armlet. As it chanced
This clinging armlet snapped upon his arm,
And fell beside his couch. A sable bird
Swooped from the clouds to where he lay, looked
round,
Beheld that armlet, brake the thread whereon
The gems were strung, then ate them each in turn,
The lustrous pearls and topazes alike,
Flew from the monarch’s couch, and disappeared.
At that adventure Bizurjmihr aghast
Mused at the process of the turning sky.
' Two couplets omitted.


NÜSHÍIRWAN 5


He understood: “ My fall, my day of wrath,
My season of dismay, are hard at hand ! "

The Shah awoke, marked how he bit his lips,
Seanned his own arm, beheld the jewels gone,
And seeing no one of his escort there!
Conceived that while he slumbered Büzur]mihr*
Had gulped the armlet down, and said to him :—
“Thou dog! who said to thee: * “Tis possible
To hide one's natural bent ?' "*

But Nüshírwán C. 1752
Fatigued with many words his tongue in vain ;
He got no answer but a deep, cold sigh,
While Büzurjmihr stood withered by the Shah,
And by the process of revolving heaven.
That wise man marked at once the ominous sign
Of downfall and remained struck dumb by fear.
The escort of the Shah had gone about
The mead while Nushirwan was in its midst.
He mounted on his charger’s back in wrath,
And noticed no one on his journey home,
But bit his lip at Büzurjmihr the while,
And muttering much alighted from his steed,
Bade smite the sage's face as 'twere an anvil,
And to imprison him in his own palace.
So Büzurjmihr abode there and beheld
A frowning sky. He had a kinsman, brave

And young, attending on Shah Nushirwan
' Within the palace day and night on terms
Of intimacy. Büzurjmihr one day
Asked that dependant of the sun-faced Sháh :—
* How dost thou wait upon him ? Let me know
So that thou mayest be more serviceable."

“ Chief of archmages ! " said the servitor,

* It chanced this very day that Nüshírwán


1 Couplet inserted from P. * Reading with P.
* Couplet omitted.


C. 1753


6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Looked so on me, his bondslave, that I said :—
‘There is an end for me of food and sleep ! '
I poured the water for him after meat,
'Transgressing with the basin in the act,
And when the world-lord was offended at me
I let the basin fall."
Then said the sage :—
* Arise! Fetch hither water and pour out
As thou wouldst pour it o'er the Sháh's own
hands." m
The young man brought warm water which he
poured
Upon the sage's hands with gentleness,
Who said: “ Pour thus when he requireth it,


' Avoiding any awkwardness, and when


The water shall perfume the basin’s brim
Forbear to pour."
The servitor took heed,
And on the next occasion, when he brought
The salver, poured the water as the sage
Enjoined with neither tardiness nor haste. — .
“© thou whose love increaseth ! " said the Sháh,
“ Who told thee this 7”
He answered: “ Büzurjmihr,

For he it was that taught to me the mode
Marked by the Shih, the master of the world.”

The Shah said : ** Go and say thus to the sage :—
* With all that high estate of thine and lustre
Why didst thou seek the worse and not the better
Through thine ill nature and misgovernanee ?'

The attendant heard and coming quickly sought
The palace eagerly with stricken soul,
Gave Büzurjmihr the message of the Shah,
And privily received this answer back :—
* My station both in publie and in private
Far bettereth the monarch of the world’s.”


NÜSHIRWAN 7


The servitor returned with this response,
But counted as he went the grains of dust.
The answer made the Shah exceeding wroth.
He had the sage bound in a dismal dungeon,
And asked the servitor the second time :—
4 How beareth that insensate one his lot ? "

The messenger came with a tearful face,

And told the words to Búzurjmihr who thus
Made answer to that faithful friend of his :—
“ My days are passed more lightly than the Shah's.”

The messenger turned back, came like the wind,
And told the Shah that answer, which enraged him ;
He was as ‘twere a pard and bade to make
A narrow iron cage, then studded it
With spikes and nails inside, and set thereon
Withal an iron lid. Thus Búzurjmihr
Could neither rest by day nor sleep by night.
Thus for the fourth time to the servitor
The Shah said: “ Take this message and bring back
His answer. Say to him: ' How far'st thou now,
Environed as thou art by piercing nails ?' "

The attendant eame and gave the message sent
By that imperious prince, Thus Büzurjmihr
Made answer to the youth : ** My days are better
Than those of Nüshírwán."

Now when the man
Returned with this reply the Shah's face grew
All livid at the words. Out of the palace
He chose a truthful man and capable
Of comprehending what the sage should say,
Dispatched too with the messenger a swordsman,
Who acted as the executioner,
And said: “ Go to this bad, ill-fortuned man,
And say: ‘If thy reply give pleasure, well ;
If not the deathsman with his trenchant sword
Shall show thee Doomsday in that thou hast said


C. 1754


5 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSIT


That jail and nails and cage, and pit and bonds
Are better than the throne of Nüshírwán.' "
The envov came apace to him and told
The words of Nüshirwán. Said Büzurjmihr
To that good envoy: “ Fortune ne’er hath shown us
Its face. None of us is exempt from change,
And verily all good and ill will end.
Enthroned and rich or grievously oppressed,
We have no choice, we all must pack and part.
To pass from durance is an easy thing ;
The quaking is for them that wear the crown.”
That wise man and the executioner
Returned and, coming to the exalted Shah,
Narrated everything that they had heard.
The fear of evil fortune came upon him.
They bore that righteous guide from that strait cage
Back to his palace with the Shah’s consent,
And heaven turned awhile with matters thus,
While wrinkles filled the face of Büzurjmihr,
His heart grew more oppressed and worn, and both


. His eyes were darkened by anxiety,


While since his travailing surpassed his gain
He wasted with his care and pined with pain.


82


How the Ambassador of Cæsar came to Niishirwan
with a locked Casket and how Buzurjmihr was
set al large to declare its Contents


Now in those days it chanced that Cesar sent
An envoy with a letter to the Shah,
With gifts, with presents, and a padlocked casket,


NUSHIRWAN


And said: '* O king of warriors and chiefs !
Thou hast no lack of holy archimages,

So let them tell, not tampering with the lock,
What is concealed therein. If they say right
We will send tribute and our wonted gifts ;
But if thy clever archimages’ hearts

Fail in this knowledge indispensable

The Shah must not ask tribute at our hands,
Nor send an army to invade our realm.

Such is the message that hath come from Cesar :
Make answer as it seemeth good to thee.”

The monarch of the world said to the envoy :—
“ This thing is not a mystery to God,

And by His Grace divine I will achieve it,
Convoking holy men to give me aid.

Abide here for a se'nnight, cheered with wine,
Make merry in thy heart and be at ease.”

The matter proved perplexing to the Shah :
He ealled to him the great men and the wise,
Who all examined it in every way
To find a means whereby to loose that coil,
Examined, as did all the archimages,

That casket and that lock whose key was lacking,
But could not tell and owned their ignorance.
Now when that concourse proved of no avail

The heart of Nushirwin, the Shah, was grieved.
He said: '" The intellect of Büzurjmihr

Will search this seeret of the turning sky."

The king of kings, in sore embarrassment,
Gave orders to his treasurer to provide
A change of raiment from the treasury,

And had a choice steed saddled royal wise.

He sent them to the sage. “` Thou must forget,”
He said, “‘ the hardships that thou hast endured
Because high heaven above us so ordained

That thou shouldst have affliction at our hands.


C. 1755


10 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Thy tongue excited my displeasure: thou
Hast been the author of thine own oppression.
I am confronted with a thankless task,
The elders’ hearts have been perplexed thereby,
For Cesar hath dispatched to us from Rum
A famed priest of that land and therewithal
A casket with a tightly fastened lid
Padlocked and sealed with musk. The envoy
saith :—
‘Thus said my lord: “ Reveal this hidden thing,
And let the sages and the princes say
What lieth in this casket." ' So methought :—
‘No one will see through this veiled mystery
Unless it be the soul of Büzurjmihr.' "
When Büzurjmihr had listened to those words
His pain and former trouble were renewed ;
He left the prison, bathed his head and body,
And first approached in prayer the Lord of all.
Albeit innocent himself he feared
The Shah, the wrathful world-lord’s, tyranny.
He watched that day and night alike and pondered
According to the message of his master.
What time the sun was brilliant in the heavens
He mused upon the aspects of the stars,
He laved his heart’s eyes in the stream of wisdom,
Chose out a trusty man among the sages,
And said to him: “ My market hath been spoiled,
My vision ruined by my sufferings.
Observe upon the road the passers by,
Address them, have no fear, and ask their names."
Forth from his house went Büzurjmihr and met
A woman hasting, beautiful of face.
That wise man vigilant informed the sage
Of all things that were hidden from his eyes,
And he as feeling for his way rejoined :—


! Couplet omitted and reading with P.


NUSHIRWAN II


“Ask if this Moon be wedded.”
Said the lady :—
* I have a spouse and child withal at home."
The sage on his white roadster, when he heard
Her answer, started. Then another woman
Appeared and, seeing her, his agent asked :—
“O woman hast thou got a child and spouse,
Or, being single, only wind in hand ? "
* I have a husband if no child," she said,
" Thou hast mine answer, suffer me to pass.’
Just then another woman came—the third.
Her too the friend approached. * My Fair!” said he,
“What mate hast thou who hast such goodly
carriage
And daintiness ? "


T


* I never had a husband,”

She said, '* I would not one should see my face.”

Now mark the inference of Büzurjmihr
On hearing these replies. He hurried on
With anxious mien. They brought him to the Shah, C. 1756
Who ordered that he should approach the throne,
But was exceeding troubled in his heart
Because he missed the sage's piercing glance,
And heaved full many a deep and chilling sigh,
Excused himself for having wronged the guiltless,
Then talked of Cæsar and of Rum, and spake
Of casket and of padlock. Buzurjmihr
Made answer to the monarch of the world :—
“= Be lustre thine so long as heaven shall turn.
Now must we hold a session of the wise,
Of Cæsar's envoy, and the archimages,
And have the casket laid before the Shah,
Before the Great, the seekers of the way ;
Then in God's strength, who gave me intellect,
And made the right the business of my soul,
I will declare the casket’s whole contents,


12 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And lay no hand on it or on its lock.

Although mine eyes be dim my heart is bright ;

The breastplate of my soul withal is knowledge.”
The king joyed at the words. His heart grew

fresh

As roses in the Spring. Anxiety

Bent him no longer, and he called for envoy

And casket, summoned all the archimages

And mighty men, and seated many a sage

With Büzurjmihr, then told the ambassador :—

* Repeat thy message and demand an answer."
The Rüman, hearing, loosed his tongue and thus

Told Cssar's words: “From the victorious world-

lord

We look for wisdom, knowledge, and renown,

And thou, O master of the world! hast Grace,

And stature, greatness, lore, and might of hand.

The wise archmages—seekers of the way—

The chiefs and heroes that attend upon thee,

Are either all assembled at thy court,

Or are thy lieges still where'er they be.

If these shrewd-hearted sages shall behold

This casket with its lock and seal and stamp, .

And state distinctly what is there concealed,

So that their statement shall accord to wisdom,

Then by this token I will send to thee

The tribute that my realm can well afford ;

But if in any wise they fail herein

Ask not for tribute from our land again.”
Whenas the sage had heard the speaker's words

He loosed his tongue and offered praise and said :—

“Oh! be the world’s Shah Shih for evermore,

May he be eloquent and fare with fortune !

Praise to the Master of the sun and moon,

Who showeth to the soul the path to knowledge,

And knoweth all things manifest and hidden ;


NOUSHIRWAN 13


I covet knowledge, He is past all need."
Within the casket are three lustrous pearls, C. 1757
And greater coverture than I have said.*
One pearl is pierced, the second is half pierced,
The third hath had no intercourse with iron.”

The Rüman sage, on hearing, brought the key
To Nüshírwán who looked. Concealed within
There was a pyx, and in the pyx a veil
Of painted silk, and in the silk three jewels,
Just as the wise man of Iran had said,
Because of those three gems the first was pierced,
The second half pierced and the third intact.
Then all the archimages praised the sage
And showered gems on him, The king of kings
Became of joyful countenance and filled
The mouth of Büzurjmihr with lustrous pearls.
His conduct in the past oppressed his heart,
He writhed, his face grew furrowed: why had he
Dealt so oppressively with Büzurjmihr
From whom he had experienced love and faith ?
The sage, when he beheld the Shah's shrunk face,
And grief-pierced soul, revealed what had been

hidden,
Declared all that had passed to Nushirwan,
Told of the armlet, of the sable bird,
The liege’s care, the slumber of the Shah,
And added: “ This was doomed to come to pass,
And sorrow and remorse will profit not.
When heaven is intending good or ill
What are Sháh, archimage, or Büzurjmihr ?
God hath implanted in the stars the seed,
And we must write the sentence on our heads ;
So let the heart of Nüshírwán, the Sháh,
Rejoice exempt from pain and grief for ever.
Exalted though the Sháh be yet his state
+ Reading with P. è Jd.


C. 1748


14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Is made more gracious by his minister.

The chase, war, pleasure, largess, justice, feast,

These are the business of the king of kings.

He knoweth what Sháhs did in days of yore,

So by that token let him do the same.

To gather treasure, to provide the host,

To chide, speak, hear the suppliant, and take
thought

For rule and treasure, these things are a care,

That, heart and soul, the minister must bear."


$3
Discourse on the Responses of. Nushirwán


Thus was it at the time of Nüshírwán :

He was at once the Sháh and paladin,

At once a warrior and archimage,

The Fire-priest and the captain of the host.

He had his emissaries everywhere,

And trusted not the world to ministers.

None could conceal from him in great or small

The good and evil of the world's estate.
One day a loyal archmage of his agents

Took on himself to put this to the Shah :—

^ One time without reproof thou passest by

A fault. Another time the same offender

Is hung howe'er much he exeuse himself ! "'
The Sháh replied: * When one doth own his

fault

I am as leech, he is as wretched patient

That would avoid the dose and sheddeth tears ;

If that dose fail I leech his soul no more."
Another archmage said to him: “ Be blest,

And sheltered from all ill on every side !


NUSHIRWAN I5


The captain of the host went from Gurgán
With privacy, and entering a wood
There for a while he slumbered. The Gurkils
Bore off his baggage! He was left unfurnished,
And, further, turneth back on that account ! "
The Shah made answer thus: ‘* We do not need
- That militarist. How can he guard troops
Who cannot guard himself ? "1
Another said :—
“ Live happy evermore with archimages
To sit, to banquet, and repose with thee !
There is a famous chieftain present here,
Whose treasure passeth thine!”
The Shah replied :—
“Yea, rightly, for he is our empire’s crown.
I tender both his treasures and his life,
And toil to magnify him.”
said another :—
“Great king! live ever and unscathed by ill!
Among the captives carried off from Rim
Are many babes unweaned."
He gave this sentence :—
" The little ones must not be reckoned captives.
We will dispatch them glad and in good case
To their own mothers.”
People wrote to him :—
" A hundred wealthy Riumans offer ransom.”
“Tf they are doing it through fear,” he said,
* Sell each chief for a cup of wine and ask.
No more because we do not lack their goods.
I will require their jewels, purses, slaves,


* Mohl translates :—"' Le Sipehbed est sorti un jour de Gourgan
en secret, est entré dans un bois et y a dormi pendant quelque tem
ses bagages étaient sur un autre steppe, il n'avait rien avec lui et
fut obligé de s'en revenir pour re joindre ses bagages." Nouschirwan
d erg: par cette sentence : | Je n'avais pas besoin d'une escorte ;
celui qui veille sur l'armée ne s'inquiéte pas pour lui-même."


C. 1759


16 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And gold and silver with the scimitar.”

They told him: “ Of the rich men of the city
There are two merchants and they keep folk waking
The best part of the night with shouts of revel,
And twanging of the rebeck and the harp.”

He made them this reply: ** No hardship this,
And do ve others that are wealthy too
Live like these twain in mirth and jollity ;

Be inoffensive and live unaggrieved.”
One day they wrote to him: “ Mayst thou be
happy !
Far from thee ever be the evil eye !
The monarch of Yaman observed at court :—
" When Nüshírwán doth ope his mouth to speak
He talketh so much of the dead that those
Alive have their glad lives made sad thereby ! ' "

He answered thus : ** All wise and high-born men
Speak of the dead : the friendship is not sound
Of any that would purge the heart of them."

Another said: “O Shah! thy youngest son
Doth act not with the justice of his sire.

He buyeth an estate at such a rate
As to aggrieve the seller!”
Said the Sháh :—

~ This is not well, so let the seller keep
Both price and land."

“O Shah,” another said,
* Imperious, far from blame and from reproach
Thy heart was gentle once: why hath it grown
So overbearing and so choleric ? ”

He thus made answer: “ I had no teeth then,
And fed on milk because I could no other,

But since my teeth came, and my back grew
straight,
My quest is flesh because I have grown strong."

Another said : ** I own that thou art mighty,


NUSHIRWAN 17


Our better both in counsel and in knowledge,
But how hast thou surpassed the kings of kings,
And made the whole world watch thy policy ? "
^" My wisdom is a thing," he thus replied,
"That is beyond their ken. Sense, knowledge,
counsel--
These are my ministers, my treasury
Is earth, my treasurer thought."
Another said :—
“O king! thy hawk in chase hath bound an.
eagle!”
Thus said he: “ Beat its back; why should it
fall
Upon its better? Gibbet it on high
To suffer in its turn, for e’en in fight
The subject may not seek to conquer kings.”
Another chief—one of the emissaries—
Said thus: '* O monarch of the world! Barzín
At morn departed with the host and met
A reader of the stars who prophesied :—
‘None will behold again this haughty chief,
This mighty army, and its equipage,
When once their backs are turned upon the king ! ' "'
The Shah replied: “ Revolving heaven hath
shown
Barzin's designs a loving countenance,
And stars and sun and moon will not destroy
That chieftain with his treasure and his host.”
Another archmage said: “ The king, one day,
Bade choose a man, illustrious by birth,
To make the circuit of the sovereignty
Both for the sake of justice and to send
Reports concerning matters great and small, C. 1760
And good or evil, to the court. Gashasp
Is both illustrious and old : ‘twere well
That justice be administered by him."


VOL. VIII. B


18 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The Shah replied: “‘ Gashasp, though far from
want,
Is still possessed by greed. Choose some one else,
Who toileth not upon his own behalf,
And is possessed of treasures of his own,
One of experience, upright and austere,
Whose first concern is for the poor.”
One said :—
“The chief cook hath a grievance ‘gainst the Shah
And chiefs, and saith: ‘ I dress his favourite meats,
And serve them at cross roads. He savoureth not,
Nor toucheth, them!* That loyal servant
quaketh.”

“Too much food may disgust,” the Shah replied.
Another said: “ All thoughtful people blame
The king of kings because he goeth forth
Without an ample escort, and the hearts
Of all his friends are full on that account
For fear some enemy with ill designs
May suppliant-wise contrive to get at him.”

He made this answer: “ Equity and wisdom
Protect the great king's person. Hight sufficeth
To guard the just judge though he be alone.”

Another said: ‘* O wisdom’s mate! the prince
Of Khurásán said on the riding-ground :—

‘I know nôt why the king recalled Garshásp.' "'

The Sháh made answer: ' He hath left undone
My bidding and ignored my purposes :

I ordered him to ope for good or ill

My treasury's portal to deserving folk.

The man that is a niggard in his gifts
Concealeth all the monarch's Grace divine."

Another said: “The great king is a magnate
With all men, and munificent and holy.

What hath Mihrak, that ancient servant, done
To have his pay reduced, his visage wan ? "


à NÜSHIRWAN t


The Sháh replied: ^ Mihrak hath grown too
bold,
Relying on his former services.
He came to court and took his seat bemused,
And he was never save with wine in hand."
An archmage of the intelligencers said :—
“The Shah, when marching to encounter Cesar,
Called only the Iranians to the war,
And so fran became hard pressed by Rúm.”
He answered: “ This hostility is innate,
"Tis war with Áhriman."
Another time
One ventured to observe: “ The Sháh selecteth
Troops differing from those of former Sháhs.
What look’st thou for in charger-riding Lions,
Expert of hand, upon the day of battle ? "
He thus replied : * The cavalier of war C. 1761
Ne'er must be satiate of combating.
Feast and the field of battle must be one
To him both by bright day and darksome night.
He never faileth in the hour of need,
And few or many make no odds to him."
Another said: '* O Nüshírwán, the Sháh !
Live ever joyful and with youthful fortune.
A man was at the gateway from Nisá—
A servant and a trusty oflicer—
Who at the reckoning at the taxing-office
Was found short by three hundred thousand drachms.
He pleaded: * All are spent.' Chiefs, archimages,
And tax-collectors are concerned.”
The king,
On hearing how the archimages claimed
The money from the officer, commanded :—
“ Press not for what is spent : give him too some-
what
Out of the treasury.”


22 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


But we have seen it niggard to the mean,
And greed and harshness tempt not me."
* O king!"
An archmage said, “ shrewd Kurakhan hath wrung
From famous Balkh three hundred thousand
drachms,
And handed them to us who laid them up
Among thy treasures.”
= We,” he made reply,
“ Require not drachms through others’ sufferings,
So give them back to those from whom they came,
With somewhat also from the treasury,
Because the world-lord that adoreth God
Hath no desire to vex his subjects’ hearts.
Raze Kurdkhin’s fine palace and enrich
His roofs with clay. His palace shall be waste,
His profit toil and, after toil, distress
And malison. Take from our roll his name,
And hold of no account his likes at court.”
Another said: “O Shah of glorious race !
Thy converse turneth greatly on Jamshid
And on Káüs."
Thus Nushirwan replied :—
“Oh! may our knowledge keep them ever young !
I speak of them that mine own head and crown
May be remembered after I am dead.”
“ Why hideth,” asked another man, ** the Sháh
His secrets from the illustrious Bahman ? "
The Shah replied: “He turneth him from
wisdom,
And eateth of the fruit of his own lusts,”
One said ; “ O Sháh that tendereth thy subjects ?
Why hast thou recently become remiss ? "
He thus made answer: “ I associate
With sage and archimage, for when the voice
Of Ahriman is at our ears our hearts


NUSHIRWAN 23


Grow void of counsel and our brains of sense.”

An archmage asked the monarch of the earth
To speak concerning kingship and the Faith,

And said: “ A man of wisdom will allow
A faithless better than a kingless world.”

He thus made answer: “I have said the same,
And holy men have heard my words. The world-lord
Ne’er saw a faithless world though every one
Hath his own Faith. One man adoreth idols,
Another's Faith is pure. One said: ' À curse
Is better than a blessing,” but mere words
Will never wreck the world, so speak thy mind.
But when the great king too is void of Faith
No one will bring down blessings on the world.
Faith and the sovereignty are like the body
And soul; the twain support the world. *

“Q Shah
Of joyous nature ! thou hast oft observed,"
One said, “ before the chiefs ; * What time the throne
Is destitute of king then Faith and wisdom
Are worthless.’ Once thou saidest: ' I am fortune,
And fortune’s pretext both for good and ill,
And when one uttereth praises in the world
The crop in secret cometh back to me.’ ”
He answered: “ Yea, “tis well. The great king's
head
Is fortune’s crown. The world is as the body ;
Kings are its head and crowned accordingly.”
Another said : * O Sháh, the people's friend !
Be thine the sovereignty and length of days !
Five days have passed, O lustre of the soul!
Since last the high priest came before thy presence."
He answered: “I am not concerned thereat,
For he is occupied on mine affairs.”
One said: “ O Shah of sunlike Grace to whom
i Cf. Vol. vi. p. 259.


C. 1764


24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Time will bring forth no peer! we see a suitor
Attending court each morn, and that affairs |
Are wrong with him, but wot not of his grievance,"
He answered : “ In Hijáz! thieves plundered him
Of countless goods. That he may not be troubled
I have replaced them from the treasury,
And keep him at the court on this account
To see if he can recognise the thieves."
Another said: “ O Shah of glorious birth,
The lord of bounty and the lord of justice !
Down from the time of Gaiümart till now
No Sháh like thee hath filled the royal throne."
He said: “I give thanksgiving unto God
That matters are as He would have them be.”
The sentences of Nüshírwán are past,
The world is old but ever young my care ;
My genius hath not blossomed to this last
Though keen it grew, such fire in eld was there !*
For many a year I told this history
Though hidden 'twas from Saturn, moon, and
sun,
But since Mahmüd's name erowned my poetry
Its commendation through the world hath run.
The idolators of Hind he bringeth down
With sword whose sheen, like silk of Wash,” is
bright.
Oh! may the age fare well through his renown,
And in his diadem the heaven delight.


' Reading with P. In A.D. 575 the Persians overthrew the
Axumite power in Arabia and conquered Yaman. The Hijáz would
come to some extent within their sphere of influence `

' Couplet omitted,

* "son épée damasquinée comme une broderie." Mohl. Wash
is the name of a city in Turkistán, famous for its silk.


NUSHIRWAN 25


$4
Niishirwan's Letter of Counsel to his Son Hurmuzd


Now read the letter of Shah Nushirwan,

And muse upon it in thine ardent soul.

He said: * This letter grateful to the heart,
Instructed, learned, well counselled, and abstruse,
Is from the Shah exalted and sun-faced.

Great is he, heaven inclineth to his wish,

The world-lord he, just and beneficent,

Without reproach, the lavisher of treasure,
Inereaser of Kubád's renown and throne,
Transmitter of the crown of state and justice,
Possessed of Grace and stature, fame and conduct,
And all that he could wish for from the crown
Of greatness, to Hurmuzd, our own pure son,
Who heartily accepteth all our counsels,

And is through God glad and victorious,

For evermore a world-lord crowned and throned.
This lucky month upon the day Khurdad,

With fair stars and world-brightening presages,
We set upon thy head the crown of gold,

As we ourselves received it from our sire,

And give thee too the blessings which Kubad,
The glorious, bestowed upon our crown.

Be vigilant and master of the world,

Be wise and noble and without offence,

Increase in knowledge and incline to God,
Because He is the Guider of thy soul.

We have inquired of one of good discourse,

One ancient both in wisdom and in years :—

" What man of us approacheth nearest God ?
Who goeth by the straitest path to Him ?'

He gave reply : * Choose knowledge as thou wouldst
That people should bless thee because the sage


C. 1765


26 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA US]


Deriveth not addition from the dust :

Make thy pure spirit then approved by knowledge.’

Through knowledge doth the Shih adorn the
throne :

Mayst thou be sage and of vietorious fortune.

God grant thou never be a promise-breaker,

For promise-breakers have the dust for shroud.

See that thou punish not the innocent,

Or listen to the words of slanderers.

Let every ordinance of thine be just,

For justice will delight thy spirit. Seek not,

As thou wouldst be the lustre of thy throne,

To compass falsehood with thy tongue. Secure

A subject in the enjoyment of his wealth,

For others’ havings are no friends of thine :

Joy in the wealth that thou hast earned thyself.

‘Tis thine to be the asylum for all folk,

For overlord and underling alike.

Reward the man that acteth uprightly ;

Oppose withal the evil-doer. Although

Thou mayst be held in honour in the world,

Forget not travail, misery, and loss ;

Be what one may this is a Wayside Inn

Wherein it booteth not to feel at home.

Seek worth and be associate with the wise

If dost wish that fortune shall commend thee.

By knowledge bind the hands of tyranny,

As thou wouldst seape the evil of mishap,

And dearly tender him who in thy presence

Hath trodden under foot thy foeman’s life.

The great men and the merchants of the city

Must have their share of justice. When thou settest

The crown of king of kings upon thy head

Discern the worse way from the truly great.

Keep ever in thy presence some wise man,

And hold him as thy body and thy soul.


NUSHIRWAN


he


wl


In matters great and small pay no regard

To any save the accomplished and well born.
Give not the worthless battle-gear for when
Thou seekest it “tis not to hand. Thy friend
Will yield thee to the foe; a double task

Both difficult and wretched will be thine :

He will bring down thy weapons to the field,
And one day will employ them on thyself.

Be generous to persons in distress,

Avoid ill-doing, fear calamity,

Discern the hidden motives of thy heart,

Make no mere outward show of good and right,
Be not unmeasured in beneficence,

And hear the counsels of the experienced.

Lean toward religious men but watch religion,
Because it causeth bitterness and wrath.
Proportion thine expenses to thy means,

And be not careful to augment thy store.
Observe the precedents of former Shahs,

And be a righteous judge in everything ;

The Shah that doth unjustly is accursed ; C. 1766
Approve but justice then and court not curses.
Where are the crowned heads of the kings of kings ?
Where are the great men and the ministers ?
Their fame is now their sole memorial ;

This Wayside Inn abideth not with any.
Command not to shed blood, or urge the host
To battle, lightly. Heed this weighty letter.
Set not thy heart upon this Hostelry.

Herein have I but sought thy good and decked
Thy heart with knowledge by the rede of Him
Who ruleth sun and moon; by Him keep off
The influence of the Div. Have thou before thee
This letter, day and night. Let wisdom rule
Thy heart. If thou dost make a memory here
Thy name will never want for majesty.


28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Now be the Maker of the world thy refuge,
May time and earth affect thee. May high heaven
Turn but at thy desire and in the world
Be none aggrieved by thee." |

He placed the letter,
When written, in the treasury and abode
With fear and trembling in this Wayside Inn.


A king of kings well counselled, wise, and just,
Will strive to make his modesty unite
With strength of hand and gallantry in fight,
Be of pure Faith and put in God his trust.


See what man of these virtues is possest
And, seeing, him his meed of praise prefer,
Seek one that is as bright as Jupiter,

Aspiring, armed with sword, with mail on breast ;


Who taketh from idolaters the sway,
Who with brocade of Faith his heart hath bound.
Yea verily the man himself is found :

Mahmúd is monarch of the world to-day.


The quest of battle and of banqueting
Are one to this world’s lord. Abú’l Kasim !
God grant the age joy in the sight of him,
That open-handed ‘and victorious king.


$5
How an Archmage questioned Niishirwén and how he
made Answer
There was an elder versed in our old speech,
And antiquate with action and discourse,
Who from a volume in the ancient tongue


NUSHIRWAN 29


Saith that an archmage asked of Nüshírwán :—
" In what way should the worshipper invoke
In secret prayer the Master of the world
That He may give an answer and bestow
Withal fair fortune on his suppliant ?
A man, with arms outstretched toward the sky,
May make request before the Lord of time,
Yet gain not his desire for all his prayers, C. 1767
And hath but tearful eyes and furrowed face."
The conquering Shah replied: ** Be moderate
In thy requests to God; when they pass bounds
A heart o’ercharged will come of that desire."
The archmage asked: '* What man deserveth good,
And who is worthiest of the name of * Great ? ^ "
The Sháh replied : ““ He that amasseth treasure
Without exertion, and bestoweth not,
Is unfit for the throne; from time to time
His fortune will grow dark, but well is he
That giveth. Give, if wealth be thine, and hoard
not."
^ What is the base of wisdom ? " asked the arch-
mage,
" And who rejoiceth in its boughs and leaves ? "
" The sage rejoiceth," Nüshírwán replied ;
“So doth the modest man of noble birth.”
The archmage asked: “ Who profiteth by know-
ledge,
And who is witless and calamitous ? ”
The Shah replied: ** The cherisher of wisdom
Will cherish life which profiteth thereby
When it aboundeth, but its lack entaileth
Grief, care, and loss.”
The archimage inquired :—
" Is knowledge better than the Grace of kings,
For Grace and majesty adorn the throne ? ”
“ A sage possessed of Grace,” replied the Shah,


30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Will take the whole world underneath his wing.
Thou needest wisdom, Grace, renown, and birth; —
With these four heaven will keep thee still in mind.”

“In kingship who illustrateth the throne ?”

The archmage said, ‘ Who ts unfortunate 7”.

And Nüshírwán made answer: “ One that seeketh
First for the aidance of the King, the World-lord,!
For bounty, knowledge, and right usages
Will make him tender toward the suppliant.

Next let him give authority to those,

Who merit such distinction by their worth.

Then let him see that nothing in the world

For good or evil is concealed from him.

He should distinguish, fourthly, foe from friend :

“Tis well that kings should be without offence.

When he hath Grace and wisdom, Faith and
fortune,

Then he is worthy of the crown and graceth

The throne, while if thou findest such things lacking

Good sooth! thou wilt behold him lustreless ;

He after death will leave an evil name,

And win not jocund Paradise at last. *

The archmage asked: “How many modes of

speech

Are there and what are they, because o'er some

One needs must weep while others are crown,
treasure,

And reputation, those grief, these content ?

Said Nüshirwán: * The sage hath classified
The modes of speech and thought the matter out.
First, profitable speech ; the sweet-voiced sage
Saith that it is the harmless. Secondly,

That which thou callest the deliberate

Know to be that of shrewd and fluent men,

For they speak? largely to the*point and leave

1 Reading with P. * Five couplets omitted, ‘Reading with P.


NUSHIRWAN 3I


Their memory in the world. Next is the speech
Of one ambitioning the word in season :

He will abide in honour all his years ;

And, fourthly, that of one called by the sage
Delectable—the competent reciter,

Who uttereth all, both new and old, in verse ;
While, fifthly, is the warm deliverance

Of one of sweet tongue and harmonious voice,
Who when he hath impleached his web of words
Attaineth verily his heart's desire.”

The archmage said: “ In spite of all thy lore,
And thou hast kindled all thy soul with knowledge,
Yet thou still questionest the little worth !

Dost say then: * How shall knowledge: have an
end ?"' ^

The Sháh replied : ** From all that I have learned
I have attained my soul's desire and wisdom.
Avoid wrong-doing then and look to knowledge—
A thing more precious than the crown and throne."

The archmage said : “I have seen none so praised
And eminent for lore that one could say :—
"Such is his eminence that no wise man
Can teach him any further.’ *

Thus the Shih
Replied: “* Can treasure satiate a man
Until he lieth underneath the dust ?
The way of knowledge is more glorious
Than wealth, more precious in the sage's eyes.
Our words remain as our memorial :
Compare not wealth with knowledge."

said the archmage :—

= What with their learning and remembering
The sages cannot be but ancient men.”

The Shah replied: “ Although the man be old
His knowledge faileth not to keep him young.
Thou wilt prefer him to the foolish youth,


C. 1769


32 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Whose dust is only valued for its tomb.”
The archmage asked : ** It was thy wont to speak
About the fortune of the kings of kings —
Before the Great,! and more than ever now
Thou namest them but with a deep cold sigh ?
The Shah said: “ It was never in my heart
That I should praise a process such as this—
To govern this world with the scimitar
Of justice, then pass on and vilely die.”
" Thy usage," said the archmage, “ in the past
Was this—to speak to all in nobler words.
Now thou despisest them and sayest naught
About the past or present.”
Nushirwan
Made answer saying: “I have talked enough,
And now I purpose to depend on deeds.”
The archmage said : * Thy prayers in former times
Before the Fire were not so long as now.
Thy praises too are longer than they were,
Thy plaints and supplications more profuse.”
He gave this answer saying: * Holy God
Exalteth from the dust His worshipper,
Doth favourably dispose the sky toward him,
And maketh all the world to be his slave.
If this slave faileth to appreciate,
Let him not scape from hardship and distress."
The archmage asked: “Since thou becamest
king |
What greater cause for thankfulness hast thou
Toward thy Maker? Hath that eminence
Increased thy joy and filled thy foemen's hearts
With blood ? "
He answered thus: “ Thanks be to God,
Our fortune hath been good. None in my presence -
Hath ever sought for the supremacy,
' Reading with P. and T.


NÜSHIRWAN | 33


But at my chastening washed his hands of ill.
My foemen have grown feeble in the fight
When they beheld mine onset and my mace.”
The priest went on: “ When warring in the West
Thou wast both quick of clutch and valorous,
But when thou wast campaigning in the East
Thou wast long-suffering and deliberate.”
And Nüshirwán made answer thus: ** The youth
Aecounteth not of pain and toil of mind,
But when a man hath come to sixty years
He must assume a gentler attitude.
Thanks to the World-lord who is all-providing,
The Author of the and ill of fortune,
That I had prowess in my youthful days,
And recked not if my luck were good or bad.
Now knowledge, treasure, generosity,
And rede, accompany my days of age,
The world is ‘neath my rule and usages,
And circling heaven my breastplate in the fight.”
Said the archmage: “ The Shahs of long ago
Desired to hold discourse on all affairs ;
Thy words are briefer and thy secrets more,
Yet thou surpassest those famed men of old."
He made this answer, saying: “ Every king,
That doth believe in Him who giveth all,
Is not concerned about himself for He,
Who made the world, still watcheth over it."
"Isee the kings who should be glad of heart,"
The archmage said, ** most anxious in our times."
And Nüshírwán replied : ** The man of sense
Hath ever at his heart the fear of loss."
The archimage rejoined : '* The Sháhs of old
Allowed not care and fight to mar their feasts.”
He made this answer saying: “ In their cups
They ever grew forgetful of their fame,
But fame hath triumphed o'er the cup with me,
VOL, VIII, C


C. 1770


34 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


My spirit is beforehand with the time.”
The archmage said: “Shahs used to tend them-
selves,
Employing drug and leech and remedy,
Lest they should have to soil themselves with tears."
“A man, whose time is not yet come,” he said,
* Not yet o'ertaken by the turning sky,
Will stand secure, and drugs will profit naught,
Because the chance of time protecteth him,
But when the hour for passing is at hand
Then no precaution will avert his fate.”
The archmage said: “ Thou praisest much and
prayest |
The Maker, vet at heart thou art not glad
The while, but ever hast a soul all care."
“ There is no care at all," said Nüshírwán,
“ The Shah's heart is at one with turning heaven;
I fear that those who offer praise to me,
And shower benedictions on my Faith,
Affect a greater fervour than they feel :
Mine object is to read my subjects’ hearts."
" Why joy we in our children," asked the arch-
mage,
" And why do we desire a family ? "
“ The man that leaveth children in the world
Will not become forgotten,” he replied.
“If he have children he will relish life,
And for that reason will abstain from vice,
While if he pass away the pang is slight,
Because a child's eyes watch his paling face.”
* Who liveth at his ease," the archmage asked,
^ And who repenteth of his own good deeds ? "
He thus replied : ** The worshipper of God
Will take the reins of fortune in his hands
And, seeking no addition, is at ease,
Who if he sought it would be full of fear.


NUSHIRWAN 35


Then as for what thou said’st about good deeds,
And secret inclinations to do good,
Know, no one is more mortified than he
That meditateth good for thankless folk.”
" The evil-doer dieth,”’ said the archmage,
* The world removeth from the roll his name.
The righteous man will likewise pass away,
And destiny account his every breath.
What need is there for praising excellence
since death is here to reap both good and bad 7?”
And Nüshírwán made answer thus : '* Good deeds
Will find a ready market everywhere.
He that doth good deeds dieth not though dead,
But resteth, giving up his soul to God ;!
He that doth fail therein will have no rest,
And leave behind an evil memory."
The archmage further said: “ No ill is worse C. 1771
Than death. If so, then what is our resource ? "
The Sháh replied : ** On leaving this dark earth,
The life which then thou wilt have gained is pure,
Whoe'er lived here in fear and care must needs
Bewail that life but, whether Sháh or subject,
Thou wilt be quit of this world's fear and pain,"
The archmage asked him: “ Which is worst of
these
In filling us with anguish and chagrin ? "
The Shah made answer : ** Reckon mountain-heavy
The troubles that descend on us in troops,
And what is fear except the fear of troubles,
Than which there is naught stronger in the world ? ”
" How can we 'scape from these ?" the archmage
asked,
~“ For this world’s doings give us cause to weep ?"
He thus made answer : *' Knowledge is the way:
The sage is ever cheerful.”
! Couplet omitted.


36 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


" Which of us,"
Inquired the archmage, “ hath most store of trea-
sure ? "'
The Shih made answer: “He that hath least
toil.”
The archmage asked : ** Which is the foulest fault,
One alien most from worth and Paradise ? "
The Sháh made answer : ** In the case of women
A strident voice and lack of modesty ;
But, in the case of men, to be a fool, .
And thus to spend a lifetime as in prison."
The archmage asked:** Who hath most confi-
dence ? "
" He that hath least remorse," replied the Sháh,
“ And goeth soiled in body, and with heart
Black with iniquity, before his God.”
The archmage said: “* Who is the upright man,
Whose heart is proven by his soul and wisdom ? ”
The Shah thus answered: “ He that toileth on
Through gain and loss and compasseth no ill."
The archmage asked : ** Who is the best of men,
The crown upon the head of all mankind ?
" The meek to whom a crown availeth naught,”
The Shah replied; ** not one intent on profit,
Not even though he be of lofty aims ;
Next, he whose greatness is its own reward—
The generous man whose heart is purged from dark-
ness—
And, thirdly, he that hath a zeal divine,
Proceeding from integrity and wisdom."
" What," said the archmage, '*is the heart's
chief dread ? *
` The troubles that we bring upon ourselves,",
The Sháh replied.
^ What giving is the best,"
The archmage said, '* so that the man who giveth


NUSHIRWAN 37


May be exalt and great ?”
“In gain and loss,”

The Shah rejoined, “ keep naught from the deserv-

Ing."
The archmage asked concerning this world’s

doings :—

" Declare its process open and concealed.

Whate'er the manner of that action be,

For loss or profit, shall we acquiesce ? "

"The All-knowing," thus the Sháh replied, “is C. 1772

greater

And higher than this ancient sky although

It knowing be and mindful; He is Lord

Of this world’s lords. Become not then perverse,

Avoid disaster, and attribute not

Good fortune and misfortune to the sky.

Know that both ill and good proceed from Him

That hath no peer—the One eternal Cause,

Whose word is * Be ' and what He willeth is,

Who was and is and will be evermore.”

“ The body is the hostel of the soul :

Which of them feeleth pain ?” the archmage asked.

The Shah replied : *‘ Our mortal bodies suffer
So long as they have brains, but when the soul
Hath filtered through they lose their consciousness,
And when it hath departed are dissolved.”

The archmage questioned him on self-control :—
" In what way can we hide our greed and need ? "'

The Shah replied: '* "Tis fitting that the sage
Suppress them, yet thou ever wilt be vexed
By greed because ne'er satiate of treasure."

The archmage asked : “* Amongthe kings of yore,
The men of sense, rede, faith, and precedent,
Whom knowest thou as subject of our praise,
When he is dead, O monarch of the earth 7”

" That great king," this was Nüshírwán's reply,


C. 1773


38 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


" Who is a worshipper of God and pure,

And thankful to the righteous Lord of all,

Who filleth none with fear of tyranny,

Who giveth to the good a hopeful heart,

And to the bad a heart of fear and pain,

Who furnisheth his troops from his own treasures,
And turneth on malignants their own ill,

Who questioneth the sages of the world,

And keepeth from his foes his bad and good."

The archmage asked : '* Wherein consisteth worship,
And who approacheth to God's holiness ?* "

“The subtle will direct,” the Shah replied,
“His soul as by fine hair-breadths and first know
The being and the unity of God,

Which small instruction will make evident,
And he will offer thanks for mercies given.
While putting trust in God and fearing Him,
Who is thy terror when thou seekest ill,


Thy trust when thou dost well. If thou art sound


Of Faith and seek'st the Way all will esteem thee,
While if thou art malign and ill-disposed

Thy soul hath forwarded its packs to Hell.

Feel not at home with this world for “twill hold
Its secrets from thee. Tend to works of Faith ;
Thy good choice will not injure thee. Let wisdom
Instruct thy heart and let not fortune fool thee.
Again, thou shalt consort not with the guilty

In wrong and strife, Loathe secretly at heart
This world because of that which is to come.

Let thy seat ever be among the sages,

A devotee of everlasting joys,

For what we have on earth will pass away,

And reason counteth them no joys at all.

Mayst thou incline to sense and rede. Let wisdom
Guide thee to God. Speak not unmeasured words,


For thou'rt new-fangled and the world is old.


NÜSHIRWAN 30


Be drunk not with the pleasures of the day.

Choose not the company of wicked men.

Refrain thy heart from what can never be,

And give such largess as ‘tis fit to give.

Withhold not from a friend aught that thou hast,

Though he should ask thine eyes, thy brains, and
skin, )

And if two friends would take account together

No daysman should be needed for that task,

If thou associate with a foe so act

That he may not obtain a hold upon thee.

When one doth seek the path of right his need

Is parts, humility, and gentleness.

Let not thy tongue exaggerate thy merits,

For falsehood is no merit with the just,

Who hold one's high estate a thing of naught,

Another's poverty no mark for scorn.

If some malicious person talk with thee

Let not his malice anger thee, and then,

When, being well assured that thou art weak,

He useth language that is past all bounds,

Reply to him in measured terms and speak

Words goodly and well-liking. If it be

That thou canst bring him to himself by kindness

He will repent his former speech. Devote not

Thy leisure to indulgence. Idleness

Is naught if thou art wise. Be diligent

In all thine undertakings and give ear

To knowledge. Enter on no enterprise

Whereof the end will cause remorse or anger.

Have pity on the sad in his distress ;

Bring not his heart to anguish and disaster.

The sage that traineth his own heart to patience

Is not held worthless in the World-lord's eyes,

But knoweth what he meriteth with Him,

And compasseth all actions with discretion,


C. 1774


40 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


For increase from a friend is laudable,
And greatness and integrity will bring
Addition. Furthermore that man of God
Will not begrudge the scattering of treasure,
But turneth him from waywardness and loss,
And maketh right and service his profession—
A stem with boughs whereby God's worshipper,
The virtuous saint, hath proved victorious.
There is but one injunction and one way—
Incline to God and let Him shelter thee.”

If thou, O monarch ! art of just intent
Good will remain to be thy monument
As it doth with Shah Nushirwan whose flesh
Hath turned to dust although his fame is fresh.
Himself unseen his fame is plain to all ;
His words survive as his memorial,
And through the righteous deeds that he hath done
His fame past doubt will live while time shall run,
And on his soul shall be, while earth and sky
Abide in place, the sages’ eulogy. |


NOUSHIRWAN 41


PART VI
THE SHÁH'S LAST YEARS


ARGUMENT


The poet tells of the last war of Nüshírwán against Rüm
and of the Sháh's transaction with a shoemaker, the appoint-
ment of his son Hurmuzd as his successor after that prince
had been questioned by Büzurjmihr, the Sháh's testament
and last counsels to his son, his dream of the advent of
Muhammad, and the death of the Sháh and of Büzurjmihr.


NOTE


$$1-3. Alter ten years of peace war again broke out
between the Persian and Roman empires in A.D. 572. The
Sháhnáma is correct in representing that the latter was to
blame for the renewal of hostilities. The Emperor Justin
II., who had succeeded his uncle Justinian in A.D. 565, wanted
war. The scene of operations covered much the same ground
as on the previous occasion. The Persians made a raid into
Syria, recorded in the Sháhnáma by the mention of Halab
(Chalybon-Beroea, Aleppo), and an unsuccessful attack on
Antioch. The Romans, under Marcian (Bátarün), the prefect
of the East, besieged Nisibis, held by the Persians ever since
its cession to. Shápür, son of Urmuzd (Sapor II.), by Jovian
in A.D. 363. Nüshírwán raised the siege, drove the Romans
into the stronghold of Dard on the foot-hills of Mount Masius,
and besieged them there. After a gallant defence the fortress
fell late in A.D. 573.1 Mount Masius seems to be the Mount
Sakíla of the Sháhnáma, the scene of one of Gushtásp's exploits
during his exilein Rüm.* Justin on this resigned the direction


| For Dárá see GDF. v. 86 and mote, * See Vol. iv. p. 342 4g.


| ots Sa
p > "i x" J en Od ee

' M — T, Á *
42 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE =~


of affairs to Tiberius who to gain time purchased a temporary — -
suspension of hostilities from the Persians. This is repre- —
sented in the Sháhnáma as the conclusion of peace and as ad
triumph for Nüshírwán but historically the war was still in —
progress at the time of his death four years later, and the 3
Great King, shortly before the end of his reign, had to make — —
a somewhat hasty and i ignominious retirement to Ctesiphon. g
§2. We have already met with the cobbler or shoemaker,
introduced as characteristic of a type, in the Sháhnáma.* “a
$5 4-6. See p. 3. | $2
$7. P. omits this section which of course comes from t:
Muhammadan sources. Though interpolated into Persian
story it does not seem to be an interpolation in Firdausi's N
Sháhnáma for there appears to be no good reason for supposing v]
that the passage was written by a hand other than that
poet's. A similar account appears both in the Persian and
Arabic Tabari*
The ascent of two score degrees is intended to indicate that —
Muhammad was forty years old when he received his '* call — m
Muhammad, having been challenged by idolaters to divide —
the moon in twain, is said to have pointed his finger at it, on
which it was at once divided into two parts, one of which |
remained stationary while the other was concealed behind
a mountain. Another tradition says that Mount Hirá inter--
vened between the two halves. Travellers from a distance
when questioned reported that they had observed the same
phenomenon. The passage in the Kurán on which the tradi- a
tions are based runs as follows :—“ The hour hath approached “a
and the MOON hath been cleft :
But whenever they see a miracle they turn aside and say, E i
This is well-devised magic. "I
MEUS Süra in which the quotation occurs is known as “ THE


Pus


i
|
,
[
i
|


t RSM, P. 4 * See Vol. vii. 260.
* ZT, ii. E "NT, p. 253. ' RM, Pt. II. vary 753.


^ RK, p. 74.


NUSHIRWAN 43


$1
How Nushirwán made ready to war against. Casar


It is recorded in the ancient book
From the recital of a truthful sage
That when news came from Rúm to this fair land
For Nüshírwán, the world-lord : ** Mayst thou live,
For Cæsar is no more and to another
Hath vielded time and earth," death filled his soul
With care; his ruddy countenance became
Like yellow leaves. He chose out of Iran
An envoy of experience and high birth,
And then dispatched him unto Cesar’s son,
Dispatched him to that fresh and fruitful Bough,
First charging him with many kindly words,
And saying: “ "Tis an evil none can ‘scape.”

He wrote a letter in distress and grief,
With eves all tearful and cheeks sallow, thus :—
“ God grant thee life and loving-kindliness
Now that thy sire is dead. No living thing
Is born unless to die. A Wayside Inn
Is this and we pass on. Although we handle
The crown or helm and easque we find no quittance
From death's clutch. What is Caesar or the Khan
When his time cometh and all suddenly
Shall lay his head in dust? Mayst thou receive
No lack of joyful tidings of thy sire ;
May Christ befriend his soul. Now I have heard
That thou art seated on his famous throne,
And hast adorned the fortune that was his.
Require of us such strength as thou dost need
Of steeds, of arms, of treasure, and of troops.”

The ambassador went forth from Nushirwan ;
He made the journey in all haste to Cesar,


=


44 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And, when he reached the court, they gave him
entry ;
The envoy of the Shah approached the state.
When Cesar saw the title on the seroll
His heart swelled at the pride of Nushirwan.
He was a hasty youth, new to the throne,
Showed himself overbearing to the envoy,
Saluted him in an unseemly fashion,
With lax observance and discourtesy,
Gave him a lodging distant from the court,
And took no notice of the Great King's letter.
A week passed, Ciesar's counsellors assembled,
And he addressed their leader: “ Now consider
The answer to this letter, draw it up,
As thou dost know to do, in fitting terms,
And set forth good and ill.”
The priest replied :—

" "Thy liege am I and will obey the world-lord.”

So all the bishops, priests, and counsellors
Assembled by themselves apart and then
Wrote with all speed a letter in response,
As Cæsar bade, and first they praised the Maker,
And based their praise on wisdom, then they said :—
" Was such a letter worthy of the Sháh,
A letter graceless and malevolent ?
Thou dost amiss for Cesar is but young,
But lately crowned, our king in right of birth.
Forbear to press the youth for this one year
With haughty superscriptions, tax and toll.
The youth hath written in befitting terms
To all the lieges and the potentates,
As the illustrious emperor of Rim,
To whom the mountain-tops are so much wax.
The envoy of the Sháh hath come to us,
And he will tell the Sháh what he hath seen
With us—our words of grief and joy alike :


NÜSHIRWAN 45


Our weal and woe shall not remain concealed.
One Cæsar hath departed but another
Succeeded who exalteth o’er all chiefs
His head without regard to any king
Among the underlords and overlords.”

When they were ready with that Rüman letter
They summoned the ambassador to court.
That sage, on hearing that they were advised,
Came to the court and asked for the response.
They made him ready an unworthy robe
Of honour and put strangers from the hall.
Then Cæsar said to him: “ No slave am I,
The inferior of the Haitalians and Chin,
One should not lightly treat a potentate
Although thy Sháh be Great King in the world.
He that hath many enemies is great,
And I have foes and friends upon my skirts.
Why dost thou scant me of my majesty,
And cloud my sun ? Thou, when such need is mine,
Shalt be my king, my father’s memory.
Make fair report of thine experience here,
And seek no foul intent in my response."

They put the robe of honour on the sage,
And called the marchlord's roadster to the door.
He parted hastily and, tarrying not
At any stage, reached Nushirwan and told C. 1776
What he had seen and heard and what had passed.
The Sháh was sorry at the words and said :—
* Thou hast had fruit of travel. I have heard
That whosoe'er indulgeth his self-will,
Not thinking what he doth, will smart therefor.
If he discerneth not 'twixt friend and foe
In telling thus the secret of his heart
To thee I ween too that he is no friend
To us and, further, hath not blood and feet
And skin. By holy God, by sun and moon,


^


46 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


By crown and throne and by Azargashasp,

I swear that if I leave of Rüman race

A single man in joy upon the throne

I am not of the race of bold Kubád,

And in men's presence never mention me.

Henceforth will I make black the fame of Rúm,

And set the cultivated parts a-blaze.

Moreover he shall fill the ox-skins for us

With all the gems and treasures of his realm,

And my sword's point shall touch not sheath until

I have my heart's desire upon this Rüman,

Who arrogantly boasteth: * Iam Ciesar,'

As though I were but one among his chiefs ! '*
He bade the clarions and the Indian bells

And gongs be sounded at the palace-gate,

And bound upon his mighty elephants

The kettledrums. The world was indigo

With dust. A host that made the green sea! quail

Marched forth from Madá'in toward the waste,

While at the blare of trump, the gleam* of flag,

And stir of horsemen in their golden boots,

Thou wouldest have declared: ‘The stars are

drowned,
And all revolving heaven is astound ! "


$2
How Nüshirwán took the Stronghold of Sakila and
how a Shoemaker had Dealings with him
When tidings came to Caesar of the Shah :—
* He hath marched forth in anger from Iran,”
He set forth from 'Ammüriya? to Halab ;


! Cf. Vol vi. p. 174 and mofe, — * Reading with P.
* Cf. Vol. vi. p. 23 and mote.


NÜSHIRWAN 47


The world was filled with tumult, bruit, and din.
Three hundred thousand horsemen of Iran
‘Besieged the fortress of Halab. Troops gathered
From every side and tarried not from strife.
The warrior-prelates of the Raman host
Set up their catapults on every side.*
The Iranians took the stronghold of Sakila,
For from that region they would fain attack ;
Halab became as 'twere a sea of blood,
And all the host of Bátarün sought quarter ;
Unnumbered Rümans perished 'neath the arrows, C. 1777
And many were ta’en prisoners in the fight.
Within two se'nnights the Íránians brought
Some thirty thousand captives to the king.
The Rümans dug a trench before their host,
And let the water in at break of day.
They barred the Sháh's advance; he and his troops
Were at a stand in fight. He called to him
His commissaries and discussed with them
The posture of the war at large and said
Thus: “ This hath grown a matter of much toil :
We cannot pass the water and the fosse.
The troops have need of money and supplies,
As well as horses, mail, and Ruman helms.”

The commissaries, scribes, and treasurers
Of that world-lord went the treasury,
Which, as the number of his soldiers stood,
Was in dinars three hundred thousand short.*
An archimage came to the Sháh like dust,
And told him what the treasury lacked, whereat
The Sháh's face gloomed. He ordered Büzurjmihr
To come, and said to him: “ With treasury void
What booteth me the throne of king'of kings ?
Go, call the camel-drivers, and dispatch
Some Bactrian camels on the road and take

| Cf. Vol. i. p. 373. " Reading with P.


. 1778


48 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Qut of the treasures of Mazandaran
A hundred loads and upwards of dinars.”
But Büzurjmihr made answer to the world-lord:—
“© just, wise, loving Shih! the way 1s long
To reach the treasures of Írán, the while
Qur troops are destitute and at a stand ;
But in the cities round about are those,
A hundredth of whose wealth would pav our troops.
If thou shalt ask the merchants and the thanes
To make advances they will not refuse."
The Sháh was in this matter of a mind
With what the wise man of Írán had said,
And Büzurjmihr chose out a messenger,
Wise, of a cheerful heart, and goodly face,
And said to him: “ Go with a second horse,
And choose thee out some lusty notable
Among the merchants and the thanes—a man
Of mighty reputation—and request
A loan of money for the troops. The Shah
Will order money to be sent with speed
Out of the treasury.”
That emissary,
Fair-spoken, young in years but old in wisdom
And shrewd, came to a neighbouring town and
asked
A loan of money for the king's affairs,
And round him gathered many of the rich.
À certain man, who made and vended shoes,
Attended closely to the envoy's words,
And asked: * How much ? "
The gallant envoy told,
And said: '* O man of wisdom and of wealth !
The sum amounteth to four million draehms."
Said that shoemaker: “I will furnish them,
And earn the treasurer's praise.”
He brought his balance,


NÜSHIRWAN 49


Weights, and the drachms, but asked no bond in
writing.

He weighed the coin, the envoy's task was done.
Then that shoemaker said: “ O fair of face!
Be good enough to say to Büzurjmihr :—
‘I have but one child only in this world,
For whom my heart is all anxiety.’
Then add: * The monarch of the world perchance
Will grant a private favour to myself,
And let me place my boy among his sages,
For he hath wealth and intellect therefor.’ ”

" With pleasure," was the messenger's reply,
“ For thou hast eut my quest for treasure short."

So Büzurjmihr came to the Sháh rejoicing,
Whose face cleared when he saw that wealth.

Thereafter
He said: ** Thanks be to God, whom I have known
Through all my vears of life, that in our realm
There is à manufacturer of shoes,
Blessed in this manner and illustrious.
God grant that we may never injure one
That is possessed of such a store of wealth.
Discover for me what his wishes are,
That this good will of his to us may last,
And when thou payest the debt bestow upon him
A hundred thousand drachms that he may not
Forget us."
Büzurjmihr said to the world-lord :—
" O well-starred Sháh of goodly countenance !
God grant that no king who is tyrannous
Be happy on his throne and fortunate.
Thy subjects all are men of wealth, aspire,
And are possessed of thrones and diadems.
Now this boot-seller, if the Shah will hear,
Made one request. He said, for so the envoy
' Couplet omitted.
VOL. VIII. D


C. 1779


50 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Reporteth : * May the world-lord mate with wisdom.
I have a son grown up who is desirous
Of one to teach him learning, and if now
The Shah is willing to assist therein,
So that my good son may become a scribe,
Then for the Sháh's life will I pray God, saying :—
" May this throne-worthy live eternally." " "

The Shah made answer saying: “O wise man!
How hath the Div perplexed thy vision! Go,
And lead the camels back, for God forbid
That we ask him for silver and for pearls.
How should the merchant’s son become a scribe,
Accomplished, learned, and mindful though he be?
Our son when he shall sit upon the throne
Will need a scribe whose fortune will prevail.
If this voung boot-seller attain distinction,
And my son look to him and list to him,
The man of wisdom and of noble birth 3
Will have but discontent and chilling sighs,
The sage will be held lightly by my son,
Receive no praise for what he answereth,
And we shall be accursed, when we are dead,
For having introduced this precedent.
Our rations must be got by honest means.
Ask not his money, talk not of our needs,
Dispatch the camels back upon their way,
And ask shoemakers for supplies no more.”

So with the cash the envoy went again ;
Those drachms filled that shoemaker's heart with

pain.!


' Two couplets omited.


NUSHIRWAN 51


$3


How the Envoys of Ca@sar came to Nushirwin with
Apologies and Presents


Whenas from Pisces Sol displayed its crown,
And flung a robe of ivory o'er the earth,
The scouts returning from the trench-edge came
Before the exalted Shah and said to him :—
" An embassage from Cesar hath arrived
In tribulation to excuse his faults."
The ambassador approached immediately
With benedictions upon Nüshírwán,
^ On seeing whose head and crown the Hüman
heaved
A cold sigh, thinking: “Lo! a Shah exalted
With kingship, manhood, and a mighty host ! "
Two seore pilosophers of Rüm, whose tongues
Were full of utterance and their hearts of sighs,
Brought, each one, thirty thousand in dínárs
As offerings to the king. When they beheld
His comely countenance they came lamenting,
And writhing serpent-like. The king of kings,
On seeing them, received them graciously,
Assigning them the customary seats,
And then their spokesman thus addressed him:
= Cesar,
O Shah! is young and hath but just acceded ;
His sire is dead, the world is new to him,
And he is unacquainted with affairs.
Now we are all of us thy tributaries,
And servants, and are under thy protection.
For thee Rum is Írán, fran is Rim ;
Why then distinguish them ? The king of kings
Hath all the age’s wisdom for his own,


39452


C. 1750


52 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And straighteneth Czsar’s back. The Khan of
Chin,

The king of Hind, are glad in him and help
To grace his throne. Although a youth, not yet
Of man’s estate, made utterance ill-advised
Let not the king of kings, in whom the vault
Of lapis-lazuli rejoiceth, take
Revenge thereat or dudgeon. We will pay
The tribute laid on Rüm from the beginning,
And keep pact."

Smiling at the envoy's words
Said Nüshírwán: ** Although the boy be noble
His speech hath little wisdom. What is Cesar ?
What Bátarün, the insensate one, whose tongue
Hath caused his soul’s abasement ? All the wise
Born of Sikandar's stock have proved triumphant,
And eminent, yet if one doeth not
Our bidding but rejecteth our advice
And our alliance, from his peopled realm
Will we send up the dust and will not fear
His treasures and his troops."

The envoys kissed
The ground, as courtiers use, and made reply :—
* O Sháh that art victorious and supreme !
Blame not the past. We are thy travail's dust,
The warders of thy treasure. When the king
Shall take us into favour we shall cease
Both from misfortune and from discontent.
The toils that here the king of kings hath borne
Are no small matter in the Rümans' eyes,
And we will pay, by way of toll and tax,
His treasury ten ox-hides of dínárs.
"Tis thine to bid us pay thee less or more,
And to accept it though it be unworthy.”
* As touching treasure,” ‘thus the Shah replied,

" The matter resteth with my minister."


NUSHIRWAN 53


Then all the Rimans went before that archmage,
Went with loud lamentations and ill-starred,
Used every plea at large, told Cwsar’s purpose,
Informed him of the ox-hides and dinars,

And matters that concerned the peace of Rum.
The archmage answered thus: “ Ye give the gold,
But what brocade will ye present as well ?

What time the king returneth he will need

A thousand pieces of gold-woven brocade,

For he is constantly concerned with gifts

Of robes of honour for his lords and lieges."

The Rümans gave consent thereto and then

Returning did obeisance to the Sháh.

He tarried on the battlefield awhile.

Then when the king and host had taken rest
He chose among the troops a warrior—

One of ability in ciphering—*

And gave him soldiers that he might demand
'The Rüman tribute and convey it home.

The Shah departed thence toward Taisafün C. 1781
With troops behind him and in front of him,
All furnished well with silver and with gold,
With silvern bridles and with golden girdles.
“The air is silken all,” thou wouldst have said,
“ With all the silken banners of the chiefs,
While hills and plains are golden and the belts
Are like the Pleiades with jewelry.”

When he drew near the city on his march

A multitude went out to welcome him.
All came to Nushirwan afoot with loins
Girt up for service and with open hearts,
While all that had accompanied the Shah
Proceeded to the palace-gate afoot,
And all the mighty chieftains called down blessings
Upon that Shah alert and just and holy,
i Couplet omitted.


54 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


While those of greatest eminence brought gifts
Of precious stones. The Shah, on his return,
Made manifest his power to all the chiefs,

And then the warriors went home. There came
Addition in the world to each man’s fame.’


§4
How Nüshirirdn chose Hurmuzd as his Successor


The high-souled minstrel, who instructeth me,
What said he of time’s mutability ?
* No prudent sage will set his mind and heart
Upon this Hostel whence we must depart,
For we arise and fall from day to day,
And alternate our joyance with dismay.
Dark earth will be our final resting-place,
This with high honour, that with deep disgrace,
And after they depart they tell us not
If wakeful joy or slumber be their lot ;
Still if they flourish not that pass our ken
At least they will not strive with death again.
In contemplation of that day of awe
What are five years and twenty or five score,
Passed by one man in pleasure and delight,
Passed by another in penurious plight ?
None have I seen that had a wish to die
Among the upright or the waywardly,
But all are shocked at death—the pious one,
Just as the idol-serving Áhriman."

Old man ! when three score years and one have

past,


' "Lorsqui'il fut prés son palais, le roi congédia chacun des
grands, et ces héros se rendirent aux lieux de leur demeure, célébrant
dans le monde entièr la gloire de Kesra." Mohl,


NÜSHIRWAN 55


Wine, cup, and rest grow savourless at last,
Yet wine for one that readieth to die
Is as a wool-coat when ‘tis winterly,*
When body freezeth in the midst of vice,
And soul hath lost its way to Paradise.
Full many a friend hath lagged or passed away,
But in the waste the cup with thee will stay.
Unless thy life’s endeavour thou forecast C. 1782
Sure retribution will be thine at last.
Ill-doing endeth in calamity ;
If thou dost ill the world will sadden thee.
Joy not in evil that thou hast achieved,
Who, grieving others, shalt thyself be grieved.
Know that, however great may be the sum
Of these thine earthly years, thine end will come;
So multiply thy good deeds here below
That thou mayst gladden when thou hast to go.
The deeds accomplished and the words let fall
In life will serve as our memorial.
I ask of God from time, its Maker He,
For such a respite, such felicity,
That all these many tales and stories told,
Now over-passed by years and waxen old,
From Gaitimart to Yazdagird, which be
In disarray, may be arrayed by me;
That I may range them, weed that garth, and tell
Anew what hap the kings of kings befell,
Then verily I shall not grieve when I
Shall have to quit this Wayside Hostelry.

And now what saith the man of ardent soul
Of Nüshírwán, the world-lord's, purposes ?
The monarch at the age of seventy-four
Became possessed by thoughts of death and sought
A master for the world whose chiefest aim
Should be to clothe him in the robe of justice,

t Literally “In (the month of) Dai.”


C. 1783


56 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Display compassion to the mendicants,

Be great, untroubled, and of ardent soul.

He had six sons of noble birth who all

Were great, shrewd-hearted, and of kingly mien,
With valour, learning, self-control and counsel,
Young with a love of knowledge, and of these
The wisest and the eldest was Hurmuzd,

The nobly born, a man unparalleled,

Exalted, knowing, fair of countenance,

And well affected to the noble race.*

The Shah gave orders to his officers

To test the disposition of his son,

By day and night to mark his utterances,

And to inform the monarch of the world

Of his proceedings whether good or bad.

At that time said the Shah to Buzurjmihr :—

“ T have a secret purpose in my mind.

When I exceeded three score years and ten

My musky tresses took a camphor-hue,

And when I quit this Wayside Hostelry

A master will be needed for the world,

Who will give largess to the mendicant,

The stranger, and the man of his own kindred,
Be bounteous, will refrain from love of treasure,
And set his heart not on this Wayside Inn—
One whose whole purpose ever is toward good,
Whose place is on the Sháh's throne. I thank God
That I have sons wise, learned, who worship Him,
And none esteem I dearer than Hurmuzd,

Or more pre-eminent for rede and sense.

Of mercy, generosity, and right

I see naught lacking in his heart at all.

50 summon now the archmages and the chiefs,
All that observe the way of understanding,


ṣe. the Persians. Hurmuzd was half Turkish by birth—the
son of the daughter of the Khán. See pp. 37, 97 seg.


NUSHIRWAN 57


Prove ye his knowledge and thereby present
Accomplishment upon accomplishment.”


$5


How the Archimages questioned Hurmuzd and how
he replied


The archimages, the investigators,
And counsellors assembled, called to them
Hurmuzd, the atheling, and seated him
Among the chiefs. Then Büzurjmihr began :—
* O prince fair-starred and fair to look upon !
What know'st thou that will brighten the pure soul
And wisdom, and be fruitful for the body ? "

He answered : ** Knowledge is the best, for great
Among the great is one of understanding.
In knowledge is man's safety ; it restraineth
The hands of Áhriman from ill, and next
Come patience and munificence whereby
The body gaineth fame and ease."

The sage

Then asked: “ What showeth virtue to advantage,
And what will raise a man to high estate ? "

Hurmuzd replied: “ First, to be courteous
To all in good and ill; next, to endeavour
To grieve as little as one can the hearts
Of every one; and, thirdly, to deal justly
Within the world and so gain self-content."

On that pure-hearted prince of goodly mien
Gazed Büzurjmihr, the questioner, and said :—
‘* Now will I speak concerning needful topics.
Count them upon thy hands, remember all
That I shall ask, and make a just response
To them in that same order. Bring to bear


58 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


High-mindedness and justice for, if thou
Art heedful of such matters, of a truth
Heaven's gate is oped to thee since I will question
At large that I may have response in full.
The Master of the world instruct thee! May
Thy wit be bright, good fortune by thy mate.
Now will I question thee of what I know
With fairness. Answer as thy knowledge is.
The wise man is discerned by his replies,
And compasseth his will in everything.
Inquiry is the lock, response the key ;
Response diseriminateth bad from good.
Who is the child dear in his father's eyes,
Fair of behaviour, and without offence ?
What man is worthy of our heart's compassion,
So that one needs must weep at his distress ?
What man repenteth of his own good deed,
And that too from the bottom of his heart ?
Who is the man deserving of my blame
When I shall make inquiry of his acts ?
Who would do better if he shunned the world
Because his quiet days are at an end ?
What maketh for our happiness in life,
And what do we recall most willingly ?
Which is the time to praise ? What profiteth
Us most ? Who is the dearest of our friends,
Whose voice doth make a pleasance of the heart ?
Who is the man with most friends in the world,
That joy in him in publie and in private ?
Who too is he that hath most enemies,
And most malignantly disposed to him ?!
What is the thing, the most injurious,
For which when done there is good cause to weep ?
Of all the things that mortals cherish here
What is the most unstable of them all ?

1 Couplet omitted.


NUSHIRWAN | «9


Who is the tyrant that is unashamed,

The man most loveless and irreverent ?

Whose words produce most ruin in the world,

And cause the greatest trouble to his friends ?

What is the matter that entaileth shame,

And evil on a man through his own words ? "
For one whole day till night rose o'er the hills

The sage’s words produced no weariness,

But when the darkness brought the time for lights

The chiefs’ heads darkened with bewilderment,

And, when the Shah grew weary of his words,

He paused for a reply. The great Hurmuzd

Rose to his feet and fitly praised the Shah :—

* Ne'er may the Sháh be lacking to the world,

But still abide upon the imperial throne ;

Ne'er may we see the crown, the royal state,

And throne of ivory, devoid of thee ;

In their excusings may the strong be dust

Before thee, heaven thine antidote from harm.

Now will I make reply to Büzurjmihr,

And solve his questions with a right good will.

The sage first questioned me concerning sons,

And so it is with them I must begin.

A son doth make his father glad of heart,

And freeth it from griefs, if he affect

His sire, incline to goodness, and be just.

Next, of the pitiable man, for whom C. 1785

The eyelids drop their tears: this is the magnate

Whose fortune hath been scattered and he now

Is thrall to one unworthy. This man’s case

Is one to be deplored with bitterness,

Because he hath a miscreant for his lord.

Again, the man that doeth benefits

To thankless folk is all solicitude,

And one forgetful of good done to him

Would make a fool of wisdom. Then the sage


5o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Inquired for whom ‘tis goodlier to seek
A resting-place by flight from tyranny ?
The wise man is at liberty to quit
The country where the monarch 1s not just ;
Escape is needful from an unjust king,
Because he bringeth Doomsday on the world.
The sage inquired: * In what rejoicest thou ? '
"Iis in a brother or some charming fere.
He then inquired : * What is the time to praise ? '
The time when we are quit of enemies :
‘Tis well to praise that ever more and more.
Moreover for thy question touching friends,
"lis good to have the aidance of all such.
If they be wealthy shelter ‘neath their cloaks,
And toil with them if they be mendicants.
The humbler and the nobler that one is
The more do his friends’ hearts rejoice in him.
The sage next asketh me: * Who hath a foe
By whom his heart is ever vexed and hurt 7’
The man whose tongue is bold to utter ill
Is very apt to make him enemies.
* What is of things the most injurious,’
Thou saidest, * and at last a cause for tears ? '
When passion hath the mastery of thy heart
It passeth with the passing of a breath,
But with fruition cometh penitence ;
So handle not the blossom of desire.
' What, he inquired, *is that inconstant thing
Whose feet I seek to clutch and grasp its head ? '
It is the friendship of a foolish man
Of evil nature and unstable counsels ;
And furthermore he saith: * Who is the tyrant
That is all shameless and remediless ? '
Call him remediless if he use guile,
A tyrant if he acteth shamelessly.

i Four couplets omitted.


NUSHIRWAN 61


ie man whose very trade is lies,
him tyrannous and despicable.
ge words,’ thou saidest, * are the cause of ruin, C. 1786


aitor and the worthless double dealer
men's hearts with pain. The sage in-


* What is the fault that causeth one most shame,
And maketh him repent of his own words ? '
The foolish talker’s who doth bear himself
Vainjgloriously within the sight of men,

But is, when he is private and alone,
Repentant for the words that he hath spoken,
Yet, when he next shall speak, will boast again.
The ‘man without accomplishment is honoured
If hé exceedeth not his limitations.
Thoge were the questions, these are my replies.
Th¢ blessings of the world be on the Shah,
a all tongues speak according to his will,

ll may his noble heart be glad and blest.”
Ehe ig of HI was lost in wonderment


Th | monarch's heart was set at large from care.


$G


nw Nushirwán appointed Hurmuzd as his Successor
and gave him parting Counsels


Phen by the Shah’s command they wrote a patent
hat gave Hurmuzd the throne and crown, and
2 when

fhe wind had dried that paper wrought in Chin


C. 1787


62 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


They set a seal of musk thereon. The Shah,
In presence of the magnates and shrewd sages,
Charged the high priest therewith. I, by the gi
Of the victorious monarch of the world,
Put into verse this act of Nushirwan's.
The world in practice doth belie its show ;
Beneath ‘tis naught but dolour and chagrin,
But, whether thou hast crown or toil and woe,
Thou ne'ertheless must quit this Wayside Inn
Peruse a letter of the kings of yore, |
And see if Nüshirwán hath any peer |
For justice, rede, festivity, and war,
Yet, his day done, he found no tarriance A
So turn from feast and pleasure, and be wise,
Thou agéd dotard and impenitent !
The world may still look freshly to thine eyes
When in thy cups thou scornest to repent ; |
Yet still, if thou be wise, repent anon ;
The man of Faith is well advised for aye ;
The seasons of thine age will soon be gone, |
Spring, Summer-tide, and Autumn pass away ! |
Then when thy body is in dust below « |
Think whither that pure soul of thine wil] go ! |
What was it that the agéd chronicler Í


Said of the testament of Nushirwan ? 5
When the responses of Hurmuzd were ended |
The high priest entered on a new discourse.

The Shih bade, and the counsellors and scribes |


Wrote out on silk a gracious document i

From Núshirwán to young Hurmuzd, beginning |

With praise of the All-just and then proceeding :— \
“This counsel of the offspring of Kubad |
Hear graciously and write upon thy heart,

Which haply through these words of mine may live.
Know that this world is faithless, O my son!

And full of toil and trouble, pain and bale.


|


[
|

Whenever thou are joying therein and when

Thy heart is free from time's distemperature

That Happiness hath no abiding-place, -d

And tliou must quit this Wayside Hostelry. is

As I resign the world to thee with justice

Thou must thyself resign it to another.

Since both by bright day and by longsome night

My tlioughts are busied with mine own departure

I seck a head fit for the royal crown

To bf a diadem on every head.

fave six sons—the Lustre of our heart—

ise generous, and just. We have made choice

te because thou art the eldest-born,

i man and the adornment of the crown.

i, the well beloved, had four score years

'halftime he spake to me of sovereignty ; »

JM have come to seventy years and four,

Andi have made thee monarch in the world.

Hefin mine aim hath been but peace and weal

So that I might have worship after death.

Myjhope is that almighty God will make thee |

Allfglad and fortunate. If by thy justice :

Folk are secure through thee thou wilt thyself *

Repose in peace, glad through thine own just

| dealing,

iii for thy good works done win Paradise,

T he is blest that sowed but seed of good.

Æ that thou ne'er lose patience; haste is ill al

B kings. The world-lord that is shrewd and learned

| be in estimation all his years.

Inj no way go about to compass lies,

Efe will the visage of thy fortune pale.

Kjeep haste afar both from thy heart and brain ; /

Tihe wisdom that is joined to haste will slumber. ne

Ihcline toward the good and strive therefor, vt

And list the sage's rede in weal and woe. d


NÜSHÍRWAN 63


|
64 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Ill must not compass thee about, for ill

Will verily result in ill to thee.

Let both thy raiment and thy food be pure,

And keep thy father’s counsels still in mind.

Make God thy refuge and incline to Him

As thou wouldst have Him for thy guide. |When
thou |

Shalt make the world all prosperous by thy justice

Thy treasury will prosper, fortune joy |

In thee. Reward men when thev act aright ;

Wait not till good men's toil hath waxen old.

Make glad the men of parts and have them near
thee,

But keep the world dark to the ill-disposed.

In all affairs take counsel with the sage,

And fret not at the toils of sovereignty.

Whenas the wise hath access to thee, throne

With troops and treasure will continue thine.

As for thy subjécts, suffer none of them

To be in cheerless case. The potentates

And nobles of thy realm must all partake

Thy good, but let the ignoble share it not,

And trust not aught to one that is unjust.

Give all thine ear and heart to mendicants,

And let their sorrows be thy sorrows too.

The chief that of his own accord is just

Will please the world as well as please himself.

Bar not thy treasury to men of worth,

But act with bounty to the virtuous ;

Still if thine enemy become thy friend

Sow not thy seed of good on that salt soil.

If thou shalt follow this advice of ours

Thy crown will be exalted evermore.

May He that giveth good wish well to thee,

Thy throne be wisdom and thy crown success.


God grant that thou PASE not forget my words


NOUSHIRWAN 65


Though thou be far removed from my sight.

May thy head flourish and thy heart be glad,

Thy person pure and far from hurt of foes.

May wisdom be thy watchman evermore,

And righteousness the subject of thy thoughts.

When I shall pass away from this wide world

A goodly palace must be built for me,

Secluded somewhere from the haunts of men,

And where the swift-winged vulture flieth not!—

A palace lifted toward revolving heaven,

And in its height ten lassoes long and more,

And thereupon let there be limned my court,

The great men, and the warriors of my host.

Let tapestries of every kind be there

In plenty, strewings, colour and perfume.

Embalm my corpse with camphor and arrange

A crown of musk upon the head thereof.

Bring forth five pieces never handled yet

Of cloth of gold and of brocade of Chin,

And garb me in them in the Kaian mode,

As is the usance of Sásánian Sháhs,*

By which same token make an ivory throne

With crown suspended o'er the ivory,

And let the golden vessels that I used,

The goblets and the censers and the cups—

À score filled with rosewater, saffron, wine,

Ten score with camphor; musk, and ambergris—

Be set upon my left hand and my right, |

No more or less, for such is my command.

Drain from my trunk the blood and afterwards C. 1789

Let the dry space be filled with musk and camphor,

And lastly block the passage to my throne—

A passage that no other Sháh may see.

That court will be conducted otherwise,

! This is not at all in accord to Pársi notions. Cf. Vol. i. p. 81

s.v. Dahhma. ! Reading with P. :

VOL, VIII. E


66 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


And none will have e'en access unto us.

Let those among my sons and noble kin,

Who feel my death as a calamity,

Refrain from feast and pleasure for two months,

For that is usual at the Sháh's decease,

And 'twould be seemly for the good to drop

A tear on this, the Great King's, testament.

Depart not from the bidding of Hurmuzd

And breathe not save according to his will."
All o'er that testament shed many a tear,

And Nüshírwán survived it just a year.


$7
How Nüshírwán had a Dream and how Biüzurjmihr
interpreted it as signifying the Appearance of
Muhammad


In that year Nüshírwán upon a night
Amidst his prayers and praises had a dream,
Wherein his lucid spirit saw in sleep

A Sun rise in the night and therewithal


Was an ascent that had two score degrees, s


Whose summit reached to Saturn in the ascendant.
From the Hijáz in stately pomp and joy
That Sun ascended that ascent, fulfilling
The world with brilliancy from Káf to Káf,!
And everywhere converting grief to mirth,
While all the horizons, whether far or near,
Took lustre from its glory everywhere,
And everywhere light entered save the hall
Of Nüshírwán which still abode in gloom.
The Sháh rose from his sleep for half the night,
And oped his lips to none on that affair,

! Káf-—Alburz. See Vol. i. p. 71.


OI—-—


NUSHIRWAN 67


But when the sun unveiled its countenance
He summoned to his presence Büzurjmihr.
The king of kings in private to that sage
Related what he had beheld in sleep,
And Büzurjmihr, possessed of all the case,
Considered all the dream from end to end,
And thus replied: **O king of power supreme !
In truth there is a mystery herein.”

The king said: “ Speak the truth because my life
Is failing in my body for suspense."

Then Büzurjmihr spake thus: ** O thou whose

rede

Is higher than moon and sun! this dream have I
Well studied : mark the marvel of its meaning.
From this day forth for forty years and more
Among the Arabs one will rise to power,
Who will adopt the way of righteousness, C. 1790
And turn aside from all deceit and loss.
He will confound the whole Faith of Zarduhsht.
When he shall show the moon his finger-tip,
His finger will divide it into two,
And none will look upon his back in toil.
The Jew and Christian shall withstand him not,
And he will do away with former Faiths.
He will ascend a triple-footed throne,
And all the world will be advised by him.
When he shall quit this Wayside Hostelry
The treasure of his words will still remain.
The world will joy in him from age to age,
Save the Shah's palace which the winds will scatter.
When he is dead a scion of thy race
Will have the tymbals, drums, and elephants.
A host will come on him from the Hijaz,
Though unpossessed of arms and equipage,
Will cast him from the throne upon the dust,
And fill the world with warriors. Then will cease


68 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The observation of the feast of Sada,
And every Fire-fane be a rubbish heap,
Folk will no longer worship Fire and Sun,
And all the fortunes of the brave will slumber.
Jámásp himself declared before Gushtásp
This secret, giving this interpretation."

When Nüshírwán heard this from Büzurjmihr
The favour of his countenance was changed ;
He was all day the mate of pain and grief,
And slumbered, when night came, worn out by care.!
Now when three watches of the night had passed
There went up such a panic-stricken ery
That thou hadst said: “The world is all o'er-

turned ! "'

And then one said: “ The hall is rent in twain ! "
Thereat the Shah’s heart started from its place,
And in the uttermost bewilderment
He spake concerning it to Buizurjmihr,
Beginning with the rending of the hall,
Which when the sage had looked upon he spake
On this wise, saying: “QO Shah Nushirwan !
This outery rose by reason of the Sun
That thou beheldest in thy dreams last night.
Know that thy palace gave a cry what time
That moon-like babe was born, and presently
A horseman with two steeds will come to say :—
' Fire-worship is abandoned to the blast ! ' *

Thereat, as swiftly as the flving dust,
A horseman came with tidings: “ Even now
Azargashasp is cold !”

The Shah's heart straitened
Because of it; he sighed continually.
os pee : “O Shah! why mourn there-
or 7


! Or, with the change of a diacritical point :—
And when the night came, toala not sleep for care,


NÜSHIRWAN 69


What matter this world's griefs and joys to thee
When thou art gone and parted far by time ?
The Shah survived not this event for long.
He died: the world bewailed him. Bizurjmihr
Veiled his own visage in the dust within C. 1791
Four se'nnights of the passing of the Sháh,
Who left behind this record when he went.
Be thy part to preserve his monument,
For since the turning sky proved so unfair
To him expect no love or justice there.!


And now the erown and throne I decorate
Of Sháh Hurmuzd, and seat him on the state.


! The reign ends here in the original,


= XLII
HURMUZD, THE 80N OF NUSHIRWAN
3 HE REIGNED TWELVE! YEARS


ARGUMENT


Hurmuzd, on succeeding to the throne, makes fair pro- ——
: mises but soon belies them and puts to death his father's ~
ministers. Afterwards, perturbed by a prophecy, he re-
pents, and two stories are told of hia even-handed justice.
War breaks out and Bahrim Chibina comes upon the scene. —
He is appointed commander-in-chief and defeats the Turks —
under King Sawa and his son Parmtda, but after having —
been shamefully insulted by the Shih he rebels—a course |
strongly opposed by his sister Gurdya. He contrives to
make Hurmuzd suspicious of his own son Khusrau Parwiz
who escapes. Hurmuzd is dethroned and blinded, and
Khusrau Parwiz returns.


NOTE


= Hurmuzd (Hormisdas IV., A.D. 578-590) may not have
3 been so black as he has been painted but his reign, to say
the least of it, stands in melancholy contrast to that of
his father whose precepts he disregarded, whose svstem of
administration he did his best to overturn, whose trusted
ministers he put to death, and whose practice of p rsonally
leading his troops he made no attempt to emulate? He

had the good fortune to possess a general at once brave,
able, and apparently quite loyal whom he treated with the |
basest and most insolent ingratitude, wrecking his own


aa" ; ' Fourteen according to P. — * RSM, p. 473.
20


HURMUZD 71


reign thereby and inflicting many wounds poe his country.


The romantic history of that general, as told in the Sháh-
nima, is one of the finest passages in the poem, and the
poet was fortunate in having such to lay before his readers
às he was nearing the end of his great undertaking.!

$2. Mákh, the marchlord of Harát, who seems to have
been known as Khurásání in accordance to Persian custom
in such matters, appears to be the father of, or identical
with, one of the four compilers of the prose Sháhnáma for
Abü Mansür which Firdausi used as his chief authority.
In the Introduction to the present Translation the name
of this particular compiler is given, in accordance to the
text of C., as Ta) son of Khurásáni of Harát* but according
to Noldeke* the Táj is quite uncertain.

$3. Nüshirwán had based his system of administration
upon the nobility. We have seen in a characteristic anec-
dote how he refused to consult his own convenience by
accepting a loan of money from a shoemaker.  Hurmuzd,
not having his fathers ability, found the system irksome
and consequently was inclined to favour the lower at the
expense of the higher orders. Accordingly later on we have
two stories of his even-handed justice. A justice, how-
ever, Which is said to have put to death 13,600 of the nobility
and priesthood, and imprisoned or degraded many others
in the course of a few years is somewhat suspect.*

Burzmihr seems to be identical with Büzurjmihr who, we
were told at the end of the last reign,’ died within a month
of Nüshirwán. ^ According to Mas'üdi Büzurjmihr survived
to be the chief minister of Khusrau Parwiz who after thir-
teen years of reign disgraced him and treated him even
worse than Nushirwiin is said to have done on one occasion,*
the two accounts no doubt being variants of the same story.
Firdausi tells us that one of the three scribes was young,”
and that Búzurjmihr was a youth at his lessons when he
first attracted Nüshírwán's attention,” He need not have
been an old man at the time of that Sháh's death. The
probability is, however, that he was executed along with
other ministers by Hurmuzd as the text seems to imply.


! See p. 96 seq. * VoL i. p. 67. * BIN, pp. 14 note 15.
* p. 48. * p. 9r. ^ !* NT, p. 2675.

' p. 69. — | pe 4 seg., MM, Hi. 224. * p. Br.

+? Vol. vii. p. 283. Cf. p. 313.


72 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§5. The account in the Shihnima and in Oriental his-
torians of these wars seems much exaggerated. The war
with Rüm was nothing new; it had been going on from
the days of Nüshirwán and was not specially active at the
moment. The Arab and Khazar invasions require further
confirmation and the latter, it may be suggested, was merely
a patriotic invention to cover up an unfortunate incident
that befell the Persians South of the Caucasus after the con-
clusion of the war with the Turks (p. 76). This last war
has generally been taken to have been waged between the
Persians and the Khán who was a relation by marriage of
Hurmuzd and would be certain to bring great forces into
the field. It appears, however, that Sawa is merely the
Persian form of “ Chao-wou "—the name piven in Chinese
official reports of the period to the princes of small states
on the Oxus that were more or less subject to the Khan
who does not appear to have been concerned in the matter
at all.!

$6. In the story of Mihrán Sitád's embassage as given
in the Sháhnáma the prophecy is limited to the outcome
of the marriage of Nüshírwán with the Khán's daughter."
It afforded, however, a convenient starting-point for the
Romance that gathered round the heroic personality of
Bahrám Chübina and the reference to him was interpolated
accordingly.

$7. Bahrám Chübina, whose story and that of his sister
Gurdya extend through the rest of this and far into the
succeeding reign, had been marchlord of Rai and governor
of the North, apparently, under Nüshirwán.? He con-
tinued to hold the same posts under Hurmuzd.' He was
a native of Rai, sprung from a race of marchlords and army-
chiefs, a Mihrán, and is said to have been descended from
Gurgín*—all important indications to the student of the
Sháhnáma. Rai was the traditional seat of Arsacid power."
Shápür of Rai, an army-chief, who was called in by Kubád
to overthrow Sufarai of the race of Kawa, also was a Mihrán
and descended from Mihrak.? The Mihrin clan played an
Important part in Sásánian times and the name often recurs.*
Gurgin, son of Milid, was the villain of the story of Bizhan


! NT, p. 269 and notes. RSM, p. 467. ' Vol. vii. p. 354.

* ZT, di. 252. Cf. Vol. vii. p. 214. * ZT, ii. 253.

' ZT, ii, 252. * Vol. vi. pp. 201, 215, 223.
' Vol. vii. pp. 185, 192. * Id.


HURMUZD 73


and Manízha. The pointis this. The words Mílád, Mihrak,
and Mihrán are closely allied, probably mere variants, are
reminiscent of Parthian times and under the Sásánian Dynasty
represent the vanquished Arsacid element. That element
recovered sufficiently to exercise much political power as
in the case of the Mihráns.

A Ruhhám of that stock is said to have been influential
in placing Pírüz upon the throne. If they could not be
kings themselves they aspired to be king-makers and
ministers. There was rivalry between them and families of
purer fránian stock, and the Sháhs, as in the instance given
above, availed themselves of it to serve their own ends. Such
rivalry, however, was a subsidiary matter: the great an-
tagonism between Arsacid and Sásánian, though latent,
still persisted and is indicated plainly enough in the course
of the story of Bahrám Chübína. |

Nóldeke'a account of that story, which is a blend of history
and romance, is briefly as follows. It was compiled in
Pahlavi shortly before the end of the Sasdnian Dynasty,
about the beginning of the reign of Yazdagird III., A.D.
632, and was translated into Arabic by a certain Jabala
bin Sálim of whom nothing more is known save that he was
"the writer of Hishám " who can be no other than the
Arabie historian Hishám Ibn Al-Kalbi. Hisham died
about A.D. 820. The story thus became known to tte Muham-
madans and was woven into the general presentment of
Sásünian history! We may add that Tabari, who was
born some eighteen years after Hishám's death and died
A.D. 923, gives the historical nucleus of the story in
his history. The redactor of his work into Persian (A.D.
963) states that as his Arabic authority has not given the
life of Bahrám Chübína in its entirety he gives it from the
book of the history of Persia where he found it more ¢om-
par This version agrees very closely with Firdausí's.

oth are derived from the Persian Book of Kings in one or
another of its later forms. Which the redactor of Tabari
used we cannot say, but Firdausi, we may assume, used the
modern Persian prose Sháhnáma of Abü Mansür* for which
‘a new translation of the story had been made from the


* Vol. iii. p. 289 seq. * Vol. iii. p. 11. vi, 256, vii. 156.
* Vol. vii. p. 156. NT, Pp. 474
! ZT, di. 253. * See Vol. i. p. 67.


74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


original Pahlavi. This may account for the difference in
some of the proper names that exists between Firdausi's
version and that in the Persian Tabari. In this and some
other respects the latter is of decided help to the under-
standing of the former. Attention will be called to such
matters in subsequent notes. |

It is evident that the redactors of the Pahlavi original
into Arabie or Persian took good care to leave little re-
pugnant to Muhammadan Faith or morals. Even the state-
ment in Tabarí and its Persian version that Gurdya was the
wife as well as the sister of Bahrám UChübína* disappears
in Firdausi.

Yalán-sína—a prominent character in the Romance—is
called Mardánsháh in the Persian Tabari. He was the
brother* and a firm supporter of Bahrám Chubina. Another
brother—Gurdwi—took the opposite side and remained
loyal to Khusrau Parwiz. The sympathies of Gurdya,
Bahram Chübína's sister, though she associated with him
till his death, were also legitimist.

$8. Here we have another instance of a Mihrán in high
office Probably he was the successor of Írzid Gashasp,
the scribe, who had been put to death by Hurmuzd early
in his reign® and is to be carefully distinguished from the
general of the same name in Bahrám Chübína's army, which
is not always done in the text of C.*

In the Persian Tabari the purveyor of sheep's heads is
said to have been naked and Bahrim Chubina to have
speared two of the heads one of which fell back into the
tray. The interpretation was that he would have to deal
with two kings of whom one would be killed while the other
would be restored to his rovalty. The nudity signified that
Bahram Chübina would revolt.?

According to the Persian Tabari, Hurmuzd, on hearing of
the invasion of Sáwa Sháh, sent Kharrád, son of Barzin,
with an escort to him to delay his advance while the ex-
pedition under the command of Bahrám Chübína was being
got ready. The envoy managed to keep Sáwa at Balkh
for a whole year.’

Faghfür, or Faghfür of Chín, hitherto in the Sháhnáma a


! NT, p. 475. ' NT, p. 279. ZT, ii. 303.
|. NT, p. 478. * Cf. p. 72. * p. 83,
* Cf. pp. 75, 150 note, 158 wor. * ZT, ii. 258. * Id. 259.


HURMUZD 75


dynastic title, here appears as the name of the younger son
of Sáwa perhaps to add to the latter's importance. In the
Persian Tabari the governor of Khurásán takes the part
here played by Faghfür.!

$12. In the Persian Tabarí Bahrám Chübína has the
dream while dozing on horseback after having been engaged
in arraying the troops all night, and in the same authority
bars the road of retreat with five hundred horse,* while the
only sorcery is in connexion with the dream.

According to Tabar” the shot that slew king Sáwa was one
of three that gave renown to archers in Persian story. The
others were that of Árish* and that of Süfaraf who in the
war undertaken to avenge Pírüz shot at a chief in the van-
guard of Khüshnawáz and pierced his horse's head. with an
arrow. The chief was taken prisoner by Sifarai who sent
him back to Khüshnawáz with instructions to report the
matter, and Khüshnawaz was so impressed that he sued
for peace.” Neither of these instances is mentioned in the
Sháhnáma though it celebrates in a famous passage Rustam’s
shot in the fight. with Ashkabüs* and Bahrám Gürs skill
in archery.?

Bahrám, the son of Siyáwüsh, had married a niece of
Bahrám Chübína.*

814. The episode of the garden is not in the Persian Tabari.

§17. The above remark applics to the quarrel between
Bahram Chibina and Parmida, and to the former's retention
of some of the booty.

The Persian Tabari makes Mardánsháh (Yalán-síná), not
Íxid Gashasp, conduct the Khán, the other prisoners, and the
booty to Írán.’ |

$18. The Sháhnáma here seems to confuse Ízid Gashasp
with the scribe of that name executed by Hurmuzd.'? It is
clear from the Persian Tabari that the person consulted by
the Shah about Bahrám Chübína was his confidant and
minister Ávín Gashasp who in the Persian Tabarí is named
Yazdánbakhsh. Ízid and Yazdán both mean God which also
caused confusion and when it beeame hopeless the form Ayin
Gashasp was adopted to get out of the difficulty.


fgg. oe 5 Jd, 261. * NT. p. 27r.
4 See VoL v. p. 12. ‘NT, p. 127. ZT, ii 143.
* Vol. iii. pp. 109, 181r. * Vol. vi. 383, vii. 54, 55, 80.


' ZT,ii.262. Cf. NT, 281, 282 wofe, — * ZT. ii. pp. 265, 266.
ap. 83. n" ZT.ii. p. 266.


70 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§§ 19-21. The definite accusation of withholding some
of the booty made by the archscribe (Mihrán) against Bahrám
Chübína is absent in the Persian Tabari which merely gives
the vague insinuation of the minister Yazdánbaksh which
rouses suspicion in Hurmuzd's mind and causes him to send
Mardánsháh back to the commander-in-chief with a chain,
distaff-case and cotton, and an insulting letter! A similar
insult is recorded to have been offered by the Empress Sophia
to the exarch Narses when he was superseded and bidden
return to his place among the maidens of the palace where a
distaff should again be placed in his hand.*

The treatment of Bahrám Chübína by Hurmuzd, though
foolish enough in any circumstances, was not quite so un-
reasonable and motiveless as it appears to be in the accounts
of oriental writers. In A.D. 589 after the successful conclusion
of Bahrim Chubina’s expedition Hurmuzd conceived the
idea of renewing the Lazio war which his father had abandoned
in A.D. 562,5 and sent Bahrám Chübína to conduct the cam-

ign. That chief, however, was defeated by the Romans
in a battle on thu Araxes and his disgrace followed*

$22. Here for once the Sháhnáma seems to join hands
with Western Romance. The Adventure, mutatis mutandis,
reads as if it had been taken bodily from some medimval
romance of chivalry.

According to the Persian Tabari both Kharrád, son of
Barzin, and the archscribe were present on the occasion.*

$23. Here again there seems to be some confusion in
connexion with Ízid Gashasp. He is identified with the
archscribe in the heading. Moreover he is pursued, captured,
and brought back to Bahram Chibina, who lets him off very
easily, because he is wanted for service with that paladin. In
the Persian Tabari both the fugitives make good their escape
to Hurmuzd.* That version does not know of Izid Gashasp,
who is mentioned, however, in Tabari.”

$24. In the Persian Tabarí Bahrám Chübina sends Hur-
muzd twelve thousand hangers with bent points to represent
all his twelve thousand troops.”

Bahrám Chübína is here described as the son of Gashasp.


"i e " * GDE, v. 336. E
'al. vii. p. 215. * NT, p. 272 sofe. RSM, p. 469
* ZT, ii. 267. * Id. 258. T E


' NT, p. 278. * ZT, ii. 267.


HURMUZD “3


Tabarí makes him the son of Bahrám-Gushnasp,! the Persian
version of Bahrám,* and Mas'üdí of the nickname—Chübín.?

$25. [zid Gashasp is regarded as dealing with both sides
because of the malicious speech that he is represented to
have made about Bahram Chubina.*

The debate is not in the Persian Tabari.

$26. The letter to the Khan is not in the Persian Tabari.

Historically Bahrám Chübína issued coins in his own name
but apparently not in that of Khusrau Parwiz.*

$27. The authorities differ as to whether Gustaham was
imprisoned as well as Bandwi. The Oriental say both, the
Greek Bandwi only,* which makes the revolt more intelligible.


$1
The Prelude


The Summer? mocked the ruddy apple-tree,
And treated fruit and leaf with raillery :—
* As for the posy that in Spring of late
Thou barest on thy breast intoxicate,
With just a blush remembered in its bloom,
And branches yielding exquisite perfume,
How didst thou find a purchaser to buy,
And do thy marketing so readily ?
Those emeralds and rubies who bestowed
On thee that bendest underneath the load ?
Sooth! thou hast bartered blossom for the grace
Of colour wherewithal to deck thy face,*
But brought me to despair who cannot see
Thy blossoms for thy flaunting bravery.”
Sweet Spring, my charmer! whither hast thou fled,
‘NT, p. 270. ‘ZT, ii. 252.
* MM, ii. 213. Cf. p. 98 mole. * p. 1§0 and mole.
* RSM, p. 471 mole, “Id,


' Tamüz, the Syrian month of July, in the original.
' Three couplets omitted.


C. 1793


78 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And left the glories of the garden dead ?
Howbeit Autumn hath a scent of thine,

And I will drink to thee in new-made wine :
Though thou art sallow I will praise thee yet,
And deck thee like Hurmuzd's own coronet,
For now my mart is brisk. Art thou to see,
When I am dead and gone, no trace of me Y


$2
How Hurmuzd ascended the Throne and harangued
the Chiefs


A marchlord of Hardt, well shot in age,
There was, in all approven and beseen,
A ready speaker, Mákh by name, world-sage,
Still flourishing and of exalted mien ;
And it was him I questioned fain to find
What record of Hurmuzd he had in mind
When that Shah filled the throne of equity :
That eld of Khurasan thus answered me :—
Whenas that Shah sat on the famous state
He first gave praises to almighty God,
The Arbiter of fortune, and then said :—
= We will renown the throne and hold in honour
The men of high degree. We will enfold
The world beneath our wings, as did our sire,
In goodly case and Glory. We will make
Offenders quake and ease the oppressed, be patient
If one doth ill and succour him in trouble.
The prop of majesty is clemency
With bounty, justice, and right conduct. Know
That good and evil never are concealed


! Division of text as in P.


HURMUZD 79


From Him who is the Maker of the world.
Our ancestors—crown-wearers in their time,
Which through their justice had its share of praise—
Sought but for mildness, equity, and greatness,
With valour, aptitude, their lieges’ service,
Their lords’ observance, and to vex their foes.
In every clime to act and to command,
Power, counsel, and authority to treat,
Are mine. The good affect a heaven-sent Shah.
Now mercy is the capital of such ;
The age becometh full of ease through bounty.
The mendicants will I entreat with kindness,
And will watch o'er the rich. The self-made man
Shall have a prosperous commerce with ourselves.
Withhold not your desires from my fond heart ;
I will abate with ease whatever cause
For fear ye entertain. Ye prosperous !
Joy in my erown and throne. Amid the great
Mine is the lustre in that mercy, justice,
And bounty are mine own. Grow still in kindness,
And banish greed and vengeance from your hearts.
They that fear God will see not evil fortune,
So strive ye all, both small and great, to win
The favour of the Maker of the world.
Again, let not the heart of one possessed
Of wisdom contemplate ingratitude,
And when thou benefitest other folk
Let there be no idea of recompense.
Mix not with men that speak deceitfully,
For what they utter is for outward show,
And if thy king be just think thou no shame
Concerning him, for while thou callest him
Unwise he may be studious of the words
Of former Sháhs,! and when his heart is prompted
To mercy sow not thou the seed of guile

i Reading with P.


C. 1793


So THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Upon the earth. The spurner of our counsel

Will throw away the benefits of fortune.

The approval of thy Sháh sufficeth thee,

While to resist him is the road to ruin.

His harshness in exhorting thee is kind,

For he would break with thee if he were wroth.

Begrudge no efforts in the cause of good,

And joy not in injustice and in wealth.

When in the world thou hast thy heart's desire,

And reached what thou wast instant to attain,

Still, when thou don'st the crown of seventy years,

Thou yieldest all thy winnings to the foe.

My heart is greatly troubled for the poor,

And I would have them ever in my thoughts.

I ask the holy Fosterer for time

To render poor folk happy with my treasures ;-

I will not bring the saintly heart to trouble.

If any by his monetary wealth

Shall grow too kinglike him will I abase :

No rival will I have. From first to last,

In publie utterance and secret thought,

We are the same. The Maker's benison

Be yours, your earth the circling vault of heaven.”
Now when the assembly heard his words each man

Grew thoughtful, those of wealth were filled with

fear,
And tyrants’ hearts were rent, while for their part
The sage and mendicant waxed glad of heart.


HURMUZD BI


$3
How  Hurmuzd slew -feid Gashasp, | Zarduhsht,
Simah Barzin and Bahrédm Azarmihdn, his
Fathers Ministers!


The Sháh ruled well until he felt secure
And had attained his ends but then he raged,
Displayed his evil nature, left the path
Of right and, as he had determined, slew
Those most in honour with his father— men,
Who, innocent and happy, feared no ill.

Among the seribes of Nüshírwán were three,
Two old, one young, their names Ízid Gashasp,
Burzmihr—a learnéd scribe of Grace and presence—
And Mah Azar, wise, shrewd, and prosperous.
The three had been vizirs and ministers
Before the throne of Nüshírwán. Hurmuzd
Was longing to bring ruin on all three
Because he feared that they might prove ingrate. C. 1794
Without a cause he raised his hand against
Izid Gashasp, bound and imprisoned him.
. The high priest's heart was straitened and his cheek
Wan with anxiety, for he was good,
An ancient named Zarduhsht, and at the bondage
Of scribe Izid Gashasp it was as though
His own heart had been arrow-pierced.

Now when

Izid Gashasp had passed a day untended,
Without food, clothes or solacer, a friend
Conveyed for him this message from the prison
To the high priest: “‘O thou that to the captive
Art skin and marrow! here am I within

* The heading in the original seems to have been carelessly com-


piled. The one above has been adopted to suit'the account in the
text.


VOL. VIII. F


83 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The prison of the Shah without attendance,
And none can come to me. I crave for food ;
A famished paunch increaseth my distress.
Send to me what is fit and, when I die,
some linen! and a stitcher for my shroud.”
The high priest's heart was grieved at his afflic-
tion,
His message, place, and lodging. He replied :—
“Complain not of the matter of thy bondage
If thou art not in jeopardy of life.”

Albeit the message left him broken-hearted,
And troubled for himself. He thought: “ If news
Shall reach this Graceless and ungenerous Shah
That his high priest hath sent things to the prison,
My life and body are not worth a mite ;

This world-lord will destroy me and will turn
A livid face toward me in his wrath."

Yet through affection for Izid Gashasp,

The scribe, his heart was wrung, his face like gall.
He bade his heedful cook take to the prison
Food for the prisoner and afterwards
Gat on an Arab steed and went to him.
The keeper of the prison paled with fright,
On seeing the high priest, but dared not say :—
“ Go not within the prison for this king
Is self-willed and a novice.”

Bathed in tears
That agéd man alighted from his steed,
And visited Izid Gashasp. They clasped
Each other in a close embrace, all anguish,
The lashes of their eyes like clouds in Spring,
And held talk of the Sháh's malignity `
Until words failed them. Then the board was

spread
Before those holy men who next began
' Reading with P.


hem 1
eè


HURMUZD 83


To mutter prayers with sacred twigs in hand,
And afterwards Izid Gashasp in whispers
Conveyed his wishes, while the high priest heark-
ened,
As to his hoarded treasure and dinars,
His mansions, palaces, and property,
And said: “O noble man! on going hence
5av to Hurmuzd from me: * Though thou mayst C. 1795
spurn
My words yet think upon the toils and care
That I supported with Sháh Nüshírwán,
And how I cherished thee too on my breast.
My recompense is chains and fear of worse,
And I shall show God on the Judgment Day
A guiltless heart aggrieved against the king.’ "
Now when the high priest had gone home a spy
Departed hastily and told the news
To Shah Hurmuzd whose heart conceived fell
schemes,
He did not spare Izid Gashasp but sent,
And slew him in the prison, heard reports
At large about the high priest, made no sign,
And pondered how by fair means or by foul
To slay him ; then gave orders to the cook
To mingle bane in secret with some dish,
And when the high priest came at audience-time
To pay his duty to the illustrious king,
Hurmuzd said: “ Tarry here to-day for I
Have a new cook.”
The high priest sat; they spread
The board; he paled; he felt that 'twas his last,
Andsoit proved. "The cooks brought up the meats,
And Sháh Hurmuzd partook of all in turn,
But when he had the poisoned dish brought in
The high priest glanced thereat and looked again.
There was an ill surmise in his pure heart :—


C. 1796


84 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


“ His remedy is poison in that dish!”

Hurmuzd, on seeing this, said not a word,
But stretched his hand out to that dish of bane,
And, in accordance to the use of kings
When paying servants honour and regard,
Put his own noble fingers to the board,
And, having taken marrow from the dish,
Said to the high priest: ** O thou honest man !
I made this luscious morsel for thyself,
5o open wide thy mouth and take this food,
And such should be thy nourishment henceforth."

The archmage answered : ** By thy life and head,
And may thy head and crown endure for ever,
Bid me not eat it; I have had enough,
50 do not press me further."

said Hurmuzd :—
* By sun and moon, and by the purity
Of soul of him who is the Sháh and world-lord,
Thou shalt accept this morsel from my hand,
And frustrate not my wish herein."
He answered :—

“ The Shah hath bidden and I have no choice.”

He ate, then left the board, in sore distress,
And hurried home, spake of the poisoned food
To none but spread a robe and lay lamenting.
He ordered one to fetch an antidote
From those old hoards of his or from the city,
But it availed not aught, and bitterly
Complained he unto God against Hurmuzd.
The Shah dispatched a trusty man to learn
The high priest’s state, the action of the poison,
And if the scheme had failed. Now when the
| eve
Of the high priest beheld the messenger
Tears fell from his eyelashes down his cheeks.

‘Reading with P.


HURMUZD 85


“Go, tel Hurmuzd," he said: ‘Thy fortune
changeth.

Hereafter, through thy mischievous designs,

Thou shalt be blind and shiftless in the world,

Thy foes shall have their hearts' desire upon thee,

And lasting shame shall dog thy soul for this.

soon wilt thou die and leave an evil name.

I go to lay my cause before the Judge,

Where we shall face each other. Never more

Sleep free from ill, for chastisement divine

Confronteth thee. I take my leave of thee,

Malignant man! Ill done will bring thee ill.’

The trusty envoy heard and went with tears

To take the king the message. He repented,

Writhed at the high priest’s righteous words, but
saw

No way to cure that smart and deeply sighed.

Anon the high priest died, and all the wise

Wept o’er him sorely. In this world of pain

And toil why court renown and clutch at gain ?

The wise count breaths because no joys remain.

The high priest’s wretched end convulsed the realm

With grief, but that blood-shedding, brutal world-
lord

Recked not of evil fortune, girt his loins

For bloodshed, made Bahrim Ázarmihán

His tool, called him by night and made him kneel

Beside the throne, then said: “ Thou wouldst feel
safe

From evil treatment at my hands? Then when

The sun is bright in heaven, and mountain-tops

Are shining like a back-plate, come among

The nobles of Iran and take thy stand

Before my throne. Then will I question thee

About Símáh Barzín: make answer boldly.

I shall inquire: * What is this friend of thine,


86 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


An evil man or one that serveth God ? '
C. 1797 Reply: ' He is an evil man, a villain,
And sprung from Ahriman.’ Then ask whatever
Thou wilt—a handmaid, signet, throne and crown.”
Bahrám replied : ** I will, and multiply
The ill a hundredfold.”
The Shah thus sought

An artifice to put Simah Barzin,
One of the chiefs, beloved by Nüshirwán—
That Lustre of the age—beyond the pale
Of sympathy.

Now when the Robe whose hue
Is ivory-bright grew visible, and Sol
Rose in the Sign of Gemini, the world-lord
Sat on the ivory throne, and o'er his head
They hung thé costly crown. The Íránian chiefs
Met and drew up in rank before the court-gate.
The audience-chamberlain withdrew the curtain,
And all the throng approached the king. First came
Bahrim Ázarmihán, Símáh Barzín,
And valiant chiefs. Each took his proper seat,
The crowd still standing in the monarch’s presence,
Who questioned thus Bahram Ázarmihán :—
“Now doth Simah Barzin, in presence here,
Deserve our wealth or is he troublesome,
Because the ill-disposed deserve not treasure ? "'

Bahrim Azarmihan well understood

The question of the monarch of the world,
Its base and motive: “* We must weep therefor,
And from the ruler of the people I
Shall have at last a charnel but no shroud!”
And thus he made response: “O noble Shah !
Look for no goodness from Simáh Barzin,
For he hath wrecked Írán. Would that his body
Had neither brain nor skin! He speaketh naught
But villainy and thus produceth strife.”


HURMUZD 87


Simah Barzin, on hearing this, replied :—
'* My good old friend ! defame not thus my person,
And be not thus confederate with the Div.
Since thou hast been my friend what words and
deeds
Of Ahriman hast thou perceived in me ?”
Bahrám Ázarmihán thus answered him :—
“Thou hast been scattering seed throughout the
world,
And thou wilt be the first to reap the crop.
Black smoke shall be thy portion of the fire,
For Nushirwin once summoned thee and me,
And made us kneel before the royal throne
With the high priest, Burzmihr, and with that chief
Of comely face, Izid Gashasp, and asked :—
‘Who doth deserve the imperial throne and who
Possesseth Grace? On younger son or elder
Shall I bestow it? Which is worthier
Of kingship ? '
Then the rest of us arose, C. 1798
And framed our tongues to utter this reply :—
‘This man of Turkman kindred is unworthy ;
None would give aught for such a Sháh, for he
Is Khán-descended, is of evil nature,
And like his mother both in looks and bearing.’
Thou saidst: * Hurmuzd is fit to be the Shah,’
And now art guilty of the consequence.
For this cause have I testified against thee,
And opened thus my lips in thy dispraise.”
Hurmuzd at that archmage’s truthful words
Turned pale with shame. At night he sent them
both
To prison and for two nights made no sign
Withal, but on the third, what time the moon
Arose above the mountains, he dispatched
Simih Barzin by slaying him within


88 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The prison of the thieves yet gat thereby

But toil and malison. On hearing how

That man of honest heart had passed away
Bahrám Ázarmihán sent to the Sháh

A message saying: “ Thou whose crown is over
The orbit of the moon! thou knowest how much
I have endured to keep thy secrets close,

And ne'er was aught but well disposed to thee
Before thy father, that illustrious Shah.

If thou wilt summon me and make me sit
Beside the royal throne I will reveal

A matter to thee in thine interest.

Free me at once from bondage in the prison ;
‘Twill help Írán and keep the wise unscathed.”

Hurmuzd, when this came, chose a confidant
To bring Bahram Ázarmihán to him,

And to that court renowned. The monarch sum-
moned

Bahrám Ázarmihán when it was night,

Caused him to kneel before the royal throne,

And then said: “ Tell me what this matter is

That will secure my life in happiness.”

He answered: “ In the royal treasury

I have observed a plain black cabinet.

Deposited within it is a casket,

And therein is a document in Persian.

"lis written on white silk : the Iranians’ hopes

Are centred there. “Twas written by thy sire,

That Sháh and world-lord, and thou shouldest see
it."

Then to his treasurer, good at need, Hurmuzd
Sent one to say: “ Seck in the ancient hoards
A plain sealed cabinet and on the seal
The name of Nüshírwán, and may his soul
Be ever young! Dispatch and bring it me
Ere night be past."


HURMUZD 89


The treasurer was prompt, C. 1799

And brought it with the seal intact. The world-

lord
Oped it, invoking oftentimes the while
The name of Nüshírwán. He saw within
A casket, which was also sealed, wherefrom
He eagerly took forth the piece of silk,
And saw the eharacters of Nüshírwán
Inscribed thereon, and thus the writing ran :—


4s Hurmuzd for two years more than ten
Will prove a matehless monarch, then
The world will be convulsed, his name
Pass to abeyance with his fame.
Foes will spring up in every place
Led by a man of evil race,
An Ahriman, the monarch’s host
Will be dispersed, his throne be lost.*
Him will that villain blind, and they
Will, after, take his life away. ^"


On seeing that script, and in his father’s hand,
Hurmuzd was frayed and rent the silk asunder.
With bloodshot eyes and livid face he cried :—

“ Injurious man! what was thine aim herein ?
Wouldst have my head ? "

Bahrám Ázarmihán
Said: “'Turkman-born! how long wilt thou delight
In bloodshed ? From the Khán, not Kai Kubád,
Art thou upon whose head the crown was set
By Nüshirwán."

Hurmuzd knew: “ If he can

He will o’erthrow me,” heard out his abuse,
And sent him back to prison where next night,
! More literally :—


“The enemy will cast him down from the throne."
! Reading with P.


TET emd x xi NUTS :
d "ws To HE a F P ir^ T x
90 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI s


What time the moon rose o'er the mountain-tops,
The deathsman slew him. At the court no sage
Or counsellor or archimage was left.

From ill self-governance all evils spring ;

See that thou disregard that evil thing.


$4
How Hurmuzd turned from Tyranny to Justice j
From that time forth he led a goodlier life, = i


Moved by remorse at heart. Now every year,

When nights were short, he sojourned at Istakhr

Two months because that city was delightsome,

The air serene: he knew not how to quit it.

He and his court were wont to spend three months

At Ispahán with its delicious air—

The seat of mighty men. In Winter-time

He dwelt at Taisafün among the troops,

The archimages and the counsellors ;

While in the Spring he was upon the plain

Of the Arwand, and thus a while went by.

His heart was terror-stricken by that scroll,

He spent three watches of the night in prayer,

Shed no more blood thenceforth and did no wrong :

His soul mused not of ill. Whene’er the Veil

Of lapis-lazuli was hidden, and when

The topaz height appeared, a herald used

Thus to proclaim: “Famed men of Grace and pru-
dence !

If tilth be trampled and the sower troubled

By that mishap, or if a horse shall enter

Crops, or if any one withal shall trespass

On orchards, then the horse's tail and ears

Must be eut off and the thief's head be set


HURMUZD UT


Upon the stake.”
He had a son beloved,
Just like the moon, whom he had named Parwiz,
And sometimes called '* Khusrau the well-content. "*
He never left his father's side for long ;
The father never bloomed without the son.
It chanced that the young steed of prince Parwiz
Escaped from stall and followed by its groom
Went to the growing crops whose owner came
Lamenting to the groom and asked : " What man
Must sorrow for this horse's ears and tail ? "
' The groom said:  "'Tis the horse of prince
Parwiz ;
What careth he for subjects 7”
Then the owner
Went to the king and laid the case before him,
Who said : ** Haste, dock the horse's tail and ears,
Then have the damage to the crop assessed,
And prince Khusrau shall recompense the man
A hundredfold in money from his treasures
Upon the field and in its owner's presence."
Thereat the prince moved chiefs to plead for him
Before the Sháh that he would not have docked
The black steed's tail and ears, but in his wrath
Against the steed the king paid no regard
To all those men of world-experience ;
The groom through terror of the king made haste
To dock the young steed of its ears and tail
Upon that tilth betrampled ; and Khusrau
Paid the complainant what the Sháh had bidden.
Anon the king went hunting, and they all C. 1801
Had much good sport. A valiant warrior,
Whose father was the captain of the host,
Saw, as he went along, a vine well laden


! Two couplets omitted.
! The prince afterwards famous a5 Shih Khusrau Parwiz.


92 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


With unripe grapes and bade his servant haste
To cut and take some bunches to his cook.
The owner came and said: “ Thou miscreant !
Thou neither wast the tender of this vine,
Nor boughtest it with treasure and dinars !
Why hast thou spoiled the labour of another ?
I shall complain of thee before the Shah.”

The valiant horseman, fearing what might chance,
Undid his belt forthwith and then bestowed it,
All costly and all golden with each link
Inlaid with gems, upon the man who said
On seeing it: “What wrong one must condone !
Tell not the king. Thou hast no purchaser
In me, so make it no affair of price ;

While as for thanks I lay on thee that word ;
Thou wouldst be lifeless if that just judge heard !


$5


flow Hosts gathered from all Sides against Hurmuzd,
and how he took Counsel with his Wazirs


When he had reigned for ten years righteously
The voice of foemen rose from every realm,
king Sáwa marched upon him from Harát
With drums and treasure, elephants and troops.
If thou wouldst take the number of that host
Go count four hundred o'er a thousand times.
There were twelve hundred elephants of war ;
Thou wouldst have said: “ Earth hath no room
for them.”

The desert from Harát to the Marvrüd*
Was thiek as warp and woof with soldiery,

` Six couplets omitted, ' Reading with P.


HURMUZD 93


And as he led them on to Marv the earth
Was hidden by the dust-clouds of the host.

King Sawa wrote a letter to Hurmuzd, C. 1802
And said: “ Convoke thy powers from every side,
Repair the roads and bridges for my troops,

Get provand and bethink thee of my sword.
I would pass through thy realm. Mine army reacheth
O'er river, height, and waste."

On reading this
The king turned pale at all that countless host.
Then from another quarter Cæsar came,
And over-ran the land with his array—
A force of Rúmans five score thousand strong,
Courageous and redoubted cavaliers.
The cities ta'en by Nüshirwán, whose name
Still frighted him, he took back with the sword :
All were again obedient unto Ciesar.!
A host came from the side of the Khazars,
And all the fields and fells were black with them.
A warrior of experience and possessed
Of troops and treasure of his own was leader,
And from Armenia their companies
Extended to the gate of Ardabil.
Then from the waste of spear-armed cavaliers
An army came past count. “Abbas and ‘Amr,
Two horsemen youthful and illustrious,
Led them. They gave to havoc land and crop
Because Hurmuzd demanded tribute of them.
That host reached the Farat, and in that land
No place for grass was left. When fortune loured
News reached Hurmuzd, and that successful Shah
Grew all amort at his informants’ words,
And he repented slaying those archmages,
And alienating wise men from his court.
He saw no counsellor, and he had need


' Couplet inserted from P. and one omitted.


C. 1803


94 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI .


Of wise advisers, so he sent and summoned
The Iranians to full session in the palace,
And made discovery of all the matter,
Addressing thus those nobles of the land :—
* A greater host than any can recall
Is marching on Írán."
Then all the marchlords :
Approached him with suggestions, saying thus :— f |
‘Advised and prudent Shah! hear us herein.
Thou art a wise Shah; we are subjects merely,
And count ourselves as less than one archmage. r
Thy seribes and thine arehmages hast thou slain,
Departing from both faith and precedent.
Think what to do and who shall guard our land."
Then said an archimage who was wazir :— 3
" O sage and knowledge-seeking Shah! if now r
The host of the Khazars come forth to battle
Our warriors will be fully occupied.
Let us make overtures to them of Rúm, -5
And then pluck up the Arabs by the root.
King Sawa is more instant and with him
Our prospect is more gloomy too. Our trouble
Will come by wav of Khurásán for he
Will waste our country and our wealth withal ;
So when the Turkman marcheth from Jíhün
To war there must be no delay.”
Hurmuzd,
For he was seeking for a policy,
Said to that archimage: ** How shall we now
Bear us toward king Sawa 7” x
He replied :— 1
“ Put thine own soldiers into war-array, "
For troops exalt a monarch. Summon too
The muster-master that he may account
The number fit for service.”


+" tes vaillantes troupes n'hésiteront pas un instant." Mohl.


HURMUZD 95


With the roll
The muster-master came before the Sháh,
Whose army numbered five score thousand men,
The more part mounted, many were on foot.
The archmage said: ‘* With such a host as this
We well may be defeated by king Sawa
Unless thou actest boldly and uprightly,
Dismissing all ideas of fraud and falsehood ;
Then thou wilt free thy subjects’ heads from bonds
As well becometh kingship. Thou hast heard
The mighty tale of ill done to Gushtasp,
And to Luhrásp all for religion's sake
By great Arjásp, that brave old Wolf, and all
The cavaliers of Chín, the woe of Balkh,
And how life was embittered in that land
Until Asfandivár was set at large,
And pressed the war amain.! Unless the king
Of earth will be advised he will behold
Much trouble from the Turks of Chín, but though
I pass the king in years I pass him not
In thought."
The king said: “ Cæsar shall not fight
With us. I will restore the cities taken
By Nüshírwán, and then he will withdraw.”
He chose a scribe—a warrior—as envoy,
A wise, a prudent, and observant man,
And sent him unto Cæsar with this message :—
=I want no Rúman cities; be that land
Thine; but withal set foot not on our coasts
If thou wouldst be both great and prosperous.”
The envoy came to Cæsar and delivered
The message of Hurmuzd. The lord of Rúm
Withdrew and did no seath upon Iran.
The king, when Cesar had withdrawn, prepared
To war with the Khazars. He formed a host,
| See Vol v. p. 35 seq.


C.


1 804


gü THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Whose dust-clouds blotted day, and sent it thither

To fire those fields and fells, led by Kharrad—

A man of Grace, of worship, and of justice.

Now when that army reached Armenia

The host of the Khazars barred all the way.

The franians slaughtered many and bare off

Much spoil. The Arabs hearing this were checked,

And went back whence they came. So when the
Shah

Heard that Kharrad had been victorious

Naught but to fight king Sawa still remained,

To which endeavour all his thoughts were strained.


86


How Hurmuzd heard of Bahrám Chübina and sent
for him


A servant of the Sháh's, one hight Nastüh,

A wise, successful, and observant man,

Spake thus: “O Shah! be happy. May the hand
Of ill be ever far from thee! My sire,

The wise Mihrán Sitád, hath still his wits,
Though old, and sitteth with the Zandavasta
In his retirement, having naught to hope for
Through age and weakness. Now but recently
I went and spent a day and night with him,
Told him about king Sawa, his vast host,

And elephants of war. My father said :—

* The ancient propheey is then fulfilled ! '

I questioned him : * To what referrest thou * '
He answered: *1f the Sháh shall ask of me

I will reveal it. "


Then the king of kings


HURMUZD 97


Commanded that a noble should set forth
In haste and fetch the old man from his palace
Upon a litter. When that ancient came,
His heart all knowledge and his head all lore,
Before the Shah, Hurmuzd inquired of him :—
“What know’st thou of the past ? "

" O fluent Sháh,
And heedful,” said the elder, “= when the Khán
Dispatched thy mother to Iran from Chin
I was the chief of eight score warriors
That went to ask of him her hand in marriage.
Thy father, that most upright king of kings,
Demanded no slave's daughter of the Khan,
But said: * Require a daughter of the queen ;
No slave must be the consort of the Shah.’ -
I went before the Khán and did obeisance. C. 1805
He had five daughters in his women's bower,
All goodly, fit to deck the thrones of monarchs,
In gait like pheasants and in looks like Spring,
And all fulfilled with colour, scent, and beauty.
The monarch sent me to their bower. I entered
That famed court. They had decked the daughters’

faces,

And twined their locks with roses, save thy mother
Who wore no coronet, no necklace, bracelet,
Or other ornament but sat there mute
With hanging head and shyly hid her face
Behind her sleeves; but she alone of all
Was daughter of the queen; none of the rest
Possessed such elegance, such bloom, and charm
Because the queen was daughter of Faghfur,
And naturally indisposed to ul.
She sorrowed that her child should dwell afar,
And that pure daughter quit the monarch's palace.
Among those daughters her it was I chose ;
I heeded not the others: Said the Khán :—


VOL. VII: G


C.


15065


pë THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


‘ Select another; all the five are fair

And worshipful,’ and this was my response :—
‘My choice is made; to choose again were fatal.’
Then summoned he his priests and made them kneel
Before the royal throne and asked concerning


. His daughter's future. Those astrologers


Replied: * Thou shalt see naught but good and
hear

Naught but the truth. From her and from the
Shah

A prince like some fierce lion will be born,

Of lofty stature and with lusty limbs,

Brave as a lion, bounteous as a cloud,

Black-eyed, impetuous, and cholerie,

Who, on his father’s death, will be the king.

He will enjoy much treasure from his sire,

And in his latter days refrain from evil.

Thereafter will a mighty king arise,

Lead forth a valiant host of Turks and seek

With that array to occupy Tran

And country of Yaman throughout. The Shah

Will be in dudgeon at him and will fear

His high, victorious fortune, but will have

Far off a subject, an exalted horseman

And loyal liege, tall and adust of body,

Upon his head crisp locks as black as musk,

Big both of bone and nose and swart of skin—

A warrior brave and strong, nicknamed Chibina,*

And sprung from paladins. This strenuous man

Will come with some few soldiers to the Shah,

Soon overthrow this Turk and wreck his host.’

Ne'er saw I one more glad than was the Khan

On hearing this. He gave the Crown of all

His daughters unto Nüshírwán while I

Received her on the Sháh's behalf. This done

tig Stick-like.


Ih. a
ev
i tse!
4 ¥


9a


HURMUZD


I hied me home, the. Khán producing for us
Such wealth of jewels from his treasury
That we were put to it to carry them.
He came with me as far as the Jíhün,
Embarked his daughter and with doleful heart
Turned back, at one with sorrow for his child.
Now have I told my tale here in thy presence,
O king of men! Seek for the man himself
Within thy realm and bid thy couriers haste
Because thy triumph lieth in his hands,
But tell not friend or foe.”
E’en with the words
He yielded up the ghost, and all the folk
Bewailed him bitterly. The king of kings
Was all astound and poured down tears of blood.
* Mihrán Sitád," he told the Íránians,
* Retained this story in his memory,
And after having told it to us died,
Committing his accepted soul to God,
And God be thanked that this old man hath uttered
Words of such import. Had I fetched him hither
But one hour later he had died and I
Had seen much grief. Our realm must now be
searched

For this man whether he be lord or liege.
. Seek indefatigably for this one
Until ye find him."

An illustrious subject,
The master of the horse, named Zad Farrukh,
Who sought in all the pleasure of the Shah,
Went to him and thus spake: “ The indications
Detailed by that famed man before the lords
Can only, otherwise we clutch but wind,
Apply, methinketh, to Bahram Chubina,
Son of Gashasp, a noble, well skilled horseman
To whom thou gavest Ardabil and Barda’


. 1807


I00 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ


Where he beeame marchlord with drums and troops.”
The Shah dispatched a speedy cameleer

To bid Bahram Chibina dally not

Upon the way but come from Ardabil

To court alone without the drums and host.*

The messenger the joyful news conveyed,

And told him what Mihrán Sitád had said.


87
How Bahrám Chübína came to. Hurmuzd and was
made Captain of the Host


Not calling any of his warriors
That world-aspirant hurried off from Barda’,
And when he came the Shah accorded audience.
On seeing the visage of the king of kings
The veteran much praised that noble one,
Who at first sight grew favourably disposed,
Perceived the marks named by Mihran Sitad
In him, smiled and grew blithe of countenance,
Received him well and lodged him splendidly.
When sombre night flung off its musky veil,
And Sol displayed its face, the marchlord came
To court, and all the chiefs made way for him.
The world-lord summoned him and made him sit
Among the magnates, told him how fran
Was placed and what Mihran Sitad had said,
Then asked about king Sáwa, saying: “ Shall I
Make peace or send forth troops ? "

The warrior
Replied : * We may not make a peace with him,
For, since he fain would fight, to sue for peace

! Reading with P.


HURMUZD IOI


Will mean defeat for us; the foe moreover
Will be emboldened if he see thee weak.
To proffer feast in war-time is to make
Contention like submission."
Said Hurmuzd :—
* What is the course then? Shall I seek delay,
Or march to battle ? "
He made answer thus :—
“Tt augureth well if! foes behave unjustly.
What said the noble counsellor ? * No match
For justice is injustice.’ Therefore seek
To fight with this injurious enemy,
For fire and water will not flow together ;*
But if thou actest otherwise herein
The ancient sky will choose another Sháh.
If we put forth the might of our own arms,
And what we have of prowess, holy God
Will neither blame us nor shall we be shamed
Before the heroes when the truth is sought.
Shall we be weak enough to shun the combat
While yet ten thousand of Íránians
Remain unslain ? What will malignants say
To thee if thou flee foes without a fight ?
When I pour arrows down on them and make C. 1808
My bow as 'twere a cloud in Spring, and when
A hundred thousand swords and iron maces
Are brandished in the ranks of war, and yet
We gain no glimpse of triumph but despair
Of fortune in our hearts, then we will be
Our foemen's to command for we shall have
No body, life or spirit, left to us ;
But let us struggle till we see if heaven
Will bring us gain or loss."
On hearing this

The Sháh smiled and the court grew bright, and then

! Reading with P. Td.


ee 2


oee eee eS RTT


102 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The veterans left the presence with full hearts,
And talking with Bahram Chübína said :—

“ Henceforth if he shall speak with thee be modest,
Because king Sawa hath such mighty powers
That c'en to ants and gnats they bar the way!
Who after what thou said’st before the Shah

Will venture to be captain of the host 7"

He answered them: “ Illustrious warriors !

I will be captain by our great Shah's leave.”

Informants on the watch went to the world’s

king,

And told him of this speech and ten times more.
The king of kings rejoiced thereat and ceased
To fear those troops. He gave Bahram Chubina
The chief command, exalting to the clouds
His valiant head. All warriors that sought
For glory hailed him captain of the host.
He came before the king with girded loins,
Equipped for war, and said: “* By thy permission
I will call o'er the roll and ascertain
Who are the fighting-men and who are slack
In quest of fame.” |

The Shah said: “ Thou art leader
Responsible for good and ill alike.”

The chief went to the royal muster-ground,
And bade the troops parade. He made his choice
Of those that were the crown among the chiefs,
And entered on the roll twelve thousand names
Of mail-clad warriors on barded steeds.

All those enrolled were forty years of age ;
The older and the younger were rejected.
Bahram Chubina held the chief command
As one renowned in war. He made one hight
Yaldin-sina—a man of vengeful breast—t
Chief of the warrior-chiefs to go before

* Sina.


HURMUZD 103


The ranks on battle-days, to wheel his steed, C. 1809
Proclaim his ancestry, and set on strife
The warriors’ thoughts. Onenamed Îzid Gashasp,*
Who drew not rein at fire, he bade to guard
The baggage-train and dress the wings. He made
Kanda Gashasp, who as he rode would grasp
The tails of lions, leader of the rear.
Then to the troops thus spake the paladin :—
“Ye ardent chiefs! if ye would have God's help
In lightening your dark task inflict not harm
Or loss and never gird your loins for ill,
And when at night the clarion-call ariseth
Leap up and one and all so spur your steeds
That in the dark more tumult may arise.
Through strength derived from resting horse and
Will take no thought about the day of battle.”

When tidings reached the king of how the wise
Bahram Chibina acted he rejoiced
Both at the words and deeds ; he oped his treasures,
And paid the troops. He gave Bahram withal*
Arms from the magazines which he unlocked,
Assembled in the city all the herds
Of battle-steeds that were at large, and ordered
The captain of the host to ask of him
Whate’er was needful, saying: “ Thou hast seen
All sorts of warfare and hast heard what stores
King Sawa, that illustrious man, possesseth
Of treasure, arms, and troops, and how his Turks
Set earth a-quaking on the day of battle.
Now thou hast chosen out of all the host
Twelve thousand men in mail on bardéd steeds !
I know not how such numbers can avail
Upon the day of fight, and thou hast chosen,
Instead of youthful sworders, men of forty ! "

! Reading with P. a fd.


C. 1810


104 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The chief replied: ** Well-starred and courteous
Shah !
The saying of the mighty thou hast heard,
Who ruled the world as Sháhs in days of old :—
* When eonquering fortune is assisting thee
"Tis well though little other aid there be,’
And by this token I will prove it too
If now the Sháh, whose word is law, will hear :
When Kai Káüs was in Hamavaran,
In bonds with countless others, Rustam chose
Twelve thousand fit and warlike cavaliers,
And freed him, and no harm befell the chiefs.
Again, Güdarz, son of Kishwad, the head
Of noble and illustrious men, employed
Twelve thousand men in mail on barded steeds
To execute revenge for Sivawush.
Again, the glorious Asfandiyar
Was leader of twelve thousand warriors
Against Arjisp and by a stratagem
Made dust fly out of host and hold alike."
When any host exceedeth this amount
It is too large for dash and enterprise ;
The leader that conducteth countless troops
To battle is discomfited in fight.
As for thy saving: * Men of forty years
Are not so eager for the fight as youths,’
The man of forty hath experience,
And excellence in point of hardihood,
Remembering the seal of bread and salt
O'er which the heaven hath so oft revolved.
In dread too of the voice of calumny,
And loss of fame, he shirketh not the fight.
Moreover wife and child and family
* In the accounts given in the poem of these instances the limita-
tion to twelve thousand is recorded only in the case of Asfandi


Later on Gurdya, Bahram Chübíina's sister, repeats the statement
about Rustam. See p. 168,


HURMUZD 105


Irk not the feelings of a veteran.
A young man is deceived by outward show,
And when he should have patience he is rash.
He hath not wife or child or tilth: to him
The worthy and the worthless seem alike.
Since wisdom resteth on experience
He seeth not the import of affairs.
If he is conqueror in any fight
He laugheth with delight and wasteth time ;
But if one chanceth to prevail against him
His foes see nothing but his back.”

On hearing,
The king grew fresh as roses in the Spring,
Then said: “ Depart, put on thy mail, and go
Forth from the palace to the riding-ground."

The general left the king. ealled for his girdle,
Mail-coat, and Rüman helm, had his steed barded,
And set the coiled up lasso in its straps.

The world-lord with his arrows, clubs, and balls
Went out upon the ground with his wazirs.
The general approached with mace and mail
And Rüman casque. The world-lord, seeing, blessed

him.
He kissed the ground and showed a liege’s prowess
With mace, at polo, and in archery.
The king then had the banner brought that bare
A violet dragon for device, the banner
That had been borne in fight in front of Rustam,!
Grasped it immediately and, handling it
With smiles, bestowed it on Bahrám Chübina,
Invoking many a blessing on him, saving :—
* My predecessors used to hail as chief
Of all our race the man whose name was Rustam, C. brt
The paladin, the conqueror of the world,
Triumphant and of ardent soul. Thou holdest

(Cf, Vol. il. p. 154.


106 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


His flag. Mayst thou be conquering and loyal!
Thou art a second Rustam to my thoughts
In courage, prowess, and obedience.”
The paladin saluted him and said :—
* Be always conquering and bright of mind."
With peerless Rustam's banner in his hand
The general left the plain for his abode,
And on their several ways the Sháh's troops went.
The captain of the host was well content.


$8


How Bahrám  Chübina went with twelve thousand.
Cavaliers to fight King Sdwa


When morning dawned upon the mountain-tops, .
And when the glittering Shield of Gold appeared,
The chief came to the palace of the Shah,
And prostrate in the presence of the troops
Spake thus: " I was a man that had no claims,
But by thy Grace became the age's crown.
I have to beg one favour of the king—
That he will send with me a trusty man
To make a note of those that fight and lay
A hostile head beneath the dust and thus
Achieve their end."

Hurmuzd replied : ** Mihrán,
The old, is great,! observant, eloquent,”
Bade him accompany the chief and quit
The palace for the combat. From the province
Of Taisafün the army marched, their leader
Bahrám Chübina. "Twas a prudent, brave,
And dauntless host, and wary as a lion

i Reading with P.


23
vow»
yw.


37.


HURMUZD 107


Was their commander. When he had departed
The monarch of the world himself withdrew,
Was privy with his archimage* and said :—
“Upon the day of fight this man will laugh
For joy! What will result ? Let us confer."

The archmage answered: " Mayst thou live for

ever,

For thou deservest everlasting life.
This paladin possessed of such a mien
And stature, ready speech and ardent soul,
Must needs be happy and victorious,
And cause a barren world to bring forth fruit ;
But yet I fear me that he will revolt
At last against his sovereign and patron
Because he talked with such audacity,
And spake so like a lion to the Shah.”

Hurmuzd made answer to him: “ Mingle not C. 1812
Bane with the antidote, misdoubting one |
If he shall prove victorious oer king Sawa
I ought to yield to him the crown and throne.
May he be ever as now for he will make
A glorious sovereign ! "

The archimage,

On hearing what the Shah said, paled and bit
His lips. The king himself moreover kept
The thing in mind, and in a while selected
A courtier as his confidant to learn
How matters stood, and said: “ Pursue in haste
The paladin and tell what thou observest."

The agent followed swiftly, known to none.
He was a guide, in omens skilled, and used
To utter his prognosties to the Shah.

Bahram Chubina, quitting Taisafun,
Led on the host himself. In front appeared,
And far from him, one that purveyed sheep s heads,

| Ayin Gashasp.


C. 1813


ro8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Which rose above a clean draped wicker tray.
The chieftain urged his horse and, strange to tell!
Pierced one head with his spear, rode off with it
Aloft, then flung it where he would and drew

An omen from the matter, saying thus :—

“ Just so will I cut off king Sáwa's head,

Will throw it in his army's line of march,

And shatter all his host."

The emissary,
sent by the Sháh, drew too his presage, saying :—
" This favourite of fortune will attain,

His labours done, the crown at last for when
His end is gained he will grow troublesome,
And will rebel.”

He went and told the king,
Who wedded grief and anguish for the words
Were worse than death to him, He withered up,
That verdant leaf grew sere. He called to him
A young man of the court and sent him off
In all haste to the paladin and said :—
" Depart and tell the captain of the host :—
' For this night tarry where thou art. At dawn
Turn back and come to me for I would clear
The court of strangers and advise thee further,
For thoughts of profit have occurred to me,’ ”

The messenger came to the paladin,
And told what he had heard. Bahram Chibina
Made this reply: ** Men do not, O wise Shih !
Recall an army on the march; such action
Would be ill-omened and would reinforce
The foe. I will return when I have conquered,
And then thy kingdom and thy diadem
Shall shine."
The messenger returned and gave

The warrior's answer to the Sháh and he
Was satisfied. That envoy's toil was vain.


HURMUZD 109


At dawn the captain of the host led on
The troops and called God's blessing down on
them.
He marched to Khüzistán:! the troops harmed
none.
There came a woman with a sack of hay
Among them and a horseman purchased it,
Refused to pay her, and made off. She came
Lamenting to Bahram Chubina, saying :—
‘‘T have some hay concealed. I brought a sack's
worth,
And passed before thy troops. A cavalier,
With iron helm, hath taken it from me
While on the march !
Forthwith they sought the man,
And haled him quickly to the general.
The brave Bahrám Chübína said to him :—
“ So thou didst think this fault a little one!”
They smashed his head and hands and feet. The
chief
Had him dragged forth before the camp-enclosure,
Then clave him through the middle with the sword,
And filled the heart of the unjust with terror.
Then from the camp-enclosure ‘twas proclaimed :—
“Q ye illustrious men and of good will!
The stealer of a stalk of hay shall find
No intercessor. I will cleave his waist
Asunder with the sword. Let all procure
By payment what they need.”
Bahram Chubina
Led on his host well ordered and they marched
Toward Dámaghán.
The Sháh was full of care
t This scems to imply that he started from Pars. Later on he says
(p. 112) that he started from Baghdad, i.e., from the neighbourhood


of Taisafün (Ctesiphon) where the troops were stationed (p. 9o).
Baghdád itselí was not then in existence.


110 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


At Sawa’s army, elephants, and treasures,!

And spake thus to Kharrad, son of Barzin,

One night at rise of moon: ‘ Prepare to go

To our opponent and be diligent,

Not slumbering but speeding. Mark his troops

As to their numbers and their quality,

And who their leader and their warriors are.”
He ordered that a letter of advice

Should be indited to the hostile king,

And countless royal presents sent therewith.

He said thus to the messenger: “ Proceed

Toward Harat and if a host appear

Know it for that of brave Bahram Chubina,

And not another. Then approach and tell him

What thou hast heard from me, thus saying: *I

By good news and by blandishment will spread

A fresh snare for the foe. Thy secret purpose

Must be kept hidden. If he hear thy name


And fame ...! I will induce him to thy net,


Employing fair and lengthy parleyings.' "
Kharrád, son of Barzín, prepared to start,

Came as the Sháh had bidden and delivered

The message when he saw Bahram Chübina.

He went thence to king Sawa, to the place

Where were the elephants and troops and treasure,

And, having audience, did him reverence,

Delivering the message privily,

And adding to it every argument

To draw the army to Harát. When Sáwa

Arrived and camped upon the river-bank

The outposts went forth, marked Bahram Chübína

With all his troops and, seeing that stout host,

Returned in all haste to king Sawa, saying :—

“ A force hath reached the desert of Harat,

Commanded by a famous chief.”


' Iwo couplets omitted.


HURMUZD III


King Sawa,
Concerned what course to take, called from the tent
The envoy of the Sháh and rated him :—
* Didst not foresce, thou crafty Áhriman !
A fall from thy high station ? From .the court
Of that vile Shah thou camest to ensnare me,
And leadest forth to war a Persian host,
Encamping on the meadows of Harat!”
Kharrád, son of Barzín, replied : “ The force
Confronting thine is small. Take not its coming
In ill part; 'tis some marchlord passing by,
Or some chief seeking shelter with the Sháh,
Or merchants who have brought an escort with
them
To guard them on their way. Who would confront
thee,
Though mountains turn to seas, to seek revenge ?
I will send one to find out who or what
This traveller 15.
His words rejoiced king Sawa,
Who said: “ In truth that is the course to take.
We will dispatch to learn if friend or foe
They be.”
Now as Kharrád, son of Barzin,
Withdrew to his own tent the night o'ertopped
The mountains, and he gat in readiness
To flee the wrath to come, At dead of night
The monarch bade Faghfür go with an escort
Forth from his father to the paladin.
"That understanding youth went forth and reaching
The Íránian host dispatched a cavalier
To ask: '*Who are these warriors and wherefore
March they 7”
The horseman went like dust and cried :—
* Who are your chiefs and leader, noble sirs !


C. rBr15


i This couplet inserted from P.


112 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


And champion in the combat, for Faghfür,
Who is king Sawa’s heart and eyes, would see him
Without attendance ? ”
Came a warrior
Forth from the troops and told Bahram Chubina
What he had heard. The captain of the host
Went from the tent-enclosure and his flag
Was reared resplendent over him.  Faghfür
Of Chin, pereeiving, hasted and made sweat
His prancing steed, and questioned: “ Whence art
thou ?

Why haltest here ? I hear that thou hast fled
From Párs as one who being wronged shed blood.”

Bahrim Chibina answered: “ God forbid
That I should purpose vengeance on the Shih.
I came forth from Baghdád with this arrav
To fight by his command, for when the news
About king Sawa and his host reached court
He said to me: * Go forth and hold the road
With arrows, maces, spears, and scimitars.' "

Un hearing this Faghfür sped back to tell
His sire how matters stood. Being thus apprised,
And grown suspicious, Sáwa sought forthwith
The envoy of the Shih but some one said :—
" Kharrád, son of Barzin, hath fled with tears
Of blood at having come."

* How could that foe,"

Said Sawa to his son, “ get clear away
At night from such a countless host as this,
And wherefore have the guards been so remiss ?”


HURMUZD 113


$9


How King Sdwa sent a Message to Bahrám Chübina
and his Answer


He sent thereafter to Bahram Chibina
A fluent elder, saying: ** Go and tell
This Persian : * Mar not out of foolishness
Thy reputation here, for surely thou
Must know this much—that that great king of thine
Would have thy life and therefore sendeth thee
To fight with one nigh peerless in the world.
He said to thee: '* Go forth and seize their road," C. 1316
And thou unwillingly didst hear the words,
For with my troops and elephants I trample
A mountain if it cometh in my path.' "
Bahrám Chübína, hearing what he said,
smiled at that hasty traffiieking and answered :—
"lf my death be the world-lord's hidden purpose
My duty is to do what pleaseth him
Though earth shall take the measure of my height."
The messenger, returning to king Sáwa,
Reported what he heard the warrior say,
And Sawa said: “ Go, tell the Persian thus -—
" Why talk so much ? Why art thou in the field ?
Ask what thou wilt of me.’ ”
The messenger

Went to Bahrám Chuübína and thus spake :—
" Reveal thy purposes because my king
Is favoured by the stars and he would have
Thee do his will.”

Bahrám Chübína said :—
"Say: 'If thou wouldst do right act openly.
If friendship with the monarch of the world
Be secretly thy wish I will receive thee


VOL. VIII, H


la


C. 1817


114 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


On this march as a guest and pledge myself
To grant thee thy desires. I will bestow
On thy troops gold and silver, crowns and girdles
Upon those worthy of them. I will send
The Shah a cavalier that he may come
Half way to meet thee and, as equals do,
Provide thee provand. If thou art a friend
He will make much of thee, but if thou hast
Come hither for contention, to the deep,
And to the crocodile’s maw, then thou shalt quit
The desert of Harat in such a plight
That all chiefs shall bewail thee. May a ditch
Be at thy door on thy return, may blast
Pursue and rain companion thee, for naught
But ill luck brought thee hither, being fain
That ill befall thy head.’ ”’
The messenger
Turned back, came like the wind, and gave the
answer |

Of that aspirant. Hearing it king Sawa
Was wroth with that stone-hearted opposite ;
His heart was straitened at that chill response,
And thinking of it filled his cheeks with shame.
He said : “ Go, take yon human diy this message :—
` Thou hast no fame in war; I would not slay thee.
Such as thy Sháh are servants at my court,
And set by thee my meanest slaves are chiefs.
If thou shalt ask for quarter at my hands
I will exalt thy head above the throng,
Thou shalt have many gifts from me, and all
Thy troops shall be enriched : but one aspiring
To valour looketh not to futile words
And deeds of madness.’ ™

That proud monarch’s envoy
Came to Bahrám Chübína and delivered
Those biting words which yet were what he wished.


HURMUZD II5


On hearing he informed the man: * Thy lord

Must hear my answer: ‘If I am so mean

That meanness covereth my head with shame,

The king of kings for his part was ashamed

To come out in his wrath to fight with thee.

‘Tis through my meanness that I have marched
forth

With troops to wreck the kindred of king Sawa.

I will cut off his head and carry it

Before the Shah; it is not worth my while

To stick it on my spear upon the road.

For me to grant thee quarter would demean thee,

But I will fall upon thee in my meanness.

Thou shalt not see me save upon the day

Of fight and followed by my dark-blue flag,

Because if thou upon that dragon glance

Tis death; thy head and helm shall sheath my
lance." "


$ 10


flow King Sdwa and Bahram Chibina set the Battle
in Array ‘against each other


King Sawa’s envoy, when he heard those words

Of stern defiance, showed his back: He went,

And told what he had heard and seen whereat

The Turks’ king's head breathed vengeance and he
bade

To bring the tymbals forth and to lead out

The elephants high-crested to the plain.

The realm was darkened with the dust of hoofs,

The trumpets blared. Now when Bahram Chuibina

Heard that a host had come, and plains and vales

Were yellow, red, and black, he bade his men


C.


1818


116 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Mount and rode forth in armour, mace in hand.
Behind him lay Hardt, before a host
Of swordsmen. He drew up the wings. The troops
Were as one heart and body. Thou hadst said :—
“The world is all cuirass; a star is shining
On every spear.”
King Sawa viewed that field,

Its order and array, perceived that while
Bahrám Chübina rested on Harat
His own position was both cramped and ill,
And thus addressed his horsemen, veterans,
And intimates: “ A lying messenger
Came from the Persian leader of the folk,
And tarried till yon host had seized the city,
And left me nothing but a brake of thorns!”

He ranked his army in that straitened place,
The air was indigo and earth was hidden.
Upon the right were two score thousand horsemen,
Who used two-headed darts and wielded spears,
With two score thousand on the left withal,
All archers and engrossers of the fray,
While two score thousand warriors formed the centre,
Who carried spear or sword, and two score thousand
He stationed in the rear; but many troops
Were left unused for he was cramped for room.
They placed the elephants before the line,
As 'twere a wall, and barred the way in front.
Thus circumstanced king Sáwa's heart was grieved
By reason of this straitening of his host.
Thou wouldst have said: “ His fortune hath fore-

shown


To him the presage of an empty throne.”


HURMUZD I17


$11


How King Sdwa sent another Message to Bahram
Chübína and his Answer


Then from the champaign of Harat he sent

Again a warrior of eloquence,

A man all guileful, to Bahram Chübína

To say: ‘ Thou hast not wedded heaven's own for-
tune :

Wilt thou not hear advice and such appeals ?

Make friends with wisdom, open thine heart's eyes.

Thou hast found two whose equals in the world

Have never yet been born of royal race ;

They shine like suns in heaven and all the year

Are clad in mail, they are so valorous.

One is myself, the lawful king of earth ;

The other is my high-born son Parmuda.

My troops are more than leaves upon the trees,

Had some the skill to number them. If I

Should reckon up my men and elephants

Thou wouldest smile at rain-drops from Spring-clouds.

There are tents, tent-enclosures, implements

Of war beyond conception; shouldst thou count

Withal my steeds and men, my wastes and moun-
tains,

Thou wouldest marvel. All the other kings,

If worthy of such honour, are my lieges.

If seas had lifet and mountains feet to run

They could not carry off my treasury,

Arms, implements, and fruitage of my toils.

The glorious Great, save for thy Persian lord,

Throughout the world acclaim me as their king,

And thy life also lieth in my hands

As well I know. If I lead on my troops C. 1819


1" Si l'eau de la mer inondait Ja lerre," Mohl.


118 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


They will not let pass ant and gnat. Withal
I have a thousand barded elephants
Whose scent affrayeth horsemen. Who will come
To face me from Írán and from Türán,
And by such coming aggravate my toils ?
From this place to the gates of Taisafün
My powers extend, will stay, be amplified.
some one hath duped thee, O mine enemy !
Some one, perchance a madman, for thou lov’st not
Thyself or else dissemblest since thine eye
Diseriminateth not 'twixt good and ill.
How should such foolishness become the wise ?
Cease this contention and present thvself
Before me, and I will not keep thee waiting,
But give to thee high office and my daughter
With worship and a crown. Thou shalt receive
A lordship at our hands and suffer not
The ills that subjects bear, and when the Shih
Shall have been slain in fight, and when his crown
And throne are mine, on thee will I bestow them
With all his treasure, diadem, and goods.
Thence will I march on Rim and then the troops,
The treasure and the land, will all be thine.
Thus have I spoken for thou pleasest me,
And wisely hast thou dealt with these affairs.
Thou knowest the conduct and the art of war :
Thy sire and grandsire held command in chief,
50 what I say is not mere compliment
But pity for thy sake who hast arrayed
Thy puny foree to fight with me to-day.
Thou shalt receive no further messages
If thou art retrograde to my desires."
The envoy spake, the chieftain heard and made

A grim response: * O man of evil mark !
Among the magnates and the eminent

None reverenceth a monarch profitless


HURMUZD [1g


And wordy. From thy talk from first to last

I have perceived thee confident in speech.

The man whose day is ending seeketh prowess

In words not deeds. I heard thy feckless parle,

Yet my heart quaileth not for fear of harm.

As for thy saying: 'I will slay the Sháh,

And give thee realm and throne;' a chief once said:—

* If thou shalt drive à mendicant away

From any town is he not sure to say :—

“There I was lord; the rest were ‘neath my sway ?"’’

In our affair there will not intervene

Two days of sunlight ere I shall dispatch

By this same token to the Shah thy head C. 1820

Upon a spear. Again, for what thou saidest

About thy daughter, treasure, troops, and realm,

I should have thanked thee once and should have
called thee

A monarch of discernment thus to give,

Without designs upon the Iranian throne,

Thy daughter to me and with her dispatch

A gorgeous throne and goods. Then thou hadst had

Myself for friend within Iran, not fought

Against its warriors; but now my lance

Is at thine ear and with my sword will I

Behead thee, and when thou hast gone thy pate,

Thy crown and treasure, are mine, and mine withal

Thy daughter and the fruit of thy past toils.

Thou saidest further: ‘ I have crowns and thrones

With elephants and horsemen past compute.’

A chief said, battling in the ranks of war :—

* The longer water is denied a hound

The greater will his eagerness be found.’

The divs seduced thy heart so that thou camest

To fight the Shah and thou wilt writhe beneath

God's chastisement and for thine evil deeds.

Again, thou sayest : * I have among my lieges


120 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Great men possessed of crowns and coronets,
And all the cities of the world are mine.’
The age herein is witness to thy words.
To cities roads are open, lord and liege k
May tramp the marches, but if thou shalt knock |
Upon a city-gate thy kingship there |
Will prove a "brake of thorns. As for thine offer |
To pardon me—a craven in thine eyes—
Thou wilt forgive me not when thou hast seen /
My spear and shalt not have me as à liege.
As for thy troops, desires, and policy,
Thy mighty elephants and throne, what time
I rank mine army I account them naught,
And care no jot for all thy warriors.
Though thou art king thou utterest such lies
That thou wilt gain no glory in the world.
For what thou saidest : ‘I approve of thee,
And would select thee as my general,'
What I approve, since reaching man's estate,
Is the approval of the king of kings.
I have allowed the king three days and when
The Glory of the Lustre of the world
Shall show, the army in Iran shall see
Thy head upon a spear before the Shah.”
The messenger returned with cheeks like gall,
And fruitful, youthful fortune waxen old.
He told king Sáwa what the answer was,
And at his words the monarch's visage loured.
C. 1821 Said the Faghfür: '* What feebleness is this ?
Yon little host should rather ask our tears."
Then to the entry of the camp-enclosure
He went and bade bring forth the Indian bells,
Gongs, mighty elephants, and kettledrums,
And make heaven ebon-hued. While that famed s
youth
Prepared to fight the haughty monarch mused ;


HURMUZD 121


Then to his son: ** Thou chosen of the troops !
Refrain from fighting till to-morrow morn.”

The troops withdrew on both sides and the watch
Went from the tent-enclosures. In both hosts
They kindled fires, and rumour filled all coasts.


$12


How Bahrdm Chibina had a Dream in the Night, how
he gave Battle the next Morning, and how King
Sdwa was slain


Now when Bahram Chubina was alone
Within his tent he sent and? called the Iranians,
And with his troops took counsel for the fight
Till dark, till Turk and Persian both reposed,
And he that would might have the world for naught;
But brave Bahrim Chubina still mused war,
While sleeping in his tent. That Lion dreamed
That in the fight the Turks proved valorous,
While his own troops were routed and himself,
Debarred more strife, unsuccoured and afoot,
Asked quarter of the heroes of the foe.
He woke in grief, his noble head sore troubled,
With pain and sorrow passed the hours of dark,
Arrayed himself but told to none his dream.
Just then arrived Kharrád, son of Barzin,
Who had escaped king Sawa, and spake thus -—!
“ What confidence is this? Behold the snare
Of Áhriman and give not to the winds
trénian lives but treat these nobles fairly ;
For valour's sake take pity on thy life,
For nevermore will such a task confront thee."

“Thy city,” said Bahram Chubina, * vieldeth
No valour save thy sample, for all there

‘Reading with P. * Two couplets omitted.


122 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Sell fish from Summer-time! till snow-storms come.
Thy work is.net and pond ; thou art no man
For spear and mace and arrow. When the sun
Shall rise o'er yon dark mountains I will show thee
How kings and soldiers fight. Thou shalt behold
Those elephants and troops of his and all
His fair presentment prostrate in the dust."

When Sol arose from Leo, and the world
Grew white as Ruman’s face, the trumpet sounded,
The battle-ery went up, earth shook beneath
The horses’ hoofs, Bahram Chübína ranged
His host and mounting grasped a war-worn mace.
They furnished for the right three thousand men,
All-cavaliers mail-clad and veteran. |
He sent an equal number to the left,
All valiant, vengeful horsemen. On the right
Izid Gashasp, who rode through rivers, led,
And on the left Kandá Gashasp who worshipped
The glorious Azargashasp. Yalan-sina
Supported them with troops as a reserve.
Hamdan Gashasp was posted in the van,
A man whose horse-shoes set the reeds ablaze.
With each there were three thousand warriors,
All fighting cavaliers with hearts of stone.
It was proclaimed : ** Ye chiefs with golden crowns !
Whoe'er, though faced by lion or by pard,
Shall flee the fight, by God ! I will behead him,
And burn his useless carcase in the fire."

On each side of the host there was a road
Whereby he? might retreat. On each he raised
A bank ten cubits high. His own position
Was at the centre, and to him there came
The archscribe® of the king of kings and said :—
“This is beyond thy power and thus to mock
At fortune cannot prosper. Of the troops

! Tamáüz. * Bahram Chibina. * Mihrán. See p. 106,


HURMUZD 123


Upon this field we are the one white hair,
Note, on a sable ox! No soil or stream,
Or hill is visible, so many are
The swordsmen of Turan!”
Bahrám Chübína
Cried at him furiously: “‘ Thou recreant wretch !
Thy business is with inkstand and with paper:
Who bade thee take the number of the host ?”
The scribe approached Kharrad, son of Barzin,
And said: “ Bahram Chibina and the Div
Are mates ! "
Those scribes then sought a way to flee
That they might not behold that day of doom.
They feared both king of kings and arrow-rain,
And bit their lips. On one side and afar
From those Turanian horsemen they beheld
A height precipitous and thither fared
A-tremble, saying: “ We must watch the host.” C. 1823
They gazed upon Bahram Chübina s helm
To see how he would fight when roused. That hero,
When he had drawn his host up, left the field,
And with loud outeries, prostrate in the dust
Before his God, exclaimed: “ O righteous Judge !
If in thy sight this conflict 1s unjust,
And thou preferrest Sáwa to myself,
Give my heart rest in battle and to Sáwa
His whole desire upon the Iranians ; | |
But if I undergo this toil for Thee, -
And risk my head in fight, make jubilant
Me and my troops and by our combating
The world all prosperous."
Still praying loudly
He mounted with his ox-head mace in hand.
King Sawa thus addressed his host: ~ Begin
Your incantations that the Iranians
1 Two couplets omitted.


I24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


May quail in heart and eye, and no disaster
Befall yourselves.”
Then all the sorcerers

Began their spells and hurled fire through the air.
Rose blast and murky cloud whence arrows showered
Upon the Irdnians. Bahram Chübína
Exclaimed : ** Chiefs, magnates of Írán, and heroes !
Shut ye your eyes to all these magic arts,
And come all wroth to fight, for this is naught
But trick and sorcery, and they that use
Such means demand our tears,"

The Iranians shouted,
And girt their loins for bloodshed, while king Sawa
Surveyed the field, saw that the foe recoiled not
At those black arts but came on all the more,
Led by Bahram Chibina, and assailed,
Like wolf a lamb, their left, brake it and charged,
Like one bemused, Bahram Chibina’s centre,
Who thence saw how his soldiers fled the foe,
Came, with his spear unhorsed three warriors,
And dashed them headlong to the ground, exclaim-

ing :—

^ This is the way to fight, this is the mode,
And how to do it! Are ye not ashamed
Before the Lord of earth, the glorious chiefs,
And nobles ? "'


Then he made toward the right,


As ‘twere a lusty lion famishing,


And brake the mighty force opposed to him,
50 that their leader's banner disappeared.
Thence he departed to his army's centre,
To where the leader was among the troops,
And said to him: “ Perdition take it all !
If this fight last the host will be dispersed !
Look out in what direction to retreat."

' Three couplets omitted.


HURMUZD 125


They went and sought; there was not any way
Because the proper road was mounded over.
Then to that leader said Bahram Chubina :—
= There is an iron wall in front of us,
And only he that knoweth how to make
A breach therein can gain the other side,
Safe-guard himself and carry to Írán,
And to the monarch of the brave, his life.
All put your whole heart in it, shield your heads,
And ply your swords. If sleepless fortune help us
It will repay our toils with thrones and crowns.
Let none despair of God or ye may see
Your white day turn to gloom.”

King Sáwá thus

Harangued his chiefs: ** Advance the elephants
.Before the host, attack in force, and make
The world both dark and narrow to our foes.”

Bahrám Chübína from afar beheld
The elephants, was grieved, unsheathed his sword,
And thus addressed his captains : * Warriors famed !
String up your bows of Chách and helm ye all.
Now by the life and head of this world's king,
The chosen of the lords and crown of chiefs,
Let every one that hath artillery
String up his bow perforce and let him fix
His arrows, fashioned out of triple wood,
Whose points are keen for blood, upon the trunks
Of yonder elephants, then out with mace,
On to the fight, and slay your enemies.”

The chieftain strung his bow and set a casque
Of steel upon his head. He made his bow
As ‘twere a cloud in Spring and showered arrows
Before the host: the soldiers followed him.
The stars were dimmed by pointed, feathered shafts.
They pierced the elephants’ trunks, and dale and


plain


C.


1525


1206 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Grew like a pool of blood. The elephants

Turned from the smart and fled the battlefield.

Now when the elephants were smitten thus

They trampled their own troops. The Iranian host

Came on behind and earth grew like the Nile.

All was confusion; many died ; ill fortune

Had all its will of them. There was a spot,

A pleasant place, behind that stricken host

Where, on a golden throne, fierce Sáwa sat.

He saw his army like an iron mountain

In flight with heads all dust and souls all gloom,

While from behind enormous elephants

Beyond control were trampling down the troops.

He wept for wherefore should his army flee ?

And mounting his bay Arab fled himself

In dire dismay. Bahram Chibina came

Pursuing like an elephant run mad,

A lasso on his arm, a bow in hand,

And shouted to his troops: “ Illustrious men !

Ill fate hath marked them out. Rain swords on
them,

And quit you in the fight like cavaliers."

He reached the hill where erst king Sáwa sat
Crowned on a throne of gold, beheld him thence
Upon his mighty lion of an Arab,

And sped forth like a tiger o'er the waste.

He chose an arrow. with a glittering point,

Plumed with four eagle's feathers, took in hand

His bow of Chách and laid the deer-hide thong

Within his thumb-stall, straightened his left arm,

And bent his right. The bow twanged as he loosed

The shaft and pierced king Sáwa's spine, who came

Down headlong to the dust; the ground beneath him

Was soaked with blood. Of that great host the king

Bediademed was gone, gone golden throne, |
* Couplet omitted.


HURMUZD r


=}


And golden crown.
Such deeds the turning sky
Doth, showing neither love nor enmity.
Joy not in lofty throne and greatly fear,
What time thou feel’st secure, disaster near.

The brave Bahram Chübína came and dragged
The corpse face downward wallowing in the dust,
And severed that crowned head while none of all
Its kindred came ancar. When the Turks found
Their king the corpse lay headless on the road.
All wailed ; cries filled the earth ; the air resounded,
And he that was the son of Sáwa said :—

“This is God's doing, for unsleeping fortune
Is with Bahrám Chübina."
Multitudes C. 1826
Died in the strait defiles. The elephants
Trod many under foot; not one in ten
Of all that host escaped. They perished crushed
Beneath the elephants or were beheaded
Upon the battlefield, and when nine hours
Of that ill day had gone the Íránians saw
No enemy alive save prisoners bound,
Their souls and bodies pierced with grief and shafts.
The route was strewn with bards and helms whose
heads
Were suffocate therein,’ with Indian swords,
With arrows and with bows dropped by the foe
On all sides. Earth was like a sea of blood
With slain, and everywhere were saddled steeds.

Bahram Chübína went his rounds to learn

Who had been slain upon the Íránian side ;
Then said he to Kharrád, son of Barzin :—
“ Give me thine aid to-day and ascertain

What slain Iranians it is ours to mourn.”

" de casques qui n 'avaient pas garanti ce jour-là les têtes contre

la mort." Mohi.


C.


1527


128 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


He went through all the tents. One man of wor-
ship |
Was missing in the host—a chieftain named
Bahram, who was the son. of Siyáwush,
A valiant prince, a magnate of Írán,
Descended from a captain of the host.
Like one insane Kharrád went forth in quest
Of traces of him, moving many a form
Of slain and wounded men but found no sign.
The captain of the host was grieved thereat,
And cried : “ Alas! thou prudent warrior!”
Howbeit the man himself appeared anon,
A key to that locked door, and with a Turk
Red-haired, cat-eyed, and, as thou wouldst have said,
With heart all wrung with rage. Bahram Chibina
Cried when he saw Bahrim: ** Ne'er be it thine
To wed the dust ! " then of that foul Turk asked :—
^ O0 thou hell-visaged, banned from Paradise !
What man art thou ? What is thy name and birth,
For she who bare thee will have cause to weep ?”
He said: “ A warlock I. I meddle not
With manhood and with manliness but help
My chief in battle when things reach a pass,
And make him dream of what will hearten him.
I gave thee that ill dream last night to bring
Ili on thy head, but I must seek for means
More potent! for.my sorcery hath failed,
Ill-fortune hath recoiled upon my head,
And all my toil is wedded to the wind.
If I get quarter from thee thou hast gained
An all-aecomplished friend."
On hearing this
Bahram Chibina mused, his heart was troubled,
His visage wan. Anon he said: ** This man
Might prove of service in the stress of fight,"
! Reading with P.


HURMUZD 129


But said again: “ What did king Sawa profit
Through this dark-dealing warlock ? All good things
Descend from God on fortune's favourites,"
Then bade cut off his head and robbed of life
His feckless form, which done Bahrám Chübína
Stood up and said: “ O just and upright Judge!
From Thee are greatness, victory, the Glory,
High place, the diadem of king of kings,
Distress and joy.  Blést is the warrior
That followeth Thv way."
The archscribe came,

And spake thus: “ Valiant Faridin, Bahram,
And Nüshirwán ne'er saw one like to thee,
O lusty paladin! Possessed art thou
Of lion’s courage, counsel, and device.
May no calamity befall thy life.
Through thee the cities of Iran all live,
And all the paladins are but thy slaves.
Through thee the exalted throne hath been exalted,
And every liege escaped mishap. Thou art
A chieftain and a chieftain'’s son, and blest
Is she that brought forth such a child, for thou
Art glorious by birth and enterprise,
A king all absolute in Grace and wisdom."

Then the Sháh's paladins and men of might
Dispersed themselves and left the scene of fight.


$13
How Bahrám Chübina sent a Letter announcing his
Victory, and the Head of King Sdáwa, to Hur-
muzd, and his Answer
When night had curled its locks and sent thereby
The eye to sleep, and when the Ebon Veil


* Bahram Gir probably is meant.
VOL, VIII. 1


C.. 1828


. An Te Mm
ee -
130 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


Appeared, the world had respite from the drum.
Meanwhile the wheel of heaven turned apace
In view of darksome night and hurried on
Till from the deep a Golden Vessel rose,
And travail waxed and slumber fined away.
Then came the captain of the host and sent
Some one to bid his comrades good at need :—
^ All those that have been slain among the chiefs,
War-cavaliers and captains of the Turks,
Each leader of the folk, behead and set
Behind the heads of all of them that were
Those warriors’ diadem a flaunting flag.”
He had the captives and the heads collected,
And carried from the field, then called a scribe -
And spake at large of that famed, countless host,
The movements and the day’s vicissitudes, t
The battle and! the divers stratagems
That he had used against so vast a foe,
The toils and fighting of the Iranians,
And how no horsemen loosed his belt all day.
When he had written to the Shah he chose
A courier from the troops, first put upon
A lance the head of Sdwa, then bade bear
The standard of that monarch and the heads
Of those chiefs of Türán and cavaliers
Of Chin withal upon a dromedary
With all speed to the Shah, The prisoners,
And whatsoever spoil there was he kept
Intact within Hardt until the king
Should make his pleasure known. He sent withal
Experienced horsemen to escort the heads,
And to obtain permission from the Shah
To march against Parmüda with the host.
The dromedary started, and a guide
Led on the cavaliers who toiled and trod
' Reading with P,


HURMUZD I31


The way that quickly they might see the Sháh,
And greet him from the paladin and chiefs.

Upon their side the Turks all destitute
Went horseless, weaponless, and baggageless,
And both their cavaliers and those of Chín
Returned toward Türán. Now when the news
Came to Parmüda he put off his erown,
While from the Turks arose a grievous wail ;
The day was bitter for those chiefs; all heads
Were full of dust, all eyes of tears, and none
Ate or reposed or slumbered. "Then he summoned
The warriors and, weeping his heart's blood,
Inquired of them : ** Why did that countless host
Prove impotent upon the day of battle ? "

A counsellor replied: ** We held the foe
To be but weak, but none will see in time
Of action such another cavalier
As brave Bahrám Chübína. Not one man
For every century of ours had he,
Yet not a youth of his brave troops was wounded,
For God directed him! I might say more,
But thou hast heard enough.”

On this Parmüda

Reflected on Bahrim Chübína's deeds,
Was wroth, turned pale of cheek, and was resolved C. 1829
In his distress of heart to battle on.
A hundred thousand of the host remained—
All men of name and ready for the fray.
He led his army plain-ward from the camp
Toward the Jíhün in order to avenge
His noble father on Bahram Chubina.

What time the letter of that’ paladin
Came to the Sháh of ardent soul that world-lord
Was sitting on his throne and holding forth
Concerning his own fortune to the court :—
* Strange! that no tidings of Bahram Chibina


132 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Have reached our court! What say ye, and hence-
forth
What shall we do? We must advise thereon.”
Now as he spake the words the chamberlain
Came from the gate and brought the king of kings
The glad news: ** May the Shah rejoice for ever !
Bahram Chibina hath prevailed o’er Sawa,
And grown the lustre of the world in fight.”
At once the Shah called in the messenger
sent by Bahram Chibina, seating him
Above the nobles present, and inquired
Concerning host and paladin and those
Illustrious and glorious warriors.
The messenger replied: “* Exalted Shah!
The battle went as thou didst wish. Mayst thou
Live ever happily and joyously,
For thy foe's fortune hath grown old. The heads
Both of king Sawa and his younger son—
Him whom his father used to call Faghfür—
Are at thy gate on spears—a sight for all
The city."
Hearing this, the king of kings
Rose, quickly bowed, and standing in God's presence
Said: “O Thou righteous Guide! Thou hast des-
troyed
Our foes, Thou Fashioner of sun and moon !
Great was my wretchedness and my despair
What time the foe came headlong from his throne !
"was neither chieftain nor the warrior-host
That did this, but God's goodness to His slave.”
Then from the treasures that his sire had left
He had a hundred thousand drachms brought forth,
With one third first gave largess to the poor,
But the more part to his own servitors,
And sent the Fanes of Fire another third,
There to be given over to the priests


HURMUZD I33


To grace the Feasts of New Year and of Sada.
With what was left men sought out and repaired
The ruined sites and caravansaries |
In desert places, rendering the roads
Secure and easy. He remitted imposts C. 1830
For four vears to the poor, and subject kings,
And then had letters written to each province,
To all the nobles, thus: ** Bahrám Chübína
Hath triumphed o'er the foe and with his sword
Cut off king Sáwa's head."
The Sháh next passed
Two weeks in prayer: then when the world’s light
rose

He called the envoy of the paladin,
And seated him rejoicing 'mongst the lords ;
Then wrote an answer instantly and set
A tree within the garth of majesty,
Sent too a silver throne and golden boots,
And wealth of all sorts. All that lay between
Haital and the great river’ he bestowed
On that bold paladin? and bade: “ Distribute
Spoil ta'en on way and waste among the troops
Except king Sáwa's private property ;
Let that be sent to court. This done, make war
Upon Parmuda till he is o’erthrown.”

Hurmuzd sent gifts too to the [ranians,
Confirmed by letters written to each city.
They gave the messenger a robe of honour,
And called thereafter for the nobles’ steeds.
Bahram Chubina, when the envoy came,
Joyed well content and gave the troops much booty,
Except the wealth pertaining to king Sawa,
The impure of heart; this he dispatched with horse-

men,
Famed veterans of his kin, who bore it all
! The Oxus. * Reading with P.


C. 1831


Ju c -
^u 1 T* = a
134 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


To court what while the chieftain went his way,
He and his army, to renew the fray.


$14


How Bahrám Chübina fought with Parmida, Son o |
King Sáwa, and overcame him, and how Parmiüda
look. Refuge in the Hold of Awdza T


Parmida, when news came “ Bahram Chübína
Is seeking for the throne of empire,” held

A stronghold hight Awdza where he joyed
Secure. Therein he stored whate'er he had

Of money, jewels, and of other treasures,

And passing with his army o'er Jíhün
Proceeded proudly to the seat of war.

The hosts drew near for battle, dallying not
Upon the march, and chose a fitting field

Two stages out of Balkh. Between the hosts
Two leagues of plain lay suitable for fight.

The next day brave Bahrám Chübína went

To view Parmüda's warriors. Parmuüda
Looked, saw him, and chose out upon the waste
A steep height and there ranged his host until
The plain was full. Thence he beheld a power,
Whose aspect dazed the desert, and in front
Bahrám Chübína with his warlike head
Exalted to the sky, was grieved and spake,
Addressing his own troops: “ A mighty lion

Is fitting mate for this protagonist! .

Öne cannot see the sum of his array,

But would not care to fight with them. The leader
Is proud and fierce. The dark dust under him
Will turn to blood. At night, when it is dark,
Make we a camisade and banish care


HURMUZD 135


And terror from our hearts.”
Now when Parmuüda
Returned to camp he canvassed schemes for fight,
And said: “ It is an excellence of theirs
That though their troops are few their horse are
splendid,
And in the chief degree of warriors,
Well armed, and have for chief Bahram Chubina,
A man to whom spears are as thorns and weeds,
With heart elate at conquering king Sawa,
And drunk with gore; yet by the Maker's aid
I will require from that huge Mountain-mass
The vengeance owing for my father’s blood.”
Now when Bahram Chúbína left Írán

To fight the Turks a reader of the stars
Said: “ Stir not on the Wednesday of each week,
Or harm will follow, and thy whole emprise
Prove profitless."

Between the hosts there lay
A garden bordered by the battlefield,
And on the Wednesday of the week at dawn
Bahram Chuibina thither went and said :—
“We will be glad to-day.” |

They carried thither
Rich earpetings ; he took wine, meat, and minstrels,
And coming to that garden revelled there.
Now when a watch of darksome night had passed
The outposts brought Parmüda the report :—
* Bahrám Chübína revelleth in the garden."
The chieftain chose among his warriors

Six thousand cavaliers, all valiant men,
And sent them forth without lights to surround
The garth and take the Íránian chiefs. Now when
Bahrám Chübína was aware thereof,
And of the plan and purpose of Parmüda,
He thus addressed Yalán-sina : * O chieftain !


C. 1832


136 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Break us a passage through the garden-wall."
Bahrám Chübína and Ízid Gashasp,
With other warriors, mounted on their steeds.
They issued from the breach; who knoweth how
Those warriors issued ? At the garden-gate
Arose the clarion-blare: the chieftain charged.
They quickly made a second breach and smote
The foe. Bahram Chübína, dart in hand,
And half bemused, assailed them. Few escaped him,
So eager was his drunken head for blood !
As when smiths’ hammers meet the steel so rang
The chieftains’ blows, and trunkless heads were
strewn
Between the garth and king Parmüda's camp.
Now when Bahram Chibina had returned
To his own camp he planned a camisade,
And, midnight past, girt up his loins and Jed
His powers against the foe. Among the Turks
There was no scout that saw him. When he reached
His fighting-ground the blare of trumpets rose,
Roused in the darkness by the clarions’ din
The warrior Turks leaped up, and such a shout
As would have split a mighty lion's ears,
Ascended.! None knew who another was
Amid the lengthy lances and the gloom.
The Íránians made their swords flash fire and set
The earth and air ablaze. Of those brave Turks
But few were left; the stones were coralline
With blood. Like flying dust the leader fled,
Dry-mouthed and livid-lipped, and thus it was
Till dawn began to breathe and sombre night
Drew in its skirts, and then the Íránian chief
O'ertook the foe and roaring like a lion
Cried to Parmüda : ** O thou runaway !
Mix not henceforth with warriors. Thou’rt no man
' Couplet omitted.


HURMUZD I37


Of battle but a very child: ‘tis fit
Thou suck thy mother’s milk.”

The king replied :—
* How long, O ravening lion! wilt thou be
Thus keen for bloodshed ? Crocodiles in water,
And pards on land, grow satiate with the blood
Of heroes in the fight. Will naught sate thee ?
Methinketh that thou art a ravening lion,
Thou who hast stricken off king Sáwa's head—
A man beloved through life by circling heaven—
And slaughtered so his troops that sun and moon
Feel ruth for them, while as for me who am
That valiant king’s memorial, know that thou
Hast slain me too with sheer distress. We all
Are mother-born for death and have surrendered C. 1833
Our necks thereto since remedy is none.!
I flee: thou followest but wilt not take me
Till my time come. If sword in hand I turn
Upon thee either of us may be slain.
Be not so hasty and so hot of head,
For that becometh neither chief nor host,
Now will I fare to mine own tent and there
Seek to retrace my steps. I will indite
A letter to the king in fashion such
As fortune maketh needful, and if he
Accept me and protect me from attack
I will become a bondslave at his court,
And wholly banish lordship from my heart.
Put from thee war and strife. Thou camest to
fight ;
Now feast in all good will.”

Bahram Chibina,
On hearing this, turned back, for that curst foe
Had grown so gracious. When the troops had

rested,


' Couplet omitted.


C. 1834


I r =~ —
s l
= VAA
i T = n | —
138 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And come to king Parmiida’s camp, they fared 2
About the field, cut off the chieftains’ heads, /
And heaped them till the pile grew mountain-like :
The hero's men of name called it Bahram Tal.
Whate'er they saw of horsemen’s equipage,
And other booty, they assembled there.

Bahrám Chübína wrote the king a letter
About Parmüda and his countless host,
Narrating * all that hath befallen us
Both from the Turks and from their warlike ki
Whose heart was eager to avenge his sire,

And who departed to Áwáza hence."

Parmiuda, on his sie, made fast the hold,
And sat down deep in thought, while in pursuit
Came countless troops and circled it about ;

But though so many leaguered it none knew
Parmüda's plans. Bahram Chibina said :—
The toils of war are better than delay,

And so he told Yal-án-sína to choose

Three thousand of the horsemen on the field,
And further that Ízid Gashasp should call

To horse four thousand warriors of the troops.
He bade behead forthwith all whom they found,
Thus haply from the hold the king to draw — —
When all the waste a-stream with blood he saw.


§15
How Bahram Chibina sent a Message to Parmida
and how Parmüda asked Quarter |


Bahrám Chübína stayed before the hold
Three days but sent at sun-rise on the fourth


* Tal i5 a heap or mound,


HURMUZD 139


This message to Parmüda as the chief

Both of the realm and race: ** O noble king

Of Chin and of the Turks! why hast thou chosen

To occupy this stronghold ? Where are now

King Sáwa's passion to possess the world,

And all his treasure, power, and elephants,

His armour for the steeds and ardent chiefs ?

Where are thy witchcraft and thy sorcery

That now thou dost seclude thyself? Time was

When all the Turks' domain was not enough

For thee, thy father peerless in the world.

Now womanlike thou sittest in this hold,

With full heart, beating thine-own head. Undo

The castle-gate, seek quarter, ask of me

To plead for thee before my king. Dispatch

Thy treasures of dínárs and all thy purses

From this hold plain-ward or if thou keep them

Keep not the realm for kings despise dinars.

Myself will intercede for thee at court

Because I am the champion of Iran ;

Thee will I make chief of all chiefs and treat thee

Above thine aims and thine imaginings.

Now if thou hast some hidden policy,

One that will make thy gloomy prospects bright,

Confide in me; since thine affairs are thus

Be not thou distant. I have given thee quarter,

As thou dost know, and opened thee a way

To scape by, else thou hadst been lifeless now,

As is thy sire, and seen not son or kindred :

But if thou hast companions for the fight,

With treasure and abundance of dinars,

Exert thyself herein and take revenge,

For troops are not to seek where there is treasure."
The messenger arriving told his message,

Which when Parmüda, the ambitious, heard

He answered: “Say: ‘If so thou canst forbear


C. 1535


140 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


To search out this world’s secrets. Thou perchance


Hast made too bold therewith because thy toils
Have brought forth fruit; yet in thy victory
Joy not; though thou art young the world is old.
The secret of the turning sky is known

To none; it never showeth us its face.

To mock becometh not a general.

I too had soldiers, elephants, and drums,

But heaven above is practised in deceit,

So couple not thy heart with arrogance.

My sire, the world-lord, that discerning man,
Whom thou beheldest on the day of fight,

Had earth as bondslave of his horse’s hoofs,

And heaven revolved according to his will;

Yet sought he what it was not his to seek,
And turned not from his wrongful purposes.
His prowess is o’erlaid by ridicule,

And enemies bemock him from afar.

As for thy saying that thy host exceedeth
The revolutions of the sun and moon

In sum, and that thy steeds and elephants
Seem grass-seeds scattered by a wind-mill's sails,
All that will pass away and thou withal

Wilt cease to joy and to illume the world.

Fear sharp fate's vengeance yet ;! it may infuse
Some of its bane in this thine antidote.

When one hath made a trade of shedding blood,
And harassing the hearts of enemies,

Men will shed his blood also by the token

That he hath shed the blood of other chiefs.
Wreck though thou mayst the country of the Turks
stall in the end they will exact revenge.

If I shall come to thee forthwith I fear

That thou wilt make an end of me. Thou art
A slave; Iam a king. Shall I abase me


* "" Crains le sort, qui sème la vengeance," Mohl.


HURMUZD 141


Before a thrall? I will not come to battle

Without a host or those that wish me well

Will call me mad; but it is no disgrace

For me to ask for quarter from thy Shah

In mine extremity. When that is done

The hold, the treasure, and the men are thine ;

Thy wishes will be law in this famed land.’
The messenger returned with this reply ;

Bahrám Chübína was rejoiced thereby.


$16


How Bahrám Chibina asked of Hurmuzd a Warrant
to spare the Life of Parmüda and the Answer


They wrote a letter that might bear good fruit
To that victorious and exalted Shih :—
‘The Khan of Chin is suppliant for quarter ;
He is beleaguered by Bahrám Chübina,
And needeth a safe-conduct under seal ;
The news thereof will be a feast to him.
Now since the suppliant is the Khan of Chin,
Fall'n from such dignity to w Tetehedness,
The king of kings should pity one whose w orship
Hath passed away."

Now when the letter reached
The Shah he cloudward raised his glorious crown.
He sent and summoned the Íránians,
And set them by the famous throne of kingship,


Bade read the letter and strew gems upon C. 1836
The reader, saying: “I thank my God and praise
Him


Three watches of the night in that the Khan
Of Chin is now our subject and high heaven


142 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Our crown. He raised his head to touch the sky,
And thought himself the monarch of the world ; TN
But now this leader who attacked our coasts =
Is made the slave of one still mightier,
And so the Turks’ chief and the prince of Chin
Is offering his homage unto us.
Praise to the Ruler of the sun and moon,
The Source of this supremacy of ours.
Do ye too offer praise to God and be
More instant in the practice of all good.”

He called the envoy of the paladin,
Gave him a long and gracious interview,
Called for a girdle set with royal gems,
A kingly robe of honour and a steed i
With trappings decked with gold and every buckle
Bejewelled. To the messenger withal
He gave dinars, a purse, and much beside
To be a present to that prudent man,*
Whom he held chief among the paladins,
Bade come a scribe and had a letter written
On silk: * Parmüda Khan is mine ally,
And in all regions under my protection.
God is the witness to this deed and seal ;
His slaves are we and He is Lord."

He wrote
An answer also to that world-aspirant,*
A letter all good will like Paradise,
And said: “ Dispatch Parmiida to my court
With all observance but without his host.
The booty that thou tookest from his troops—
A service which thou didst right zealously —
Send thither too, whate'er of it is worthy.
The Maker aideth thee. Spy out the foe,
And if he hath a stronghold let thy guards
Seize and consume it through thy glorious fortune,
' Couplet omitted. * Bahram Chübina.  * Id.


HURMUZD 143


And world-illuming presages. If thou

Hast need of further troops they shall be thine,
And there shall be addition to thy treasures.
State thy demands in writing; we will send
Whatever troops are needed, In thy letter
Name those Íránians that have acted well

In thine esteem; their toils shall be rewarded.
Thy troops the guardians of the march shall be ;
The crown of paladins I give to thee.”


817


How Hurmuzd's Letter granting Quarter to Parmida
reached Bakrdm Chibina, and how Bahram
Chiébina was wroth with Parmida


Now when this letter reached the paladin C. 1837
That famous chieftain's heart grew young; the
letter


Astounded him. He sent and called the Íránians,

And showed the Shah’s gifts; all that saw them
blessed him.

He showed the Íránians too all that Hurmuzd

Had written of them. The warriors acclaimed ;

Thou wouldst have said: '' Earth's surface shook."
He sent too

The honourable safe-conduct for Parmüda,

Giv'n by the monarch, to the hold to him ;

His darkened soul grew bright. With many blessings

Upon the king he left his famous fortress,

And leaving to Bahram Chubina all

The wealth therein made ready to depart.

Descending from the hold the proud Parmuda

Bestrode his charger swift as flying dust,


144 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And set forth with his troops without regard
To bold Bahram Chibina who chagrined
Thereat, and though his captive was a king,
Sent after him and had him brought afoot,
And running in the presence of the troops ;
Then said to him indignantly: “ Are such
Your manners in Türán and Chin—to go
Without leave asked of me ? Sheer folly this!”
Parmüda said : * Once I was raised o'er folk,
But now am humbled and a suppliant,
Cast vilely from the zenith of my power.
To-day withal thou art not generous
In bringing me before thee, evil one!
Now that I have the letter of safe-conduct
I purpose going to the king. Perchance
He will receive me brother-like ; misfortune
May grow more light to me. What wouldst thou
more ?
I have surrendered fortune, home, and goods."
Bahrám Chübína raged with flashing eyes
In indignation at Parmüda's words,
And struck him in excitement with a whip—
Behaviour only fit for miscreants.
They bound Parmida’s feet forthwith and made
A seanty tent his prison. Said thereat
Kharrad, son of Barzin: “ This paladin
And wisdom are not mates ! "
He sought the archscribe,
And said: * This mighty paladin possesseth
Not one gnat's wing of wisdom |? so he taketh
No heed of any one, and we must go,
And say to him: * This is remediless.’
His temper is his great calamity.”
The two departed to Bahrim Chibina
With pallid cheeks and counsel on their tongues,
! Reading with P.


HURMUZD 145


And told him: “ Thou hast given to the winds
Thy toil! Oh! be that noble head of thine
Unfilled with fire!”

Ware of his foul behaviour,
That into water had been flung a brick


- Already dried, he in his penitence


Released the Khan and was in great concern.
He sent the Khan a steed with golden trappings,
And Indian falehion with a golden scabbard,
Moreover went forthwith to him to make

His dark soul bright, there tarried till the Khan
Had armed and mounted on a speedy steed,
And then escorted him upon his way,


_ Perceiving that the prince's visage loured.


When it was time to part Bahrám Chübína

Told him; “ Thou hast a secret grudge against me ;
Yet, though it be so, tell it not the Shah ;

No credit will result to thee therefrom.”

The Khan replied to him; “ It is of fortune

That I complain; I leave it all to God.
I am not such an one as would desire
To speak in many words of other men ;
Still if thy monarch hath no news hereof
He is not worthy of his high estate.

It was the turning sky that fettered me ;
I tell not of ill usage from a slave."

Thereat Bahram Chibina paled ; he writhed,
But with an effort swallowed down his wrath,
And thus returned reply : ** An instance this
Of what the famous nobles used to say :—

* Forbear thine utmost seed of ill to cast,
For time will give thee fruit thereof at last.”
To what end did I deck for thee my heart,
Attempt to do thee kindness in the world,
And wrote its lord a letter hiding all
! Couplet omitted.
VOL. VIII, K


C.


1839


146 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Thine own shortcomings ? ”
“That,” the Khan rejoined,

* [s past, and all the past hath turned to wind.
By God! I do not owe thee any grudge,
Or cherish in my heart the former strife.
Thy kindness hath been greater than this wrong,
And thou didst guide me on the way to good ;
But just as there is insolence in war,
So is there courtesy in time of peace,
And if the two are all the same to thee
Thy wisdom out of question is but small,
And when a leader is too wise to take
His lord’s commands then evil will befall him.
Moreover one should tread God's path and purge
All darkness from the heart. "TPwere well for thee
To say no more for past ill is but wind."

On hearing this Bahrám Chübína said :—
* Methought 'twould out, but no mishap will come
Of thy complaint for I will hide it up
With painted silk. On thine arrival say
Whate'er thou wilt; “twill minish not my lustre.”

The Khan said: “ Every king that taketh not
Account of good and ill, but passeth over
His slave's misdeeds in silence, be assured
Is witless, and when malcontents afar—
Allies or other kings—observe this thing
They will term thee unseemly and light-headed,
And him the foolish monarch of Iran.”

Bahrám Chübína paled, and when Kharrád,
Son of Barzin, had taken note thereof
He feared that wrathful and bloodthirsty man
Would hurl Parmiuda from his steed to dust,
And said: “© general of the Shah! repress
Thy wrath and quit that path because the Khan
Saith well, so list to him and think no ill,
For had cool words ne’er passed the hearts of neither


HURMUZD 147
Would have been pained.”


“This ill-conditioned one,”
Bahram Chubina said, '* would join his sire.”
The Khan said: ** Wrong me not. Reft as I am
Of mine own father I may well die young.
All those that in the world are like thyself,
With heads all dust-cloud and with hearts all fume,
Imagine ill, accord to none, but raise
Themselves by craft and cruelty. I fear not
The king of kings; from him bale or relief
Is well. He is my peer among the great,
And not a slave malignantly disposed
Towards me, but is gentle, wise, high-born,
And greatly mindful of the men of name.
I charge thee by the soul and by the head
Of Sháh Hurmuzd that thou return forthwith.
Give me no more replies and insolence ;
Say naught and hear naught."
When Bahram Chubina
Heard he returned to camp in vengeful mood,
And thus that proven warrior harangued
The prudent chiefs: “ Kharrad, son of Barzin,
And those wise men, the archscribe and arch-
mages,
Shall write a letter to the world's king, telling C. 1840
All that hath passed in publie and in private."
The general said further to the chief
And other arehimages : '* Men of wisdom !
Depart hence to the hold, be diligent,
Companion with the wind and ascertain
What quantity of wealth is hoarded there."
With fearful hearts the seribes set forth. From
e dawn
Until three watches of the night had passed
They blacked much paper but they had not done.
There was not room to move for precious things,


í 4 > dies
Y. WX 2 3 i


148 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Hoards of the era of Afrásiváb,
And of Arjásp, so ancient vet unspent,
Gold coins and jewels won from sea and mine
By favour of the skv ; such were the treasures
Within Áwáza hold world-famous then.
Among the goods of Siváwush came first
A belt with jewelled buckles and such earrings
As no one high or low besides possessed, |
Which Kai Khusrau had given Luhrásp and he
Thereafter rave them to Gushtásp. Arjasp
Gat them and stored them there, none knoweth

when.
They wrote a list of all the precious things
That were laid up within the treasury,
But no one in the world, astrologer,
Or noble prince had knowledge of the sum.
Bahrám Chübína sent a scribe, a man
Shrewd, eloquent, and mindful, who collected
The booty from the hold and battlefield.
There were a pair of earrings in the spoil,
And pair of boots with patterns formed by gems ;
The stuff was interwoven with gold threads
Bestrung with precious stones. There were withal
Two gold-embroidered curtains from Yaman,
Whereof each one was seven mans! in weight.
Now through presumption and perversity
The captain of the host, contemplating
No scrutiny, put secretly aside
The pairs of boots and curtains of Yaman,
And made no entry of them in his list.
He then gave orders to Ízid Gashasp
That he and all his cavaliers should mount,
Select a thousand warriors from the host,
And take the booty to the monarch's gate.
The warriors having mounted on their steeds,

1 See Vol, i, p. 290 note.


S -
E Reet, X bw
VACUUM CX
rat? Br


-


a $ "E p
a * "S ê
i
jr
"^ vm


i
*


HURMUZD 149


{zid Gashasp bore off that mass of spoil,
And full of joy and merriment they took

A hundred caravan-loads to Írán.

Íránian horsemen closed the long array,
The Khán with his own nobles led the way.


$18


How Parmida ‘came before Hurmuzd with the
Treasures sent by Bahrdm Chibina


With treasure, gifts, and troops the Khán drew near C. 1841

The monarch of the world who heard and mounted

With crown on head and mace in hand, and thus

Came to the gate. When from the porch he saw

The visage of the Khán he paused to note

If at the sight of him that prince and troops

Would light down from their steeds. Parmuda
watched,

Full of concern, if he would turn away,

Then, mounted still, came with the archimage,

Ízid Gashasp, whereat the Shah, the world-lord,

Bestirred him with his troops. The Khan alighted

And hastened toward the Shah, without delay

Remounting his black Arab, while the Great King

Abode not with Parmida in the porch,

And rode his fleet steed off; but when the Khan

Was following, the keeper of the curtain

Laid hold upon his reins forthwith. Parmuda

Alighted instantly and manifested

His own diplomacy by that submission.

Now when the Khan approached the royal throne

The king of kings received him with all favour,

And having welcomed set him in the presence,

Repenting of the past hostility.

They lodged him fitly in the pleasant palace


C. 18423


150 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Prepared for him and brought whate'er he needed.
A scribe was charged to lodge the retinue
Hard by. The Shah, on hearing of the wealth
Brought by Parmida, sent it to the park,
And charged therewith the keeper of the camels.
The eighth day, when Parmüda was refreshed
From all his toils, the Sháh ordained a feast,
And, when the Khán was seated at the board
At court and in the presence of the world-lord,
Bade bring the camel-loads before the chiefs.
One counted up the porters; on that day
There were ten thousand hired. The next, at dawn,
Hurmuzd had wine set forth and took his seat,
And from the park came fifty thousand bales
As well as parcels on the porters’ backs.
The baggage filled a hundred treasuries.
The Shah, when his task was achieved, bade bring
Before the presence publicly a bale
Of stuffs, bejewelled earrings, and a girdle
Compact, thou wouldst have said, of gold and gems.
These he bestowed with many words of praise
Upon the messenger who kissed the ground,
While from the banquet-hall arose acclaim :—
“ Victorious be the Shah.”
He at that time

Said to his confidant Ízid Gashasp :—!
"* What seest thou in Bahrám Chübína's exploit ?
He maketh war to cease right manfully.”

The scribe Izid Gashasp replied: ** O Shah,
Who art observant and of ardent mind !
When at a feast the theme is such know there
Will likewise be but ill-conditioned fare.”


_* Perhaps we ought to read " Ayin Gashasp " here and below.


Fu ui ia 174 seg. :
' With changes of reading Mohl translates: "' sache que les mets


d'une féte ou c'est le mot corneille (djoubin) qui forme le refrain


doivent ètre étranges.”


HURMUZD 151


The Shah became suspiciously inclined
On hearing this; misdoubtings filled his mind.


$19


How Hurmuzd heard of the Ill-doing of Bahrám
Chibina and made a Compact with the Khan


Then came a lusty camel-post and brought
This letter from the arehseribe: * May the world-
lord
Be ever joyful and his head and erown
For ever present in his servant's thoughts.
Know that there were two curtains of Yaman
Among the spoil, boots decked with gems uncut,
The earrings too of noble Siyawush,
Who left us wisdom as his monument,
And these the paladin bare off with him!
No marvel since he underwent the toil."
Hurmuzd said to Parmüda : “ Tell me all
That thou didst see hereof."
The fallen king
Confirmed the seribe's report. The haughty Sháh
Was wroth thereat and said: '" Bahrám Chübina
Doth err, uplifting to the moon his head.
For one thing he hath struck the Khán of Chín—
An act the outcome of an evil nature—
And then would nothing but these earrings serve
His turn ? Perhaps he hath become a king.
His toil hath turned to wind and all his knowledge


*


And justice have become corrupt."
'This said,
He called the Khán and having seated him
Upon the famous throne they feasted there
! Reading with P.


|


INE ll U-


C. 1841


ABE OE
i12 "4 x iu fh
P x.
152 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI =


Till night spread out her musky tresses black.
Then said the Sháh : “ If thou wilt league with me
Thou shalt partake my honey.” |
As he sat
He grasped the Khán's hand, and Parmüda mar-
velled.
The Shah proceeded: “ Swear to me afresh,
And make a new departure, not to break
With me or with the nobles of this folk
On thy return.”
Parmuda swore forthwith :—
“ By shining daylight and night azure-dim,
By God who hath of right supremacy,
The Artificer of Jupiter and Venus,
The great Shah's crown and throne, Azargashasp,
The signet and the diadem, the Khan
Shall not grow alien from the Shah in heart,
And vex him not in aught,”
This sworn, they rose
And sought their couches.
When the yellow sun
O'er-topped the mountains, and the kings awoke,
The noble Shih prepared a present—ware
Of gold and silver, horses, coronets,
Of girdles gemmed and golden, armlets, torques,
And earrings, Arab steeds with golden trappings,
And Indian scimitars with golden sheaths,
Dispatched them to the Khan, consorted with him
Two stages and the more part of the third,
And having bidden him farewell returned.
The paladin, on hearing of the gifts
Presented by the monarch of the world,
And how the Khán was coming back rejoicing,
Rode forth to meet him with the Íránian chiefs.
He stored provisions where the Khán would pass
In town and village, station, hill, and plain,


2955


HURMUZD 153


And hurried on in shame at his ill temper
To make excuse in person. When he saw
Parmüda he did reverence but the Khàán
Proved wholly adverse, would accept of naught
That he had brought of provand, purse, or slave,
And on the way ignored him utterly. s
Bahrám Chúbina fared three stages thus,
And not once did Parmüda call for him.
Upon the fourth the Khán sent one to say :—
“ Return for thou hast toiled enough.”

Thereat
Bahram Chuibina left him and in wrath
Set face toward Balkh where he abode in dudgeon,
Repenting of-his acts with aching heart.
Withal the world-lord was displeased with him,
And fumes of anger filled the monarch’s soul
First at that outrage to the Khán wherein C. 1844
Bahrám Chübína had done shamefully.
And next that he had dared to lay his hand
On certain of the spoil without command.


$920


How Hurmuzd wrote a chiding Letter to Bahram
CAtibina and sent him a Distaff-case, Cotton, and
Women's Raiment


The king then wrote thus to Bahram Chibina :—

“ Unconscionable div! perceiv'st thou not

That all our excellencies are from God,

And yet thou sittest on the vault of heaven ?

Hast thou forgot my pains, troops, toil, and treasure ?
Thou keepest not the way of paladins,


C. 1845


154 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


But raisest thy head skyward. Thou hast turned
From my behest and acted otherwise.
Here is the robe of honour meet for thee,
Agreeable and appropriate to thine acts.”

The Shah, when he had sealed this, ordered one
To bring him a black distaff-case with distal
And cotton, much unworthy gear, withal
A blue silk shift, red drawers, and yellow coil,
Chose an ignoble messenger to match
With that unseemly gift and said: “ Convey
These to Bahram Chibina. Say to him :—
' O worthless misereant ! thou didst bind the Khan,
And gloat upon great men’s mishaps, but I
Will fetch thee from thy seat and hold thee naught
Henceforth.’ ”

The messenger, these words in mind,

Departed with the gift and went like wind.


$21


How Bahram Chibina put on the Woman's Dress
and showed himself therein to the Chiefs of the Host


Whenas Bahrám Chübína saw the present

Sent with the letter he endured in silence.

He thought: “ This is my guerdon! So the Shah
Is now my foe though he hath not devised

This wrong but mine ill-wishers slandered me.

The world-lord is the master of his slaves,

And if he putteth me to shame ‘tis well.

I did not think that enemies of mine

Had access to the Shih. Since I left court

In haste with but few troops all men have witnessed
My deeds, my sorrows and my toils and hardships.


HURMUZD 155


If these toils are rewarded by a shame
That is the portion of the infamous

I will complain of circling heaven to God
For having docked me thus of all its love.”

He called upon the Judge that giveth good,
Then, having donned the red and yellow garb,
And set before him the black spindle-case,

And all the other things sent by the Shah,

He summoned to him all the mighty men,

The nobles of the monarch of the world.

These came forth from the army to the chief,
Whose gloomy soul was full of anxious thoughts.
They came, both young and old, were all astound,
And mused, on seeing their paladin so clad.

He said: “ A robe of honour from the Shah !
Ye saw and heard of what I did and how

I combated with my two-headed dart.

The Sháh despaired about the royal throne ;
The world was dark and I illumined it.

I have put on me this repugnant garb
According to the exalted king's command.

The Sháh is world-lord and we are his slaves,
Our hearts and souls are full of love for him.
What are your views, ye witnesses! herein ?
What answer make we to the king of earth ?

All cried : * Famed paladin and worshipful !
If this be thy worth with the Sháh the troops
Are dogs at court! Note what the ancient sage
Observed at Rai when angry with Ardshir :—

* I grow averse from archmage and Sháh's throne
When he regardeth not my weal and woe.’
How canst thou seek for honour from a man
That honoureth not thee ? "

He said: “ Forbear :
The Shah is source of honour to his troops ;
His slaves are we; he giveth, we receive."


C. 1845


| i Sh fS P,
as ANM e
e T |
156 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI d


The Íránians said: ** We will not arm hence- ¥
forth ; m

We will not have him in Írán as Sháh, E

Or, as our general, Bahram Chibina.” | |
They spake and went forth from his presence, -
left

The palace of the chieftain! for the plain,

But he refrained his lips and at the most
Gave only prudent counsels to the host.


§ 22
How Bahrám Chübína went to. hunt. and saw a Lady
who foretold the Future to him


Two weeks passed, then Bahram Chubina left
His palace for the waste. In front of him
There was a forest furnished well with trees — | /
The very place for lucky revellers. S
Upon the mead he saw an onager, 3
And none will see a fairer one. He followed
At leisure, heating not his steed. Appeared
Within that woodland-chase a narrow path,
Which when that gallant onager had traversed
A pleasance next was seen upon the plain.
Bahram Chúbína, marking this, proceeded
Until a splendid palace came in sight.
Led by the onager he turned and rode
Thereto; behind him was Izid Gashasp,
To whom he gave his fleet steed’s reins and said :—
~ May wisdom ever be thy mate,” then entered
The porch alone. Izid Gashasp the while
Abode without and held the noble steed.
Behind him hurrying came Yalán-sina

t Reading with P.


HURMUZD 137


Armed on a swift horse. Brave Ízid Gashasp
Said: “ Lion! enter thou and find out whither
Our chief, the heroic captain of the host,
Our suecourer, hath gone."

Yalán-sína
Made for the palace with an anxious heart
To seek the chief. He saw it and its hall
Magnifical ; its like he had not seen
Or heard of in Írán. Upon one side
Thereof there was a cupola whose top
Was viewless through its height and under it
A throne of gold with steps begemmed. The throne
Was covered with brocade of Rum in patterns
Picked out with jewels on a ground of gold.
Upon the throne there sat a lady crowned,
Of eypress-height and with a face like Spring.t
Beside it was a seat and thereupon C. 1847
The eaptain of the host while many slaves,
Idols fay-faced and blooming, were around.
On seeing Yalan-sina the lady bade
A handmaid : ** Hasten to yon lion-heart,
Fair mate, and say: * Thou mavst not enter here.
Stay with thy comrades. He will come anon,
But go thou first. As from Bahram Chibina
Speak this and ease them as to his return.’ ”

She sent some also to his retinue
To bring the warriors’ horses to the stalls,
And take good care of all their equipage.
The gardener unlocked the garden-gate
By hest of that fair hostess,* and they set
About the garden victuals past conceit.
Whenas the warriors had eaten bread
They led the chargers to the place assigned.
Bahram Chibina, when he left the lady,
Spake thus: “ May Jupiter espouse thy crown.”
' Three couplets omitted. ' One couplet omitted.


C. 1848


158 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


She answered: “ Be victorious and ever
Of patient heart and wise.! Go thou! the throne
And the Íránian diadem are thine.
The world shall be set straight by thee, so win it
By might and sword from dark dust to the stars."*
Now when he came forth from that garth of roses
Thou wouldst have said: “ He weepeth blood ! "
5o changed
Was he in temper and in talk that thou
Hadst said: “ He raiseth to the Pleiades


His head."

Anon the onager appeared ;
The chieftain followed after on his steed,
And it was so that till he cleared the forest
The onager still served him as a guide.
He went back to the city from the chace,
But spake not of the matter to the host.
Kharrád, son of Barzín, regarded him
And said thus : ** O thou chief that speakest sooth !
What was this marvel seen and heard by none
That happened in the chace ? "

The paladin

Vouchsafed no answer but in dudgeon sought
The palace, and none else dared ask : ** What might
This matter mean, this vision of delight ? "


$23


How Bahrám Chiübina assumed the royal Style and
how Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, and the Archscribe
fled

The next day, when the uplands silvered over,

And when yon yellow shining Lamp appeared,

‘id. — * HM. — *Ízid Gashasp in the original. Cf. p. 106.


HURMUZD 159


Bahrám Chübína spread a carpeting
Made of brocade of Chin, and thou hadst said
That earth had turned to sky. Throughout the
palace

He ranged gold seats and cushions of brocade
Of gold. They placed a golden ante-throne
Whereon the captain of the host sat down,
Then held a session like the king of kings,
And placed upon his head the crown of greatness.

The archscribe marked Bahram Chibina’s con-

duct,
And, knowing him to be both bold and strong,
Went and retailed his knowledge, sight or hearsay,
Before Kharrad, son of Barzin, who listened,
Knew that his own toils had been vain, and said :—
" Take not this lightly, O thou noble scribe !
This king of kings of ours hath played the fool
In sending as a gift the distalT-case,
Not knowing that this battle-loving Lion
Would thus revolt. We must not talk of this,
But when ‘tis midnight fare forth to the Shah,
And say: * Bahram Chübína's heart is set
Upon the crown; the seat too under him
Is ivory. "
They canvassed all the case,

And made a shift to flee, prepared the pretext,
And fled from Balkh by night. The chief, informed
Thereof, and knowing well their clear, shrewd minds,
Said to Yalán-sína : ' Go in pursuit
Of those two dotards with a hundred horse.”

He overtook the archseribe, raged at him,
As ‘twere a wolf, took from him all he had,
And brought him back made fast in heavy bonds,
Back to Bahram Chubina so that he
Might slay the innocent. The paladin
said : “ Doer of div’s work ! why didst thou quit me


C. 1849


160 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Without my leave ? "
“ O paladin ! " he answered,
" Kharrád, son of Barzin, made me afraid.
He said: * We may not tarry; thy delay
Will please those only that speak ill of thee,
For when the heroic captain of the host,
Bahrim Chibina, holdeth court as Shah
There is a fear lest thou and I be slain
Save we return.’ ”
Bahram Chibina said :—

“ Just so: one must consult o'er good and ill.”

He then restored and with advantages
From his own treasures what the scribe had lost,
Then said to him: “ Go thou and ponder o'er
Thy conduct in this case and flee no more.”


$24


How Hurmuzd received News of Bahrám Chiübína's
Doings, and how Bahram Chübína sent a Frail
of Swords to Hurmuzd


Kharrad, son of Barzin, for his part rode,
Escaping notice,till he reached the Shah,
To whom he told his news, suppressing naught,
Of wood and meadow, course of onager,
Strait pathway and Bahram Chibina’s sojourn ;
Told of the palace and the jewelled throne,
The slave-girls and the lady with the crown :
He told whatever he had seen and heard.
The Shah mused at the tale, laid it to heart,
And sighed as he remembered what the archmage
And fortune-teller had said: ** Bahram Chibina
Will turn him from thy throne."

1 See pp. 107, 108,


HURMUZD 161


Forthwith he summoned
The high priest, set Kharrád, son of Barzin,
Within the room and said to him: “ Relate
The adventures of thy journey.”
Thus enjoined
He oped his lips and told it all. The Shah
Said to the high priest: *'* What importeth this ?
We must consult at large. The onager
That led him through the wood, the palace seen
Amidst the wilderness, the lady crowned
Upon the golden throne, the slaves in waiting
As on a queen—the account is like a dream
Suggested by old tales!”
The high priest thus
Made answer to the monarch of the world :—
* Beneath that onager there was a div
Who sought to lead Bahram Chübina wrong,
And make perverseness show within his heart.
The palace, be assured, was sorcerer's work,
The lady on the throne an impious witch,
Who on this wise to hearten him the more
Displayed the crown and throne of majesty.
All eager and bemused he went from her: C. 1850
Be sure that he will ne’er come back to hand.
His heart was wounded by thv distaff-case,
And going to that div-witch made it worse.
It was not well to send the ignoble robe
To one so overweening, for thereby
' The Iranians were estranged and ceased to trust
The king of kings. So now devise a scheme
To bring the army back to court from Balkh.”
The king repented having acted so
About the cotton and the gaudy dress,
‘And asked Kharrad, son of Barzin: '" What say
The troops there of that lady ? "
He replied :—
VOL. VIII. L


C. 1351


162 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


“ As for that crownéd lady, all the troops
Call her, O king! * Bahrim Chiubina’s Luck,’
Which will be very great and glorious.”

The king, on hearing, greatly feared the ills
That fortune had in store. Ere long there came
One from the paladin, the cavalier,
And brought a frail of swords with points all bent.!
He set them down before the Shah who looked
Upon that iron gear, bade break the swords,
Replace them in that ill-conditioned frail,
And then return them to Bahram Chubina :
No word was spoken but the intent was clear.
Bahram Chúbina oped the frail, beheld
The long swords snapped at point and then replaced,
And, wayward as he was, grew full of thought.
He called the Iranians round the frail and said :—
~ Behold the king's gift! Underrate it not.
It meaneth that this host is little worth,
And not the head of one of us will scape.”

The troops thought much of what the Shah had

done,
And of their paladin's address. They said :—
“One day our monarch sendeth us as gifts
A distaff and a gaudy robe; anon
He giveth broken swords—a present worse
Than striking or abuse. Ne'er be such Shah
Upon the throne ! May none remember him,
And if again the offspring of Gashasp—
Bahram Chibina—ride on that eourt's dust
Then may they perish, skin and marrow both,
He and his worthless sire !
The chieftain heard,

Saw how Hurmuzd had vexed the host and said :—
“ Be vigilant and let your minds be clear
Because Kharrád, son of Barzín, hath told


+ par usage qu'on en avait fail dans la bataille" Mohl.


HURMUZD 163


Our secrets to the king. Let each consult
His safety and conspire with me to-day.

If I send none to watch our enemies

Regard my days as done, my soldiers slain.”

He spake and took new order: mark and muse.
He scattered horsemen through the realm lest letters,
Sent by the king, should reach the Iranians,

And they should arm themselves to fight for him,
And so it wes that till a time had gone
A royal letter was perused by none.


§ 25


How Bahrám Chibina made known to the Chiejs his
Designs upon the Throne, and how his Sister
Gurdya advised him


Bahram Chubina summoned then the chiefs,

And told them many secrets. There were present
Hamdan Gashasp and the archscribe, Yalan-sina,
Renowned and strong, with valorous Bahram,
The son of Stvawush, and that wise chief,

Kanda Gashasp. With these he held debate,

For they were Lions and men of war, and then
Harangued that fierce host, which was all astray,
Thus: * Famous chiefs whose counsel all require !
The Sháh is wroth with us without a cause,
And so hath turned away from what is right.
What will ye do ? What is the remedy ?

"Tis useless to shed tears upon the past.

Whoe’er hath hid his anguish from the leech
Hath showered from his lashes tears of blood,
And trifles grow in moment when we keep

Our secrets from the men of understanding.


C. 1353


164 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


I have myself my privy griefs and I
Will tell them to the sages of the world.
Ye all are conversant with these affairs,
And so can testify to what I say.
We left [ran by order of the Shah
With but few troops, though eager to engage,
And none, though long his life, will see a foe
More numerous. Now if the Turk Parmuda,
Had, with king Sawa, marched upon Írán
It would not have been worth a piece of wax,
And later they would have attempted Rim ;
But on Parmüda and king 5áwa came
A marvel such as none within the world
Had seen, and though we bare much toil ourselves
We left them neither elephants nor treasure.
The Shah hath laid up wealth anew, grown rich,
And yet he is enraged against the host
Though all the business hath been done for him,
And he is franchised through no toil of his !!
In such a coil what shift shall I employ
To set my head at ease? Do ye too all
Shift for yourselves. What is your remedy
For such a wound ? I have discharged my heart,
And freed my soul. Respecting weal or woe
If ye are ware of any means now speak.”

He proved with these words, for he feared, the host.
Behind his curtains that famed paladin
Possessed a sister, one of ardent soul,
And that wise lady's name was Gurdya,
Of fairy-visage and his heart's delight.
Now she, on hearing from behind the veil
Her brother's words, was angered; her heart flared.
With much to say and full of instances
She came forth to that conclave, and her brother
Kept silence, when he heard her voice, from word

i Couplet transposed.


HURMUZD 165


And answer, and the Íránians too were silent
For fear of harm. Thus Gurdya addressed
The troops : “ Illustrious men who seek for guidance !
Why do ye hold your peace and check your spleen ?
Ye are the warrior-chieftains of Iran,
Wise, prescient lords. What see ye in this matter ?
What game play ve upon this scene of blood ? "
Then said Izid Gashasp, the cavalier :—
= Memorial of the mighty ! were our tongues
Sharp swords they would take flight before the sea
Of thine advice. Thine acts are all of God,
Brave, learned, and wise. We need not fight like
pards
With all the world. Let no one seek my counsel
Henceforth because my lore hath reached its bound.
If ye will fight I too will bear a hand,
And eavalierly counter cavaliers,
While if the paladin is pleased with me
Methinketh that I shall be young for ever."
Bahrám Chübína, hearing him thus speak,
Saw that he dealt with both sides. Then he marked
Yalán-sína and said: “ What thinkest thou ?
Quoth he: “ Brave chief! the walker in God's way
Will be wise, famed, and learned, will have his will
In all and, winning victory and Grace,
Will haste not to do ill for that would turn
A blessing to a curse and circling heaven
Be vengeful towards him. God hath given thee
Grace, fortune, troops withal, wealth, prowess, throne ;
If thou art grateful He will send thee more,
But through ingratitude the heart will ache.”
Then said Bahram Chuibina to Bahrim :—
* Wise friend and prudent mate! what sayest thou
About this seeking after throne and treasure ?
Will majesty result or pain and grief ?
He laughed that such a case should be discussed,


C. 1853


166 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSF


Then tossing up his finger-ring replied :—
“As long as this remaineth in the air

So long shall it be servant to the Sháh ;
Yet he is great; despise him not for none
Should under-estimate the diadem.”

Said to Kanda Gashasp! Bahram Chibina :—

" () thou sword-wielding and steed-spurring Lion f
What seest and sayst thou touching this affair
Of ours ? Do we deserve the royal throne 7”

That cavalier replied: '* O thou that art
The memory of heroes in the world !

There was an archimage at Rai who said :—
* The wise and luckv man to whom ‘tis given
Once to be king his soul will soar to heaven.’
So aiming at the treasure of the king

Is better than to be long vears a slave."

Then to the archseribe said Bahrám Chübina :—

“ Old wolf! unclose thy lips."
The archscribe kept
His lips still shut awhile and sat amid
A crowd of thoughts, then said : ** Whoe'er shall seek
His wish in fitting fashion will attain it,
For time's stretehed hand is long. Know that no
pains
Can shun whatever God will have to be."

Then said the chieftain to Hamdán Gashasp :—
“0 thou well versed in fortune’s rise and fall !
Whatever thou shalt utter in our presence
Shall be as wind and, like wind, hurt thee not.
Advise us in this case, this test of good
And evil fortune.”

Great Hamdan Gashasp
Thus spake: “ Prized by the great! why dost thou
dread
Ills not yet come and question of the crown
+ Reading with P. C. has Ízid Gashasp.


HURMUZD 167


Of kingship? Act and leave the rest to God.
Why reach out for the date if thou dost fear
The thorn ? A people's Head hath never rest ; C. 1854
His mind is fearful and his body weary."

'The sister of the captain of the host
Writhed at their words and grew o'ercast of soul,
Yet spake she naught in this debate from eve
Til midnight. Then Bahrám Chübína said :—
* What thinkest thou of this assembly's words,
Fair lady ? "

Gurdya made no reply ;

The counsels of the chief displeasured her.
Thereafter she addressed the archseribe thus :—
* (Q man maleficent like some old wolf !
So thou conceivest that the crown and throne,
Host and addition and the might of fortune
Were in the world no objects of desire
To any famous chiefs of generous bent
Though kingship easier is than servitude !
Such sentiments as thine demand our tears.
Take we the precedents of former Shihs,
And hear the sayings of those greater ones.”

The archseribe made response: “ If rede of mine
Obtain not with thee speak and do whatever
Thou art advised and follow thy heart’s lead.”

Then likewise to self-willed Bahram Chubina
His sister spake and said: “ They are not good,
Thy knowledge and thy counsel, and thy steps
Are tending toward deceit. Full many a time
Hath the Shah’s throne been void and yet no chief
Cast any look upon it. -It was theirs
To guard the world by valour, not to have
An eve upon the throne. They did not aim
Thereat but girt their loins to serve. They sought
Their sovereigns’ weal and rendered hearty service.
They were no strangers to the throne and crown,


&


C. 1855


168 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST


But worthy of their greatness by descent.

I speak first of the case of Shah Kats,}!

Who would have searched the mysteries of God,

Have summed the stars and trod heaven's circling
dome,

But fell despised and wretched at Sari

Through his perverseness and ill bent, and yet

Gudarz and Rustam, who was paladin,

Did not take dudgeon, and thereafter when

Kats went to Hamavaran,? and folk

Bound him in heavy fetters, none essayed

The throne but manifested warm regret.

So when the Iranians said to Rustam: ‘'Thou

Art worthy of the throne,'* he cried against

The speaker: * Be thy mate the narrow charnel !

Shall I be on the throne of gold, the Sháh

Bound ? Perish kingship rather! Perish crown!’

He chose out of Iran twelve thousand men,‘

World-taking cavaliers on barded steeds,

And freed Káüs and Gív, Güdarz and Tis,

From that captivity. Then when Pirúz

Was slain and for the Iranians all was lost,’

While Khüshnawáz emboldened by affairs

Was seated on the alluring throne in peace,

Came Süfarai, the scion of Káran,

In order to restore the throne of power.

When his success was manifest the nobles

Went from Írán to hail him as their Sháh,

And make a subject monarch of the earth.

He told them: *'Tis unseemly. Majesty

And crown are for the Shah. Although Kubad

Is little he will grow; we may not put

The wolf within the lion's wood. To make


t See Vol ii. p. 102 seg.
* Id. p. 82 seg. ! Cf. T. p. 143.
i Cf. p. 104 and mote, * See VoL vii, p. 167 seg.


HURMUZD roy


A Shah without blood royal is to give

His kindred to the winds.” Now when Kubad
Reached manhood he perceived that Sufarai
Deserved the crown and, led by miscreants’ words,
Slew him who was the backbone of the state.

The folk thereafter put Kubád in fetters,

That horseman bold, that hero of the race

Of kings, and gave him to Zarmihr, thc low-born,
That he might take revenge for his own sire.
Zarmihr saw none else worthy of the crown

And throne of kingship, so he freed Kubad

In order that he might assert his claim

Without delay. No subject dared aspire

Though many were entitled by their birth.

When from the Turks one hight * King Sawa’ came
To seek the seal and crown the glorious Maker
Ordained that he should perish in Iran.

Since by God's Grace and by thy hand so great
An action was by thine own thumbstall wrought
Thou wouldest have the empire! Know that thou
Wilt lose thy life. Yalán-sína curvetteth,
Exclaiming : * I will set up a new king—

Bahrám Chübína, offspring of Gashasp—

And make my name remembered.” Nishirwan,
The understanding Shah, found in cld age

His lost youth in Hurmuzd whom all the magnates
Of this our realm support. Support, say I?

Are all his bondslaves and his underlings.

He hath three hundred thousand cavaliers,

All paladins, all famed, and all his slaves,
Obedient to his will, yet chose he thee

By virtue of his high prerogative,

Ennobled all thine ancestors and granted C. 1856
Revenge upon their foes. Wilt thou repay

His good with ill ? Know ‘twill recoil on thee.
Design not evil, brother! It will bring


- pu i


wa
her i
170 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI n
Ill on thine own head. Make not greed the lord
O'er wisdom else the sages will not call thee
A man of piety. Although a woman,


Far younger than my brother, yet I give
A man’s advice. Oh! fling not to the wind
Thy fathers’ deeds and mayst thou not recall
My words to mind.”

The assembly marvelled at her,
The chieftain bit his lips as well aware
That what she said was just and that she sought
The path of right. Yalán-sína replied :—
“O noble lady! in this company
Forbear to treat of Sháhs because Hurmuzd
Will soon pass and the paladin enjoy
The throne of majesty. Now since the Shah
Is what he is in prowess count thy brother
Already as the monarch of Iran,
And if Hurmuzd affect! the royal erown
Why sendeth he a distaff as a pift ?
The paladin is such a lion-man
That at the terror of his sword earth quaketh,
And had his sword remained undrawn Hurmuzd,
[rin and Shim had perished, and to send him
The present of a distaff and of cotton !
Fie on a king so faithless! Talk no more
About Turk-born Hurmuzd. May all that race
No longer be! To count from Kai Kubád
This stock hath had the crown and throne of

gold
A thousand years. Now it is at an end,
5o name them not or give Khusrau Parwiz
A thought; his mention is not worth a mite,
And those that are the princes at his court
Will be thy brother's subjects who will place
At his word their lord's feet in heavy bonds."
i Reading with P.


iM rw n


K 4 v


< jea ra" nite. "
t


=" i
uuu 2


i. S iss


SR


4
i
Pa d
"
a


"a i i
rii NT ML


ris


zh


HURMUZD


“The Black Div spreadeth out,” said Gurdya
A net upon thy path. Destroy us! not,
Both soul and body. I perceive in thee
But wind and vapouring. Our sire was march-
lord
At Rai and thou wouldst have us seek the throne.
Now thine incitement of Bahram Chibina,
And putting into tumult all our kindred,
Will give our race’s travail to the wind,
And through thy words, thou base-born underling !
Yea! lead him on and fill our quiet times
With turbulence ! ”
She spake and then withdrew
In tears with heart grown alien from her brother, 2
While all those present said: “ This saintly lady, C. 1857 —
Our eloquent, clear-minded counsellor, |
Hath spoken, thou wouldst say, just like a book,
And is in wisdom greater than Jámásp."
Howbeit the thing displeased Bahram Chubina,
Who was in dudgeon at his sister's words,
And through long musing his distempered heart
Showed him the throne of kingship in his dreams.
He said: “ By toil alone aspirants win
This fleeting world.”
| He bade to spread the board,
And call for wine and harp and minstrelsy.
He told the minstrels; * Let your song to-day
Be of heroie deeds. I will not hear
Aught but the story of the Seven Stages ;
So while we revel sing the part wherein
Asfandiyár went to the Brazen Hold,
And of the game he played in that cempaign."'?
They drank much wine to him and eried : “ May
Rai
Be prosperous since such a chief as thou
1 Td. * See Vol. v. p. 143.


C. 1858


172 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Ariseth thence, and may God fashion more
Like thee." |

At night they went their several ways ;
The heads of all those topers were a-daze.


§ 26


Buhrám Chibina’s Letter to the Khan and how he coined
Money with the Name of Khusrau Parwiz and
sent i to IHurmuzd


Whenas the rising sun shot forth its beams,
And darksome night turned sickly at the glow,
The chief Bahram Chübina, that bold Wolf,
Bade the archscribe attend. They wrote the Khan
A letter that was worthy of the Artang,!
Perfumed?, illuminate and illustrate :—
* For grief, while asking pardon for mine acts,
My heart is full of sighing and remorse.
Henceforth I will not hurt thy country, land,
Or marches through regard for thee; and I,
If I become the monarch of the world,
Will be to thee as 'twere a younger brother.
Wash vengeance from thy heart and thou shalt know
No difference between Írán and Chín.
Take not to heart the past for God forgiveth
His slave. A thousand blessings on thy helm,
Upon thy sword and thy world-conquering hand.”

He spake much to the same effect, The envoy
Was in amaze at him, then trod earth’s face,
And bore the message to the Khan of Chin
By whom a gracious answer was returned :—
~ I for my part term thee magnanimous.”

' See Vol. ii. p. ro and note, * Reading with P.


HURMUZD 173


He sent Bahrám Chübína gifts that cheered
The heart.
This matter done, Bahram Chubina
Formed other plans, unlocked his hoarded treasures,
Gave his troops drachms, steeds, slaves, and privily
Aimed at the seat of sovereignty. He chose
Among the host a paladin, one fit
To be the prince of Khurásán, bestowed
That land on him with Nishápür and Balkh,
Marv and Harat, and troops withal, then went,
From Balkh to Rai, full of solicitude,
Upon the glorious Khurdad of Dat;
Took thought of great and small, then bade his men
Set up a mint and issue coins that bore
The superscription of Khusrau Parwiz.
He gave to merchants shrewd and plausible
Of speech, and fitted for the ticklish task,
Sacks of these new-coined drachms and said: “ Buy
up

Whatever ye can get in Taisafün
Of costly Rüm brocade with silken figures
Upon a ground of gold."

He meant to bring
That coinage to the notice of the king.


827

How Bahrám Chübína wrote to Hurmuzd and how
Khusrau Parwiz fled from his Father

Bahram Chibina chose a prudent envoy,

Strong as the blest Surush.* He wrote withal

A blustering letter and discoursed at large


* The previous section ends here in the original.


174 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


About Parmiida and king Sawa's host,

How he and his own troops had fought, the gift

That had been given to him by the Sháh—

That woman's coif and that black distaff-case—

Then said thus: “Thou wilt never more behold
me

Een in a dream so draw thy fish-hook up.!

While thine illustrious, high-fortuned son,

Khusrau Parwiz, is seated on the throne

At his command will I make mountains plains,

And deserts like Jíhün with foemen's blood.

Young though he be still he is fit to rule,

And faithful, not a faithless one like thee.

I have accepted him as king of kings,

And will henceforth be man to none beside.”

His wish was that the king should put to death
The son though innocent? because he feared *
Khusrau Parwiz, a young and charming prince."
The fortune-favoured envoy reached Baghdad
With men of name from Rai. Hurmuzd grew pale
As fenugreek when he received the letter,

Anon accounts of that new coinage reached him,
Which added grief to grief. He writhed, suspected
His son, and spake thus to Áyín Gashasp :—

“ Khusrau Parwiz hath grown so bold that le

Fain would revolt; moreover he hath struck

A brand-new coinage! Could he hold me cheaper ? "'

Ayin Gashasp replied: ** Be course and charger
Ne'er seen without thee. Though Khusrau Parwiz
Is thine own son he should be bound for this.”

Hurmuzd made answer: “ Presently will I
Remove this upstart.”

That ambitious lord
t Jamais, même en rêve, tu ne me verras porter sous le bras


du linge sortant de l'eau," Mohl.
* Couplet omitted. * Five couplets omitted.


HURMUZD 175


Thus answered him: “ May none prevail without
thee."

They called one privily by night and set him
Before the Shah who said: “ Perform my bidding,
And rid earth’s surface of Khusrau Parwiz."

He said: “I will, and charm love from my

heart,
So let the Shah assign me from his store
Bane, and some dark night when Khusrau Parwiz
Is drunken I will drug his wine. This way
Is better than to shed his blood.”
The son,
Unwitting that his ruin was proposed,
Sat in his palace gloriously, intent
On charming Idols and on pleasant wine,
And ignorant of all. A chamberlain
Heard of the plot, banned appetite and sleep,
Sped to Khusrau Parwiz and made all clear.
He, hearing that the monarch of the world
Was plotting secretly to slay him, fared
From Taisafün bv night, and thou hadst said :—
“ He vanished from the world.” He did not give
His priceless head away but reached apace
Azar Abadagin. When tidings came
To all the chiefs—the marchlords of that province :—


“ Khusrau Parwiz, aggrieved against the king, C. 1860
Hath fled with some few cavaliers,” those mag-
nates


Sought for the traces of that well loved prinee ;*
All went, both troops and chiefs, to make him


Shah.
They said: “O prince! crown, throne, and helm
befit thee,


And from fran and desert of the spearmen
As many of the swordsmen and brave leaders,
! Reading with P. t Three couplets omitted.


176 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


As thou mayst wish, will come to thee. Thy
Grace
Will lead the army on. Fear no disaster,
But live great, glad, and well beloved.! Although
Three hundred thousand horsemen of Iran
Shall mount the saddle to discomfit thee
We all will give our bodies to be slain
For thy sake and will honour those that fall.”
He said: “I fear the Shah and folk, ye chiefs !
Unless ye come before Azargashasp,
And take great oaths to assure me that henceforth
Ye will be loyal to me; then will I
Abide here in all confidence and fear
Not Ahriman.”
The warriors, when they heard
His words, all set forth for Azargashasp.
They took the oath thet he desired, protesting : —
* We hold thy love as precious as our eyes.
Assured about the chiefs he secretly
Sent agents everywhere to learn what ssid
His father of his flight and purposed next.
The Shah, on hearing that Khusrau Parwiz
Had fled, sent hastily to put Bandwi
And Gustaham in bondage as suspects ;
Both were the uncles of Khusrau Parwiz
Upon the mother's side and heroes bold.
All others of his kin beside these two
They also haled to ward without to-do.


‘Two couplets omitted.


HURMUZD 177


g 28
How Hurmuzd sent Ayin Gashasp with an Army to
fight Bahrdm Chiibina and how he was slain by his
Comrade


Then to Ayin Gashasp thus spake the Shah ;— C. 1861
"Ilack advice and sorrow is my mate.
Now that my son hath gone how shall we treat
Bahram Chubina, that slight, self-willed slave ? ”
Ayin Gashasp sought an expedient
To make his counsel gracious and replied :—
" Exalted Sháh ! Bahrám Chübína oft
Hath spoken of me and of all things he
Desireth most my blood for I was first
To vex him privily, and to dispatch me
In fetters to him may prove serviceable.”
The Shah made answer: “ This is not my work,
But miscreant Ahriman’s. I will dispatch
A host; be thou its leader and prevail ;
But send him first one of our counsellors
To learn his purpose. Fortune, if he seeketh
Power, crown, and throne, will turn from him at last,
While if he shall remain a loyal liege
"Twill be the better for him in the end.
Him will I give a portion of the world,
And set upon his head the heroes’ crown.
The world hath searcely such a warrior,
But, though like Rustam, he is still my thrall.
Inform me of his doings every whit ;
Proceed with diligence; cut short the way.”
The order given by the prudent Shah
Ayin Gashasp obeyed.
There was a captive,
And fellow-citizen of his, within


VOL. VIII, M


C. 1862


i - d A
m hl
ers -*-
^^ 33 7E
2. ("UP SS


à
178 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The roval prison, eager for release.
On hearing that Ayin Gashasp, the horseman,
Was going to the war he sent to say :-
“ O battle-loving warrior! Iam
Thy fellow-citizen and now in prison.
Thou art acquainted with my quality.
I, if thou wilt but beg me from the king,
Will fare with thee on this campaign and risk
My life before thee when I am released
From this strait prison-house."
Ayin Gashasp

Thereat sent to the monarch of the world
A man in haste to say: “ There is in bonds
A fellow-citizen of mine in fear
And peril who will go with me if now
The Shah will grant him pardon for my sake."

The Sháh replied : * How should this uscless wretch
Fight in the front of thee ? Thou pleadest for
A murderer, a scamp, and thief! Dost thou
Look for reward ? -Still I have now no choice
Though 'twere the greatest of calamities.”

He gave Ayin Gashasp that man compact
Of ill, that villain, thief, and murderer,
And then Ayin Gashasp led forth the host,
And marched like wind as far as Hamadan,
Where he encamped and asked: “Is any one
Skilled in astrology or presages
Within this noble city ? "


All replied :—

Our readers of the stars shall come before thee,
And earn thy praise.”

An old, officious townsman
Came bustling up and said: “ There is a dame
Both old and rich here, and thou mightest say :
‘She is the stars’ eye.’ What she saith is so;
Her prophecies will surely come to pass.”


HURMUZD 179


Avin Gashasp, on hearing this, dispatched
One with a horse for her and when she came
He asked her how the Shah fared and of him
Who led the host, then added: “ Bring thy lips
Close to mine ear and tell me if mv soul
Will quit my swarthy body in its bed,

Or wounded by the weapon of a foe ? "

While thus he spake of secrets to the erone
With voice so low that none could overhear them
The man for whom he had obtained release,

And taken as companion on the journey,
Approached and, as he passed by that sage dame,
Looked at the general and went his way.
The ancient dame inquired: ‘* What man is that ?
A blow of his will make one weep for thee.
Thy dear life lieth in his hand, and may
He perish, skin and marrow ! "

At her words
Ayin Gashasp recalled a former presage,
Which he had heard from readers of the stars
But had forgotten. Thus it ran: “ Thy fate
Shall be in thy eompanion's hand—a man
Both mean and poor—who will go far with thee,
And in return for friendship shed thy blood.”

He gave her presents and dismissed her quickly,
But could not sleep or eat for care. He wrote
A letter to the Shih: “The man whom I
send back should not have been released for he
Is worse than dragon’s spawn, and so the Shih
Informed his slave who lacked the imperial Grace.
When this man cometh bid the ill-disposed* C. 1863
Behead him instantly."

He wrote and set


! The divine insight pertaining to lawful kingship.
' The executioner, according to Mohl, but execution sometimes
was embittered by being entrusted to the hands of a private enemy.


180 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I


His seal thereon. When it was dry he called
His fellow-citizen, much lauded him,
Bestowing gifts and many hearty blessings,
Then said: “ Convey this letter unperceived
And quickly to the monarch of the world.
Bring his reply to me with all dispatch,
And see that thou remain not with the king.”
The young man took the letter from the chief ;
His mind was all surmises at that mission,
And thus he said: “I have endured enough
Of prison, heavy bonds, and want of food ;
But God delivered me from my distress,
From grief, affliction, and mine evil fortune ;
Yet now that I return to Taisafün
My blood and marrow seethe.”
He journeyed sadly
Awhile, then broke the letter open, read it,
And marvelled at the process of the world.
He said: “ My neighbour begged my life and urged :—
‘The act is worthy of the prince, so how
Should he be now insistent for my blood
Unless some dream hath moved him to this ill ?
But now to bloodshed he shall see the way, -
And rest from travail and endeavouring |”
He turned back musing, went as swift as wind,
And on arrival found the chief alone.
Ávin Gashasp was seated in his tent,
Without attendant, scimitar, and steed
Absorbed in thinking on the king and all
That fortune might inflict upon himself.
Now when his neighbour came within his tent
Ayin Gashasp knew that he proposed bloodshed.
The murderer drew his scimitar; the chief
Implored him much and said : ** Deluded one !
Did not I beg thy lost life from the Sháh ?
The other answered : “ Granted. What have I


HURMUZD IBI


Done that thou shouldst deal ill with me ? "
He smote
That noble chief across the neck, determined
His fighting and his feasting, and bore off
His bloody head unnoticed from the tent.
Let him that seeketh honour never be
Alone, in war-time more especially.
The miscreant left the murdered in his blood,!
Sped to Bahrám Chibina and exclaimed :—
" See thy foe's head—the man’s who sought to harm


thee !
He marched against thee, knowing not thy purpose."
Bahrám Chübína asked: '"* Who is it? Who C. 1864


Will mourn this head ?”
He said: “ Ayin Gashasp,
The cavalier, who left the court for war.”
Bahrám Chubina said: “The man was good,
And he had come from court to reconcile
The Shah and us, and thou hast ta’en his head
While sleeping! Now will I requite thee so
That folk shall sore bewail thee.”
He bade set
A gallows at the door in sight of all,
And gibbeted the wretch alive, thus rousing
The hearts of evil-doers. Many horsemen
Brought by Áyín Gashasp from court sought out
Bahrám Chübina when their chief had perished,
While many others sought Khusrau Parwiz,
And some the Shah. A flock will stray just so
Un-herded on a day of wind and snow.


t Or with Mohl: "Il sentit que le sang versé le rendait infime."


C. 1865


132 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ 29


How Hurmuzd grieved, refused Audience to the Franians,
and was blinded by Bandwi and Gustaham


When tidings reached the king of that famed hero,
Ayin Gashasp, he shut the gate of audience
For grief; none saw him too with wine in hand ;
He could not rest or eat or sleep; his eyes
Were full of tears. At court the talk ran much
Upon the Shah and his secluded state.
One said: “ Bahrám Chübína seeketh fight,
Desirous of the throne of majesty.”
- Another said: “ Aggrieved against the Shah
Khusrau Parwíz is marching on Írán.”
Confounded at the case the warriors
Each held a different view, and as the bruit
Arose from Taisafün the monarchy
Lost credit while its servants' heads were full
Of grief and wrath, preferring eurse to blessing.
Few troops remained about the gate; the world
Grew strait to the Sháh's heart.
Then tidings reached
Bandwi and Gustaham : ** The Grace of kingship
Is darkened." |
All the eaptives loosed their bonds,
And sent forth one to ascertain and learn
What warriors' kept the portal of the Sháh,
And having learned rebelled, threw off restraint,
And broke from ward; shouts rose that shook the
plain ;
The garrison were left remediless.
Appeared Bandwi and Gustaham in mail
With troops in arms. The cavaliers forthwith,


HURMUZD 183


All unabashed, rode hot-foot to the court,*
And gallant Gustaham harangued the troops :—
“This is no trivial case, for if ye join

With us ye must ban reverence for the Shah.
If ye will all gird up your loins in vengeance
For those Iranian chiefs, because Hurmuzd
Hath turned upon the innocent, henceforth
Hail him not, Shah; we will requite his deed,
And‘ turn for him the waters of Iran

To colocynth. We will direct your course,
And set a new Shah on his throne. If ye
Show weakness we will leave [ran to you:

A corner of the world will do for us,

And thither with our comrades will we go.”

The whole throng at the words of Gustaham
Began to curse the Shah’s peace and exclaimed :—
“Down with a king that sheddeth his son's blood!”

The troops thus heartened fired the palace-gate,
Made entry of the imperial hall, and reached
The presence of the Sháh, that man of Grace.
When they had ta'en his erown and flung him head-

long
Down from his throne they set upon his eves
The searing irons, and the radiant Lamps
Were darkened. Then they suffered him to live,
And gave his treasure shamefully to spoil.

Such are the doings of the exalted sky !

Affect not thou this Wayside Hostelry,
Wherefrom we have our whiles of wealth and woe,
And in the end must quit them both and go.

The hundredth and the huhdred thousandth year
As soon as they are numbered disappear.

The man by whom good fortune would be won
Must speak no evil and must list to none.’


' Couplet omitted.
t In C. and FP. the reign ends here.


184 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


$30
How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Blinding of Hurmuzd


c. 1866 Then Gustaham sent to Azargashasp
One with two roadsters to Khusrau Parwiz
In haste by night with tidings from Iran.
The messenger approached the youthful Shah
(The moon was one night old) and told what he
Had heard of or had seen in that revolt.
The young prince paled like flower of fenugreek,
And cried: “ Whoever quitteth wisdom’s ways,
Obeying impulse through his lack of knowledge,
And fearless of the process of high heaven,
His life will profit not. If I found pleasure
In this thy tale of ill my food and sleep
Would turn to fire, but though, what time my father
Set hand to blood, I could no longer dwell
Within fran yet I am still his slave,
And hearken to his words.”

All seared at heart

He marched his host as swift as fire for fear
Lest that world-winner, great Bahram Chibina,
Should get the start of him, and so he led
His men from Barda’ and from Ardabil,
Troop after troop, while from Armenia
A power sped with the Shah’s son swift as wind.
‘As soon as tidings of him reached Baghdad :—
“ The claimant of the throne of might hath come,”
The folk were all contented, and thereby
The atheling accomplished his desire, —
The great men of the city—those that shared
The general joy—went out to welcome him,
Then going to the dwelling of the Shah
Discoursed at large, and he approved their words.


They set an ivory throne upon the dais


With golden torque and with a sumptuous cro’
That many a Shah had worn : it had beheld
No lack upon the state. Khusrau Parwiz

Made entry of the city mouri
And visited his father with a sigh.


* There is no break here in the original.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ
HE REIGNED THIRTY-EIGHT YEARS
ARGUMENT


The deposition of Hurmuzd leaves Khusran Parwiz and
Bahrám Chubina rivals for the throne. After abortive nego-
tiations Khusrau Parwiz is compelled to flee to Ram and


Hurmuzd is put to death. On the way to Rim Khusrau


Parwiz is saved from capture by the devotion of his maternal


uncle Bandwi. Bahrim -Chibina assumes the crown and ý ?


frustrates a plot against himself. Khusrau Parwiz is well
received in Rum, is given Cresar's daughter in n mring , and
returns to Írán with a Rüman army. He is joined |
and others. After a severe str rusas Bahráin s Ys i 5
forced to take refuge with the Khán of Chín i in whose service
he greatly distinguishes himself but as he i is preparing to ii 7
vade Irán his death is compassed by Kharrá
at the instigation of Khusrau Parri. The Khan avenges
Bahrám Chübína whose sister, Gurdya, he asks in marriage. —
Gurdya escapes with her brother's partisans to frán. Khusrau


Parwiz to avenge his father puts to death Bandwi whose


brother Gustaham rebels and marries Gurdya. She murders. |
her husband at the instigation of Khusrau Parwiz who marries


her himself and accords pardon to her adherents. He treats


the city of Rai harshly but relents at-her request. He organizes


the realm. Maryam, Cwsar's daughter, gives birth to Shirwi


(Kubád) on which occasion Cesar asks for the return of the
True Cross but is refused. The poet then tells of the case of
the fair Shirin, who murders Maryam, and that of Barbad,
the minstrel, and of the greatness of Khusrau Parwiz. Sh

iş imprisoned, but the troops at length revolt and release him.
Khusrau Parwiz is dethroned and put in ward.


186


"sun of Dati, d


Lido k-


fur
bp


Nar


=
>


KHUSRAU PARWIZ


NOTE

Khusrau Parwiz (Chosroes II, A.D. 590-628) was contem-
porary with three Eastern Roman Emperors—Maurice (A.D.
582-602), Phocas (A.D. 602-610), and Heraclius (A.D. 610-
642). The word ' Parwíiz'" seems to be a variant of the
Persian word * Pírüz" which means “ victorious.” Certainly
Khusrau Parwiz did more to justify such a title than any
Shih since the days of Darius Hystaspis. Egypt and the
whole of the Roman possessions in Asia fell into his hands,
and Persian troops were encamped wthin a mile of Constanti-
E The genius of Heraclius, however, at length turned the
On all these great events the Sháhnáma is silent and.

is bulk of the material of the reign is made up from the
Romance of Bahrám Chübína! which le leaves his sister, Gurdya,
firmly established in the favour of Khusrau Parwiz though
with Shirin in the neighbourhood it seems doubtful whether
she would be allowed to retain her position long.* The reign.
ia the last great one of the poem and towards the end of it

" bad begins, and worse remains behind."

$4. Tabarí also states that the meeting between Khusrau
Parwiz and Bahrám Chibina took place on the Nahrawin.*

$5. The proverb is in the Persian Tabari but is spoken by
Khusrau Parwiz when about to combat with three Turks.*
See below.

$$ 6-7. In the Persian Tabari the three Turks are encoun-
tered by Khusrau Parwiz after his return from Rúm," not as
here and in Tabari.*

$8. * Thou shalt not kill but need'st not strive

Officiously to keep alive."

robably about represents the share of responsibility that
Khüstsn Parwiz had in his fathers murder. Bandwi and
Gustaham were his maternal uncles,

$9. According to the Persian Tabarí Bahrám, the son of
Biváwush, had married Bahrám Chübina's niece.*

Firdausí's description of Khusrau Parwiz' place of refuge is
somewhat grandiloquent. It appears to have been a hermi-
tage* or monastery
£$ I2. For the wife of Rete: son of Siydawush, see above.


t See p. 72. i ! Cf. pp. 364, 389. ! NI, pp. 274, 273.
+ ZT, du. 292. D Pp. 291. * NT, pp. 274, 280.
' ZT, ii. 283. * Id. 280. "NI, p. 281.


188 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Mausil, prince of Mish, was a member of the Mamigonian
family, celebrated in. Armenian history.! AS

$13. Khusrau Parwiz, on quitting Ctesiphon in his flight,
crossed the Euphrates and went to Ambar, thence followed the
course of the stream and recrossing it reached the Roman
frontier-station of Cireesium. Subsequently at the invitation of
the Emperor Maurice he took up his residence at Hierapolis.*

According to the Persian Tabari the Arab was Ijás, son of
Kabisa, He was one of the chiefs of the Bani Tayy tribe?
famous for its hospitality. He was made governor of Hira by
Khusrau Parwíz after the execution of Nu'mán, the last prince
of the dynasty, and commanded the Persians at the battle
of Dhü Kár.! The Persian Tabarí omits the meeting with the
merchant.

Kársán looks like a Persian form of Circesium but is a
shortened form of Káristán, a busy place. The miracle is not
in the Persian Tabarí. |

Warigh, as appears from the account in the Persian Tabari,*
was Rakka (Nicephorium, Callinicus) now in ruins. Some
miles to the south-west of it lay the city of Reseph or Rasafa,
also now in ruins, in which was the shrine of the celebrated
Saint Sergius who with his consort Saint Bacchus suffered
martyrdom under Maximian. The town was in consequence
known as Sergiopolis. Either from a genuine but temporary
impulse or from policy Khusrau Parwíz during his exile in
Rim much affected Christianity, adopted Sergius as his patron
Saint and after recovering his throne still continued to send
gifts to, and ask favours of, that shrine. Tabari makes Sergius
the leader of the Roman army that effected the restoration of
Khusrau Parwiz* In the Sháhnáma the hermit —Sergrus.

$17. The terms on which the Emperor Maurice agreed
to help Khusrau Parwíz included the cession of Dárá, Martyro-
polis, and perhaps Nisibis? Western authorities are silent
about the marriage of the Emperor's daughter Maryam to
Khusrau Parwíz, but Nóldeke points out that Shirwi's pre-
eminence at the Persian court is best explained by the assump-


! Id. 285, RSM, 319. * NT, p. 282 note, RSM, P. 480 and mote.

' ZT, ii. 286 * NT, p. 333 seg. ZT, ii. pp. 286, 318 seq.

- £T, ii. 288, For Dhà Kár see p. 190.

* See NT, p. 284 and note, ZT, ii. 288, GDF, v, 375 and mofe, RSM,
.P- 497 and mofe,

' NT, p. 285 note, RSM, p. 482 and mole, GDF, v. 375 and mole.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 1509


tion that his mother was a princess. Shirin, who naturally
was antagonistie to him in the interests of her own son, Mar-
dánsháh, was unable to prevail against him.!

$$ 19-20. "These are not in the Persian Tabari.

$21. The army lent to Khusrau Parwiz bv the Emperor
was commanded by Narses, à Persian in the Roman service,
an able general who was afterwards cruelly put to death by
Phocas. Niyátüs (Theodosius) was the seven years old son,
and so described in the Persian Tabari,” of Maurice and had
already been crowned by the Emperor. He may have accom-
panied Narses.*

$23. The mission of Dari Pandh is not in the Persian
Tabarí.

$$ 24-26. Historically the events of the campaign seem to
have been briefly as follows :— Khusrau Parwiz with his Roman
allies marched to the lesser Zab in order to effect a junction
with his native and Armenian supporters with whom were
his two uncles and Mausil. Bahrim Chibina vainly tried
to prevent this. He then offered battle with his back to the
Zagros mountains but was compelled to retreat to higher
ground where Khusrau Parwiz attacked him against the opinion
of Narses, who, however, with his Roman troops saved the
situation when Khusrau Parwiz was in imminent danger of
disaster. This incident appears as the intervention of Surüsh
in the Sháhnáma.* In the meantime a detachment of the
allied forces had occupied Seleucia and Ctesiphon. The out-
come of the situation was that Bahrám Chübína retreated
through the mountains in his rear to the neighbourhood of
Takht-i-Sulaimán in order to maintain his communications
with Rai and eastern Irin generally. He was pursued and
after a further retirement was defeated decisively and escaped
with the remnant of his forces by way of Rai and Dámaghán
to the Turks.

§27. The Persian Tabari lays the scene with the car-
line in the neighbourhood of Hamadin. Thence Bahram
Chübina proceeds to Kai and Dámaghán. He then defeats a
mountain-chief named Karan and takes him prisoner but
releases him.*


! NT, p. 283 note, RSM, p. 504 nole. * GDF, v. 373 and mole, 391.
a ZT, Hd. 29r. ‘NY, p. 284 mole,
' See p. 299. * ZT, il. p. 296 seg.


je
A
IA a
L]


t
-e
i=
-_-
Fe
i i
mi -=
læ
ie


i Mi ena

pF att t 4 T P A
Cos Ih ey + VRON m
DOOR iQ OR Page


Persian court all Nu'mán's effects. The Arab chief, Háni


* - i —
L4 i F, P, P-- j^ aM x '
a 2d i y
sof
" X.


a
—— fe 4
k


t
i Y J y M E
> FE vi
2 €


190 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§30. According to Sdsinian usage Khusrau Parwiz in- -
augurates his reign by visiting the Fire-temple at Shíz.! — — f
$31. The death of Firdausís son took place apparently — -
about A.D. 1004. -
$32. In the Persian Tabari the name of the chief that
domineered over the Khan was Paighü—the word used for the


k


races of the north in Dakikí's portion of the Sháhnáma.! He
was the Khán's brother and claimed to have a better title — —
to the throne? | "112
$324. In the Persian Tabari it is a bear that carries of |
the Khán's daughter and Bahrám Chübína rescues her. — ——
$37. Inthe Persian Tabarí the queen is concerned directly —
in the murder of Bahrám Chübína, She is heavily bribed and
provides the assassin.5 So too in Tabarí* — E
$39. The crafty Kharrád, son of Barzin, as Firdausi calls — —
him, but whose real name was Hurmuzd Garabzín or Galab-.
zin, may be identical with the chief who commanded one of the
Persian wings at the battle of Dhú Kár? and was killed,’ but
according to the Sháhnáma he was alive at the accession of -
Kubad (Shirwi). "—
The battle of Dhü Kár, though the forces engaged in it do
not appear to have been large, was a very memorable affair.
The events that led up to it are given at length in Tabari. It
will be sufficient to say here that a long series of intrigues re-
sulted in the execution of Nu'mán bin Munzir by order of.
Khusrau Parwiz. This ended the dynasty of the princes of
Hira, and Ijds bin Kabisa” was appointed the Persian governor
by the Shih who ordered him to collect and dispatch to the


bin Mas’ad, who had been entrusted with them refused to give
them up. Khusrau Parwiz instructed ljás to enforce com-
pliance, and the battle of Dhü Kár, in which the Persians were
overthrown, followed. Where Dhü Kár was is not clear but
it was not far from the Euphrates and Küfa, and had an all
the year round water-supply which made it a great resort of
the Arab tribes in the summer at which season the battle was
fought. The Arabs celebrated their victory with songs of
triumph, and its results and those of the Persian policy that


: T. i. p. 6o. * Vol. v. p. 21 and note, * ZT, ii. 302.


, i s Id. 3031. * NT, * 289.
' See below. * NT, pp. 289 and sote, 335 mole, 33 41.
«Cf Le note, 335 nole, 338, 341, 342


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 101


led up to it were very important. The destruction of the
dynasty of the princes of Hira, which had formed a buffer-
state between the Persians and the Arabs, was a political
blunder. The defeat was a display of weakness on the part
of the Persians in a region at no great distance from their own
capital. It gave the Arabs independence, encouraged them
to make raids into Persian territory, and was a glorious and
stimulating memory with which tradition soon associated
Muhammad himself when the time came for the great Arab
invasion of [rin. For these reasons the battle called for some
notice here although there is no mention of it in the Shihnima.
It was fought some time between A.D. 604-610.!

$§ 40-42. According to Tabari the Khan wished to marry
Gurdya to his brother who ues and is killed by her.*

§§ 4447. On these see NT, p. 478 sey. The story of the
revolt of Gustaham seems only to be known from various

versions of the Romance of Bahram Chübína. Bandwi ap-
pears to have been killed early in the reign about the year
A.D. 591. Gustaham rebelled shortly afterwards and held
out till about A.D. 595,

$52. Shírwi seems to have been Khusrau Parwíiz eldest
son but who his real mother was is unknown.? His troubles
with his father sprang from Shírin's ambition on behalf of her
own son, Mardánsháh.!

$$ 53-54. According to the Sháhnáma the Cross had been
long indeed in the possession of the Persians. Here the carry-
ing off is attributed to Ardshir not Dáráb.* Histori
they took it when they captured Jerusalem in A.D. 614.* [^
was given back as one of the terms of peace between Heraclius
and Kubád (Shíirwi) in A.D. 628.

The statement that Jesus laughed upon the Cross is a corol-
lary from the notion, common among the Gnostics, that he was
not really crucified but some one in his stead. The more accur-
ate form of the statement would be that quoted in Fhotius
from a work called “ The Journeys (or Circuits) of the Apostles”
('AxosróhwrTleploBo) viz., that Christ was not crucified but
another in his place, and that therefore he laughed at the
crucifiers (The Xpurràw js oravpethjea: "akA' frepor ‘arr’ “avrov, kal
warzryskür Bià révro Ter reptera Muhammad in the Kurán


! See for the above generally NT, p. 310 se4. and motes, ZT, ii. 309 seg.


* NT, p.289. ' Cf. p. 188. * NT, p. 357, mote.
i Vol. v. p. 306, and nole. * NT, p. 291 nole. " BPB, cod. 114.


> a
f but


E h Ha


192 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


adopted this view which of course became the belief of his
followers :—' They slew him not and they crucified him not,
but they had only his likeness."?

§56. Shirin has been described by different authorities
as of Roman, Greek, Armenian, and Persian descent, She
has been identified also with Maryam, the problematical wife
of Khusrau Parwíz—a view that receives no support from
the Sháhnáma. There is a general agreement that she was a
Christian. According to the Sháhnáma the association of
Khusrau Parwiz with Shirin began during his father's lifetime.
This is affirmed also in some accounts quoted by Mir Khánd
according to which Shirin was in the service of a Persian noble
at whose house Khusrau Parwiz in his youth occasionally
visited. There he saw Shirin, fell in love with her, and gave
hera ring. The noble got to know of what was going on and
ordered a servant to drown her, She saved herself, however,
with the servant's connivance and took refuge with a hermit.
After Khusrau Parwiz became Shah she got the ring conveyed
to him, and he carried her off to Madá'im in great state.* If
Shirin really managed to retain her influence over Khusrau
Parwiz for the best part of a lifetime she must have been pos-
sessed of a very exceptional personality. The devotion to
her of her lover, Farhad, is celebrated in Nizimis poem of
" Khusrau and Shírin" (A.D. 1180). Farhád, famous for
his architectural and engineering skill, seems to be an histori-
cal character. To him with some probability may be attri-
buted the responsibility for Khusrau Parwiz’ triumphal arch
at Takht-i- Büstán* near Kirmánsháh and his palace at Mashíta
(Mashetta) some twenty-five miles due east of the northern
end of the Dead Sea. The date of the construction of this
palace, of which the exquisitely carved stone facade is now
in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum at Berlin, however, is still
disputed.* Farhád is not mentioned in the Sháhnáma. In
the Persian Tabari Shirin is stated to have been a Greek, to
have predeceased Khusrau Parwiz, and to have been loved
by Farhád, but it is not said that she was in love with him.*
Firdausí does not suggest that she was of other than Persian


' KE, p. 551 and mofe.. Cf. SK, k 62 and motes, 116 and notes,

Cf p. 195. = RM, Pt. L Vol. i. p. 399.

* For an illustration see PCHAP, p. 135.

" A general view of the ruins, as they were, and a detail of the orma-
mentation, are given in RSM, p. 594 seg. * ZT, ii. 304.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 193


origin, and she is said to have been a native of Khüzistán.!
Her name is derived from the Persian word for milk “ shir”
and so comes to mean “ sweet.”

$957. X somewhat similar story is told of the Egyptian
Amasis by Herodotus.*

§ 58. The murder of Maryam by Shirin is on the face of it
a poetical fiction suggested by the known enmity felt by Shirin
with regard to Shirwi who, as a parricide to be, is here repre-
sented in an unfavourable light. His imprisonment probably
was brought about by Shirin in the interests of her own son
Mardánsháh and nearly had the effect desired.*

$60. In the Persian Tabari Sarkash is called Sergius.‘

$61. The palace here referred to must be the Takht-i-
Khusrau whose facade and vast hall on the left bank of the
Tigris some twenty-five miles below Baghdád form the finest
remains of Sásánian architecture. The palace, however, seems
to have been built not in the days of Khusrau Parwiz but in
those of his grandfather Nüshírwán and, as Firdausi states,
a Rüman architect may have been employed.* Khusrau Par-
wiz from about the time of the outbreak of the Roman war
(A.D. 603), after the murder of the Emperor Maurice by Phocas
till nearly the end of his reign, held his court at Dastagird
not at Ctesiphon." |

$8 63-65. The reign of Khusrau Parwiz bears a considerable
resemblance to that of Assurbanipal (B.C. 668-626). Their
seats of government were on the same historic stream—Dasta-
gird and Madáin in the former case, Nineveh and Chalah
in the latter. Both reigns were long and the last great ones
of their respective dynasties, The wars of both monarchs
covered much the same ground—Syna, Armenia, Asia Minor
and Egypt. In both cases a season of military brilliancy and
territorial expansion was followed by one of cumulative dis-
aster. In both cases the national resources were over-strained
and in both cases the subsequent collapse came with startling
suddenness.

The account given by Firdausi of the causes that led to the
fall of Khusrau Parwiz and of the fall itself may be amplified
from other authonties thus :—In A.D. 626 the Sásánian Em-
pire, though it had suffered shrewd blows in the previous


==


! NT, p. 283 nole, '* RH, Bk. ii, ch. 172. ' p.195. * ZT, ii. 305.


* For an illustration of the ruins see RSM, frontispiece.
* Sec p. 194.
VOL. VIII. as


194 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


campaigns of Heraclius, was still after nearly a quarter of a
century of warfare far from being worsted. It was not Khusrau
Parwiz but Heraclius that made several vain attempts to
bring about peace. The Persian army under Shahrbaráz
(the Guráz of Firdausi) still occupied Chalcedon, divided only
by a mile, but an impassable mile, of sea from Constantinople.
The Persians had good cause to deplore their lack of sea-power.
To get over this difficulty they made arrangements for a mixed. -
horde of Avars, Slavs, and other tribea, who had no straits
to cross, to attack Constantinople. That city was besieged
accordingly but proved impregnable to the resources of the
barbarians. Heraclius, meanwhile, contented himself with
operations in Lazica but his brother, Theodore, worsted the
Persians in Asia Minor. In this connexion we have an in-
stance of the way in which Khusrau Parwiz treated his un-
successful generals. The defeat of the Persians on the occasion
in question seems largely to have been due to the effects of a
severe hail-storm. Khusrau Parwiz, however, was very wroth
and when the Persian commander died of despondency shortly
afterwards he had the body embalmed and sent to him to be
maltreated.! In A.D. 627 Heraclius determined on a Winter-
campaign against his enemy's capital. He defeated the
Persians near Nineveh on December 12th and then marched on
Dastagird, some seventy miles above Ctesiphon, where Khusrau
Parwiz had held his court for the previous twenty years in
consequence, it is said, of a prediction made to him when
besieging Dárá in the days of the Emperor Phocas that he
would perish on the next occasion that he entered Ctesiphon.*
Nevertheless he retreated thither, abandoning Dastagird to
its fate, and then crossed the Tigris to Bih-Andshir (Seleucia),
taking with him Shirin, two sons of his by her, and three
daughter-wives. His eldest son, Shirwi, and his other sons
were in internment at 'Akr Bábil, a state-prison near Babylon.*
At Bih-Ardshir the Shah armed his personal attendants etc.
and sent them to reinforce the defeated Persian army which had
made no effective stand since the battle of Nineveh. These
combined forces, with two hundred elephants, took up their
position on the river Arba, a short distance from Ctesiphon
and broke down the bridges. On January 7th A.D. 628
Heraclius advanced from Dastagird, which he had devastated,


i CTC, VoL i. p. 485. ! Jd. pp. 494, 496 * Id. 496, 499.
* NT, p. 356 and mote. * CIC, p. 498.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 105


and three days later encamped within twelve miles of the Arba.
He sent George, the leader of the Armenian contingent, to
reconnoitre the Persian position and on his report retreated
northwards to the neighbourhood of Lake Urumiah where
he passed the rest of the Winter. Shortly before he had made
another of his appeals to Khusrau Parwiz for an accommoda-
tion: “T follow thee and am instant for peace, for I do not of
mine own will consume Persia with fire but because I am
forced thereto by thee. Now therefore let us throw down
our arms and welcome peace. Let us put out the fire before
allis burned." The Sháh refused the offer to the exasperation
of his people! with whom he was already very unpopular be-
cause, according to Tabarí, he despised them and trented their
great men without regard, had given the barbarian Farruk-
hánzád, son of Sumai, power over them, and ordered the
execution of the captives, and intended to put to death the
Persian troops defeated by Heraclius. He had also, it seems,
sent instructions for the putting to death of the Persian general
Shahrbardz, but the bearer of the letter was taken by the
Romans. Heraclius informed Shahrbaráz who falsified the
letter by making the order apply to forty other chiefs as well
as to himself and read out the dispatch as altered to the as-
sembled Persian leaders. In their wrath they renounced their
allegiance to Khusrau Parwiz, made terms of peace with
Heraclius, and decided to quit Chalcedon and return home?
Khusrau Parwiz also had managed to offend his native Christ-
ian subjects, In earlier days he had been disposed favourably
towards them, and we have seen how he placed himself under
the special protection of 8, Sergius,* while his wife, Shirin,
was a Christian of the Nestorian persuasion. She was, how-
ever, lured over to the Monophysites and used her influence
against the Nestorians who in consequence were not allowed
to choose a Catholicus. A very highly esteemed Nestorian
named Yazdin was chief tax-collector, After his death Khus-
rau Parwiz seized his property and did not bestow by way
of compensation the vacant post on Yazdín's son, Shamtá,
who also was a Nestorian and afterwards took a prominent
part in the revolt against the Shah. Towards the end of the
reign the Monophysites also had cause for complaint against


a fd.
* NT, p. 356. The prisoners are said to have numbered 36,000.
* CTC, i. 497. * p. 188,


= i Ms hea
bo
YAE

'
z^.


v]


t


WO UN


-


196 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI al


Khusrau Parwiz. Generally: epee King, too, all Christians must
kai bon horrified at the sack of Jerusalem and the carrying
off of the True Cross! There was therefore no lack of dis-
content throughout the army and nation emari: The


retreat of Heraclius, however, at a moment when t at
seemed threatened with imminent peril, might have staved
off matters for a while had it not been for the question of the
succession. It is said that See reves he fled from
Dastagird to Ctesiphon was suffering from dysentery and
wished to secure the crown for his son Mardasas (Mardanshah),

the offspring of Shirin® Shírwi, the Sháh's eldest son, who
was in internment with many of his brothers, was therefore in

a situation of imminent peril A conspiracy was formed to
make him Shah and rescue the captives in the prisons. Among

the conspirators were two sons of Shahrbaráz, Shamtá, son of
Yazdín, and Mihr Hurmuzd, the son of a former governor of
Nimriz who had fallen a victim to Khusrau Parwiz jealous
suspicions." A party of the nobles hastened to 'Akr Bábil

and brought Shirwi by night to Bih-Ardshir (Seleucia) wheres

at the bridge of boats, which it would be important to seize, —
he was met by others of the conspirators. The prisons were —
thrown open, and that night Khusrau Parwiz heard the shouts —
that hailed Shirwi as * Kubád pacino When one e :
approached the palace in the early morning the roya ly:
ania fled and Bases Parwiz escaped into his garden which t
was called “ The Garden of the Indians " but was discovered
shortly and taken prisoner. The date, according to our reckon-
ing, was February 25th, A.D. 628.4


$1
The Prelude


Of heaven's dome revolving rapidly,
And ever restless in its instancy,
What shall I say ? It giveth one a crown,
Another to the fishes in the sea ;
* See for the above NT, pp. 357. 383 and mofes. * CTC. i. 499. E


' NT, p. 379 and wofte.  Noldeke does not consider the execution of
the governor historical. * Id. p. 356.


af VS
T
ei: KHUSRAU PARWIZ
"To one man naked hands and head and feet, C. 1867. —
No where to dwell in and no while to eat,
And to another beaver-skin, brocade,
And silk, with milk and honey for his meat.
The end of both, ensnared in bale's dark net,
Is in the dust, and had the sage ne'er set |
x Eyes on the world, nor passed through days of strife a
— As lord or liege, his lot were happier yet.


i


I treat the matter of Khusrau Parwiz,
And proffer to the reader novelties.?


» g^ js

Au
W

= à 1


" i x
j in
E M. wi.
t +


.


if


joe FT ms
EA


a


$2


How Khusrau Parwiz sat upon the Throne and made
an Oration


Whenas Khusrau Parwiz sat on the throne

Of gold the men of noble birth repaired
To him. They summoned all the chiefs and showered
Gems over that new crown. He thus addressed

© "The archmages: “ No one save the fortunate

— — an win this crown and throne. May mine employ
— — Be right alone for from injustice cometh

— Allloss, We purpose well to all. Our head

|» — Js void of evil-doing. This new throne,

And this new fortune bright and opulent,

Are mine from God. Do ye withal incline

Your hearts to obey and covenant with us

To observe three things in all contingencies :

To harm not holy men, not to rebel,


$4 406


fv
i


Lg tt


VITLIEE ef


E


e hes


wees Pennie


! There is no break here in the original.


C. 1868


198 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍI


And to abstain from others’ goods forwhy

The pang will pass to him that did the wrong,

Whene’er it chanced, and sold his heart for naught.

Now must your hands be washed from things like
these,

The path of right ensued. Moreover wisdom

Approveth what accordeth best to manhood.

I have no difference with any one

Although such sought my crown and signet-ring.

The man of high birth and of noble nature

Will speak but right. Your safety is assured :

I will not work the works of Áhriman."

All those that heard the Shah blessed crown and

throne,

And going forth rejoicing praised his fortune,

While he descended from the throne of might

Right glad and mused upon Hurmuzd all night.


83


How Khusrau Parwiz visited his Father and asked
Forgiveness


Now when the ebon Veil had disappeared,

And in the distance cock-crow reached the ear,

The winner of the world with stricken heart,

And deeply sorrowful, approached his sire,

On seeing him lamented, did obeisance,

And tarried long with him. Khusrau Parwiz,
Beholding his sire’s face, sighed deeply, kissed

His eyes and head and feet, then said to him

With full heart and with face all wet with tears :—
“ My father, fortune’s mate, thou memory

Of Nishirwin! thou know’st that none had prieked


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 199


Thy finger had I been but there to help thee.
See what thou wilt command me; grief hath come
Upon thee and my heart is full. If now
Thou biddest I am at thy gate a slave
To guard thy head. I seek not crown, I want
Not host, and lay my head before thy throne."
Hurmuzd replied : ** O prudent one! my day
Of misery will pass from me, and he
That perpetrated this will soon be gone :
Both trouble and delight are transient,
I ask three things of thee, no more, and one
Is that each morning at the break of day
Thou wilt delight mine ears with thine own voice ;
The second is that thou wilt send to me
some noble cavalier scarred with long fight
To talk to me of warfare and the chase,
And some old sage to hold discourse of kings,
And bring to me the records to abate
My pain and misery; and my third wish
Is that thy mother’s brothers, who are not
Thine equals but thy slaves, shall never see
The world henceforth; discharge thy wrath on them
For all this grief.”
"O king!” he made reply,
" May that man perish who deploreth not
Thine eyes and be thy foes, though their ill deeds
Be secret, banished from the world, but still
Consider in that lucid mind of thine :
Bahram Chuibina hath been paladin
While with him there are countless forces—horsemen
And gallant sworders—and if we lay hand
On Gustaham no refuge will be left us ;
But as regardeth an old scribe to read C. 1869
The annals, and some war-primed cavalier,
Skilled in the feast withal, I will dispatch
Such ever new to thee. Be no whit sad,


200 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


And hold not thou the action Gustaham’s ;
"Tis God's because of senseless words and deeds.
May thy heart bear this anguish, and may patience
Consort with wisdom: but should fortune serve
I will myself exact complete revenge
On Gustaham and reprobate Bandwi,
And give them shroudless to the dogs to eat.
Be of good cheer, O son of Nüshírwán !
And may thy soul be ever young.”

He spake,
And left the presence weeping but reserved.
The son was kindlier-tempered than the king
In which regard a man of wisdom said :—
" A bland youth, sweet-tongued, is a better friend
Than some fierce warrior ageing to his end,
Yet at the last dust is the common lot
Of one of parts and one that hath them not;
Albeit to learn of one there is no need,
Who saith that wits and fools are of one breed,
For knowledge will ensure thy fair surcease,
And heaven in Paradise will give thee peace.
As victuals serve to keep the body whole,
So knowledge is all needful for the soul.
Cry to the Holy and Supreme in all,
And be all undismayed at great or small."


HES
How Bahrdm Chübina heard of the Blinding of Shah
Hurmuzd and how he led his Troops against
Ahusrau Parwiz
Bahram Chibina heard how fortune dealt
With that famed king: * They set the searing irons


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 201


To his bright eyes, and those two Lamps, those twin
Narcissi of his garth, are dead, his son
Is seated on his throné and his high fortune
Is trodden underfoot.”
Bahram Chiubina,
The hero, was amazed, grew wan, and pondered.
He said: “ The time for me to fight hath come;
Ey daring I will seize the world.”
He bade

To bear forth to the field the kettledrums
And flag of majesty. He packed the baggage,
He called his warriors to horse and spake
Of waging war against Khusrau Parwiz.
His host, as 'twere a moving mountain, marched
Audaciously as far as Nahrawán.
Khusrau Parwíz, on hearing, was in dudgeon C. 1870
At such swift action and sent spies to note
The progress of events with these behests :—
“ We first must learn the feeling of his troops :
If like Bahrám Chübína they intend
To fight or whether we shall have delay,
And whether he be foremost at the centre
Or at the wings, his state at audience-time,
And if he hunteth while upon the march."

They went unnoted by the troops, gat news,
And came back to the Sháh all privily.
They said: “ His troops are for Bahrám Chuübína,
All from the highest chieftains to the bovs.
In marching he is sometimes at the centre,
And sometimes with the right or left or baggage.
We saw him long of sight and diligent—
A cautious warrior and cavalier.
His kinsmen all are in his confidence :
He hath no need of strangers, giveth audience
In royal fashion, hunteth on the plain
With cheetahs, knoweth but the usages


+ 1871


202 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI
Of Sháhs, and readeth all the book of Dimna.'!


Khusrau Parwiz said to his minister :—
“ A long task faceth us.  Bahrám Chübína,
When he is charging at an enemy,
Would break the hearts of dragons in the deep,
And from the monarch of the world withal
Hath learned the methods of the kings of kings,
While, thirdly, with Kalila,* so to speak,
As minister none hath so shrewd a scribe."
Then said he to Bandwi and Gustaham ;—
“ Our mates are grief and toil."
Now when Gurdwi,
Darmin, the monarch of Armenia,
Shápúr and Andaman, shrewd chiefs and fighters,
Were set in secret conclave with the Shah
He thus addressed them: “ Mighty warriors !
When wisdom is a light within the brain
Then knowledge is the body's coat of mail,
Which naught except the sword of death will sever,
A sword whereto a steel helm is as wax.
I am but young to you so cannot walk
The world aright; instruct me what to do.
Who suffereth from these wounds ?
An archmage said :—
“ Thou wilt be happy and the Grace and provand
Of empty brains. Now since the mystery
Of this our whirling world grew manifest
Hath wisdom been disparted into four.
One portion is the king's for Grace and wisdom
Fit him ; another is the pious man's ;
The third the loyal liege's who as near
The royal person tendereth advice ;
The wise account the small part left the thane's.
The impious and unthankful have no wisdom.
If now the king will hear the old sage's words,
* The Fables of Bidpai. See Vol. vii. p. 382. t Jd.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 203


And fix his heart's eye on them, he will eat
Their fruit when they have passed within his heart."
The Sháh replied : ** Were I to write this down
In gold its Grace and vogue would ask no less ;
The archimages’ utterances are gems,
But I have other purposes at heart,
For when our two hosts meet, and when our spearheads
Shall reach to Gemini, I shall not be
Blamed if I quit the centre and advancing
sfore the host call to Bahram Chuübíina,

That impious and self-seeking general,
Show him a peaceful face, make much of him,
And praise him. If he shall receive my words
"Tis well, for who at court can be his peer ?
But if he seeketh fight I too will fight,
And range my host against his."

All the leaders
Assented to his scheme, the great applauded,
And hailed him king of earth; all said: ““Oh! be
The ills of fortune far from thee, O king!
Be victory, Grace, majesty, and crown
Of king of kings thine own.”

He answered thus :—
“So be tt; enough. May none of us behold
Disunion or defeat.”
Then from Baghdad,
And with new camp-enclosures, he marched forth
Upon the plain. As the two powers drew near
Upon the march, the captain of the host's
On that side and on this the Sháh's, and when
The world's light had been taken in the toils,
And pitchy night had shaken out its locks,
Scouts went forth from both hosts to guard the
approaches ;

And when night, frighted by the sword of day
Had fled dry-lipped and quaking, rose the din


204 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Of tymbals from both camps and Sol led forth
To war. Then at the Sháh's command Bandwi
And Gustaham put on their iron helms,
And went with other chiefs of ardent soul `
Toward the canal! of Nahrawán, whereat
The outpost came before Bahrám Chübína,
And said: " There is a force two bowshots off.”

On hearing this he ranged his host and called
His veterans and bestrode a piebald steed
With musk-black tail—a noble caracoller
With brazen hoofs. An Indian scimitar
sufficed to arm him, and its stroke was like
The levin from the cloud. He urged his horse
As 'twere a lightning-flash. "That misereant,
Ízid Gashasp, was on his left. Withal
There came Hamdan Gashasp* and. Yalán-sína,
All rage and enmity, while three bold Turks,
Sprung from the Khán, made ready to take vengeance
Upon Khusrau Parwíz and swore: * When we
Shall see the Sháh out-distancing his troops,
Him will we bring to thee in bonds or slain,
And thy realm shall repose in peace."

On one side

There was Khusrau Parwiz and on the other
The paladin, between was Nahrawan,
While on both sides the armies watched them meet,
And how the paladin the Shah would greet.


$5
How Khusrau Parwiz and Bahrám Chúbina met and
parleyed
Bahrám Chübína and Khusrau Parwíz i
Thus met, one cheerful and the other grim.
' "Spring " in the original, * Reading with P,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 205


'The world-lord rode an ivory grev and wore
A gold and jewelled erown ; his robe from Chín
Was of brocade of gold. Gurdwi as guide
Preceded him, Bandwi and Gustaham
Were at his side, and therewithal Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, who wore a helm of gold.
They all were clad in iron, gold, and silver ;
Their golden girdles were occult with gems.
Bahram Chübína paled with rage on seeing
The king of kings and thus addressed his chiefs :—
This whoreson miscreant from low estate
And boorish manner hath attained to manhood,
Grown powerful and girt himself for action.
The writing of the down is manifest
Upon the ivory rondure of his face ;
So now he hath become Sháh Farídün
With mace and crown and caught the imperial style,
But speedily will this world end for him.
This dark-souled bastard leadeth on his troops
Like Nüshirwán. Scan thoroughly his host
To see if there be of it one of name.
I cannot spy one warlike cavalier
That could confront me for a single breath.
Now shall he look upon the deeds of men,
Steeds charging, scimitars, the dust of war,
The clash of battle-axes, showers of arrows,
The heroes’ shouts, the captives, give and take.
The elephants are driven from the field
When I march forth to battle. At our voice
The mountains melt and warriors lose their prowess.
I take the rivers with my sword and turn
Their waters into blood.”

He spake and spurred
His pied steed, thou hadst said: “ His flying eagle.”
He chose himself a narrow battlefield,
The troops in wonder watching him, and thence


C. 1873


206 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Went on to Nahrawán and there confronted
The glorious Great with certain of Írán,
Armed for the conflict with Khusrau Parwiz,
Who said: ** O noble chiefs ! who recogniseth
Bahrám Chübína ? "
Said Gurdwi: “O king!
Observe the warrior on the piebald steed,
With white juppon, black baldrick, and who rideth
About among the troops."
He recognised
The man at sight and said: “ Yon lengthy one,
smoke-hued and riding on the noble piebald ? *'
surdwi replied : ** The same and bent on ill."
" If thou shouldst question," said Khusrau Parwiz,
" That crook-back he would answer churlishly ;
With that hooked nose and half shut eyes * he hath,’
Thou wouldest say, ‘a wrathful heart.’ Thou seest
That he is wicked by his looks, God's foe.
I mark naught of submission in his head,
And that none will command him."
To Bandwí
And Gustaham he said thereafter: “ I
Will give an illustration of this saw :—
‘If ‘neath the load the donkey will not pass
Then take the weighty burden to the ass.’
If some bold div hath gulled Bahram Chibina
How should he see God's way ? — All hearts that ache
With greed are helped not by the advice of wisdom.
When thou goest forth to war debate is over.
We must consider all from first to last :
Who knoweth which will conquer in the fight,
Which host be doleful or illustrious ?
Considering those troops so well arrayed,
And with a leader eager for the fray,
Such as Bahram Chübina is—a man
Grim as a lusty dív—and militants


|


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 207


Like ravening wolves, I will, with your consent, C. 1874
So that disgrace may not attach to me,
Be first to make advances; ‘twill be better
For me than showing slackness in the fight.
If I receive from hin a fair reply
His late misdoings shall be obsolete ;
I will bestow some corner of the world
Upon him and by bounty earn his thanks ;
Our warfare and endeavours in the field
Shall end in peace—a gain to us. No doubt
The wisest course is safest. Good folk joy
When monarchs act as merchants do.”
“O king!”
Said Gustaham, “ live happily while time
Shall last. Thou scatterest gems in talk and art
More wise. Do what thou willest. Thou art just,
And yon slave is unjust; thy head 1s full
Of brains and his of wind.”
Khusrau Parwiz,

On hearing this, advanced before his troops,
Held distant parle with brave Bahram Chubina,
And sought for feast in war-time. Thus he said :—
= Illustrious man! what business hast thou here
Upon the battlefield ? Thou art as though
The jewel of the court, the wealth of throne
And diadem, the army’s prop in war-time,
And as a bright light at our festivals.
Thou art ambitious, brave, and servest God ;
Ne’er may the Almighty take His hand from thee.
I have considered of thy case, approved
Thine acts, will entertain thee and thy troops,
And make my soul glad by the sight of thee.
I will appoint thee general of Iran,
As is but right, and I will pray to God
For thee."

When brave Bahrám Chübína heard


C. 1874


208 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


He gave his black-tailed, piebald steed the rein,
Saluted from his seat, paused, and replied :—
“In good ease, blithe, and fortunate am I,
And may the day of greatness ne'er be thine,
Who knowest not kingship whether just or not.
The Aláns' king in the conduct of his kingship
Is being helped by the unfortunate !
I have considered of thy case and suppled
A lasso for thy sake. I will erect
Forthwith a lofty gibbet, make thy hands
Fast in the coils, and hang thee up thereon
As thou deservest, giving thee a glimpse
Of fortune’s bitterness,”
Khusrau Parwiz
Heard and his cheeks became like fenugreek.
He knew: “ Bahram Chibina will not yield,
And part with crown and throne,” and thus replied :—
"Ingrate! No good man would speak thus. When.
guests
Come to thy house from far dost thou revile them
At feasting-time ? This note is not the wont
Of Sháhs or of the exalted cavaliers.
No Arab and no Persian e’er have acted
Like this in thirty centuries. The wise
Would shame hereat, so go not thou about
The door of thanklessness. When guests give thee
A glorious greeting one must be a div
To answer as thou dost. Ill days, I fear,
Await thee for thou knowest that thy counsels
Are troubled, Thy resource is in the hands
Of that Great King who liveth ever more,
Whose word is law. Thou sinnest in His sight,
And art ingrate, with person in disgrace,
And heart in fear. In calling me the king
Of the Alans thou takest but one side
Of my descent unless I am unworthy


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 209


Of king of kingship and the cap of power
As having for my grandsire Nüshírwán,
And for my sire Hurmuzd. Whom knowest thou
More worthy ? "
Said Bahrám Chübína: * Wretch,
And mad in deed and word! first, for thv talk
Of guests: thou art thyself new-fangled though
Thy talk is of the past. What have the words
Of Shahs to do with thee ? Thou art no sage,
Or valiant cavalier. Thou wast the Alans’ king,
And now though thou art chief thou art withal
Inferior to the slave of slaves. Thou art
A fruitless evil-cloer in the world :
No Shah art thou or fit to lead the mighty ;
But me men bless as Shih. I will not let thee
Set foot on earth. Moreover, when I said :—
* Thou art ill-starred, unfit for rule and kingship,’
I said it, worthless Shah! and may the state
Be never thine! because the Íránians
Are foes of thine, will struggle to uproot thee,
Will rend the, skin and veins, and give the dogs
Thy bones to eat."
Khusrau Parwíz replied :—

" Knave! why so fierce and haughty, for foul words
Disgrace a man? But from the very first
Thy disposition hath been thus; clear wisdom
Is severed from thy brain. Blest is the noble
That eateth wisdom's fruits! Fey divs discourse
At large. I would not have a paladin
Like thee made weak and ruined by his temper.
I prithee banish anger from thy heart, C. 1876
Be not so moved and charm away thy wrath.
Remember God, the just Possessor; base
Thy wisdom on His justice. Thou hast now
A height before thee higher than Bístün,
And if a king shall ever come of thee

VOL. VIII. o


210 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The Egyptian thorn will bear. Thy heart is full
Of thoughts of rule but we shall see what God
Ordaineth. Who hath taught thee such ill carriage,
Such principles of Ahriman, I know not,
But thy colloguer seeketh for thy death.”
He spake and lighting from his ivory steed;
And taking from his head the precious crown,
Wailed with his face turned sunwards, put his hope
In God, and said: **O glorious Judge who bringest
The tree of hope to fruit! Thou knowest who
Is now affronting me, Thy slave, and how
We should for very shame bewail the crown.
If royalty is to desert our race
I will not strive but be a thrall within
A Fane of Fire and live on milk and herbs,
Hoard neither gold nor silver and at prayer-time
Wear woollen ; but if rule is to be mine
Thee will I serve in truth and equity.
Oh! let my host prevail, give not my crown
And palace to a slave. If I succeed,
And haste to bring before Ázargashasp!
Crown, steed, and armlets, earrings, torque, and robe
Of gold adorned with gems, and pour withal
Upon the dome of lapis-lazuli
A hundred sacks of red dinars, and give .
The worshippers five thousand score of drachms,
When I become the monarch of the world,
Then will I strive to reinstate some city
Unjustly desolated and the haunt
Of onager and lion, leave it not
To thorns and weeds, but send on my return
From battle five score thousands of dinars.
Those of the scions of Bahram and others
That shall be brought to me as prisoners


1:5. When according to Sásánian custom he makes his pilgrimage
Io the Fire-temple at Shíz. Cf. Vol. i. p. 6o.


KAUSRAU PARWIZ JII


Will I make servants of the glorious Fire,
And glad the hearts of priest and archimage."

He spake these words and rose up from the dust :
That speaker sore-oppressed was justified.
swift as a dust-cloud from the place of prayer
He came and shouted to Bahram Chiibina :-—
“Thou hellish, dív-like slave remote from wisdom,
And far removed from precedent and Grace !
Some rabid, tyrannous, and lusty dív C. 1877
Hath blinded thee. Thou hast, in wisdom's stead,
Wrath and revenge, and won the divs’ applause.
A thornbrake is a city, Hell a garden
To thee; the lamp of wisdom hath died out
Within thy brain and robbed thy mind and heart
Of lustre. It was but a lying witch
That led thee thus through greatness to a fall.!
To-day thou settest hand upon a shoot
With leaves of bane and fruit of colocynth.
Thy stock ne'er so aspired nor is the aspirant
Applauded. God hath not bestowed on thee
The Grace and stature. Hast forgot Gurgin,
son of Milád ?* 'Thou unjust wretch ! ne'er hope
For what will never be. The crab hath not
The eagle's wing nor doth the eagle soar
Aloft the sun. By holy God, by throne
And crown if I shall come upon thee hostless,
And if I blow a chilling blast upon thee . . . !
Thou hast not seen me yet in fight and I
Have heard but thy harsh words. I lean on Him
That giveth victory. If I am unworthy
To be a king let me not live a liege.”

Bahram Chubina said: ** Thou fool possessed !
Thy sire, that world-lord friendly to the Faith,
Who ne'er blew cold on anyone, thou knewest not


' Cf. p. 150 seg
* Cf. Vol. iii. p.: 202 seg. and p. 72.


212 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


To prize but flungest vilely from the throne,
And thou wouldst fain be world-lord after him,
Be vigilant and wise! Thou art impure,
God's foe, and wilt experience naught but ill
From Him that.giveth good, while if Hurmuzd
Had been unjust and time and earth exclaimed
Against him ‘tis not fit for thee, his son,
To king it in Iran and in Turan. —
Thy life will not be passed upon the throne ;
Content thee with the charnel for thou art
Afar from fortune. For Hurmuzd will I
Exact revenge; moreover, I am king
Within Iran. Now make this clear to me:
What upright man agreed that thou shouldst sear
The eyes of Sháhs or bid one do the deed ?
Take thou henceforth the kingship to be mine
From Sun to Fish's back."

Khusrau Parwiz
Replied: ** May his sire's woe ne'er joy this slave.
Thus was it written and what was to be
Hath been; how long wilt thou add word to word ?
Thou makest thyself king, thou who at death
Wilt not possess a shroud ! So far as folk,
And barded steeds can go thou art a monarch—
In expectation—but thou hast no house,
Home, land, and birth ; thou art a windbag king.
With thy false title and such wares as these
Thou wilt not shine upon the royal throne.
There have been brave men ere thy time—aspirants
With massive maces—yet they never sought
The kingship, being lieges, nor pretended
To crown and throne, but thou becomest ever
More rabid and art lost to modest y. *
The World-lord maketh kings for justice-sake,
Or for their parts or on account of birth,


' See Vol. i, p. 7r. * Couplet omitted


RHUSRAU PARWIZ 213


Bestowing kingship on the worthiest,
The wisest or the least injurious.
My sire made me the monarch of the Aláns
Since through thy wiles he was concerned for me,
And now God hath bestowed on me the kingship,
Throne, greatness, and the crown of power. I have

them
From Him who is the Master of the world,
From Him who knoweth all, by the appointment
Of king Hurmuzd who from his sire received
The throne as heirloom, from high priest and sages,
The mighty men and the experienced chiefs,
According to the Faith which once Zarduhsht,
The wise and ancient, brought from Paradise,!
And gave Luhrásp the word of God, which he
Accepted and transmitted to Gushtásp.
All those that have agerieved me, all whose treasures
I have received, are under my protection,
Be they my friends or foes, The mendicants
At lurk from wasted cities will I make
Rich, be they outcasts or of mine own kin,
And bramble-brakes like Paradise, fulfilled
With men, with cattle, and with tilth, ignore,
By way of compensation, no good thing
Until we quit this world for that, will make
Our heart the scales, will weigh, and use the might
Of our own arm. What time Hurmuzd, the world-lord,
Ruled justly, earth and time rejoiced in him.
The son past doubt should have his father's throne,
Should have the crown, the girdle, and the fortune,
But as for thee, thou wicked, crafty man,
Who wast the first to war against Hurmuzd !
No ill hath come unless by thy command,
Thy spells, thy guile, and plotting. If God will C. 1879
I will make dark in vengeance for the Shah

1 See Vol, v., p. 33.


214 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Bright Sol to thee. Now who deserveth crown,
And if not I who is there ? "
“Valiant one!”
Rejoined Bahram Chubina, “ he is worthy
That carried off from thee the sovereignty.
When, from the daughter of Papak, Ardshir
Was born, and the Ashkánians had the sway,
Grew he not mighty and slew Ardawan,
Whose throne he won? And now five hundred years
Have passed by and Sásánian heads and crowns
Are waxing cold. Now is my day for throne
And diadem; the headship and the work,
Allied with conquering fortune, are for me.
When I behold thy fortune, face, and troops,
Thy crown and throne, like some led lion roused
Will I abolish the Sasanians,
Erase them from the roll and trample down
Sisin, both head and crown. The power should be
The Ashkanians’ if the wise would hear aright.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied : “* Contentious fool !
If kingship is for those of royal race
What dost thou in their midst ? What are the folk
Of Rai but double-faced ? And what as men ?
But few at first they joined Sikandar's host,
And arming on the Rimans’ side soon won
The Kaian throne. It did not please the Maker,
And ruin came upon them from themselves ;
The Judge that giveth succour crowned Ardshtfr,
And he was worthy of the royal crown
Although he had no treasure and dinars.
Those great men’s work hath passed away, our words
Are wind. God choosing him for sovereignty
Saw naught but good in him. Now who deserveth
The government and who shall be the lord
Of this unstable world ? Inform me truly,
Choose the good path and shun perversity.”


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 215


Bahrám Chübína hearing changed his ground,
And said: “1am Bahram, the warrior,
The rooter up of kings.”

Khusrau Parwiz

Made answer: '* Thou hast heard the sage's saw :—
* The equipage of greatness ne'er commit
To mean or wayward folk of little wit,
For they, when they have got it from thee, take
Their ease and if thou ask it back they quake.’
My father, who was rash and ill-advised, C. 188a
Discerned not close from open and among
His many great and small gave men of straw
The roval equipage which came not back
Upon demand for he that was possessed
Thereof had grown intoxicate thereby.
What was the saying of the sweet-voiced sage ?
* "will cause thee pain and toil to stablish men
Unstable: woo not the ungrateful then.’
Thou wast a brave man, keen and of high aims,
But thine ill nature made thee an ill-doer.
My father made thee first among the chiefs ;
Thou wast the greatest in the sovereignty ;
But royal favour and the silvern throne
Have made thee drunk and err. The name Chübína
Is now Bahrám, the silvern throne become
A snare to thee. There seated thou art fain
To mount the moon; thou wast the general,
And wouldst be Shah. No sage e’er held such talk ;
I wot that thou consortest with the Div.”

Bahrám Chübína answered: “ Evil one !
Reviling is thy sole accomplishment.
Thou heedest not God's covenant, thou seekest
This state whereof thou art not worthy, and blindest
The Shah! How can such deeds as these be hidden ?
Thy friends are hostile, being thine in word,
But mine in heart. The Khan is mine ally


C.


r881


216 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


With all the armies of Irán and Chín,
For I am just and kindly with a hand
And sword. No enemy will conquer me.
I will transfer the power from Párs to Rai,
And ban the name of Kaian, set up justice,
And reinstate the customs of Milád.!
I spring from famed Arash* and am in war
A fire unquenchable, the grandson I
Of great Gurgín and the consuming Flame
Upon Barzin. It was king Sáwa's mind
To leave not in Írán throne, crown, or signet,
To rase the Fanes of Fire and suffer not
Nauruz and Sada feast. The Iranians too
Were all enslaved till I girt up my loins,
And by an arrow from my bow determined
King Sáwa's life. If thou knowest not the sum
Of that rash monarch’s troops go count a thousand
Four hundred times. Twelve hundred elephants
Of war had he. Thou wouldst have said: ‘The

earth
Will hold them not. That great host fled while I
Roared like a lusty lion in their rear.
Know thou that none without accomplishment
Doth rashly seek the seat of mighty men.
My helmet savoureth of the crown, my sword
Will win the ivory throne, but if a gnat
Shall war with thee ‘twill bring thee from thy throne
To earth.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied : ** Thou luckless !

Why not be mindful of Gurgin at Rai,
Whom fortune never succoured in the world,
And who had not throne, majesty, and state ?
None knew thy name; thou wast obscure and poor.
The great Mihrán Sitád came and informed
The monarch of the age about thee, thus

! Cf. p. 72. ' See Vol. vi. p. 197.


Ak


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 217


Exalting thee from darksome dust, but thou
Hast lost sight of that day ! He furnished thee
With treasures, arms, and troops, and Rustam’s
banner
Resplendent as the moon. God did not will
That Turkmans out of Chin should waste Iran,
And helped thee in the fight with them; thy helm
Rose cloudward since the Lord of circling heaven
Willed the Great King success; but thou dost take
The merit to thyself who never sawest
The great and good. If kingship is to quit
The Kaian race why girdest thou thy loins ?
"Twill need one like Sikandar to obscure
The fortune of the king of kings. Mayst thou
With thy div’s face and dusty hue attain
To naught except a ditch. Thy waywardness
And conduct dimmed the Sháh's davs. Thou hast
put
My name on drachms and striven to ruin me.
Thou art ill's source in this world and supreme
Among transgressors. Whereso blood is shed e
The guilt is thine. Thou wilt not find by night
In slumber what thou seekest for all day
Beneath the sun. O luckless and unjust !
Give not thy whole time to perversity,
Inflict not rashly outrage on thyself,
And so remain unjust and miserable.
Think how to gain God’s favour and make wisdom
And truth thy task for what is mine and thine
Will pass; time reckoneth our every breath.
Who will declare, when thou hast decked thy
heart | 1 |
With guile, that guile 15 better than the right ? | |
At thy behest whate'er thou wilt is thine,
Thine to one half the realm. Then in this world
Thou wilt be happy, all at ease, and far


C. 18823


218 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


From hurt of foes, and when this Wayside Inn
Thou quittest thou wilt pass un-irked. No need
To labour this, for in the Zandavasta
Thus saith Zarduhsht : * He that abandoneth
The holy Faith hath neither fear nor awe
Of God within his heart. Let him be counselled
For one year: if thy counsel profit not
Let him be slain by order of the Shah,
And his offending corpse flung on the road :
But if he is the Shah’s own enemy
Let him be slain forthwith.’ Men in good sooth
Will shed thy blood for thy perverted fortune
Requireth this. Now will a wretched life
Be thine and Fire thy place when thou departest.
If thou continuest long thus to revolt
From Sháh and from God's justice there will come
Remorse for thine unseemly words and deeds.
Thou ailest and the drug for thee is counsel ;
I am endeavouring to make thee whole,
But if desire and envy rule thy heart
Say so and I will send a different leech.!
Thy victories had made thee somebody,
But thoughts of treasure caused thee to rebel.
Heard hast thou that Zahhák was impious,
That divs and warlocks filled the world with fear,
And how when he had vexed the nobles' hearts
The glorious Farídün entreated him.*
Thy troops, alive or dead, are all my slaves
At heart. Through thee they have obtained some
glory,

And so have turned their heads from right, but when
I shall display my treasures, and incline
The warriors’ hearts, not one of all this host
Will bide with thee because thou hast not name,
Or Grace or goods. When thou didst overcome

! Couplet omitted, * Vol. i. p. 168 seg.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 210


King Sáwa all the troops believed that they

Would never see defeat, they were so drunk

And satiate with spoil. Thy warriors,

50 fearless, must not perish by my hand ;

I would not that the country of Tran

Should lose this mighty warrior-host—all chiefs

And nobles—and defeat befall the throne

Of might. Now tell me, in Árish's! days

Who was the Sháh for this may end our parley ? "
Bahrám Chübína answered : * Minüchihr

Was then the Shah and had the host and crown.”
Khusrau Parwíz replied : *' Ill-natured one!

Thou know'st that he was monarch of the world :

Know'st thou not that Árish was but his slave,

And bowed to his directions and commands ?

Just so it was with valiant Kai Khusrau

With such as Rustam for his officer,

For Rustam might have seized the world, the throne,

And style of Shah, but held to precedent,

And never glanced that way. Then why dost thou

Not follow me and hail Khusrau Parwiz

As Shih ? Thou dust-face! thou art but a div,

Like Ahriman: the crown and throne of Sháhs

Have stirred thy greed.”


C. 1383


Bahram Chubina said :-—
"Thou miscreant ! rightly art thou from Sásán,
Who was a shepherd and was shepherd-born ;
Pápak was not the first to make him one."
Khusrau Parwiz replied : “ Thou evil-doer !
Thine arrogance is not Sásán's. Thy words
Are wholly lies, and falsehood is no honour.
Thou comest of bad-natured, worthless men,
And spring'st not from Sásán."
* See Vol. v. p. 12.
* According to both the traditions given in the Sháhnáma


S4sán's ancestors had been shepherds or in similar menial employ-
ment for generations. See Vols. v. p. 291, vi. 211.


ik.


C. 1884


o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]

“ The shepherdship,”
Bahram Chibina answered, “ of Sasan
Me'er will be hidden."


i


Said Khusrau Parwiz :—
" Dárá, when dying, gave not to Sásán
The crown of majesty. Though lost was fortune
Was lineage lost? No talk will turn injustice
To justice. Seck'st thou, having for thine own
such prudence, rede, and Grace, the imperial throne ?"


86
How Bahrám Chibina and Khusrau Parwtz returned,
how Gurdya advised Bahrám Chitbina, and how
Khusrau Parwiz told his Purpose to the [rdnians


He spake and smiled, turned from Bahrám Chübína,

And set his face towards his host. Of those

Three valiant Turks who served the Khán of Chín,

Were savage as a wolf and had assured

Bahrám Chübína: * We, to win renown,

Will on the day of battle bring to thee

The person of the Shih alive or dead

Before the troops,”! one impious horseman, strong,

Fierce, fearless, rushed forth seeking fight and grim

With sixty coils of lasso on his arm,

And drawing near that steed of ivory,

And aiming at the splendid crown, flung forth _

His lasso coiled, and caught the Shah’s crowned head :

But Gustaham clave with his sword the lasso,

The Sháh's head 'scaped from harm, while brave
Bandwi

Strung up his bow and with his arrows robbed


! p. 204.


RHUSRAU PARWIZ 221


The air of light. He loosed a poplar shaft
Against the Turk; that battle-seeker fled,
And to that miscreant said Bahram Chibina :—
* Be sombre dust thine only hiding-place !
Who said: * Assail the Shih?’  Didst thou not see
me

Upstanding in his presence with respect ? ' '

Sick, mind and body, he returned to camp.
His sister heard of his return, put off
Her splendid erown and, when a slave had brought
Her veil, ran forth in dudgeon sore of heart
To meet him and thus spake: “ O warlike chief !
How didst thou fare, say, with Khusrau Parwiz ?
If he be hot and hasty through his youth
Relax no effort in the cause of peace.”

The brave Bahrám Chübína answered thus :—
" One must not reckon him among the Sháhs.
No valiant cavalier or sage is he,
Not generous or brilliant. Parts are better
Than birth, and kings should have them."

His wise sister

Replied: “O shrewd, ambitious chief! if I
Say much thou wilt not hear me but display
Ill-temper and ill-nature. Call to mind
The saving of the aphorist of Balkh :—
‘When any one shall truth from hiding bring,
And tell thy faults, truth is a bitter thing.’
Think not to waste thy country for thou hast
Thy share of earth. A very wise man said :—
' To have an ox’s horn an ass once tried,
And lost forthwith his ears on either side.’
Court not the world’s reproach; none of thy race
Hath worn the crown. Had this youth intervened not
I had not been thus seared and dark of soul ;
But as it is his sire is living, the throne
Of sovereignty is still in place yet thou


C. 1885


2232 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Must interfere! How it will end I know not,

But all night long mine eyes are filled with blood.
Thine only aim is pain and malison ;

Thou sniffest rashly at a poison-flower.

How folk will call Chubina infamous,

The name Bahrim disfame! God will be wroth
Withal and Hell the prison of thy soul.

The world is not for every one, my brother !

And naught abideth save a fair renown.

Consider now, who was it sought thee out

save king Hurmuzd ? But since king Sáwa's throne
And goods came to thy hands thou didst assume
The crown, and having grown renowned through him
Art seeking for the imperial throne ; but know

That every good thing is from God and be

Not ingrate to our Sháh ; presume not thus

Upon thy stricken fields. Thou hast gained honour,
But be not arrogant. Thou hast at heart

Consorted with the Div and hast grown guilty

In God's sight. When Hurmuzd was wroth and raved
Through what the foul Áyín Gashasp had said

Thou shouldest have been patient and not made it
A liege's opportunity for war ;

And in his great afflietion when his son

Came forth to fight from Barda' "twas thy duty

To visit the young Sháh and ornament

His new throne as he wished. The youth had then
Adopted thine advice and thou hadst not

Seen evil days but quiet, joy, and triumph.

Why these designs upon the crown and throne ?
Thou knowest that there still are princes left,

Both old and young, descended from Ardshir,

With wealth and countless hosts. Who in fran

Will hail thee king ? If any king with treasure

And troops could dare to eve this land of ours

It had been Sáwa, prince of Chín, none else,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 223


Who marched upon the country of Írán ;
But holy God made thee his opposite,
And saved our land and elders. Since the World-lord
Made this world and spread over it high heaven
Men have not seen a cavalier like Sám,
Whom not the rending lion would confront,
Yet when it happened that Naudar became
Unjust and trampled on his father's ways,
And when the nobles called on Sám and had
The turquoise throne made ready, ‘ God forbid,’
He said, * that ever captain of the host
Should contemplate the throne because the dust
Of Minüchihr is mine, my coronet
The footings of Naudar's.! I recognise
In Sám thy better; he sought not the kingship,
Not being ill-conditioned. So too Zal
And elephantine Rustam never sought
To rule our folk. Know, I have said this, brother !
Because the fortunate alone who hath
August hands, Grace, and high birth, and is wise,
Of ardent heart and just can take the throne.
I know not what will come on thee, for wisdom
Hath vanished from thy heart ! "
Bahram Chibina C. 1886

Made answer: “Tis all true and holy God
Is witness, but the thing hath gone too far:
My heart and brain are sick with greed and I
Must grow whole or resign my head to death,
Which pierceth helms of steel. If I am stricken
By this young Shah my troops will take from him
His throne and, black at heart with vengeance, set
Another there.”

The youthful king for his part
Recrossed the bridge of Nahrawan, rejoicing,
Called all the captains of the host, set those

! See Vol. i. p. 340.


224 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Entitled by their rank beside the throne
Of sovereignty, and said: “ Good-hearted chiefs,
Adept and veteran! of this my kingship
This is my primal act—a mere essay—
And none doth owe us praise though our intent
Be good, and ye have had no good from us
While we must now augment your toils and griefs.
Ye served mine ancestors and have seen much
Of this world’s salts and sours. I will disclose
My purpose, hidden from the host, to you ;
My words must go no further, that would mar
My scheme if it were published to the troops.
I mean to lead the host to-night to battle,
For I have parleyed with Bahrám Chübína,
Who is an active, skilful cavalier,
Though I discerned no wisdom in his head,
Or in the heads of his illustrious troops.
His fight with Sáwa is his only theme,
He telleth o'er and o'er the same old tale.
He thinketh me a foolish youth and fain
Would frighten me with mace and scimitar,
Not knowing that I attack by night and. so
Gain confidence. If ye will share the fray
With me I will not loiter but, when night
Shall steep her face in ambergris and loose
Her musky locks, do ye mount armed and grasping
The mace and scimitar.”
They all agreed


To do the Sháh's behest. When he had gone
Back to his tent he put all strangers forth.

He sent for Gustaham and for Bandwi,

And for Gurdwi, a veteran warrior,

And told his purpose of a night-attack

In hopes that they would aid. Said Gustaham :—


C. 1587 “O king! why put such confidence in fight ?


A camisade may alienate thy troops.


-* TI


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 225


Thy soldiers and the soldiers of the foe
Are one in heart and body; on one side
Are grandsons, on the other grandsires. "What
Deception can there be ? Here is a brother,
And there a father; they are all akin;
How shall son war with sire? Encourage not
The wishes of thy foes by this design.
This was no matter for the host; thy words
Have ruined all.”

| Gurdwi said: “ All is over,
E'en as a wind that passeth o'er the plain.
Power, passion, treasury, and troops make err
A young man’s head. Do not be thou to-night
Upon the field and suffer not the host
And treasure to be lost, because I doubt not
That all our secret plans and preparations
Will be reported to the other side ;
Yield not thy head then to the enemy.”

Pleased with the rede Khusrau Parwiz assented,
Selected certain chiefs devoted to him
For good and ill—Kharrad, son of Barzin,

And Gustaham, the Lion, and Shapur,
And Andiyan, the valorous, Bandwi,
Kharrid, withal, the Lustre of the host,

Nastüh, the chief and burner up of heroes,
And others who would serve to guard the troops,
The treasure and himself. They sought a hill
That would avail if fight were toward—a place
All grass and apt for feasts. Khusrau Parwiz
Thenee viewed the host from far.

Bahrám Chuübína,
The brave, for his part mounted and when great
And small drew near he questioned of the
chiefs :—
= What tidings have ye of your kith and kin ?
Send to them, ye that have such—men at one
VOL, VII i


C. 1338


226 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


With you in word and Faith. If they will come
And do my will, and stake their lives as pledges
Of their sincerity, I will enrich them,

And they shall all be nobles like yourselves.

The troops from Barda’ and from Ardabil,

And slack Armenians—a band or two— !
Remain. We fear them not in fight while those
From Barda' are but as a pinch of dust."

The chieftains heard what brave Bahrám Chübína
Proposed and chose a warrior from the host,
Sage, fluent, heedful, who thus charged departed,
And speeding onward through the longsome night
Declared his message to the Íránian chiefs,

And heard their answer: “ Till the hosts engage
We will not leave Khusrau Parwiz. This matter,
We fear, will prove a long one. He will make

A night-attack, so feel not ye secure.’

The envoy, hearing this, went swift as dust
Back to the army of the paladin,

And as a privy matter, every word,
He there reported all that he had heard.


$7
How Bahrám Chuübína attacked the Army of Khusrau
Parwiz by Night and how Khusrau Parwiz fled


Now when Bahrám Chübina was aware

That all the troops were well disposed to him
His host lit watch-fires and set lights ablaze

In every quarter. Then that Lion chose

A valiant band fit to subdue the world,

Six thousand Sabres as the leaders reckoned.
Bahram Chibina told them: “ When the drum
Shall beat at cock-crow raise the battle-cry,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 227


Attack and crown the nobles’ heads with blood."
Led by the three proud Turks the troops sped forth
At his command and full of spite and vengeance
Fell on the army of the king. Arose
A din of mace and sword and battle-ax,
The earth was iron and the clouds were dust.
The troops all asked: ‘* Where is Khusrau Parwíz ?
The day and victory to-day are ours."
Khusrau Parwiz was on the hill in anguish,
His eyes were full of blood, his cheeks the hue
Of lapis-lazuli, and, till the shafts
Of dawn shot up, the clashing of the hosts
Confounded him, but when the dark night’s skirt
Had vanished, and he saw the battlefield
All killed and wounded, to his chiefs he said -—
* Help and put forth your powers against the foe,
For God, the Victor, is mine aid and prop,
And now my work is blows and scimitar."
He charged amain at those three Turks. Turks ?
Nay,
Three fierce and savage wolves. One closed with him,
Unsheathed his glittering glaive and sought to strike
The king upon the head: the royal rider


Put up his shield to save it, thrust beneath C. 1889
The guard, and laid his foeman low. “ Famed
fighters !


Slack not the struggle now," he cried, but still
His troops all turned away, abandoning
That world-aspirant shamefully who then
Said to Bandwi and Gustaham: “ Hereof
I augur ill. I have no child grown up,
Or other kindred, fitted for the crown,
And if I should be slain in fight the world
Would have no king."

Bandwi made answer thus :—
~ O noble prince! may this world yearn in love


228 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


For thee. Thy troops are gone, abide not thou,
For none is left to aid thee.”
To Gurdwí
Then said the king: “Haste with Tukhar and
take

The tent-enclosure, treasure, and brocade,
Crown, captives, purses, and the ivory throne,
All that thou canst, and take a thousand horse
Of those still left.”

The nobles toiled to load,
And carry off, this treasure. Then appeared
A dragon-flag ; the world turned violet.
Behind the flag rode brave Bahram Chübína,
Who robbed the world of lustre in the fray.
He and Khusrau Parwiz encountered,both
Redoubted warriors and savage lions.
Like elephants of war they raged and smote
Each other on the head. All lion-like
Bahram Chubina wheeled, his weapons failed
Against the foe, and thus till set of sun ,
The conflict passed all bounds. Then eame Tukhár
To tell Khusrau Parwiz that he had drawn
The treasure and the baggage to the bridge,
Whereat the monarch said to Gustaham :—
"* We have not any helpers in the fight ;
We are but ten; this is a mighty host,
And led on by a valiant paladin.
Although we have the Grace upon our side
We lack for friends, so flee we. Timely flight
Is better than affray. I may not tarry,
For I am all alone.”

The unpractised youth
Fared till he reached the bridge of Nahrawan,
Pursued all hotly by Bahram Chubina,
His head all vengeance and his heart all strife.
Khusrau Parwiz, when he perceived this, stopped


OO ae


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 229


Upon the bridge and summoned to his presence
The veteran Gustaham. “ Bring me my bow,”
He said; “ “tis mine interpreter in war.”

The treasurer, who was Gustaham himself,
Produced the bow.) The valiant chieftain took it, C. 1890
And robbed the air of lustre with his shafts,
Showered them like hail and pegged with each a

helm
And head together. Then Bahram Chibina,
That Lion, charged with lasso in his hand
And Dragon under him. With lasso only
He passed behind Khusrau Parwiz who saw,
Rejoiced, strung up his bow and with a shaft
Struck on the breast Bahram Chübína's horse ;
Its task was done. That general afoot
Despairing took his buckler while Yalán-sina
Advanced like dust and charged. The atheling,
Who knew him valiant, aimed and hurt his steed.
Yalán-sína fled from the bridge afoot,
And with him fled the rest, both old and young.
Now when Bahram Chubina thus withdrew
Khusrau Parwiz, swift as a dust-cloud, broke
The bridge and went to Taisafün in dudgeon,
With pain at heart and eyes fulfilled with blood.
He barred the city-gates with iron bars,
Sat down amid a multitude of cares,
From every quarter called to him the Great,
And posted sentinels at every gate.


1" Son trésorier le lui apporta, et Gustehem était en cette
affaire le lieutenant du roi." Mohl.


230 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


$8
How Khusrau Parwiz went to his Sire and fled to Rim,
and how Hurmuzd was slain


Thence weeping blood and liver-pierced he went
Before his sire, gave greeting, tarried long,
And said: “ The cavalier, the paladin,
Whom thou didst choose, O king! came as do Sháhs
That have the Grace and brought a numerous host.
I counselled him but 'twas of no avail,
He only cared for war and conflict. Never
Be his name current! All against my will
Was fought a great fight, and the stars brought scath
On many. All my troops deserted me ;
Thou wouldst have said they saw and passed me by,
And, not reflecting, hailed Bahrám Chübína
As Sháh. Pursuing me he led his troops,
As ‘twere a moving mountain, to the bridge
Of Nahrawan, and I, when mine estate
No longer flourished, fled and scaped the net
Of bale. As I account of gain and loss
The Arabs only may prove serviceable,
And, if the king bid, I will bring their horsemen
In countless numbers."

" This is ill-advised,"'
Replied Hurmuzd, ** for now thou hast no standing.
To go to them is labour lost, for we
Possess not men, or arbalists or treasure.
The Arabs will not help when there is naught
To gain or lose but in despite and dudgeon
Will sell thee to thy foes, yet God will aid,
And smiling fortune side with thee. If thou
Wouldst quit this land depart with speed for Rüm,
And tell to Ciesar what this slave in straits


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 231


Hath said. He will assist thee with his treasure
And troops. In that land are both men and stores,
And arms and host arrayed. Moreover all
That spring from Farídün are kin to thee,
And will assist thee in thy need."
Thereat
Khusrau Parwiz kissed earth and gave the praises
Due to the Great. Then to Bandwi, Gurdwi,
And Gustaham he said: ** We must consort
With grief and toil. Take order, pack, and yield
Our country to the foe."
said Gustaham :—
" Ne'er mayst thou see ill hap, O king!”
He answered :—
“ The circling heaven produceth wrath and love
By turns.”
With that the watchman cried: “ O Shah,
Just and auspicious! from the road hath risen
Dark dust. Amid a host a standard waveth
Charged with a dragon, and Bahram Chubina
Raised it beside the Nahrawan.”
Thereat
Khusrau Parwiz gat on his steed like smoke,
And fled like flying dust with that blue banner
Behind him. Turning him about he saw
Bandwi and Gustaham proceeding slowly,
And shouted to them in an angry tone :—
“O villains! what hath happened that yon foes
Become like friends to you ? If ‘tis not so
Why ride at leisure with Bahrám Chübína
Hard on your backs ? "
Bandwí replied : ** O king !
Be not concerned at him: he will not see
Our dust, the host’s flag is too far away. C. 1892
Thy friends all say there is no cause for haste


Because Bahram Chubina, when he reacheth


232 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The palace, will at once give to Hurmuzd
The crown and throne, will sit as minister
Beside him, and will angle to some purpose
By writing from his sovereign to Cæsar
To this effect : * A worthless slave hath fled
This country; let him not obtain asylum
In Rim. Each time that he hath raised himself
He hath done hurt and damage to your land.
When he arriveth put him into bonds,
And fill with trouble his rejoicing heart.
Return him to this court and tarry not
Until he have grown great,’ and they will bind him,
And send him back in tears and strongly guarded."
Khusrau Parwiz heard this with troubled heart,
His cheek gloomed at their words and he replied :—
* Ili-fortune well may treat us thus, but words
Are long and deeds are strong ; trust we in God."
He urged his steed and said : ** What good and bad
The World-lord hath writ o'er our heads will come,
No musing can avert it. May our foes
Ne'er have their will."
: When he had gone the two
Unjust ones turned back eager for revenge.
Arrived, they sought the palace of the Sháh,
All dudgeon and with hearts prepared for crime.
When they had passed the gate and reached the throne
They straightway took the string from off a bow, |
Flung it forthwith around the monarch's neck,
And hung his honoured person. Passed that crown
And throne of king of kings: thou wouldst have
said :—
" Hurmuzd was never in the world at all."
The custom of revolving time it is
To furnish sometimes sweets and sometimes bane ;
Seek not for profit from a stock like this
Because the quest will bring thee naught but pain.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 233


When thus Hurmuzd's days ended and the throne,
That happy seat, remained unfilled, forthwith

Arose a sound of drums; those murderers’ cheeks
Became like sandarac. Upon the road

Bahram Chubina’s standard came in sight

Amid his troops, and that outrageous pair—
Bandwi and Gustaham—fled from the palace,

And hasted till they reached Khusrau Parwiz,

Who, seeing their wan looks, knew that their hearts
Contained some secret, else would they have quitted
The master of the world ? His cheeks became C. 1893
Like flowers of fenugreek but he revealed

Naught to that savage pair. He bade his troops :—
" Turn from the highway for a host approacheth.
Take the long route across the unwatered plain,

And let your bodies grow inured to pain.”


$9
How Bahrdm Chiibina sent Troops after Khusrau
Parwiz and how Bandwit contrived to rescue him
from their Hands


On entering the palace of the Shah

Bahram Chubina chose from his fierce host

Six thousand wielders of the scimitar,

Mailed, to pursue the king, and put Bahram,
The son of Siyáwush, in charge of those
Famed, warlike troops, while on the other part
Khusrau Parwiz took to the waste to ‘scape
His foes with life, and reached at length a hold
With battlements of viewless height. Folk called it
"The House of God "—a shrine, a blesséd spot,
With bishops and a metropolitan,


m i i ae 2


T3 €13-41710 —-—-e—e————À —————————" 17 — 39 — EE. Š


234 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


A place for penitents. He there addressed
A holy man: “ What food is there to hand ?”
A bishop said: ‘‘ There are unleavened loaves
And watercress, my lord! If such thou needest
Let it be none save ours.”
The king forthwith
Alighted with his escort. That aspirant
With his two courtiers took in hand for prayer
The sacred twigs, then on the soft, blue! sand
They sat and ate in haste of what there was.
Thereafter he addressed the bishop thus :
“ Hast thou no wine, old sir whose steps are blest ?
He said: ** We manufacture wine from dates ;
We make it in the heat of summer-time.
There is a little left, clear as rose-water,
And red as coral in the sun."
Forthwith
He brought a eup thereof and it eclipsed
The hue of Sol. Khusrau Parwiz drank three,
Partook of barley-bread and, when his wits
Were warmed with ruddy wine, slept with his head
Laid on Bandwí's lap on the yielding sand,
All sorrowful of soul and liver-pierced.
Just as he slept the senior bishop came.
“ Black dust-clouds have arisen on the road,"
He said; “ behind them is a mighty host."
Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ It is bad luck
That foes should seek us just as men and steeds
Are spent. The inevitable day hath come.”
Then spake Bandwi the good at need : '* Yon chief
Approacheth."
Said Khusrau Parwíz: * Good friend |
Direct us in the matter.”
He rejoined :—
" I will devise escape for thee, O king !
! For the sake of the rhyme, probably.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 235


In this strait, though I shell have sacrificed
My life to save the monarch of the world,”

Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ A sage of Chin
Hath uttered better things in this regard :—

‘In Paradise shall be his future state
Who here hath tilled about a monarch's gate.
The plastering can not abide in place
When city-walls are levelled to their base.
When mighty cities perish out of hand.
Let not the hospitals be left to stand.'
If shift thou knowest use it; holy God
Will save thee from the need of other help."

Bandwi said: “ Let me have the crown of gold,
The earrings, girdle, and the robe from Chin,
Gold-woven and tulip-hued, and while I don them
Abide not thou. Go with thy troops apace
As sailors speed a vessel o'er the deep."

The youth did as Bandwí advised and thence
Companioned with the wind. When he had made
Shift thus to flee, Bandwi, the veteran,

Turned to the bishop, saying: ‘* Ye must tarry
Unseen of all upon the mountain-top,”
Then went himself dust-swift within the shrine,
And with all speed shut fast the iron door,
Assumed the gold-embroidered robe and donned
The royal crown. He went upon the roof,
And thence unwillingly beheld a host
On every side. He waited till they came
Up to the hold to fight. At sight of him
With gold crown, earrings, torque, and belt all cried :—
It is Khusrau Parwiz with his new crown
And robes.”
Bandwi, when certain that the troops
Had taken him to be the Shah himself,
Went from the roof, donned his own clothes with
speed,


C. 1895


235 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Then fearlessly returned and said: “ Young braves !
To whom shall I address me as your chief
Because I have a message from the Shah
To give in presence of the mighty men ?”
The son of Styawush, on hearing this,
said: “Tam chief and Iam hight Bahram.”
Bandwi replied: “The world-lord saith: ‘My
journey "
Hath much distressed me; all our beasts are sore,
Foundered aud all amort with lengthy travel.
I reached this house of penitents for rest,
But will at day-break give up worldly hopes,
And take with you the longsome road that leadeth
To great Bahrám Chübína, and herein
I do not seek delay that heaven perchance
May succour me. Mine ancestors were wont
To keep the laws of honour and good faith,
And through their long and fortunate careers
They ne'er refused when subjects asked a boon.
So now that fortune is my foe I make
An open breast to you, for from bright Sol
To darksome dust the will of God is done.’ ”
The chief agreed and every one that heard
The Shah's words grieved for him. The troopers all
Dismounted and kept guard on him that night.
Next day Bandwi went to the roof upon
The side that faced Bahram and said: “ The Shah
Is praying and will do naught else to-day.
He spent last night in prayer. Besides, the sun
Is high, he must not suffer from the heat.
Leave him in peace to-day. At dawn to-morrow
He shall surrender.”
| “This may prove a trifle,”
Bahram said to his chiefs, ** or else of moment.
If we shall press him much he may be wroth
And fall on us. He is a host himself,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 237


A world-aspirant, shrewd and valorous.
If he be slain in fight Bahram Chubina
Will send too dust from us. ‘Tis best to wait
To-day, although our stores are running low,
To see if he will yield without contention.”
Thus was it till the night rose o'er the mountains,
And her host gathered, then both far and wide
The troops spregd, kindling fires on every side.


$10
How Bahrám, the Son of Siydwush, took Bandwi and
carried him to Bahrám Chiübfna


When earth grew sun-hued eloquent Bandwi C. 1896
Went to the roof and thus addressed Bahrám :—
" Experienced one! when dust rose from the plain
Khusrau Parwíz at sight of you departed,
He and his troops, in haste toward Rim, and now, a
Wert thou to wing it eagle-like and soar
Above the sun, thou wouldst not spy the Shah
Unless in Rúm where he hath aged by now ;
But if ye grant me quarter I will come
Forth to thy valiant chief and I will answer
All questions asked of me about ourselves,
But if not I will arm and send the dust
In combat to the sun."
The youth's heart aged
With grief when he heard this. “ What will it profit,”
He asked his comrades, “if I send the reek
Up from Bandwi? The better course will be
To take him as he is with mind unclouded
Before the paladin to tell whatever
He knoweth of the Shah and either lose


=
a
e a ail


C." 1897


235 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


His head or keep his crown.’
Then to Bandwi :—
* Diseuss this question with Bahrám Chübína,
Thou evil schemer !
Then Bandwí, the Lion,
Came down and went back with the valiant chiefs.
Bahrám Chübína heard of their return,
And that Khusrau Parwíz bent on revenge
Had gone to Rüm, and vehemently raged
Against the son of Siyáwush, exclaiming :—
“ Thou luckless miscreant ! thou hast disobeyed.
Fool that I am! I have approved a fool ! "
He summoned next Bandwí, the ambitious one,
And turned the wrath on him: “'Thou miscreant
knave !
Blame-worthy liar who hast been so foolish
As thus to gull my troops! "Thou couldst not rest
Through thine ill nature and hast now become
One with accursed Khusrau Parwiz, hast made
A youth a veteran and hast come to boast :—
‘I will renew this outworn age." "'
Bandwi
Replied: “ Exalted chief! look but for right
From me and be not fierce. Know that the king
Of kings is of my kin, his majesty
And greatness are mine own, and I have given,
As was my duty, mine own life for his.
If thou'rt a chieftain act straightforwardly.”
Bahram Chibina said: ** I would not slay thee
For this thy fault. Howbeit thou wilt perish
By his hand soon and know that I speak sooth.”
They gyved Bandwi’s feet, and Bahram Chubina
Consigned him to the son of Siyáwush
To keep him scathless, stayed till sunset there,
Then sought his own couch with a heart all care."


KHUSRAU PARWIz 239


$11
How Bahram Chibina summoned the Magnates of Írán,
how they discussed his Pretensions to the Kingship,
and how he acceded to the Throne


When Sol unsheathed its sword, and when its veil
Of yellow showed, Bahram Chibina sent

And called the magnates, seating them upon
The dais of the kings on golden seats,

Which he had ranged around, and sat in joy

As conquering monarchs do. Thereafter he
Spake with a mighty utterance thus and said :-—
" Ye that are worshipful! now make response
In full assurance and auspiciously

Advise upon my words. Give them all heed,
And note my prompt dispatch. Ye will not find
A worse Shah than Zahhak, search as ve may,
Who slew his sire for kingship's sake, whereby
[rin fell to his hands ;* and now again

Khusrau Parwiz, a man unjust and cursed,

Hath slain his father and hath gone to Ram;
And so till one of royal race appeareth,

One fit to claim the throne and make crown, girdle,
And fortune his who, think ye, is the man

To gird him at this present to restore

The precedents of kings ? I swear by Him,
Who is the Master of the sun on high,

That I will give you aidance in the quest.”

The nobles heard the famous chieftain’s words,
And none dissented. Then an elder rose—
Shahrin Gurdz, a hoary warrior,

A chieftain eminent—and answered thus :—
“ Thou art a benefactor to the world,
! See Vol. i. pp. 136, 139.


C. 1898


240 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]T


Illustrious prince! Hadst thou not been at Rai
No one had matched king Sawa when he reached
Our coast with forces to enslave the Free :

But bravely thou didst arm thee and that trouble
Passed from the Íránians, and a host equipped,
And warriors all, four hundred thousand strong,
Fled from thy wooden shaft, and thus Írán

Had rest from heat and strife; so now its throne
Befitteth thee as thine unsleeping fortune

Is witness. Him that disobeyeth thee,

Or shunneth thine alliance, will we cause

To do thy will, brave though he be, and though
The matter touch Khusrau Parwiz himself.”

Thus spake he and resumed his seat, whereat
The chieftain Khurásán stood forth before
Bahrám Chübína and thus spake: “I ask en
This old, ambitious sage, who hath harangued
The assembly at such length, who hath inspired
His words ? He praised thee so that all our hearts
Rejoiced, and yet there is a goodly saving
Used in the Zandavasta by Zarduhsht
For honest brains to hear: * Whoe'er shall quit
The Almighty's way, admonish such one year,
supplying all his needs, and after that
If he return not slay him with the sword
By order of the Sháh, while if he be
The just Sháh's foeman let him be beheaded
Forthwith.' " ;

He spake, ceased, and resumed his seat.
Then Farrukhzád stood up. “O helpful chief ! *
He said, ** just speech is better than mishap.
If justice then is better perish he
That joyeth in unjust words."

Then he spake

Thus to Bahram Chübína: ** Blest be thou,
And may the sight of thee sustain the world.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 241


If these my words find favour and if God,
The Conqueror, assist us live for ever
As our blest Shah, and be the hands and tongues
Of bad men far from thee.”
$ That valiant man
Sat down and Khazarwán, son of Khusrau,
. Came forward lion-like and said: “ Although
. Both young and old talk much vet in the end,
If thou wouldst follow right, dispatch like wind
A cameleer and tarry not until
Khusrau Parwiz, the exalted one, shall tread
The longsome road a victim to injustice.
Excuse thy late behaviour and approach not
The throne thus boldly, for no general
Is worthy of it while the world-lord liveth.
If thou art fearful of Khusrau Parwiz
Break off thy love for Pars and Taisafin,
And live in ease and power in Khurásán. C. 1899
Write letter after letter of excuse ;
Perchance Khusrau Parwíz may prove amene."
When he withdrew stepped forward Zid Farrukh,
And said with justice: ‘* Chiefs of noble race !
_I have been listening to this debate
Of these the chosen leaders of Írán.
First, that proposal worthy of a slave
To make a paladin the Sháh is one
Distasteful to the wise, one to diminish
A man’s renown. "The words of Khurásán
Were grand and wedded, I maintain, to wisdom,
While those of Farrukhzád were violent,
Such as would hebetate the hearts of sages.
The fourth to speak was Khazarwán, the chief,
Whose words were also wise, for since God made
The world the course of time is manifest.
Start from Zahhák, the Arab, who was both
Unjust and foul of Faith. He slew Jamshid,


VOL. VII, Ù


242 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


That overweening one, and seized the world
Unjustly. Holy men grieved that a div
Was Sháh till Faridün, that glorious king,
Abated him. Next came that miscreant,
Afrásiváb, who for that purpose left
Türán and crossing o'er the stream beheaded
Naudar, the noble, with the scimitar
In piteous fashion and o'erturned the state ;
And, third, Sikandar who from Rüm invaded
Írán, laid waste our land, and slew Dara,
The swordsman, so that food and slumber grew
Harsh to the Íránians, while, fourthly, came
Foul Khüshnawáz who robbed our fields and fells
Of mirth and joy when unexpectedly
The Haitaélians slew Pirtiz, a Shah high-starred,
The conqueror of the world, the chief of rulers,
And overturned the throne of king of kings.
But none hath seen a wonder such as lately
Came on [ran when Shah Khusrau Parwiz
Fled from the throne, from his own troops, to
foes |"

This said, he sat and wept. Bahram Chibina
Turned livid at the words. The veteran
sambáz, loin-girt, with Indian sword in hand,
Leapt to his feet, “ This noble paladin,”

He said, “is great, just, ardent, so till one

Of royal race shall come and gird his loins
C. 1900 "Tis best for him to sit upon the throne,

For he is warlike, brave, and fortunate.”

Bahrám Chibina, chief of warriors,

Heard, clapped his hand upon his sword and drew it,
Exclaiming : ** If we find within this quarter
A woman of the lineage of the Sháhs
I will behead her with the trenchant sword,
And let the breath of death pass over her.!
' Couplet inserted from P.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 243


I will not wait for one to claim the realm,
And caracole amidst the cavaliers."
Whenas the chiefs possessed by Ahriman!
Heard their foul leader thus assert himself
They drew their scimitars, arose, and spake
In terms unheard till then : ** Bahrám Chubina
Is Shah and we are subjects. We will not
Transgress his wishes and commands.”
Now when
Bahram Chubina saw the scimitars
Drawn he did what was just and right, and said :—
“Tf any one shall leave his seat and touch
His scimitar I will cut off his hand
Forthwith and sober him.”
This said, he left
The nobles for the pleasance. That great conclave
Dispersed with faces lined and broken hearts.
Whenas the pitch-hued, star-illumined Veil
Appeared, and watchmen’s calls were heard, he asked
For pen and paper, and a noble scribe,
And wise, approached, to whom he handed pen
And inkstand, saying: '* Write out on this silk
This declaration from the Íránians :—?
* Bahrám Chübína is the Sháh, triumphant,
Deserving crown, adorning throne, and seeking
Right publicly and. privily.' "*
This written
They lighted links and passed an anxious night,
But when the Veil of lapis-lazuli
Had passed away and when the world was sun-gilt,
One fortune-favoured came and set a state
Within the palace of Bahram Chiubina ;
Upon that golden state they placed a seat,
And oped the court. He took his place as Shah,


' Reading with P.
* Thus imitating the impious Zahhik. See Vol. i. p. 154.


C. 1901


244 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And donned the royal crown. The scribe then brought
The declaration of his sovereignty
Inscribed upon the costly painted silk,
And each chief testified: “ Bahram Chuibina
Is monarch of the world.”
When they had signed
He sealed it with his golden seal and said :—
* All-holy God will testify to you
That now this realm is mine and may its kings
Be of my lineage for a thousand years,
And thus ennobled hold in line direct
The erown and lofty throne."
"Twas on the day
Khurshíd of month Ázar that thus the Lion
Gave up the Onager's back.! Bahrám Chübína
Thereafter thus harangued the Íránians :—
" Revengeful strife hath risen in our midst.
Whoec'er aecepteth not this settlement,
Be he an honest man or not, shall spend
But three days in Írán and on the fourth,
What time the world's Light mounteth to the sky,
Shall go to join Khusrau Parwíz and sleep not
In our dominions longer."
Blessing him,
Not from their hearts, men said: ** May earth ne'er
lack thee."
. Heart-broken that Bahrám Chübína reigned
Those loyal to the kingdom's rightful lord
Departed Rüm-ward and dispersed abroad.
' Mohl has "' lorsque le lion dévorele dos del'onagre." It may


mean " When the country (the onager) lost its natural tyrant the
lion (Khusrau Parwiz) by the accession of Bahram Chubina.”


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 245


$12


How Bandit plotted wth Bahrdm, the Son of Siyáwush,
to slay Bahram Chiibina, and how Bandwi fled from
Bond


For seventy days Bandwi, like cheetah bound,
Was in the prison of Bahram Chübína,
Watched by Bahrám, the son of Siyáwush—
A most unwilling jailor—whom Bandwi,
Still scheming though in bondage, thus beguiled :—
“ Despair not of the monarch of Írán :
Though night be dark ‘twill turn to day and though
His fortune, like the fortune of Pírüz
With Khüshnawáz, shall tarry long. The Maker
Restored him in the person of Kubdéd,!
And gave him back the world. Bahram Chubina
In like wise will retain not crown and throne,
Doth he himself, this man of fortune, think it ?
Nay, perish any rustic who thus giveth
Himself in folly to the wind. Count thou
Two months upon thy fingers and thou'lt see
Troops from Írán in Rüm, and they will cast
Fire on this erown and throne, and break the jewels
On this man's head."
Bahrim said: “If the king

Will grant me quarter I will deck my soul
With thine advice and do thy will in all,
But I must have a great oath sworn to me
By moon, Azargashasp, by throne and crown,
That if Khusrau Parwiz come to our coasts,
And bring a host from Cesar and from Rim,
Thou wilt ask him to spare my life, not slight C. 1902
What so importeth me, lest he be led

* Kaikubád in the original.


246 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


By what the Iranians say and harm befall me.”
He spake, then calling for the Zandavasta
He caused Bandwi to swear, who took the roll,
And said: “Let not Bandwi see aught but pain
And toil from the Supreme or e'er find rest
Within this Wayside Hostelry if I
Do otherwise. Else when Khusrau Parwiz
Bestir himself I will not look on him,
Or ever rest, unless he send to thee
Withal a signet and a chieftain's erown."
Bahrám, on hearing what an oath he swore,
And seeing his pure heart and loyalty,
Said: “I will tell thee all my schemes aloud.
I will achieve revenge and set a snare
To catch Bahram Chubina. Where I set it
There will I do mine utmost to destroy him
With bane of scimitar. Our streams are dry
Since we have had to hail him as the Shah.”
Bandwí replied : * Know, O experienced man !
That I am shrewd and prompt and wise, and when
Khusrau Parwiz returneth with a host
From Rim, and sitteth on the state, thou'lt find
That he will not refuse me anything.
I will ask pardon for thy past offence,
And he would give his crown at my request.
If thou wilt keep thy word and not ensue
Guile in thy heart unfetter me and thus
Begin to recognise Khusrau Parwíz ;
‘Twill prove thy secret bent; that plain appeal
Will reach his ear."
Thereat Bahrám's face brightened,
And he removed the fetters.
When night’s veil,
Musk-hued, turned bright and dawn laid hand thereon
Bahram said to Bandwi: “ If my heart fail not,
What time Bahram Chübína playcth polo


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 247


To-day I have engaged me with five friends
To slay him."
Calling for à coat of mail

He donned it 'neath his dress and rode awav.
Bahram, the warrior, had a wicked wife
Who wished him hewn to pieces. In her heart
She was enamoured of Bahrim Chubina,
While hatred of her husband filled her soul ;
So to Bahram Chubina she dispatched
Some one to say : '* O thou that succourest !
Protect thyself because Bahram hath donned
His mail beneath his robe and buckled it.
I know not what may be his ill intent, C. 1903
But thou hadst better keep aloof from him."

Bahram Chubina, hearing her advice
Not to play polo with her spouse, tapped all
Who came upon the ground with polo-sticks,
And drew anear him, gently on the back
With kindly greetings in a pleasant tone
Until he reached the son of Siyáwush,
Found him to be in mail and said: “O thou
Worse than a biting snake! who weareth mail
Beneath his silk upon the polo-ground ? ”

This said, he drew his vengeful scimitar,
And clave the son of Siyáwush in two.
"Iwas bruited in the city that Bahrám
Was slain, and when the tidings reached Bandwi
The daylight failed him. Putting on his mail
He mounted, quaking girt his warlike loins,
And taking all the kinsmen of Bahrám,
With all that looked for safety to himself,
Fled from the city and the Day of Doom.
When they had gone one stage their numbers grew ;
They pressed along the road to Ardabil.

Bahrim Chibina, when he left the ground,
Trailed in his wrath his robe in blood, then ordered


C. 1904


248 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Mahrwi to guard Bandwi. The people said :—
“ Fret not for him, O king! for when he heard
News of this slaying verily he took
The wind for waymate, knowing that the matter
Concerned himself and that Bahram was slain
For their intrigue. He sorrowed to have caused
His comrade's death and saw the outlook dark."

The king said : ** May he lack both skin and brain
That knoweth not foe from friend. One will repose
Upon the points of elephants’ tusks, another
Trust to the billows of the dark blue sea ;
A third will brave a monarch’s wrath, a fourth
Take lion by the foreleg. Let thy soul
Feel for all four; their fortune is averse.
Another would move mountains and inviteth
All to his aid. He wearieth himself,
And as the outcome clutcheth but the wind.
To voyage in a ship unseaworthy
Is better than to be precipitate,
And if thou seekest and dost find a spring
Wilt thou grow daft and turn therefrom in wrath ?
The man whose guide is blind will tarry long
Upon his way. The handler of a dragon
Would die, the dragon ‘scape, while pain and death
Are his who eateth bane for trial's sake,
And yet I did not slay Bandwi at first,
50 he hath schemed and hath escaped my hands !
My act is one for which I needs must weep,
And see what is God's will.’

Bandwi the while

With his small band sped on like rushing wind.
Each carried with him what he could toward where
Mausil, the Armenian, dwelt along a road
Infested by wild beasts and waterless,


* The import of the speech is: ‘ There are many sorts of fools
but I am the greatest of them all."


Ot ott"


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 240


Bandwi perceived a eamp-enclosure pitched,
Saw that it was Mausíl's, found streams and food,
And hurried forward to that fertile spot
Alone, beheld Mausil, did him obeisance,
And told him privily the case, who said :—
"Stay here, for here the latest news will reach thee
Of what Khusrau Parwíz doth in fair Rúm,
And if he contemplateth peace or war."
Thereat Bandwi was minded to remain,
And called up his companions from the plain.


$13


How Khusrau Parwiz went toward Rúm by the Desert-
route and how a Hermit told him of the Past and
Future


Khusrau Parwiz led on in haste where guide,
And grass and water, were not. Slack of rein
They went in dudgeon till they reached Babil,
Where all the well-disposed among the chiefs
Went forth to weleome him. As he drew near
He made his men dismount outside the city,
And scarce had done so when a courier came
Out of Írán in haste. He bore a letter
Concealed upon him from Bahrám Chübína,
And written to the ruler of Bábil :—

^ Detain a company if one shall come ;

My troops pursue and will arrive anon.”

The ruler, seeing the letter’s purport, sought
Khusrau Parwiz in haste, who looked and read,
Astounded at the process of the world.

He feared pursuit and mourned his own fatigue,
But mounting presently departed thence,
And girding up his royal loins pressed on


C. r9o5


as v i


250 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Until he came to the Farat: no rest
Saw he in his own realm. His followers,
Both old and young, were famished. Then they spied
A wood and water while a caravan
Of camels led on by a cameleer
Appeared anon. That youth, when he beheld
Khusrau Parwiz, called blessings down upon
That noble one, who asked : “* What is thy name ?
What is thy trade and whither goest thou ?”
He answered: “ Kais am JI, son of Haris,
And heir of Arab chiefs. From Misr have I
Come with a caravan and am myself
Chief cameleer. I dwell beside the waters
Of the Farát and came thence to this forest."
Khusrau Parwiz asked: * What hast thou of food
And stuffs, for we are wearied out and famished,
Not having food or packs ? "'
The Arab said :—
" Stay ; I am one with thee, share, soul, and body."
In his affection for the Sháh he brought
A fatted cow; they slaughtered her and lit
A fire by kindling sticks both green and dry.
He grilled kabab; the comrades of the Shah
Were eager to partake, consuming much,
But had no bread. Each chieftain then made ready
A sleeping-place. They slept awhile, then rose
And offered up their orisons anew
To that just Judge who made the world, made mighty
And weak alike, and then the Shah addressed
His comrades thus: “ The most in fault are they
That are my noblest and most famous subjects :
Still those that have done worst, rebelled, and left
God's way, may trust with confidence to me.
See that ye give to them the fairest hopes."
His comrades blessed him, saying: “ O thou pure
Of heart and Faith! bright be thy heart and jocund


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 251


Thy lot, and may the just Judge give thee back
The throne. He hath bestowed on thee such Grace
And mien that love and justice are increased
For every one: thou art the sum of wisdom,
For thou replacest ill by good.”
The Shih,
Though pleased at this acclaim, was in his heart
Concerned about his route and asked the Arab :—
" What is it like? How shall I fare with troops ? "
He answered: “ Seventy farsangs and more C. 1906
Of waste and mountain front you. With thy leave
I will find meat and water for the road
If thou wilt hurry not."
Khusrau Parwiz
Replied: “ There is no other course, for this
Will furnish provand and a guide.”
The Arab
Dispatched a cameleer to fare before
The troops. He hurried over waste and mountain,
All eare and travail, with that company.
Withal afar another caravan
Appeared upon the route before the troops.
A wealthy merchant sought the king, who asked :—
" Say, whence art thou and whither hastening ? "
He said: “‘ I am a merchant and a scribe,
And I have come from Khurra-i-Ardshír."
" How did thy father name thee ? " said the Sháh.
The merchantman replied: ** Mihrán Sitád."
The king requested of the man supplies
Because the leader of his troops had said :—
“ He hath, O Shah! provisions past compute,
But may not be best pleased.”
" To find a host
Upon the way is so much to the good,"
The Shah replied. The merchant loosed his bales
Of cheap and costly wares, brought provand forth,


C. 1907


252 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And sat himself upon the ground, invoking
A blessing on the king. The eating done,
The hospitable merchant brought the Shah
The water for his hands, but when Kharrád,
Son of Barzin, saw that he rose, ran up,
Took the warm water from the merchant's hand,
That no respect toward the Sháh might fail,
And when the merchantman made haste to bring
Wine lucent as rose-water then again
Kharrád, son of Barzín, took from his hand
The goblet and presented it himself.
In due observance servants profit find,
For all such service is repaid in kind.

“ Which is the army's route,” the Shah then asked
The merchant, “ and, O hospitable man !
Where dwellest thou in Khurra-i-Ardshir ? ”

He said: “O Shah! live in prosperity.
I of these traffickers am from Káraz."

The Shah enjoined Ruzbih, the scribe, to note
The young man's name and village. “Go thy ways,
And be at heart the warp and woof of wisdom,”
He said. The army left that verdant spot,
And hurrying toward the Riiman marches reached
The town which Cesar named Kársán. The Christ-

lans,

On seeing the troops afar, went hurrying
Across the waste to carry their effects
Within the walls and firmly barred the gates.
The Shah, the lustre of the world, chagrined
Remained outside for three days with his troops,
And on the fourth dispatched a man to say :—
" Our troops are few, send provand, succour us,
And treat us not in this high-handed wise."

They scorned his words, his troops were weak and

famished,


+" Je suis le courtier des marchands," Moll.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 253


When suddenly there rose a murky cloud,
Which roared like some great warrior-lion ; a storm
Swept o'er the place; from every quarter came
Din and a cry for help.. By midnight half
The walls had gone; the town was all amaze;
The bishop offered prayers ; in every quarter
They gathered food together, and three priests,
Three venerable men, went forth in haste
With native produce and with Ruman robes,
And brought a led horse to the Shah. They said :—
“ Our fault, O Shah! is manifest te us,”
And he, a noble youth, reproached them not.
There was within the city’s walls a palace,
Whose summit was at home among the clouds ;
"Twas built by Caesar and had many slaves.
The Shah went thither when he left the plain,
And oft-times used to go about the city.
The Rümans all acclaimed him and strewed jewels
Beneath his feet. Possessed of this fair dwelling
He rested for a while and wrote to Cæsar
Of that storm, rain, and darksome cloud, then went
Toward Minwi which he renamed Mini."
The shrewd and wise, the great and powerful,
Among its citizens, with priests and monks,
Went to the king with gifts and offerings,
Spake of the storm and of that ancient town,"
And all said: “ We are slaves and bow before
Khusrau Parwiz’ behest.”
He stayed three days,
And on the fourth when Sol, the world’s light, rose,
And thrust its bright sword through the clouds,
departed
Toward Warigh ;* it was a city’s name,
And had the true Cross! and a hospital.
! t.£. Paradise. * Karsan.
' Spelt also Aurigh, i Cf. VoL v. p. 3o6 and mole.


254 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Upon the waste he saw a hermitage ;
He heard the hermit's voice, approached, and asked :—
^ What blesséd one is here ? "

They made reply :—
“An ancient man grown wan with many years,
A skilled astrologer; there is not aught
Concealed from him, and what he saith will be.”

The Shah drew nigh the door forthwith and cried :—
“ Be thine to worship God, and may He bless thee
If thou wilt come forth from thine ancient cell."

Forthwith the hermit, when he heard the words,
Descended from his cell and seeing the Sháh
said : ** Of a truth thou art Khusrau Parwíz
Brought by the hand of an ill-doing slave,

Impure, Armenian-like, a servitor,
To this affliction for thy father’s throne.”

He spake at large; Khusrau Parwiz became
Cheered in his heart through all that kindliness,
And all in wonder at the words invoked
The blessings of the Maker on the man,

The devotee, and, mounted, greeted him
With outstretched hand, whereat the man of God
Did reverence and spake long. By way of proof
The Shah said: “ Of the Iranian host am I,
A subject, bearing a dispatch to Cæsar,
And I shall carry to my lord his answer.
See if my journey will be prosperous,
And how result.”
He answered : “ Say not so;

Thou art the Shih, make not thyself a courtier.
I told thee all at sight so never prove me.
Thy Faith alloweth no falsehood, and deceit
Is not thy way and wont. Thou hast endured
Much toil and sulTered, and at last hast fled
Before thy slave,"

Astounded and confused


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 233


Khusrau Parwiz began to make excuse.
The hermit said: “ Forbear, and question me
Of what will be. As to thy coming hither
Be glad and confident, and to the world
A fruitful bough for God will satisfy thee,
And give to thee high fortune and high place,
While thou wilt have from Cæsar arms and troops,
And daughter worthy of the crown of state.
The World-lord, who ne'er sleepeth, will assist thee
In battle with thy slaves, while in the end
The miscreant will flee and oft recall
The days of his success. He will alight C. 1909
Far from that field of battle and there dwell :
"et still, though rather than submit to thee
He will choose exile, they will shed his blood
At thy behest.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied :—
" God grant it, ancient sage ! but tell me this :
Will it be long ere I obtain the kingship ? "
He said: “ Twelve months and thou wilt have the
throne,
Then fifteen days and thou wilt light the world
As king of kings."


= Who of this company,”
The Shah inquired, * will bear most toil and care
On mine account ?”
The hermit said: ** Bistám,!

A lofty spirit and a prosperous,
And thy maternal uncle who, thou knowest,
Hath made thy lifetime pleasant; but be ware
Of that unprofitable man, the source
Of all thy plaints, affliction, and mishap.”

The Shih was wroth and said to Gustaham :—
“Thy name revealeth thee! Thy mother called thee


' The Arabic form of Gustuham. He was no true Persian
and therefore not to be trusted.


C. roro


256 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


Bistám but thou proclaimest in the fight
Thyself a Gustaham ! "
Then to the hermit :—
" This is mine uncle on my mother's side."
The hermit answered : ** Yea, it is the same ;
Thou wilt see pain and strife through Gustaham."
~ And after,” said the Shah, “ what will ensue,
My counsellor ? ”
He answered: ‘* Heed not that,
For thenceforth thou wilt have but praise; no ill
E’er will befall thee, and if hardship cometh
‘Twill be from God. This rebel will disturb
Thy peace, but after thou wilt be content,
And, bad as this malicious one may prove,
His fate is in thy hands."
^ Be not concerned
Hereat, O king!" said Gustaham. * By God,
The Holy One, the Maker of the moon,
Who made a Shah like thee to rule the world :
By sun, by moon, and by Ázargashasp,
And by the life and head of our famed Sháh,
While Gustaham shall live he shall not seck
Aught but the right or knock at evil's door :
And if he should be minded otherwise
Then may the soul of Gustaham depart.
No human being since the World-lord made
The world hath looked upon His seeret's key ;
Why shouldst thou credit then a Christian's words,
And heed his idle talk ? Suspect me not
Through speech of his, and seek not for a pretext
Against me now that I have sworn to thee."
Khusrau Parwiz made answer: * Holy men
Speak to the point. Withal I have not seen
Ill from thee ever, and thou catchest not
At guile or folly, yet high heaven's process
May make thee harmful and no wonder too,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 257


For when God willeth wit and wisdom swerve.”
Then said he to the hermit: “ Be thou glad
In heart and prosperous.”
From that hermitage
He went like levin flashing from a cloud
Toward the city of Warigh, and thence
There met him those of worth and eminence.


$14


How a Cavalier of Casar came to Khusrau Parwt:
and how Khusrau Parwiz sent a Letter by Gusta-
ham, Bálwi, Andiydn, Kharrád, Son of Barzín,
and Shádpür to Casar


When he arrived there came from noble Cesar
A cavalier to say: “ Ask what thou wilt
Within our coasts and see that thou refrain not
Thy will from kings, for though this realm is mine
I hold thee as mine equal. Stay secure,
And happy in yon city, apprehending
No ill. All Ramans, haughty though they are
And chiefs, shall serve thee, and I will not seek
Food, sleep or rest till I have furnished thee
With arms and troops.”
The Shah heard and rejoiced ;

His soul was eased; he bade call Gustaham,
Bálwi, aspiring Andiyan, Kharrad,
Son of Barzín, and lion Shápür, and thus
Spake that brave monarch: “ Saddle up at dawn
With golden saddles on the horses led,
Put on your tunics gold-inwoven from Chin,
Be one in heart and honesty, depart,
And parle with Cæsar. Be ye wary, shrewd,

VOL. VIII. R


C. 1911


258 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Attentive, bland, and courteous. If he goeth
Upon the Ground for archery or polo
Exert you to the utmost 'gainst his chiefs,
For ye must not be worsted: let him know
That horsemanship proceedeth from Írán,
While from its Lions there come might and valour.”
The Shah then bade Kharrdd, son of Barzin -—
“ Bring hither silk from Chin and black musk; I
Must write a letter like resplendent Sol
In jocund Paradise to Cesar, brief
But to the purpose, such as all men’s hearts
May recollect. He hath philosophers ;
Be instant that they hear no foolishness.
They measure not their words in anything ;
Let them not find a fault in our dispatch.
When he hath read the letter loose thy tongue ;
None of them can compete with thee in speech.”
Then to Bálwi :* * If Cæsar speak of us
In public with regard to an alliance,
Oath, treaty or affinity, reply
As sweet as honey for thou art my tongue
Before that folk and mine interpreter
For good and ill. Endeavour by all means
To save us from defeat: be diligent ;
Take mine assurances and bear in mind
My words."
Those ardent, veteran warriors
Heard the instructions of that glorious youth,
And blessed him saying ; *' May none wear the crown
But thou.”
They fared with cheerful hearts to Cæsar,
Who when he heard: “ Some nobles of Írán,
The envoys of the monarch of the world,
Have reached Yuünán," sent many troops to meet
them.
* Reading with P. and below.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 259


He decked a palace with brocade of Rim,
The pattern jewelled on a ground of gold,
And sitting on the famous ivory throne
Assumed the heart-illuming crown and bade
Withdraw the curtain and to introduce
The envoys from the vestibule, rejoicing,
First came the noble Gustaham, behind
There were Balwi and brave Shápür, Kharrád,
Son of Barzín, and valiant Andiyan,
All erowned and girdle-girt. They came anear
To Cæsar and on seeing did obeisance,
With one consent called. blessings down on him,
And on that golden throne besprinkled gems,
He first inquired about the Shah, Iran,
The host and toilsome journey. Hearing this,
Kharrad, son of Barzin, approached the throne,
And brought the letter of the Shah. They set,
By order of that noble sovereign,
Four golden seats, and of the envoys three,
Men of illustrious rank and well advised,
Sat down, but still Kharrád, son of Barzin,
Stood. Cæsar said: “A traveller should sit.”
“ The Shah hath not conferred on me the right,”
He answered, “in thy presence while I hold
His letter: mine abasement may commend
Itself to thee and aid mine embassage.”
Said Cesar: “Speak. What said the prudent
prince ?”
Kharrad, son of Barzin, what while he spake
Observing what Khusrau Parwiz had said,
First praised the Maker and besought His help,
“ Who is above all height, all wise, all mighty,
Who hath revealed heaven’s host and given us
Soul, wisdom, love. He bade and heaven was,
For He is over space and time. The sphere
And stars revolving are His work. When He


C. 1982


266 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


Created servants out of worthless dust
He gave life first to Gaiümart.! The race
Went on to Farídün whom God most favoured
Of all those noble chieftains. Once obscure
His stock became illustrious in the world,
And lasted up to Kai Kubád who donned
The crown of majesty. His race ne'er saw
Calamity and ever kept God's way ;
But now a worthless slave hath come and sat
Upon the royal throne. I seek for justice
Against the unjust, not crown, throne, cap, and

girdle.
Whoever sitteth on a throne hath need
Of wisdom, fortune, and nobilit y.
This man shall learn to whom the fortune, Grace,
And diadem of king of kings pertain.
Help me and quell this traitor for I roam
Despised by small and great."

When Cæsar heard

His cheeks became like bloom of fenugreek ;
That bloom of fenugreek grew charged with hail,
And from his tongue and soul there burst a wail.”


$15
How Cesar answered the Letter o Khusrau Parwtz


He read, his grief increased, the throne appeared
All mournful* to his eves, and thus that world-lord
Said to Kharrad, son of Barzin: ** That I
Esteem Khusrau Parwiz above myself,
Above my kindred and my fluent soul,
Is not a secret with discerning men.

' See Vol. i.p. 117 seq. — * Like lapis-lazuli in the original.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 261


I have arms, troops, and treasure. Now consider
What ye require. If he will have mine eyes C. 1913
I will not say him nay though they are better
Than wealth, dinars, and sword."

Then Cesar summoned
A well-experienced scribe and, seating him
Upon the royal dais, bade him write
An answer decked like meads of Paradise |
With many a counsel, promise, and kind word
About past times and present. When the scribe
Had finished Cesar chose a cavalier
Brave, fluent, ardent, and of heedful mind,
Wise, learned, a warrior, and scribe withal,
And said: “*Go to Khusrau Parwiz and say :—
‘Thou seeker of God’s way, shrewd-hearted Shah!
I have men, arms, and treasure, and no need
To trouble any one but, if need were,
Would requisition drachms from every lord
Throughout the realm that thou mightst have thy

wish,
And go hence to thine own home in Iran.
Grieve not while here, “tis circling heaven's way,
Which is by turns our refuge and our bale,
By turns our loss and profit. While I find
Arms, troops, and money do thou take thine ease.’ ”
The envoy went and told Khusrau Parwiz.


$16


How Ceasar wrote to Khusrau Parwiz, declining to
help him, and his Answer


Then Cesar cleared the audience-room and sat
Deliberating with his counsellor,
And said thus to that priest: ** This suppliant


252 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS}


Hath made choice of ourselves to refuge with :
What shall we do that he may gather strength,
And feel no more his subject's insolence ? "
The counsellor thus answered: “ What we need

Is that a few shrewd-hearted men of those
That are our well-advised philosophers
Shall act with us herein,”

50 famous Csesar
Dispatehed a messenger and four arrived
Of those philosophers, two young, two old,
All Rüman-born, and thus they spake at large :—
“The Iranians, since Sikandar passed away,
Have deeply wounded us by frequent raiding,
By war and strife, and causeless, reckless bloodshed :
Now holy God requiteth their ill deeds
In kind. Since the Sásánians' fortune halteth
Forbear to intervene.. Khusrau Parwiz,
If he shall gain the royal crown and raise

C. 1914 His forehead to the moon, will ask for tribute
From Rúm anon and trample on our land.
Reflect if this be wise. Hold their words wind.”
When Cæsar heard he changed his mind and sent

The Sháh a letter by a cavalier
To tell what course the sages had advised
In long debate., He reached Khusrau Parwiz,
And told what he had heard the famed king say,
Delivered Casar’s letter too and uttered
Words past compute. Khusrau Parwiz grew strait
Of heart thereat, his face turned wan with care.
He thus replied: “ If we must lay to heart
All that can be alleged from days of yore
Then all our travail will but catch the wind.
Consider now if my progenitors,
Those chosen world-lords, men of holiness,
Made wars with justice or unjustly ; ask
Of ancient men who bear such things in mind.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 263


Vouchsafe to question the wise men of Rum
If ‘twas the crow or owl that did the wrong.’
Although the Maker hath not left in want
The Great of Rüm mine ancestors withal
Were men of name, in their own days supreme,
Who were no brookers of insurgency,
Pride, wrong, or foolishness from any one ;
But what can this avail now that my head
Is in the dragon’s maw ? Greet Cæsar for me,
And say: ' The Great speak only to the point
In wisdom's presence though both good and ill
Pass in the end. I will not rest till I
Have drawn my skirt forth from this turbid stream,
And if the Rümans will not succour me
I will send envoys to the Khán. My words
Have naught availed because my river-bed
Was fouled, and when my messengers return
My sojourn in this city will be short." "

He said to the Íránians : “ Obey
My hests; let not this matter break your hearts,
For God, the Conqueror, is aiding us ;
Our part is fortitude and manliness.”

He took the matter lightly and dispatched
His answer by Tukhár. He wrote as though
He recked not either good or ill. Tukhar
Departed from Khusrau Parwiz and came
To where was Ceesar’s court, that man of name.


! Alluding to a story in the book of Kalíla and Dimna (see Vol.
vii, p.382). The owls, paving £2 ancient prudge against the crows,
one of whom had prevented the owl from being elected the king of
the cranes, made a treacherous night-attack wpon the crows. A
counsellor of the king of the crows, acting somewhat as an Haitian
chief is said to have done in the war against Pírüz (id. p. 161),
succeeded in avenging them,

.


C. 1915


264 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST


$17
How Casar wrote the second Time to Khusrau Parwtz
about giving him Aid


Now Cæsar having read the letter pondered,
And then addressed his noble minister :—
" Expound these problems. Call the Great and
Brave,

Tell what hath passed at large and ascertain
If now Khusrau Parwiz in this contention
Will be successful or will writhe at fortune.
If ye shall say: * He will not be victorious,
Henceforth there is no New Year's Day for him,’
Then will we let him journey to the Khan,
And go, since he is ailing, to that cure;
But if he is to triumph and possess
The kingship, like his father, it were well
In all ways that he go hence with a host,
And so not contemplate revenge at heart.”

The prudent minister, on hearing this,
Gave orders and the readers of the stars
Came with their ancient tablets and consulted
Until three watches of the night had passed,
And in conclusion an astrologer
Spake thus to Cesar: “ O illustrious !
I have consulted these old tables made
In astrologie wise by Falátün.!
Ere long Khusrau Parwíz will have the realm,
The kingship start afresh, and darksome dust
Receive him not for eight and thirty years."

Thereat said Cæsar to his minister :— »
~ Our doubts are cleared about Khusrau Parwíz.
What shall we say ? What answer shall we give ?"

i Plato.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 265


" Let us apply a salve," he made reply.
~“ If he betake him to the Khán's domains,
Get aid from him, perceive himself secure,
And levy soldiers elsewhere than in Rúm,
He never will forgo revenge on thee.
Advise thou who art wiser and more potent
In compassing thy will.”

= We must,” said Cæsar,
“ Dispatch him troops forthwith. When all is
weighed

"Tis well to hold wealth cheap and keep from harm.”

He wrote forthwith, bestowing praise on praise :-—
“ We have consulted loyal, honest priests
On all points bad and good, and have returned,
Discussion over, to our former view.
All is arranged and now we will unlock
Our ancient hoards. Within Kastantaniya! C. 1916
We have but force enough for garrison,
But have ta’en order and have requisitioned
Troops from the other provinces. As these
Arrive I will not fail to send them to thee.
All this delay and great deliberation.
This pricking with a fleam the lion's jaws,
Arose from sages’ tales about the past,
How under Sháh Shápür, son of Ardshír,
Our youths' hearts aged with toil, much ravaging,
Assault and slaughter and unjust revenge ;
Then passing to Kubád? and to Hurmuzd,
Both reckless of God's justice, of our cities
Were nine and thirty turned to bramble-brakes
By the Iranians, and the waste became
Filled with the blood of chiefs whose wives and children
Were carried captive; so thou must not marvel
If Rimans mused revenge. Howbeit to owe
A grudge is not according to our Faith,

' Constantinople. * Kaikubad in the original.


C. 1017


266 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And God forbid that we should practise ill.
We know no better thing than uprightness,
And lack of all deceit and knavery.

We have convoked the chiefest sufferers,

And spoken much to them in this regard ;
Their evil passions have been charmed away,
For gnawing bane hath turned to antidote.
Thus then have we secured that none will use
The language of revenge about the past,

And pledge our lives to further thy commands.
Thou too must pledge thy word that none will bear
Ill will to us, must say : * While I am king

I will not think your labours slight or mean,
Will not demand a tribute from the Rümans,
Or sell for aught these services of theirs.'

Go further in complaisance : treat and make
Affinity with us. Whate'er ye do,

E'en in an unjust war, let us be friends

And brothers still through all vicissitudes

Of power. Now when ye need our help no longer,
And thoughts of vengeance shall recur to you,
There will be talk again of Tur and Salm,

And of the follies of the past, so now

I ask a binding pact, fit for thy seal,

As a reminder that from this time forth

We will not speak of vengeance for Iraj,

Or of the past. [Írán and Rim shall be

One realm ; we will not seek to sever them.
There is a daughter in our ladies’ bower—

A fit mateh for the greatest of the great ;

Ask her according to our holy Faith,
According to our rites and ritual,

That when thou hast a child of Cewsar’s line
He may not think of vengeance for Iraj :

Then earth will rest from war and strife, and seek
The right way in the Faith. Regarding this


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 267


With wisdom's eye thou wilt esteem it just.

Affinity will make alliance sure,

Such is the precept that we have of God.

Good sooth, it is a long day since Pírüz,

Or Khüshnawáz.| They gave their heads to wind,

But perish any treaty-breaking king!

Our Prophet, the Messiah, said thus: * If thou

Quit justice wisdom warpeth. Many a plan

Tried Khüshnawáz to keep the other's head

From coming to the shears, but when Pírüz

Used force against him, in that fight the Shah

Saw but black reek while host and royal throne

Went to the winds because his head was turned

From right. Thou art a youth new to affairs,

And if thou wouldest gather fortune's fruit

Make not a treaty-breaker thine ally ;

Dust is the shroud of such, and crown and throne

Curse treaty-breaking, strife-provoking kings.

Peruse my letter o'er and, if thy fingers

Possess the needful skill, write heedfully

A fair and good response. I would not have

This known to any scribe, so write thyself,

And take good heed. When I shall read thine
ANSWer, 7

And see therein the heart of one resolved,

I will dispatch forthwith arms, troops, and money

To ease thy heart of care. As touching those

Who are with thee most honoured or renowned,

And those withal ‘gainst whom thou harbourest
vengeance,"

Put manfully such hatred from your hearts.

Leave their? ill doings to almighty God,

^ With a slight change of reading. Mohl translates: “ Depuis

Pirouz Jusqu à Khouschnewaz, il s'est passé bien du temps, pendant

lequel les deux ples ont livré leurs tétes au vent.
: A qs E withal," etc., referring to Bahrám Chübína.


C. 1918


268 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And be not masterful with friend or foe.
If thou wouldst have victorious fortune hold thee
Lord of the world with host and crown and throne,
Lay not thy hand on others’ goods but make
Thy soul a pathway toward the light, indulge
Thy kindred, and protect the labouring poor.
If thou art bounteous and a friend in need
None will attempt thy crown and throne, Of Shahs
The vigilant have kept the world from foes.
The magnates that desire affinity
Themselves or for their virtuous children ne'er
Have suffered ill from foemen, and God's Grace
Hath magnified them.! Now we all court thee,
And deck our tongues to give thee good advice.”
Whenas the address was dry they sealed the letter

With musk. Now when with tidings of a league
That he expected not the letter reached
Khusrau Parwiz he told the Iranians :—
" The sun revolveth otherwise to-day !
A letter of high poliey hath come
From Cæsar in most favourable terms :
He seeketh to abate the ancient feud
Between Írán and Rüm."

They answered him :—
"* Whene'er this feud is o'er no chiefs will seek
The Sháh's crown, or such numbers live in want.
If in thy days such righteousness come down
Men will inscribe thy name on every crown.”


' Couplets transposed.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 269


$18


How  HAhusrau Parwit answered Ceasar about the
Alliance


Now when they had approved this policy
Khusrau Parwiz put strangers forth and called
For inkhorn, pen, and silk of Chin, and bade

A scribe attend. He wrote, as Sháhs were wont,
Thus in the olden tongue in royal seript :—

" Khusrau Parwíz doth swear by holy God,

By circling sun and stable earth that while

I sit as Shah upon the seat of state,

Lord of Írán, its treasures and its troops,

I will not ask the chiefs of Rum for tribute,

Or send a host against those fields and fells.

I will restore to Cesar all the cities

Thereof however tradeless they may be

And worthless, and thereafter will return

Their documents and records. Further, I

Am well content to ask of him a daughter
Whose mother is both pure and of his race,

And by so asking illustrate my heart.

Entrust to those Irinians at thy court,

And under thy protection—Gustaham,

Kharrád, son of Barzín, of royal race,

Shápür and Andiyán—thy daughter, wise

And high-renowned, when thou dost send the troops.
Iam through mine affinity to thee

As my great family were heretofore.

The first was Gaiümart, the next Jamshíd— C. 1919
A source of hope and terror to the world—

Then followed others of the glorious stock,

Great men in wisdom and in royalty.

From those old monarchs, wearers of the crown,


270 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The story runneth on to Kai Kats,
And Kai Khusrau, and by the selfsame token
To mighty Kai Kubad! whose justice made
The sheep and wolf akin. Pursue the tale
To Shah Luhrasp through whom to Shah Gushtasp
There came the glorious Asfanfiyár,
That chief of chiefs, from whom sprang great Bahman,
And thus we come to Ardshir Papakan
“Neath whom our ancient star regained its youth.
Now when Khusrau Parwiz, son of Hurmuzd,
Is one in heart and sentiment with Cæsar,
Among whose distant ancestors was Salm
(I seek no fables and I tell no lies)
We shall abolish all the feud between us,
And Rüman and Iranian will be one.
I do accept from Ciesar Ciesar's daughter—
The crown of all his daughters. Whatsoever
May be her faults or virtues it is well,
And holy God is witness to this letter,
Writ in mine own hand known throughout the world,
And I have sealed the letter with my seal
According to our customs, ways, and faith.
For thy suceessors—world-lords crowned and
throned—
That which is written here shall be my pledge,
With mind and wisdom to corroborate,
That I will keep my word in great and small.
That what I say is true my heart and star,
And holy God, bear witness, so delay not
To act upon thy words, for I have lingered
Long in this city.”
All being said, he gave
The letter to Khurshid, son of Kharrad.
As swift as wind that chieftain rose and mounting
His chestnut steed sped till he came to Cæsar,
* Kai Kubád really preceded the two Sháhs previously mentioned.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 271


And gave the message of Khusrau Parwiz.
Then Cesar, having snapped the band and read
The words of that exalted Shah, commanded
The wise men and the eloquent to meet
Before him and inquired of them in turn :—
^ What cure shall I adopt ? How shall I make
A treaty with the monarch of Írán ?
His letter leaveth us without excuse ;
All we of Rüm and of Írán are one."

The chiefs and sages rose to answer him,
And said: '" We are but subjects; thou art Cesar, C. rozo
The world-lord throned and crowned. Do thou

advise,
Who hast both counsel and authority :
Our bodies and our souls are thine.”
When Cesar

Heard he commended those shrewd, plous chiefs,
And waited till in the revolving sky
The lamp of day had lost its radiancy.


§ 19
How Cæsar made a Talisman and deceived the Envoys


of Khusrau Parwiz, and how Kharrád, Son oj
Barzin, solved the Mystery


When circling Sol grew pale, and in the tower
Of night the stars were stationed, Caesar bade
His warlocks muse and frame a talisman—

A marvel—somewhere, such as none would know
From real—a woman modest, fair, and seated

In trailing. raiment on a goodly throne

With handmaids on both sides of her and slaves
Before her and behind, She was to sit,


C. 1921


272 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


That moon-faced one in silence, to appear
A woman weeping, and from time to time
To raise one hand and dash her tears away.
The warlocks, as they were instructed, made
The semblance of a woman with long hair,
And all that from a distance gazed thereon
Took it to be a woman lovelorn, bright,
That sorely wept o'er Christ, her cheeks aflame,
Her lashes like Spring-clouds. When of the adepts
That talisman was set up in its place .
One went and said to Cesar: “ We have finished
The matter in accord to what thou badest."

When he had heard this from the expert, Caesar
Came from his throne in haste and visited
The talisman. He marvelled at that feat
Of sorcery and sent for Gustaham.
He bounteously rewarded those magicians
With money and with divers other gifts,
Then said to Gustaham: “ Famed warrior !
I had a daughter beautiful as Spring :
She grew up to a marriageable age.
I had a kinsman, an aspiring one,
To whom I married her with Christian rites.
I countenanced him unadvisedly,
And sent her to his palace. "That youth's soul
Hath gone to Heaven; she is deeply grieved ;
Bright day for her is lapis-lazuli ;
She will not take my rede or speak a word,
And our young world hath agéd through her trouble.
Concern thyself to see her, and employ
The words of men of lore, for thou art wise,
A paladin by race, and she may speak
To thee"

He said: “I will: it may be I

Shall banish this affection from her breast."

With cheerful heart and charged with potent words


KHUSRAU PARWIZ


That chief approached the guileful talisman,

Which bowed to greet him as he neared its throne.
Illustrious Gustaham sat humbly down,

And spake to that sad dame, beginning boldly

With such advice as seemed to him of profit :—

" () daughter born of Cxsar's race ! ^ he said,

“ The wise exclaim not at the course of nature :

The flying eagles, lions in the forests,

And fishes in the waters, are not free

From death,” but all his words were wind; no soul,
Or tongue had she but ever and anon

Would dash away the tear-drops from her eyes

As her physician talked. While Gustaham

Was lost in wonder Cæsar summoned him,

And asked : '* How didst thou find that child of mine,
Whose pain and mourning cause me this distress ?

He answered: “ I advised her much but vainly.”

The following day said Cesar to Balwi :—

" Go thou with Andiyan. Shápúr withal,

The nobly born, may help to make my heart
Glad in my daughter. Go to that sorrower,
And speak to her about the famous king.

She that is heaping fire upon my head

May answer thee. Be good enough to aid me
By converse with my mourning child; perchance
In view of your high rank she may accept
Your counsels. Sure I am that she will speak
To-day, and when she maketh fair reply

I shall be freed from this disconsolate, —
Who raineth tears of blood upon her breast."

Then those three noble Persians went to her,
And each one strove, but answer gat they none ;
That tongueless dame was mute. The baffled three
Went back to Cesar, that just judge, and said :—
“We spake and gave advice as best we could,

But there was no improvement.”


VOL. VIII. 5


274 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


* "Tis ill hap
For us," he said, “ to grieve for one in grief.”
C. 1922 Since these great men had failed he had recourse
To great Kharrad, son of Barzin. “Thou art,”
He said, “ one of these chiefs and thou mayst hear
Her voice forthwith,” then sent him to the mourner
From court attended by a trusty servant.
When he arrived he looked upon the mien
Of that crowned form and waited in its presence
No little while. The guileful talisman
Made him a bow of greeting. He observed
The woman, head and foot, most heedfully,
And marked the attendants standing round. He
spake
At large; she answered not a word: that man,
That scion of the chiefs, grew full of thought.
“If grief hath robbed her of her wits,” he said, |
" Why do her servants hold their peace the while ? <
lí these be very tear-drops from her eyes
One would expect her passion to abate,
She letteth fall the drops upon her breast,
And knoweth not to move to left or right ;
Her tears fall on one spot ; she hath not used
One hand or stirred a foot! Had this form life
She would move more than foot or hand, would shed
Her tears, and stretch her other hand, elsewhere.
I see life stir not in her body ; ‘tis
A talisman of these philosophers.”
He came to Ciesar with a smile and said :—
* This moon-faced lady is not rational ;
It is a talisinan of Rüman make,
And hath deceived Balwi and Gustaham.
Thy purpose was to laugh at us or charm
Our eyes. Our Shih when he shall hear will smile
With open lips and show his silvern teeth."
Said Cæsar: “ Live for ever! Thou art fit


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 275


To be the minister of kings. I have

A wondrous chamber in my palace, one

Can not imagine aught more marvellous.

When thou beholdest it thou wilt not know

Its secret—talisman or work divine.”
Kharrád, son of Barzin, on hearing this,

Went to that ancient chamber and beheld

A cavalier upstanding, poised in air,

And going back to famous Cesar said :—

“The cavalier is tron and the chamber

Withal is fashioned of the famous ore

Called loadstone by the sages. Those of Rum

Have mounted him upon an Indian steed.

Whoe'er shall read the Indians’ books will find

Both pleasure and enlightenment of mind.”


§ 20


How Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, expounded the Faith of
the Indians and exhorted Caesar


** In what regard," said Cæsar, * do the Indians C. 1923
Err from the Path? Those that are worshippers,
Are they idolaters or what are they ? "

Kharrad, son of Barzin, replied: “ In Hind
They worship ox and moon, put not their trust
In God and circling heaven, and regard not
Their persons, look no higher than the sun,

And reckon not men like ourselves as wise.
Whoever kindleth fire, shall enter it,

And shall consume himself therein, believeth
That in the air there is a fire ordained

By God, whose word is law, which fire the sage
Of Hind entitleth * Ether’ and hath much


v I924


275 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Of worth and interest to say thereon,

As thus: when earthly and etherial fires
Combine man’s sin is purged; they must be kindled
Since burning is accounted righteousness.

Withal ye too speak not aright; hereto

Christ's life is testimony. Mark’st thou not
What Jesus, son of Mary,! said when he

Was bringing secret things to light ? * If one
Shall take thy skirt from thee resist him not,
And if one buffet thee upon the face,

So that thine eyes are darkened by the blows,
Be not enraged or let thy cheek turn pale,

But shut thine eyes and speak no chilling word.
If thou hast little food let it suffice,

And if thou hast no carpet seek one not.

Hold not this kind of evil to be bad,

And ye without a pang will quit this Gloom,’
But now with you desire is king o'er wisdom,
Your hearts have erred through overweening greed,
For ye have raised your palaces to Saturn,

And camels bear your treasuries’ keys. Besides
The treasures ye have mighty hosts with coats
Of mail from 'Ád and Rüman helms. Ye lead
Hosts everywhere unjustly and allow not

Your swords to rest. The wilderness is all

One fount of blood : Christ led you not to this.
He was a poor, unfurnished man who earned

His bread by toil and lived on curds and milk
With butter for his only other food.

Now when the Jews gat hold of him and saw
Him friendless and without resource they slew him,
And having slain him set him on the gibbet

To make thereby his Faith contemptible.

His father was an ancient man, his mother


' * Ts4 son of Maryam ™ in the original,
* S. Mat. v. 39, 40. S. Luke, vi. 29.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 277


A temple-keeper and a trier out
Of good and ill! Grown ardent and desirous
Of knowledge, eloquent, instructed, mindful,
He made withal disciples by his teaching,
And compassed in his youth his will by shrewdness.
Thou sayest that he was God's son and smiled
When slain upon the gibbet !* At such things
The sage doth smile. If thou art wise fear God,
Who hath no need of consort and of son,
And unto whom all mysteries are clear.
Why turn'st thou from the Faith of Gaiümart,
The path and precedent of Tahmuüras,
Which tell us that the Judge of earth is One,
And that our only course is serving Him ?
The experienced thane and worshipper of God,
When muttering prayer he taketh in his hand
The sacred twigs, may taste no drop of water
Albeit for very thirst he dream thereof ;
He trusteth God upon the day of battle,
And asketh not cold water in the fight.
Withal he taketh for his cynosure
The highest element which is above
Earth, air, and water. Our Shahs barter not
Their Faith but list to Him, the Lord of all.
They joy not in dinars and gems but seek
To make their name and mark by justice only,
By gifts of lofty palaces or joying
The hearts of mourners. Fourthly, they pronounce
None wise but one that on the day of battle
Doth veil the bright sun's face with dust and guardeth
The land from foes. Be curses his, not blessings,
That seeketh from religion aught but right.”
When Cesar heard this he approved; the words
' According to the Kuran Mary had been dedicated from the
first to the service of God. Zacharias built for her a chamber in


the temple and provided for her. SK, i. 58 and notes,
* See p. gt.


C. 1925


278 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Seemed profitable to him, and he said :—

- The Maker made thee foremost of the great ;

Üne needs must hearken to thy pure discourse.

Thou hast the key that openeth the door

Of mysteries. The head of one with liege

Like this is higher than the moon’s own crown.”
Then from his treasury he bade to bring

Dinars and drachms and crown magnifical,

Bestowed them on Kharrád, son of Barzin,

And uttered many praises: “* Cultured be

The country of Iran,” he said, “ through thee.”


$21
How Casar sent a. Host and his Daughter to Khusrau
Parwiz


Now Cæsar, when he heard that troops had come,
And that the world was black with horsemen’s dust,
Chose from those Rúmans five-score thousand men,
All famed in battle, requisitioned arms,
War-steeds and drachms, and thus much time elapsed.
He had one daughter Maryam hight, wise, grave,
Well counselled and resolved, and later on

Brought forth such stores of bridal bravery

That e'en the speedy baggage-beasts grew slow—
Gold trinkets, jewels that a king might wear,

Gems, gold-embroidered raiment, carpetings,
Brocade of Rúm with golden patterns wrought
Upon a ground of silk, torques, bracelets, earrings,
And three most costly and bejewelled crowns.

He had four gilded litters too made ready,

Their curtains decorate with royal gems,

And forty others made of ebony


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 279


All jewelled like the eye of chanticleer.
Then came three hundred moon-faced waiting-maids
All colour and perfume, five hundred slave-boys
Intelligent and bright with ornaments
Of gold and silver, forty Raman eunuchs
Fay-faced, illustrious, attractive men,
And four of the philosophers of Rúm,
Wise, learned and famed. He gave them their
instructions,
And privily withal charged Maryam
To be obedient, order her desires,
To do her duty, to be bountiful,
As to her food and how to bear herself.
There was, as reckoned in the Riman way,
More than three hundred millions" worth! of goods.
To every envoy at his court he gave
A crown inlaid with jewels, robes withal,
Steeds and dinars and much of all things fitting.
He bade write to the Shah on painted silk : —
“Well may they raise their necks up to the moon,
These subjects of the Shah! No man more courteous
Than Gustaham hath sprung from small or great.
Is there a champion like the chief Shápür
To act as arbiter? Bálwi withal
Can keep a secret for he would not sell
His folk for aught, while none though he live long
Will see one like Kharrád, son of Barzin,
Whom God created to solve mysteries.
He is as bright and faultless as the sun,
Divine in rede and deed."
This written, he summoned

His counsellors and readers of the stars
To fix a lucky day for setting forth,
And started on Bahram with favouring stars
And auguries. He went himself three stages,

| "de dirhems," Mohl.


C. 1926


280 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And then resigned the conduct of the host,
Bade Maryam come to him, conversed with her
At large, and said: ““ Be ware of putting off
Thy girdle till thou comest to Iran.
Khusrau Parwiz must see thee not unveiled
Till then or things unlooked for may befall thee,"
Then bade her tenderly farewell: “ May heaven
Protect thee on thy way.”
He had a brother,
The valiant Nivátüs, who led his host
In that campaign, and “ Maryam is akin
To thee,” he said, “in blood and, I would add,
In Faith. I charge thee with her, with this
wealth,
And this well ordered army.”
Niyatus
Accepted all from Cæsar who, this said,
Turned back in tears. The host marched toward
Warigh,
Led on by Nivátüs with mace and sword.
Khusrau Parwíz, on hearing that the host
Had come, set out with forces from that city,
And when the leaders’ dust-clouds and the flags
Of those mailed cavaliers appeared, and when
The troops came onward cloud-like, lapped in iron,
In helmet and cuirass, his heart laughed out,
Like Spring-tide roses, at that fine array ;
He plucked up heart and gave his steed the heel. `
He saw, embraced, and greeted Niyátüs,
And testified his gratitude to Cæsar,
Who had endured such toil and with that toil
Of ordering the host had rendered void
His treasury ; then going to the litter
Beheld the face of Maryam through her veil,
Saluted her and kissed her hand, rejoicing
To look upon the Fair. He bore her off


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 281


To his encampment where he gave his Moon

A bower and passed three days in converse with her.

Upon the fourth when Sol, the world’s light, shone

They gat in readiness a choice pavilion,

And summoned Nivátüs, Sarkab, and Küt,

The bold, with other chiefs both great and small,

Whom thus the Shah addressed: “ What chiefs and — C. 1977
warriors

Are here, such men as brandish sword and mace,

In battle reck not of their lives, and turn not

From lion or from leopard in the fray ? "

.Then Niyátüs made choice of seventy men

To lead in fight; each had beneath his banner

A thousand chosen, lance-armed cavaliers.

Khusrau Parwiz beheld this picked array

Of noble horsemen eager for the strife ;

He praised the Maker of heaven, time, and earth,

He praised too Niyátüs, his troops withal,

And noble Cæsar and his realm, and said :—

“Tf God almighty aid me in this war

I will display my puissance and make

Earth like a sea for jewels; ye shall joy

At having come and rather tell thereof

Than hold your peace; heaven's airs shall breathe
love-fraught

From pleasance, friendship be our only thought."


$22
How Khusrau Parwiz led his Host to Azar Abddagan
and how Bandwi met him on the Way
Upon the seventh day that comely Shah
Arrayed his host as 'twere the turning sky,
The din of tymbals went up from the court,


. 1928


282 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And air grew ebon with the dust of troops.

He chose a force of Persians and set out
Toward Azar Abidagan. There passed

Two weeks what while by order of the Shah
The soldiers concentrated at his camp.

He pitched it on the plain of Dik; the army
Was great and under Raman discipline.

He gave the whole host up to Nivátüs,

Thus saying: '*'Thou art master of the flock,"
And thence with certain valiant eavaliers

Let his swift steed have rein and made toward
Khanjast—an anxious journey—till he reached
Mausil, the Armenian, who could hold his own
Among the great and had with him Bandwi,
The Sháh's maternal uncle. Now these twain,
On hearing that Khusrau Parwiz was stirring,
Sped from the waste to meet him on the way,
Preceding their own troops. To Gustaham
The Sháh said, seeing them upon the road :—
"^ O warrior! two are hurrying o'er the field :
See who they are and wherefore in such haste."

He answered: “ Sure am I, O king! that he
Who rideth on the piebald is my brother,

The brave Bandwi: his friend is not of us."

The Shah said: “What! How canst thou know

him? Nay, |
Seek him in ward if living and if slain
Upon a gibbet in the riding-ground.”

Said Gustaham: “O Shih! regard him well
From this side: ‘tis thine uncle: let me die
For saying so if it prove otherwise,"

Afoot the twain approached the shady spot
Where was the Shah, praised him and did obeisance.
He gave Bandwi a welcome and observed :—

" I said that I should find thee hid in dust."

He told the Sháh all that had chanced to him,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 283


His ruse of putting on the royal robes,
And all Bahram Chübína's clemeney.
Khusrau Parwiz wept greatly at the tale,
Then asked him: “ Who is this ? "
"= O sun-faced Shah !
Hast thou no kindly welcome for Mausil ? ”
He answered. “ Since thou left’st Iran for Rum
He hath not slept in lands inhabited,
But camped upon the plain, his palace been
Tent and pavilion. The troops with him
Are many; he hath all the gear of greatness,
With drachms and treasures. Now he hath been
waiting
Upon the road and longed for thy return.”
" How came it,” asked the world-lord of Mausil,
“ That all thy toil was hidden ? We will strive
To give thee happy days and make thy name
The greatest of the great."
Mausil replied :—
" Give me new life, O king! Let me approach
And kiss thy stirrup while I praise thy Grace
And splendour."
* For these words," replied the Sháh,

"I will make bright thy gains to pay thy pains,
Will grant thy wish and set thy name on high
Above the great." |

Then he withdrew one foot
Out of the stirrup, and that ardent soul,
All eagerness, kissed foot and stirrup both,
O'ercome by veneration for the Shah,
Who, when that loyal liege was satisfied,
Bade him remount and urged his own steed on
Across that barren waste until he reached
Azargashasp. With muttered prayer he entered C. 1929
The Fire-fane, with an aching heart. A priest,
The Zandavasta in his hand, approached


284 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The pious Shah who, loosing from his loins
His golden belt, flung jewels on the Fire,
And in his prayers outdid the priest himself.
“ Just Judge!” he said, “ bring my foes’ heads to
dust.
Thou knowest that I justly plead and purpose
To keep the path of good. Approve not Thou
The injustice of the unjust."
This said, he girt

His golden belt and sought the plain of Dük
With wounded heart in trouble for his way :
Night fell ere he reached camp.

He sent shrewd spies
To learn the posture of the world's affairs,
And when the army of Nímrüz had heard :—
* The Sháh, the lustre of the world, hath come,"
They bound the drums upon the elephants,
And earth became as 'twere the river Nile.
All folk at that intelligence, which made
Them young again, drew near to give him aid.


$23
How Bahrám Chübína had Tidings of the Coming of
Khusrau Parwiz and wrote to the Chiefs of. frán,
and how the Letter jell into the Hands of. Khusrau
Parwiz and his Answer


Bahrám Chübína heard: “ The Grace of kingship
Hath been revived,” and cast his eyes on one
Devoted to himself, one of the host,

Aspiring, sage, fair-famed—Dara Pandh—

Then called a scribe of note whom he instructed
To write him letters of great charge to all


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 285
The valiant leaders—Gustaham, Bandwi,


Gurdwi, the warrior (for he had won

That name from all the other chiefs), Shápür,
And Andiyan, the cavalier, and all

That were the living memories of the great.

The letters? ran: “I offer to the Maker

Mine adoration privily that ye

May.all awake from sleep and hasten not

To il on this wise for from verge to centre,

With this Sásánian race in evidence,

Things worsen through their wrangling and self-
| seeking.

Ardshíir, sprung from Pápak, was first to bring C. 1930
Confusion on the world, his scimitar
O'ershadowed all his age and mazed the Great ;
And first of all I instance Ardawán

With other chiefs of ardent soul whose names

Are lacking on the earth to this throne's grief.
Then surely ye have heard of what befell,
Through ill-advised Pirüz, to Süfarai.

He freed Kubád from fetters and Kubad,

Of all the chieftains, gave him to the wind ;

For when malevolent Kubád grew strong

He put away his virtues, took to crime,

Slew this illustrious and devoted man,

And soured the nobles’ hearts. He that aggrieveth
His kin, preferring passion to his child,

Would injure strangers more. No one would look
For ivory in ebony ; so put not

Your only trust in the Sásánians,

Or seek for jewels in red willow-trees.

When they shall bring this letter unto vou

May vour Urmuzd prove gracious. Ye possess

A place illustrious in my regard ;


! The word is used here sometimes in the singular and sometimes
inthe plural. Several copies were made of the letter actually written.


C. 1031


286 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


The breast and sleeves are all one with the shirt ;
Our place for rest and sleep by dark or day
Is one, and when ye join me ye will brighten
My gloomy soul, I reck not of the Rümans,
Or of their king, and will tread down their heads
And throne.”
They sealed the letters with his seal,
And then the envoy went in merchants’ guise
In haste to where Khusrau Parwiz held court.
He had a caravan of various goods,
And with the letters carried presents too.
He marked the grandeur and great host wherefor,
Thou wouldst have said : * Earth hath no thorough-
fare,"

And thought: “ With such a king who will confide
In brave Bahrám Chübína ? I am Persian,
I carry thirty camels’ loads of goods,
And have no foes; why should I wreck myself
When majesty hath risen from the abyss ?
I will deliver to Khusrau Parwiz
The letters—an unlooked for offering.”

Perturbed he reached the Shah's court with those

letters,

And all the presents of that hostile liege ;
He brought the drachms, the letters, and the gifts,
Revealing all. The world-lord having read
Assigned the messenger a golden seat,
And said to him: “O man exceeding wise !
Speak of Bahram Chibina as one vile
In our regard. Thou hast attained thine end,
But make it not a feather in thy cap,’

Then sending for a scribe he had an answer,
Such as the case required, drawn up at large :—
" Brave and exalted chief! we have perused
Thy letters and been privy with thine envoy.

t Ey boasting of it.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 287


In word we battle for Khusrau Parwiz,
But are to thee like new Spring in our hearts.
When thou hast led thine army hither who
Will reck of Rúm or Rümans ? We will draw
Our scimitars and slay them in the fight.
Khusrau Parwiz, when he shall see thine host,
Thy prowess and pre-eminence, will quail
At heart upon the battle-day and flee
Like fox before thee.”
Having sealed the letters
He gave them to that loyal chief and said :—
" For this thy conduct, sage! thou shalt have fruit
From toil," then gave him jewels and dínárs,
And many precious gems. * Convey,” he said,
“ These to Bahram Chubina and recount
What thou hast heard, and thou shalt want for
nothing
When my high fortune brighteneth.”
From court
Dárá Panáh departed and achieved
His journey like the wind. The youth delivered
The letters which the paladin received.
When that aspirant had perused the letter
He summoned greed and banished rede, and led
By what the letters said prepared to march.
The Íránians were amazed. The elders went,
On seeing that blind act, and said: “ Depart not,
Or thy young day will age. Khusrau Parwiz,
If he invadeth us, will only find
The maces and the scimitars of war:
But do not thou betray the royal throne,
Or fortune will beguile thee forwardly."
1 The meaning seems to be:—" If you remain on the defensive
you may rely on the people supporting you against Khusrau Parwiz
backed up, as he will be, by foreign troops; but if you assume the


offensive you will throw away this advantage and so betray your
Own cause,"


C. 1932


288 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSIT


Their words were vain; he bade the host assemble ;
He loaded up the baggage, called to horse,
Struck up the drums, and led the army forth.
That valiant armament of Persians reached
Ázar Ábádagán. Host drew near host,
And ant and fly were barred from thoroughfare.
That warring subject said: “ I fain would scan
Yon host and see what Rüman cavaliers
Are like, and if their troops are troops or what."

Then with Yálán-sina and with the chief,
Ízid Gashasp, the warriors all mounted
Upon their steeds. These magnates went to view
The hostile host, saw and returning told
Their chief : * Yon host is boundless! The affair
Is other than we deemed."

Upon their side

The Rüman horsemen of the Sháh arrived
In all haste at the place of audience,
And girding up their loins exclaimed : “ We long
To battle with the fránians," which thing
Accorded to the wishes of the king.


§ 24


How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram Chibina
and how Kut, the Ruman, was slain


When Sol rose o’er the darksome hills the war-cry
Ascended from both hosts ; thou wouldst have said :—
* Earth is a turning sky and swords eclipse

The sun!” The troops drew up to left and right;
Earth was an iron mountain. At the neighing

Of chargers and the shouting of the hosts

The desert fled for shelter to the hills.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 289


When brave Bahrám Chübína saw he drew

His glittering glaive, his heart conceived no fears
Though raging lions’ hearts were rent asunder.!
He went himself to view the left and right,

And told Yalán-sína : ** Take thou the centre,
And keep before the army for I champion

The troops to-day and tarry though they flee."

Khusrau Parwiz surveyed the battlefield,

And saw the whole world blackened by the hosts ;

The bright sun’s face was like a lion’s maw,

And thou hadst said: “The clouds are raining
swords !

Then Niyátüs, Bandwí, and Gustaham

Went with the Sháh from battlefield to height.

Those leaders took their station on Mount Duk,

Their eyes upon their followers, and thence

The Shah surveyed his host, the right and left,

The centre and the wings. The tymbals sounded

From both sides and the eager warriors

Advanced to fight. “ Earth is an iron mountain,”

Thou wouldst have said, “ heaven lost in foemen's
dust ! "

Now when Khusrau Parwíz saw matters thus,
Saw heaven as woof and earth as warp, he praved
Thus in the olden tongue: “O Thou more pure, C. 1933
And higher than the high! who but Thyself,

O holy Judge! can tell which will return

Exulting from the fight to-day ? The spear

Of him whose fortune halteth hath but thorn

Or weed for point.”
Khusrau Parwiz was full

Of care, both heart and soul; the world appeared

A brake to him, for from among the troops

Kút, like a dark hill in his iron mail,

Brake from the centre to the height and cried :-—
! Couplet omitted.

VOL, VIII, T


290 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


“= Tilustrious monarch ! point me out the slave,
The doer of div’s work, 'gainst whom thou foughtest
When in Írán and fleddest while he triumphed.
Look to the army's left and right, and find him
Among the chieftains. I will teach him warfare,
And show what hearts and might true warriors have.”

Thereat all mindful of the former fight
The Shah was vexed at heart because Kut said :-—
" "Thou didst let fall thy knightly equipage,
And flee before a slave," but answered not ;
His heart was full, he sighed. At length he said :—
" Approach yon rider on the piebald steed ;
He will attack thee when he seeth thee ;
Then fly not lest thou bite thy lips in shame."

Küt sped back like the wind and spear in hand
Came furious as a maddened elephant
Upon the battlefield. Yalán-sina
Called to Bahram Chuibina, saying: “ Beware,
Brave cavalier! A div armed with a lance,
And with a lasso in his straps, hath come
Like elephant gone mad.”

He heard, unsheathed
Like wind his falchion and proclaimed his name,
Which when the Shah observed he rose and peered
Down from the mountain-top upon the pair,
Wet-eyed and wroth of heart. Now when the Rüman
Charged with his lance the aspirant gripped his steed,
Escaped the thrust, raised to his face his shield,
And clave his foe asunder to the breast.
The sword's clash reached Khusrau Parwíz who
laughed
To see the stroke struck by Bahrám Chübína,
While valaint Niyátüs frown-blinded raged
Because the Shih had laughed, and said: “ Great
sir !

One should not laugh in war whereof thou knowest


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 291


Naught but the sleights, and when thou wouldst C. 1934
avenge
Thine ancestors I see thy heart asleep.
Men will not see in any peopled part
Of Rúm or of Írán one like to Kút,
Hazára's son, whose slaying made thee laugh.
Know this, that fortune hath deserted thee."
He made reply : ** I laugh not at his slaughter,
Or at his body which ts cleft in twain.
Know this that he who mocketh shall receive
Himself a buffet from the turning sky.
He said to me: * Thou fleddest from a slave
With whom thou hadst not prowess to contend.’
But fleeing from this slave who striketh blows
In such wise in the battle is no shame.”
Bahram Chubina for his part exclaimed :—
= Ye chiefs of glorious birth— Y álán-síina,
Ram and Izid Gashasp! bind ye the slain
Upon his charger and thus send him back
To his own camp for their own Shah to see.”
They hasted to secure upon the saddle
The corpse of Kut, and then the charger sped
Back to the camp with that exalted chief,
Khusrau Parwiz was grieved at heart for Kit.
They loosed the knotted lasso from the slain,
Then by the Shah's direction dried the body,
And having filled with musk and stitched the wounds,
sewed up the corpse in linen and dispatched it,
All armed and girded, unto Cesar, saying :-—
“ Tf this infernal slave can give such blows
In time of battle with his scimitar
I am not shamed for having fled from him.”
The Rümans were heart-broken ere they fought,
And sorely stricken ; their patricians wept ;
They all were tearful and dispirited.
Ten thousand of the mighty men adv ancing


C. 1935


292 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


All prelates,! warriors, and cavaliers,
Charged so that hills split at the cry of them,
The clash of arms, the shoutings of the chiefs,
The blows of scimitar and massive mace,
Rose. Thou hadst said: “ It is a raging sea,
And heaven as it turneth crieth * Blood.’ ”
The hosts were blocked and sundered by the slain ;
An army of those Rüman chiefs had fallen. —
Khusrau Parwiz was stricken to the heart,
And had the wounds of those still living dressed.
They piled the corpses mountain-high; men called it
“ The harvest of Bahram.”  Khusrau Parwiz
Lost faith in Rümans for he said: “ If they
Bear them like this again know that their host
Will cease to be and all their swords of steel
Prove merely wax.”
Then said he to Sarkab :—

“To-morrow take no Rimans to engage,
But rest and I will lead the Iranian host
To battle.” |

To the Íránians he said :—
" No more delay ; to-morrow ye must fight,”
And one and all replied : ** We will not fail
To level to the plain mount, waste, and dale."


$25


How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram Chibina the
second Time, was defeated, and escaped from him
by the Help of Surtish


When day’s white banner rose aloft the main,


And when the stars grew hopeless of the dark,
The drummers went forth from both camp-enclosures


* Cf. Vol. i. p. 373.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 293


With elephants and elarions, There rose
The sound of pipes and horns, the trumpeting
Of elephants, and clash of brazen cymbals.
Thou wouldst have said: * The plains and uplands
heave,
The sun's face is like raven's plumes," and when
The Íránians ranged their ranks and grasped their
spears,
And Indian swords, thou wouldst have said: “ The
earth
Is all cuirass, the spear-heads light the stars ! "'
Whenas Khusrau Parwíz arraved the centre
The troops took heart. Gurdwi, that brave aspirant,
Commanded on the right, and on the left
A famed Armenian! with cuirass and sword
Like Áhriman's. Shápür with Sipansár
And Andiyán drew tight their loins for battle,
While close beside the Sháh was Gustaham
To guard him from the foe.
Bahrám Chübína,
The hero, secing not the Rümans, paused
In silence, then commanded and they bound
The drums upon the elephants; the world
Was like the Nile. The elephant he rode
Was white and his antagonist despaired.
He charged the Sháh's right, shouting to Shápür :—
“O knave! ‘twas not thy promise in thy letter
To come against me on this field of blood !
This is not Persians’ usage, and thou givest
Thy body to be slaughtered all for naught.”
Shapur replied to him; “ Thou div-like one!
Thou hast lost all thy wits in slavery.
Whose name and token did the letter bear C. 1936
Of which thou speak’st in presence of the lords ? "
Then great Khusrau Parwiz said to Shápür :—


t Mausil.


294 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


“That letter was to match with his designs ;
I and the other nobles of the host
Will compensate thee for it. In due season
I will explain and purge thee of suspicion.”
Bahram Chibina heard Khusrau Parwiz,
Perceived the ruse, was both enraged and shamed,
And in his wrath resolved on fight. The usurper
Charged all alone upon his elephant
The centre of the army of the Shah,
Who saw and said to Andiyan: “ Fierce lion !
Shower arrows on yon elephant and make
Your bows like clouds in Spring.”
The Iranians,
All that were fortune-favoured, strung their bows.
The elephant’s trunk was riddled so with shafts
That thou hadst said: “It is a Nile! "* Forthwith
Bahram Chibina called for horse and helm,
King-worthy, and the arrows showered anew
Upon that proud one’s steed. The warrior
Alighting, girt his mail-skirts round his waist,
And then with buckler raised above his head
Brought Doomsday with his trenchant scimitar
Upon the foe who dropped their bows of Chách,
Andran. They broughtahorse. He mounted raging,
And shouting charged the centre of the foe—
The station of the Sháh—and pierced it through :
The standard of the leader disappeared.
Thence went he toward the foe's right and outflanked
The Persians and the baggage.* Now Gurdwi
Commanded there—a man of valiance
And of ambition. When he saw his brother
He strung and drew his bow. Those men of blood
Closed; thou hadst said: “They mingle.” Long
they strove,
And neither would give way. Bahrám Chübina
! "de sang." Mohl, ' Couplet omitted.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 295


Cried: “ Misereant ! wherefore girdest thou thy loins
To shed thy brother's blood ? "
Gurdwi replied :—

“ Old wolf! hast thou not heard the weighty saw :—
‘A brother as a friend is good: forego
Both skin and vein if he become thy foe.’
Thou art a man of blood, a miscreant, C. 1937
An Áhriman, the Maker's enemy
At heart. No one of honour and repute
Will come against his brother in the fight.”

Bahrám Chübína, hearing this, withdrew
In anger and high dudgeon, while Gurdwi,
His martial countenance a-gloom with iron,
Proceeded to the Shah. Khusrau Parwiz
Commended him right lovingly and said :—
" May turning heaven reward thee."

Then the Sháh

Made toward the centre, where his warriors reeled,
And sent one to Shápür. ^ Assist Mausil,"
He said, " put forth your power, fight back to back,
And ye may compass shining fortune vet."

At that time said the king to Gustaham :—
If any Rüman shareth in this fight
Then when Bahrám Chibina hath been worsted,
‘Or even wounded, they will raise their heads
Up to the sky and brag immeasurably.
I would not have the Rimans waxing proud,
And glorying over us about the war.
I have seen all their prowess; they are like
A flock in Winter. “Twill be best for me
To fight with him short-handed ; I require not
Aid from another for I trust in God,
The Succourer.”

Said Gustaham: * O king !

Conspire not thou against thine own sweet life ;
But if thou art determined choose some comrades ;


C. 1938


206 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Wreck not thy person on this battlefield."
Khusrau Parwiz rejoined: ‘‘ What thou hast said
Is well, so make thy choice of some to help!
Out of the army.”
Gustaham selected
Twice seven Iranian horsemen brave and proud.
He wrote himself down first upon the list,
Then brave Shápür with Andiyán, Bandwi,
Gurdwi—the prop of kings—Azargashasp,
And then Shirzil, Rangwi who could outface
The lion and the elephant, Tukhára—
A help in fight and to Yalán-sína
A mortal foe—illustrious Khusrau,
And Farrukhzád, Ustád son? of Pírüz,
Who caused his enemies to melt away,
Urmuzd and fortunate Khurshíd—a pair
To whom their foemen were as grass. Their chief
Was gallant Gustaham expert in war.
On this wise he made choice of fourteen men,
And hurried with them from the host apart,
Khusrau Parwiz harangued those chiefs and said :—
“ My noble followers ! look ve all to God,
Be blithe of heart and smiling. Naught will chance
But as He willeth while this ancient skv
Endureth. Better perish in the fight
Than have a slave to rule us. Ye must be
My body-guard and instant in the fray."

All blessed him, hailed him king of earth and vowed
That none of them would quit him in the strife.
The monarch heard, was reassured, rejoiced,

And well contented with those warriors.

He left the host with glorious Bahram,

And went forth with those fourteen combatants,

While from the look-out rose a shout forthwith :

They told Bahrám Chübína: * Troops have come."
! Reading with P. ' Jd.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 297


That vigilant aspirant gat to horse
With lasso in the straps and sword in hand.
When from his steed he saw the sum of them
He chose him some few warriors and spake
Thus to Yalan-sina: “ Yon miscreant
Hath proved that he is hardy in the fight,
For now I know that none but he would venture
Upon this field of vengeance. He hath come
Attended by a troop like this to battle,
But it may be to face the crocodile !
There are not more than twenty cavaliers,
And not one of them do I recognise ! "1
Then to Ízid Gashasp? and to Yalán-sína
He said: * Men hide not valour, Four of us
Will do, for fortune is a greater friend
To me than to Khusrau Parwiz."
He gave
The host to one hight Janfurtiz, who loved
The night’s gloom more than day, and then went forth
Himself and sped on with the wary three.
Khusrau Parwiz perceived Bahram Chiubina,
And told his comrades: “There hath come a troop.
Be not perturbed for ‘tis my time to stand.
Leave it to me and with my mace to deal
With vile Bahram Chibina: be it yours
To combat with his chiefs. Ye are fourteen
To three and may ye never see defeat.”
Then with his Rüman soldiers Niyátüs
Must needs gird up the loins and from the field
Of fight they made their way toward the heights
To view both companies gnd all exclaimed :—
= Why bartereth the great Sháh life for erown ?
Abundant horse are left and yet he goeth
To fight in person recklessly ! "
All raised C. 1939
' Couplet omitted. * Reading with P,


N - 4


298 THE SHÁHNAÁAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Their hands to heaven because they deemed him slain.
Now when Bahrám Chübína and his comrades—
Yalán-sína and brave Izid Gashasp1—
Charged, all the comrades of Khusrau Parwíz
Took flight. Bahram Chübina was the wolf,
These nobles were the flock and full of dudgeon
When they beheld that div escaped from bonds :
Howbeit Bandwi, Gurdwi, and Gustaham
Stayed with the Shah till, with a prayer to God,
He also, left resourceless, turned his steed,
Pressed by Ízid Gashasp.? * My fate," he said,
Is on me! Why in folly did I court
This Doomsday, for the folk have looked upon
My back in flight ? "
said Gustaham : '* The horsemen
Approach us: wherefore shouldst thou fight alone ? '*
The Shih looked back and saw Bahrám Chübína
The foremost of the four, and then to save
Himself eut loose his charger's sable mail.
His three? companion-horsemen lagged behind ;
His vengeful foe pursued. A narrow gorge
Confronted him. Behind him warriors three
Came on like pards. The gorge was barred by rocks.
The world-lord was afar from his own troops.
That glorious youth dismounted fain to scale
Afoot in haste the heights. His path was barred :
The heart of that famed man was sore thereat,
He might not tarry and he could not flee,
While after him came fierce Bahram Chibina,
Who called to him: “ O knave ! the abyss is yawning
Before thy height of greatness! Why hast thou
Thus shouldered thine own fate and brought it me ? "
Then straitened with the scimitar behind,
The rocks in front, the Sháh cried : ** God almighty,
Who art above the processes of time !
* Id. t Jd. | ' Td,


hb
,
i
]


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 299


Thou art my succour in my helpless strait :
I ery not unto Mercury and Saturn.”

Or ever fromthe mountain rose that ery
Surüsh, the glorious, grew manifest
Upon the pathway, garbed in green and riding
A white steed. At that sight Khusrau Parwiz
Recovered confidence. Surtish drew near,
And having grasped the prince’s hand (such things
Are not a marvel with all-holy God)
And borne him from his foe, placed him in safety,
And then let go his hold.

"* What is thy name ? "
Khusrau Parwiz inquired and spake and wept
By turns. He said: “Surtish. Thou art in safety ;
Lament no more. Henceforth Great King art thou,  C. 1940
And shouldst be naught but holy.”
Having said,

He vanished: none hath looked on such a marvel.
Bahram Chübina saw and, all astound,
Invoked the Maker oft. A trembling came
Upon him when he saw his purpose foiled.
He said: “ May pluck ne'er fail me while I fight
With men, but now that it hath come to fays
I needs must weep for my beclouded fortunes."

For his part Niyátüs upon the mountain
Asked God's protection, Maryam tore her cheeks
In anguish for her world-lord spouse. The host
Filled mountain, plain, and dale, the Rümans' hearts
Were grieved and seared. Said Niyátüs to her :—
“Stay here; I fear me that the Shah is lost.”

With that upon the mountain's further side,
Far from the troops, Khusrau Parwiz appeared.
That famed host joyed and Maryam's heart was eased.
He eame to her, informed her of that marvel,
And thus he said: “ O spouse of Cwsar’s line |!
The just Judge hath done justice unto me ;


C. 1941


300 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


‘Twas not through slackness or through cowardice,!
For cowards show their slackness in the fight.
I was companionless within the gorge,

And in my trouble called upon the Maker,

And He that ordereth the world’s affairs
Revealed to me, His slave, His hidden purpose.
Not glorious Farídün or Tür or Salm,

Or yet Afrásiyáb, e'er dreamed such things,
For, nobles! what I looked upon to-day
Betokeneth victory and sovereignty.

Renew the struggle and remember me."


$26
How Khusrau Parwiz fought the third Time with Bahram
Chibina and defeated him


Forthwith the host descended from the mountain ;
The world was blackened by the horsemen’s dust.
Bahrám Chübína for his part was troubled,
Hepenting all his conduct, but advanced,
Not having any choice, his powers apace.
There was no daylight left. He said: “ All those
Commanding troops need wisdom, mastery,
And courage. Seeing how I ply the dart,
And have the making of a paladin,
The brave preferred me to Khusrau Parwiz,
And I will bring the crown of Nushirwan
To dust.”

Advancing rashly toward the Shah
He strung his bow and loosed a whole wood arrow,
Which in a moment struck the Sháh's belt whence
It dangled point-arrested by the silk,


o7 que je me suis enfui." Mohl.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 301


A slave that saw came and extracted it
From the brocade. The Shah’s spear struck his
foe
Upon the belt which was of mail and broke not,
But though the spear-head snapped the usurper
quailed.

The Shah, indignant that his spear was broken,
Brought down his mace upon his foeman's casque.
The mace's head was broken by the blow,
And stuck upon the crest, while all that saw,
Or heard the iron ring, acclaimed the Shah,
Whose troops were heartened, for Bahram Chibina
Had had a check, who, when the sun and moon
Loured on him, turned reluctantly away,
Aware how hard his task had grown—one past
Both prowess and endeavour. The Sháh's host,
When they beheld his lion-manlihood,
All—Rümans and Íránians—unsheathed
The sword of vengeance and charged mountain-like
In mass. The magnates followed in his steps,
And utterly o'erthrew those mighty powers.
Bandwi came to the Shah and said: “O thou,
Whose crown is higher than the sky and moon !
This host like ants and locusts is dispersed
Upon the plain, the sands, and stony ground.
It is unworthy to shed needless blood,
And for the Shah to strive against his slave.
"Lis better that they should appeal to us
For quarter than be slain or maimed in fight."

Khusrau Parwíz replied: “ I seek not vengeance
On any that repent. I grant them grace ;
They are the earrings of my crown."

Night's flag

Rose o'er the darksome hills, both hosts withdrew,
The sentries challenged, bells rang, and the troops
Had little sleep. Bandwi, the ambitious, went


C. 1042


302 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


Between the hosts, chose from the troops a chief—

A herald fluent, with a goodly voice—

Bade him to mount upon his Arab steed,

And make him ready to proclaim. They rode

Between the hosts till close upon the foe,

And then the herald shouted: “ O ye slaves,

In fault yourselves and followers of fortune !

By God! the Shah will pardon all, e’en those

That have done worst and in the war achieved

Most fame, be their faults patent or concealed.”
The sound went through the darkness of the

night,

And all gave ear. Bahram Chibina's chiefs

Girt up their loins to quit him. When the sun

Hose o'er the hills, and day spread taffeta

Upon the ground, the tents upon the plain

Were all abandoned, but Bahram Chuübína

Was not aware of what had passed that night.

None but his friends were to be seen in camp.

On hearing of the troops he visited

The tents and told his comrades: “ To retreat

Is better now than waking on a Doomsday.”
He bade the master of his camels furnish

Two thousand lusty and foam-scattering,

And all his treasures that were portable,

The hangings and the carpets and the plate

Of gold and silver, with the ivory thrones,

The golden torques, the armlets and the crowns,

They loaded up and then themselves took seat

Upon their steeds and girt them for retreat.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 303


$27
How Khusrau Parwiz sent an Army under Nastáht
ajter Bahram Chibina, and how Bahram Chihina
captured him and reached the Khan of Chin


Whenas the bright sun had arrayed its throne
Exploring parties went out from the Shah:
They found the chieftain’s tent unoccupied,
While of the other tents not many stood.

The scouts came in and told Khusrau Parwiz,
Who grieved the more about that battlefield.:
He choose three thousand cavaliers in mail

On barded steeds, then bade Nastúh to mount,
And gird his warlike loins for the pursuit.

He went in dudgeon ; he was not the man

To fight Bahrám Chübína who the while,
Uncertain of his kingdom and his rights,

Kept with himself his silver and his gold,

And marched all fearful by a trackless route.
Yalán-sína and brave Ízid Gashasp

Rode by the soldiers’ side conducting them
Along those wayless ways and as they went
Told stories of the Shahs. They saw afar

A ruined hamlet where no chief could dwell,
And as Bahram Chibina rode ahead,
Remorseful and in dudgeon, he and all

His men athirst, he found a carline’s cot.

In courteous terms they asked for bread and water.
She brought a worn-out sieve, laid down a sheep-skin,
All tattered, and set out upon the sieve

Dry bread. Yalan-sina then handed him

The sacred twigs who thought not in his grief


* Reading with P.
* Because Bahrám Chübína had escaped.


C. 1943


304 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


Of muttering prayer They ate, then asked for wine,
And prayed.
_“ Tf ye would have wine,” said the crone,
There is some, and I have too an old gourd,
The end of which I cut off even now,
Have made a cup, and set it by the wine."
Bahrám Chübína said : ** If. wine is there,
What better cup could be ? "
She went and fetched them,
And he was well content to use that cup.
He gave it brimming to her that she might
Be festive too, and said: '* My gracious mother !
What tidings hast thou of the world's affairs ? "
" My brain is worn out, I have heard so much,"
She answered. “Many came from town to-day,
And talked but of Bahram Chubina’s battle,
How all his troops deserted to the Sháh,
And how the chief fled hostless,"'
“ Pious dame ! '*
He answered, “ say if he hath acted wisely
Or followed his desires."
" Famed man!" she said,
* How is it that the Div hath dimmed thine eyes ?
Dost thou not know that since Bahrám Chübína,
Son of Gashasp, urged on his steed against
Khusrau Parwíz, son of Hurmuzd, the sages
Laugh at him? None accounteth him a chief.”
Bahram Chubina said: * Since his desires
Have made him quaff wine from a gourd do thou
Keep barley-bread for him on this old sieve
Until next barley-harvest.''?


' Couplet omitted.

! L6 " Since I have been led into wrong-doing by my desires let
me continue to fare badly "—words put into Bahram Chibina’s
mouth by the author or redactor of the Romance. This is another
instance of the legitimist feeling pervading this portion of the poem.
See Vol. vi. p. 351.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 305


Having eaten
He passed withal the night there in his tunic,
His shoulders on his breastplate, but sleep came not:
He found no rest—to vain desires a prey.
Whenas the sun in heaven made secrets clear
The warlike chieftain had the tabor sounded,
What troops he had he gathered, and those nobles C. 1944
Set forth and came upon a goodly reed-bed,
And many folk were harvesting the reeds,
Who when they saw afar Bahram Chibina
With his large body of determined men,
said: “ Blest be thou ! Why take the reed-bed thus ?
In front are many troops with hands blood-bathed
For fight.”
" They must be horse," he made reply,
" Sent by the king. I heard, when we resolved
To quit our camp, that he had chosen Nastüh,
A man ambitious but inapt, to lead
Three thousand cavaliers—stiff opposites
In battle—in pursuit of us. When I
Behold him I will end his days. Now tighten
Your girths and ring him in."
The cavaliers
Drew tight their girths and grasped their Indian
swords,
They fired the reed-bed and o’erthrew their foes -
That bed of reeds was utterly consumed,
This man was slain, that burnt. Bahram Chübína,
The warrior, perceived Nastüh and gave
His fleet steed rein, and with the lasso's noose
Unhorsed Nastüh whose feckless hands thev bound.
He begged for quarter, saying : '* Famous king !
Why wish to shed my blood ? Compassionate
My luckless fortune. Slay me not that I
May run before thee and approve myself
Thy wretched mendicant.”


VOL. VIII. U


C. 1945


305 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Bahram Chibina

Replied: ““ I would not carry from the field
Of fight such men as thee. I will not sever
Thy head because I shame at having fought
A cavalier like thee. When thou art set
At liberty be off with you and tell
Khusrau Parwiz what thou hast seen of me.”

Nastüh, on hearing, kissed the ground and gave
Abundant thanks. This done, Bahrám, Chübina
Departed with his warriors good at need
To Rai, reposed, then sought the Khán with speed.


§ 28


How Khusrau Parwiz pillaged the Camp of Bahram
Chübína and wrote a Letter to Cæsar who
answered it with a Robe of Honour and Gifts


Khusrau Parwiz on his side visited
Bahrám Chübína's lines and pillaged them,
Bestowing on his soldiers purse and crown.
He mounted a fleet steed and girt himself
For prayer. Before him was a bramble-brake.
He entered that befitting place afoot,
And wallowed in the dust before his God. |
“ O righteous Judge ! " he said, * Thou hast delivered
The country from the burden of the foe,
And hast surpassed our whole imaginings.
I am thy worshipper and worthless slave :
I walk according to the Lord’s command.”
Thence he returned to camp ; counsellors
Assembled, and he called a scribe to write
A letter out on silk from Sháh to Cæsar,
Detailing what had passed in that campaign.


AHUSRAU PARWIZ 307


He first praised God—the Source of manliness,
Of prowess, and success, then said: “ In secret
Much hath God favoured me. I and my host
Came to Ázargashasp. I hurried onward,
Returning for the fight. Bahram Chubina
So pressed me that I had not room to strive:
But when all-holy God ceased to assist
My foe the flaming blast of war died out,
And with resources failing and with troops
Deserting he withdrew at break of day.
I have destroyed his whole host, fired his camp,
And intercepted too by God's behest
His line of march."
They set upon the letter

The Sháh's seal, and the messengers departing
Bare it to famous Csesar's court where he,
Whose fortune was awake, on reading it,
Descended from his throne and cried to God :—
“0 Guide! Thou changest never. Thou hast made
Thy slave triumphant and restored the outcast.”

He lavished alms and provand by the ass-load,
And wrote withal an answer like a tree C. 1946
In Paradise, beginning: “ In the name
Of God, the Lord of victory, of Grace,
And justice, Lord of moon and sun and might.
Know thou that greatness and good fortune come
From Him, what while thou livest give Him praise,
And in this world in public and in private’
Ensue but justice and beneficence.”’

He sent a crown—an heirloom of the Caesars,
Reserved for fit occasions—with a pair
Of earrings and a royal torque, of robes
Eleven hundred broidered all in gold,
A hundred camel-loads of gold dinars,
As well as many pearls and precious stones,
A jewelled cross and throne all royal gems,


308 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


A green robe shot with gold whereof the fringe
Was finished off with jewels. With the gifts
And offerings went four philosophers
Of those of Rim, Khusrau Parwiz dispatched
A thousand cavaliers of noble birth
To meet and welcome them. Those magnates
reached

With their new gifts Khusrau Parwiz in safety,
Who, having viewed them and perused the letter,
Was lost in wonder at that wealth and said
To his own minister: “ These robes of Rúm,
Adorned with jewelry are not the wear
Of wealthy thanes but Christian priests! If we
Have Crosses on our dress we shall conform
To Christian fashion. If I wear them not
"Twill anger Cesar who will of a truth
Miseonstrue me, while if I put them on
The magnates all will say: “‘ This king of men
Perchance hath turned a Christian for wealth’s sake,
Because he is all Cross,

His counsellor
Replied: “O Shah! clothes constitute not Faith.
Though Cesar be thy kin thy Faith is still
That of Zarduhsht, the Prophet."

Then he donned

Those royal robes, hung up the jewelled crown,
Bade raise the curtain, and bring in the envoys.
Both Rümans and Íránians erowded in
Without distinction. When the sages saw
The Sháh's attire they knew that he desired
To pleasure Cesar, others said that he
Had of a truth turned Christian privily.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 309


§ 29


How Niydtis was wroth with Bandwi and how Maryam
made Peace between them


Next day Khusrau Parwiz prepared his throne, C. 1947
And donned his crown of state. The festal board
Was spread within the rosary. “ Invite,"
He said, * the Rümans."

Nivátüs arrived
With the other Rümans and they took their seats
Before the board with the philosophers.
Now when Khusrau Parwiz came from his throne
Of audience in the jewelled robes from Rim,
Advanced with smiles and sat down at the board,
Bandwi came quickly, sacred twigs in hand.
The world-lord took them with intent to join
The other nobles in their muttered prayers,!
While Niyátüs, on seeing that, threw down
His bread and all disordered left the board,
Exclaiming: “ Muttered prayer and Cross at once
Insulteth Christ through Cesar ! *

Seeing this
Bandwi, still at the board, back-handed smote
That servant of the Cross upon the face.
Khusrau Parwiz was grieved, beholding this;
His cheeks grew like the flower of fenugreek.
He said to Gustaham: “ This valiant fool
Should wrangle not when drinking, What hath he
To do with Rüman Niyátüs ? He recked not
His person in this quarrel.”
Niyatis,
Departing, mounted and returned half drunk
To camp. He donned his Rüman mail and thought
* Ser. Vol, i. p. 8o,
€ *


310 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


To mar that feast. The Rüman cavaliers,
All eager for the fray, set face to where
Khusrau Parwíz held court, and Nivátuüs
Sent on a cavalier of Rüman race
Withal to go like wind to him and say :—
"* Bandwi; the worthless, with a back-hand blow
Smote on the cheek God's servant. Now if thou
Wilt send him to me—well. If not, expect
A tumult of the folk. Thou wilt writhe more
At me than at the slave! ambitioning
The throne of king of kings."
Khusrau Parwiz

Was wroth on hearing this. ** None should ignore
The Faith of God," he said. “ From Gaiümart
And from Jamshíd to Kai Kubád none spake
Of Christ, and God forbid that I shall quit
My fathers’ Faith, those world-lords choice and holy,
Adopt the Faith of Christ, and murmur not
A prayer at meals but be a Christian !
If thou wilt take account thou art alone:
I saw of late what Riiman prowess is!”

Then Maryam spake thus to Khusrau Parwiz :—
* I will abate the brawling of these folk.
Commit illustrious Bandwi to me,
So that the Riimans may contemplate him
From head to foot. I will restore him whole.
None ever made a point of senseless strife.”

The king dispatched Bandwi to Niyátüs,
Escorted by ten horsemen, with Maryam,
That prudent lady on whose lips good counsel |
Ne’er failed. He said: “Approach thy father's

brother,
And say: * Thou quarrelsome, ill-meaning man !
Hast thou not seen how Csesar hath assisted
The Sháh to majesty, hath fought his battles,
! Bahrám Chübína,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 311


Hath made affinity and league with him,
And furnished men and means and hoarded treasures ?
Wilt thou destroy affinity and league,
And take away from me the Grace of Cæsar,
Who told thee that the Sháh would not abandon
His Faith on his return ? Why speak raw words ?
Now take Bandwi's head to thy breast and utter
No word ungracious. Give not to the winds
The toil and work of Cæsar, and God grant
That thou mayst not recall my words too late.”

She went and spake to that effect. Her cheeks
Were like a rose in bloom, and Niyatus,
Who thought her words of profit, took her counsel.
He pacified his heart about Bandwi,
And shamed on his account, at sight of him
Arose and bade his treasurer bring forth
A noble led horse and received Bandwi
With smiles and welcome, and they visited
The king together. When Khusrau Parwiz
Saw Niydtus he said: “ The heart of one
Of ill condition seeketh not for good.
Bandwi hath ne'er ensued but strife and tumult :
Make not the world both dark and strait to me;
Give not the toil of Cesar to the wind
In passion; let me have a moment's joy.’
If he hath spoken ill of thy religion
Expect not wisdom from a foolish man."

* Expect not wisdom from a Rüman drunk,
O Sháh ! " said Nivátüs. “* Keep thy sires’ Faith,
For wise men change not such."

When in this strain

Much talk had passed he sought his camp again.


i Two couplets omitted.


C. 1949


312 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


§ 30


How Khusrau Parwiz gave Presents to Niydtis and the
Kiumans, how he dismissed them to Rim, and
wrote Patents for the Nobles of [ran


The Shah then bade Kharrád, son of Barzín :—
" Hold a review and call a court. Let all
The Riiman troops be mustered, young and old.
Bestow on them two thirds of all my treasures ;
They must feel well content with what we give."

For all deserving of a robe of honour
By prowess shown in fight he bade make ready
Such, and to requisition splendid steeds
From his own court. He gave to Niyátüs
Such jewels, steeds and handmaids girt with gold
That they exceeded measure and surpassed
Withal what potentates were used to give.
All cities taken by Kubád from Rüm,
Or captured by Hurmuzd and Nishirwan
Of glorious birth, he gave to N iyátús,
Had patents drawn for them and filled the cup
Of colocynth with honey. Then the Rúmans
Set forth for Rúm, that prosperous coast and land.
The great Khusrau Parwiz escorted them
Two stages, farewelled Niyátüs, and then
Turned back. Next week he took ten cavaliers,
Both shrewd and true to him, and quitting camp
Fared to Ázargashasp. On seeing the dome
He lighted down and went afoot, his eves
All wet, his cheeks sun-yellow. When he passed
The portal and approached the Fire his visage
Was hidden by his tears. There he recited
The Zandavasta for a se‘nnight’s space,?

* Reading with P.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 313


And humbly danced attendance on the Fire,
Departing on the eighth day for the feast

Of Sada was at hand. As he had promised
Before his lords he gave his share of spoil,

Of gold and silver, jewel-work, and gems

Fit for a monarch, to the Fire. He gave
Drachms to the poor abimdantly and left

No one dissatisfied throughout the land.

He went thence to the country of Andiv

To have his portion in the day of joy :

That province was the salt waste’s boundary,
And none could put a value on the soil,
Within the palace built by Nüshírwán,

Who dwelt there much, he had a splendid suite
Of rooms prepared, the golden throne arrayed,
And then the conquering, God-fearing world-lord C. 1950
Came and sat down upon his grandsire's seat,
And bade a scribe and his own minister—

A helpful archimage—attend. They wrote

Out patents for the Íránians as the Great

And Mighty used to do. Bandwi, the chief.
The well advised, the veteran, managed all.
The Sháh gave Khurásán to Gustaham,

And bade him reinstate both law and justice,
Assisted by Burzmihr, the experienced scribe
Of beauteous face, and since heaven favoured him
Bestowed by grant Istakhr and Dárábgird.

He set his golden signet on the patent,

Then handed it to Ram Barzin forthwith,

And bade him bear it to Shápür to whom

He gave withal both slaves and robe of honour.
He bade convey a patent under seal

To Andiyan, as was the royal use,

And gave him all the country of Kirmán
Because Khusrau Parwíz esteemed him great.
He gave another province to Gurdwi,


C. 1651


314 THE SHÁHNÁMA OF FIRDAUSI re |


And sealed the letter with the golden seal.
He gave Bálwi the town of Chách and sent
The patent with an ivory throne. He counted
The treasury-keys and to Tukhára's son
Committed them. The monarch of the world,
This matter ended, turned to folk at large,
And bade the chieftains all-obey Kharrád,
Son of Barzin, whose rule should be world-wide,
And name be countersigned on every patent.
The soldiers all that in the time of action
Held by the famous king were given from him
A robe of honour and dismissed with joy.
A herald fluent and a chief withal
Of sweet voice and shrewd heart went round pro-
claiming :—
"O ye, the subjects of the king of earth !
Praise justice only, seek not vengeance, shed
Not blood, and prompt not unto deeds of ill.
If any of our subjects be aggrieved,
Or injured by the troops, the wrongers’ place
Shall be the gibbet here and penal fire
Hereafter. Ye are all lords of the treasure
That cometh to you from your proper toil.
Enjoy and give away, ye that have means !
And ye that have none! ask. In every city
We have a treasure through our fathers’ travail,
Or ours, and we have bidden the treasurer
Give food and clothes withal to such as lack.
When food is requisite they shall receive
From him three mans! at dawn upon condition
That they shall make thanksgiving and shall
strive
To keep the earth in culture,"
Through his justice
The world became a Paradise on high,
' "trois man de blé." Mohl. Cf. Vol. i. p. 290 nolé.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 315


And one may well acclaim Khusrau Parwiz,
For better is a great king of that kind
Than one impure albeit sage in mind.!


§ 31
Firdausi’s Lament for the Death of his Son


At sixty-five ‘tis ill to catch at pelf.
Oh! let me read that lesson to myself,
And muse upon the passing of my son.
My turn it was and yet the youth hath gone,
While I for sorrow am as soulless clay.
I will make haste, perchance o’ertake, and say
Reproachfully : '" My turn it was to go;
Why hast thou gone then 'gainst my will and so
Robbed me of all my peace ? Thou didst abate
My cares; why hast thou left thine agéd mate ?
Didst thou perchance find younger company
That lightly thus thou hast abandoned me ? "
Seven years and thirty o'er the youth had sped
When he distasted of the world and fled.
Harsh comrade proved he of my pilgrimage,
And, having turned his back on me in rage,
Went, but he left me his calamities,
His griefs, a full heart, and blood-weeping eyes.
Now whither he hath passed he doth aspire
To choose a habitation for his sire
In Light. Since then a weary time hath gone,
And of his way-mates hath returned not one.
Good sooth ! he looketh for me wrathfully
Because I loiter. Five and sixty I,
He thirty-seven. He asked not agéd me,
! In the above passage the last couplet of the section is read with
P. before the two preceding ones.


C. 1952


316 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


But hurried off alone. I stayed to see

The outcome of my labours. May God grace

Thy soul with light and wisdom's breastplate place
Before thy life. It is my prayer that He,

Who giveth all and ruleth righteously,

The Holy, will forgive each fault of thine,

And cause thy moon now overcast to shine.


§ 32
The Story of Bahrám Chübina and the Khán of Chin


Tell now old tales, tell of Bahrám Chübína.
When he drew near the country of the Turks,
loward the Lions and the Khán, there went
Ten thousand shrewd and wary cavaliers,

Led by the son and brother of the Khán,
Each with a priest as counsellor, to meet him.
On reaching the Khán's throne Bahrám Chübína
Gave praises to him and did reverence.

The Khin, upon beholding him, rose, kissed,
And stroked caressingly, his face, inquiring
At large about the travail of the way,

And of his warfare with the Sháh and host,
Then gave a welcome to Ízid Gashasp

Withal and to Yalán-sína—those chiefs

No longer hostile. When Bahram Chibina
Was seated on the silvern throne he took

In his the Khán's hand, saying: * Glorious prince,
The captain and ruler of the Turks

Of Chín! thou know'st that no one is secure
Within the world by reason of malign
Khusrau Parwiz who vexeth those that fain
Would rest from toil and doubleth it for those


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 317
i


That live at case. If now thou wilt accept me,

And be mine aid in good and evil, I

Will be thy comrade in this priceless land,

And frend in good and ill, while shouldst thou suffer
Through me I will depart and seek a cistern
Elsewhere, and if thou wilt have none of me

Then I will journey unto Hindüstán."

The Khin said: “ Noble chieftain ! never mayst
Thou need that day. Like mine own kin will I
Hold thee. My kin? Nav, better than my child.
My whole land will co-operate with me
Herein, both lord and liege. Pre-eminence
I give thee o'er my chiefs and furthermore
I make thee independent of my lords."

Bahrám Chübína further asked an oath
To bind his soul, for so far all was tongue.

The Khan said: * By the most high God, the Guide
Of me and thee, I am thy mate indeed,

What while I live, and friend for good and ill."

Thereafter they prepared two palaces,

And furnished them with vessels of all kinds.

Slaves, food, and raiment, needful carpeting,

With serviceable plate of gold and silver, C. 1953
Dínárs and royal jewelry, the Khán

Sent to Bahram Chubina whose dark soul

Grew bright, and save with whom the Khan went not

To polo, the assembly, and the chase,

Remaining in this mind and lauding him.

The Khan possessed a chief who was his friend,
His help in war and of a stronger nature,!

Named Makátüra, bv whose means the Khán
Had won success and fame. He used to visit
The Khán at dawn with fingers on his lips,
For thus did subjects offer reverence,
To those illustrious potentates of Chin,


| "un homme de plus haute naissance que le prince." Mohl.


318 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST


And each time from the veteran monarch’s treasure
Would carry fifty score dinars away.

Bahrám Chübina marked this for a while,
Astonied at the Khán, then laughed and said

One day: “ Exalted one ! thou art esteemed
Among the potentates, yet every morn

At audience-time this Turk thus beareth off

These fifty score dínárs! If he receiveth

A mine ‘tis not for rendered services,!

The Khan replied: “* This is a way of ours—
The glory of our Faith—that all our bravest,
And stanchest on the day of stress, should meet
With no refuse] when they ask for more,

And plead with importunity. His power
Is more than mine. I charm him with dínárs.
If I refused the troops would mutiny,
And dim my shining day."

Bahrám Chübína,
The world-aspirant, said: '* O king of men!
Thou hast made him a master o'er thyself.
When world-lords are both valiant and alert
They must not let a subject have the reins.
If I should rid thee of him wouldst thou be
Well pleased or dost thou care for his support ? "

* "Tis thine to order this," replied the Khan,
^ And thine to plan and compass this desire.

If thou canst free me from him thou wilt bring
The question to an end."

" To-morrow morn,"
He made reply, * when Makátúra cometh
For his dinars, smile not, regard him not,
And answer not or, if at all, in wrath.”

That night passed and at dawn came Makátüra
Before the Khan. That world-lord neither saw him,


t" Que ce soit un cadeau, que ce soit sa paye, faut-il donc que
sa part soit tout l'or d'une mine ? "— 7d,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 319


Nor heard what that bold Turk had got to say,
Who, angered, raged and glared at him, and cried :—
" Why is it that to-day I have grown vile, C. 1954
My lord? Assuredly this Persian prince,
Who reached our land with thirty friends, is striving
To turn thee from the right and would consign
Thine army to the wind."
Bahram Chibina
Replied: “O warrior! why so fierce in talk ?
I, if the Khan will follow mine advice,
And prudently regard our covenant,
Will let not thee come hither every morn
To waste his treasures with impunity.
Thou mayest he three hundred cavaliers,
And hunt the Lions on the battlefield :
It followeth not that thou each morn shouldst come,
And claim dínárs by ass-loads from the king.”
When Makátüra heard his head became

All vengeful at Bahram Chibina’s scheme.
In wrath and passion he put forth his hand,
And plucked a poplar arrow from his quiver.
“This is my token and interpreter
In battle," said he to Bahrám Chübina,
* So look out for my point when thou shalt come
To court to-morrow morn,”

On hearing this
Bahram Chibina, growing mettlesome,
Gave him a poplar arrow tipped with steel,
And said: “ Receive this keepsake and observe
Its usefulness.”

Then Makátüra went
Forth from the Khán and hurried to his tent.


C. 1955


320 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


$33
How Makátára was slain hy Bahrám Chiübína


When night withdrew its sombre skirt, and dawn
Brake o'er the gloomy mountains, Makátüra
Put on his battle-armour and went forth,
Türánian sword in hand, Bahrim Chubina,
On hearing, called for steed and royal breastplate.
The spot they chose was one whose plain and waste
No leopards e’er resorted to for fight.
The Khan, on hearing, mounted on his steed,
And went accompanied by the loyal Turks
To see which raging Lion of the twain
Would have the better fortune. Makatura,
On coming to the scene of strife, dispatched
Dust cloudward from the plain and shouted thus
To haught Bahram Chibina: “ What hast thou
To say of manhood now ? Wilt thou begin,
Or shall the loyal, lion-hearted Turk ? "

Bahrám Chübína said: “ Begin thyself,
For thou didst start this quarrel by thy words."

Then Makátüra called on God and strung
His bow, grasped joyfully the string and arrow,
Drew to the point and then released his thumb.
He struck the cavalier upon the belt,
But that bright iron point pierced not the mail.
Bahram Chibina held aloof awhile
That Makátüra might grow tired of fight,
Who, thinking that his enemy was shent,
Turned shouting from the field.

" O warrior!”

Bahrám Chübína eried, * thou hast not slain me ;
Depart not to thy tent. Thy say is said ;
Stop and hear my reply and, if thou livest


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 321


When thou hast heard it, go."

With that he chose
A breastplace-piercing shaft of poplar-wood,
One to which stone and iron were as wax,
And hit the valiant horseman on the girdle.
That chief grew satiate of dínárs and fight,
And wept and slept upon his bast-bound saddle,
For he, on mounting for the fray, had tied
His two feet to the saddle and thus kept
His seat though wounded, while his wounder rode
Up to the Khan and said: “ Imperious !
Yon noble needeth one to dig his grave.”

The Khan said: “Look more closely. He is
swooning,
But living on the saddle.”
Thus replied

Bahram Chubina: “ Puissant sovereign !
His body cometh even now to dust.
May all thy foemen swoon as he is swooning
On his Turanian steed.”

The valiant Khan
Dispatched a cavalier to that famed Lion,
Whom they saw bound, slain vilely, and released
From fate’s vicissitudes. The Khan thereat
Laughed to himself in secret, wondering
At that chief horseman of the world’s exploit ;
Then full of thought returned to his own palace
With crown that soared to Saturn in his joy.
He called for arms and drachms, for steeds and slaves,
Genmed trinketry, imperial crown, dinars,
King-worthy jewels, and all kinds of gear
Of war. These from the Khan a messenger
Bare to Bahram Chubina’s treasurer.


VOL. VIII. X


C. 1956


322 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSÍ


$54


How the Lion-ape slew a Daughter of the Khan, how it
was slain by Bahram Chibina, and how the Khan
gave him a Daughter and the Kingdom of Chin


Time passed and peace was tutor night and day.

There were at that time in the hills of Chin

Wild animals past count. One was a beast

Out-bulking horses and upon its head

Were two black locks like cables. It was tawny

Of body while its ears and throat were black.

None saw it save at noon-tide and it had

Two claws resembling those of mighty lions.

Its roar rose o'er the clouds, it swallowed stones,

And turned the day of mighty men to gloom.

Folk called it ** Lion-ape : “1 the land was all

Confounded at the ill it wrought. The Khán

Possessed a moon-like daughter, had the moon

Two raven locks, two rubious lips, a nose

As ‘twere a silvern reed, two smiling cheeks?

Of coral, and dark eyes. Her parents used

To weep for terror lest the sun should strike her.

One day she went forth to the plain and roamed

The meadows while the Khan, the world-lord, followed

The chase elsewhere. The queen was in the palace

Engaged in converse with a counsellor.

Thus went her daughter to that meadow-land

With other damsels, wine, and revellers.

The lion-ape deseried her from the heights,

Descended to the plain and gulped her down :?

That fair-cheeked damsel ended in a breath.

The Khan heard and his face turned black, his queen
' | Sher-kappl" which Mohl translates '' le lion Keppi.”


* "deux lévres '" (Mohl) but they have just hee LAS
| Cf. Vol. v, p. 233 and nole. y just been mentioned.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 323


Tore out her hair: they mourned the maid for years,
As if they had been burning in fierce flames,
And sought to slay the monster and relieve
Chin from that stress. Now when Bahrám Chübina
Fought with and sent the dust from Makátüra
The queen went forth to watch him and discoursed
To all about his prowess. Mecting him
One day with five score nobles of Iran,
And many men on foot preceding him,
While he rode with a counsellor, she asked :—
" Who is this with such height and Grace divine ? "

A servant answered: “ Thou hast much to learn,
Not knowing brave Bahram Chübína's name !
He once was Shah within Iran; his crown,
Qut-topped the moon. Chiefs title him * Bahram
The brave,’ for he hath borne the fame of valour
From other kings, and now that he hath quitted
Iran for Chin earth quaketh ‘neath his charger.
Our sovereign would have him for a chief,
So setteth on his head a royal crown.”

She thus made answer: * Since his Grace is such
Well may we nestle underneath his wings,
And well may I request a boon of him ;
He will not act with slackness like the Khan,
But venge me on the monster when he heareth
The reason for my grief and malisons.”

He answered: “ If the queen of upright folk
Will speak to him she will not find a trace
Left of the lion-ape except a corpse
Dragged by the feet by wolves.”

She heard and joyed :

Pain for her daughter left her. She made haste ~*
To see the Khan and tell him all. He said :—
““ Where there is horseman such as I, and where
A lion-ape hath battened on my child,
*T were shame for us to tell it; ‘twould disgrace


C. 1957


324 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI i


My stock. Bahrám Chübína knoweth not !
That that terrific monster will make budge l,
An iron mountian with its breath. Although |
The daughter of a king be famed life too |
Is dear to him."
She said: “I want revenge
For her who was mine Eye, so speak I will,
Shame or no shame, and haply gain mine end.”
Much time thus passed away. She kept her rancour
A secret. Now the Khin chanced to prepare
A feast and summoned thereunto his chiefs.
He sent and called the brave Bahram Chibina,
And seated him upon the silvern throne.


Now when the queen behind her curtains heard f
She entered quickly, saw the hero, praised |


And blessed him much, and said to him : ^ * May Chin 1
And Turkistán be prosperous through thee ! |
Fain would I ask a favour of my lord ;
May he accord it me."
He said: “ "Tis thine

To order and to will and win thy wish."

she said: “ Near by there is a meadow-land—
The very spot for feasting—and therein
The youths of Chin keep merrymake each Spring.
A bow-shot past the wood thou mayst behold
A mount more black than pitch, Upon that mount
Of flint there is a monster, and the realm
Of Chin is in distress because of it.
A lion-ape I term it for I know not
What else to call it, By the Khan I had
A daughter whom the sun was wont to praise.
"She left the palace for that feasting-place
What while the Khan was hunting with his men.
Came from the mountain that ferocious monster,
And gulped down her that was our very Eye.
Now every Spring it visiteth that meadow


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 325


In quest of prey. No youth or paladin

Of any name is left in this our city

Since through the mischief of this lion-ape

They have been slaughtered, and it hath sent up

The dust from this fair land. Our cavaliers

Of war and men of action have gone forth

In numbers to that mountain-height but when

They see afar the monster's claws and breast,

Its back, its shoulders, ears and head, it roareth ,

And shattereth those warriors' hearts, for what

Are lions, tigers, crocodiles thereto ?

No counter of the cost will venture near."
Bahram Chubina said: ** At dawn to-morrow

I will go forth and view this pleasure-ground,

And by the strength and might that God hath given,

The exalted Fashioner of sun and moon,

I will relieve the pleasance of this monster

If some will guide me thither when ‘tis dawn,”
Whenas the moon's disk shone forth from the sky,

And dark night shook abroad its dusky locks,

They broke up and departed on their ways,

Bemused, each to his palace. When the glory

Of golden Sol appeared and plaited up

Night’s azure tresses, brave Bahram Chibina

Put on his gambeson and then committed

His honoured form to God. He took his lasso,

His bow, a hundred shafts and one forked dart

As used in hunting. When he neared the height

He bade his retinue turn back, and when

Hard on the lion-ape thou wouldst have said :

""The mount loured o'er him." There mid rocks of

flint

He girt himself and mounted on his saddle,

Armed with his coiled up lasso, plied his bow

And strung it, called on God who giveth good,

Sent up his battle-cry, and smote the rocks


ae


C. r958


C. 1949


426 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Until they flashed again, The lion-ape

Was in a pool. It wallowed and came forth,

For when the monster's fell was soaked no shaft

Availed against it. That grim monster came

To gulp Bahram Chübina down. That hero

Shot and the body of the lion-ape

Had fight enough. He shot again and smote

The monster on the head; the blood poured down

Like water o'er its breast. He marked the strength

And onset of the monster, shot again,

Transfixed its claw, then loosed his lasso, leapt

Upon that lofty mountain-top and speared

The creature’s loins; the flints were dyed with blood.

Then reaching for his scimitar he clave

The monster's form in twain, cut off its head,

And flung it down contemptuously, descended,

Came to the Khan, rejoicing, and proclaimed

What had befallen the ape. The Khan and queen

Set forward to the wood and made all haste

To reach the mountain-top while acclamation,

such that thou wouldst have said; ‘ The earth is
rent "

Rose from the warriors of Chin. They praised

Bahram Chibina and showered gold and jewels

Abundantly upon him while the chief

Of Chin embraced him and bestowed on him

Thenceforth the style of king, and having reached

The palace chose a trusty messenger,

And sent a hundred purses full of drachms,

With slaves and robes, and bade a scribe attend.

They wrote a patent out for Chin on silk.

The Khan at that time gave Bahram Chibina

His daughter to secure his staying there.

As was their custom they made ready robes

Of honour, many crowns and belts. The Khan

Said to Bahram Chibina: “ These bestow


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 327


On such Íránians as are worthy of them."
Bahrám Chübína took to feast and chase,

Untroubled by the passing on of time ;

The noblest of the cavaliers of Chin

Were his petitioners, and all Chín said :—

“We are thy slaves and only live for thee,"

While he mid feast and largess passed his days,

And all folk too united in his praise.


$35


How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Case of Bahram
Chübina and wrofe a Letter to the Khan, and
how he replied


Thus matters fared till tidings reached Írán,
Reached the great monarch of the brave: “ A king-
ship

And treasure greater than thine own are now
Bahram Chibina’s and untoiled for!”

Vexed
And troubled by solicitude, his heart
Wrung by the doings of Bahram Chiubina,
He held consult with his own magnates, spake,
Discussing all expedients, and at night
Called for a scribe and made an arrow-head
His pen-point. To the Khán of Chín he wrote
A letter, and thou wouldst have said: "* He made
His sword the pen.”

He first praised God, “ the One,

The Guide to good, who setteth up on high
Sun, moon, and Saturn, who enthroneth kings,
Who pricketh sinners and increaseth Grace. C. 1960
By ignorance, by knowledge, by uprightness,


328 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And by perversity, by harm and loss,
"Tis owned that He is One and hath no comrade,
No peer, no mate, Whoever seeketh good
Shall find it but so may not he whose hands
Are steeped in ill, and he that maketh choice
Of God's way must forgo ingratitude.”

He then said thus: “ Bahram Chibina (may
He ne'er in this world see his wishes won !)
Was an ungrateful servant to the Shah,
Ignoring both his master and his God.
He was of small account, unfamed and weak,
Till my sire took him up when season served ;
But when the monarch of the world thus raised him
He only did according to his nature :
His conduct is well known to great and small.
The mighty and the wise rejected him,
But thou didst welcome him when he arrived,
And take him by the hand as one well born—
A thing incredible to upright folk,
And not approved by me. Thou hast forgotten
Perchance his conduct when thou went'st in fear
Beenuse of him. He lashed thee many times
Upon the head—a thing that none commend.!
Thou shouldest not make barren thine own fame,
And barter thy tranquillity to him.
When they deliver this let thine advice,
Now dark, consider well if thou wilt profit
By sending us that slave, his feet in fetters ;
Else I dispatch an army from fran,
And for Turin turn daylight into gloom.”

Now when the letter reached the Khan, and he
Had heard the intention of Khusrau Parwiz,
He told the envoy: ““ When thou com’st to court
To-morrow morning ask for the reply.”

The envoy came in haste; he had not slept

! See p. 144.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 329


All night. He waited till he saw the Torch
Resplendent of the sun, then made all haste
To have an audience of the Khan who sent
For scribe with pen and ink and silk of Chin,
And wrote in answer: " To the Maker be
Such praise as magnates give from me, a slave,"
Proceeding thus: “ Thy letter I have read,
And set the messenger before me. Speak
Thou unto slaves expressions such as thine.
It fitteth not thine ancient family
To disallow the greatness of the great,
Or not to make the lowly know his place.
Mine are the whole of Chin and of Turan, C. 1961
And the Haitilian crown. I ne’er broke faith;
Suggest it not. To break my pledge when I
Have ta'en Bahram Chubina by the hand
Will make men call me base-born. I fear none
Save holy God, but as for thee if greatness
Increase with thee so also should thy wisdom.”

He set his seal thereto and told the envoy :—
* Companion with the wind.”

Within a month

The envoy reached the Shah who when he read
The letter writhed and was in fear of fortune.
He called the Iranians, told the Khán's reply,
And showed the letter, and the Great, when they
Had read it, mused. He gat from them this answer :—
“© glory of the throne and crown of kings !
Weigh these things well; consult some ancient sage ;
Let not this letter make thee rash: turn not
The torch of former Grace to gloom; select
Some old [ranian sage, wise, eloquent,
A warrior and a scribe, and let him go
Hence to the Khan to speak and hear his views,
Inform him what Bahram Chuibina was
At first and, after, to what ends he used


E = pg. = Ee =


C. 1692


330 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


His leadership, and having ordered all
Was fain to make a bondslave of his lord.
If this be not accomplished in one month
Then let the envoy stay a year forwhy
"Twill not be easy to disparage him
Because he is the Khiin’s own son-in-law.
The envoy must be very plausible,

And none must gather what his purpose is."
Thereafter brave Bahrám Chübína, hearing
That some one from Iran had brought the Khan

A letter, went to him forthwith and said :-—

“ My gracious lord! I hear yon recreant knave
Is plying thee with letters. Choose from Chin
A gallant host and occupy Iran.

My scimitar shall conquer it and Rúm ;

I will salute thee monarch of those lands,

And there the watchmen of the night shall haye
Thy name upon their lips. I will behcad
Inglorious Khusrau Parwiz, and may

No top or toe be left him! I took service
That I might root out the Sásánians."

The Khan, on hearing, pondered and his heart
Was like a wood with thoughts. He summoned all
The elders—eloquent, learned, heedful men—
Told them Bahrám Chübina's scheme, revealed
What had been secretly proposed and gat
This answer from the men of lore, alike
From those of his own kin and alien :—

" "Tis. no light task, but hard, to consummate
The measure of the lineage of Sásán ;

Yet if Bahrám Chübína shall march forth,

And show the wise the way, he in Írán

Will find full many a friend since he will have
The Khán to back and help him, and thy fortune
Soon will achieve the work. We ought to listen
To what he saith,”


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 331


Bahrám Chübína's heart
Revived when this he heard ; he laughed and changed
In bearing. All the warriors agreed
That they must choose two young men who were fit
To have command, inured to toil and soldiers.
There was in Chin a noble named Chinwi,
And one Zhangwi—a chief. The Khan sent, sum-
moned,
And made those men of war his paymasters.
He bade them both: “ Be circumspect in fight,
And ever look up to Bahram Chubina
Alike in times of joyance and of wrath,
Secure the fords of the Jíhün and send it
In dust up to the sky."
He gave to them
A valiant host—all chiefs and warrior-lions.
Drums sounded at Bahram Chubina’s portal,
And Sol's face changed to ebony with dust.
From Chín toward Írán he took his way
Upon Sapandármad at break of day.


§ 36


How Khusrau Parwiz sent. Kharrádd, Son of Barzin, to
the Khán and how he schemed to slay Bahrám Chübina


Now when the great king heard: “The wolf hath
come

Outside the wood, and bold Bahram Chubina

Hath brought a host that robbeth heaven of lustre,”

He said thus to Kharrád, son of Barzín :—

“Go to the Khan upon this business.

Thou art acquainted best both with Iran

And with Turan, and with their divers tongues.”


C. 1963


332 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!]


He oped his treasury and brought forth such jewels,
Such scimitars and golden belts, as made
Kharrád astound and secretly invoke
The name of God. With these he left for Chín,
Crossed the Jíhün and took unwonted paths,
Neared the Sháh's palace, looked around and chose
One to announce: “An envoy from the Shah
Hath come to court.”
The Khan, on hearing this,
Prepared his throne and bade admit the envoy
Who, as he drew anear, made eloquent
His tongue and did obeisance, saying: ** Thy slave
Will frame his tongue to speak at thy command.”
The Khan replied; “ A sweet tongue maketh young
The heart of eld. Speak words of profit; they
‘Are pith when spoken but, unspoken, peel."
Thereat Kharrád recalled old tales and first
Praised the Creator, who controlleth fortune,
The Almighty and the Lord of fate, who made
“Sky, earth, and time, high heaven and the world,
Who hath all power of right while we are slaves,
And tell his righteous acts. To one He giveth
The crown and lofty throne, another one
He maketh vile, afflicted, and cast down,
Not that He loveth this and hateth that,
But why He only knoweth. We, both great
And small, are born but to return to dust,
And have perforce resigned to death our bodies.
Begin we with pre-eminent Jamshid,
Or with the glorious world-lord Tahmuüras,
And thus pass on to Kai Kubád and all
The Great that we remember—Kai Khusrau,
The famous Rustam and by that same token
Continue till we reach Asfandiyár.
Their share of this world was the charnel-house ;
They have drunk bane instead of antidote.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 333
Our present Shah is of thy kin: he joyeth


And sorroweth as thou dost wax and wane.
His great-grandsire upon the mother's side,
When glorious Sháhs held sway, was Khán of Chin.
Now in these latter days our covenant
Hath been renewed and everything is changed.
May He that giveth victory bless thee,
And be thine earth compact of heads of kings."

He spake. The Khan gave ear and answered

him :—

* O trafficker in lore ! if in Írán
Be one like thee he knoweth well the sky! ”

The Khan assigned him lodging in the palace,
And seat anear the throne, then bade him bring
The gifts and give all to the treasurer.
The Khan said: “* Mayst thou lack not worldly wealth. ©. 1964
If thou wilt take a present of me speak
That I too may accept what thou hast brought,
But if not thou art brighter than a gift—
The crown of chiefs in knowledge.”

They prepared

For him a pleasant dwelling-place and draped it
With stuff of every kind. At board and chase,
At feast and drinking-bout this favourite
Was with the Khan, sought an occasion, found him
One day at leisure and made bold to say :
"* Bahrám Chübina is a misereant,
Worse than malicious Ahriman, and selleth
Men veteran for what it were not worth
A mite to mention. King Hurmuzd was first
To bring him forward, raising him by favour
Above the sun. Not one knew e'en his name,
And yet his will hath everywhere prevailed! #
Although he doth thee many a kindly office,
Yet will he break faith with thee in the end
As with the Shahs he did, regarding neither


C. 1965


334 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


The Shah nor God. If to the Shah thou wilt
Dispatch him thou wilt raise up to the moon
The Íránian monarch's head. Thenceforth fran
And all Chin are thine own and thou mayst dwell
Where'er thou wilt.”
The Khan was stunned to hear
Such talk, regarded him with louring eyes,
And said to him: “Speak not such words as these,
For thou wilt blacken our regard for thee.
I am no misereant and treaty-breaker
Because the shroud of such must be the dust."
Kharrád, son of Barzín, on hearing that,
Knew that his novelty was out of date,!
And made reply : ** O thou of royal race !
Why dost thou think to speak such words ? The Shah
Is better than Bahram Chibina is
For thee because of old relationship.”
The Khan rejoined ; “ I will make plain my purpose:
If Cesar broke his covenant by making
Agreement with Khusrau Parwiz shall I
Do likewise and act treacherously against
The brave Bahram Chibina ? I possess
A thousand slaves such as Khusrau and come
Of an illustrious race. The king of Rim
Did not oppress thy Shih but gave him treasure
Land and a host. Since brave Bahram Chibina,
Whose gests are written in the chronicles,
Is my supporter and my son-in-law
How can I draw back from my covenant ?”
Again Kharrád was foiled and took to guile.
He thought: * The Khán is not concerned for us,
Because Bahrám Chübína hath suggested
Írán to him. My words are willow's fruit."
In black despair about the Khán he turned,
He had no choice, toward the queen and sought
‘ The remainder of this page in C. should perhaps be omitted.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 335


Among her suite one that could cheer his soul.
He found a steward and was privy with him,
Recounted what Khusrau Parwiz had said,
And made that wretch’s heart rejoice, then added :—
“ Speak for me to the queen that I may be
Her scribe." /
The crafty steward answered him :—
“That will not serve because Bahram Chibina
Is now her son-in-law; she is his brains
And skin. Thou art ascribe; contrive some scheme ;
Moreover let not thy design get wind.”
Kharrád, son of Barzin, on hearing this,
Discerned no top or bottom to his cares.
There was an agéd Turkman, named Kulün,
Whom other Turkmans scorned. He dressed in sheep-
skin,
And lived withal on millet.! Makátüra
Was of his kindred, so he railed against
Bahram Chibina, ever cherishing
Revenge at heart and cursing him.* Kharrad
Sent to invite Kulün to his famed mansion,
Gave him dinars and drachms, clothes, much to eat,
Invited him to feasts and seated him
Among the chiefs. Khárrád, exceeding wise
And patient-hearted, clever and expert,
Mused much, consulting on one hand the steward
About the queen of Chin but held his peace
When, day or night, he visited the Khán.
The agéd steward spake thus to Kharrád :—
= A man like thee, a noble and a scribe,
If he had skill and was of fame in leecheraft,
Would be a crown upon my lady's head,
And all the more so as her daughter aileth.”
Kharrád replied : ** I have that knowledge too,


! On millet bread—a sign of poverty. Cf. p. 337.
" Two couplets omitted.


C. 1966


a


336 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


And, as thou say’st, will take the case in hand.”
The steward hastened to the queen and said :—

“ A learned leech hath arrived.”

, " Live and enjoy,"
She answered. “Seratch not thou thy head but

bring him.”
He went and told Kharrid, son of Barzin :—
“ Preserve thy secret, go announce thyself,
And act the cheerful leech.”
That schemer went
Before the queen and found the patient's liver
Disordered. He prescribed pomegranate-juice,
And therewithal a herb that flourisheth
Beside a stream; folk call it chicory.
He sought to stay the aching of her head.
Within a week, for God so ordered it,
The girl grew like the world-enlightening moon.
The queen brought from her treasury dínárs,
A purseful, and five gold-embroidered robes,
And said : * Take this unworthy recompense,
And ask what more thou wilt.”
He said: “ Keep these,

And I will ask my guerdon when I please."


$37


How Bahrém Chiibina was slain by Kuliin as Kharrdd,
Son of Barzin, had planned
Bahram Chubina, for his part, arrayed
His army like a pheasant’s wing and marched
To Marv. Then one came to the Khan to say :—
" Let none pass to Írán from Turkistán
' There is no break here in the original.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 337


Or Chin to tell Khusrau Parwiz about us,
And make a gift to him of our designs.”

The Khan proclaimed: “ If one go to fran
Without our seal him will I cleave asunder,
And money shall not buy him off, by God ! "

Kharrád, son of Barzín, abode two months,
Intent on his close schemes. Then in concern
He called Kulün, gave him the seat of honour
One day and said to him: ** None is exempt
From secret sorrow in this world. Thou oft
Hast begged for millet, barley-bread, and sheepskins
From all in Chin, but now thy food is bread
And lamb, and thou art richly clad withal.
Contrast thy present with thy past estate,
Past malisons with present benisons.
Thine years have reached a hundred or at least
Are great in sum. I have a dread emprise
For thee whereby thou mayest gain a throne,
Or darksome dust. I will obtain for thee
An impress from the signet of the Khán ;
Then speed as though thou wouldst roll up the earth.
Thou must get access to Bahrám Chübína,
And bide thy time at Marv. Don thy black sheep-

skin,
Provide a knife, and go. Note heedfully
The twentieth! of the month and on that day
Approach this man world-famous for he holdeth
That day ill-omened as I have observed
For many a year. He will admit not then C. 1967
The public and wear but brocade of Rim.
say: “From the daughter of the Khin I bring
The mighty chief a message.” Keep thy knife
Unsheathed within thy sleeve till he shall bid thee
Approach alone and as thou dost say thus :—
"The noble lady said : ** When thou dost tell
| Ihe day Bahbrám "in the original.
VOL. VIII. Y


338 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


The secret in his ear hide it from others." '
When he shall say: * What is the secret? Tell me,’
Approach him quickly, slit his navel, rise,
And seek to flee, All those that hear his ery
Will hurry from the chieftain to the stalls ;
This one will go for steeds and that for treasure,
And thou wilt suffer not for slaying him.
If they slay thee . . . well thou hast seen the world,
And hast approved its weal and woe. Besides
Thou wilt have had revenge and done what use
Enjoineth,? but indeed none will concern
Himself about thee at that time to harm thee,
While if thou scapest slaying thou hast bought
The world and paid for it, the conquering Shah
Will give to thee a city and withal
A share in this world.’"?

To that sage Kubin
Made answer: * Need I any further guide ?
Good sooth ! although I am a hundred I
Fain would get somewhat so I have no choice,
Be both my body and my soul thy ransom,
Such is the covenant I make with thee."

Kharrád, son of Barzín, on hearing that,

Sped to the queen and said : ** The time hath come
For me to ask my boon, O gracious lady !

And I will tell it. Certain of my folk

Across the river are in bonds. Be pleased

To set mine own feet free. Procure for me

An impress of the Khán's seal and this know

That by so doing thou wilt give me life."

She said: “ He is asleep and drunk: I might
Put clay upon the signet on his hand.”

She asked Kharrád, son of Barzin, for seal-clay,
Went to that drunken sleeper's couch forthwith
From her apartments, presently impressed

' Cf. p. 335- " In C, the new section begins here.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 339


The clay upon the signet, came, and gave it

To her petitioner. That scribe gave thanks
Therefor, then went and passed it to the elder.
Kulün received that seal, sped pheasant-like,! C. 1968
And came to Marv, unmarked. He tarried there
Until the twentieth of the month—the day

That was unlucky for Bahram Chübína,*

Who was at home attended by one slave,

With apples, quinces, and pomegranates placed
Before him. All alone Kulün approached

The gate and said thus to the porter: * Sir!

I bring word from the daughter of the Khán,
And I am neither warrior nor Persian.

That pious lady hath entrusted me

With secrets, which for her sake must be kept,
For this great monarch. She is ailing too,

And is with child. Tell him that I may give
My message to the crowned and famous chief."

The noble chamberlain made haste, went in,
Came to the entrance of the warrior's chamber,
And said: “ A scurvy-looking messenger,

Clad in a sheep-skin, hath arrived and saith :—
‘I carry from the daughter of the Khan
A message to thy potent lord.’ ”

Replied
Bahram Chubina: “ Say to him: * Display
Thy visage also at the chamber-door.’ "

Kulün drew near and from the doorway showed
His head. On seeing an old man weak and wretched
Bahram Chubina said to him: “ If thou
Hast letters give them up.”

Kulün rejoined :—
“ I have a message only and will speak not
With others by.”
Bahram Chibina said :—
* Cf. Vol. vii. p. 88 mote, — ' Cf. p. 337.


C. 1969


340 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


= Approach without more mystery and tell it
Within mine ear."
Kulün drew near. The knife

Was up his sleeve. His villainy grew plain.
He feigned to whisper and then struck. A cry
Rose from the room. Now when Bahram Chübína
Called out the people ran to him. He said :—
“ Arrest the fellow. Ask who prompted him.”

Then all within the palace came and dragged
That hoary-headed man off by the feet,
The servants in their fury smiting him
With palms and fists. He took the buffetings,
And opened not his lips from noon till midnight,
Then when he had been broken, hand and foot,
They flung him down within the palace-court,
And gathered in their sorrow and dismay
About Bahram Chübína. He still bled,
And groaned. His cheeks were lapis-lazuli.
His sister too had come to him forthwith.
She tore her hair, laid on her lap his head,
Then wailed and cried Teh bitterly : “* Brave horse-

man !

The lion used to flee the woods before thee !
Who hath removed this Column of the world ?
Who hath o'erthrown this mighty Elephant ?
Woe for the cavalier of chieftain-mould,
World-conqueror, undaunted, lion-queller !
Thou didst not serve the Sháh, and no God-server
Was he that smote thine elephantine form.
Alas! who tore this tall, exalted Mountain
Out of the pleasant waters by the roots ?
Who hath plucked up so flourishing a Cypress ?
Who east this erown of greatness basely down ?
Who filled the ocean suddenly with dust ?
Who hurled this moving Mountain to the abyss ?
Now alien, friendless, helpless, and alone


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 341


We live despised in other men’s domains.
I said to him: ‘O captain of the host !
Uproot thou not the sprout of loyalty,
For if a daughter only had been left
Sprung from Sásán she would assume the crown,
The whole face of the land would be her slave,
Her blest crown touch the sky." Thou wouldst not
hear
My profitable words but now repentest |
Thy deeds and bear'st a guilty soul to God.
Ill is on our great house; we are the sheep;
Our foemen are like wolves."
The wounded man,
On hearing what she said and seeing all
Her heart and prudent counsellings, her cheeks
Hent by her nails, her hair plucked out, her heart
And eyes all blood, her face all dust, though faint
And suffering loosed his tongue and answered thus :—
^ My noble sister! nothing ever matched
Thy counsel yet the measure of my days
Is full. Iacted not on thine advice :
A div-like guide led me in everything.
No prince was more exalted than Jamshid,
Through whom the world was full of fear and hope,
Yet erred he at the bidding of the divs
So that he made the world black for himself,
"T'was just the same with watchful Kai Kats,
Heaven's favourite whose steps were fortunate,
The loathly Div's incitements ruined him ;
The evils that befel him thou hast heard :
He mounted heavenward to look upon
The circling sky and course of sun and moon,
But fell into the deep beyond Sari,
Headforemost.! In like manner hath the Div
Caused me to err and docked my hand from good.
* Cf. Vol. ii. p. 102 seq.


C. 1970


342 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


‘Thine is the royal diadem,' he said,
‘From Aries to Pisces all is thine.’
I do repent mine evil deeds. God's pardon
Were gracious to me. Thus was destiny
Writ o'er my head; why should I mourn the past ?
The water riseth o'er me; grief and joy
Are both as wind to me: ‘twas written thus ;
What was to be hath been; none can abate,
Or greaten ills. Thy counsels are mine heirlooms,
Thy sayings are mine earrings. Right and wrong
Are over: call not fruitless words to mind,
But turn to God and place your confidence
Where fortune smileth. He is friend enough
In troubles; tell none of your grief and joy.
My destined portion of the world is mine,
The end is come and now I must depart."

Then to Yalan-sina he said: “I leave
The whole host, throne, the kingship and the state,
To thee. Do thou take heed of my good sister :
Thou wilt not need another counsellor.
Part not asunder. May disunion
Ne'er come between you twain. Abide not long
Within this hostile territory. I
Came hither and am weary of the place.
Go and present you to Khusrau Parwiz,
Speak and hear him.! If he shall pardon you
Hail not another as your sun and moon,
Take many grectings from me to Gurdwi,
And tell him what hath chanced. Make me my

charnel

Within Iran, and wreck my palace here.
Much trouble have I suffered through the Khan,
And have not found him gracious for one day.
It was no guerdon for my toils to have
A div dispatched to slay me, yet in truth,


! Couplet omitted. * Two couplets omitted.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 343


If he shall hear of this, he will not know
What he should think. None save Iranians
Conceived this plan, end had the Div for guide.”
He called a seribe and wrote, as there was need,
This letter to the Khan: '* Bahrám Chübína
Hath passed away in failure, shame, and woe.
Be good to those I leave and keep them safe
From toil and trouble caused by enemies,
For I have never wronged thee but ensued
Whate'er was wise and right."
He gave his sister
Much good advice, embraced her darling head,
And laid his mouth against her ear, his eyes C. 1971
Suffused with blood, and he gave up the ghost.
All wept him bitterly and lived in sorrow.
His sister in her pain bewailed him sorely,
And kept recalling all her brother's words :
Her heart was riven by her grief for him.
She had a narrow silver coffin made,
She wrapped brocade around that warrior-form,
With raiment of fine linen neath his vest,
And covered him with camphor, face and all.
The process of this Wayside Inn is so!
Toil not, thou knowest that thou needs must go.
Quaff not thou grief but wine by day and night
With lips all laughter and with heart-delight.


$38
How the Khan had Tidings o] Bahrám Cliübina's Death
and how he destroyed the House and Family of
Kulún
When tidings came about Bahrim Chúbina,
And what his gory had entailed on him,


344 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And when his letter too arrived, and when

The messenger had told his tale, the Khan

Was grieved at heart, his eyes were filled with
blood, .

His cheeks became like lapis-lazuli.

Amazed he called his veteran counsellors,

And told the fate of brave Bahrám Chübína

While every one that heard it wept for woe.

All Chín bewailed right bitterly and burned,

Without a fire, for anguish. Then the Khán

Investigated all to ascertain

The author of the crime and, when he found

That ‘twas Kharrid who planned that wicked
deed,

Exclaimed : ** How did that dog escape when he

Had turned such fire as this on us ? "

Kulün

Had two sons living in Türán as well

As divers friends and kinsmen. When the Khán

Had learned the truth he burned Kulün's house
down,

And all about rt, flinging on the flames

His sons and giving all their goods to spoil.

Then when the queen's turn came he had her
haled

Forth from the curtains by her hair, seized all

Her goods, and heeded not her misery.

He sent swift dromedaries everywhere :

Kharrád, son of Barzin, came not to hand.

The Khán grieved long, arraying all his slaves

Throughout the land of Chín in mourning weeds,

For he had loved Bahrám Chübína's deeds.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 345


$ 39


How Khusrau Parwiz had Tidings of the Slaying of
Bahrám Chibina and honoured Kharrdd, Son of
Barzin


Now when Kharrad, son of Barzin, approached C. 1972
Khusrau Parwiz and told what he had done,

And seen and heard, the Sháh's heart joyed for he
Was quit of that opponent worshipful.

He showered many drachms, robes, and much else
Upon the poor. They wrote to every king

And chief a letter in the ancient tongue

'To tell what God almighty, the All-just,

Had brought to pass and how He had sent up

Dust from that foe. The Shah too wrote a letter

In royal wise to Caesar. For a se'nnight

They held festivities and called for harp

And wine in every quarter of the city.

The Shah sent offerings to the fanes of Fire,

And robes of honour to the Great. He told
Kharrád, son of Barzin: “ Thou hast deserved

To have the crown and throne,” and filled his mouth


Some hundred thousand, out before his feet
On such wise that they grew as high as he.
The Shah said: “* Whoso turneth from the way!
Shall have his day bedimmed although he be
In battle like the brave Bahrám Chübína
From whom an ancient Turk hath raised the dust."
The chiefs all blessed Khusrau Parwiz and said :—
* Without thee never be the crown and signet,
And if, in spite of all thy loving-kindness,
A man would have thy face lack radiancy
Then let him as Bahram Chibina be."
* Reading with P.


C. 1973


346 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ 40


How the Khdn sent his Brother to Gurdya, the Sister of
Bahram Chibina, with a Letter touching her
Brother's Death and asking her in Marriage as
his Queen, and her Answer


Now when the Khán's heart was relieved and Chin

Was all like clay with gore he said one day :—

“ Weak men, weak deeds! but I was well content

And gladdened through Bahram Chibina’s prowess.

Now why have I allowed the hero's kin

To bide in so much weakness and contempt ?

I shall be blamed by all that hear thereof,

And in the future none will trust mine oath.

I have not soothed his little son's distress

Or have concerned me for his kin although

He was related to me through my daughter,

And heart and soul compact of love and wisdom."
He bade his brother come and spake at large :—

" E'en as a pheasant flieth in a garden

Betake thyself to Marv, look on the kin

Of brave Bahram Chubina, greet them well,

And say: * By God and by the throne of greatness

I had no knowledge of this villainy.

I too am stricken to the heart and wrapped

In grief while I shall live, and in revenge

Have bathed the surface of the land in gore.

The cities curse, but bless Bahram Chibina.

Although I should take vengeance for this hurt,

And bring the heaven down, one in a hundred

Would not avenge so famed a hero’s blood ;

But no one, as all wise men know, can ‘scape

From God’s decree. This was assigned to him,

And all through the perverse Div’s sorcery.

I hold to my first pledge and will keep faith.'


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 347


Convey a separate letter to Gurdya :—
* O holy lady of unsullied skirt !
Thou art all uprightness and kindliness,
Of lofty nature, far from all defect.
Long have I mused upon thy state, while wisdom
Hath been in secret session with my heart,
And have found no lord fitter than myself
For thee, so grace my curtains by thy counsel ;
Thee will I hold as mine own soul and body,
And do mine utmost to keep faith with thee.
Then all in this state shall be thine to bid,
And I will pledge my heart to do thy will.
Now gather all thy friends, discuss the matter
Before the wise and see what seemeth best
To thy bright mind when thou hast wisely weighed.
Let wisdom rule thy words and then inform me.’ ”
That atheling, his brother, heard and like

A turtle-dove from cypress sped to Marv,
And to Bahram Chubina’s kindred bare
The letter and good will, told what the Khan
Had said and how he passioned to avenge
The slain, then added: * Sages and archmages
Approven well and vigilant of heart !
Herein may much good tidings come to you,
And may the almighty Judge befriend the dead.
This sudden death—no trifle—was a thing C. 1674
That none expected."

Then he gave the sister,
But privily, the letter and the message
Sent by the Khan, He spake of their connexion,
Her counsel and fair words, of past and present,
And of the purity and piety
Of women that both counsel and console.
The young man spake, the lady of the skirt
Unsullied heard him but made choice of silence.
Thereafter, when she had perused the letter,


348 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


And all the words of the imperious Khan,
She made her wisdom and her knowledge mates,
Thought out her answer and informed the brother :—
I have perused this letter and held session
With wisdom. Just what kings, experienced folk,
And potentates would do the Khán hath done.
Oh! may our eyes be bright upon the man
That seeketh thus to avenge us! May the world
Ne'er lack the Khan, and may the crown of greatness
Rejoice in him. May care ne'er wound his heart,
And may he ne'er despair. We sat in counsel.
I read thy letter over, every whit,
And all the men of wisdom and of might
Agree to entertain this wish of thine.
Howbeit all my family are now
_In sorrow and the subject is ill-timed.
When mourning for so great a chief is over
The Khan's commandment shall not be transgressed.
I purpose not to go back to Tran.
Naught can be better for a virtuous dame
Than to be married, but if I shall come
In haste what will the wise king say of me ?
If in the midst of grief I aim at joy
I shall not act with virtue or respect ;
The wise will say that I lack modesty,
The Khan himself will think me indiscreet.
When four months of this mourning have elapsed
I will dispatch a horseman to the king.
Meanwhile hear will I what I ought to hear—
All that my counsellors may have to urge—
And state it in a letter to the king
When mine adviser goeth unto him.
As for the present, fare rejoicing hence,
And tell the Khan the message that I send."
She gave the envoy many gifts, and he,
A man experienced, left Marv joyfully.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 349


§ 41
How Gurdya consulted her Nobles and fled from Marv


Then at her leisure that young, prudent dame C. 1975
Consulted with her counsellors and said :—

“A new thing, one that ne'er will stale with me,
Hath chanced: the Khan, that ruler of the world,
In flattering terms hath asked for me in marriage.
He hath no fault; he is a king, great, brave,
And master of the armies of Turan.

None dared to name me while my Lion lived.
For twelve years after I had lost my sire

The brave Bahram Chubina took in charge

Mine orphanhood and raged when any one
Demanded me in marriage. Now the Khan

Is not a person of small consequence,

And he hath both ability and power.

Howbeit when he striveth to make kinship
Between the Turks and the Íránians

From that bond and connexion time will see
Both travail- and affliction in the end.

Look what it was that Siyáwush received
Except sun-burning from Afrásiyáb !

That youth unmatched by other mother's son
Gave from the first his head up to the wind.
What did that chieftain's son too do but send
The dust up from Írán and from Türán ?
Contrive that unknown to the Turks we may
Convey this story to Írán forthwith.

I have dispatched a letter to Gurdwi,

For I had apprehensions on this score,

That he might ope my matter to the Shah,

And tell my toil and care. God helping me,

He will both hear and grant my fair appeal.”


C. 1976


350 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


They said: “Thou art for life our youthful lady
In Chin and in Iran. An iron mountain
Could not displace thee, and thou guidest. heroes
To manliness. Thou art more shrewd than sages,
More full of counsel than wise ministers.
We are thy subjects all; ‘tis thine to bid,
And thine to judge and deal with this request."
On hearing this she called the muster-roll,
And opened offices to pay the troops,
Went forth, inspected every one of them,
And chose eleven hundred and three score,
Each one of whom would face ten cavaliers
In fight. She furnished drachms and then returning
To her abode harangued her warlike powers :—
* He that hath ever seen a stirrup-strap
Is not perturbed because of ups and downs.
He feareth not a murderous multitude
E'en if the clouds shall shower heads on him:
He will not turn from me when I retreat :
He will not be afraid when foemen charge.
Fare we toward Iran, fare we toward
The monarch of the brave. Here in Türán
We are but strangers, destitute and friendless,
Weak as we are and abject mid the great.
Withdraw we then when darkness hath set in,
And when our foemen's heads are dull with sleep.
Let not your hearts be straitened on the way
If any troops of Chín encounter us,
Because the chieftains with their massive maces
Will follow us past doubt, but let us each
Take his own life in hand and, if they come,
Give and get blows withal; but all of you
That disapprove of this! abide ve here."
They shouted: “ We are lieges and obey."
This understood, they rose and made them ready
For war with Chin. Izid Gashasp, the chief,


KHUSRAU PARWÍZ 351


And Yalán-sína mounted with the troops,
Who all said: “ Better perish with renown
Than live and let the men of Chín prevail."

She crossed the desert to the caravans ;
She had the camels passed in front of her,
And chose three thousand to transport her baggage.
At night like some illustrious cavalier
She mounted, mace in hand ; her charger's mail
Was splendid, and she wore a breastplate, sword,
And battle-helm, then led both night and day,
swift as the wind, her host upon its way.


$ 42


How the Khán received Tidings of the Flight of Gurdya
and how he sent Tuwurg! with an Army ajter her,
and how Gurdya slew Tuwurg


A number of deserters from her force

Arrived to seek protection from the Khiin.

His brother came and said: “* O famous chief,
And lover of the fray! some valiant troops
Have made toward Iran, and many others

Have sought for my protection. Realm and host
Will laugh for ever at thy court’s disgrace.”

The chieftain’s cheek, when he had heard the words,
Grew white with anger, and he answered: * Haste, ^ C. raz7
And lead an army forth. Observe what road
Those troops have taken. When thou reachest them
Act not injuriously but first of all
Make use of honied words, for of them none
Hath any knowledge of our usages ;

Their fear perchance hath turned us into foes.
Speak with all unction and entreat them well ;
* Reading with P.


352 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Encourage them by loving-kindliness ;
But if they offer armed resistance play
The man and let there by no dallying ;
Make one tomb for the whole of them at Marv
So that the earth may be like pheasant’s plumes.”

He went forth with six thousand valiant horsemen,
Picked Turks, and on the fourth day overtook
The Iranians, but that lion-hearted dame
Was not concerned beholding them. She left
The army, visited as swift as wind
The cameleers, disposed the baggage-train
Behind the lines, and then surveyed the field.
She donned her brother’s armour and bestrode
A fiery steed. The hosts were ranked.. Each man
Took his own life in hand. Tuwurg came forth
Before his troops (the Khán was wont to call him
“Old Wolf”) and said to the Íránians :—
“Is not the virtuous dame in this great host ? "
For Gurdya was arrayed in heavy mail,
And had her waist girt like a warrior’s,
So that the valiant billman knew her not,
But spurring on his steed and coming near
Said to her: “ Midst this army where shall I
Seek for the sister of the murdered Shah,
For I have many things to say to her,
Respecting both the present and the past ?”

She answered: “ Here am I prepared to charge
À ravening lion."

When he heard the voice

Of her that rode a lusty lion-steed
He was amazed and said: “ The Khan of Chin
Of all the kingdom made a choice of thee
To keep him mindful of Bahrim Chibina,
The Lion and the chosen cavalier.
He said: ‘I will requite the favour done
If only thou wilt listen to my words.’


=


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 353


He said to me: * Haste unto her and say ;—
‘If what I spake was not acceptable
Know that my words were not imperative,
And that I have renounced what I proposed.
If is not well for thee to quit our coasts :
Attempt it not although thou wilt not wed.
Join words together unto this effect,
And if she will not take advice use bonds
For her and all that have supported her.
This is too much ! ' 1
She answered: ** Let us quit C. 1978
The field and troops, and I will answer thee
Advisedly on all points."
He approached
That famed and valiant dame who, seeing him
Alone, displayed to him her face beneath
Her sable casque, and said : ‘“ Thou hast beheld
* Bahrám Chübína's horsemanship and courage
With admiration : his full sister I.
His day is done so I now will essay thee.
I long to fight with thee. If thou shalt find
That I am worthy of a husband say so.
Good sooth ! thou mayst approve me as thy spouse ! "'
She spake, then spurred her steed. Izid Gashasp
Rode close behind her. With her spear she struck
The girdle of Tuwurg and pierced his mail.
He tumbled headlong, and the sand beneath
Ran blood. With chosen warriors Yalán-sína
Charged and discomfited the host of Chín,
Slew, overthrew, and wounded many a man,
Pursued the foe two leagues and left few mounted.
The whole plain was a-stream with blood that day,
This man was headless, that head-downward lay.


|” Arrange les affairs de cette mani&re, et si un conseil du KAhakan
ne te suffit pas, fais un traité. Quiconque croit le Khakan capable
de faire ce que £u crains, dépasse ce qu'il est permis de dire," Mohi.


VOL. VIII. z


C. 1979


354 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ 43
How Gurdya wrote to Gurdwi


Victorious she drew toward Iran,

She drew toward the monarch of the brave,

But halted for a short time at Amwi

With questionings increasing in her heart.

She wrote thence to her brother, telling him

In sorrow all that occurred, and said :—

“What time the brave Bahram Chuibina died,
All care and grief fraternal, to us both

He proffered much good counsel. May we never
Distress his spirit! Furthermore he said :—
‘Inform the exalted monarch of the counsels
That thou hast heard from me.” A mighty host,
All men of name and warriors, pursued us,

But I have so entreated them in fight

That never more will they see fight or feast.
With me are many famous chiefs, and harm
Must not be theirs. Till my good star convey

A hoped response I pause upon the way.”


$44
How Khusrau Parwiz slew Bandwi


From that time forth the Shah sat undisturbed,
Since brave Bahram Chubina was no more,

And found no chieftain hostile and disposed

To counter him in fight. One day he thus
Addressed his upright minister: “* How long

Shall I conceal my thoughts ? Shall my sire’s slayer
For ever be about me as a kinsman ?


KHUSRAU PARWIzZ 355


Now that I have the power and feel aggrieved
What should result ? "'
They spread the board and quaffed,

And put Bandwí in fetters that same day.

The Sháh thereafter bade his minister :—

* Cut off his hands and feet; he will not then
Gird up his loins to shed the blood of kings."

. They lopped him and he died forthwith, resigning
His blood-stained life up to Khusrau Parwiz.

The Shih then sent a man to Khurásán

With strict injunctions: ‘ Hold thy tongue and go
Hence to the marchlord's court. Bid Gustaham :—
* When thou hast read my letter come forthwith.’ ”

The envoy reached in Khurásán the court

Of one at ease and gave the Sháh's behest,
That youthful Sháh who poured out blood with zest.


§ 45


How Gustaham rebelled against Khusrau Parwiz and
took Gurdya to Wife


When Gustaham heard this he summoned all

His scattered troops, set forth upon the march,
And passing by Sari and by Amul

Came to Gurgán—the country of the Great—
Heard that the Shah had grown severe and slain
Bandwi, his brother, unexpectedly,

Whereat he gnawed his hands, gat from his steed,
Rent all his raiment asa paladin,

And wailing poured the dust upon his head,
Perceiving that the world-lord would avenge
Hurmuzd on him. He turned back sorrowing,
And, thou hadst said: “ Companioning the wind.”


C. 1980


356 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Collecting all his scattered troops he marched
Toward the forest of Nárwan and, when
He reached the mountains of Ámul, drew up
His army in that forest, thence made raids,
And thus began a system of revenge.
He found a living for all workless men,
And where he heard that royal troops were camped
Descended on them and destroyed them all.

Now when Gurdwi arrived he told the Shah
All that his sister with her warriors
Had done against the marchlords of the Khan,
And how she made their dust go up at Marv,
While Gustaham, on his side, was informed
That brave Bahrám Chübína's days were done,
And that Gurdya with many troops had fled
That fierce chief,! that a host had followed her
To take revenge, and how she had entreated
Those famous men of Chin. He called to horse,
And from that forest led his troops like wind
To meet her. When Gurdya was ware she went
Forth with her chiefs and nobles. Gustaham,
On seeing them, rode out before his troops.
He met Gurdya and was o'ereome by pain
And much remorse about Bahram Chubina,
Spake also of his sorrow for Bandwi,
And wiped blood from his eyelids with his sleeve.
He lighted weeping from his steed at sight
Of Yalán-sína and Izid Gashasp,*
And said: “* The Shih hath slain Bandwi; his day
Is over and thou wouldst have said : * The Shah
Was not his sister’s son. Bandwi bled not
For him who used to pour his very soul
Out at Bandwi’s feet and lamented him
When absent!" Now upon the earliest chance
The Shah, true to the instinets of his race,

' The Khan. ' Reading with P.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 357


Hath severed from Bandwi both hands and feet !
So now what hope can ye have in the Shah,
For never came fruit from the willow'’s bough ?
He will entreat your kindred even worse, -
And make meat in the city cheap enough.
E'en at a distance he will rage to see,
And plan new vengeance on, Yalán-sína,
Thou being Bahrám Chübína's general,
And having power through him. Let each that
knoweth
The Shah be ware or better cut his throat !
If ye will stay with us we will consult
On all things great and small.”
The hearers took
His counsel; they all shunned destruction’s path.
He spake in earnest to Gurdya, recounting
Bahram Chibina’s acts. She was o’ercome
By what he said, and felt that he was right.
All joined him and his clouded counsels cleared.
“Doth not,” thus said he to Yalán-sína, C. 1981
“ This lady talk of marriage and desire
Its honours ? "
He replied : * Wait till I speak,
And by long converse ascertain her will."
He said to her: “O lady! I have seen thee
Act as adviser. Thou didst well to flee
The Khán, preferring wisely thine own race.
What sayest thou to the Sháh's maternal uncle,
The valiant and the wealthy Gustaham,
The captain and the leader of a host ? "
She said: “A spouse that cometh from [ran
Ne’er will despoil my kindred.”
So Yalan-sina
Gave her to Gustaham—a gallant hero
Of royal lineage—who tended her
Like a fresh apple, for he saw in this


358 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


His exaltation nothing of a fall.

The armies sent forth by Khusrau Parwiz

Found their old fortune altogether changed,

And Gustaham, on seeing a host o'erthrown,
Would spare the troops and take them for his own.


§ 46


How Khusrau Parwiz took Counsel with Gurdwi con-
cerning Gustaham and how Gurdya, prompted by
GFurdwi, slew him


Time passed; the Shah’s soul grieved at Gustaham.

One day he said in anger to Gurdwi :—

" 8o Gustaham hath got Gurdya to wife,

And those great companies resort, methinketh,

To him by her advice. A spy of mine

Hath come back from Amul and all is clear.”

He spake thus till it darkened, and the eyes

Of warriors failed, then while the slaves brought lights

And wine they sent all strangers from the hall,

And holding conclave with Gurdwi the Shih

Discussed affairs and said: “I have dispatched

Great forces to Amul to take revenge,

And all have come back wounded and in bonds,'

Have come back full of sorrow and dismay.

There is one plan—a trifle when compared

With crown and throne. Although Bahram Chibina

Erred yet Gurdya was ever on our side,

And I have got a scheme, but keep it close.

A letter must be written to Gurdya,

Like wine-streams in the garth of Paradise,

To say : * Thou hast been friendly and hast helped me
! t£. in a state of disability.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 359


In all things everywhere. Much time hath passed
While my heart's secret was not on my tongue,
But now the time for speaking hath arrived C. 1981
Because Gurdwí is as myself to me.!
Look out for some expedient to abate
This foul affliction and put Gustaham
Beneath the stones; then both my heart and home
Are thine. This done, thy troops and partizans
Shall find protection with me everywhere,
Be nowhere treated with contempt, and I
Will give a province unto whom thou wilt
That thev may act as rulers, and do thou
Come to the golden palace of my wives,
And thou shalt put an end to my revenge.
Thus will I pledge myself with many oaths,
And add to these yet more assurances.’ ”
Gurdwi replied: ** May the king live for ever,
And be as Venus in the Sign of Virgo.
Thou know’st that I regard my children’s lives,
My fruitful lands and all my family,
However precious I account them all,
As worthless when contrasted with thy head.
I will send one to her on this affair
To give her light thereon. I shall require
A letter, written by the Shah and sealed
With his own signet, like a shining moon.
This will I send my sister by my wife,
And thus put off all our antagonists,
For this is woman's work and specially
For one that is discreet, In mine opinion
Thy words should reach my sister, and the matter
Soon end as thou wouldst wish. The plan is perfect.”
Khusrau Parwiz, on hearing this, rejoiced,
And thought his cares wind, asked his treasurer


| de "I may speak now that thy brother is mine own dearest
friend and so there is safe communication.”


C. 1983


360 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


For paper, chose words redolent of musk,
And wrote a letter like a garden full
Of roses like the cheeks of the beloved,
Replete with pledges, oaths, and promises,
And manifold advice and flattery.
Whenas the ink of the inscription dried
They sealed the letter with a seal of musk.
Gurdwi wrote counsel too, and much besides,
Reciting first Bahram Chübína's deeds
Disgracing all his family and land,
And adding: “ God forgive him! May his wrangling
Cause no remorse in him! Those void of wisdom
Heed not the consequences of their acts.
Well, he hath gone and we shall follow him,
Confiding in the justice of our God.
My wife, on coming, will enlighten thee.
Swerve not from what she saith or thou wilt make
Thy fortune's visage wan."
He put the letter
Writ by the Sháh inside his own and wrapped
Them both in painted silk. "The wary wife
Took them and heard those peremptory words.
She hasted for the forest of Narwán—
A woman sent as envoy to a woman.
Thereat Gurdya became like jocund Spring
With cheeks all grace and colour and perfume.
They talked at large about Bahram Chubina,
And wept. Then privily Gurdwí's wife gave
Gurdya the letter and made plain the path.
That lion-woman saw the Shah's dispatch
And, thou hadst said, looked down upon the moon.
5he laughed and said : * None with five friends would
think

This matter difficult."

She called her five,
And stationed them by Gustaham's bed-chamber.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 361


She read to them the letter of the Sháh,

But kept it from the chiefs in general.

When she had said her say she quickly made

A compact with them and shook hands thereon.

At night she put the lights out and at once
Pressed with her hands upon her husband's mouth ;
Some of the five too came to give her aid,

Came to the couch of that illustrious one.

She struggled greatly with the drunken man,

And silenced him at last. The general

Died in the darkness and bequeathed both night
And shining day to others. There arose

Within the city shouts and cries for help,

In every quarter tempest rose and fire,

And when the dauntless lady heard the din

She clothed her in a Riman coat of mail.

That night she called the Iranians, spake at large
About the murdered man, showed the Shah's letter,
And so emboldened them. They blessed the event,
And showered jewels on the document.


§ 47


How Gurdya wrote to Ahusrau Parwiz and how he
summoned and married her


That dauntless lady called for pen and inkstand,

And sat at ease among her counsellors.

She wrote a letter to the Shah concerning

His friends and foes, first praised those that eschew
Revenge, then said: ‘ The bidding of the Shah C. 1984
Hath been obeyed as loyal hearts would wish,

And through the fortune of the valiant world-lord

That great host hath dispersed. What further orders


302 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


Hast thou to give ? What further wilt thou hang
On thy slave's earring ? ”
When the letter reached
Khusrau Parwíz he joyed in her the more,
The mighty Lion sought a messenger,
High-starred, an honest man and shrewd of soul,
And wrote a letter like the Artang of Chín,!
With many blessings in it, summoning
The noble lady to the court, and in it
Called her the Diadem upon the moon.
The envoy came dust-swift to her and told
All that the Sháh had said. "The lion-lady
Became like radiant roses in the Spring-tide
By reason of that letter, called and paid
Her troops, and loaded up when it was day.
As she approached the citv of the Sháh
An army met her; when she reached the court
The Sháh received her, and she found him kind.
Thereafter she produced great olferings,
As did the chieftains in her company,
Exhibited the goods and all the wealth,
Then gave them to the royal treasurer—
Dinars and kingly jewels past compute,
Gold-woven brocade, crowns, girdles, golden thrones,
And golden shields. Khusrau-Parwiz beheld
That noble Cypress-tree with cheeks like Spring,
And pheasant’s gait, with countenance like day,
And locks like night, while pearls, thou wouldst have
said, |
Rained from her lips, He sent her to his bower,
Gave her precedence there, sent to her brother—
His own resourceful minister—to ask her
In marriage, took and held her dear as life,
While robes of honour, coin, and much beside
He showered upon the comrades of his bride.
' Arzhang in the original, See Vol. ii. p. 19 nole.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 3603


$48


How Gurdya showed her Accomplishment before Khusrau
Parwiz


Two se'nnights passed away. “ By sun and moon,
By throne and casque," he said to her, ** narrate
Thy battle with the soldiers of the Khan,

And gird thy loins as thou wast girded then.”

* () Shih ! " she thus made answer, ** live for ever,
And be souls nourished by the sight of thee.
Command thy men to bring a charger here, C. 1985
A saddle and choice lasso and a bow,

A spear and helmet and a warrior's mail,
Besides a quiver filled with poplar arrows.”

The Shah then bade the servitors: * Prepare

A place within the pleasance.”
Heedfully
Those slaves from Rüm and Turkistán attended.
Twelve hundred Beauties of Khusrau Parwiz
(Thou wouldst have said: “The garden hath not
room,"

Arrived preceded by sunlike Shirin
In height a silver column as she walked.
Gurdya approached the Sháh and bade a slave
Bring coat of mail and Rúman casque. She quitted
Her seat and came forth with her loins girt up
And spear in hand.! That all-accomplished dame
Drew nigh a black steed by the Sháh's command,
Set on the ground the butt-end of her spear,
And vaulted to the saddle swift as wind.
She chose her field of action in the pleasance,
Wheeled her about on all sides right and left,
And pierced the dark clouds with her battle-eries.

1 Couplet omitted.


C. 1986


364 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


She told the Shih: “ What time I fought Tuwurg
I was an angry Wolf as I am now.”
Shirin said: “ Wilt thou arm thy foes, O king,
For she is thinking of her brother's death,
And will, I fear, consign thee to the wind ?
Thou wearest but a robe upon the throne
Of gold, and she can reach thee any time!”
He laughed and answered: “‘ Then provoke her
not."

The moon-faced lady wheeled amid the dust.
She was a heroine in love and war,
And said: “* Would that a foeman of the Sháh's
Were here before me on the battlefield.
I would unhorse him as I did Tuwurg
Here in the Great King's presence."

He was all
Astound, she had such stature, thews, and limbs.
He said to her: “ Thou wilt not have to rail
At fortune. Let me see if thou art quelled
By wine or unaffected.”

Then she took—
That lady-paladin—a goblet filled
With royal wine, which Ahriman himself
Would have declined, and in the sight of all
Quaffed to the Shih and drained it at a draught ;
She knocked the dust out of that golden stream !
The Shah in wonder said: '* O warrior-moon !
I have about the world four generals,
Who have it in command to guard my life,
Each hath twelve thousand men—Tranians
And valiant cavaliers. I have withal
Within my golden bower and room of gems
Twelve thousand slaves, all pure, with torques and
earrings.

Henceforth thou art their overseer for thou
Dost toil and care for what is thine. I wish


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 365


To hear no word of them from any one,
Or young or old, save thee."
Gurdya rejoiced
On hearing this; the slanders of her foes
Had harmed her not. She swept earth with her face,
And called down blessings on her sovereign's Grace.


§ 49


How Khusrau Parwiz sent an ill-disposed Marchlord
to Rai and how he oppressed the Folk there


A long time passed ; meanwhile the monarch’s star
Sought only the ascendant, but one night,
As he was drinking wine among his sages,
His magnates and experienced officers,
There was a cup in use among the guests,
Graved with the name Bahrim.! The Shah bade
throw
The cup away whereat they all began
To curse Bahram, the cup, and him that wrought it.
Thus said the Shah: “ Now let the elephants
Of war tread down the fields and fells of Rai,
Expel the folk and turn it to a waste."
The noble minister addressed him thus :—
“© thou memorial of mighty kings !
Consider that the state of Rai ts large,
Not one for elephants to trample on,
For God and all good folk would disapprove."
The king replied: “I want one ill-disposed
And of low birth to act as marchlord there,
One who is coarse of speech and ignorant.”


! The cup had. belonged to, or the name on it suggested, Bahram
Chübina.


C. 1987


366 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


" Do thou, O king! " the minister rejoined,
“ Characterize the wretch, and I will seek,

And bring him, otherwise we have no guide.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ I want a gabbler,
Ill-starred, red-haired, foul and with nose askew,

With sallow face, malicious, squat, and soured,
A coward, vile and gloomy, vengeful, lying,
Green-eyed and squinting, with projecting teeth,
And humped like wolf in gait.”
The archimages

Were all amazed that he should speak of such,
And all made search about the world, amidst
The cities, and among the great and small.
One day a man brought one such to the Sháh,!
Who said: “ Tell thine ill deeds in fitting terms."

The man replied: “I cease not to do ill,
I have no wisdom and I say one thing
And do another, and snub all that greet me.
My stock is lies; I never help the right ;
I break my pledge and fling nobility,
Both root and stem, to earth."

Khusrau Parwiz

Made answer: “ May thine evil star ne'er change."

They gave him Rai by patent, so the wretch
Grew great by turpitude. They gave to him
Troops that had been dismissed. He left the court,
Famed for depravity. The miscreant,
When he arrived at Rai, put off all fear
Of God, and bade the gutters of the roofs
Be torn away : this gave him much delight,
And afterward he had all cats destroyed,
Which gave great umbrage to the householders.
Where'er he went he took with him a guide,
While in the front of them a herald walked,
Proclaiming : *' If I see a gutter left,

' Two couplets omitted.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 367


Or cat within a house, I will set fire

To house and field, and stone the inmates' heads."
He would turn out a place to find one drachm,

And vex its owner. All the people left

Their homes in terror and gave up their lands.

There were no gutters when the rain came down,

No watchman in the city. Through the foul

And ill-conditioned miscreant that came

From court to Rai that city was laid waste.

The sun beat down upon the people's heads,

The place was full of pain and wretchedness,

And not a soul regarded their distress.


$ 50
How Gurdya made Sport before Khusrau Parwiz and
how he gave Rai to her


Thus was it till the month of Farwardin, C. 1988
And rose-leaves decked the surface of the earth,
Until the clouds’ tears grew as large as hail,
And tulips filled the valleys and the plains,
Till all the dales were dappled like a pard, !
And earth was coloured like brocade of Rum.
The chieftains came to sport within the garths,
And to the uplands flocked all sheep and deer.
Khusrau perceived the garden's open gates,
The water-birds disporting on its streams,
And bade the trumpets sound. They carried thither
Jars of perfumes, sat down upon the grass,
Called out for wine and decked their souls with joy.
A man from Rai approached Gurdwi and told
All that had happened. He was grieved at heart,
And sought in his concern a remedy.
He told his sister: “ Thou must» tell the Shah.


C. 1989


368 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS]


See if thou canst devise a scheme to make
His heart indifferent in this regard.”
Anon Gurdya produced a kitten, clad
As ‘twere a child, upon a courser trapped
With gold and jewels. In the kitten's ears
Were earrings and its claws were tulip-hued,
Its eyes were pitch-like, languishing like those
Of folk bemused, its cheeks were like the Spring. -
It rode about the garden like a child
With saddle-flaps of gold. The Shah laughed out,
And laughter took possession of the court.
“ What,” said he to Gurdya, “is thy desire,
My gracious lady ? "
| That resourceful dame
At once did reverence. “* Exalted Shah ! “
She said, * grant Rai to me, be wise again,
Release the hearts of woeful folk from grief,
Reeall that wretched mannikin from Rai,
And term him miscreant and malefactor,
For he doth ban the eats and wreck all gutters !"’
Khusrau Parwiz laughed out at his wife’s words,
And said: “ Thou saucy shatterer of hosts!
I give to thee the city and the lands.
Send thither presently some upright man,
And call back that malignant one from Rai,
Like Ahriman, that loathly infidel.”
The lady’s fortune waxed continually
Beneath that royal and illustrious Tree.


$51
How Khusrau Parwiz portioned out his Realm


Thereafter when the Sháh's hand was extended,
When all folk wished him well, when other kings


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 369


Were subject to him, and his other lieges
Had been enriched, he chose out of Írán
Four times twelve thousand warlike cavaliers,
Brave and experienced, oped the ancient hoards
Filled by Pirtiz and glorious Kubád,
Partitioned out the world in four and made
Appointments to the governments. He sent
Twelve thousand out of those illustrious men,
Shrewd cavaliers, deft wielders of the sword,
Toward the Rüman marches to safe-guard
That populous and glorious coast that troops
From Rúm might not attack fran and lay
The country waste or any one encroach,
But be content with his own rank and fortune.
He chose moreover of the men of name
Out of [ran twelve thousand warlike horsemen
That they might march forth to Zábulistán
(They left a rose-garth for a gloomy land)!
And said to them: “ If any one shall turn
Out of the way, not keeping his own place,
Restore him to the path with courteousness,
But in worse cases use the chain and pit.
Send spies about to keep you well apprised ;
Ye will have need of outposts day and night,
And sleep not in your tents without a guard."
Out. of the host he called twelve thousand others,
All magnates valorous and fond of fight,
And having given to them much advice
Dispatched them to the route of the Alans,
And charged them with the gate-way of the West?
50 that no enemy might pass thereby.
He bade the chiefs: “Be watchful and God guard
you."
He chose and sent twelve thousand warriors more,
Such as were fit, to Khurásán, exhorting,
!""Ce pays à ferre noire," Mohl, " Darband. See Vol. i. p. 16.
VOL. VIII. 2A


C. 1990


370 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And greatly charging: “ From Haital to Chin
Let none set foot upon our land save those,
Devoted and attached to me, that are
Admitted with my knowledge and command.
In all the provinces I have full hoards
Available to all. When ye have need
Ask and live happy, prudent and secure.”

He oped his treasuries’ doors and seeing drachms
With the inscription of Hurmuzd he wept,
And gave them to the poor with further gifts
When they were clothed. He cut the heads off all
The adherents of Bandwi and intimates
Of foul-mouthed Gustaham who had rejoiced
O'er his sire's murder. Having made an end
Of cursing and revenge he wisely took
A new departure, portioning in four
The night and day, which make revolving time.
At one of these four seasons an archmage
Of goodly speech attended to inform
The Sháh about the host and world's affairs,
Who, if he noticed anything amiss
Among the people or the warriors,
Would ply forthwith the skirt of justice, learn
The facts, and find a way. Another time
Was given up to song and minstrelsy,
And quiet, careless session with his lords
As mighty men should do. "The third was set
Apart for prayer and praising God, the fourth
For study of the starry sky above,
Its character, its nature, and its host.
The readers of the stars then stood before him
Because they were his guides to understanding ;
But during half of this night-period
He sat among the Idols of Taráz.
He also made division of each month
In four parts that life might be pleasurable :


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 371


One for the riding-ground, for archiry,

And polo with some noble to record ;

Or for the chase among the hills and plains

To keep himself in health, and when he left

The chase by day or night the affluent

Would decorate his route. The second part

Was given up to chess and nard and tales

Of battle, while the third was for the sages,

The scribes and story-tellers, who in turn
Narrated to him stories of the past,

While in the fourth the Shah received the envoys
Of other potentates and wrote his answers

To those exalted chiefs. With robes of honour C. 1991
The envoys, gratified and satisfied,

Would set forth from the court and journey home.
On that day too for all the provinces

He used to write out patents and bestow them
On all the chiefs. When the New Year began

At Farwardin, and sunshine in men’s hearts
Relumed the Faith, he laid a treasure by,
Unknown to all his subjects, secretly.


§ 52
How Shirwi, the Son of Khusrau Parwiz, was born of
Maryam with bad Auspices and how Khusrau
Parwiz informed Casar


When he had reigned five years he had no peer,

And in the sixth year Ciesar's daughter bare lim
An infant like the moon. “Twas not the custom
To give the call to prayers! in infants’ ears

If delicately nurtured. Fathers spake


! Le. to proclaim loudly.


diem ng


C. 1992


372 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


One name into their ears—a private one*—
The other name was publicly announced.
The Sháh in private called his son Kubád,
But publicly Shírwi of glorious race.
When of that night of birth there had elapsed
Three watches the astrologers approached
Khusrau Parwiz who asked: ** What have all those
Who read the stars observed, what will result,
And what is this young world-lord's horoscope ? "'
They said: “ Thou canst not scape the sky's decree.
The earth will be in turmoil through this child ;
His army will not bless him. He withal
Will quit God's path. What need we further say ? n
The upshot of their travail and those words
Unseemly grieved the Sháh's heart, and he said
Thus to the sages: '* Take a better view.
Be eareful that ye speak no word thereof
Before the Iranian chiefs."
He took good heed
Of that ill horoscope and laid it up
When he had sealed it with his royal signet.
The matter filled him with concern; he gave
No audience for a se'nnight and refrained
From chase and wine. None saw him for a space.
The chieftains all resorted to the archmage,
And held discourse at large to ascertain
What had befallen the illustrious Shah,
And why he gave not audience to his lieges.
The high priest sought the Sháh, on hearing this,
And told the army's words. He answered thus :—
* Fate troubleth me, and I am all concern
About the process of the turning sky
Through what the astrologers have said."
! As a precaution against evil influences. Sometimes children


were left un-named for a similar reason. Cf- Vol. i. pp. 8, 177. 179
and CMN, p. 36 seg.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 373


He bade
The treasurer: “ Bring forth the painted silk
With script therein."
The treasurer produced,
The archmage scanned heart-straitened, and was
mute,

But in the end said: “ God is all in all,
For He surpasseth all men’s understanding.
Now if the blindly turning sky presenteth
An altered aspect to the questioner
How can concernment make it turn from ill ?
Why then should any sage suggest such things ?
May naught but joy be thine. Heed not their talk.
We reap as heaven soweth and perforce
Must trust thereto. While heaven itself shall last
At whiles will love and justice and at whiles
Strife and revenge prevail. From it the body
Hath gain and loss. The understanding soul
Is not afraid. The Maker be thy stay
And comforter, and fortune’s head be laid
Upon thy lap.”

Thereat Khusrau Parwiz
Smiled and then gave his mind to other things.
He called a trusty scribe, instructed him
At large, and bade him write to Cæsar thus :—
“ Put on a crown fit for a king to wear,
For in the night Maryam hath borne a son,
Whose like thou ne’er hast seen. He needs must be
Both wise and fortunate, and through his virtues
Both worthy of the throne and bountiful.
So, as I do myself, live happily,
For joy and high estate pertain to thee.”


—— nS — a a Ee ee ee
E


C. 1993


374 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


$53


How Cesar wrote a Letter to Khusrau Parwiz, sent
Gifts, and asked for the Cross of Christ


Now Cæsar, when the letter reached him, saw
The superseription of Khusrau Parwiz,
And bade to blow the trumpet at his gate ;
The realm resounded. They adorned the wastes
And ways in honour of Shirwi the son
Ot Shah Khusrau Parwiz; the voice of minstrels
Rose from the state of Rüm from end to end.
Folk went with many Crosses to the court,
The scent of roses and sweet perfumes rose.
Thus for seven days they joyed with harp and wine
O'er prince Shirwi while Cæsar on the eighth
Bade drivers with their caravans attend.
He loaded up with drachms a hundred camels,
And ñfty with dinárs by way of largess,
Two hundred with gold-woven brocade of Rúm,
Thou wouldst have said: “ The fabric is all gold,”
With forty golden tables made with feet
Of coral, fitting for the use of kings,
With gold and silver effigies of beasts
With gems for eyes,’ with robes of beaver-skins,
With silk from Chín, and with a golden laver
Adorned with emeralds. He sent Maryam
A peacock made of gold, and many gems.
He sent as tribute also forty million
Dinars of Rum with forty watchful Rumans
To guard it led by Khánagí—a man
Unmatched in wisdom, Thus with cameleers
Ten caravans went laden with dinars.
When tidings reached the conquering Shih: ~“ An
envoy
|! Cf. Vol. vii. p. 36.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 375


- From Cesar draweth nigh,” he bade Farrukh,
A loyal marchlord, ruler of Nimruz,
High-born, a warrior, and the army's Lustre,
To mount. With him went horsemen of the Shah
With golden helms. When Khánagi deseried
Those troops afar he boldly rode ahead
Until they reached the Shah and that famed court.
On seeing his fair face and splendid throne
All louted to the ground and homaged him.
Then Khanagi, his face in dust, exclaimed :—
" () lord of justice, holy man! may God,
The All-conquering, bless thee, mayst thou ever be
The Shah and glad."
The chiefs arose and made

Room for him near the Shah to whom he said :—
“ Whose wisdom is like thine ? Thou art more bright
Than Sol in heaven, more lasting than the soul
Of eloquence. May this world never lack
A king like thee, and may time bear him fruit.
May none behold the day whereon thy will
Is frustrate ; be thy name writ on the sun.
May this world never lack thy head and crown,
This land thy host. From Cæsar salutation,
From us praise to this famous king of earth.
May all be dark to one that joyeth not, C. 1994
In his alliance. We have come from Rum
With gifts and tribute to this famous land,
Come with philosophers withal lest any
Should feel aggrieved at us. Let him accept
From Cæsar goods and tribute and moreover
His blessing.”

Smiled the Shah upon that man
Of worship and they set for him a seat.
Khusrau Parwiz sent to the treasury
The gifts and said to him: “ There needed not
Such pains ;" then to Kharrád, son of Barzín :—


376 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


“ Read out this letter to the company."

The scribe, an eloquent and heedful man,
Scanned the address and said: “ "Tis ‘ to the great,
Exalt Khusrau Parwiz, that man of God,

The watchful ruler of a lovely land,

Whose crown and wisdom are God's gifts to him,
The world-lord and the son of Shah Hurmuzd,
The glory of the crown and throne, from Cesar,
The father of the mother of the prince

Of lion-name,! and may his fame and power
Endure. Be his height, Grace, and victory,

And may his days be all a New Year's Day.


May he rule o'er Írán and o'er Türán,


‘In sovereignty without competitor,


For ever glad in heart and bright in soul,

For ever old in wit and young in fortune.

The noble monarchy of Gaitimart,

The offspring of Hüshang and Tahmuüras,

Sire after sire, son after son, God grant

The stock ne'er fail. May holy God bless these,
The Mighty both in kingship and in Faith.

No horseman and no Spring is like to thee,

Like thee there is no picture in the halls ;

Thou hast all manliness and uprightness,

And may thy spirit look not on defeat.

In all Írán, Türán, and Hindüstán

From Turkistán to Rüm, the sorcerers’ land,
God hath giv'n thee high birth with purity :

No holy mother e'er bare such a son.

When Farídün gave to Iraj fran,

And took supremacy from Rüm and Chín,*?

He from the first acclaimed Iraj and purged
His heart from guile and gloom. Thou hast no want,


: UM Cer) AM " sher," a lion:
um and Chin (Türán) were the portions of Salm and Tür,
the elder brothers of Iraj. See Vol. i. p.355.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 377


Thy fortune prospereth, and thou wouldst say
That God bestoweth majesty and charm

And manhood upon thee and robbeth others

Of their renown for manliness. As patrons

Of virtue, noble, bountiful, no member

Of their race e'er saw trouble. Tax and tribute
They laid on foes, and their ill-wishers bare,

As oxen do, their burdens. Since the days

Of Nushirwan (may wisdom make him young
For evermore !), whose peer hath never been,
And ne'er will be, as Sháh—the prudent king
By whom was reared a bulwark from the deep,!
So that they freed the whole wood of Nárwan
From Turkmans and the folk reposed, so freed
A vast expanse from enemies amid

The benisons of lords and underlings,

While Arabs, Indians, and Iranians

Girt up their loins before him—from the sea

Of Chin up to the land of the Khazars,

And from Armenia to the Eastern? gate,

The nobles of Haitál, Chách, Turkistán,

And Samarkand, although possessed of crowns,
Of Grace and splendour, all have been your lieges
Admittedly because the Shahs were sprung
From Farídün and others had no right.

By this affinity that I have now

Contracted with thee, and increased thereby
My greatness by my wisdom, I rejoice

As those athirst, or herbs sun-parched, at water.
Let the shrewd world-lord make me glorious,
And answer me this day. I ask the king

To grant a wish of mine. It is a matter

Of no account to him. Among thy treasures
There is the Cross of Christ: observe and ve


Will find it so. It hath been there for long.


! See Vol. vii. p. 239. * From Czesar's point of view,


C. 1995


378 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Now let the Shih restore it and so doing
Confer a favour on us great and small ;
Then all the world will bless him, saying thus :—
' Let time and earth without him be no more.’
"Twill be a favour to me; I will pray
All day and three fourths of the night for him.
Let him accept the tribute, toll, and gifts
Sent by me to his folk, and in return
I will accept the Cross by way of thanks.
Ne'er may the wicked look upon thy face !
Our feasts and ritual will prove glorious,
Our Faith become resplendent in the world,
As will our holy day, our Sunday, God
Will everywhere be worshipped, and the sad
Will kiss the Cross and burn thereto much incense.
That time will be delightful to my heart,
For ye will purge your hearts of all the vengeance
That hath come down to us from Faríidün,
And privily possessed both Salm and Tir ;
Our realm will rest from forays and all feuds.
Our wives and children have been carried off,
In every way our hearts have been distressed,
But our affinity hath calmed the world,
And all insensate passions are appeased.
May the Creator bless thee and thy land.”

The Shih heard Caesar's letter to the end
With secret joy ; the days of mighty kings
Had been restored in him. He gave great praise
To Khánagí and said: “ Be thou no more
A stranger.”

They made ready for that worthy,

That man both shrewd and brave, as dwelling-place
Two halls delightsome, and provided him
With all things needful. Khanagi first viewed
The appointed dwelling, then rejoined the Shah,
And companied that worshipper of God


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 379


At feast and entertainment, wine and chase.
On this wise with the Sháh a month they spent
In all good fellowship and much content.


$54


How Khusrau Parwiz amswered Cæsars Letter and
gent Gifts


Khusrau Parwiz wrote when the month had passed
A letter couched in wise and happy terms,
Beginning thus: " The blessings of the Great
Be on the man who keepeth pure within,
Who seeth God's work both in good and ill,
And feareth none beside but praiseth Him—
The Master of the sun—who thus sustaineth
The heavenly sphere: and first, thy praises of me,
As instanced in thy letter, I acknowledge.
And I am gratified that they proceed
From sages eminent. I have received
Thy splendid? treasure sent and only wish
That thou hadst less concerned thyself. Since God,
The holy Ruler of the world, hath raised
Thy realm o'er Spica, so as to outprize
Hind and Saklab, Chin and Khazar, what manhood,
What knowledge, virtue, and what Faith are thine,
And with God's blessing! When I was in trouble
Thou didst assist me and remove my griefs
Most wisely. Now I am more gratified
In thine affinity and virtuous daughter
Than any other chief in child, in land,
And virtuous kin. The other chiefs all turned
Their backs on me and passed me by as vile,

' Reading with P.


C. 1907


38o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


But thou didst take the place of sire to me,

And more. I recognise that thou hast been

A father noble and benevolent.

Next, what thou sayest of the holy Faith.

About your Sundays, fastings, and thanksgivings,

The seribe hath read to me. The words are both

Apt and acceptable, but still I shame not

For mine old Faith—Hushang’s—than which the
world

Hath seen naught better, teaching as it doth

All justice, goodness, reverence, and love,

With observation of the stars of heaven.

Sure am I that God is and ever strive

To follow justice. We do not allow

That God hath any partner, son, and consort.

He is and ever will be manifest,

Not comprehended by our thoughts but still

To me the warrant of His own existence.

Now as for these old tales recalled by thee

About the Cross of Christ: a well based Faith

Hath reason for its guide. Concerning those

Who, as thou say’st, are sad because their Prophet

Was crucified yet call Him * Son of God,’

And say that on the Cross He laughed, if He

Was son He hath but gone back to his Father ;

Be not concerned about some rotten wood.

If foolish utterances proceed from Cæsar

His letter will be laughed at by the old.

The Cross of Jesus, which Ardshir the Shih

Put in his treasury, is not worth the pains,

And if I send it from Iran to Rim

The land will laugh at me, the archimages

Think that I have turned Christian and a priest

Upon Maryam’s account! Demand of me

Whatever else thou wilt: the way is open.

I look with admiration on thy gifts,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 331


For which thou hast encountered so much toil,
And have bestowed them on Shirwi that so
I might inaugurate his treasury.
I am concerned about [rin and Rim,
My thoughts all night are like a wood, I fear
That when Shirwi is grown mishap will come
Upon both lands. Beginning with great Salm,
Prolonged by that old vengeful Wolf Sikandar,
What with new feuds and old, the whole affair
Will be revived. In all things that thy daughter’
Hath said to me know that she hath restored
Thy crown to youth. She is a Christian still,
And heedeth not my words. She is at ease
And joyful, triumphing in this young Tree
Of royalty. The World-lord help thee ever ;
May fortune's head be always on thy lap."
They sealed the letter with the roval signet, C. 1998
Kharrád, son of Barzín, took charge thereof,
And then they oped the doors of treasure-hoards
Collected by the Sháh for many a day,
And in the first place eight score money-bags,
For coins which Persians call ** paidáwasíis,'!
They filled till they were hard as stones with jewels,
Then sealed them tightly: Every bag was worth,
According to the reckoning on the roll,
One hundred thousand drachms. There were besides
Of pieces of brocade from Chin one hundred
And forty thousand, some of cloth of gold
With jewelled patterns, and five hundred pearls
Of purest water and like water-drops,
With eight score jewels like pomegranate-seeds,
Such as a skilful jeweller would prize,
While of the native produce of each land,
Of Hindüstán and Chín, Barbar and Misr,
And raiment from Shustar—all that the chiefs
' See Vol. vii. p. 95 mole.


392 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Esteem—he sent three hundred camel-loads
To noble Cæsar. He gave Khánagí

A grander robe of honour than he gave

To strangers or his kin, with garments, steeds,
Thrones, trappings, and all kinds of noted stuffs.
In this way too he made up camel-loads,

Ten out of them consisting of dinars

To give to the philosophers of Rum.

The embassy went on its way rejoicing,

While all the mighty men called down upon
That prowest king of earth their benison.


THE STORY OF KHUSRAU PARWIZ AND
SHÍRÍN


8 20
The Prelude


Now will I tell again old histories

About Shirin and Shih Khusrau Parwiz.

The book containing them is antiquate,

But that same story bring I up to date

lo serve as a memorial of the Great.

Six times ten thousand couplets there will be,
Well ordered, banishers of misery.

For thrice a thousand couplets one may look
In vain as yet in any Persian book,

And if one were to cancel each false strain

In sooth five hundred barely would remain.
That one—a bounteous king and of such worth
And lustre mid the monarchs of the earth—
Should disregard these histories is due

To slanderers and mine ill fortune too.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 383


They envied this my work and with the king
They have prevailed to spoil my marketing ;

But when the royal potentate shall read C. 1094
My pleasant histories with all good heed

I shall be gladdened by his treasures here,

And may no ill from foe approach him near.

My book may then recall me to his mind,

The seed of mine endeavours fruitage find.

Be his the crown and throne while time shall run,
And may his destiny outshine the sun.

A rustic minstrel wise and old once said :—

“To know is that which giveth man most aid ;
The tale of grief and joy he needs must tell,
Taste all the bitter and the salt as well,

For youths though knowing and of noble birth
Can only by experience compass worth."


$56
How Khusrau Parwiz loved Shirin, how they parted,
how he met her again while hunting and sent her
to his Bower*


Khusrau Parwiz like other paladins,
While yet his father lived, was young and bold,
And had for mate Shirin who was to him
As his bright eyes. He cared for none beside
Among the fair and daughters of the night,”
But parted from her for a while when he
Came to be king and had to roam the world
Unrestingly, for all his work was then
To fight Bahrim Chibina while the Fair

* There is no break in the original here.

* Part of this heading is not in the original.

© "Jes filles des grands." Mohl.


C.


ZR


354 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Wept day and night o'er his defect in love.!

It was so that one day he willed to hunt,
And all things were prepared as in the times
Of former Shihs. They took three hundred steeds,
Caparisoned with gold, for that famed King,
While of his loyal servitors there fared
Afoot a thousand and eight score, and earried
Two-headed darts. A thousand and two score
Bare scimitars and wore brocade above
Their coats of mail. Seven hundred faleoners
Came next with royal faleons, sparrow-hawks,
And gos-hawks, while behind them mounted men—
Three hundred keepers of the cheetahs—fared,


And pards and lions chained three score and ten,


All harnessed with brocade of Chin, all trained,
And furnished with gold muzzles. For the deer-hunt


There were eight hundred hounds with golden leashes.


Behind them came, to harp on hunting-days,
Two thousand minstrels all on camel-back,
And crowned with gold. Five hundred camels went
Ahead, and ‘twas their special task to bear
The seats, pavilions, and tent-enclosures,
The tents and shielings for the quadrupeds.
There were two hundred slaves to kindle censers,
And to burn aloe-wood and ambergris
Therein. Before the Shih two hundred youths
Of those attending on him went with posies
Of saffron and narcissus that the scent
Might meet him from all quarters as he came,
Preceded by a hundred water-bearers
To sprinkle all the road, and thou hadst said :—
" They pour rose-water over ambergris "'
Lest any sudden blast might scatter dust
Upon that Sháh of glorious lineage.
Three hundred youthful princes rode with him,

' The section in the original ends here.


KHUSRAU PARWÍIZ 385


Arrayed in yellow, red, and violet.
The king of kings had with him Káwa's standard,
Wore crown and earrings, royal cloth of gold,
A golden girdle, armlets, and a torque,
And jewelled buttons.
Now Shirin, on hearing :-—
“ The host, preceded by the mighty Shah,
Hath come,” put on a yellow vest musk-scented,
And made her visage like pomegranate-blooms,
She wore a red robe of brocade from Rim
With patterns jewelled on a ground of gold,
And placed upon her head a royal crown
Set with the jewels of a paladin.
She left her jocund hall, went on the roof,
And in her day of youth showed naught of joy,
But waited till Khusrau Parwiz arrived,
Then let the tear-drops fall upon her cheeks.
At sight of him she rose, showed all her height, k
And spake to him with sweetness of the past.
The twin Narcissi bathed the Cercis-bloom,
The first all languishment, the last all health.
All tears! and beauty, eagerly she cried
Thus in the olden tongue: * O Shih! Great Lion!
O framed to be leader of the host !
O blesséd hero, lion-conqueror !
Where is that love of thine ? Where are the tears
Of blood once stanched by looking on Shirin ?
Where all those days which once we turned to nights,
Tears in our hearts and eyes, smiles on our lips ?
Where are our loves, our troth, our bonds, our oaths ?"
E'en as she spake she shed blood-drops of gall
Upon her guise of lapis-lazuli,*
And when he heard and looked and saw Shirin . C. 2008
He wept for her, his face hued like the sun.
He sent a led horse all betrapped with gold,
t Or "sheen," ' "sur son visage en deuil" Mohl.
VOL. VIII, 2 B


386 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And forty honest eunuchs, men of Rüm,
To bear her to his golden bower, his house
Begemmed, then went to hunt with hawks and
cheetahs.
When he had had enough of hill and plain
He went back to the city joyfully.
They decked it and the roads because the Sháh
Was coming from the chase; the trumpet-calls,
And sounds of singing, ravelled all the air,
And thus the royal Fruit of that tall Bough!
Passed through the city to his lofty home,
While from his bower Shírín came forth and kissed
His feet and hands and head. At that time spake
The Shah to the high priest : “* Indulge no thoughts
Save good concerning us, bestow on me
This fair-cheeked lady as my lawful wife,
And publish the glad tidings to the world.”
So he espoused her in the ancient way
With all the rites and sanctions of his day.


& 57


How the Nobles heard that Shirin had come to the Bower
of Khusrau Parwiz and how they advised him and
were satisfied with his Answer


Now when these tidings of Khusrau Parwiz

Came to the nobles and the host: “* Shirin

Is in the Sháh's bower and the old affair

Hath been revived," the city was aggrieved,

And full of care, distress, and malisons.

For three days none approached him. On the fourth,
When the world's Lustre shone, he sent and called


' The Sásánian race. "' Lorsque cet homme å la stature royale
ct aux membres puissants," Mohi,


EEE  —— T — IA eee eee nn


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 387


The chiefs and set them on the nobles' seats.
He said to them: ** For days I have not seen you,
And grieve thereat. I am concerned for fear
Of your concernment and solicitous
About your dealings.”

Thus he spake but none
Replied; they simply held their tongues, but those
Aggrieved and angry looked at the high priest,
Who seeing this rose to his feet and thus
Addressed Khusrau Parwiz: “ O righteous judge !
Thou hast in youth’s day come to be the king,
Hast seen from fortune much of good and ill,
And heard how in the world no stint thereof C. xoz
Ariseth from the deeds of those in power ;
How when a noble race hath been defiled
Defiled too are the mighty sprung therefrom.
Know this, that never hath a noble son
Laid hands upon his father's life! unless
His mother had befouled the seed and smirched
Her offspring. Thus Zahhák, the Arab, slew
His sire and brought ill on Jamshid’s Read, thus
Sikandar, who poured out Dara's blood, brought
So great a fire of feud upon ourselves
Although his father called Dara his brother,
While Failaküs was wont to call him son.
When sire is pure and mother virtueless
Know that no holy son will come to birth.
None seeketh for uprightness in perverseness
If he is fain to fill his sleeves with right.
Our hearts are sad because a potent div
Is now the great king's mate, for had there been
No other woman in Írán e'en then
How could Khusrau Parwiz thus honour her ?
If but Shirin were absent from his bower

t Blood in the original. `
* In this and the preceding line the pronouns refer to Sikandar.


C. 2003


uu CAMS|BASCES- GE d-——X- 07 —— —— = Se um


488 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


His face would be resplendent everywhere.
Thine ancestors, those wise and upright men,
Ne'er would have thought of this."

When he had spoken
At great length, and the king of kings returned
No answer, he said thus: “ At dawn to-morrow
We will assemble here and haply have
The Sháh's reply; our talk was long to-day.”

Next day they rose at dawn and went to offer
Their service to the Shah, and some one said :—
* It is not right to speak such words," another :—
Ihe words were wisdom's mates,” a third: “ He will
Reply to-day, and what he saith should make
For happiness."

The archimages all

Set forward and with stately steps approached
The Sháh. The magnates took their seats and then
A man came with a bowl all furbished bright
As Sol and passed before the chiefs in turn.
Now warm blood had been poured therein. He set
It gently by the Shah, All turned away
Their faces and the assembly was all talk.
Khusrau Parwiz looked on them and they quaked.
He said to the Iranians: '* Whose blood
Is this and wherefore is it set before me f”

* "Tis noisome blood,” the archimage replied,
* And so polluteth him that seeth it."

When he had spoken thus men took the bowl,
Passed it from hand to hand, cleansed it of blood,
And scoured it out with water and with sand.
Then when that noisome bowl had been made bright
And clean, the washer filled it full of wine,

And sprinkled it with musk and with rose-water.
The bowl shone out sun-bright. Khusrau,Parwiz
Said to the arehmage : ** Verily the bowl :
Appeareth otherwise ! "


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 389


The archmage said :—
" Live ever more! Good hath appeared from ill.
Thy bidding hath turned Hell to Paradise,
And from ill-doing good is manifest."
" Shírin," Khusrau Parwiz said, “to this city
Was e'en as this disgustful bowl of bane,
But in my bower she is a bowl of wine,
And savoureth as we. She first obtained
Her ill repute through me; she did not court
The friendship of the Great.”
All blessed him, saying :—
* May earth ne'er lack thy crown and throne. They
grow
In goodness whom thou makest good, and mighty
Are those whom thou hast made so in the world,
For to be Sháh, archmage, and chief is thine,
And have withal on earth the Grace divine."


$58


How Shirin murdered Maryam and how Khusrau
Parwiz put Shirwi in Bonds


Thenceforth the greatness of the Shah increased,
And what had been a moon became a sun.

His days were spent with Ciesar's daughter; she
Was chief within his bower. Because of her
Shirin was sore, her cheeks were ever wan

With envy till at last she gave her bane,

And Ciesar's lovely daughter ceased to be.

None wotted of the trick because Shirin

Kept her own counsel, and Khusrau Parwíiz
Gave her the gilded chamber when Maryam
Had been deceased one year.


C. 2004


300 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI


Now when Shirwi
Was sixteen years of age, and in his stature
O'ertopped the men of thirty, his sire brought
The erudite to educate the prince,
While by command an archimage maintained
A kindly watch upon him day and night.
It happened that the archimage one morn
Went to his patron’s and returning found
Shirwi as usual occupied in sport,
Saw that he had in front of him Kalila
And Dimna! but that the fierce youth was holding
In his left hand a wolf's claw eut and dried,
And in his right a buffalo’s horn, and these
He beat together as the humour took him.
Such actions, pastime, and behaviour
Vexed the archmage’s heart who boded ill
From that wolf's claw, the buffalo's horn, and manners
Of that rude youth, and was in great concern
At what might happen through that ill-disposed
And luekless prince in times to come for he
Had seen the horoscope and made inquiries
Of minister and treasurer. He sought
The high-priest and reported thus to him :—
" This youth is wholly given up to play."

The high- priest went at once and told the Sháh,
Who kept a careful eye upon his son, j
On whose account his ruddy cheeks grew pale
In trouble for the future of the world.

His heart was full of pain, his liver ached
At what the readers of the stars had told him.
He said: “I wait the Lord of Heaven's will."

When twenty-three years of the reign had passed,
And when Shirwi had gotten stalwart limbs,

The Great King was displeased because D
Was lusty grown but not as he desired.
! See Vol. vii. pp. 382, 423.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 391


The monarch's mind, which else had been all smiles,
Was pained thereat, and he confined the youth
To his own palace with a foster-brother,
Disgraced on his account, and all that were
Attached to him or went to him for counsel :
There were above three thousand more or less.
Their palaces, connected each with each,
Were as a whole the prison of Shirwi.
They decked, draped, carpeted, and furnished them
With provand and the means of giving largess,
With male and female slaves, with wine and minstrels.
The place was all dinars. The inmates passed
Their time in song and feast while forty men
Kept guard.

And now as episodes recite
Tales told by men who thought and spake aright.


$ 59
How Khusrau Parwiz made the Throne of Takdis


Of that throne which thou knowest as Takdis,
And which Khusrau Parwiz set up within

The hippodrome, the origin occurred

Beneath Zahhak—that loathly infidel—

For when heroic Faridün eame forth,

And from the Arabs carried off the style

Of kingship, on Mount Damáwand there dwelt
A man who was distinguished by the Shah.
His name was Jahn, son of Barzin, a power
Within the realm, and for that Shah renowned
He made a throne and studded it with gems,
So that Shah Faridiin rejoiced o’er him

When that grand throne was finished, and bestowed
Drachms*thirty thousand with a golden crown,
And pair of earrings on him, and had written


C. 2005


392 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


On his behalf a patent for Sari,
And for Amul. The coast-lands thus assigned
Resembled Paradise.! When Faríidün
Bestowed Írán upon Íraj—the youngest
Of his illustrious sons—he gave withal
Three things—this very throne, the ox-head mace
To serve as his memorial in the world,
And thirdly what the just Sháh used to term
" The Seven Founts "—a jewel. When fraj
Departed these were left and Minüchihr
Had joy thereof. Each wearer of the erown
Made some addition to that throne, and when
It came to Kai Khusrau, the fortunate,
He added greatly to its height. It passed
In due suecession to Luhrásp and so
On to Gushtasp who, when he saw it, cried :—
" The work of mighty men must not be hidden,”
And to Jámásp that man of worship said :—
What canst thou add to this achievement ? Scan
It everywhere and see what supplement
Thereto will win us praises after death."

Jámásp beheld the throne and saw therein
À key wherewith to open wisdom's door.
Upon it he inscribed the heavenly host,
Which hold the secrets of futurity,
And there portrayed by order of the Sháh
The planet-forms from Saturn to the moon.
The throne thus reached the era of Sikandar,
Each Sháh that looked upon it adding somewhat—
Gold, silver, ivory, and ebony—
Until through ignorance at one fell swoop
Sikandar broke it up; howbeit the nobles
Concealed and handed down full many a shard.
Thus was it till Ardshír began his reign,
And then the name e’en had grown obsolete.

l Cf. Vol. ii, p. 27.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 303


He found no traces and so made another,
Not as he would, and had small joy therein.
He died and left it as thereafter did
Those that succeeded. When Khusrau Parwíz
‘Sat on the throne and all the chiefs were loyal
They spake about that other royal throne, C. 2006
And its past history. Thus said the Sháh :—
* Ye chiefs! I ask a favour of my lieges
So that I may remake that throne renowned
To keep my name in mind. I need the plan
Drawn by Jámásp—the favourite of the sky—
The one adopted by Gushtásp, the Sháh,
Assisted by Jámásp's advice and skill."

An archimagus reproduced the plan
Whereat the exalt Khusrau Parwiz was glad,
And, this obtained, made haste to reconstruct
With joy the throne, brought forth that of Ardshír,
And gathered all the craftsmen of Iran.
So in the days of that victorious Shah
They reconstructed that resplendent throne.
The artificers came out of Rüm and Chín,
Makrán, Baghdád, and from Írán itself.
Of eraftsmen there were one and sixty score,
Intent upon the fashioning thereof,
And each had thirty workers under him—
Men out of Rüm, Párs, and Baghdád. The Shah
Commanded all to labour earnestly
To have the throne completed in two years,
And when it was set up high fortune shone.
The height thereof was five score royal eubits!
If thou wilt add thereto three score and ten ;
The breadth six score for 'twas less broad than high.
A different carpet was laid down each morning
Throughout the month,* and seven score thousand

plaques
* A royal cubit=a fathom. * Couplet omitted.


394 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Of gold with patterns fashioned of turquoise
Were set upon the throne, while every nail
And clamp were solid silver; each of them
Weighed sixty-six miskals. When Sol displayed
Its lamp in Aries the desert lay
Behind the throne which fronted garden-wards,
But when Sol raged in Leo then the back
Was turned toward it ;! in the month of Tir—
The time for fruit and festival—the throne
stood fronting toward the garden and the fruits
To catch their scents ; in Winter, in the days
Of wind and wet, none felt them seated thus ;
The top was all shut in right royally
With beaver-skins and sables. A thousand balls
Withal of gold and silver glowed like brands*
Upon the fire, each five and twenty score
Miskals in weight and coral-hued with heat.
One half was in the fire, the other half
Was turned towards the noble warriors.
The host of heaven, planets, Zodiac,
The bright moon in whatever Sign soe'er,
And all the bodies, fixed or wandering,
Were visible to the astronomer,
Who saw what portion of dark night had passed,
And how much sky had moved athwart the earth.
Among these tables some were made of gold,
And what a wealth of jewels was therein !
Not e'en an expert could compute their tale.
The cheapest ran to some three score dínárs
And ten; seven hundred would not purchase some,
50 strike an average. Full many a ruby
Was there whose value none could estimate :
They lit the night like Venus in the sky.
Upon the throne-steps were three rows of seats

i The sun.

* " Les valets de garde-robe faisaient chauffer au feu, etc. Mohl.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 395


Enriched with gems. From one row to the next
There were four steps of gold inlaid with jewels.
One row, whose ornaments were shaped like heads
Of rams, took thence its name; the next above
Was known as ** Lapis-lazuli " as higher
Than wind or dust-elouds, while the third was all
Turquoise, and every one that saw it burned
With longing. Rural chiefs and underlings
Sat on the Rams’ Heads’ row while cavaliers—
Men un-affeared upon the day of battle—
sat on the cirque of lapis-lazuli.
The turquoise seat was for the minister
That was engaged in governing the realm,
And he that sat there must be wise and loyal.
A fabric was spread out of cloth of gold  .
Two score and seventeen cubits long, its fringe
All strung with jewels held by golden threads.
A map of heaven was inscribed thereon
Where Saturn, Mars, Sol, Jupiter, and Venus,
With Mercury and shining Luna, showed
The fortunes of the Shih; there too appeared
The Seven Climes, and peers of Pars and Rim ;*
The seven and forty Shahs,* their faces, thrones,
And crowns, were shown, those of the kings of
kings,

Of woven gold. The fabric was unique.
A man of Chin, unrivalled in such work,
Had given seven years to weaving it.
One New Year at Urmuzd of Farwardin
He came before the monarch of Irin,
And brought that royal carpet to the Shah :
The nobles let him pass. He laid it down
On New Year's Day. The Shah's joy was complete.

* Reading with P. * Jd.

* Khusrau Parwiz himself was only the forty-third Shah, Shah,


however, may be used here in a more general sense so as to embrace
siyawush, Asfandiyar, and others. Mohl has “ quarante-huit."’


C. 2008


396 THE SHÁHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


That carpet gave an opportunity |
For mirth : they called for wine and minstrelsy.


$ 60
The Story of Sarkash and Bárbad, the Minstrel, and
Ahusrau Parwiz


There was a minstrel who was named Sarkash—
An expert—who aeclaimed the king of kings
With all felicitations on the harp,
While nobles showered jewels over him,
And hailed him as the Grace of majesty,
What while the Sháh grew greater year by year.

Now in the nine and twentieth of his kingship,
When none fared ill at court, Bárbad heard tell
Thereof, for all folk said to him: *'* The world-lord
Affecteth minstrelsy in private life,
And thou, if thou wert introduced to him,
Wouldst overtop Sarkash.”

Thereat the man

Became ambitious and though well to do
Departed to the Shih’s court from his province,
And noted all the minstrels there. Sarkash,
On hearing him perform, was vexed at heart,
And, all eonfounded at such minstrelsy,
Approached the audience-chamberlain, bestowed
A present on him of dínárs and drachms,
And said: “ There is a minstrel at the gate,
Who is my better both in years and skill.
He must not come before Khusrau Parwiz
For I am waxing old and he is young."

The keeper of the door, on hearing this,
Refused the new musician audience,
And so Bárbad, whenever he approached,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 397


Found his employment and his profit nil.
When he despaired of being heard he sought
The royal pleasance with his harp. The gardener,
A man by name Mardwi, revived his hopes,
Because at the New Year the Shah was wont
To hold a two weeks’ feast within that pleasance.
Barbad approached Mardwi forthwith, became
Friends that same day and said : “ Thou wouldest say
That we are soul and body. I desire
A boon—the merest trifle. When the world-lord
Shall come to revel hither give to me
The means of seeing him, myself unseen.''!
Mardwi replied: “I will; my love for thee
Shall oust reflection,”
When the Shah took order
For visiting the garth the gardener’s heart
Was like a shining lamp. He went and told
Bárbad: “ The Shah is coming to the pleasance.”’
Bárbad dressed all in green and took his harp,
Prepared to sing of glory and of war,
And went to where the Shih would be who had
Each Spring a fresh spot for his festival.
There was a verdant cypress full? of leaf,
Whose branches, like the battle of Pashan,
Extended far and wide. With harp on breast
The minstrel climbed it and abode until
The king came from his palace to the pleasance :
The gardener had the spot in readiness.
There came a fay-faced reveller with wine
While in the monarch’s hand there was a cup ;
The world-lord took the liquor from the youth ;
Its crimson made the crystal disappear.
Now when the sun turned sallow, but abode


* Ccuplet omitted.

* Gashan. Firdausi might have used this adjective as a rhyme-
word in his alleged competition with the three poets (see Vol. iii.

p. 15) but preferred the more erudite Pashan.


C.


2070


308 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Until night turned to lapis-lazuli,
The minstrel in that eypress took his harp,
And sang a royal ditty. In that tree
He sang a lay so charming that the Sháh,
That man of wakeful fortune, was amazed.
The melody which that sweet voice gave forth
Was that which now thou callest Dádáfríd.!
The company were in astonishment,
And everyone had his own view thereon.
The playing made Sarkash like one insane ;
He recognised the source, but held his peace,
And thought: “ None but Barbad can play like this,
Or knoweth thus the song of paladins.” .
The Shah gave orders to his lords: “ Search all
The pleasance.”
They searched long and came again,
While shrewd Sarkash observed: “* No marvel ‘tis,
So fortune-favoured is the Shah, that rose,
And cypress-tree should serve him as mug» Ans.
For ever may his head and crown enduresp, Y
Then the cup-bearer brought another/*
And as the king received it from the you
So fair of face, the minstrel preluded
In other fashion and forthwith began |
A dillerent song—that called Paikar-i-G Md,
A name suggested by the words. The minstrel
Sang and the Shih gave ear, drank to the voice,
And bade: “ Produce this man and all within
The garden.” ^
5o they searched the garden through,
And carried lights beneath the trees, but saw
Naught but the willows and the eypresses,
And pheasants pacing underneath the rose.


' "The Source of Justice.”


" The Battle of the Brave." This and the preceding are musical
terms.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 399


The king of kings called for another cup,

And raised his head to hear the voice. Again
There came the singing to another tune

Upon the harp—the tune called Sabz dar sabz,!
A melody employed in magic arts,

On hearing it Khusrau Parwíz arose,

And that adorner of the garth demanded

A cup of wine that held a man.* He drank

The sparkling wine off at a draught and eried :—
* An angel this, all musk and ambergris,

For if he were a div he would not sing,

Or know to play the harp !* Find out the player.
Search all the garden and the flower-beds

To left and right, for I will fill his mouth

And lap with gems, and he shall be chief minstrel."

Now when the singer heard the monarch's voice,
And speech so kind and welcome, he descended
The branches of the straight-stemmed evpress, fared
Glad and triumphant, came and laid his face
Upon the dust. Khusrau Parwiz said: “ Speak.
What man art thou ? "

“O Shah! a slave am I,”
He answered, “and live only by thy voice.”

He told all that had happened from the first,
And who had been his friend. The king rejoiced,
Like roses in the Spring-tide to behold him,

Then spake thus to Sarkash : ** Unskilful one,
Like colocynth while he is sugar-like !

Why didst thou bar his access to me thus ?
Thy harp is banished from this company."

Then while Bárbad sang on the monarch quaffed,
And drained the jewelled cup until his head

iU Green on green," anticipating Marvell's “ green thought in a
green shade." Also a musical term.

* Sec Vol. i. p. 290 mole.


* [n the carlier parts of the Sháhnáma dívs sometimes are repre-
sented as being accomplished. See Vol. i. p. 127, Vol. ii. p. 31.


C.


OII


400 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Inclined to sleep, whereat with watered pearls

He filled the singer's mouth. Barbad became

Chief minstrel and renowned among the great.
The epoch of Bárbad hath past and gone :

May ill be never thy companion,

For since the day will pass alike of chief,

And underling, why should the sage eat grief ?

Full many have gone—both chief and underling—

And I from slumber wish no wakening.

When six and sixty years have passed of life

It is not good for one to be at strife.

When I have ended these my famous lays

The country-side will echo with my praise.

Thenceforth for me not death but life shall last,

For I have flung the seed of words broad-cast,

And all of Faith, of counsel, and sound lore

Will sing my praise when I shall be no more.


$61
How Khusrau Parwíz built the Palace’ of Madá'in


I will retell the tale of Madá'in,

Tell of the palace of Khusrau Parwiz.

A Persian shrewd of heart, o'er whom had passed
Years four times thirty, said: Khusrau Parwiz
Sent men to Rúm, Hind, Chin, and other lands
Inhabited, and from all climes there came
Three thousand famed artificers, of whom

He chose two hundred—masters of their craft,
Who knew the use of bricks and mortar well—
Out of Írán, Ahwáz, and from the Rümans.

Of these he next chose thirty and from them


! City in text.


KHUSRAU PARWIz "m


Two Rümans and one Persian, from which three
They chose a Rüman matchless in the world.
That expert came before Khusrau Parwíz,

And held discourse of plan and elevation.

That Rüman worshipful, that scientist
Surpassed in speech the Persian. Said the Sháh :—
~“ Accept this contract at my hands and heed
These mine instructions: I require a building
Such that although my sons and race shall dwell
Therein for many a year it will not fall

To ruin through the rain or snow or sun.”

The expert undertook the Sháh's commission,
And said: “ For this thing I am competent.”

Ten royal cubits deep he excavated,

(A royal cubit is five common ones)!

And laid foundations made of stone and mortar
To form a solid basis. When the walls
Belonging to the palace had been reared

He came before the master of the world,

And said: “ Let now the Shih appoint a man,
Exceeding wise and well advanced in years,
And send out to the works this man approved
Together with some trusty archimages,"

The Shah appointed men as he was asked,
Who went and made inspection of the walls.
The artist brought silk which the company
Turned to a slender cord by twisting it.

Then from the wall-top of the royal palace
He measured to the level of the ground,
And after measuring the twisted cord
In presence of the Shah’s commissioners
He took it to the royal treasury,
And having sealed it gave it to the keeper ;
Then going to the court said to the Shih :—
“ The palace-walls have risen to the moon,
* Reading with P. and T.
VOL. VIII. 2¢


C. 2012


402 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


But though the Sháh bade : * Haste ! ' I will not urge
The work for forty days but let it settle.
The Shah selected me, and when the time
Is ripe the palace-wall shall be as Saturn.
Let not the Sháh's wrath aggravate my toils.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ Why askest thou
Such a delay from me, thou malcontent 7
Thou must not stop the work but shalt not want
For gold or silver.”

By the Sháh's command
They gave the artist thirty thousand drachms
Lest he should take it ill. That honest workman
Knew that experts would blame him when he built
The palace hastily and, if it fell,
That he himself would lose his livelihood.
That night he disappeared ; none saw him more.
Khusrau Parwíz when told : ** Farghán hath fled,"
Poured out upon the speaker all his wrath,
And said: ** How could a dullard give himself
Such airs before me?”
Then he bade: “ Survey

The work and put in prison all the Rümans."

He said moreover: * Bring artificers,

And gather mortar, stones, and massive bricks."
Albeit those that viewed the walls took flight
Both from the Sháh and realm, and he was forced
To leave the work alone and turned his thoughts

Upon Ahwáz if haply he might find

An architect that such an enterprise

Might not continue headless very long.

He sought for one for three years but they found
None of surpassing worth, and people still
Talked much about the former architect,

Who in the fourth year reappeared. A man

Of prudence and of Grace divine informed
Khusrau Parwiz and presently the Raman


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 403


Himself came swift as dust.
“ Thou criminal ! *'
The Shah said, “ say what disability
Was in the work to make thee lose both wealth
And Paradise ? "'
The Rüman said: “ If now
The king will send me with a trusty man
I will explain to him about my doings,
And pardon will ensue on explanation.”
The Shah dispatched them and they left the palace,
The noble artist and king's confidant.
The clever Rüman took the measuring-line,
And with the Sháh's own representative
Tried the wall's height and found that it had sunk
Seven cubits, Then they carried to the Shah
The line. The expert’s comrade made report.
The Ruiman then spake thus: “ If I had carried C. 2013
The buildings to their height no wall, O Sháh !
No vaulting and no work had stood, and I
Could not have stayed at court.”
Khusrau Parwiz
Saw that he spake, as all should do, the truth,
Freed those in prison, whether ill-disposed
Or innocent, and gave the architect
Ten purses of dínárs and to the imprisoned
Full many a gift. Thus much time passed away.
The Sháh was eager for the work's completion,
And after seven years it was achieved,
And was approved by wise Khusrau Parwiz,
Who gave the architect much honour, land,
Dinárs and drachms and praise. All went to view
That palace, and the Sháh was wont to spend
His New Year there. None ever saw a structure
Like that or heard from famous architects
Of such. A ring of gold cast for the purpose
Hung from the ceiling of the cupola,


C. 2014


464 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And from the ring a chain of ruddy gold
With jewelled links. Whene'er the king of kings
Ascended to his throne of ivory
They used to hang the crown upon this chain,
And when he took his seat on New Year's Day
The nearest were the favoured archimages,
The next below the chiefs, the mighty men,
And commissaries, lower down the merchants
And other traders, lower still the poor,
And those that laboured for their daily bread,
And, lowest, many maimed in hand or foot,
Or cast down mangled at the palace-gate.
Then from the hall would proclamation come
That used to stir all hearts: “ All ye that are
The subjects of the monarch of the world !
Be not heart-darkened and dispirited.
The cares of all that look up to this height
Shall end, but look beyond the royal throne,
And take ye all the lieges in account.”

Then no one, whether innocent or not,
Was still retained in bondage by the Shah,
Who used to clothe his prisoners withal
From head to foot and give to them dínárs
And gifts of all kinds, while all mendicants
Within the city that received no share
On New Year's Day he seated at his gate,
And flung drachms to them from the treasury.
Ill-doers used to fear him, drowsiheads
Grew vigilant while proclamation issued,
Whenas the time for leaving had arrived :—
“ Famed, high-born chiefs ! why seek so for addition ?
Your first concern should be your health and safety.
Consider what ve do and ne'er distress
The diffident, reflect then act, and heed
The sayings of the wise. Regard inferiors,
For those of luckless lives demand our tears.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 405


A man may slumber at my very throne
Unharmed by me if he shall keep the path,
But those that clutch at others’ goods, on all
That do such things our anger shall befall.”


$62


Discourse on the Splendour and Greatness of. Khusrau
Parwiz


The greatness of the Shih I next display,
And give new freshness to a bygone day,
Such majesty that mid the small and great
There is no memory of equal state.
Well may the reader of the roll of kings
Shake from his skirts all transitory things,
And well may I too say a word for I
Am well assured of sages’ sympathy.
Be not at home in this world for its bane
Is greater than its antidote; refrain
From greed and strife; make not life's stage to be
Thy home, ‘tis but a wayside inn for thee.
Fare on. Thou agest and the young anon
Arrive; this cometh, that one passeth on :
Awhile they strut or batten and are gone,
For lion's head and elephant's both must,
The signal given, come alike to dust.
When thou hast heard from me the wondrous tale
About Khusrau Parwiz keep it in mind.
He had such puissance and eminence,
. Such majesty, such Grace, such throne and crown,
That, though thou ask of experts, thou wilt hear
Of no one greater. From Türán and Hind,
From Chín and Rüm and every peopled clime


C. 2015


406 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


They brought him tribute night and day alike—

Boy-slaves and girl-slaves out of every court,

And pearls and gems. His treasures and dinars

Were infinite; theré was no king like him.

The wingéd eagle, royal falcon, hawk,

Pard, lion, and stream-haunting crocodile

Submitted to him willingly : his mind

Was bright as Sol. The first of all his treasures,

Amassed from Chin, Bulghar, from Rim, and Rus,

Was called “ ‘Aris ” ;) the next of watered pearls,

And in an edifice a bowshot high,

Was named * Khazrá "? by chiefs and Arab sages ;

The next was known as * Bár "* and lord and liege

Have never looked upon its like; the next

Was great Shádward* which minstrels celebrate ;

The next was that which men called “ Bad Áwar" ie

They strove to estimate it but they failed.

The next whereof thou hearest speak thou callest

" Díba-i-Khusrauí,"* and next the famed

Hoard of Afrasiyab; none hath possessed

Its like by sea or land; another hoard

Was that entitled * Sükhta "* and its lustre

Illumed the realm. Sarkash was of his minstrels ;

So was Barbad; that market never failed

Khusrau Parwiz, and in his golden bower

There were twelve thousand girls like jocund Spring.

He had twelve hundred elephants of war;

Thou wouldst have said: ** Earth hath not room for
them."

The war-steeds in the stables of the king

Were six and forty thousand, while of camels

Red-haired? there were ten thousand, and none
then

' The Bride. * The Green. * Perhaps "The Spring... (of

* The Throne. Khusrau)." Cf. NT, p. 355, mole.


* Windfall, i.s. E of jetsam. Cf. ZT, ii. 305.
' Brocade ol Khusrau. 7. Weighed. * The best sort.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 407


Possessed one like to them. Twelve thousand more
Were beasts of burden, sixty-six were swift
For litter-bearing ; none had seen or heard
Of such from white-haired veterans. Of troopers
There were a thousand thousand—men of Rum,
Of Chin and Turkistan. He had withal
Shabdiz, the charger that ne'er failed in fight,
While in his women’s bower there was Shirin
To add her lustre to his Rosary.

Since he was ruined by a servitor
Be not solicitous in quest for more,
But rather choose a life exempt from care
If thou wouldst have just praises for thy share,
For good and evil pass away with death,
And time is counting up our every breath.
What though thou gainest as thy portion here
Throne, crown, and treasury, though thy career
Be ever so laborious, vet at last
Thy lot among the bricks and dust is cast,
So sow but seed of good. Khusrau Parwiz
Should furnish thee with ample instances :
When thou shalt read the roll "twill startle thee.
‘The famous throne, the seat of sovereignty,
Might and the diadem of empiry,
Were not sufficient for him but he must
Raise from Írán and from Türán the dust !


How Khusrau Parwiíz turned from Justice, how the


Chiefs revolted, and how Gurdz called in Caesar


The Shah, who had been just, became unjust, C. 2076
Joyed in the injustice of his underlings,


408 THE SHÁHNAÁMA OF FIRDAUSI-


Robbed all men of their goods and stirred up strife

"Iwixt man and man. That which had been a
blessing

Turned to a curse because the Ram grew like

A tyrannous Wolf. He undertook new toils,

His one desire was to increase his hoards,

Until the folk, who lacked both bread and water,

And had not e'en their bodies for their own,

Betook them to the country of the foe ;

The oppressed although unwilling left the land.

There was a worthless man by name Guráz,

Through whom the Shah enjoyed both ease and
pleasure.

He kept a constant surveillance o'er Rum,

And was div-headed, tyrannous, accursed.

Now when the once just Shah became unjust

This man was first to turn against Iran.

Another was the favourite, Farrukhzad ;

None could approach Khusrau Parwiz unless

Through him, and as the king of kings drew near

His end this man too grew corrupt. He came,

This offspring of Azar Makan, a man

Of louring face and gruff with underlings,

And grew confederate with old Guráz

Till province after province was involved.

Guraz, who was the general, wrote to Cesar,

And stirred him up to mischief, saying thus :—

" Arise and seize Irán. I will be first

In aiding thee.”


Then Cæsar mustered troops
For battle, beat the tymbals, paid his host,
And marched like wind toward the Íránian coast.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 409


§ 64


How Cesar withdrew through an Expedient of Khusrau
Parwiz and how the Chiefs released Shirwi from Bonds


The king, on hearing, took this grave case lightly.
He recognised the practice of Guraz
In prompting warlike Cesar and recalled him, C. 2017
But he excused himself and disregarded
The royal letter, for the villain feared
Khusrau Parwiz, the court, and all the chiefs.
The king of kings sat with the Great and all
That were the men of leading in Írán.
. He plunged his heart in thought and sought at large
Among all manner of expedients,
And when a bright thought came to him he wrote
Thus to Guráz: “I quite approve thy conduct,
And have commended thee before the lords.
This artifice surpasseth all, for thou
Hast caused the fall of Cæsar. When they bring thee
This letter set thy sharpest wits to work,
Wait till I make a move, then move thyself
That Cesar being placed between our hosts
May have his purpose foiled. We will convey him,
And all his Rümans, captives to Iran.” |
Then from his court he chose one of resource,
Informed and eloquent, as there was need,
And said: “ Convey this letter secretly,
As if thou wert a spy, but so contrive
That Rümans may observe thee on the road,
Interrogate and carry thee to Cæsar,
Or else before the captain of the host.
He will inquire: ‘Whence art thou? Speak.’
Reply :—
* À subject and in straits. I have been facing


C.


2018


410 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Toil and the longsome road to bear Guráz
A letter.” Have this bound to thy right hand,
And if he take it from thee 1t is well.”

The courter went forth from Khusrau Parwiz,
And made the letter fast to his right arm.
A scout deseried him as he drew anear,
And carried him to Cæsar with his head
All dust, with wan cheeks, and with livid lips.
Then Cesar asked: ** Where is Khusrau Parwiz ?
Thou must declare the truth."

The embarrassed liege,
O'erwhelmed with fear, replied with favour changed.
Said Cesar: “ Search this wretch malevolent,
Ill-purposed and ill-faced."
Shrewd, skilful men

Searched him and took the letter from his arm,
Then sought a learned chieftain of that march,
One who could read aright the ancient tongue.
Now when that scribe had read the letter over
The monarch's countenance became like pitch,
And thus he said in private to his troops :—
“ Guraz intended to destroy us all !
The king of kings with countless elephants
And treasure, and three hundred thousand men,
Was minded to involve me in his net :
God grant his heart and policy be darkened ! "'

He dropped his purpose and withdrew his host.
Guráz, informed that Ciesar had returned
To Rüm, grew pale and sorrowful. He chose
A horseman from his troops and wrote this letter
With sighs and loud complainings : '* Why is Cæsar
Displeased with me? Say wherefore hast thou

quitted

Irán and made me shift thus for myself ?
The king of kings, informed of what I did,
In pain and vengeance is estranged from me."


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 4II


When Cæsar was aware of this and saw
That letter he selected from his host
A noble and dispatched him to Guráz
In haste to say : “* Hath God so furnished thee
That thou shouldst desolate my crown and throne,
And burn my troops with fire ? Thy former letter,
Thou miscreant ! came but to consign to wind
My treasure, and the purpose was to give me
Up to Khusrau Parwiz. May good estate
And greatness ne'er be thine! Thou shouldst have

known
That while they see a Shah of royal race
The Iranians will desire no alien,

None born of Cæsar, none however wise."

Guraz protested unto Cæsar much,

But failed to gain an acecess to his ear.
Khusrau Parwiz then chose as messenger
A Persian who was learned and eloquent,
And sent him with this letter to Guráz :—
“Thou worthless villain, worker for the Div!
These many times I summon thee to Court,
But thou art far from loyalty and right.
Now all the army that thou hast with thee,
For many years thy fortune’s fosterers,

Are backing Cesar both in heart and will,
And privily are not as they appear.
Dispatch to me the disaffected rebels.”

When this arrived the wary chieftain mused.
He chose twelve thousand valiant cavaliers,
And thus addressed them: ** Be ve one in heart,
And heed ye not what any one may say.

Abide awhile on this side of the stream,
And hurry not at all upon the march.
If ye are one in tongue and confidence
Ye may uproot a mountain."

Young and old


C. 2019


412 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Advanced as far as Khurra-i-Ardshir,!

Advanced until they reached the river-bank,
Expectant of the bidding of the king,

Who, hearing, was not anxious to behold them,
But ordered Farrukhzád to go and say :—

" Till now ye have been loyal ; wherefore then
Allowed ye Caesar to invade us thus 7

Who hath transgressed the way of God and quitted
The path of duty and of loyalty ? "

The faces of the soldiers at that message,
sent by Khusrau Parwiz, grew dark with fear.
None dared to speak but tarried pained and pale.
The messenger was with Guraz at heart,

But kept his seeret both from wind and dust.

He then approached the leaders privily,

And threw some light upon their darkened minds.
" Fear not," he said, “* ye chieftains! for the Shah
Hath not detected you in open fault.

Be of one heart and tongue, and say to him :—
‘What disaffected person is with us ?

And if there be one eloak is over all ;

We stand by one another lustily." "

The chiefs all heard him, understood, rose up,
And framed their answer on the lines proposed.
Then Farrukhzád returned like flying dust,

And told the Shih their words, who said: “ Go back,
And say: * Which of you seeketh his own hurt ?
The man that hath been duped by luckless Cæsar
With gifts of treasures, weapons, crowns, and thrones,
That man is guilty in respect to us—

A traitor to this crown and majesty.

Dispatch ye to my court without delay

All that are disaffected in this wise,

Else all of you that have transgressed shall see


* Khurra-i-Ardshir was a district in Pars, Bih-Ardshir (Seleucia)
must be meant, :


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 413


The gibbet and the dungeon,’ ”
Farrukhzad
Went with these words, and in the soldiers’ hearts
Old grievances revived. None dared to speak,
But kept a mournful silence. Thereupon
Spake Farrukhzad and in unseemly words :—
“Tn all this young and valiant host I see
None inefficient ; why then fear the Shih,
Whose troops are scattered through the world ? I note
At court no great man to illuminate
His star and moon. Despise my words and fear not
My threats, but curse me and the exalted Sháh." C. 2020
The hearers knew: “ The fortune of the king

Hath aged,” and framed their lips for malisons,
While Farrukhzád went to Khusrau Parwiz,
And said: “ The troops all stand by one another,
And if thou sendest me again I fear
For mine own life.”

Khusrau Parwíz perceived :—
“This knave will cause both blood and tears to

flow," i

But fearful of his brother! answered not,
And hid the truth; for Rustam had revolted
Where he was stationed with ten thousand swordsmen,
And holding Farrukhzid disloyal too
Caused his own soldiers to revolt withal,
While Farrukhzád was ware too that the Shah
Knew him as author of the host's default :
So when that malcontent had left the presence
He dared not to return but kept without,
And tampered there with all the folk, for ever
_ Attempting to pervert them, man by man,
From their obedience to the Shah. He told
Them all and they agreed: “ Another Shah


* Rustam, the brother of Farrukhead not of Khusrau Parwir as
given in the Genealogical Table of the Sásánians in Vol. vi. p. 3.


. 2021


414 THE SHAHNAMA OF FRIDAUSI


- Should sit upon the throne for this hath lost


The Grace, the royal usages, and fortune.”

There was with Farrukhzád an ancient man,
Skilled in affairs, who said: '* The Sháh imputeth
The army's fault to thee. Thou must produce
A new king soon because our fertile land
Is growing waste, its tumult as destructive
As was Pirán. We needs must ascertain
Which of the Shah’s sons hath most modesty,
And will cause least dispute. He must be seated
Upon the throne as Shih and o’er his crown
Dinars be showered. Then we shall fare anew ;
We have drunk bitter and we shall drink sweet,
For since Shírwi,! the shrewd and eldest-born,

Is now in prison we shall need no other."

They all agreed thereto. But few elapsed
Of davs and nights before Tukhár's host raised
The dust and slighted all the Sháh's affairs.

Then Farrukhzád went out to meet Tukhar
With many troops. They met and much talk passed
In public and in private. Farrukhzad,
Moreover, loosed his tongue and told the ills
Wrought by Khusrau Parwiz. He said: “ The host
By valour and by counsel will restore
The sovereignty.”
The general replied :—
“Tam not one for words but when I come
To battle with my troops I make things strait
For this world’s warriors. This king when young
Was loved by chief and paladin, and since
The days of such an one as he grow dark
I would that none should look on crown and throne.
The fatal time was when he grew unjust,
And joyed in the injustice of his slaves.”
When Farrukhzád heard this? he chose Tukhar,
' Cf. p. 193. * Reading with P.


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 415


And said to him: “ Now go we to the prison,
To those unfortunates, and boldly bear
Shirwi, the brave, the atheling, away.
The captain of the host, whose brain and skin
Thou wilt take sooner, watcheth o'er his prison,
And with six thousand proven cavaliers |
Is keeper of those wretched prisoners."

Tukhár thus answered : ** We have overlooked
This matter of the captain of the host,
For if the fortune of Khusrau Parwíz
Revive there will not be a paladin
Left in Írán, and what with gibbet, bonds,
And dungeon, none will 'seape calamity.”

He spake and urged his charger, speeding like
Azargashasp, and led his powers to battle.
The captain of the host encountered him
Forthwith. Those famous troops were overthrown,
The captain of the host himself was slain
In fight, the forces of the king were scattered,
The day was one of gloom and all was lost.
By that expedient and in war-array
Tukhár made entry of that narrow prison,
And called exalt Shirwi. The prince replied
Forthwith, well knowing why that chief had come.
His heart throbbed, laughing after eare, when he
Beheld that cheerful face, but still he wept,
And asked: ' "Where is Khusrau Parwiz?  Is't

thine
To free me ? ^
said Tukhár: “ As thou'rt a man

Be not perverse, for if thou wilt consent not,
And lettest go this opportunity,
One in sixteen may fail us, but thou hast
Still fifteen brothers left and each deserving
To be the king of kings: the throne of greatness
Would joy in them.”


C.


2022


416 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


Shirwi remained in tears

And consternation. Should he quit the prison ?

Now Farrukhzád meanwhile was at the gates,
And suffered none to pass to tell the Shah,
But acted as sole chamberlain. When Sol
Grew wan of face, and all the lords had gone
To seek repose, he bade the watch or them
That were its officers to fare to court—
That place of happiness and royal ease—
And said: “ Your ery to-night must not be that
Of yesternight : all watchmen every watch
Must in their cries employ the name * Kubád. ".— |

They made reply : * We will; we will forget
Khusrau Parwiz.”

So when the night resumed

Its pitch-like robe from city and bázár
Arose the ery: “ For ever live Kubád,
The scion of the great, and may his name
Be promulgate in all the provinces.”

The night was dark; the monarch of the world
Slept but Shirin beside him was perturbed,
On hearing what the watchman said, and grieved.
Her heart beat fast with care. Roused by her

volce

The Shah took dudgeon, but she cried: '* O sire!
What shall we do? How shall we act herein 7”

He said: “ O moon-face! why dost chatter so
When I am sleeping ? ”

She replied : ** Give ear,
And listen to the watch."
He heard: his cheeks
Became like flowers of fenugreek ; he said :—
“What time three watches of the night have
passed

Consult the astrologers for when this knave
Was born I named him privily Kubád,


KHUSRAU PARWÍIZ 417


But I have spoken of him as Shírwi,
And kept his other name concealed. In public
Shirwi hath always been his name, so why
Is this vile fellow calling him Kubád ?
We must depart while it is night toward Chín,
Máchín or else Makrán, and I will ask
Faghfür for troops, and make our way to them
By some device."
But as his star was dark
In heaven so on earth his words were wild :
His scheme of night-departure came to naught.
He took a hard case easily and told
Shirin: “ The time hath come; our foes prevent
Our schemes.”
She answered him: “ For ever live:

Far from thee ever be the evil eve.
Plan in thy wisdom something for thyself :
Ne'er may the foeman have of thee his will.
As soon as it is light that ruseful one C. 2023
Will turn toward the palace past all doubt."

He called for armour from the treasury—
Two Indian scimitars and Riman casque,
A quiver, arrows, and a golden shield—
And for a valiant slave who loved the fight.
He went forth to the garden in the dark,
What time the crow awakeneth, hung up
His golden buckler on a bough where none
Was like to pass and with a heavy sword
Beneath his knee sat on the flowery sward.


VOL. VII. 2 D


C.


2024


418 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


§ 65
How Khusrau Parwiz was taken and how Shirwi sent
him to Taisaftin
When Sol shot down its rays the enemy—
That doer of div’s work—approached the palace,
And went about it, but that splendid seat
Was void of Shah. They gave to spoil his treasures,
None recking of his travail, and then all
Withdrew in tears and wroth at fortune’s doings.
What of yon swiftly turning sky say we,
Which never resteth from its instancy ?
It giveth unto one the royal crown,
Another to the fishes in the sea.


One man hath head and feet and shoulders bare,
No peace, no food, no shelter anywhere ;
It giveth to another drink of milk
And honey; furs, brocade, and silks to wear !
Dust and the darkness of the grave await
Them both. To be unborn would best abate
The sage's cares for never to have been
Is better than to be for small and great.


Now for fresh toil upon Khusrau Parwiz
To give reciters novel histories,

The Shah bode in that mead, a lofty tree
O'ershadowing him. When half the longsome day
Had passed he hungered. Now within the pleasance
There was a man employed who did not know
The king by sight. The Sun-faced bade his slave :—
“Cut off a cantle from this costly belt.”

That cantle had on it five studs of gold
Enriched with jewelry. The king then spake
Thus to the gardener: “ These studs will prove
Of use to-day. Go thou to the bazar,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 419


Buy meat and bread, and shun frequented paths.”
Those jewels would have cost a purchaser
Some thirty thousand drachms. Immediately
The gardener sought a baker and asked bread
In change for that gold cantle but the baker
Said: “I have not its worth and cannot pass it.”
The two conveyed it to a jeweller,
And said: “ Price this according to thy knowledge.”
The expert, when he looked upon the studs,
Said: “ Who will dare to buy, for this should be
Within the treasury of Khusrau Parwiz,
Who hath a hundred new like this each year ?
Whom didst thou steal these jewels from, or didst
Thou cut them off a slave who was asleep ? "
The three men went to Farrukhzád and took
The jewels, gold and all, and he on seeing
Ran to the new-made king and showed the gems,
And cantle severed from the golden girdle.
Shirwi said to the gardener: “ If thou
Show’st not to me the owner of these jewels
I will behead thee and thy kith and kin
Forthwith."
“QO Shah!” he answered, “in the garden
There is A man in armour, bow in hand,
In height a cypress and with cheeks like Spring,
In all points like a king; he brighteneth
The garden everywhere, and in his mail
Is like the shining sun. His golden shield |
Is hanging from a bough. Before him standeth
A slave with loins girt up who cut for him
This jewelled cantle, handed it to me, |
And told me: *‘ Hence away and from the market
Buy bread and relish.’ Swift.as wind I left him
But now.”
Shirwi knew: “ "Tis Khusrau Parwiz,
His features are the age's cynosure, ~


C.


2025


420 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!


And sent three hundred horsemen from the court,
Like rushing wind, down to the river-bank.
Khusrau Parwiz, perceiving them afar,
Grew pale and drew his scimitar, but when
They saw the king of kings they all returned
In tears. They went to Farrukhzad and said :—
" We are but slaves; he is Khusrau Parwiz—
A Shah to whom the evil day is new.
None either in the garden or the fray
Would dare breathe cold on him."

Then Farrukhzád
Went to the Sháh with troops from court, advanced
Alone and spake at large.  Khusrau Parwíz
Gave ear to him. He said: “ If now the Shah
Will grant me audience, and will excuse
My conduct, I will come and tell the truth
To him but otherwise will hie me home.”

Khusrau Parwiz made answer: “Say thy say,
For thou art neither friend nor enemy.”

Then said that fluent speaker: “ View the matter
More wisely and assume that thou hast slain
A thousand warriors, yet thou wilt get
Thy fill of fight at last while all Iran
Is hostile to thee, leagued both heart and body
In opposition. Wait the will of heaven:

Perchance these conflicts may result in love.”

" Yea," said Khusrau Parwiz, “ 'tis well. What I
Dread are the vile who may approach and treat me
With all indignities if so they will.”

While he was speaking thus to Farrukhzád
His heart was troubled at his agéd fortune
Because astrologers had said to him,

And he had been astonied at their words :—

" Thy death will come to thee between two heights,
And by a slave's hand in a lonely spot.

One height will be of gold and one of silver,


KHUSRAU PARWIZ 421


And thou with broken heart wilt sit between.
Thy heaven will be golden, thine earth iron,
And fortune will be full of enmity.”

He said: “So now this armour is mine earth,
My golden shield my heaven, and the heights
Are my two treasuries within the garden,

Which used to make my heart shine like a lamp.
In sooth my days are coming to an end:

Where is my star that used to light the world ?
Where are the satisfaction and the peace

Of me who had my name inscribed on crowns ?”

They brought an elephant for him. His soul
Was dark with woe. He mounted, and the troops .
Led him away while in the ancient tongue
He cried: “ O treasure! if thou art my foe
Be not a friend to these mine enemies,

For I am in the hands of Ahriman
To-day. Thou aid’st me not in my distress :
Conceal thyself and show thyself to none.”

Kubád gave orders to his minister :—

“Remind him not of any evil deed,

But bid them carry him to Taisafun

Away from court with his own counsellor.

There let him bide in peace for many a day
And harmed by none. Let trusty Galints

Be made his keeper with a thousand horsemen.”

When thus the sky revolved above his head
His reign had lasted eight and thirty vears.

Tt was the day of Dai of month Azar, CG san
A time for fires and wine and roasted fowls,
When from Khusrau Parwiz the Grace of kingship
Withdrew and he was crownless like a slave.
Kubád acceded and put on the crown,
And sat in peace rejoicing on the throne.
The Iranian troops did homage to the Shah,
Who gave one year's pay from the treasury,


422 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI


And lived but seven months so call him naught,
Or call him Sháh, just as it pleaseth thee.
Such is this tyrant Hostel’s wont! Thou must
Look not upon it with an eye of trust.
Of all things cultivate a generous mood,
And let thy thoughts be ever bent on good.
When thou shalt say: ** The world hath granted me
My wish " then mark ! that wish will prove to thee
A bond and snare. If so thou canst abstain
From thought of ill and list this sage’s strain.
Here will thy soul from every fault be freed
When thou dost rightly both in word and deed.


INDEX


This Index and the Table of Contents af the beginning of the
volume are complementary. — References to the latier are in
Romam numerals.


A


ABBREVIATIONS, list of, xv


"Abbás, Arab chief, attacks Hur-


muzd., 93


Aba Mansur, prose Shahnima |


compiled for, 71, 73
Abü'l Kásim, Firdausi, 28
'Ad, Arab tribe, 276
Afrasiyab, ruler of Turin, 242,
300, 349
hoard of, 148, 406
Áhriman, the Evil Principle. 19,


21, 22, B6, B7, 175, 177. |


198, 210, 219, 243, 193,
333. 364. 421

-Wolater, 54

=Bahrim Chibina, 89 (?),


erated: son of Barzin,
III
Ahwaz, city in Khuzistin (Susi-
ana), 400, 402
'Akr Bábil, prison, 194, 195
Aláns (Alani), people, 369
king of—Khusrau Parwiz,
208, 209, 213
Aleppo (Chalybon-Beroea), city,
şi
Amasia, 193
Ambar (Piriz Shipur), city on
the Euphrates, 188
"Ammtriya (Ancyra, Angora),
stronghold, 46
‘Amr, Arab chief, attacks Hur-
muzd, 9


3
Amul, city in Mázandarán, 355. |


356, 358, 392


443


Amwi, city on Oxus, 354
Andaman, [rinian noble, 202
Andiv, country, 313
Andiyán, Íránian warrior, viii,
225, 257, 259, 269, 293.
294, 296 |
deceived by Cæsars talis-
man, 273
Bahrim Chibina writes to,
285
receives Kirmán, 313
Antioch, city, 41
Apothegms, 119, 166, 200, 215,
221, 235, 295 T
Arab, Arabs, 67, 94, 188, 190,
TOI, 208, 230, 241, 150,
251
invasion of, 72, 93
withdraw, 96
steed, 126, 302
sages, 405
Arabia, 24 mote
Arabic, language, 73
Tabari. See Tabari.
Arash, son of Kai Kubád, 216
Araxes, river, Battle of , 76
Arba, river, 194, 195
Architect, Rüman, 401
Archscribe, vii. Ser Izid Gashasp
amd Mihrin
Ardabil, city in Ázarbáiján, 93,
Q9, IO0, 184, 226
Ardawán, Ashkánian king, 214.
285
Ardshír Pápakán, first Sásánian
Sháh, ror, 214, 222, 265,
270, 285, 392, 393
true Cross in treasury of,
380


424


Aries, constellation, 342, 394

Árish, famous Í[ránian archer,
75, 219 and nole

Arjásp, king of Türán, 95, r04,
I


4
hoard of, 148
Armenia, country, 93, 96, I84,
193, 1202, 377 —
Armenian, Armenians, 188, 189,
195, 226, 248, 282
exlike, 254
= Mausil, 293 and wore
Arrow-shots, three famous, 75
Bahram Chibina'’s, 126
Arsacids, rivalry of, with Sásán-
lans, 73
Artang, the house of the here-
siarch Máni, 172 and mole
* 362 and nota
“Aris, treasure, 406 and nole
Arwand (Tigris), river, go
Arzhang. See Artang,
Asfandiyár, franian hero, 05,
7TO4 and wole, 171, 270,
332, 395 mate


Ashkabüs, Türánian hero, fight |


of, with Rustam referred


| to, 75
Ashkánian, Ashkánians, 214
Asia, 187
Minor, 193. L04
Assurbanipal, Assyrian king, and
Khusrau Parwiz, reigns
of, compared, 193
Astrologers, consulted on birth
of Shirwi, 372
Avars, Caucasian tribe, 194
Awaza, stronghold, vi, 134, 138
ee Ethiopian dynasty, 24
note


Ávin Gashasp (Yazdánbakhsh), |


Íránian noble, vil, 75,
150 mol, 222
Hurmuzd consults, 174, 177


and the prisoner, story of, |


177 #2.
marches to Hamadán, 178
consults a seer, 178
mtirdered, 181
avenged by Bahram Chú-

bina, r81


245, 256, 415 |
temple of (Azar Ábádagán),
at Shiz (Takht-i-Sulai-
mán) in Ázarbáiján, 68,
184, 210 and molt |
wiz, 283, 307, 312
Árargashasp, [ránian warrior,


206
Ázar Makán, father of Farrukh-
zád, 408


B


Bábil (Babylon), 194, 240
Bacchus, Saint and Martyr, 188
Bactrian camels, 47

Bid Awar, treasure, 4o6 and


note
Baghdad, 109 nofe, 112, 174, 193,


| 203, 303
Bahman, Sháh, 270
Bahman, fránian noble, 22
Bahrám, son of Siyáwush, viii,
75, 163, 245
"ported slain, 128
returns


with captive sor-
cerer, 12
speech of, 166
related to Bahrám Chübina,
187
wife of, 187
247 |
pursues Khusrau Parwiz,
233
236 i
beguiled by Bandwi, 236,


24
returns with Bandwi to
Bahrám Chübína, 238


L]


INDEX
blamed by Bahrám | Bahrám Chuübina, re by


Bahrám,
Chübína, 238
given custody of Handwi,


slain by Pahrim Chinn,


Bahrám, mim general, left in


charge of host hy Khusrau |
Parwiz, 296

Bahrim, father, in Persian
Tabari, of Bahram Cháü-
bina, 77

Bahrim, day, 279


fatal to Bahrám Chübína,
337 and sole, 339 and

Lr
Bahrim, name of, inscribed on
cup incites Khusrau Par-


wiz to afflict Nai, 365 and |
note
scribe, vi

Hurmuzd attempts to
suborn, 85 seg.

reveals state-secret to Hur-
muzd, 88


put to death, 89


Bahrám Chübína, Íránian hero, |


vi 5eg., 70, 73, 184, 187,
199, 109, ZI4, 215, 343 5eq.,
352 seg., 356 seg., 360, 383
Romance of, 72 ség., 187,
IQI, 304 nole
Nüoldeke on, 73
account of, 72


seller of sheep's heads and, |


74. 107
dream of, 75
mono g of booty by, 76,
I4
insult of Hurmuzd to, 76
defeat of, in Lazic war, 76
sends swords to Hurmuzd,


75
parentage of, 76, 77


malicious speech about, 77, |


i50

brought to notice of Hur-
muzd, 98

described, 98, 206


425


Zád Farrukh,

sent for by HUE. 100

consulted by Hurmuzd, 100

made commander-in-chief,
102

selects his troops, roz

justiies his method in so
doing, 104

receives Rustam's banner
from Hurmuzd, ros

receives Mihrán as recorder
from Hurmuzd, 104

marches from Taisafün, 106

refuses to be recalled, ros

marches to Khüzitán, tog
and mole

hay-seller and, 109

marches toward Diamaghin,
109

parley of, with Faghfür, 112

refuses Sáwa's offers, 1113
Stg., 117 seg.

counselled by Kharrid, 121

arrays his host, 122

prayer of, before battle, 123

encourages the fránians
against Sáwa's sorcery,
elc,, 124 seq.

defeats and slays Siwa, 126

doings of, after battle with
Sawa, 130

rewarded by Hurmuzd, 133

ordered to attack Parmüda,
133

holds revel in a garden,
135 |

attacked by and defeats
Parmüda, 135 se4.

pus Parmüda in Áwáza,
13

informs Hurmuzd, 138

tiates for surrender of

\wiza with Parmida,
138 seg.

receives surrender of, and
insults, Parmüda, 143

blamed by Kharrid and
archscribe, 144

tries to appease Parmüda,
145


INDEX
Bahram Chibina, has inventory


made of the wealth in
Awézra, 147

sends Ízid Gashasp with
spoil to Irán, 148

Hurmuzd begins to suspect,
ISI

advances of, to Khán re-
jected, 153

goes to Balkh, 153

guided by an onager, 156

incited to seek the kingship,
I55

change in, 158


questioned by Kharrád, 158 |


sends Yalin-sina after Khar-
rid and archscribe, 159

pardons archscribe, 160

Luck of, 162

renounces allegiance to Hur-
muzd, 162

intercepts the royal letters,
163

consults the chiefs, 163

becomes friends with the
Khan, 172

appoints a prince for Khur-
asin, efc., 173

marches to Rai, 173

avenges murder of Ayin
Gashasp, 181

historical campaign of,
against Khusrau Parwir,
189

carline and, 189, 303

marches to the Nahrawàn,
201

Spies’ report of, to Khusrau
Parwiz, 201

Khusrau Parwiz marches to
mect, 203
MN of, with, 204


ue with troops of
Khusrau Parwir, 225

combat of, with Khusrau
Parwiz, 228

arrives at Taisafün, 231

sends Bahrám, son of Siyá-
wush, in pursuit of Khus-
rau Parwiz, 233


elected Shih, 243

gives malcontents three
days to quit Iran, 244

plot against, 245 seq.

warned, 247

slays Bahrám, son of Siyá-
wush, 247

hears of Bandwi's escape,


248 |
deceived by forged letters,


287, 293, 294
marches A Khusrau


Parwiz, 28
goes to Ázar Abádagin, 288
arrays his host, 239
fights with and slays Rat,


290

sends back corpse of Kut,
291

worsts Romans, 292

" Harvest of," 292

charges and routs Khusrau
Parwiz' centre, 204

fights with Gurdwi, 294

goes to fight Khusrau Par-
wiz and his body-guard,


207
leaves Tánfurüz in charge of ©
host, 207
puts to flight and pursues
Khusrau , 298
Surüsh saves Khusrau Par-
wiz from, 299
retreats, 3702 i
releases Nastüh, 306
goes to Kai, 305
welcomed by Khán, 316
asks oath of Khin, 917
counsels Khán to resist


Makátüra, 318

lengexd by Makiátüra,
319

fight of, with Makátüra,
320

Khán sends gifts to, 321


INDEX
Bandwi, turns back and murders


Bahrám  Chübína, asked by
Khün's wife to avenge
death of her daughter
on lion-ape, 324

battle of, with lion-ape, 325

extradition of, demanded
oy Khusrau Parwiz, 328

s Khán to make war on
; 330

sets forth for fran, 431

Kharrád attempts to pre-
judice, with Khán, 333

arrives at Marv, 336

fatal day of, 337, 339


Kulün seeks interview with, |


339

Kulin staba, 340

sister of, laments over, 340

dying speech of, 341

makes Yalán-sína his man-
datory, 342

letter of, to Khán, 343

burial of, 343

name of, on cup, 365 and
note


Bahrám Gür, Sháh, 75, 129 and |


wale
Bahram-Gushnasp, father in
Arabic Tabari of Bahram
Chibina, 77
Bahrám Tal, 138 and mote
Balkh, city, 22, 74. 95, 153. 159,
161, 173
aphorist of, 221
Balwi, Íránian noole, viii, 257, 5&4.
deceived by Caesar's talis-
man, 273
praised by Caesar, 279
receives Chách, 314
Bandwí maternal uncle of Khus-
. Tau Parwiz, vii seg., 200
202, 204 seg., 224, 225, 227,
231, 234, 245 se7., 259,
296, 298, 356, 357
imprisonment of, 77, 176
Gustaham and, escape and
revolt, r8»
referred to, 130
put to death, I9I, 355
accomg Khusrau Par-
wig in his flight, 231


427


Hurmuzd, 232
rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, 233
promises to save Khusrau
Parwiz, 234
disguises himself as Khusrau
Parwiz, 235
beguiles Bahram, son of
Siydwush, 236, 245
imprisoned by Bahrám Chü-
bína, 238
Bahrim Chibina hears of
escape of, 248
entertained by Mausil, 249
goes with Mausil to meet
Khusran Parwiz, 282
Bahrim Chibina writes to,
285
causes defection of Bahrim
Chübína's chiefs, 302
insults of, to Niyátüs, 309,
310
reconciled to Niydtüs, 311
minister of Khusrau Par-
wiz, 313
adherents of, beheaded, 370
Bani Tayy, Arab tribe, 188
Bir, treasure, 406 and note
Birbad, minstrel, xi, 397 seg., 406
supersedes Sarkash, 399
Barbar, town and country (Brit-
ish Somaliland), 351
Barda', city on the borders of
Árarbáiján and Armenia,
gg, roo, 184, 222, 226
Barzin, general of Nüshirwán, 17
Barzin, vii seg., father of Khar-
tád, 74, 76, 190, 205 and
passim
Barzin, father of Jahn, 491
Barzin, sacred Fire, 216
Bátarün (Marcian), Rüman gen-
eral, 4T, 47, 52
Berlin, 192
Bih Ardshír (Seleucia g.v.), 194,


190

Bistim (Gustaham 4.v.), 255 and
nole, 256

Bistün, rock famous for its in-
scriptions near Kirmán-
shàh, 209


death of, 69, 71
= Burzmihr (?), 71
Mas'üdi on, 71


428 INDEX a
Bizhan and Manizha, Story of, | Cæsar, offers help to ‘(Khusran
referred to, 72 Parwiz, 201 —
Brazen Hold, 171 changes his mind, 262
Bulghár (Bulgaria), 406 consults the astrologers, 264
Burns, quoted, 3 decides to help Khusrau
Burzmihr, scribe, 81, 87, 313 Parwiz, 265
—Büzurjmihr (?) g.t., 71 offers daughter to Khusrau
Büzurjmihr, scribe and coun- Parwiz, 266
sellor of Nüshirwán, v, offer of, accepted by Khus-
3 seq., 67 seg. rau Parwiz, 269, 270
goes hunting with, and is talisman of, 271.
suspected of theft by, deceives Kiiman envoys,
Nishirwin, 4 272
disgraced by Nüshírwán, 5 mastered by Kharrad,
instructs Nüshirwán's page, 274 n
5 | gifts of, to Kharrád, 278
refuses to admit himself in | writes to Khusrau Parwiz,
the wrong, 6 sey, 279
treated with increasing | praises Rüman envays, 279
rigour, 7 8 counsels Maryam, 279, 280
released, gives Niyátús charge of
divination by, 10 seg. | Maryam, 250
advises with Nuishirwiin, 47 | corpse of Küt sent to, 291
seg. Khusrau Parwiz announces
instructed by Nüshírwán to death of Bahrám Chibina
prove Hurmuzd, 56 seg. to, 345
abolition of  Fire-worship daughter of, gives birth to
loretold by, 68 Shirwi, 371


eed Parwiz' letter to,
renk of, at birth of


Shirwi, 374
embassy of, to Khusrau


gilts of given by Khusrau
Parwiz to Shirwi, 381

invited to seize Írán, 408

tricked by Khusrau Parwiz
and retreats, 410


cn (Warigh g.v.), city.
Carline d Bahrám Chübína,


C


CÆSAR, V, viii seg., 8 seq., 19, 43
s6d., 51 56g., 230, 232, 245,
252 ség., 257 süQ., 299,
3o6 seq. 334. 373 seq.
408 seq,
death of, 43
son and successor of, offends


Nüshirwán, 44 seg. 189, 303
marches against Nüshírwán, Catholicus, 195
46 Caucasus, 72
attacks Hurmuzd, 93 Chách (Táshkand), city in Taran,
retakes cities, 93 314. 377
makes peace with Hurmuzd, bows of, 125, 126, 204
95 Chalah, 193
welcomes Khustau Parwiz, | Chalon. 194, TO5 "


257 Chalybon-Beroea, 41


INDEX


Chao-wou —5á&wa q.r., 72

Chase, the, Khusrau  Parwiz'
equipage for, 384

Chess, 371


ix, 45, 95, 97, 130. 139.
172, 216, 217, 316 and
passim
brocade of, 65, 159, 381, 384
prince of, =Parmiida, 142
prince of =Siwa, 222
robe of, 205
sage of, 235
tunics of, 257
silk from, 2553, 269, 374
sea of, 377
Chinese, 72
Chinwi, 331
Christ, a 43, I9I, 272, 310,


3
account of, 276
father of, 276
mother of, 276
Faith of, 310
Cross of, xi, 377, 380
laughter of, tg1, 350
Christian, Christians, 21, 67, 195,
196, 256, 272, 308, 310,
381
shut gates of Kirsin against
Khusrau Parwiz, 252
Chibin (Jubin), father. according
to Mas‘idi, of Bahrim
Chübína, 77
Chübina, 215, 222
meaning of, 95 wofe
Circesium, 188
Climes, the Seven, 395
Clough, quoted, 157
Constantinople, 194
Contents, Table of, v
Cook, Chief, of Nüshirwán,
grievance of, 18
Cross, Crosses, 308, 309, 374
the true, xi, 191, 195, 253,
377. 375, 38o
Crows and Owls, story of, 243
and nole


Ctesiphon (Taisafin, ¢.v.), 42, |


188, 189, 193, 194,496


Dari, Shah, 2:
| Dáráà [Daras), city, 41, 194


429


D


| DápáArRID, melody, 398 and mole
Chin, country (often=Tirin), |


Dai, month and day, 55 nofe, 173.
42I
Dakiki, Persian poet, 190
Dámaghán, city, 109, 189
Damiüwand, mountain south of
Caspian, 301
,2432, 387


taken by Nüshirwán, 41
ceded by Khusrau Parwiz,
188
Dáráà Panáh, 189, 284
goes disguised to Khusrau


returns to Bahrim Chübina
with forged letter, 257
Darib, Shah, r91
Dirdbgird, city, 313
Darband, 369 nols
Darius Hystaspis, 187
Dármán, 202
Dastagird, city, 193, 195
taken hy Heraclius, 104
Dead Seca, 102
Dhi Kar, battle of, 138
historical account of, too
date of, 191
Dibá-i-Khusraul,
and mote
Dimna, Kalila and, Book of, 202
Hole, 300
Div, 159, 161, 206, 209, 211, 217,
218, 290, 341, 342, 399
amd «2ofe, 418
zz Áhriman, 27, 50, 87, 123,
215, 222, 304, 34 1, 346, 411
=Bahrim Chibina, 153,
219, 203, 2953
—witch, 161
Black, 171
=fahhik, 242
=Kulin, 342
Dik, plain, 282, 284
mountain, 239


treasure, 405


43°


E


Ecvrr, 187, 193
Egyptian, 193

thorn, 210 |
Ether, 275 |
Ethics, Muhammadan, respected, |

74

Euphrates, river, 188, 190
Eye, evil, 16, 417


E


FAGHFÜR, of Chín, 74, 97
Faghfür, son of Sáwa, 74, 75, 120
confused with Faghfür of
Chin, 74 |
parley of, with Bahrám
Chübína, 112 |
head of, on spear, 132
PATAKA EN IT of Macedon),


397
Falátůn (Plato), 264
Farit (Euphrates), 93, 250
Farghin, Ruman architect, and
Khusrau Parwiz, 401 seg.
Farhád, lover of Shírín, 192 |
Faridin, Shih, 129, 205, 218, |
231, 242, 260, 300, 376 |
5éq., 391, 392
Farrukh, ruler of Nimriz, 375
Farrukhánzád (Farrukhzád g.v.),
195
Farrukhzád (Farrukhánzád,
q.v), favourite of Khusrau


conspires with Guráz, 408,
412

goes to the host, 412

rebels in favour of Shirwi,


413
brother of, 413 and mole
conspires with Tukhdr, 414
proclaims Shirwi Shah, 416
hears where Khusrau Par-
_ wiz is hiding, 419
holds talk with Khusrau
Parwiz, 420


| Garden of t


INDEX


Farrukhzád, Íránian warrior,
241, 296
Farwardin, month, 367, 371


Firdausi, ix, 71, 73, 74, 187,
igo, 192, 193
ditions into Sháhnáma,
42 E
death of son of, 190 |
Fire-worship, abolition of, pro-


phesied, 68
Fish, mythological, 212 and mole
Founts, the Seven, 392
G
Gaiumart, Shih, 24, 55, 260,
2609, 310, 376


Faith of, 277
Galinis, put in charge of Khus-
rau Parwiz, 421
ie Indians, 196
Garshisp, [rinian noble, 18
Gashan, as rhyme-word, 397 note
Gashasp, Íránian noble, 17, 18
Gashasp, father, in Sháhnáma, ot
Bahrám Chübína, 76, 99,
162, 169, 304
Gemini, LIH EDEN
George, Armenian general, 195
Giv, Trinian hero, 168 —
Grace or Glory, the divine, 12,
18, 21 and passim
Green Sea, 46 and nols |
Güdarz, Tránian hero, 104, 168-


| Guráz (Shahrbaráz q.v.), general


of
194, 408, 409 seg. —
408

invites Cesar to take Írin,
408

rebels, 411


Gurdwi, brother of Bahrim
Chübína, x, 74, 202,
205, 206, 231, 293, 295,
296, 298, 343, H9. 3354
358


INDEX 431


Gurd wi, a legitimist, 74
Gustaham


and, persuade


Khusrau Parwiz not to |
make a night-attack, 224 |


takes charge of baggage, 228

€ Chübína writes to,
205

fights with Bahrim Chibina,
204

receives province, 313

informs Khusrau Parwiz of
Gurdya‘'s doings, 356

writes to, and sends Khus-
rau Parwiz letter to,
Gurdya, 360

wife of, goes with letters to
Gurdya, 360

hears of the plight of Rai
and informs Gurdya, 367


Gurdya, sister of Hahrám Chü-


bína, vii, viii, x, 74, 104 note,
187, 191, 347, 358, 365
a legitimist, 74
present at council, 164
speech of, 165, 167, 171
referred to, 221
counsels Bahrim Chibina,
221


ipsc Bahrám Chübína,


rident at Marv, 340 seg.
informs her followers of the
Khán's offer of marriage,


349

starts for Irán, 351

parleys with Tuwurg, 352

arrives at Amwi, 354

doings of reported to Khus-
rau Parwiz, 356, 358

met by Gustaham, 356

asked in marriage by Gusta-
ham, 357

receives letters from Khus-
riu Parwiz and Gurdwi,


360
plots murder of Gustaham,
360


justifies murder of Gusta- |


ham, 361
reports death of Gustaham
to Khusrau Parwiz, 361


Gurdya, a Up as a

warrior to please Khusrau
Parwiz, 363

prowess of, in drinking, 364

appointed overseer of royal
bower, 764

diverts Khusrau Parwiz and
saves Rai, 365


| Gurgin, city ae region in
eastern


Mázandarán, 15,


355
Gurgin, Iranian hero, 72, 211,
216
Gurkils, tribe (?), 15
Gushtasp, Shih, 41, 68, 95, 145,
213, 270, 392, 393
Gustaham (Bistim g.v.), mater-
nal uncle of EKhusrau
Parwiz, vii, Vili, x, 199,
200, 202, 204 5£].,227, 228,
231, 255, 257, 259, 269,
282, 289, 293, 295, 298
imprisonment of, 77, 176
Bandwi and, escape and
revolt, 182
informs Khusrau Parwiz of
the blinding of Hurmuzd,
184
referred to, 189
revolt of, 191, 355
saves Klhnusrau Parwiz from
Turk, 220
Gurdwi and, dissuade Khus-
rau Parwiz from making
a night-attack, 224
treasurer, 229 and nole
accompanies Khusrau Par-
wiz in his flight, 2341
turns back and murders
Hurmuzd, 232
rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, 233
kKhusrau Parwiz warned
against, 255, 256
deceived by Cæsar's talis-
man, 272
praised by Cesar, 279
Bahrim Chubina writes to,
285
chooses comrades for Khus-
rau Parwiz in battle, 296
receives Khunisin, 313


432
Gustaham, summoned to court,


335
hears of execution of Band- |


wi, 355 !
hears of Gurdya's doings,
350
goes to meet Gurdya, 356
asks Gurdya in marriage,


357
Guidya plots murder af, 360 |


intimates of, |
H


HarrÁL,Haitálians (White Huns),
45. 242, 329, 370, 377

Halab (Chalybon-Beroea, Alep-
pol city in northern
Syria, 4T, 45, 47

Hamadán (Ekbatana), city in
'Irak-i-'Ajami, 178, 189

Hamivarin (Yaman), south-


. 379


western Arabia, 104, 1658


Hamiüàn Gashasp, Iránian chief,
122, 163, 204 speech af,


I i
Háni bin Mas'üd, Arab chief, 190
Harit, city in north-western
Aighinistin, 71, 92, 110,
116, 117, 130, 173
marchlord of.
desert of, 114
Háris, father of Kais, 250
" Harvest of Bahrám," 292
Hay, sack of, Hahrám Chibina
and the, tog
Hazára, father of Küt, 291
Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 187, 191


attempts of, for peace with |


Khusrau Parwiz, 194, 195
takes Dastagird, 194
retreat of, 195, 196


Hermit, Khusrau Parwiz and


the, viii, 254

Herodotus, 193

Hierapolis, 188

Hijáz, 24 and mote, 66, 67

Hind, Hindüstán, 24, 275, 317,
1437. 379, 3581, 400, 405
king of, 52


See Mákh. |


Hurmuzd, Shih, v. teg., '56 seq. 69
seq. 74 seq. 78, B7. 147,
169, 170, 174, 198, 209,
212, 213, 212, 232, 265,
270, 304, 312, 333. 355
379. 376
amine of, 3. 57 ,
counselled by Ndshirwin,


ieee


rim
puts to death Bahrám Ázar-
mihán, DE
repentance o 90, 93
places of residence of, 9o
wars of, 92
attacked by Sawa, 92°
Sáwa's letter to, 93
attacked by Cassar, 93
Khazars, 93
Arabs, 93 — .
consults the Íranians, 94


INDEX


433


pzd, counselled by his | Hurmurd, hears of the murder


wazir, 94

makes peace with Caesar, 95

attacks and defeats the
Khazars, 95

sends for Mihrán Sitad, 97

hears prophecy about Bah-
ram Chibina, 98

orders starch to be made for
Bahrám Chübíina, 99

discovers and sends for
Bahrám Chübína, 100

consults Bahrám Chübína,
100

gives chief command to
Hahrám Chübína, 102

questions Bahrám Chübina,
103

gives. Rustam’s banner to
Bahrim Chibina, 105

sends Mihrin with Bahrim
Chübina, 106
intelligencer after Bah-
rám Chübína, 107


to recall Bahrám Chübína,


108
Kharrád, son of Barzin,
as envoy to Sáwa, 110
hears of Bahrám Chübína's
victory, 132
makes thanksgiving, 132


rewards Hahrim Chibina |


and the troops, 133
surveys spoils sent by Bah-
rim Chobina, 150
grows suspicious of Bahram
EENE, 151.


ils, 152


hears from Kharrid of |


Bahrim  Chübina's dis-
affection, 160

consults with high priest,
Ib1 °
Ayin Gashasp, 174, 157

plans to make away with
Khusrau Parwiz, 174

hears of Khusrau Parwir'
flight, 176

imprisons Bandwi and Gus-
taham, 176

VOL. VIII.


of Ayin Gashasp, 182
dethroned and blinded, 183,
200
visited in prison by Khusrau
Parwiz, 185, 198, 230
requests of, to Khusray
Parwiz, 199
referred to, 211
counsels Khusrau Parwiz,
230
murdered, 232
Hurmuzd Garabzin or Galabzin
(Kharrád son of Barzin
g.U.), 190
Hishaag, Shih, 376
Faith of, 380


Ty As BIN Kanisa, 188
governor of Hira, 190
Indian, Indians, ix, 377
bells and gongs, 46, 120
swords, 127, 145, 417
Garden of the, 196
Kharrád's account of the,
275
Íraj, youngest son of Faridün,
266, 376 and mole, 3092
[rin, ix, 13, 19, 43, 46, 48 and
passim
Írinian, Íránians, viii, r9, 99,
IOI, III, 119, 124, 130,
135 and passim
take Sakila, 47
chiefs received in audience
by Hurmuzd, 86
consulted by Hurmuzd, 94
defeat the Khazars, 96
advise Hahrám  Chübína,
I02, I21, 239 5tg., 287


Siwa employs sorcery
against, 123

encouraged by Bahrim Chú-
bina, 124

defeat the Turks, 126

revolt against Hurmuzd,
156

elect Báhrám Chübína Shih,
243

2E


434

[sd (Jesus), 276 mote |

a city in 'Irak-i- Ajami,

Istakhr (Persepolis), city in.
Párs, 90, 313 |

[zid, 75 |

[zid Gashasp, archscribe, vi,


74
confusion in name of, 75. = |
put to death by Hurmuzd,

75, 83


malicious speech of, 77 and |


"oie, r50 and sole

imprisoned, 81

sends for high priest, 8t

Írid Gashasp, Íránian warrior,

IO3, 122, 136, 1398, 149,
350, 353. 356

conducts spoil to Írán, 149°

goes hunting with
Chübína, 156

speech of, 165


J
JABALA BIN SALIM, 73
Jahn, architect of throne of
Takhdis, 391
Jámásp, minister of Sháh Gush-
tásp, 171, 393
prophecy of, 68


Tákhdís, 392
Jamshíd, Sháh, 22, 242, 269, 310,
332, 341, 387
Jánfurüz, Tránian general, 297
Jerusalem, 191, 196
Jesus, 191
savings of, 276 and moie
Cross of, 380
laughter of, 191, 380
Jew, Jews, 21, 67, 276 |
Jihán (Oxus), river, 94, 99, 134.
174, 332
fords of, 331
Jovian, Eastern Roman Em-


peror, 41

Jupiter, planet, 28, 152, 157, 305

Justin Il, Eastern Roman Em- |
peror, 41


INDEX >


peror, 41
K
Kapis, small pieces of meat
skewered together for
roasting, 250
Kabisa, 188


Kai ‘Kaas, Shih, 22, 104, 168,
270, 341 |
Kai Khusrau, Shah, 148, 219,
279, 332, 392
Kai Kubád, Sháh, 89, 170, 260,
270, 310, 332 |
Kaian, 65, 216
throne, 214
race, 217
Khusrau Parwíz, 250
Kaiser Friedrich Museum, 192
Kalíla and Dimna, Hook of, 202
noit, 390 note
Kandá Gashasp, frinian war-
* rior, 103, 122, 163
h of, 166
Káran, (actin hero, 165


| Karan, mountain-chiel, 189
| Káraz, 252 and note
additions of, to throne of |


Káristán, 188
Kürsán, 188, 252
gates of, shut against Khus-
rau Parwiz, 252
walls of, fall down, 253
Khusrau Parwiz stays at,


253
Kastantaniya (Constantinople),
265
Káüs, Sháh. See Kai Kaus.


Kawa, the smith, 72
Standard of, 985


Khan of Chin (See foo Parmida),


vii, ix, x, 43, 52. 57,59.
97 Seq. 141 seg., 190, 191,
204, 215, 220, 263 seg.
306, 316 seq., 342 seq., 346
sis 351. 352, 355. 357.
393


INDEX
Khin of Chin, supposed war of,


with Hurmuzd, 72
marriage of daughter of,


with Nuüshírwán referred |


to, 72
letter of, 77
dismissed by Hurmuzd with
gifts, 152


refuses advances of Bahrám


Chübíina, 153
becomes friends with Bah-
rám Chübína, 172
brother of, 190, 191
reports flight of Gurdya,
351
ordered to go in pursuit,
35T
parley of, with Gurdya,
357
daughter of, 190
killed by lion-ape, 322,
324
queen of, 190
asks Bahram Chübina to
avenge her daughter,
34
disgraced, 344
welcomes Bahrám Chübína,
316
swears friendship with Bah-
rim Chübína, 317
dominated by  Makátüra,
317
advised by Bahrim Chibina
to slight Makátüra, 318


views fight between Bah-
rim Chübína and Maká-


türa, 320

sends gifts to Bahrim Chi-
bina, 321

refuses to give up Bahrim
Chübína, 329
distrust Bahram Chibina,

33

E of seal of, obtained

— by Kharrád, 338

burns Kulün's kindred, 344

" seeks in vain for Kharrád,
344

mourns for Bahrim Chi-
bina, 344


435


Khinagi, Raman noble, 375, 378


leads Cisar's embassy to
Khusrau Parwiz, 374

Khusrau Parwiz' gifts to,
382

returns to Kim, 382


Khanjast (Urumiah), lake, 282
Kharrád, son of Barzín (Hur-


muzdl Garabrzín or Galab-

. zin), vil seg.,74, 76,158 seq.,
205, 225, 257 seg., 269,
270, 331 seég., 3B1

sent by Hurmuzd as envoy
to Sáwa, 110

beguiles Siwa and flees, 111

flight of, reported to Sawa,
112

counsels Bahrám Chübína,
[21

sceks refuge, 123

counts Iránian slain, 127

blames and counsels Bahram
Chühína for his behaviour
to Parmüda, 144, 146

questions Bahrám Chübíina
on his adventure with the
onager, 158

flees from Balkh with arch-
scribe, 159

makes report of Bahrim
Chibina to Hurmuzd, 160

real name of, 190

waits on Khusrau Parwiz,252

speech of, to Cæsar, 250, 275

masters Ciesar's talismans,
274. 275

Cesar's gift to, 278

praised by Cæsar, 270

made chief minister, 314

speech of, to Khán, 332

attempts to prejudice Bah-
rám Chübína to the Khán,
333

intrigues against
Chübina, 334 seg.

cures daughter of queen of
Chin, 336

incites Kulin to kill Bah-
ram Chibina, 337

Soe of queen of Chin,
33!


Bahráim


436


Kharrád, returns to [rin and is
rewarded, 345
reads out Caesar's letter to
: Khusrau Parwiz, 376
Kharrád, Íránian general, 225
defeats Khazars, 96
Khazar, Khazars, region and
people north of the Cau-
casus, 94, 377, 379
invasion of, 72, 93
defeated, 96
Khazarwin, [frinian
speech of, 241
Khazri, treasure, 406 and nofe
Khurasin, chieftain, 241
speech of, 240
Khurásán, province, 78, 94, 241,
313. 355. 369
governor of, 75
prince of, 173
Khurásáni, See Mikh.
Khurdád, day, 25, 173


Khurra-i-Ardshir (Ardshir Khur- |


ra), district in Pars, 251,
152, 412 and nole
Khürshid, chief, 270, 296
Khüshnawáz, talir of the Haitá-
lians, 75, 168, 242, 245,
267
Khusrau, father of Khazarwin,
241, 296 (?)
Khusrau Parwiz, Sháh, vii se4.,
71, 74, 179, 173, 174, 181,
182, 191 sey.,216, 304, 306,
316, 334, 335. 342, 355,
367 seq., 395 mole, 413
horse of, story of, of
Hurmuzd plots to kill, 174
flees, 175
adherents gather round, 175
swear fealty to, 176
goes to Baghdád, 184
visits Hurmuzd in prison,
185, 193, 230
extensive historical
quests s 187
materials for reign of, in
Sháhnáma, 187
flight of, historical,
Ctesiphon, 188


con-


noble, |


from |


INDEX


Khusrau Parwiz, affects Chris-
tianity in exile, 188
helped on terms by Em-
peror Maurice, 188.
historical campaign of,


visits of, to Fire-temple at
Shiz, 190, 283, 307, 312

Nu'man bin Munzir exe-
cuted by, 190

triumphal arch of, 192

Assurbanipal and, reigns of,
compared, 193

fall of, historical account of,
193 seg.

attempts of Heraclius to
make peace with, 194, 195

treatment of defeated gen-
erals by, 194

prediction concerning, 194

accession of, 197

Hurmuzd's requests to, 199

spies’ report of Bahram
Chübíina to, zor

takes counsel, 202

marches to meet Bahrám
Chübína, 203

interview of, with Bahrim
Chübína, 204 seg.

attacked by Turk and saved
by Gustaham, 220

dissuaded from making a
night-attack, 224

troops of, tampered with by
Bahrám Chübína, 226

sends away his baggage, 228

combat of, with Bahrám
Chübína, 228, 229

retreats to, and holds, the
bridge of Nahrawán, 228

worsts Yalán-sina, 2209

flees to Taisafün, 229

counselled by Hurmuzd, 23a

prepares to flee, 231

takes refuge in a shrine,
233

arrives at Babil, 249

entertained by Kais, 250
Mihrán Sitád, 251

town of Kürsán and, 252


INDEX
Khusrau Parwiz, interview of,


with Hermit, 254
warned against Gustaham,
255, 256
welcomed by Cesar, 257
takes up his abode at
Warigh, 257
instructs his embassy to
Cassar, 257


Csesar offers daughter to, 266 |


accepts Casar’s offer, 269,
270

welcomes Niyátüs and
Maryam, 280

marches to Dük, 282

Mausil and, 233

returns to Dik, 254


Dara Pandh goes: over to, |


256

“forges letter to Bahrim
Chibina, 286

sends corpse of Kut to
Caesar, 291

decides to fight without
Riman help, 292, 293

arrays his host, 293

resolves to fight in person,
295

bodyguard of, 296

leaves Bah


host, 296 |
flees from Bahrám Chübína,
208
saved by Surüsh, 299
returns to  Niyátüs and
Maryam, 200
of Christian ten-
— dencies, 308


gives banquet to Niyátüs


and Rümans, 309

restores captured cities to
Rüm, 312

makes Kharrid, son of
Barzín, chief minister, 314

proclamation of, 314

"demands extradition of Bah-
rim Chibina, 328

advised to send envoy to
Khan, 329

resolves to put Bandwi to
death, 354


rim in charge of |


|


437


Khusrau Parwiz, summons Gus-


taham, 355

hears of Gurdya's doings,
356, 358

writes to Gurdya, 359

hears of the death of Gusta-
ham, 362

welcomes Gurdya to court,
362

Gurdya dresses up to please,
363

warned by Shirin against
Gurdya, 364

makes Gurdya overseer of
royal bower, 364

oppresses Kai, 365

relieves Rai, 368

the realm, 369 seg.

puts to s death adherents of
Bandwi and Gustaham,
370

consults astrologers on birth
of Shirwi, 372

grieved at Shírwi's horo-
scope, 372
consults the high priest,
372

writes to Ciesar, 373

Cuesar's embassy to, 374

gives Ciesar's gifts to Shirwi,
381
presents to Khinagi, 382

and Shirin, Story of, 382
seg.

equipage of, for the chase,


384
married to Shíriín, 386
justifies his marriage, 358
gives pilded chamber to
Shirin, 389
displeasured with Shirwi,


390
and throne of Tåkdis, 3091


Ln of, story of, 400 seq.

Farghán and, 401 seq.

imprisons Riman artificers,
402

releases Riman artificers,
493

treasures of, 406


435
Khusrau Parwiz, Guriz intrigues
against 408
device of, against Guráz and
Cesar, 409
sends Farrukhzid to the
host, 412
hears Kubád proclaimed
Sháh, 416 |
arms and hides in garden,
417


palace of, plundered, 418
discovered, 419
holds talk with Farrukhzád,
420
recalls former presage, 420
imprisoned, 421
duration of reign of, 431
Khusrau and Shirin, Persian
poem, 192
EKhuzistán (Susiana), province at
head of Persian Gulf, 169
and mole, 193
Kings, Persian Book of, 73
Kirmán, in southern


Kirmánsháh, citv between Bagh-
dád and Hamadán, 192
Kishwad, father of Güdarz, I04


Kubád, Sháh, father of Nishir. | L


win, 25, 46, 72, 168, 169,
245, 265, 285, 312, 369
Kubád (Shirwi g.c.), Shah, son


of Khusrau Parwiz and |


Maryam, roo, 196
secret and public names of,
371, 416
proclaimed Shah, 416
imprisons Khusrau Parwtz,
421
accedes to throne, 421
brief reign of, 422
Kufa, city west at the Euphrates
and in the neighbourhood
of Nejef, 190
Kulün,
Vharrád against Bahrám
Chübína, X, 335


incited by Kharrád to kill |


Bahrám Chübína, 337


arrives at Marv by help of |


Khán's seal, 339


| Máh Á


INDEX


76

in, 76 |
Leo, constellation, 122. 394
Lion-ape, the, ix, 322 seg.
Loadstone, chamber of, 275
suspended cavalier in, 275

Sháh, 95, 148, 213,

270, 302


| Luna, planet, 395


MAcuis (China), 417

Madå'in, Ctesiphon (Taisafán)
and neighbouring cities,
xi, 4, an 192, 193

palace of Khusrau |
at, story of, 400
r, scribe, 8r
Mahmüd, Sultán, 24
Mahrwi, 248


| Makátüra, Turkman chief, ix,
Turk in league with


317 :
dominates the Khán, 318
slighted by the Khán, 318
eae Bahrim Chibina,
319
fight of, with Bahrim Chi-
bina, 370


INDEX
| Mas'üdí, historian, on Büzurj-


Mákh, 71, 78

Makrán (Balochistan), 393, 417

Mamigonian, Armenian family,
188

Man, weight, 145 and mòir, 314,


399
Manizha, daughter of Afmistyab,
Bizhan and, Story of,
referred to, 72
Manwi, town, 253
Marchlord, ill-conditioned, op-
presses Rai, x, 366
destroys gutters and cats,
366
recalled, 368
Marcian (Bátarün q.v.), 41
Mardanshah (Yalin—sina q.v.),


74, 76 !
Mardánsháh (Mardásas q.v.), son
of Shirin, 189, 191, 193
Mardásas (Mardánsháh g.v.), 196
Mardwi, official, 21
Mardwi, gardener, 397
Mars, planet, 395
Martyropolis, rede by Khusrau
Parwiz, 188
arv, oasis and city in ancient
Khurásán, now in Turkis-
tán, x, 20, 93, 173. 335.
337, 346 seg. 352, 356
Marvel], quoted, 399 note
Marvrid í(Murgháb), river in
Khurásin flowing
sap E the Marv
Mary, Maa mother of Jesus,
236 nole, 277 noie
Maryam, daughter of Cesar, ix
šeg., 188, 192, 276 mole,
278, 279, 373. 374. 380
murder of, 193, 359
referred to 255, 266, 269,
270, 371, 381, 389
ane by Cæsar, 279,


Nivátás put in charge of,
280
as peace-maker, 310
Mashetta (Mashita g.v.)
Mashíta, palace at, 192
Masius, Mount, 41


into |


439


mihr, 71
Maurice, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 187, 188
helps Khusrau Parwiz on
terms, 183
murder of, 193
Mausil, Armenian prince,
189, 248, 232, 295
entertains Bandwi, 240
Khusrau Parwiz and, 233
referred to, 293 and note
Maximian, Roman Emperor, 188
Mázandarán, region between AI-
burz range and Caspian,
8 .
Mercurv, planet, 209, 305
Messiah, the, 267
Mihrak, import of word, 72, 73
Mihrak, servant of Nüshirwán,
18, 19
Mihrán, Mihráns, 72, 74
clan of, their importance, 72,


188,


3
Mihrin. archscribe, 76
sent with Bahrám Chübina,
ro^
counsels Bahrim Chubina,
22 and nole
secks refuge, 123
congratulates Bahnim Chù-
bina, 129
takes counsel with Kharrad,
159
fices from Balkh and is
retaken, 159
pardoned by Bahrim Chú-
bina, 160
referred to, 163
speech of, 166
Mihrán Sitid, Irinian notable,
95, 100
embassage of, referred to,
72, 97
sent for by Hurmuzd, 97
tells of prophecy about
Bahram Chibina, 98, 216
death of, 99
Mihrán Sitid, merchant, enter-
tains Khusrau  Parwiz,
25!


449


Mihr Hurmuzd, Íránian noble,


196
Milád, 72, 211
import of word, 73
customs of, 216
Minů, 253 and nofe
Mimichihr, Shih, 219, 223, 392
Mir Khánd, historian, 192
Miskál, measure of weight, a
dram and three sevenths,


394
Misr (Egypt), 381
Modes of speech, 30
Monophysite, 195
Moon, divided by Muhammad,
42, 67


Muhammad, Prophet, v, 42, |


IGI
divides the Moon, 42, 67
birth of, 65


Muhammadan, Muhammadans,


73
elements in Sháhnáüma, 42
ethics respected, 74
Mush, town west of Lake Van,
188


N


NAHRAWAN, canal on eastern
bank of Tigris, 187, 204,
206, 231
bridge of, 223, 228 seg.


broken down by Khusrau


Parwiz, 229
Name, secret and public, 472 and
note
Nard, game, 371
Narses, exarch, treatment of by
Empress Sophia, 76
Narses, general, 189
Nárwan, forest, 356, 360, 377
Nastüh, son of Mihrán Sitád,
ix, 225, 303
advises Hurmnuzd, 96
released by Bahrám Chü-
bína, 306
Naudar, Shah, 223, 242


| Noldeke, Professor, 71, 188


INDEX


Naurüz, Persian New-vear's day
when the sun enters Aries,
216


Nestorian, Nestorians, 195


Nicephorium (Warigh g.v.), 188
Nile, 126, 284, 293, 294
Nimriz,* 196, 284


Kimin. 19
Nishápür, city E Khücisán: 173


| Nisibis, besieged by Romans, 4I


ceded by Khusran Parwiz
(?), 188 à
Niydtis (Theodosius, son of
Maurice), ix, 189, 281, 289
brother of Ciesar, 280, 310
p in charge of


wekonsi ur REC Pee
Wiz, =


watches fight between Khus-
tau Parwiz and Bahrim
Chübína, 297

entertained at ME. by
Khusrau Pa

quarrel of, with ‘Bandwi,


jog
threat of, to Khusrau Par-
wiz, 310
reconciled to Bandwi, 311
returns to Rüm, 312 *
Nizámí, Persian poct, 192


on Romance of Bahrim
Chibina, 73
Note on Pronunciation, xvi
Nu'mán bin Munrír, 188
put to death, r9o
Nüshírwán, Sháh, v, 3 seg.,
71, 72, B6 seq, 93, 120,
169, 198, z200, 205, 209,
300, 312, 313, 377
precautions of, as to suc-
cessor, 3


* See Vol. 1 p. 396 note


INDEX


Müshirwán, goes hunting with |
Büzurjmihr, 4
suspects — and —disgraces


Büzurjmihr, 5
treats Büzurjmihr with in-
creasing rigour, 7, 8
reconciled to Büzurjmihr, 9
questioned by archimages,
I4 seq., 28 seg.
gives judgment against his
own son, r6
chief cook of, aggrieved, 18
counsels Hurmuzd, 25 seg.


writes to console Caesar's |


son and successor, 43
wrath at answer received, 45
invades Rim, 46
success of, 47

checked, 47
in want of money, 47
takes counsel with Büzurj-

mihr, 47


refuses advances from a |


shoemaker, 50, 71

high esteem of, for scribes,
gn

grants peace to, and takes


tribute from, Rümans, 52 |


returns to Taisafün, 53

sons of, 56, 63

instructs Büzurjmihr to
prove Hurmuzd, 56 seg.

testament of, in favour of,
and last counsels to, Hur-
muzd, GI seg.

directions of, as to inter-
ment, 65

hall of, shattered, 68

death of, 69, 71

system of administration of,
71

marriage of, with Khán's
daughter referred to, 72,

ministers of, put to death
by Hurmuzd, 8r seg.

his. choice of Hurmurd,
story of, 47

palace of, 193


4a
o


OxAGER, Bahrám Chübína
guided by, 156, 158


| Owls and Crows, story of, 263


and mofe


|, Ox-hide or skin filled with gold


| Oxns (Jihán), 72


P


PacE, of Nüshírwán, 5 seg.
relative of Büzurjmihr, 5
instructed by Büzurjmihr, 6
takes messages between

Nüshirwán and HBüzurj-
mihr, & seg.

Pahlavi, middle Persian language

of Ashkinian (Parthian)
and Sásánian times, 73, 74

Paidáwasis, 381 and mofe

Paighü, 190

Paikir-i-Gurd, melody, 398 and


nof
Pápak, tribal king, 214, 219 and
Hole, 285
daughter of, 214
Parmüda (see foo. Khán of Chín],
vi, 75, 117, 130, 136 seq.,
1465, 149 seq., 104, 174
hears of Bahrám Chübína's
victory and takes counsel,
131
marches toward ]íhün, 131
approaches Balkh, 134
attacks and is defeated by
Bahram Chibina, 134


seq.
escapes to Áwáza, 138
besieged by Bahram Chú-
bina, 145 seq.
tiates surrender of
wise with Bahram Chù-
bina, 139 seg.
surrenders Awdzra and sets
out for Írán, 143
insulted by Bahrim Chi-
bina, 144
Bahrim Chibina
placate, 145


tries to


442
Párs (Persis, Fársistán), country


on castern shore of Per- |


sian Gulf, 100 mole, II2,
216, 2p, 393, 395


ians, 73
Berets meaning of, 183


Pashan, battle of, 397 and mote
Persia, 195
Persian, Persians, 24 mole, 42, 71,
75. 121, 188 seg., 194, 208,
273, 282, 286 and passim
wisdom- -literature, 3


conquest of Yaman, 24 mole -


empire, war of, with Rüm, 41
raid Syria, 41
defeat by Romans referred
to, 73
war with Turks, 72
Book of Kings, 73
Tabari. Ser Tabari.
=Bahrim Chůbina, 113
-Hurmuzd, 116, 117
prince Bahrám Chübína,
o 3
Phocas, Eastern Roman Em-


Photius, quoted, 191

Pirin, Tininian hero, 414

Pírüz, Shih, 73, 75, 168, 242,

245, 267, 285

Piriz, father of Ustad, 206

Pisces, constellation, 51, 342

Pleiades, 53, 158

Polo, 246, 247, 258, 371
—Bticks, 247


Prelates as warriors, 47 and note |


Pronunciation, Note on, xvi
Proverb, 187


Q


QUEEN or Cuis {wife of the |


Khán), 190
daughter of, slain by lion-
ape, 322


asks Bahrim Chibina to


avenge her daughter, 324

steward of, plots with Khar-
råd against Bahrám Chá-
bina, 335


INDEX


Sabra RER
disgraced, 344


R


Rat, city and district near Tih-


Tán, X, 72, 155, 166, I7I,
173, 174. 189, 214, 216,


misery of, 367
Rakka (Warigh q.v), city, 188
i.t. 1
Rim, Íránian warrior, 291
Rim Barzin, Persian official, 313
Rangwi, E warrior, 296


| Rasafa, 18
peror, 187, 189, 193, 194 |


Reseph, 188
SS p A ETE v, 14


| Rhyme-word, Firdáusi and, 397


Roman Romans, 188, 189, 195
Empire, war of with Persian,

41, 193
defeat Bahrám Chübina, 76
Ruhbám, a Mihrán, femp. Pírüz,


73
Rüm, Eastern Roman Bem


passim.
brocade of, 157, 173, 278,
337, E $4


robes of, eee
captured cities of, restored
to, 312


Rüman, HRümans, ix, 15. 45
Ség., 52, 53, 03, 123, 214
and passim

envoy, 8 seq.
surrender to Nüshírwün, 47
entrench themselves, 47


INDEX
Rüman, Rümans, sue for peace


and pay tribute, 51 seg.
architect, 193, 401
marches, 252
robes, 253
helms, 105, 276, 417
cunuchs, 279
worsted by Bahrim Chù-


released by Khusrau Par-
wiz, 403
Ris (Russia), 406
Rustam, hero, 106, ©77,
219, 223, 332
fight of, with Ashkabiüs,
referred to, 75
conduct of, in Hámávarán,
Io4, 168
banner of, bestowed on
Bahrám  Chübína, 105,
217
Rustam, brother of Farrukhzád,
413 and mode
revolt of, 413
Ruzbih, scribe, 252


S


SABZ DAR SABT, melody, 399 and
mote

Sada, feast, 68, 133, 216, 313

Sage, saving of, 155

Sakila, Mount, v, 41

stronghold of,

Rümans, 47

Sakláb (Slavonia), 379

Salm, eldest son of Farídün, 266,
270, 300, 376 nole, 378,


Sim, ise hero, 223


Samarkand, city in Turkistin,


taken by


377

Sambáz, Íránian chief, speech of,
242

Sapandarmad, month and day,
331

Sapor II, Sháh, 41


| Sarkab, Riman


443


Sari city in Mázandarán, 168,
341, 355. 392
n general, 281, 292
sarkash (Sergius), minstrel, xi,
193, 398 seg., 406
story of, 396
. disgrace ol, 399
Sásán, eponym of Sdsinian
dynasty, 219, 220, 330,
1
Sásánian, Sisinians, 65, 72, 73,
214, 262, 330, 413 nole
rivalry with Arsacids, 73
usage, rgo
architecture, 193
empire, 193
Tace, 255, 356 wole
Saturn, planet, 24, 66, 321, 392.


395 E
| Siwa, ruler of the Turks, vi, 74,


U4 Ség., LOO seg., 107, 108,
IIO seg, 123, 129, 132,
133, 135, 137, 139, 104,
169, I74, z16, 2I9, 2211,
224, 240

sChao-wou, 72

attacks Hurmuzdl, o*

letter of, to Hurmuzd, 93

prophecy about, 95

Hurmuzd] sends Kharrád,
son of Barzin, to, 110

hears of Bahrám Chübína's
army and blames Khar-
rl, rro

offers of, to Bahrim Chi-
bina, 113 seg., 117 seq.

employs sorcery against the
Iránians, 123

defeated and slain, 126

head of, set on lance, 130

wealth of, sent to Hurmuzd,
133

Scribe, scribes, office of, highly

esteemed by Nüshírwán,


go
put to death by Hurmuzd,


71

Seleucia (Bih Ardshir), city on
right bank of Tigris oppo-
site to Ctesiphon (Taisa-
fün), 139. 194, 195


444


Sergiopolis, 188
Sergius, Saint and Martyr, 188
patron saint of Khusran
Parwiz, 158, 195
Roman leader in Tabarí, 188


Sergius (Sarkash), minstrel, 193


Seven, stages, Story of, 171
founts, 3921
Climes. See Climes.
and forty Sháhs, 395 and


note |
Shabdiz, steed of Khusrau Par-


wiz, 407
Shádward, treasure, 406 and note
Sháhnáma, 3, 41, 42, 7I, 72, 74
seq., 187 æg., IQI, 192
Prose, compilers of, referred
to, 71, 73


Shahrán Guráz, Irinian warrior,


speech of, 239


Shahrbaráz (Guráz g..), fránian |


general, 194
revolt of, 195
sons of, T96
Shakespeare, quoted, 187
shim (Syria), 170


Shamtá, 195, 196

Shápür, son of Ardshir, Sháh,
265

Shápür, son of Urmuzd, Sháh, 41

Shápür of Rai, 72

Shápár, Íránian warrior, viii, |
202, 225, 257, 259, 269,
291, 296

‘deceived by Caesar's talis-

man, 273


praised by Cassar, 27
Bahrim Chübinz writes to,
255


receives Istakhr and Dáráb- | |


gird, 313
Sheep's heads, Bahrám Chübína
and the, 74, 107 .
omen of, reported to Hur-
muzd, ro8
Sher-Kappi, 322 mofe
Shírin, wife of Khusrau Parwiz,
Xi, 187, 194, 363, 383,
407
enmity of, to Shírwi, 189,
IGI, 193


INDEX
| Shirin, account of, 192


192
meaning of, 193
Maryam murdered by, 193,


of, 382
married to, 386
gilded chamber given to, 380 |
hears Kubád proclaimed
Sháh, 416 |
a | Parwiz,
Shírwi tikabad g.v.), Sháh at i xi,


188, 190, 371 seg.
Shirín's enmity to, 189, 191,
193
internment of, 194, 196, 791
released, 106, 415
secret and public names of,


372, 416 /
Lies consulted at


| ulaimán), seat of
Shíz (Takht-i-S
“te Magi in Ázarbáiján,


| Shoemaker, Y, 42
Offer of, to advance money
to Nüshírwán, 48
rejected, 50, 71. —
Shustar, city in Khuristán, 381
Sikandar (Alexander the Great),
52, 214, 217, 242, 262,
357, 392


381,
| Simah Barzin, scribe, vi


Hurmuzd plots against, 85
seg.


INDEX
| Takht-i-Khusrau.


Sipansár, fránian warrior, 293
Siyiwush, son of Kai Kats, 104,
340, 305 note
goods of, 148, 151
Siyiwush, Irinian chief,

128, 163, 187, 233
son of — Bahrám, 247
Slavs, r94
Sol, planet, 395
Son of Firdausi, death of, ix, 190
Sophia, Empress, her treatment
, af Narses, 76
Speech, modes of, 30
Spica, star, 379


vill,


Süfarai, an chief, 72, 75.
168, 285

Sakhta, treasure, 406 and mole

Sumai, 195


Sunday, 378, 380
Surüsh, angel, the messenger of
Urmuzd, ix, 173
saves Khusrau Parwiz from
Bahrám  Chübina, 189,
209
Syria, 103
raided by Persians, 41


T


pens a 73 75 Seq.
1
Persian, 42, 73 se4., 187 se4.
Arabic, 42, 73, 75. 197, 199,
195
Table of Contents, v
Tahmiras, Shah, 277, 332. 376


Taisafin (Ctesiphon g.v.}, Xi.


city on left bank of Tigris,


. 53, 90, 109 wole, 118, 173.


175, 150, 182, 729, 241
Nüshirwán returns to, 53
Bahrim Chibina marches

from province of, 106
Khusrau Parwiz imprisoned

at, 421

Taj, 72
Tákdis, throne of, xi, 391
account of, 391 seq.
.  &dded to by Jámásp, 392
Takht-i-Büstán, 192


| Treasures,


445


ste Mada’ in
Takht-i-Sulaimian (Shiz, g.v).
189
Talisman, Cassar’s, vili
described, 271
deceives Persian envoys, 272
mastered by Kbharrád, 274
Támür, 77 note
Taráz, city north-cast of Tüsh-
kánd, 370
Idols of, 370
Theodore, brother of Heraclius,


Tag
Theodosius (Niyátüs), 139
Tiberius, Eastern Roman Em-
a $e


peror
| Tigris (Arwand), river, 193, 194


Tir, month, 304
of Khusrau Parwiz,


406
Tukhár, fránian chief, 228
takes letter to Cesar, 263
Tükhár, Íránian general, con-
spires against Khusrau
Parwiz, 414
releases Shirwl, 415
Tukhára, Íránian warrior, 296
son of, 314 4
Tur, second son of Faridin, 266,
300, 376 mole, 378
(Turkistàn), 115, 123,
130, 242, 329, 331, 349,
350, 376, 405, 407


Türán


| Türánian, Türánians, 123, 320


Turk, Turks, 95, 103, 121, 135,

136, 138 seg. T42, 164,
169, 170, 189, 316, 320,
349. 352

war of, with Persians, 72
prophesied, 98

zs Sdwa, 98

defeated, 126


ind Sáwa's corpse, 127

sorcerer, sends ill dream to
Bahram  Chübína, 121,
128
put to death, 129

heads of chiefs of, sent to
Hurmuzd, 130

retreat to Toran, 131


three, the, 187, 204


Khusrau Parwir, 220
reproved by Bahrám
Chübína, 221
lead night-attack on
Khusrau Parwiz, 227
= Makitira, 319
=Kulin, 345
defeated by Yalán-sina, 353


Turkistán (Türán), 324, 336. |


363, 376, 377, 407

Turkman, Turkmans, 377
=Turk, 87. Sy, 904, 217
Tüs, Íránian hero, 168


Tuwurg, brother of Khán, x,
364
reports flight of Gurdya, 351


sent in pursuit, 351
parleys with Gurdya, 352


U


Unuvzp, the Good Principle, 285 |


Urmuzd, Sháh, 41

Urmuzd, Íránian warrior, 296
.Urumiah, lake, 195

Ustád, Iránian warrior, 296


yr
VENUS, planet, 152, 3159, 394, 395
Virgo, constellation, 359 à


Ww


Warion, city on the Euphrates,
188, 253, 257, 280


usrau Parwiz takes up


his. abode at, 257
Wash, city, 24 and mote
West, gateway of, 360 and mola
Wisdom, apportionment of, 202
literature (Persian), 3


INDEX
Turk, Turks, one of, attacks


Y


YatAn-sixa (Mardánsháh), bro-
ther of Bahrám Chübína,
74, TO2, 122, 135, 138.
157, 163, 169, 204, 283,
291, 296 $éq., 303, 316,
355, 357


commands the centre, 289
mandatory, 342

defeats the Turks, 353

negotiates marriage between
Gurdya and Gustaham,


357
Yaman, south-western Arabia,
98


monarch of, 16
conquered by Persians, 24
mote
curtains of, 148, 151
Yazdagird IIT, Sháh, 55, 73


| Yazdán, 75


Yazdánbakhsh (Avín Gashasp
g.v.), 75, 76


| Yazdín, 195, 196


Yunin, Greece, 258


Z


Zan, lesser, tributary of Tigris,
189
| Zábulistán,* 369


Zád Farrukh, suggests Bahrim
Chibina to Hurmuzd, 99
speech of. 241 |
Zagros, mountain-range in west-
ern Irán, 139
Z£ahhák, Sháh, 218, 239, 241,
. 387. 3091
father of, referred to, 387


* See Vol, i, p. 395 mote


INDEX 447


£4), father of Rustam, 223 Zarduhsht, visits Ízid Gashasp in
Zandavasta, 96, 246, 283, 312 prison, 82

quoted, 218, 240 | visit of, reported to Hur-
Zardubsht (Zoroaster), 67, 213, muzd, 83 °

308 poisoned byHurmuzd,B3 seq.

saying of, 218, 240 Zarmihr, son of Süfarai, 169

Zarduhsht, high priest, vi, 31 | Zhangwi, Turkman noble, 331
Zodiac, 394


END OF VOL. VIII.


T: A ts Weg
P m. = M
tee, a


—


i El
oT ues
J "t Tul


Je
=,


4


r *


i d | T
=


M t * 72 (a
wet ota


be

an —-
P,
f z —-


Ji


D EE
- Fa a
E "n acr
he We s
"LT o” á


+


vy‘


E
Ln 2 M
| e .


L
vie


V Wo Tur Ne
e
a, E PPS
kee ay rene |
4. RI


C "T
edt sath EN
EM nF T b AS
het eee, oe
n Se) a
ee” Ore lark Me
74^ at iy 4 P s
ET ur a 1


“A book that ts shut ts but a block"


j(AEOLOG,

«CP C4
v" GOVT. OF INDIA a
Department of Archaeology A

Y

T.


E
E NEW DELHI.
O


Please help us to keep the book
clean and moving.


B. E- 14H. Ha DELHI
