Testimony of Christ's Second Appearing
United Society of Believers (Shakers) (1810)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Second edition (Albany, 1810) of the Shakers' 1808 Testimony of Christ's Second Appearing; the 1808 first edition is not digitized. Public domain.

========================================================================

TESTIMONY


OF


CHRIST'S
SECOND APPEARING.


And  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  the  tower,
which  the  children  of  men  builded.  Moses.


Mft


ILIM


THE

TESTIMONY


OF


CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING

CONTAINING

A  GENERAL  STATEMENT

OF

ALL  THINGS  PERTAINING TOtH* FAITH  AND
PRACTICE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF GOD
:  IN  THIS  LATTER-DAY.


PUBLISHED  BY  ORDER  OF  THE  MINISTRY,

IN  UNION  WITH  THE  CHURCH.


Now  ie  come  salvation,  and  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our
God,  and  the  power  of  his  Christ.  revelation.


SECOND  EDITION,  CORRECTED  AND  IMPROVED


ALBANY:
Printed  by  e.  and  e.  hosford state-street.

iaio.

J


m

ADVERTISEMENT.

I»  the  First  Edition  of  this  work,  printed  last  year,  (at  Lebanon,
in  the  State  of  Ohio,)  the  reader  was  notified  that,  from  a  variety
of  causes,  several  important  errors  had  passed  through  the  press
uncorrected  ;  some  of  which  were  afterwards  corrected  in  the  sheet,
and  others  of  less  importance  still  remained.  Since  that  time  the
work  has  been  carefully  reviewed,  and  where  any  words  or  senten-
ces were  discovered  that  appeared  not  to  convey  a  clear  under-
standing of  the  sense,  or  likely  to  mislead  the  reader's  mind  from
the  true  meaning  of  the  subject,  they  have  either  been  struck  out,
or  others  added,  in  order  to  render  the  sense  more  clear,  plain  and
familiar  to  the  understanding  of  common  capacities.  Some  verses,
not  essentially  connected  with  the  main  subject,  have  been  placed
in  the  form  of  Notes  at  the  bottom  of  the  pages  ;  a  few  of  less  im-
portance have  been  excluded,  and  a  number  of  new  Notes  added.
Some  of  the  long  chapters,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  have  been
divided  :  this  improvement,  together  with  some  amendment  in  the
division  of  the  verses,  has  occasioned  a  variation  from  the  first
copy  in  the  numbers  of  many  of  the  chapters  and  of  the  verses  in
general ;  but  the  true  sense  and  order  of  the  original  is,  through-
out, preserved  entire.  This  is  to  notify  the  reader  that  this  Second
Edition  is  corrected  and  improve dby  the  authors.


Done  near  Lebanon,  in  the  Miami  Country,
and  State  ofOhio,29thof  Nov.  1809,


i


PREFACE.


MANY  have  undertaken  to  write  and  publish  concerning
the  fi?*inci/2le s^and  practice  of  a  people,  who,  in  derision,  are
called  SHAKERS,  and  either  through  ignorance  or  preju-
dice have  misrepresented  both  :  so  that  no  true  information,
from  this  quarter,  could  be  obtained  by  those  who  desired  it  :
hence  many  have  become  solicitous  of  having,  from  the  peo-
ple themselves,  a  correct  statement  of  their  faith.  It  is,
therefore,  in  answer  to  the  long-repeated  requests  of  the  un-
prejudiced and  candid  part  of  mankind,  that  the  folio  wing;
sheets  have  been  prepared  for  the  press.

The  greatest  part  that  hath  been  published  abroad  in
the  world,  by  common  fame,  or  through  such  preachers  or
writers  as  were  either  unacquainted  with  the  people,  or  ac-
tuated by  a  spirit  of  prejudice,  is  too  ridiculous,  absurd,  and
contradictory,  to  merit  the  least  attention  ;  nor  has  any  thing,
hitherto,  been  published  that  meets  our  approbation,  except
a  small  pamphlet,  entitled,  A  concise  statement  of  the  firinci-
files  of  the  only  true  Churchy  written  to  a  deaf  man,  by  par-
ticular request,  and  printed  at  Bennington,  Vermont,  in  the
year  1790  ;  and  a  pamphlet  published  last  year,  under  the  ti-
tie  of  The  Kentucky  Revival.

Some  things,  however,  have  been  published  from  a  spirit
of  detraction  and  slander,  which  are  not  altogether  unworthy
of  notice,  inasmuch  as  they  have  some  appearance  of  author-
ity, and  claim  for  their  foundation,  certain  well  known  facts,
from  which  undue  advantage  has  been  taken,  not  only  of  sta-
ting facts  in  an  imperfect  light,  but  also  of  adding  the  most
groundless  falsities.

This  remark  will  justly  apply  to  an  anonymous  publica*

A3


*i  PREFACE.

tion,  printed  in  Danville,  (Kentucky,)  1805,  said  to  be  taken
from  the  Theological  Magazine.  A  specimen  of  this  garb-
ling writer  is,  that,  "  The  first  founder  of  this  wild  sect  was
•u  one  Jane  Lees  :  she  lived  in  the  town  of  Manchester,  in
"  England  ;  was  of  low  parentage,  and  procured  her  living  at
"  the  expence  of  her  chastity.  She  sustained  the  character
"  of  a  woman  of  ill  fame  in  England,  which  character  she
"  supported  in  America  until  her  death."

That  God  did  make  use  of  a  woman  to  open  the  present
Testimony  of  Christ,  is  a  fact ;  and  also  that  she  lived  in
the  town  of  Manchester,  in  England,  and  was  of  low  parent-
age :  But  the  writer  unhappily  mistook  both  her  name  and
character,  which  may  have  given  occasion  to  a  thousand  other
mistakes,  or  palpable  falsehoods,  concerning  the  people.

The  woman  whose  character  he  attempts  to  slander,  we
can  confidently  say,  upon  good  evidence,  was  a  chosen  vessel,
ordained  of  God,  to  convey  the  knowledge  of  his  will  to  a  lost
world  ;  and  for  no  other  cause  than  the  purity  of  her  life,
and  the  piercing  truth  of  the  testimony  which  she  bore
against  the  hidden  abominations  of  the  wicked,  was  her  chas-
tity called  in  question,  and  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  against
her  falsely.

And  her  sustaining  the  character  of  "  a  woman  of  ill  fame,"
in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  was  one  very  stri-
king evidence  that  she  was  not  of  the  world,  for  the  world
loveth  its  own  :  and  in  this  it  is  very  evident  that  she  bore  the
more  striking  relation  to  the  Son  of  God,  who,  as  to  out-
ward appearance,  was  so  particularly  noticed  for  the  mean-
ness of  his  parentage  and  character  ;  and  who  was  well
known  to  have  been  a  person  of  ill  fame,  in  Judea,  among
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  until  he  was  publicly  executed  as
a  malefactor,  between  two  thieves.

But  there  is,  still,  a  more  striking  analogy  between  this
anonymous  libel,  and  the  character  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  given


PREFACE.  vii

by  Celsus,  the  epicurean,  namely  :  "  That  the  mother  of
"  Jesus,  being  great  with  child,  was  put  away  by  the  carpcn-
"  ter,  who  had  espoused  her,  he  having  convicted  her  of
"  adultery  with  a  soldier  named  Pant  her  as."  (See  Part  III.
Chap.  IV.  v.  19.)

Long  experience  and  observation,  however,  have  afford-
ed sufficient  evidence,  that  the  most  eminently,  virtuous  and
useful  characters  on  earth,  have  been  the  most  scandalized
and  traduced  by  the  tongue  of  common  fame  ;  insomuch  that
men  of  prudence  and  candour,  in  many  cases,  are  able  to  see
through  the  deception,  and  reasonably  expect  the  best  where
the  worst  is  said.

Probably  no  work  of  God,  in  any  dispensation,  has  been
more  misrepresented  than  the  present,  nor  any  people  more
wrongly  reported ;  yet  it  is  no  unpleasing  reflection  to  us,
that  from  the  beginning  of  the  work  to  the  present  day,  we
have  never  published  any  reply  to  any  of  those  reports,  (how-
ever evil  and  false  we  knew  them  to  be,)  either  in  defence
of  our  character,  or  the  cause  we  have  espoused  ;  but  have
peaceably  passed  on  without  regarding  them  any  more  than
if  they  had  not  been  ;  and  that  for  the  following  reasons.

First :  Because  the  testimony  which  we  gladly  received,
pointed  out  to  us  a  very  strait  and  narrow  way  of  self-denial,
and  mortification  to  all  that  natural  men  call  good  and  great ;
and  opened  to  us  that  hidden  treasure  which  we  esteemed  so
far  beyond  any  thing  we  possessed,  or  wished  to  possess  on
earth,  that  we  were  cheerfully  willing  to  sacrifice  our  char-
acter and  our  all,  to  obtain  it :  so  that  the  world  could  take
nothing  from  us  that  we  were  unwilling  to  part  with  for
Christ's  sake  and  the  gospel's.

Therefore,  whatever  evil  was  reported,  being  conscious
of  our  innocence,  it  only  served  to  increase  our  consolation  in
Christ,  and  afforded  an  increasing  evidence  to  the  candid  and
judicious,  that  we  were  following  the  despised  footsteps  of


viii  PREFACE.

him  who  said,  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  andfier*
secute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  false*
ly  for  my  sake.

Secondly :  With  regard  to  the  defence  of  the  cause  in
which  we  were  engaged  :  We  had  long  been  weary  of  those
human  creeds  and  confessions,  and  subtle  arguments,  written
in  defence  of  divided  and  sub-divided  parties,  ^which,  for  ma-
ny ages,  had  perplexed  the  human  race,  and  in  the  end,  left
their  abettors  (and  us  with  the  rest)  totally  destitute  of  the
real  power  of  salvation  from  all  sin.

When,  therefore,  we  were  called  by  the  gospel,  and  re-
ceived that  anointing  power  which  bringeth  salvation,  we
were  led  and  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  the  work,  (and  found
it  to  be  a  point  of  wisdom,)  first  to  prove  the  faith  we  had
received,  for  ourselves,  and  to  manifest  it  by  our  works,  as
the  greatest  confirmation,  both  to  ourselves  and  others,  that
the  work  was  verily  of  God,  before  we  could  feel  justified
in  giving  that  full  and  perfect  information  which  the  weight
and  importance  of  the  subject  demands.  For,  until  it  was
sufficiently  proved,  that  the  gospel  which  we  received,  was,
in  its  own  nature,  productive  of  the  works  and  fruits  of
righteousness,  justice,  mercy  and  peace,  and  that  it  was
planted  by  the  finger  of  God,  and  nourished  and  supported
by  his  wisdom  and  power,  separate  from,  and  wholly  inde-
pendent of  all  human  laws  and  creeds  of  men,  we  never
could  with  a  just  confidence  and  propriety  say,  Thus  hath
God  wrought.

The  Third,  and  most  weighty  reason  why  we  have  never
made  any  reply  to  those  clamorous  reports,  and  given  a  pub-
lic statement  of  our  faith  and  practice,  was,  that  we  could
not  have  done  it  without  acting  contrary  to  the  order  of  God
in  every  dispensation  of  his  grace.  It  was  the  gift  of  God
to  Moses,  long  after  the  flood,  to  record  the  lives  and  trans-
actions of  the  Patriarchs  5  and  the  character  and  works  of


PREFACE.  ix

the  servants  of  God,  always  remained  to  be  published  by
their  successors,  or  those  who  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  their
labours  :  for  no  testament  is  of  force  while  the  testator  liveth,

Christ  Jesus,  while  engaged  in  the  work  of  his  ministry,
strictly  charged  his  disciples  to  tell  no  man  that  he  was  the
Christ.  And  many  things  were  said  and  done,  which  were
known  only  to  his  disciples,  and  kept  closely  concealed  from
the  vain  speculations  of  the  world.  He  well  knew  the  invet-
erate malice  of  his  enemies,  who  were  continually  watching
for  something  whereby  they  might  condemn  him  ;  and  even
until  the  last,  they  accused  and  condemned  him  as  a  blas-
phemer, and  worthy  of  death,  for  the  least  intimation  that
he  was  sent  of  God,  although  his  works  plainly  declared  it.

It  is  also  evident  that  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  was
verbal  for  many  years,  and  nothing  was  written  for  the  in-
formation of  those  who  were  unacquainted  with  the  work
of  Christ,  or  at  a  distance  from  where  the  first  scene  was
transacted,  until  the  work  of  that  day  was  fully  established  :
and  even  then,  their  writings  and  sayings  were  far  from  be-
ing common,  but  were  kept  close,  and  spread  no  farther
than  the  operation  of  the  spirit  of  God  had  prepared  the  way
for  them  to  be  received  by  faith.  Therefore  it  need  not
seem  strange,  if  the  circumstances  preceding  the  public
opening  of  Christ's  second  appearing,  should  be  similar  to
those  of  his  fr st  appearing.

The  second  appearing  of  Christ,  commonly  called  the
Millennium,  or  Latter  day  of  glory,  has  ever  been  consid-
ered as  a  period  of  the  greatest  importance  to  mankind  uni-
versally, inasmuch  as  all  the  prophecies  of  the  holy  scrip-
tures were  then  to  have  their  certain  accomplishment ;  ev-
ery threatnifrg  of  God  to  be  fully  executed  upon  the  ungodly
and  sinners,  in  the  final  overthrow  of  their  unjust  and  op-
pressive governments,  their  false  and  pernicious  supersti-
tions, and  all  their  unrighteous  works. On  the  other  handj


x  PREFACE.

all  the  promises  of  God  to  his  people,  were  then  to  be  ful-
filled, in  their  final  redemption  from  all  the  sorrowful  ef-
fects of  the  fall ;  in  building  them  up  in  holiness,  righteous-
ness and  everlasting  peace  and  true  felicity  ;  and  enriching
them  with  all  the  fulness  of  temporal  and  eternal  goodness.

But  it  never  was  intended,  nor  could  it  be  expected,  upon
any  principle  of  reason  or  truth,  that  all  those  things  should
be  accomplished  at  once  ;  but  according  to  the  usual  manner
of  God's  working,  they  must  gradually  proceed  from  small  be-
ginnings, and  continue  to  operate,  in  a  progressive  manner,
from  one  degree  to  another,  as  a  small  seed  planted  in  its
proper  season,  springs  up,  and  grows  into  a  tree.  The  be-
ginning of  this  great  event  we  have  stated,  according  to  the
degree  and  measure  of  what  has  already  taken  place .  And
although  it  may  appear  to  some  as  a  day  of  small  things,  we
are,  nevertheless,  persuaded  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the  same
who  hath  begun  the  good  work,  will  carry  it  on  until  the
whole  be  accomplished.

It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  mankind,  so  long  imposed
upon  by  false  systems,  said  to  be  of  divine  authority,  must
be  very  cautious,  at  this  day,  of  receiving  any  thing  that
bears  such  an  appearance.  And  therefore,  through  the  ten-
derness and  mercy  of  God,  the  truth  and  revelation  of
Christ  is  opened  answerable  to  the  weak  and  prejudiced
state  of  the  world,  for  the  edification  of  the  candid,  and  not
for  their  destruction.

And  as  it  is  the  most  special  call  of  God  to  all  who  are  seek-
ing for  eternal  life,  to  free  themselves  of  those  pernicious
superstitions,  and  false  doctrines  oi  Antichrist,  in  order  to
their  receiving  the  everlasting  gospel  of  Christ's  kingdom,
therefore  it  is,  that  so  great  a  part  of  the  following  pages  is
taken  up  in  exposing  the  works  of  Antichrist,  during  his
dark  and  deplorable  reign  of  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years,
in  order  that  souls,  who  are  groaning  under  bondage,  may


PREFACE.  xi

discover  the  cause  and  be  released.  And  truly,  when  the
whole  depth  of  that  antichristian  delusion  is  exposed,  that
saying  will  be  fully  verified  :  And  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth
shall  wonder j  when  they  behold  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  noty
and  yet  is.

This  subject  might  have  been  comprised  in  much  less  room
than  it  now  occupies,  were  it  not  that  mankind  have  been
so  long  deceived  and  led  astray  by  a  false  influence,  instead
of  being  guided  by  the  light  of  truth.  A  particular  account
of  the  transactions  of  Antichrist,  during  his  reign,  must  be
sought  for  in  the  history  of  those,  who,  sometime  after  the
days  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  took  the  dominion  in  the  af-
fairs of  the  Church,  and  established  a  false  religion,  under
the  pretence  of  being  their  successors.  Therefore,  in  or-
der fully  to  expose  the  dark  reign  of  that  power,  which  has
so  long  triumphed  in  disguise  under  the  sacred  name  of  Je-
sus Christ,  it  appeared  necessary  to  make  large  extracts,
from  some  of  the  most  noted  ecclesiastical  writers,  that
when  facts  are  established  by  the  testimony  of  these  writers,
in  their  own  words,  they  need  not  be  disputed.

In  treating  on  this  dark  period,  we  have  extracted  some  of
>  the  most  interesting  facts  from  Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical  His-
tqry,  Robinson's  Ecclesiastical  Researches,  and  from  The
Works  of  Lardner.  And  on  various  occasions,  we  have
used  quotations  from  Newton,  Robertson,  Edwards,  Boston,
Sewell,  Wesley,  and  others.*  Most  of  the  historical  writers
whom  we  have  quoted,  are  well  known,  and  highly  esteem-
ed ;  nor  have  we  any  knowledge  that  their  veracity  was  ever
called  in  question  by  the  learned.

*  The  largest  extracts  are  made  from  the  three  first  mentioned  writers,  whose  works  arc
supported  from  the  best  authorities  of  ancient  and  modem  history.  John  Laxvrcnce  Mo~
slieiin  was  a  Lutheran  priest,  and  Chancellor  of  the.  University  of '  Goiiin.gen,in  Germany,  the
seat  of  the  Reformation.  His  Ecclesiastical  History  was  translated  from  the  original  Lutin
by  Archibald  Maclaine,  D.  D.  The  extracts  are  irom  the  Philadelphia  Edition,  printed  in
1797,  in  six  octavo  volumes.  Those  from  Robinson's  Ecclesiastical  Researches^  are  from  a
Kuropcan  Edition,  printed  at  Cambridge  in  1792,  a  very  valuable  production  of  one  quar-
to volume.  The  writings  ot  Dr.  Lardner  are  held  in  high  estimation  by  modern  histori-
ans in  general ;  the  extracts  ajre  from  tiie  London  ISdition  of  hi*  Works,  primed  in  I768>in
eleven  octavo  volumes


xix  PREFACE.

The  work  which  God  purposed  to  do  in  the  latter  days,
■was  not  to  be  according  to  the  systems  of  human  invention
known  and  understood  among  men  ;  but  was  to  be  a  strange
work  ;  and  the  act  which  he  intended  to  bring  to  pass,  was
to  be  a  strange  act)  even  a  marvellous  ivork  and  a  wonder.
Neither  was  Christ  to  come  in  order  to  establish  any  of  those
systems  of  man's  building  that  should  be  found  on  earth  at
his  appearing  ;  but  in  the  progress  of  his  strange  work,  he
will  most  certainly  consume  them  all.  Therefore  said  the
prophet,  "  Be  ye  not  mockers ,  lest  your  bands  be  made  strong :
for  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  a  consumption^
even  determined ufion  the  whole  earth."  And  hence  the  warn-
ing of  the  apostle  :  "  Behold,  ye  desf risers,  and  wonder,  and
fierish  :  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  a  work  which  yc
shall  in  no  wise  believe,  though  a  man  declare  it  unto  you."

In  the  time  of  Christ's  first  appearing,  the  Jews,  who
called  themselves  God's  chosen  people,  were  looking  for  a
Saviour  to  appear  in  royal  splendor,  surpassing  all  temporal
monarchs  ;  but  behold,  he  appeared  in  a  man,  and  took  on
him  the  form  of  a  servant.  Again,  those  who  called  them-
selves Christians,  expected  him  to  appear  in  the  form  of  a
man,  far  surpassing  all  earthly  beings,  in  pomp  and  grandeur,
and  warlike  power ;  and  behold,  the  humble  Saviour  was
manifested  in  the  form  and  likeness  of  a  woman,  and  assum-
ed the  appearance  of  an  handmaid.

Thus,  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth,  so  are  the
thoughts  and  imaginations  of  mm  above  all  that  is  called  God  ;
and  as  far  as  virtue  is  below  vice  in  the  eyes  of  the  wicked,
so  far  is  the  way  of  God  below  all  the  ways  that  ever  man  con-
trived, by  which  all  the  works  and  inventions  of  man  must
be  supplanted ;  and  therefore,  in  the  eyes  of  man,  the  real
work  of  God  must  appear  strange  and  unaccountable.

Sixty  years  have  now  passed,  since  the  beginning  of  this
work  in  England-**Twenty-eight  years  since  it  began  in


PREFACE.  m

America— Twenty  years  since  the  gathering  of  the  Church—
and  sixteen  years  since  the  Church  was  established  in  her
present  order  and  spirit  of  government.  And  in  all  this  time
of  sixty  years,  the  testimony  has  been  verbal,  and  those  who
were  faithful  in  it,  have  increased  in  further  light  and  un-
derstanding, and  in  power  and  harmony  from  time  to  time,
without  any  written  creed,  or  form  of  government  relating
to  themselves,  or  any  written  testimony  in  defence  of  their
cause,  or  for  the  public  information  of  others.

Nor  is  this  present  publication  to  be  considered  as  any  creed
or form  of  government,  to  influence  the  faith  or  practice  of  the
Church  ;  but  as  the  first  public  testimony  in  writing,  contain-
ing a  true  statement  of  the  fundamental  principles  and  rea-
sons of  our  faith  and  practice,  given  through  the  order  and
appointment  of  God,  by  the  joint  union  of  the  body,  accord-
ing to  the  measure  of  our  present  light  and  understanding.

Whatever  is  written  on  any  subject,  imist  have  respect  to
some  foundation  or  first  principles  ;  and  as  the  living  power
of  God  was  first  ministred,  in  this  latter  day,  for  the  purpose
of  destroying  the  false  foundation  and  pernicious  principles
of  Antichrist ;  so  the  work  itself  appeared  like  madness  and
folly  to  such  as  stood  on  that  foundation.  And  in  no  better
light,  would  any  written  account  of  it  have  appeared,  nor  in
truth,  could  any  thing  satisfactory  be  written,  until  this  ne-
cessary work  of  preparation  was  accomplished,  and  the  sub-
stance of  what  was  to  follow  had  come  to  a  sufficient  degree
of  maturity.

But  since  the  subjects  of  the  work  have  been  broken  off
from  their  false  foundation,  and  built  upon  the  foundation  of
the  present  revelation  of  Christ,  and  are  raised  up  in  the  or-
der of  a  spiritual  house,  to  that  degree  of  righteousness,
peace  and  union,  which  they  visibly  manifest,  every  thing
hath  assumed  a  different  appearance  :  so  that  time  and  cir-

B


xiv  PREFACE.

cumstances  have  rendered  it  proper  to  state  those  different
operations  and  degrees  of  the  work  in  their  true  nature.

And,  as  those  first  operations  of  the  power  of  God,  in  de-
stroying the  foundation  of  error  and  vice,  exhibited  many  out-
ward appearances  which  looked  like  confusion  and  wild  disor-
der, owing  to  the  mixture  of  human  depravity,  both  in  the  sub-
jects of  the  work,  and  in  spectators,  and  gave  occasion  to
innumerable  false  conjectures  and  groundless  reports,  which
*jQiay  have  obtained  some  degree  of  credit  at  a  distance  ;  it
iherefore  seemed  necessary,  at  this  time,  to  give  this  public
testimony  of  facts,  that  the  truth  of  things  may  be  establish-
ed, and  every  necessary  satisfaction  be  afforded  to  mankind,
upon  the  authority  of  those  who  have  had  a  perfect  under-
standing of  the  work,  from  its  earliest  rise,  either  from  their
own  certain  knowledge,  or  from  their  most  intimate  acquain-
tance and  near  relation  with  those  who  were  eye  and  ear
witnesses  of  all  the  most  important  matters  from  the  be-
ginning.

The  present  publication  may  serve  to  convey  a  general  in-
formation to  the  unprejudiced  mind,  yet  certain  it  is,  that
the  true  knowledge  and  internal  power  by  which  we  are  sav-
ed from  the  torrent  of  human  depravity,  cannot  be  conveyed
by  letters,  so  as  to  be  comprehended  by' the  wisdom  of  man  ;
neither  can  any  attain  that  treasure  through  any  other  medi-
um than  that  which  is  given  of  God  in  the  order  of  his  grace.

Although  we  do  not  despise  the  rules  of  rhetoric  estab-
lished among  the  learned,  yet  we  have  taken  no  pains  to
adapt  either  our  manner  or  style  to  the  refined  taste  of  the
present  age.  If  any  chuse  to  criticise  or  find  fault  on  this
account,  they  are  at  liberty,  we  intend  neither  vindication
nor  defence  on  this  ground  :  nor  do  we  suppose  that  any  but
vain  cavillers  will  be  carried  away  with  empty  speculations
of  that  nature,  so  long  as  the  matter  is  clear,  and  the  lan-
guage such  as  sufficiently  conveys  our  ideas. As  the  un-


PREFACE.  xv

learned  cannot  comprehend  the  learning  of  the  learned,  un-
less they  are  taught  by  those  who  are  learned  ;  so  neither
can  the  learned  nor  unlearned  comprehend  the  work  of  God,
unless  they  are  taught  by  those  who  are  in  it.  Our  princi-
pal aim  has  been  to  open  matters  so  as  to  be  understood,  and
we  think  this  sufficient  to  satisfy  every  candid  enquiring  mind.

The  matters  of  fact  which  we  have  stated,  are  confirmed
by  three  kinds  of  evidence  :  First,  the  holy  scriptures  ;  se-
cond,  the  general  consent  of  ecclesiastical  history  ;  and  third,
the  testimony  of  living  witnesses,  in  the  present  day.  And
as  all  that  took  place  from  the  beginning,  had  respect  to  the
latter  day  ;  so  it  is  a  matter  of  the  highest  importance  to
know  what  God  hath  actually  accomplished,  in  the  present
day  ;  and  therefore  the  testimony  of  living  witnesses,  is  con-
sidered of  the  highest  authority,  and  superior  to  any  writtea
record  whatever.

We  are  far  from  expecting,  or  even  wishing  any  of  our
writings  to  supercede  the  necessity  of  a  living  testimony,  or
in  any  wise  to  prevent  a  further  increase  of  light  and  under-
standing in  the  things  of  God.  As  far  as  the  builder  is  su-
perior to  the  thing  which  he  builds,  so  far  the  living  sub-
jects of  the  knowledge  of  God,  stand  forever  superior  to
any  thing  that  they  can  possibly  comprise  in  letters.  The
living  testimony  of  God  is  not  of  the  letter,  but  of  the  spir-
it :  for  the  letter  killeih,  but  the  spirit  givcth  life.

And  as  it  is  certain  that  the  work  of  the  latter  day,  spoken
of  by  all  the  prophets,  hath  verily  commenced  ;  therefore
we  have  not  the  least  doubt  that  the  true  knowledge  of  God
will  mcrease,  from  one  degree  to  another,  until  the  full  man-
ifestation of  his  glory.  And  for  this  purpose  God  will  con-
tinue to  raise  up  chosen  witnesses,  to  give  the  knowledge  of
salvation  to  those  who  sit  in  darkness,  until  the  whole  of  his
work  be  accomplished. Therefore,  for  the  more  clear  and


xvi  PREFACE.

perfect  understanding  of  many  things,  which  are  here  but
briefly  hinted  at,  we  refer  the  candid  reader  to  those  who
kec/i  the  commandments  of  God>  and  have  the  Testimony  of
Jesus  Christ.

DAVID  DARROW,
JOHN  MEACHAM,
BENJAMIN  S.  YOUNGS.

Lebanon,  Miami-Country,  State  >
of  Ohio,  1st  of  Dec.  1808.  5

BTote.  David  Barrow,  now  in  the  59th  year  of  his  age,  was  among
the  first  in  America  who  received  die  testimony  of  the  gospel,  in
the  year  1780.  John  Meac.ham  (being  then  a  youth,  under  the
care  of  his  father  Joseph  Meacham,  in  union  with  the  family)
/  eceived  the  testimony  the  same  year,  1780,  and  is  now  in  the
39th  year  of  his  age.  Benjamin  S.  Youngs  received  the  testi-
mony in  the  year  1794,  and  is  now  in  the  35th  year  of  his  age.


CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

PART  I.

The  State  of  Man  from  his  first  Creation  until  Christ.

Chap.  Page.

I.  The  Order  of  the  visible  Creation. 1

II.  The  State  of  Man  in  his  first  Creation. - - - 5

III.  The Nature and Effects  of  the  Fall  of  Man,

from  his  first  Rectitude. -------11

IV.  The  Mystery  of  Iniquity,  or  the  Man  of  Sin  re-

vealed : His  rise  in  the  Fall  of  Man, by  the
Subversion  of  the  Original  Order  and  Law  of

God. 20

V.  The  Subject  continued. 32

VI.  The  principal  Seat  of  human  Depravity.  - - - 44»
VII.  The  Cause  of  the  Destruction  of  the  Old  World. 5 1
VIII.  The  Call  of  God  to  Abraham  :  what  it  signified. 57
IX.  The  true  End  and  Design  of  the  Law  given  by

Moses. ---  Cf4t

X.  The  State  of  all  Mankind  before  the  appearing  of

Christ. 76

PART  II.

The  first  a/i/i  earing  of  Christ — The beginning'
and  Work  of  a  New  Creation.

I.  Christ  introduced  by  John  the  Baptist. - - -  89

II.  The  Ministry  of  Jesus  the  Christ. - - - -  95

III.  The  Institution  of  the  Primitive  Church. - -  101

IV.  The  Cross  maintained  by  the  Primitive  Church.  109
V.  The  Attainments  of  the  Primitive  Church. -  123

VI.  The  Order  and  Power  of  the  Primitive  Church. 131
VII.  The  Rise  of  Antichrist  predicted. - - - - 140


xviii  CONTENTS.

PART  III.

The  Rue  and  Progress  of  Antichrist's  Kingdom.

Chap.  Page.

I.  The  Work  of  Antichrist  by  false  Teachers. - 143

II.  The  Work  of  Antichrist  by  Egyptian  Philosophers.  152

III.  The  first  Distinction  between  Catholics  and  Her-

etics. 159

IV.  The  Subject  continued. --------165

V.  Antichrist  established  by  Roman  Emperors. - 177

VI.  The  Subject  continued. - 184

VII.  General  Marks  of  the  Catholic  Religion. - - 191

VIII.  The  Subject  continued. 200

IX.  The  established  Order  of  the  Catholic  Church. 206
X.  The  Subject  continued. - .---.-213

PART  IV.

The  Ri-ign  and  Dominion  of  Antichrist.

I.  The  beginning  of  the  Reign  of  Antichrist. - 223
II.  The  Catholic  Gospel  propagated  under  the  Reign

of  Antichrist. 229.

III.  The  Subject  continued. 235

IV.  The  Abominations  of  the  Mother  of  Harlots. - 241

V.  The  Subject  continued. - ------251

PART  V.

The  grand  Division in  the  Kingdom  of  Anti-
christ called  the  Reformation.

I.  The  Cause and  -first Means  of  Reforming the

Catholic  Church. 263

II.  The  Subject  continued. ,272

III.  The  Subject  continued. 280

IV.  Reformed  Churches  established  by  the  Works  of

Antichrist. ---- 287

V.  The  Subject  continued. -295

VI.  Particular  Changes  effected  by  the  Reformation. 303

VII.  The  Subject  continued. - 3Q8

VIII.  The  Subject  continued, -. - 314


CONTENTS.  xix

Chap.  I'age.

IX.  The  Subject  continued. '  - - 324

X.  The  persecuting  Spirit  of  the Protestant  Re-
formers. - - - 332

XI.  The  Subject  continued. 341


352


XII.  The  Subject  continued.

TART  VI.

The  Extent  and  Duration  of  nvhat  is  called  the
Christian World.

I.  Worldly  Christians  contrasted  with  virtuous  Be-
lievers in  Christ. 363

II.  The  Subject  continued. 369

III.  Remarks  or*  the  present  State  of  the Christian

World. - - - - 377

IV.  Remarks  on  the  present  State  of  the  Witnesses  of

Truth. 391

V.  The  Subject  continued. - 402

PART  VII.

The  Second  Jj rifi earing  of  Christ :  The  finishing
• TVork  of  the  New  Creation.

I.  General  Remarks  on  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy. - 411
II.  The  Subject  continued. - ------418

III.  The  Subject  continued. ------- 423

IV.  The  true  Character  of  the  Church  of  Christ. - 429
V.  The  Foundation  Pillars  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 433

VI.  The  Subject  continued. 440

VII.  Types  and  Prophecies  fulfilled  in  the  two  Foun-
dation Pillars. ----- 446

VIII.  The  Subject  continued. - -  456

IX.  The  Subject  continued. -  466

X.  Evidences  accompanying  the  second  Appearing

of  Christ. 473

XI.  Remarks  on  the Evidence  of  Christ's  Second

Appearing. - ---------  489

XII.  The  Church  Established  in  Gospel  Order. -  495

XIIL  The  Subject  continued. 505


xx  CONTENTS.

Chap.  Page.

XIV.  Prophecies  and  Promises  fulfilling  in  the  present

increasing  Work  of  God. - - - - - - 517

XV.  A  Short  calculation  of  the  principal  Prophecies

relating  to  the  latter  Day. ------529

PART  VIII.

Particular  Doctrines  according  to  the  fireaent
Jfifieari?ig  of  Christ.

I.  The  Revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost. - - - 537
II.  The  Subject  continued. -------- 547

III.  The  Nature  and  Manner  of  the  Coming  of  Christ.  554

IV.  The  Order  of  God  in  the  Confession  and  Forgive-

ness  of  Sins. ----------564

V.  The  Sufferings  of  Christ  in  the  Work  of  Regen-
eration. 572

VI.  The  Subject  continued. 580

VII.  The Resurrection. - 589

VIII.  The  Subject  continued. 594

IX.  The  Worship  of  God. 600

X.  The  Holy  Scriptures. -------- 604

XI.  The  Conclusion  :  In  a  few  thoughts  addressed  to

Young  Believers. 613


%CT*  Note.  Page  510,  at  the  end  of  verse  25,  after  es-
tablished, addy  unless  the  inheritance  of  the  children  were
secured  to  them  until  they  became  of  age.


INTRODUCTION.


WHATEVER  decree  of  natural  wisdom  may  be  attained
by  those  who  are .  without  Christ  and  without  God  in  the
world,  certain  it  is,  that  the  only  true  saving  knowledge  of
God  that  ever  was,  or  ever  will  be  communicated  to  man,  is
by  and  through  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ :  and  there-
fore such  as  reject  Christ,  and  take  their  own  wisdom  for
their  guide,  never  were,  nor  ever  can  be  saved.  And  in  no
better  situation  are  they  who  profess  faith  in  an  absent  Sa-
viour,— who  believe  that  Christ  was  once  upon  earth,  but  is
now  departed  to  some  remote  and  unknown  heaven,  where
it  is  impossible  for  the  weak  capacities  of  mortals  to  reach
him  ;  when  in  truth,  nothing  but  the  real  and  abiding  pre-
sence of  Christ,  by  the  indwelling  of  his  spirit,  ever  did,  or
ever  could  save  one  soul.

And  as  Christ  is  the  only  Saviour,  the  only  true  light  of
the  world,  to  lead  souls  into  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment
of  God,  and  as  there  is  no  other  name  or  substance  under
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  any  can  be  saved  ;  it  fol-
lows, beyond  all  contradiction,  that  until  Christ  made  his  ap-
pearance in  the  world,  the  world  was  in  darkness,  without
the  saving  knowledge  of  God,  without  a  Saviour,  and  con-
sequently without  salvation.

II.  Man  was  at  first  created  under  the  law  and  government
of  God  ;  but  having  violated  that  law,  he  never  could  again
be  brought  into  his  true  order  and  line  of  subjection,  until
God  sent  forth  his  own  Son  into  the  world  for  that  purpose.

It  is  true,  a  law  was  given  to  one  particular  nation,  by
which  great  restrictions  were  laid  upon  that  lawless  disposi-
tion, which  governed  man  in  his  fallen  state  ;  but  it  availed
nothing  as  to  the  redemption  of  the  soul  from  the  influence^
of  that  disposition  ;  nor  could  it  bring  any  into  that  perfect
obedience  with  which  God  was  well  pleased  :  hence  it  was
truly  said,  I  gave  them  also  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and
judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live.

^  But  when  Christ  Jesus  made  his  appearance  ;  as  a  wise  le-
gislator, his  first  work was  to  form  a  law,  by  which  man

C


xxii  INTRODUCTION.

should  be  ruled  and  governed  ;  and  this  he  did,  by  his  exam-
plary  life.  And  having  passed  through  the  world,  and  lived
such  a  life  as  was  in  all  points  acceptable  to  God,  he  received
that  power  and  authority,  as  the  head  and  ruler  of  the  hu-
man race,  by  which  he  could  righteously  demand  their  sub-
jection— convince  them  of  the  evil  nature  of  sin,  and  justly
dispense  rewards  and  punishments,  according  to  their  obe-
dience or  disobedience.

III.  The  law  and  government  which  Christ  established  in
his  first  appearing,  did  not  so  immediately  and  extensively  re-
spect this  present  world,  as  it  did  the  world  of  spirits.  Yet,
before  he  could  extend  his  power  and  authority  to  the  spirit-
ual world,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  first  pass  through
the  present,  and  experience  a  feeling  of  all  the  trials  that
ever  had  been  experienced  by  those  over  whom  he  was  ap-
pointed ruler  :  hence  he  said  to  his  disciples,  I  go  to  prepare
«  place  for  you :  which  implied  that  his  law,  and  the  order
of  his  government,  were  not  yet  established  in  the  world  of
spirits.

It  was  also  necessary  that  Christ  should  open,  in  the  pre-
sent world,  such  a  measure  of  the  nature  and  order  of  his
government,  as  should  subserve  his  future  purpose,  when
mankind  in  the  present  state,  should  become  the  more  im-
mediate objects  of  his  labour.  Hence  his  parable  of  a  man
going  into  a  far  country  to  receive  a  kingdom,  and  to  return,
— and  giving  to  each  of  his  servents  a  certain  sum,  accord-
ing to  their  several  abilities,  saying,  Occupy  till  I  come.

IV.  During  the  time  of  this  preparatory  work  of  Christ,  in
establishing  his  law  and  order  in  the  spiritual  world,  this
earth  was  a  seat  of  the  most  perfect  confusion,  injustice,  de-
ception and  cruelty ;  which  was  properly  the  period  of  An-
tichrist's reign  and  dominion.  Hence  that  corrupt  hierarchy,
called  the  Church,  which  pretended  to  have  the  power  of
salvation,  and  assumed  all  the  authority  of  Christ  on  earth,
was,  in  reality,  the  habitation  of  devils,  and  the  /wld  of  every

foul  spirit,  and  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird.

And  such  extravagant  superstitions  prevailed,  during  this
period,  as  through  the  invisible  operations  of  God's  provi-
dence, have  become  objects  of  just  contempt  to  the  enlight-
ened part  of  mankind.

And  as  Christ  did  actually  go  to  prepare  a  place,  and  to
receive  a  kingdom,  and  promised  to  return,  and  establish  his


INTRODUCTION.  xxfii

law  of  righteousness  and  order  on  this  earth  ;  so  his  promise
is  actually  fulfilled  ;  and  the  most  striking  evidence  in  this
latter  day,  that  he  has  gained  the  kingdom,  and  begun  to  set
it  up  on  earth,  is  the  manifest  change  in  civil  government,
and  that  spirit  of  toleration  and  liberty  in  matters  of  religion,
which  began  to  take  place,  about  the  close  of  the  seven-
teenth century.

V.  Faithful  witnesses,  chosen  and  appointed  of  God,  had*
from  age  to  age,  borne  testimony  against  the  beastly  and  bloody-
power  of  Antichrist,  millions  of  whom  had  fallen  victims
to  his  cruelty  ;  but  under  the  invisible  and  restraining  power
of  Christ,  his  influence  began  to  be  cut  off,  at  the  time  ap-
pointed.

The  people  called  Quakers  were  the  last,  who  were  per-
secuted unto  death,  for  the  testimony  which  they  held  ;  but

n  process  of  time^  distrusting  the  providence  of  God,  and
petitioning  the  same  antichristian  power  for  toleration  and
protection,  they  gained  an  honourable  standing  in  the  world,
but  lost  that  degree  of  the  light  and  power  of  God,  in  which
they  had  at  first  set  out.  Soon  after  this,  the  spirit  of  proph-
ecy appeared  in  those  called  French  Profihets,  attended  with
the  most  convincing  evidences  of  divine  power  ;  but  these
extraordinary  appearances  were  not  of  long  continuance.

However,  a  few  of  those  French  prophets  came  over  to
England  about  the  year  1706,  and  opened  their  testimony  ia
and  about  London,  which  was  a  means  of  great  awakening,
and  numbers  received  their  spirit,  which  continued  to  ope-
rate, in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  until  its  principal  effect
was  produced  in  a  small  body  of  people,  who  were  gathered
into  a  society,  under  the  special  ministry  of  James  and  Jane

War  diet/ j  among  whom  was  a  particular  work  of  preparation
for  the  true  and  real  manifestation  of  Christ.  This  work
began  in  Bolton  and  Manchester,  in  the  county  of  Lancashire,
ill  England,  about  the  year  1747.

VI.  James  Wardley,  a  taylor  by  trade,  and  Jane  his  wife,
who  wrought  at  the  same  occupation,  had  belonged  to  the  so-
ciety of  people  called  Quakers  ;  but  receiving  the  spirit  of  the
French  prophets,  and  a  further  degree  of  light  and  power,
by  which  they  were  separated  from  that  community,  they
continued  for  several  years,  disconnected  from  every  denom-
ination. During  this  time,  their  testimony,  according  to  what
they  saw  by  vision,  and  revelation  from  God,  was,  That  the


xxiv  INTRODUCTION.

second  afipearing  of  Christ  was  at  hand,  and  that  the  Church
was  rising  in  her  full  and  transcendant  glory,  which  would
effect  the  final  downfall  of  Antichrist.

From  Bolton  they  removed  to  Manchester,  and  lived,  for
a  number  of  years,  in  Canon-street,  with  John  Townley,  who
was  by  trade  a  brick-layer,  and  possessed  considerable  prop-
erty. Here  the  number  of  persons  which  were  formed  into
a  society,  were  about  thirty.

James  and  Jane  Wardley,  as  well  as  most  of  the  society,
were  in  low  temporal  circumstances ;  but  as  John  Townley
Was  wealthy,  he  contributed  liberally  to  the  support  of  such
of  the  society  as  were  needy  ;  on  which  account  he  sustained
much  injury  in  his  property,  by  persecutors. The  meet-
ings of  the  society  were  held  both  at  Manchester  and  Bolton,
(which  were  twelve  miles  apart,)  but  more  generally  at  Man-
chester.

VII.  John  Townley  had  a  measure  of  faith  in  the  testimony
of  James  Wardley  ;  his  wife  was  a  member  of  the  society,  and
had  great  power  of  God,  and  the  gift  of  prophecy. — John
Hocknell  was  her  natural  brother ; — he  lived  in  Cheshire,
twenty-four  miles  from  Manchester. — According  to  the  ac-
count of  his  daughter,  Mary  Hocknell,  now  living  at  Water-
Vliet,  he,  having  separated  from  the  Church  of  England,
had  joined  the  Methodist  society,  and  had  stated  meetings  al-
ius house  ;  till  visiting  the  society  at  Manchester  several
times,  and  afterwards  being  visited  by  James  Wardley,  about
the  year  1766,  he  received  faith  in  his  testimony.  And  be-
ing very  zealous  for  the  cause,  and  a  wealthy  man,  a  number
of  poor  members  of  the  society,  were  gathered  and  support-
ed at  his  house,  which,  at  first,  displeased  Hannah  his  wife,
and  her  natural  relations,  (the  Dickins  family,)  who  were
wealthy  and  high  spirited  people  ;  whereupon  three  of  her
brothers,  with  the  assistance  of  a  magistrate,  had  John  put
into  prison  at  Middlewich,  four  miles  from  his  own  house.
He  was  tried  and  released,  and  soon  after,  Hannah  became
a  member  of  the  society,  and  continued  through  all  the  in-
crease of  the  work,  till  she  departed  this  life  (in  America)
sound  in  the  faith.

VIII.  About  this  time,  [1766,]  and  onward,  the  Believers
frequently  held  meetings  at  John  Partington's,  in  Mayor-town,
as  they  passed  and  re-passed  from  Manchester  to  John  Hock-
neWf. The  manner  of  public  devotion  practised  by  the  so-


INTRODUCTION.  xxr

cietyr  while  under  the  ministry  of  James  Wardley,  was,  in
divers  operations  of  the  spirit  and  power  of  God,  according
as  they  were  moved  from  time  to  time.

Sometimes,  after  assembling  together,  and  sitting  a  while
in  silent  meditation,  they  were  taken  with  a  mighty  trem-
bling, under  which  they  would  express  the  indignation  of
God  against  all  sin.  At  other  times  they  were  affected,  un-
der the  power  of  God,  with  a  mighty  shaking  ;  and  were
occasionally  exercised  in  singing,  shouting,  or  walking  the
floor,  under  the  influence  of  spiritual  signs,  shoving  each
other  about, — or  swiftly  passing  and  repassing  each  other,
like"  clouds  agitated  by  a  mighty  wind.  From  these  strange
exercises,  the  people  received  the  name  of  Shakers,  and  by
some,  were  called  Shaking  Quakers  :  but  from  the  time  of
James  Wardley's  ministration  to  the  present  day,  they  have
been,  most  generally,  known  and  distinguished  by  the  ..name
of  Shakers.  r

XI.  The  work  which  God  promised  to  accomplish  in  the  lat-
ter day,  was  eminently  marked  out  by  the  Prophets,  to  be  a
work  of  Shaking  ;  and  hence,  the  name  (though  by  the  world
intended  for  derision)  was  very  properly  applied  to  the  peo-
ple, who  were  both  the  subjects  and  instruments  of  the  work
of  God  in  the  latter  day.

Thus  the  Lord  promised,  that  he  would  shake  the  earth
with  terror.  (Lowth's  translation  o/'Isai.  ii.  19,21.) — That,
in  that  day,  there  should  be  a  great  'shaking  in  the  land  of  Is*
rael.  (Ezek.  xxxviii.  19,20.)— That  he  would  shake  the  hea-
vens and  the  earth.  (Isai.  xiii.  1 3.  Joel,  iii.  16.  Hag.  ii.  6,  7,  21.)
That  he  would  shake  all  nations,  and  that  the  Desire  of  all
nations  should  come. — And  according  to  the  apostle,  (Heb.
xii.  26.)  That  yet  once  more,  he  would  shake  not  the  earth
only,  but  also  heaven  ; — signifying  the  removing  of  things
that  are  shaken,  as  of  things  that  are  made,  that  those  things
which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain.  All  which,  particular-
ly, alluded  to  the  latter  clay,  and  now,  in  reality,  began  to  be
fulfilled  ;  of  which,  the  name  itself  was  a  striking  evidence,
and  much  more  the  nature  and  operations  of  the  work.

The  effects  of  Christ's  first  appearing,  were  far  from  ful-
filling those  promises  in  their  full  extent :  for  in  reality,
that  heaven  which  was  to  be  shaken,  had  not  yet  been  built ;
neither  was  the  appearing  of  Christ,  in  the  form  of  a  man,  so
properly  the  Desire  of  all  nations.  But  as  his  second  ap-
pearing  was to  be manifested in  that  particular  object,

C  2


xxvi  INTRODUCTION.

(namely  wo?nan,)  which  is  eminently  the  Desire  of  all  nation*  ;
therefore  it  was,  that  the  present  wTork  of  God  began  in  shak-
ing, both  as  a  preparatory,  and  an  increasing  work,  for  the
full  and  final  manifestation  of  Christ.  And  this  particular
operation  was  a  significant  token,  that  God  was  about  to  shake ,
to  the  foundation,  and  utterly  ruin  all  their  corrupt  systems,
and  their  false  notions  of  the  work  of  God,  and  of  the  use  and
end  of  his  creatures.

X.  These  various  operations  continued,  with  a  gradual  in-
crease of  light  and  power,  until  about  the  year  1770,  when
the  present  testimony  of  salvation  and  eternal  life  was  fully
opened,  according  to  the  special  gift  and  revelation  of  God,
through  Anne  Lee,  that  extraordinary  woman,  concerning
whom,  so  many  strange  things  have  been  conjectured  ;  and
who,  at  that  time,  was  received  by  the  society  as  their  spirit-
ual Mother  : — of  whom  it  may  be  sufficient,  here,  to  state  the
following  particulars.

According  to  her  natural  genealogy,  she  was  of  the  -Eng-
lish nation  ;  born  about  the  year  1736,  in  the  town  of  Man-*
Chester,  where  she  was  also  brought  up.  Her  natural  father,
John  Lee,  lived  in  Toad-lane,  in  Manchester,  and  was  a  black-
smith by  trade,  with  whom  she  lived,  until  she  embarked  for
America.  By  occupation,  she  was  a  cutter  of  hatter's  fur.
She  had  five  natural  brothers,  viz.  Joseph,  James,  Daniel,
William  and  George,  and  two  sisters,  Mary  and  JVancy.

From  her  childhood,  she  had  great  light  and  conviction  of
the  sinfulness  and  depravity  of  human  nature,  which  she
often  made  known  to  her  parents,  entreating  that  counsel  and
protection,  by  which  she  might  be  preserved  from  sin,  But
not  having  attained  that  knowledge  of  God  which  she  early
desired,  nor  having  any  to  strengthen  and  protect  her  in  the
pursuit  of  that  true  holiness  which  she  sought  after,  she  grew
up  in  the  same  fallen  nature  with  the  rest  of  mankind,  and
was  married  and  had  four  children,  who  all  died  in  infancy.
Her  husband,  Abraham  Standley,  was  also  a  black-smith  by
trade,  and  lived  with  her  at  her  father's  house,  while  she  re-
mained in  England.

XT .  About  the  year  1 758,  she  became  a  subject  of  the  work

that  was  under  the  ministration  of  ./awes  and  Jane  Wardley,

and  joined  herself  to  that  society  of  people,  who  then  were

called  Shakers,

-The  people  of  the  society  were  known  to  be  a  people  of


INTRODUCTION.  xxvii

the  most  blameless  deportment,  remarkable  for  the  clearness
of  their  testimony  against  sin,  the  strictness  of  their  moral
discipline,  and  the  innocence  and  purity  of  their  lives  and
manners.  As  their  light  extended  to  the  confession  of  every
known  sin,  and  to  the  taking  up  of  a  cross  against  every  thing
which  they  knew  to  be  evil,  hence  they  were  endowed  with
great  power,  by  which  Anne  found  that  protection,  which,
for  the  time  then  present,  was  answerable  to  her  faith  ;  and
in  all  things  she  conformed  to  the  rules  of  discipline  in  the  so-
ciety, and  was  baptized  into  the  same  spirit ;  and  by  her  per-
fect obedience  to  all  that  she  was  taught,  she  attained  to  the
full  knowledge  and  experience  of  those  who  stood  in  the  fore-
most light.

As  the  only  distinction  among  the  members  of  the  society,
was  formed  according  to  the  different  degrees  of  spiritual
light  and  power  known  and  felt  in  each,  respectively,  and  as
it  was  the  faith  of  the  society  not  to  rest  short  of  complete  sal-
vation from  all  sin  ;  therefore,  those  who  received  the  great-
est light  and  power  of  God,  were  acknowledged  as  the  lead  ;
that  is,  the  greatest  light  of  God,  in  whomsoever  it  was  made
manifest,  was  acknowledged  and  followed,  as  the  lead,  with-
out respect  to  persons.

XII.  When,  therefore,  Anne,  by  her  perfect  obedience,  had
attained  to  all  that  was  made  manifest  in  the  leading  characters
of  the  society,  and  still  finding  in  herself  the  seed  or  remains
of  human  depravity,  and  a  lack  of  the  divine  nature,  which
is  eternal  life  abiding  in  the  soul,  she  did  not  rest  satisfied  in
that  state,  but  laboured  in  continual  watchings  and  fastings,
and  in  tears  and  incessant  cries  to  God,  day  and  night,  for  de-<
live  ranee.  And  under  the  most  severe  tribulation,  and  vio-
lent temptations,  as  great  as  she  was  able  to  resist  and  endure,
such  was,  frequently,  her  extreme  agony  of  soul,  that,  clinch-
ing her  hands  together,  the  blood  would  flow  through  thq
pores  of  her  skin.

By  such  deep  mortification  and  suffering,  her  flesh  wasted
away,  and  she  became  like  a  skeleton,  wholly  incapable  of
helping  herself,  and  was  fed  and  nourished  like  an  infant,
although,  naturally,  free  from  bodily  infirmities,  and  a  per-
son of  a  strong  and  sound  constitution,  and  invincible  fortitude
of  mind.

XIII.  In  this  manner  she  was  more  or  less  exercised  in  soul
%nd  body  for  about  the  term  of  nine  years5  during  which  period;


xxyiii  INTRODUCTION.

the  way  of  God,  and  the  nature  of  his  work,  were  gradually
opened  from  one  thing  to  another,  and  the  light  and  under-
standing which  she  received,  was  gradually  communicated
to  the  society,  until  she  received  that  manifestation  of  God  by
which  the  man  of  sin  was  revealed,  and  through  which  she
discovered  the  transgression  of  the  first  woman — the  root  and
foundation  cause  of  human  depravity,  whence  all  mankind
were  lost  and  separated  from  God  ;  and  by  special  and  imme-
diate revelation,  she  received  the  Testimony  of  God  against
the  whole  corruption  of  man,  in  its  root  and  every  branch  ;
which  is,  properly,  The  Testimony  against  the  flesh  ;  or  The
Testimony  against  all  sin.

Her  testimony  was  in  the  power  of  God,  attended  with  the
word  of  prophecy,  and  such  energy  of  the  Spirit,  as  penetra-
ted into  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  and  was  irresistable,  espe-
cially in  those  with  whom  she  was  united.

And  from  the  light  and  power  of  God  which  attended  her
ministry,  and  the  certain  power  of  salvation  transmitted  to
those  who  received  her  testimony,  she  was  received  and  ac-
knowledged as  the  first  Mother,  or  spiritual  parent  in  the
line  of  the  female,  and  the  second  heir  in  the  covenant  of  life,
according  to  the  present  display  of  the  gospel.  Hence  among
Believers,  she  hath  been  distinguished  by  no  other  name
or  title  than  that  of  Mother,  from  that  period  to  the  present
day.  To  such  as  addressed  her  with  the  customary  titles
used  by  the  world,  she  would  reply, — '  I  aminn  the  Word  ;?
signifying  that  in  her  dwelt  the  Word,

XIV.  After  Anne  was  received  and  acknowledged  as  the
spiritual  Mother  and  leader  of  the  society,  the  manner  of  wor-
ship and  the  exercises  in  their  public  assemblies  were,  singing
and  dancing,  shaking  and  shouting,  speaking  with  new  tongues
and  prophesying,  with  all  those  various  gifts  of  the  Holy
Ghost  known  in  the  primitive  Church.  These  gifts  pro-
gressively increased  until  the  establishment  of  the  Church  in
America  ;  by  which,  those  who  were  in  the  spirit  of  the
work,  were  convinced,  beyond  all  doubt  or  controversy,  that
it  was  the  beginning  of  Christ's  reign  upon  earth.

The  first  full  and  public  testimony  which  was  borne  by
Mother,  against  the  root  of  human  depravity,  was  about  the
year  1770.  And  the  convincing  power  of  God  which  attend-
ed it,  caused  the  formal  denominations  to  raise  and  stir  up
tumultuous  mobs,  by  whom  she  was  often  shamefully,  and
yery  cruelly  treated  ;  and  was  a  number  of  times  imprisoned.


INTRODUCTION.  xxix

XV.  About  this  time,  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  at  her
father's  house,  where  the  society  were  assembled,  and  while
in  the  worship  of  God,  under  great  power,  the  house  was  be-
set by  a  tumultuous  mob,  at  the  head  of  which  was  the  War-
den. They  broke  open  the  door,  and  dragged  out  Mother,
and  cast  her  into  the  dungeon  of  the  stone  prison.

The  next  morning  she  was  taken  out  of  the  dungeon,  and
put  into  another  prison,  called  Bedlam,  or  the  Mad-house,
where  she  was  confined  several  weeks,  without  any  suste-
nance except  what  was  conveyed  to  her  by  putting  the  stem
of  a  pipe  through  the  key-hole  of  the  prison  door,  and  pour-
ing milk  and  other  liquid  substances  into  the  bowl  of  it :  This
was  done  by  one  of  the  Believers.

But  knowing  that  she  was  not  mad,  and  finding  in  her  no
cause  of  accusation,  she  was  set  at  liberty,  and  continued  to
bear  the  testimony  as  she  was  moved  and  directed  by  the  gift
of  God,  and  the  generality  continued  to  reject  it,  until  the
testimony  ceased  in  England,  about  a  year  before  she  receiv-
ed her  mission  and  revelation  of  God  in  relation  to  America^
by  which  she  saw  the  future  increase  of  the  work  of  God,
and  the  establishment  and  glory  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  this
land  of  freedom."

XVI.  Accordingly,  as  many  as  were  able  to  follow  her  in
the  designed  purpose  of  God,  settled  their  temporal  affairs  in
England,  paid  their  passage  at  Liverpool  in  the  month  of  May,
1774,  and  embarked  for  America,  in  the  ship  Marian,  Cap-
tain Smith  of  New- York.

Those  who  embarked  with  Mother,  were  Elder  Williain
Lee,  her  natural  brother,  Elders  James  Whittaker  and  John
Hocknell,  and  Mary  Partington,  and  others.

James  and  Jane  Wardley  removed  from  John  Townley's  the
same  summer,  into  a  hired  house,  from  whence  they  were
afterwards  taken  to  the  Alms-house  and  there  died.  John
Hocknell  returned  to  England  the  next  year,  and  came  again
to  America,  with  his  family  and  others;  and  those  of  the
society  who  remained  in  England,  being  without  lead  or  pro-
tection, lost  their  power,  and  fell  into  the  common  course  and
practice  of  the  world.

The  ship  in  which  Mother  came  over,  while  on  her  pas-
sage, sprang  a  leak,  in  an  uncommon  manner,  so  that  the
pumps  were  only  sufficient  to  keep  her  above  water.  The
seamen  being  greatly  discouraged,  and  the  vessel  near  sink-
ing', Mother  and  the  Elders  with  her,  believing  in  him  that


sxx  INTRODUCTION.

sent  them,  and  confiding  in  his  protection,  put  their  hands  to
the  pumps  and  encouraged  the  seamen  :  so  that  they  arrived
safe  at  New-York  on  the  6th  of  August,  1774.  The  follow-
ing extract  of  a  letter,  written  by  Morrell  Baker,  now  living
at  New-Lebanon,  in  the  state  of  New-York,  may  further  serve
to  illustrate  this  particular.

"  I  had  a  natural  brother  at  that  time  who  followed  the
sea  ;  his  name  was  Jedediah  Baker,  He  and  I  were,  one  day,
in  conversation  together  about  religion,  I  think  about  three
years  after  Mother  landed  at  New-York.  He  told  me  that
he  sailed  from  Liverpool,  in  England,  to  New-York,  in  a  ship
rigged  in  the  manner  of  a  Snow  ;  and  there  came  passen-
gers, a  people  who  had  a  strange  religion — were  very  reserved
in  their  ways  and  manners  ;  but  honest,  kind  and  zealous —
that  they  shook,  and  had  operations  on  their  bodies.  He  told
me  the  danger  they  were  in  on  their  passage,  by  reason  of
the  vessel's  springing  a  leak.  He  said  he  believed  the  wo-
man, and  those  who  came  with  her,  had  a  power  above  the
natural  power  of  man — and  were  the  means  of  their  ever  ar-
riving at  America.  This  was  the  first  time  I  ever  heard
that  there  was  such  a  people  on  the  earth,  and  heard  no-
jnore  of  them  for  three  or  four  years  after  this  conversation.
But  since  that  time,  I  have  seen  Mother,  and  the  Elders  who
came  with  her  ;  and  have  also  seen  one  of  the  Elders  [James
Whittaker]  and  the  said  Jedediah  Baker,  face  to  face,  and
they  confirmed  those  things  expressly,  relating  to  their  voy-
age from  England  to  America"

XVII.  When  Mother  landed  at  New-York,  she  counselled
those  who  came  with  her,  for  a  season,  to  seek  their  livelihood
where  they  could  find  employ,  as  they  were  mostly  poor,
and  had  nothing  to  subsist  upon  but  what  they  obtained  by
honest  industry.  Accordingly,  they  were  all  scattered  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  country.  Mother  herself  remained  at
New-York,  in  a  family  by  the  name  of  Smith,  in  Queen-street,
(now  Pearl-Street,)  where  she  was  treated  with  great  kind-
ness, and  continued  there  until  the  spring  of  the  year  1776.
She  then  went  by  water  up  to  Albany,  and  from  thence  to
Niskcuna,  (now  Water-Vliet,)  and  about  the  month  of  Sep-
tember, fixed  her  residence  where  the  Church  is  now  estab-
lished, eight  measured  miles  North-west  from  the  centre  of
the  city  of  Albany.

This  was  an  obscure  place  in  the  wilderness,  remote  from
the  public  eye. Here  the  Believers  gathered  as  their  place


INTRODUCTION.  xxxi

c*f  residence,  and  here  they  held  their  solemn  meetings,  par-
ticularly on  the  first  days  of  the  week,  full  three  years  and  a
half,  until  the  opening  qf  the  testimony  in  the  spring  of  the
year  1780.  At  this  time  various  reports  began  to  be  spread
abroad  concerning  these  people.

XVIII.  To  such  as  loved  the  things  of  this  present  world*
the  testimony,  and  the  work  accompanying  it,  appeared  like
the  greatest  possible  inconsistency  and  delusion.  It  being  in
the  time  of  the  American  war,  numerous  conjectures  were
agitated  concerning  the  people,  and  especially  concerning  Mo-
ther. By  some  she  was  suspected  of  witch-craft,  and  the  old
blasphemy  was  in  substance  revived  :  She  casteth  out  Devils
by  Belzebub.  Others  assumed  the  charge  of  treason,  because
those  who  received  the  testimony  were  averse  to  war,  and
chose  rather  to  suffer  than  to  resist  wrong.

But  such  as  had  ^ny  light  of  God,  considered  things  in  a
very  different  light ;  knowing  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ
was  not  of  this  world,  and  therefore  his  servants  would  not
fight ;  and  remembering  that  it  was  written,  From  whence
come  wars  and  fig h  tings  ?  come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your
lusts  that  war  in  your  members  ?

As  the  testimony  was  expressly  against  every  lust,  and  all
known  sin,  therefore,  such  as  feared  God,  and  whose  only
aim  was  peace  and  righteousness,  had  sufficient  to  engage
their  attention,  without  any  concern  in  the  clamorous  af-
fairs of  the  world.  They  esteemed  it  as  matter  of  the  high-
est gratitude  to  God,  that  they  were  counted  worthy  of  the
privilege  of  confessing  their  sins,  and  of  receiving  power  to
become  separate  from  the  spirit  and  practice  of  the  world,
and  every  kind  of  vice,  whatever  degree  of  outward  afflic-
tion might  follow,  on  that  account,  through  evil  report  or
persecution.

XIX.  The  first  general  opening  of  the  testimony  in  Ameri-
ca, was  at  New-Lebanon,  in  the  township  of  Canaan,  county  of
Columbia,  and  state  of  New-York ;  in  consequence  of  a  re-
markable religious  awakening  which  had  taken  place  in  those
parts,  in  the  year  1779,  and  was  intended  as  a  work  of  pre-
paration for  the  reception  of  the  gospel,  which  was  opened
the  following  year,  (1780,)  and  received  by  many.

As  Mother  and  the  Elders  who  came  from  England,  re-
sided at  Water-Vliet,  about  forty  miles  distant  from  the  main
body  of  those  who  had  lately  believed  ;  and  as  great  numbers


xxxii  INTRODUCTION.

from  Lebanon ,  and  other  eastern  parts,  resorted  there  for
instruction  and  counsel  ;  hence,  the  Believers  at  Lebanon,
Hancock*,  and  other  places,  who  were  able,  found  it  necessary
to  take  provisions  there  for  their  support,  which  served  as  an
occasion,  to  some  prejudiced  persons,  to  misrepresent  and
accuse  the  people  of  being  enemies  to  the  country,  and  to
stir  up  those  in  power  to  persecute  and  distress  them.

XX.  One  particular  circumstance  of  this  kind  took  place  in
the  month  of  July,  1780.  As  David  Darroiv  was  on  the  way
between  Lebanon  and  Albany,  with  a  flock  of  sheep,  which
he  was  driving  to  Water -Vliet,  he  was  followed  by  a  compa-
ny of  evil-minded  men,  who  pretended  to  have  authority  to
arrest  him.  Accordingly,  they  brought  him  back,  with  his
sheep,  to  Lebanon,  and  had  him  before  the  court,  under  pre-
tence of  treason.  But  finding  no  just  ground  of  accusation
against  him,  to  answer  their  purpose,  these  hungry  wolves,
after  dividing  the  sheep  among  them,  sent  their  owner  (ac-
companied by  Joseph  Mea&ham)  under  guard,  to  be  tried  by
the  Commissioners  at  Albany.

Being  brought  before  the  Commissioners,  they  were  re-
quired to  promise  obedience  to  their  laws,  without  being  in-
formed what  those  laws  should  be.  But  had  the  Commis-
sioners even  been  disposed  to  form  laws  consistent  with  the
faith  of  the  Believers,  they  well  knew  that  it  was  contrary  to
their  faith  to  come  under  any  such  verbal  promise,  because
they  considered  all  such  outward  obligations  as  masks  of  hy-
pocrisy, under  which  their  accusers  themselves  were  acting
in  direct  violation  of  those  just  and  equitable  principles,  in
support  of  which,  they  pretended  to  contend  with  the  powers
of  Britain.

Besides,  they  were  aware  of  the  design  of  their  accusers,
to  take  an  undue  advantage  of  such  promises,  whereby  they
might  either  distress  them,  or  compel  them  to  bear  arms,
and  shed  human  blood,  contrary  to  their  faith.  And  as  the
spirit  of  Christ,  which  they  had  within  them,  both  disposed
and  enabled  them  to  keep  every  just  law,  without  any  exter-
nal obligation  ;  therefore  they  could  not  in  conscience  answer
the  request.  Whereupon  David  Darrovo,  Joseph  Mcacham,
and  Elder  John  Hocknell,  were  put  into  prison  :  and  soon  af-
ter, Hczekiah  Hammond  and  Joel  Pratt  ;  and  then  Mother
(accompanied  by  Mary  Partington)  and  Elder  William  Lee,
Elder  James  Whittaker  and  Calvin  Harlow,  all  of  whom  were


INTRODUCTION.  xxxiii

leading  characters  in  the  work,  were  arrested  and  imprisoned
at  Albany.

All  this  took  place  at  the  instigation  of  certain  designing
men  in  the  east,  who  were  continually  stirring*  up  those  in
authority,  and  other  citizens  who  were  otherwise  well  dis-
posed. Nevertheless,  the  Commissioners  at  Albany  gene-
rally treated  Mother  and  the  Elders  with  kindness  ;  and  many
sensible  and  candid  men  expressed  their  displeasure  at  the
injustice  and  inconsistency  of  imprisoning  and  oppressing  an
innocent  people  for  no  other  cause,  in  reality,  but  their  pe-
culiar faith  ;  and  especially  at  a  time  when  the  nation  itself
•was  struggling  to  get  free  from  the  oppression  of  a  foreign
yoke,

.  XXI.  But  notwithstanding  those  outward  bonds  ofaffliction,
the  word  of  God  was  not  bound,  but  even  through  the  grates
of  the  prison,  was  preached  to  crowded  assemblies.  Many
received  faith  through  the  Elders,  while  in  prison,  and  came
and  confessed  their  sins,  and  shewed  their  deeds  ;  and  such
was  the  convincing  power  of  God  which  attended  the  word,
that,  frequently  in  presence  of  the  crowd,  open  confessions
were  made,  of  every  known  sin  :  so  mightily  grew  the  word
of  God  and  prevailed.  Although  the  persecutors  intended
this  imprisonment  of  Mother  and  the  Elders,  for  evil ;  yet
the  Lord  turned  it  for  good,  while  it  wrought  effectually  to
the  spreading  of  the  gospel.

Believers  were  allowed  the  privilege  of  communion  with
those  in  prison,  and  of  ministering  freely  to  their  necessities.
But  very  shortly  after  their  imprisonment,  Mother  was  sep-
arated from  the  rest,  and  taken  from  Albany  (accompanied  by
Mary  Partington)  with  a  design  of  banishing  her  to  the
British  army,  which  then  lay  at  N&w*  York  ;  but  her  perse-
cutors failing  of  their  purpose,  she  was  put  into  prison  at
JPoughkeefisie,  where  she  remained  until  about  the  last  of
December,  and  was  then  released  by  order  of  Gov.  Clinton,
who  received  information  of  her  treatment,  having  had  no
certain  knowledge  of  the  matter  before.

The  Elders  and  Believers  at  Albany,  were  also  released
about  the  20th  of  the  same  month,  without  any  formal  trial.
It  is  particularly  worthy  of  observation,  that  in  all  those  im-
prisonments, and  the  accusations  against  Mother  and  the
Elders,  and  others  of  the  Believers,  both  in  England  and
America,  no  fault  could  ever  be  found>  as  to  their  lives  and

D


Kxxiv  INTRODUCTION.

moral  character  ;  nor  any  evil  alleged  against  them,  but  from
mere  slander,  on  account  of  their  faith  and  testimony.  Nor
was  any  persecution  ever  raised  against  them,  but  by  means
of  that  false  religion  and  spirit  of  oppression,  which  had  long
been  established  in  the  British  dominions,  and  whose  despotic
influence  had  not  yet  ceased  in  America.

XXII.  It  is  unnecessary,  however,  to  enlarge  on  this  sub-
ject, or  to  state  all  the  particulars  of  the  abuse  which  Mother,
and  the  Elders,  and  the  Believers  in  America  received  on  dif-
ferent occasions,  from  lawless  ruffians,  who  were  taught  by
the  false  religion  of  their  forefathers,  to  commit  the  most
scandalous  outrages  upon  a  harmless  people,  under  pretence
of  suppressing  error.  It  may  here  suffice,  simply  to  observe,
that  Mother  was  the  principal  object  at  which  their  rage  was
pointed  ;  that  during  the  time  of  her  ministry,  she  frequently
suffered  such  cruel  and  shameful  abuse  as  modesty  forbids  to
mention  ;  and  that  her  testimony  was  supported,  and  gained
the  ascendency,  amidst  those  scenes  of  trial  and  difficulty,
which,  to  every  outward  appearance,  were  insurmountable,
and  under  which  she  persevered,  unshaken  and  immovable,
with  that  patience  and  fortitude  of  mind  which  surpassed  all
human  comprehension.  And  although  unsupported  by  letter-
learning,  and  independent  of  man's  wisdom  ;  yet  she  was
supported  by  that  hidden  wisdom  and  power  of  God,  by  which
she  opened  Cn-  scriptures,  and  the  very  nature  of  things,  in
so  convincing  a  manner  that  none  were  able  to  gainsay  or
resist  the  force  of  her  words,  upon  any  principle  of  candour.

After  Mother  and  the  Eiders  were  released  from  prison,
they  again  collected  together  at  Water -Vlict,  where  they  were
visited  by  great  numbers  from  distant  parts  of  the  state  of
'JVew-  York,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New-Hampshire,  and
the  District  of  Maine,  who  received  faith  ;  and  through  the
power  and  gifts  of  God,  which  were  abundantly  manifested
for  the  destruction  of  sin,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  many
were  filled  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  and  in-
creased in  their  understanding  of  the  way  and  work  of  God.

XXIII.  In  the  Fifth  month  1781,  Mother  and  the  Elders
left  JVater-Vliet,  and  visited  the  distant  parts,  from  place  to
place,  where  the  gospel  had  been  received  ;  and  in  all  the
principal  places  which  they  visited,  they  were  resorted  to
from  the  adjacent  parts  ;  and  their  ministry  being  every
where  accompanied  with  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in


INTRODUCTION.  xxxv

searching  out  sin  and  purging  iniquity-  from  the  soul,  Believ-
ers were  built  up  ill  their  most  holy  faith,  received  an  increase
of  that  overcoming  power  by  which  they  were  enabled  to
keep  out  of  sin,  were  filled  with  consolation  and  peace,  and
many  more  were  added  to  the  faith.

Having  finished  their  labours  among  the  distant  Believers,
they  returned  to  Watcr-Vliet,  where  they  arrived  in  the
Eighth  month  1 783, — having  been  absent  about  two  years  and
four  months.  On  the  21st  day  of  July,  the  year  following,
Elder  WilUam  Lee  departed  this  life  at  Water-Vliety  being
forty  years  of  age.

The  decease  of  Elder  William  served  as  a  particular  means
of  preparing  the  minds  of  Believers  for  a  still  heavier  trial,  fa
being  deprived  of  the  visible  presence  and  protection  of
Mother,  the  thought  of  which  seemed  almost  insupportable
to  many.  But  having  finished  the  work  which  was  given  her
to  do,  she  was  taken  out  of  their  sight,  in  the  ordinary  way  of
all  living,  (at  Water-Fliety)  on  the  8th  day  of  the  Ninth
month  1784.

Thus,  in  the  early  <lawn  of  the  American  revolution,  when
the  rights  of  conscience  began  to  be  established,  the  morning-
star  of  Christ's  second  coming,  'disappeared  from  the  view*
of  the  world,  to  be  succeeded  by  the  increasing  brightness  of
the  Sun  of  righteousness  and  all  the  promised  glory  of  the  lat-
ter day.

And  thus  the  full  revelation  of  Christ,  in  its  first  degree,
was  completed  ;  which  was  according  to  that  remarkable
prophecy  of  Christopher  Love,  (who  was  beheaded  under
Cromwell:)  "  Out  of  thee,  O  England,  shall  a  bright  star  arise,
whose  light  and  voice  shall  make  the  heavens  to  quake,  and
knock  under  with  submission  to  the  blessed  Jesus. "

XXIV.  After  Mother's  decease,  the  gift  and  appointment
of  God,  for  the  lead  and  protection  of  the  Believers,  rested
upon  Elder  James  Whittaker  ;  under  whose  ministration  the
work  continued  and  increased,  in  purging  away  sin  and  un-
cleanness,  and  promoting  union  and  harmony  among  those
who  believed  and  had  set  out  to  obey  the  gospel,  in  reprov-
ing the  disobedient,  strengthening  the  weak,  and  confirming
the  faithful  ;  till  having  finished  his  labours,  he  departed  this
life  at  Enfield^  in  the  state  of  Connecticut,  on  the  20th  day  or
July, 1787,  being  37  years  of  age.

Elder  John  Hocknell  (the  last  of  those  from  Europe  who


xxxvi  INTRODUCTION.

were  called  Fathers)  survived  Elder  James  many  years  ;  and
deceased  at  Watcr-VUet,  February  1799,  being  76  years  of
age.  But  after  the  decease  of  Elder  James,  the  leading  gift,
in  the  visible  administration,  descended  upon  those  who  had
received  the  gospel  in  America,  and  was  particularly  vested
in  two,  namely,  Joseph  Meacham  and  Lucy  Wright  ;  who,  ac-
cording to  the  special  gift  and  appointment  of  God,  were
known  and  acknowledged  by  all  to  stand  in  the  spiritual  re-
lation of  a  joint  parentage  to  the  whole  visible  body  of  the
Believers.  Through  their  special  labours,  the  Believers
were  gathered  together  into  families,  according  to  the  reve-
lation of  God  respecting  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the  true
order  of  the  gospel,  which  order  was  established,  in  the
year  1792.  About  four  years  after,  Elder  Joseph  (having  fin-
ished his  work)  deceased,  at  Neiu-Lebanon,  August  the  16th,
1796,  aged  54  years.

XXV.  From  the  beginning  of  the  work  in  America,  in  the
year  1780,  until  about  the  year  1787,  there  was  little  to  be
£pZH  or  heard  but  the  out-cry  of  convicted  souls,  labouring
under  the  powCI*  ^f  God, — and  roaring  like  the  sound  of  many
L'jaf..*rs  and  mighty  thundcrings  £g;rinst  the  Man  tf  Zin,  ana
all  that  is  of  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes>
and  the  pride  of  life — shaking  and  trembling,— prophesying
or  speaking  with  new  tongues — singing  and  dancing — leap-
ing and  shouting,  day  and  night ;  and  such  various  supernat-
ural effects  of  the  power  of  God,  as  appeared  to  the  blind
spectators  of  this  world  like  the  most  unaccountable  confusion.
13 ut  such  as  were  in  the  work,  knew  perfectly  what  those
things  meant,  and  felt,  therein,  the  greatest  possible  order
and  harmony,  it  being  to  them  the  gift  and  work  of  God  for
the  time  then  present ;  and  which  bore  the  strongest  evidence
that  the  world  was  actually  come  to  an  end,  (at  least  to  those
who  were  the  subjects  of  it,)  and  the  day  of  judgment  com-
menced.

But  when  they  had  found  a  sufficient  degree  of  mortifica-
tion and  death  to  the  life  and  influence  of  a  corrupt  nature,
and  separation  from  the  spirit  of  the  world,  the  scene  chang-
ed, and  such  righteousness,  peace,  and  order  followed,  as
had  never  before  been  established  on  this  earth,  since  man
was  created.

XXVI.  During  the  progress  of  this  remarkable  change,
the  testimony  was  entirely  withdrawn  from  the  world :  and


INTRODUCTION.  xxxvii

therefore,  though  the  men  of  the  world  in  general,  have
been  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  the  visible  fruits  were  good,
yet  the  real  internal  work  from  which  those  fruits  were  pro-
duced, was  wholly  hid  from  their  eyes.  And  though  some
have  ignorantly  tried  to  ascribe  these  evidently  good  effects
to  some  secret  evil  cause  ;  yet  every  reasonable  person  must
grant  that,  an  evil  tree  cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Conse-
quently, that  testimony  which  is  productive  of  faithfulness,
justice,  righteousness,  and  every  virtue,  both  in  relation  to
things  temporal  and  spiritual,  must  have  proceeded  from  the
eternal  fountain  of  truth  and  goodness  :  Therefore,  the  fruits
and  effects  of  the  present  gospel  of  Christ,  are  justly  to  be
considered  as  a  standing  evidence  of  the  real  character  of
Mother  and  the  Elders,  and  of  all  those  who  have  been  lead-
ers in  the  work  ;  whatever  wicked  and  unreasonable  men
may  insinuate  to  the  contrary.

The  testimony  was  withdrawn  from  the  world  about  the
year  1785,  and  was  rarely  opened  to  any  until  about  the  yeai*
1797  ;  after  which  there  were  a  few  small  openings,  in  dif-
ferent places,  to  such  as  were  in  a  special  manner  awakened  ;
but  nothing  very  remarkable  has  appeared  in  the  order  of
providence,  to  open  the  way  for  the  spreading  of  the  gospel,
until  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.

XXVII.  In  the  year  1801,  an  extraordinary  work  of  God
began  in  Kentucky  and  the  adjacent  states,  which  prepared
the  way  for  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  to  be  opened  in  this
western  country,  in  the  year  1805.

Accordingly,  on  the  first  day  of  January,  1805,  three  mes-
sengers, namely  John  Meacham,  Benjamin  S.  Youngs  and
Issachar  Batce>  were  chosen  and  sent  by  the  gift  of  God,
from  the  Church  at  New-Lebanon,  to  the  people  of  the  Re-
vival in  Kentucky  and  the  adjacent  states,  and  were  cordially
received  by  a  number  of  the  first  leading  characters  in  the
Revival,  and  opposed  by  others.

A  general  account  of  this  extraordinary  work  in  Kentucky
and  the  parts  adjacent,  from  the  year  1801,  until  the  year
1805,  may  be  seen  in  the  pamphlet  lately  published,  entitled,
The  Kentucky  Revival ;  with  an  account  of  the  entrance  and
progress  of  the  testimony,  and  the  opposition  it  received  from
false  teachers.  Since  that  time  the  work  hath  continued  to
increase  both  North  and  South  of  the  river  Ohio  ;  and  at  pre-
sent there  are  in  this  Western  country,  eleven  brethren  and

D2


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION.

eight  sisters,  sent  from  the  Church  at  Debanon^  as  labourers
together  in  the  work.

XXVIII.  Since  the  opening  of  the  gospel  in  this  western
country,  the  minds  of  mankind  have  been  greatly  stirred  up,
both  by  way  of  opposition  and  enquiry  ;  and  many  are  struck
with  astonishment  to  see  such  effects  produced  by  means
which  to  human  wisdom  seem  so  inadequate  :  to  see  so  many
persons  of  good  infopmation,  and  of  the  most  upright  char-
acters, and  even  eminent  for  their  piety,  renounce  the  hon-
ors and  pleasures  of  the  present  life,  with  all  their  hopes
of  salvation  upon  their  former  principles,  to  find  their  relation
to  a  people  whose  faith  is  said  to  be  founded  upon  the  testi-
mony of  a  despised  woman.

But  souls  who  are  truly  convinced  of  sin,  and  are  willing
to  have  salvation  on  any  terms,  will  not  stumble  at  God's
manner  of  dispensing  it ;  and  many  such  there  are  at  this  day,
"who,  like  the  tender  branch  of  the  good  olive  manifest,  (by
their  fervent  prayers  and  tears,  under  the  pressure  of  an  evil
nature)  that  the  summer  of  their  redemption  is  nigh,  even  at
the  door.  But  as  the  fulness  of  redemption  could  not  be  ob-
tained until  the  times  appointed  for  the  full  manifestation  of
Christ ;  we  shall,  therefore,  proceed  to  consider  the  various
operations  of  God,  from  the  first  creation  of  man,  in  rela-
tion to  this  important  event :  and— 4c t  him  that  readcth  un~
deretand.


THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  L

THE  STATE OF  MAN  FROM  HIS  FIRST
CREATION  UNTIL  CHRIST.

CHAPTER  I.

TJie  Order  of  the  Visible  Creation.

IN  all  the  works  of  God  throughout  the  order  of  the  char
visible  creation,  there  is  an  evident  relation  of  one L
thing  to  another,  as  the  effect  is  related  to  its  cause  ;  """"
and  we  may  every  where  see  one  thing  springing  out
of  another,  and  progressing  on  to  still  higher  degrees
of  perfection.

2-  This  is  manifest^  not  only  in  the  works  of  nature,
but  of  art ;  and  upon  this  principle,  the  new  is  grant*
ed  to  be  superior  to  the  old,  inasmuch  as  it  contains
all  the  useful  properties  of  the  old  with  additional  in-
crease.

3.  It  is  not,  however,  our  design  to  reason  on  the
works  of  nature  or  of  art,  any  further  than  as  they
serve  to  illustrate  the  things  of  eternal  duration.  It
belongs,  riiore  properly,  to  men  of  natural  wisdom,
to  search  out  the  properties  and  progress  of  that  cre-
ation, of  which  they  are  a  part.

4.  But  as  God  promised  to  create  new  heavens,  and
anew  earth,  wherein  should  dnvell  righteousness,  and
as  the  new  creation  stands  in  a  certain  sense  related
to  the  old,  being  formed  out  of  it  ;  therefore,  the
children  of  God  are  not  immediately  created  in  that
character,  but  have  first  a  certain  relation  to  the  chil-
dren of  men,  until  by  the  spirit  and  power  of  Christ,
an  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  pertaining  to  the  new


2  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  VISIBLE  CREATION.  P. I.

chap,  creation,  they  arise  out  of  the  old,  in  a  gradual  in-
__.  crease,  to  higher  degrees  of  perfection.

5.  Man,  in  his  natural  creation,  was  designed  for  a
higher  purpose  than  merely  to  fill  up  the  momentary
scenes  of  the  present  life  :  an  evidence  of  this  is  im-
planted in  the  breast  of  every  individual  possessed  of
common  rationality.

6.  The  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  a  future  state
of  existence,  is  a  sentiment  that  requires  no  other  ar-
gument for  its  establishment  than  the  hopes  and  pros-
pects of  every  rational  mind.

7.  Hence  it  is,  that  natural  death,  or  the  departing
out  of  the  active  scenes  of  this  world,  is  of  all  other  ob-
jects the  most  frightful,  inasmuch  as  it  appears  to  put
an  end  to  man's  existence,  and  is  the  strongest  ar-
gument against  the  immortality  of  his  present  state  of
being.

8.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  so  productive  of
joy  and  triumph,  as  those  sensible  manifestations  from
a  world  of  spirits,  which  at  times  operate  in  the  mind
of  man,  and  promise  a  durable  felicity  in  a  future  state
of  existence.

9.  Had  man  even  continued  in  the  order  in  which
he  was  at  first  created,  he  could  never  have  been  es-
tablished in  any  precise  measure  of  that  order,  be-
cause the  very  order  itself  was  changeable,  and  he
must  of  necessity  advance  to  some  higher  order,  or  sink
into  an  inferior  state  ;  much  less  could  his  natural  cre-
ation be  supposed  to  stand  in  the  highest  degree  of
perfection,  when  he  had  fallen  from  God  into  a  state
of  sin  and  misery.

10.  Eternal  life  was  but  an  object  of  hope  to  man
in  his  highest  state  of  innocence  ;  for  if  he  had  posses-
sed eternal  life,  he  must  have  been  eternally  out  of
the  reach  of  death  ;  but  his  being  subject  to  fall  into
a  state  of  death,  was  an  evidence  that  he  was  only  as
yet,  in  a  state  of  probation,  and  of  course,,  that  the
whole  creation  of  man  was  as  yet  unfinished,  and  had
not  yet  progressed  on  to  the  ultimate  end  for  which
it  was  created.

1 1.  When  God  promised  to  create  another  heaven
jsaLixv.  and  earth  at  some  future  period,  saying,  Behold  I  cre-
ate neiv  heave?is>  and  a  ne%v  earth  ;  and  when  the  apos-


P.  I.  THE  ORDER  OP  THE  VISIBLE  CREATION.  $

tie said, We,  according  to  his  firomise,  look  for  new chap.
heavens,  and  a  new  earthy  wherein  dwelleth  righteous-


ness ;  it  is  evident  that  this  new  heaven  and  earth  spo-  2  Pet.  w.
ken  of  in  different  ages,  was  something  yet  to  be  ere-  13-
ated,  therefore  none  could  possibly  reach  it,  but  thro*
those  revolutions  which  should  lead  to  that  period.

12.  It  is  certain  that  the  matter  which  composed
the  body  of  man,  existed  before  the  human  body  was
formed,  and  that  matter  was  incapable  of  comprehend-
ing  its  intermediate  state,  before  it  was  organized  into
human  form.

13.  No  better  able  is  the  most  penetrating  mortal
to  conceive  of  the  intermediate  state  of  man  between
the  old  and  new  creation,  until  he  is  created  anew,
according  to  the  work  and  progress  of  the  new  crea-
tion. And  what  lies  beyond,  belongs  to  God  to  make
manifest,  through  Christ,  by  the  gospel,  in  the  order
of  the  times  appointed.

14.  Nothing  can  be  created  without  a  creator,  and

fee  that  formed  all  things  is  God  :  he  is  before  all  things,  CoU  jr<
and  by  him  all  things  consist  ;  but  every  thing  in  its
own  order  has  a  secondary  cause.

15.  God  always  works  by  means  that  are  adapted
to  the  end  ;  he  did  not  form  man  by  or  out  of  nothing,
but  out  of  the  dust ;  nor  are  the  human  species  crea-
ted or  propagated  by  or  out  of  any  other  than  the  liv-
ings substance  of  man.

16.  Therefore,  before  a  thing  can  be  created,  the
means  of  its  creation  must  exist.  And  as  Christ  was
promised  to  be  the  immediate  Creator,  or  secondary
cause  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth,  or  the  beginning
of  the  new  creation ;  so  the  future  destiny  of  the  hu-
man race  was  suspended  on  the  coming  of  Christ.

17.  The  coming  of  Christ  was  not  to  destroy  the
order  of  the  visible  heavens  and  earth  that  were  cre-
ated very  good  at  the  beginning  ;  but  to  create  out  of
them  a  new  world,  or  order  of  things,  that  should  be
of  eternal  duration,  beyond  the  present.

18.  And  therefore  he  came  into  this  world,  and
passed  through  it  as  a  stranger,  and  did  not  abide  in
it,  his  work  lay  entirely  beyond,  (although  not  far
from  every  one  of  us  i)  and  having  laid  and  completed

the  foundation  of  that  order  of  eternal  duration,  hiss


4  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  VISIBLE  CREATION.  P.  L

chap, message  by  his  servants,  is — Come  ;  for  all  things  are

__  now  ready,

Lukexiv. 19-  It  never  was  intended  by  the  Creator  of  all

l7,  things,  that  any  part  of  creation  should  be  redeemed
or  governed  by  a  foreign  power ;  for  that  would  have
laid  a  foundation  for  confusion,  and  showed  a  lack  of
wisdom  in  the  whole  order  of  things  ;  which  may  be
observed  from  things  that  are  natural.

20.  But  God,  in  his  wisdom,  proportioned  to  every
part  of  creation,  its  own  internal  government,  with-
out dependence  on  foreign  aid,  or  the  fear  of  foreign
invasion.

21.  And  therefore,  when  Christ  Jesus  came  into
the  world  as  the  redeemer  and  ruler  of  his  dominion,
he  did  not  come  descending  through  the  air  from  some
remote  part  of  space,  but  being  born  into  the  old  cre-
ation, he  was  commissioned  and  sent  from  God,  while
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  those  whom  he  came  to  re-
deem, and  over  whom  he  was  appointed  ruler.

$2.  And  thus  was  fulfilled  the  words  of  the  proph>
MicakV.  et :  Out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me  that  is  to
be  Ruler  in  Israel.  Plainly  showing,  that  in  the  order
of  things,  the  power  of  redemption  would  arise  out
of  that  creation  itself  which  needed  a  redeemer,

23.  Seeing  then  that  the  whole  of  God's  work  is
connected  like  the  links  of  a  chain,  and  that  one  thing
rises  out  of  another  in  an  increasing  line  from  begin-
ning to  end  ;  it  will  be  proper  to  treat  of  things  in  their
true  and  natural  order  as  they  arise,  from  age  to  age  ;
from  which  the  appearing  of  Christ,  first  and  last,
jnay  be  understood  in  its  true  nature  and  design,


2.


P.  1. THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATION,

CHAPTER.  II.

The  State  of  Man  in  his  first  Creation.


A


LL  things  were  made  and  created  for  the  honour  chap,


ii.


and  gloiy  of  the  invisible  first-cause,  whom  we
call  God — the  Father  of  angels  and  men — a  being  of"
infinite  perfections — eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  his
nature  and  purpose  ;  from  everlasting  to  everlasting —
possessing  ail  power  and  wisdom — the  centre  of  all
goodness — the  true  spring  of  eternal  life,  and  the  only-
source  of  true  happiness.

2.  In  the  beginning  God  set  in  order  the  creation  of
the  visible  heavens  and  the  earth  ;  and  "  made  every
plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the  earth,  and  every  Gen.u.
herb  of  the  field  before  it  grew  :  for  the  Lord  God  had  4'  5*
not  caused  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth."

3.  By  which  it  may  be  understood,  that  God  reserv-
ed the  times  and  seasons  in  his  own  power  :  for  al-
though it  was  said,  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  <**^  ».
the  herb  yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit
after  his  kind,  whose  seed  is  in  itself,  u/ion  the  earth  :

AND  IT  WAS  SO."

4.  Yet  it  was  not  instantly  so.  The  earth  could
not  bring  forth  grass,  nor  the  herb  yield  seed,  nor  the
fruit  tree  yield  fruit,  any  otherwise  than  according  to
the  laws  of  creation  established  in  each  particular  thing,
whose  seed  was  in  itself  after  its  own  kind  ;  and  ac-
cording to  the  order  of  times  and  seasons  appointed  by
the  Creator,  in  the  law  of  nature.

5.  This  was  the  law  and  order  established  in  the
Vegetable  creation  :  and  every  thing  was  beautiful  af-
ter its  kind,  and  in  its  times  and  seasons.  "  And  God
saw  that  it  was  good/*

6.  Therefore  no  inferior  law  could  be  given  to  any
superior  part  of  the  creation  :  but  each  part  of  the
creation  must  be  regulated  by  a  law  equal  to  its  own
inferior  or  superior  dignity,  that  the  whole  might  op-
erate in  one  harmonious  concert  with  the  first  moving
cause.

7.  "  And  God  created  every  living  creature,  which  Gen  L
the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly,  after  their  kind,  21>  *•


6  THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATtON. P.  I,

C**AP-  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  kind  ;  and  God  blessed
' them  saying,  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  wa-
ters in  the  seas,  and  It t  fowl  multiply  in  the  earth."

8.  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature  af-
ter his  kind,  cattle  and  creeping  thing,  and  beast  of

Gen.i.24.  the  earth  after  his  kind  :  and  it  was  so" M  And  out
19"  of  the  ground  the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the
field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air."

9.  Thus  God  made  the  animal  part  of  the  creation,
which  was  superior  to  the  vegetable,  from  the  great
whales  in  the  sea,  to  the  least  reptile  of  the  earth,  and
the  smallest  bird  of  the  air  ;  and  created  every  partic-
ular part,  with  a  natural  law,  or  instinct,  to  be  fruitful
and  multiply,  each  after  its  own  order,  and  after  its
own  kind,  and  in  the  times  and  seasons  appointed  by
the  Creator,  and  established  in  the  law  of  nature.

10.  And  thus  the  animal  creation  was  set  in  order  ;
and  each  part  after  its  own  kind,  and  in  its  own  place,
showed  forth  the  glory  and  power  of  the Creator.

Cen.i.25.  u  jnci  God  saw  that  it  was  good"

11."  And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of
the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of
life  ;  and  man  became  a  living  soul."  That  is,  he  be-
came endowed  with  spiritual  sensations  and  the  facul-
ties of  reason.  Thus  mak  was  created  the  head  and
most  noble  part  of  all  the  creation.

12.  Also  the  animal  parts  of  the  creation,  which  were
formed  out  of  the  ground,  were  endowed  with  animal
faculties,  or  bediiy  sensations,  such  as  hearing,  seeing ;

feeling,  tasting,  and  smelling,  which  made  them  noble
in  their  order.

13.  And  although  man  was  formed  of  the  ground^
yet,  as  he  was  made  the  most  noble  part  of  the  crea-
tion, distinct  from  hi*  living  soul,  he  could  not  be  defi-
cient of  such  animal  sensations  as  pertained  to  any  of
the  inferior  part  of  the  creation.

14.  Therefore,  distinct  from  his  living  soul,  he  was
likewise  endowed  with  those  natural,  or  bodily  sensa-
tions, of  hearing,  seeing,  feeling,  tasting,  and  s7nellingf
whim  are  called  ihefve  senses.  And  thus  his  living
sou.  gave  him  the  pre-eminence  over  the  animal  part
of  the  creation,  and  constituted  him  a  human  and  ra-
tional creature,  more  noble  than  the  re$t,


P.  I. THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATION.  7

15.  Again,  the  living  soul  of  man,  being  superior  to  chap.
his  animal  body,  could  not  therefore  be  deficient  in  any *
one  part  or  sensation  which  pertained  to  the  body  ;  "
consequently,  in  the  union  of  soul  and  body,  every  part

or  sensation  of  the  body  must  be  occupied  by  a  corres-
ponding part,  or  sensation  of  the  soul.

16.  And  hence,  there  was  also  a  spiritual  hearing,
seeing,  feeling,  and  so  on,  which  being  superior  to  all
those  natural  sensations,  were  capable  of  dictating  and
ordering  every  faculty  and  sensation  of  his  natural  body
aright.

1 7.  And  thus  man  was  created  with  a  most  noble  ca-
pacity, to  know  how  to  please  and  serve  his  Creator,
and  how  to  order  and  govern  every  part  of  his  natural
capacity  and  bodily  sensations  for  the  honour  and  glory

Of  the  GREAT FIRST CAUSE.

18.  And  as  this  noble  and  superior  capacity  of  the
living  soul,  had  the  pre-eminence  over  all  the  inferior
senses  of  his  own  natural  frame  ;  therefore  man  was
capable  of  having  the  sole  dominion  over  all  the  infe-
rior creation,  and  of  preserving  its  order  and  harmony,
for  his  own  happiness,  as  well  as  for  the  honour  and
glory  of  the  Creator.

19.  But  as  man  was  formed  of  the  ground,  like  the
rest  of  the  animal  parts  of  the  creation  ;  so  like  those,
his  natural  body  was  of  the  earth  earthy,  and  was  crea-
ted for  time.  And  because  God  breathed  into  him  the
breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a  living  soul ;  there-
fore his  living  soul  was  the  immediate  offspring  of  Him
who  is  eternal,  and  was  created  for  eternity.

20.  "  And  the  Lord  God  said,  It  is  not  good  that  the  »Heb#  ^
man  should  be  alone  ;  I  will  make  him  an  hel/i  meet  for  -help  art*
Jiimr* For  among  all  other  living  creatures  that  had^;&:
yet  been  formed,  for  Adam  there  was  not  found  an  cS'«.
help  according  to  that  order  winch  was  before  him. *8-

21.  And  out  of  the  man,  the  Lord  God  made  him
an  helper,  who  was  called  woman,  because  she  was
taken  out  oiman*  Thus  man  was  formed  of  two  parts,
male  and  female.  These  two,  as  to  their  local  situa-
tion were  different  ;  but  in  point  of  nature  and  union,
they  were  one,  and  formed  but  the  one  entire  man,
complete  in  his  manhood.

22.  Therefore,  as  the  woman  was  formed  cut  of  lite
man,  who  was  the  most  noble  and  superior  put  of  all

E
#


8,  THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATION. P.  I.

( :ltiAP*  ^e  creation,  by  reason  of  his  living  soul  ;  so  the  wo-
l. man  also  was  endowed  with  those  same  rational  facul-


ties and  governing  powers,  as  a  suitable  help  in  the
dominion  and  government  of  all  the  inferior  creation.

23.  But  as  the  man  was  first  formed,  and  afterwards
the  woman,  to  be  a  helper  with  the  man;  therefore
she  was  dependant  on  him  for  her  counsel  and  instruc-
tion, and  was  not  first,  but  second  in  the  headship  of
man,  and  second  in  the  order  and  government  of  all
the  inferior  creation.  Thus  the  order  in  the  first  cre-
ation of  man  was  finished.

24.  "  And  God  blessed  them,  and  said  unto  them,
Gen.i.28,  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and

subdue  it  ;  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,

and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living1

thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth  "
Kcci.vii. ^5.  Also,  "  God  made  mamifiright — in  his  own  im-
»•  age  created  he  him," and  therefore  he  was  without

Gen4.*7.  blemish,  as  he proceeded  from  the  fountain  of all
rsai.viii.  wisdom  and  perfection — made  but  a  little  lower  than

the  an  pels — having  dominion  over  the  creatures,  and

lleh.  n.  7.

'  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,

2  6.  Thus  man  in  his  first  rectitude,  stood  as  sole
lord  of  the  earth,  and  the  most  noble  part  of  all  the
creation.  And  being  endowed  with  a  capacity  to  re-
ceive the  law  of  God  in  his  living  soul,  lor  the  right
ordering  of  all  things  under  his  dominion,  he  was
properly  the  centre  of  order  and  union  to  all,  and
comparatively,  stood  as  a  living  and  most  nohle  tree
in  the  midst  of  the  trees  of  the  garden.

27.  And  while  this  was  his  standing,  being  the  head
and  centre  of  union  to  the  creation,  every  particular
part,  having  a  law  peculiar  to  itself,  served  to  increase
the  glory  and  beauty  of  each  other,  and  operate,  and
move  in  one  general  and  harmonious  concert,  to  show
lorth  the  glory  and  power  of  the  great  and  first  mov-

•Gsim.31.  ing  cause. "  And  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had
made,  and  behold  it  was  very  good"

28.  But  the  living  soul  of  man  was  united  to  a  ma-
terial and  natural  body,  which  was  of  the  earth  earthy,
and  which  Avas  possessive  of  its  own  animal  and  earth-
ly instinct  ;  and  this  constituted  his  state  of  trial,  and


P.  I. THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATION,

placed  him  as  it  were  between  two  worlds,  between  jchap,
life  and  death.  _J_

29.  And  therefore  it  is  said,  that  the  Lord  God  put
him  into  the  garden,  to  dress  it,  and  to  kee/i  it,  and
commanded  him  saying,  "  Of  every  tree  of  the  gar-  ^^  «
den  thou may  est  freely eat  ;  but of  the tree  of  the  ic,  i>.
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shaft  not  eat  of  it :

for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  ihou  shalt  surely
die."

30.  From  which  it  may  appear  evident,  that  man
was  created  with  an  inferior  nature,  to  be  kept  in  sub-
jection by  a  superior  law,  in  order  to  his  becoming  a
just  and  rightful  heir  to  any  inheritance  of  promise,
and  more  especially  that  of  eternal  life,  which  was
the  ultimate  end  of  his  creation.

31.  It  would  have  been  contrary  to  the  order  that
was  established  in  tjie  creation,  for  the  Lord  God  im-
mediately to  exercise  his  governing  power  over  any
object  which  he  had  placed  under  the  dominion  of  man,
On  man  therefore  it  depended,  rightly  to  use  the  pow-
ers with  which  he  was  invested  by  the  father  of  his
living  soulf  with  whom  he  stood  united.

32.  Consider  then,  the  state  and  order  in  which
the  man  was  placed.  His  living  soul,  endowed  witii
the  power  of  reason,  stood  in  connexion  with  the  Fa-
ther of  Spirits,  and  was  superior  to  the  instinct  of  his
earthly  nature,  or  the  animal  sensations  and  natural
desires  which  might  arise  therefrom.  And  therefore
he  could  not  be  influenced  and  governed  by  these,
without  the  most  pointed  breach  of  the  law  and  order
of  God,  and  the  forfeiture  of  his  dominion.

33.  He  could  not  be  influenced  anil  governed  by  the
female,  although  bone  of  his  bone  and  flesh  of  his
flesh,  without  the  violation  of  the  same  law  and  order  ;
because  he  was  the  first,  and  she  the  second,  in  the
order  of  the  creation.

34.  Neither  could  the  male  or  the  female,  together
or  separately,  be  influenced  and  governed  by  any  infe-
rior part  of  the  creation,  whether  beast,  or  fowl,  or
creeping  thing,  without  the  subversion  of  the  order
and  harmony  of  the  creation,  as  well  as  the  most  di-
rect and  presumptuous  transgression  of  the  law  of  God.

35.  For,  God  by  his  righteous  law,  had  endowed


10-  THE  STATE  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FIRST  CREATION;. P.  I.

CIi£R  them  with  wisdom  and  power,  to  subdue  and  have  the
-.--- dominion  over  all  the  inferior  creation ;  therefore  it


was  not  the  law  of  nature  in  any  part  of  the  inferior
creation,  but  the  law  of  God  \x\  the  living  soul ',  by
which  the  conduct  of  .both  male  and  female  was  to  be
directed,  and  all  their  actions  disposed.  This  law  was
constituted  in  the  ruling  powers  of  man,  and  because
k  was  given  of  God  the  father  of  their  existence,  it
laid  them  under  the  strictest  obligations  to  the  most
punctual  obedience.

36.  And  while  man  stood  in  his  first  rectitude,  and
the  line  of  order  which  God  had  placed  in  the  crea-
tion remained  entire,  every  part  was  in  a  condition  to
be  regulated  by  a  principle  of  justice  and  equity,  to,
produce  the  fruits  of  harmony  and  peace,  and  through
obedience  to  answer,  without  obstruction,  the  ulti-
mate end  of  its  creation.

37.  For  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  made,
and  behold  it  was  very  good.  No  evil  could  flow  from
a  good  cause,  nor  could evil ensue  while  that  cause

Gen.fi. was  regarded. a  And  they  were  both  nuked^  the  man
85, and  his  wife^  and  were  not  ashamed" Such  was  their
perfect  peace  and  innocence.

38.  It  was  but  the  beginning  of  man's  work  of  self*
denial,  to  abstain  from  one  particular  tree.  In  th^
progress  of  his  government,  he  was  to  subdue  the
earth,  and  have  dominion  over  ALt,  and  prove  that
his  living  soul  had  not  its  equal  among  all  the  beau-*
ties  of  nature,  nor  in  all  the  temporal  glory  of  the
universe.

Psai-xifc* 39.  But  man  who  being  in  honour,  and  abode  not*
'. is  like  the  beasts  that  fiaulu


P.  I. THE  NATURE  AND  EFFECTS  OF,  &C- It


CHAPTER  III.

Tlie  Nature  and  Effects  cf  the  Fall  of  Man,  Jrom  hft
first  Rectitude.

BY  the  fall  of  man,  is  not  meant  any  change  in  the  ckak.
position  of  his  body,  but  of  his  soul. His  body '
retained  its  natural  relation  to.  the  earth, possessed
of  its  usual  gravity,  subject  to  the  laws  of  attraction,
cohesion  and  repulsion,  and  endowed  with  all  its  for-
mer natural  instinct,  sensations  and  faculties.

2.  But  his  spirit  fell  from  God  by  disobedience.
By  yielding  to  the  influence  of  an  inferior  attraction,
he  was  deceived,  and  drawn  out  of  his  proper  order
in  which  he  was  placed  by  the  fountain  of  truth.

3.  And  being  d?awn  out  of  his  proper  order,  he
loosed  the  bond  of  his  union  and  relation  to  heaven  ;
and  being  loose,  he  fell  into  that  which  attracted  him;
and  in  that  he  is  a  fallen  spirit ;  but  still  proves  his
supernatural  descent,  by  a  life  and  power  which  the,
most  perfect  law  of  naturq  never  was  given  him  to
inspire.

4.  According  to  the  law  which  God  prescribed  to,
man  at  the  .beginning,  he  was  to  subdue,  and  have
dominion  over  all  inferior  things  ;  this  was  his  stand-
ing in  his  first  rectitude  ;  of  course,  to  be  subdued
and  overcome  must  be  his  fall.

5.  The  living  soul  of  man  was  united  to  a  natural
body,  and  occupied  all  its  natural  faculties  and  senses,
which  were  as  a  medium  of  conveyance,  through
which  the  law  of  God  that  was  implanted  in  his  soul,
might  be  put  into  action,  according  to  the  directions
of  the  law -giver.

6.  And  hence,  no  object  inferior  to  the  perfect  will
of  God,  could  find  any  access  to  his  living  soul,  so  as
to  bring  it  into  captivity  and  rival  God's  claim  to  man's
affections,  but  through  the  same  medium  of  those
animal  passions  and  appetites  arising  from  his  inferior
nature,  and  which  were  appointed  to  be  under  the
government  of  a  superior  law.

Z.  And  therefore;  any  object  on  which  his  obedi-

E  a


'12  THE  NATURE  AND  EFFECTS  OF  P.I.

CmP'  ence  cou^  ^rst  De  proved,  must  be  that  which  ad-.

, ]_  dressed  those natural and  earthly  appetites,  or  the

propensities  of  his  inferior  nature.  And  these  could
not  operate  without  the  previous  consent  of  his  sou]
to  cast  off  his  superior,  even  God,  who  claimed  the
first  and  principal  right  to  all  his  affections.

8.  Here  was  the  state  of  his  trial :  and  it  now  re-
mained with  him,  whether  he  would  obey  his  supe-
rior or  inferior  ;  and  his  servant  he  must  be,  to  whom
he  yielded  obedience.

9.  Therefore,  in  obeying  his  inferior,  he  became,
servant  to  that  over  which  he  was  appointed  ruler,,
and  committed  sin  and  transgression  in  breaking  the
law  and  order  of  God,  by  going  over  the  bounds  pre-
scribed by  the  law-giver..

10.  It  is  evident  that  the  law  and  order  of  God*,
appointed  for  man,  was  good,  not  only  from  the  thing
considered  in  itself,  but  from  the  consideration  that
God  is  good,  and  no  evil  effect  can  Mow.  from  a  good,
cause.

1 1.  But  as  man  himself  was  created  in  a  probation-
ary state,  in  order  to  subserve  a  higher  purpose,  it
rendered  the  creation  of  man,  in  itself,  susceptable.
of  either  good  or  evil :  the  good  to  ensue  as  the  ef-
fects of  obedience  to  those  laws  which  God  gave  f©£
its  regulation  ;  or  the  evil  might  ensue  in  consequence*
of  neglect  and  disobedience.

12.  Therefore  as  man  was  not  obedient  to  the  law
pf  God,  his  superior,  but  yielded  to  be  influenced,
through  an  inferior  nature,  by  that  scrfient  called  thee
Devil,  who  in  his  nature  is  directly  opposite  to  all
good;  hence  ensued  the  evil.  And  the  Devil  could
have  no  influence  in  the  creation,  otherwise  than  by
a  subversion  of  that  true  order  which  God  had  placed,
between  soul  and  body,  male  and  female,  man  and
beast.

13.  And  as  the  man  was  the  head,  and  first  prin-
cipal agent  in  the  order  and  dominion  of  the  creation,
and  the  woman  was  the  second  and  weaker  part  of
man  in  the  same  agency  ;  therefore  that  deceiver  the
serpent  came  forth  with  a  lie,  and  tempted  the  wo-
man to  counteract  the  law  and  order  of  heaven,  that
is,  to  be  led  by  the  inilueace  of  the  serpent,  her  injc-


P.  I. man's  tall  from  his  first  rectitude*  13

rior,  instead  of  being  led  by  the  counsel  of  her  sufie-  c^^
rior,  the  man.


14.  Now  the  serfient  was  more  subtle  than  any  beast  een.ia.L
of  the  field,  (a  striking  emblem  of  man's-  nature  !.)

and  therefore  the  most  suitable  to  allure  and  deceive.
And  he  said  unto  the  woman,  Yea,  hath  God  said,  ye
shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden  ?

15.  And  the  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  "  We
may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden  :  but
of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the
garden,  God  hath  said,  "  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  nor
touch  it,  lest  ye  die"  Thus  far  she  exercised  the
rational  faculties  of  her  soul,  and  while  she  stood
stedfast  here,  no  evil  could  ensue.

16.  But  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman, Ye  shall  Gen.  aft.
not  surely  die :  For  God  doth  know,  that  in  the  day  ye

eat  thereof,  then  yo%r  eyes  shall  be  o/iened  ;  and  ye  shall
be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil.

17.  Here  the  woman  was  allured,  and  being  allur-
ed, she  was  deceived,  and  being  deceived,  she  was  ex-
cited to  a  passion  which  prevailed  over  her  reason  to
listen  to  the  voice  of  the  serpent.

18.  Thus  the  serpent  beguiled  her  ;  and  being  be-
guiled, she  distrusted  the  order  of  God,  which  was
placed  in  the  man,  as  it  respected  her  immediate
safety  and  protection  ;  a  contrary  view  of  the  order  of
things  began  to  take  root  in  her  animal  nature,  and  to
promise  something  more  delightful  than  what  she  ap-
prehended from  the  order  and  counsel  of  God.

19.  Here  the  nature  and  disposition  of  the  woman,
which  before  was  pure,  innocent,  and  lovely,  becam®
transformed  into  a  nature  and  disposition  which  is  un-
clean, wicked  and  deceitful.

20.  The  nature  and  quality  of  that  disposition,  with
which  God  created  man  at  the  beginning,  being  pure,
innocent,  and  lovely,  is  figuratively  compared  to  a  nat-
ural tree  of  pleasant  fruit,  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make
one  wise.

31.  And  had  man  regarded  the  law  of  God,  and
punctually  obeyed  the  directions  of  the  law-giver,  the
fruit  would  have  been  good,  pure,  innocent  and  lovely,
The-  tree  was  good  only  in  its.  right  use>  and  evil  only
in  its  wrong  use.


I4r  Tltfe  NATURE  AND  EFFECTS  OF  P.  I.

Cm.P' .  22,  ■^Ut'  t0  tne  perpetual  torment  and  condemna-

.«._  tion  of  men,  and  a  heavy  woe  to  women,  they  delight

to  chuse  the  knowledge  of  the  evil  !  Therefore  the

tree  was  called,  The  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and

evil,

23.  Thus  it  was  an  undue,  unseasonable,  and  inor-
dinate desire  of  the  knowledge  of  that  nature,  the  sub-
tilty  of  the  serpent,  by  which  the  woman  was  allured
and  led  away  out  of  her  proper  order,  instead  of  being
led  by  the  righteous  law  of  God,  vested  in  the  man,
who  was  her  proper  head.
fcOor.xi.  24.  But  I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  head  of
every  man  is  Christ ;  and  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the
man  ;  and  the  head  of  Christ  is  God.  This  was  that
line  of  order,  which  the  God  of  all  wisdom  and  good-
ness placed  in  the  most  noble  part  of  the  creation.

25.  And  therefore  the  woman's  obedience  to  the
serpent,  was  not  only  contrary  to  the  dictates  of  her
reason,  and  inconsistent  in  the  nature  of  things,  but
directly  contrary  to  the  true  order  of  God.  And  having
now  eaten  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  that  is,  having  re-
ceived the  nature  of  the  serpent  to  rule  in  her,  she
gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her,  and  he  did  eat.

26.  Thus  the  foul  and  deceitful  nature  of  the  ser-
pent set  up  its  growing  influence  in  the  first  part  of
man  through  the  second  ;  and  by  obedience  to  the
serpent,  their  nature  became  corrupted  at  the  root,
figuratively  compared  to  an  evil  tree,  all  the  fruit  of
which  must  consequently  forever  after  be  corrupt,
tmtil  that  evil  influence  should  be  broken  by  obedi-
ence to  Christ  the  seed  of  promise.

27.  And  thus  the  devil  placed  his  seat  of  influence
and  dominion  in  the  very  instinct  or  seed  of  nature,

Jcr.S.2i.  and  the  nature  of  man,  like  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right
seed,  became  corrupted,  and  turned  into  the  degene*
rate  plant  of  a  strange  vine,  nourished  according  to
the  corrupt  and  deceitful  law  of  the  serpent,  bringing
forth  fruit  unto  death.
Kem.>iff.  28.  And  as  the  soul  was  united  to  a  natural  body,
*•;  H  &  man  must  either  groan  under  the  oppression  of  his
wicked  master  to  whom  he  yielded  obedience,  until
his  redemption  should  appear,  or  resign  up  the  body,


]?.  I. man's  fall  from  his  first  rectitude.  15

ami  every  inferior  part  of  the  creation  to  the  sole  do-  CI^'
minion  of  evil.  .

29.  But  the  law  of  God  was  in  itself  eternal,  and
his  purpose  in  the  creation  of  man  unchangeable,  and
therefore  the  devil  could  not  annihilate  the  law  of  God,
nor  destroy  the  creation.  Nevertheless  the  whole
creation  became  corrupted,  and  its  beautiful  order  and
harmony  lost  in  sin  and  confusion.

30.  No  sacred  laws  of  influence,  nor  ruling  power
had  any  longer  a  free  course  through  the  governing
parts  of  the  united  creation,  to  govern  from  the  supe-
rior to  the  inferior  ;  but  an  unclean,  deceitful,  and  re-
bellious law,  seated  in  the  nature  of  man,  was  now
tfre  principal  motive  and  leading  object  of  his  obedience.

31.  The  soul  was  no  longer  led  and  governed  by
the  pure  and  original  law  of  God,  but  by  the  now  cor-
rupted and  growings  passions  of  an  inferior  earthly  na-
ture— The  male  no  longer  led  by  the  law  of  God,  but  by
the  law  of  the  devil  through  the  female— -^The  female
no  longer  led  by  the  law  of  God  through  the  male,  but
by  the  law  of  the  devil  through  the  serpent.

32.  Thus  rebellion  and  confusion  spread  its  bane-
ful influence  through  the  universe,  and  man  could
rise  up  against  man,  who  was  made  in  the  image  and
after  the  likeness  of  God,  and  shed  each  others
blood.

33.  The  beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  reptiles  of  the
ground,  over  which  man  in  his  state  of  innocence
had  the  dominion,  could  now  rise  up  against  the  most
noble  part  of  the  creation,  while  man  against  man,
and  beast  against  beast,  are  dreading  and  devouring-
one  another.

34.  Thus  man  by  his  disobedience,  was  wholly
excluded  and  shut  out  from  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life,
and  ingrafted  into  an  evil  tree  ;  and  all  the  fruit  k
could  produce  must  be  like  itself,  the  fruits  of  a  flesh-
ly, earthly,  sensual,  cruel  and  corrupt  nature  ;  adul-

ter!/i  fornication,  uncleanness,  lascvviousness,  idolatry,  20,  21I  "*"
Witchcraft,  hatred,  variance,  emulations,  wrath,  strife,
seditions, heresies, envying s, murders,  drunkenness y
revellings,  and  such  like.

35.  Instead  of  purity  and  holiness,  he  brings  forth,
sin  and  uncleanness — instead  of  pure  and  heavenly  atV


16  THE  NATURE  AND  EFFECTS  OF  P.  %

Cm.P" faction,  lust  and  wantonness — instead  of  condescen-
-  sion  and  obedience,  pride  and  seif-will — instead  of

tenderness  and  mercy,  oppression  and  cruelty — in-
stead of  justice  and  equity,  partiality  and  fraud — in-
stead of  peace  and  harmony,  wars  and  tumults,  se-
ditions and  bloodshed,  and  ail  manner  of  sin  and  con-
fusion.

36.  Such  are  the  dire  consequences  of  man's  fall.
And  as  man  was  tempted  and  overcome  by  the  ser-
pent, who  was  below  him  in  the  order  of  the  crea-
tion, he  of  course  fell  below  the  order  of  the  brutes,

Rom.  vi.  being  servant  to  tliat  to  which  he  yielded  himself  ser-
vant to  obey.

37.  And  hence  it  is,  that  the  human  species  are
become  devilish,  beastly  and  unclean,  in  their  nature
and  disposition. And  therefore  it  is  said  of  them,

Matt. Ye serpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers  ! And again,
Jude  io3.'  What  they  know  naturally ,  as  brute beasts,  in  those
things  they  corrupt  themselves.

38.  Unto  whatever  this  subversion  of  the  true  or-
der of  God  may  be  likened,  whether  to  a  beautiful
garden  that  is  laid  waste  and  grown  over  with  thorns,
or  to  a  tree  that  becomes  degenerate  and  corrupt,  by
beifcg  neglected,  or  transplanted  into  a  bad  soil,  it  is
certain  that  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  does  exist
in  the  mind  of  man.

39.  For  the  creation  remaining  united  in  that  which
is  corrupt,  the  soul  of  man,  though  a  lost  captive,
cannot  but  know  the  difference  between  the  good,
which  the  dignity  of  his  order  requires  him  to  do,
and  the  evil  to  which  he  is  enslaved  by  the  low  and
beastly  appetites  of  an  inferior  nature.

40.  That  which  cannot  bear  the  light  of  men,  how
shall  it  bear  the  light  of  a  perfectly  pure  and  holy
God  ?  The  soul  of  every  rational  creature  must  there-
fore ascribe  to  the  agency  and  influence  of  the  devil,
every  act  that  will  not  bear  the  inspection  of  a  fellow-
creature,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  that  insatiable  pro-
pensity to  such  an  act.

41.  The  soul  cannot  but  know  that  a  just,  right-
eous and  holy  God,  never  was  the  original  cause  of
that  law  or  instinct  which  would  destroy  the  dignity
and  superiority  of  man,  and  lead  him  to  corrupt  him*


P.  I. man's  fall  from  his  first  rectitude.  \7

self,  or  to  corrupt  others,  below  the  order  of  the  bru-  c^p'
tal  creation.  *__

42.  And  therefore  the  creation  groaneth  in  pain,
under  all  these  things  that  are  unclean  and  abomina-
ble in  the  sight  of  the  Creator.  The  works  of  men
have  become the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness  :  So

that,  as  it  is  written,  It  is  a  shame  to  sficak  of  those  Eph.v.18
things  which  are  done  of  them  in  secret. How  then  will
every  secret  action  appear  openly  in  judgment  ?

43.  It  was  Lust,  even  the  Lust  of  the  flesh,
that  was  imbibed  by  obedience  to  the  serpent,  which
corrupted  the  nature  and  disposition,  and  degraded
the  dignity  of  man.  Here  was  the  fountain  head,
from  which  all  manner  of  sin  and  iniquity,  like  a
mighty  torrent,  came  rolling  along  down  through  the
fallen  race,  corrupting  the  earth,  and  teeming  with
ten  thousand  evils.

-44.  From  hence  proceeded  the  greatest  of  all  evils,
as  well  as  the  least :  and  what  still  remains  as  the
most  striking  evidence  of  man's  fall  and  depravity,  is
the  shedding  of  each  other's  blood.  As  it  is  written,
.From  whence  come  wars  and  fightings  among  you?  jairasiv.
come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  lt
your  members  ?

45.  All  fleshly,  sensual,  carnal  and  wanton  thoughts
and  desires,  which  captivate  the  mind.,  and  place  it
upon  any  other' object  but  the  perfect  will  of  God,
proceeded,  through  the  serpent,  from  the  source  of
all  evil,  are  the  effects  of  the  fall,  destructive  to  the
soul,  and  a  fatal  bar  to  man's  eternal  peace  and  hap-
piness.

46.  All  selfish  and  fleshly  gratifications,  and  works
of  uncleanness,  and  all  actions,  of  whatever  shape  or
kind,  that  require  to  be  performed  secretly  and  in
the  dark,  to  prevent  them  from  being  seen  and  judg-
ed by  the  eye  of  God  or  man,  originated  with  the
prince  of  darkness,  are  influenced  by  a  base  and  foul
spirit,  are  the  effects  of  guilt,  entered  by  the  fail,  and
degrade  the  dignity  of  man  below  the  order  of  the
brutes  of  the  field.

47.  And  that  all  the  hidden  works  of  darkness  are
of  such  a  base  nature,  would  immediately  appear,
were  all  the  secret  actions  of  the  human  species  to  be


18  THE  NATURE  AND  EFFECTS  OS*  P.  L

€  ntP# Perf°rmed  openly  and  in  the  sight  of  all  men. Sure-
__  ly  then,  the  sins  of  the  present  generation  would  be
found  to  exceed  those  of  Sodom,  and  their  cry  imme-
diately ascend  up  to  heaven  i

48.  And  as  God  is  a  God  of  perfect  light  and  puri-
i  Johni.  ty^  anc|  -m  }^m  }s  no  sjn  or  darkness  at  all,  therefore,

every  work  or  action  that  requires  to  be  performed
secretly  and  in  the  dark,  as  well  as  every  sin  that  men
commit,  whether  secretly  or  openly,  are  ail  directly
contrary  to  his  purity  and  holiness,  are  condemned  by
the  light  of  his  presence  as  evil,  and  exposed  to  his
righteous  indignation.  %

49.  All  tyranny  and  oppression,  of  whatever  name
or  kind  under  heaven ;  all  wars  and  fightings ;  all
slavery  and  involuntary  servitude,  of  whatever  sex,
grade  or  colour,  barbarous  or  civilized,  proceeded
from  the  devil,  that  old  enemy  to  the  peace  and  hap-
piness of  mankind,  and  entered  by  the  fall,  and  is  a
present  and  direct  violation  of  the  just  and  righteous
laws  of  heaven.

50.  And  also  all  treachery,  or  breach  of  faith  in
point  of  office  or  trust,  relating  to  the  benefit  of  soci-
ety ;  all  negligence  of  moral  duty  in  parents  to  chil-
dren, and  of  disobedience  in  children  to  parents  ;  all
unjust  and  unfair  dealing  with  friend  or  foe ;  all  civil
fraud,  and  sacred  hypocrisy ;  all  indolence  and  sloth,
deceit  and  lying.

51.  All  these,  and  every  other  evil  are  the  effects
of  the  fall,  through  the  violation  of  the  righteous  Jaws
of  God,  are  degrading  to  the  dignity  of  man,  and  are
the  fruits  of  an  evil  and  corrupt  tree,  implanted  by  the
serpent  in  man's  very  heart  and  disposition.  As  it  is
written.

52.  Either  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good  ;
Matt.xiL  or  else  make  the  tree  corrupt,  and  his  fruit  corrupt :
33, 34. j*Qr  tjie  tree  £8  known  by  hir,  fruit. O  generation  of  vi-
pers !  how  can  ye,  being  till,  speak  good  things  ?  for
out  of  the  abundance  of  the  Heart  the  mouth  s/ieaketh.

53.  For  from  within,  out  of  the  heart  of  men,  pro*
Mark  vn.  cecd  evil  thought*,  adulteries, fornication^  murders^
31,22, 23.  tjlf>jts^  covetousness,  wickedness*,  deceit,  lasciviousness,

an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,  foolishness. All ttese
come  from  within,  and  defile  the  man.


P.  I. man's  fall  from  his  first  rectitude.  19

54.  Although  the  root  and  fountain  of  all  sin  and  CI^P'
iniquity,  which  entered  into  the  nature,  and  captivated  -
the  soul  of  man  by  the  fall,  was  not  to  be  fully  reveal-
ed until  Christ  should  make  his  second  appearing  ;

yet  more  or  less  in  every  age  since  his  first  appearing,
there  have  been  those  who  have  borne  a  testimony
against  the  root  of  sin,  according  to  that  measure  of
light  which  they  possessed.

55.  For  every  degree  of  light  that  goes  to  discover

sin,  be  it  more  or  less,  is  of  God  ;  and  every  spirit,  Jam.li?.
that  goes  to  conceal  it,  is  a  spirit  of  darkness,  and  ari-  Jj*"*"*"
ses  from  a  contrary  source. And  here  it  may  not  be
improper  to  add  a  few  sentences  from  the  writings  of
Thomas  Boston.

56.  "  Man  certainly  is  sunk  very  low  now,  in  com-  Four-foia

*  parison  of  what  he  once  was,  God  made  him  but  a  p^*1^
4  little  lower  than  the  angels  :  but  now  we  find  him &i.

'  likened  to  the  beasts  that  perish  :  he  hearkened  to  a

x  brute  ;  and  is  now  become  like  one  of  them — mind-  f<£*I,tai

1  ing  only  earthly  things. Nay,  brutes,  in  some  sort,

*  have  the  advantage  of  the  natural  man,  who  is  sunk
1  a  degree  below  them  :  He  is  more  witless  in  what

c  concerns  him  most — He  is  more  stufiid  than  the  ox  isa.  l  a
'  or  ass.*"

57.  "  Nay  more  than  all  this,  the  scripture  holds
■'  out  the  natural  man,  not  oniy  as  wanting  the  good

*  qualities  of  those  creatures  ;  but  as  a  compound  of
4  the  evil  qualities  of  the  worst  of  the  creatures — the
'*  fierceness  of  the  lion,  the  filthiness  of  the  dog  and

*  swine,  the  poison  of  the  asp.  and  such  like. Truth Matt.

i  itself  calls  them  serpents,  a  generation of  vijicrs  ;  joh£4fc

*  yea,  more,  even  clrildren  of  the  de~uil. Surely  then  44«
4  man's  nature  is  miserably  corrupted."

58.  "  Cast  your  eye  upon  these  terrible  convulsions
i  the  world  is  thrown  into  by  the  lust  of  men:  Lions.
4  make  not  a  prey  of  lions,  nor  wolves  of  wolves  ;  but
4  men  are  turned  wolves  to  one  another,  biting  and

jp  devouring  one  another  !  Upon  how  slight  occasions
f  will  men  sheath  their  swords  in  one  another's  bow-
l  els  !  These  violent  heats  among  Adam's  sons,  speak

*  the  whole  body  to  be  distempered — They  surely  pro-

1  ceed  from  an  inward  cause,  Lusts  that  ivar  in  the  jaaur.-i;

*  members .*'


20  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY, OR  P.  I,


CHAP.
IV.


59.  "  Laws  are  often  made  to  yield  to  men's  lusts —
_  4  And  seldom  is  there  a  time  wherein  there  are  not

4  some  persons  so  great  and  daring-,  that  the  laws  dare
4  not  look  their  impetuous  Lusts  in  the  face."

60.  "  Men  live  as  if  they  were  nothing  but  a  lump
Tto-n.viii.  <  0f  flesh — They  are  fie  sh,  they  mind  the  things  of  the

'  fiesh,  and  they  live  after  the  fitsh — If  the  consent  of
4  the  flesh  be  got  to  an  action,  the  consent  of  the  con-
4  science  is  rarely  waited  for  :  yea,  the  body  is  often
4  served,  when  the  conscience  has  entered  a  dissent."

61.  "  The  mind  of  man  has  a  natural  dexteiity  to
c  devise  mischief:  none  are  so  simple  as  to  want  skill
4  to  contrive  ways  to  gratify  their  lusts,  and  ruin  their
4  souls — None  needs  to  be  taught  this  black  art ;  but
4  as  weeds  grow  up,  of  their  own  accord,  in  the  neg-
4  lected  ground,  so  doth  this  wisdom,  ( Which  is
1  earthly,  sensual,  devilish)  grow  up  in  the  minds  of
4  men,  by  virtue  of  the  corruption  of  their  nature."

62.  "  Doth  not  the  carnal  mind  naturally  strive  to
4  grasp  spiritual  things  in  imagination,  as  if  the  soul
4  were  quite  immersed  in  flesh  and  blood,  and  would

S<u)n'?*  i  turn  cverv  thing  into  its  own  shape  ?  And  hence  are
Four-rud  <  horrible,  monstrous,  and  misshapen  thoughts  of  God,
^S^58.'  '  Chri3t,  the  glory  above,  and  all spiritual  things."

63.  Such  then,  are  the  evil,  and  deplorable  effects
of  man's  fall  from  his  first  rectitude,  to  which  the
heavens  and  the  earth  bear  witness.


CHAPTER  IV.


The  Mystery  of  Iniquity,  or  the  Man  of  Sin  revealed  :
His  Riae  in  the  Fall  of  Man  ;  by  the  Subversion  of
the  Original  Order  and  Law  cf  God.

MAN  being  created  male  and  female,  with  a  liv-
ing soul,  in which  was  implanted  the  image
and  law  of  an  all-wise,  and  perfectly  holy  God  ;  and
bein^  united  to  a  terrestrial  body,  endowed  with  animal  j
faculties,  sensations  and  affections,  which  all  originated  j
from  the  fountain  of  true  happiness  and  everlasting;


P.I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  21

life,  he  stood  in  a  noble  capacity  to  honour  and  glorify  CI*£p-
his  Creator.

2.  Thus  man  in  his  state  of  innocence,  stood  as  the
temple  of  God. As  it  is  written,  Ye  are  the  temple  &/\Cor  Ui
the  living  God. Here  were  deposited  his  righteous ie.
laws  and  commands,  relating  to  the  order  and  govern-  2  J;.**
ment  of  the  creation.

3.  While  as  yet  the  man  stood  alone,  before  the
woman  was  formed,  the  Lord  God  brought  unto  Adam
every  beast  of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  G€n...l)
whatsoever  he  called  every  living  creature,  that  was  20.
the  name  thereof. But  among  all  those,  for  Adam
there  was  not  found  an  help  to  be  with  him.

4.  Now,  upon  the  supposition  that  it  might  still
have  continued  so,  the  deficiency  in  the  order  and  glo-
ry of  the  creation  of  man  would  as  sensibly  appear,  as
it  would  for  the  natural  body  of  a  rational  man,  to  be
divided  into  two  equal  parts,  the  one  part  made  extinct,
and  the  other  left  destitute  of  those  co-operating  parts,
without  which  his  body  could  not  be  complete,  nor
his  glory  augmented.

5.  But  the  Lord  God,  seeing  that  it  was  not  good
for  the  man  to  be  alone,  formed  him  in  two  parts,

male  and  female  ;  and  these  two  parts  constituted  one  ci^p.  «.
entire,  and  complete  man,  as  hath  been  observed.  W*w

6.  And  in  this  capacity,  they  were  endowed  with  co-
operating faculties,  sensations  and  affections  ;  which
arising  from  the  true  source  of  all  goodness,  were
pure,  innocent  and  lovely,  and  were  thus  calculated  to
be  influenced  by  proper  objects,  to  augment  their  hap-
piness, as  well  as  the  honour  and  visible  glory  of  the
Creator.

7.  Consider  then,  as  the  living  soul  of  man,  with
all  its  rational  faculties,  in  which  the  perfect  law  of
God  was  implanted,  was  superior  to  all  the  animal
sensations,  faculties  or  affections  of  his  natural  body  ;
therefore,  sin  could  not  enter  into  man,  but  by  a  wil-
ling sacrifice  of  his  reason,  and  a  direct  violation  of
God's  law.

8.  And  when  man  had  once  sacrificed  his  reason,
and  violated  God's  express  command,  by  obeying  the
voice  of  the  serpent  through  the  woman  ;  then  the
true  order  of  God  in  the  obedience  of  the  inferior  to


$2  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  OR  P. L

CJ£P*  the  superior,  was  not  only  subverted,  but  sin  found
an  easy  entrance  into  man,  who  stood  as  God's  tem-
ple, claiming  the  sole  right  to  man's  obedience,  shav-
ing himself  that  he  is  God.

9.  So  that  it  was  by  the  first  man's  disobedience*
that  sin  entered  into  the world, and  death  by  sin,

Bora.  v.  forasmuch  as  death  is  the  wages  of sin. And  so

*& death  passed  upon  all  men,  in  that  all  Adam's  poster-

ity  have  sinned. And  therefore  sin  is  not  imputed  to

any,  merely  on  account  of  Adam's  original  sin  and

transgression,  but  their  own  sins  are  imputed  to  them.

«ri$L20. The  soul  thai  dnneth  it  shall  die.

10.  And  as  by  a  subversion  of  the  true  order  of
God,  and  the  express  violation  of  his  law,  sin  enter-
ed into  the  world,  so  it  took  the  possession  and  gov-
ernment of  all  those  faculties  and  affections  of  body
and  mind,  which  had  constituted  man  a  noble  creat-
ure in  his  state  of  innocence.

1 1.  And  thus,  sin,  taking  possession  of  all  that  con-
stituted man  in  his  innocent  state,  constituted  himself
The  Man  of  Sin,  and  placed  himself  as  God,  in  the
highest  and  most  noble  seat  of  man's  affections  :  and,
there  he  sat,  ever  ready  to  oppose  and  exalt  himself

sThesii.  ahove  and  against every work  and  dispensation  of.
God's  grace.

12.  And  this  he  did  particularly  in  the  days  of
Christ's  first  appearing,  because  he  was  essentially
disturbed.  As  saith  St.  Paul,  The  mystery  of  iniquity
doth  already  work.

13.  Here  then,  even  in  the  fall  of  man  from  his  first
rectitude,  was  the  rise  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  that  Son  of
Perdition ;  and  not  in  some  certain  man,  or  set  of
men  called  Popes,  four  or  five  thousand  years  after
man  had  received  the  very  nature  and  disposition  of
the  serpent.  Nay,  when  sin  first  entered  into  man,
there  was  the  beginning  of  the  Man  of  Sin.

Hom.xiii. 14,  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  God's  pure  and  per-

io. feet  law. The  highest, and  most  noble  of  all  those

7,J8~is?  affections  which  God  placed  in  man,  and  the  chief  and

Rom.v.5.  jeaciing  motive  of  all  his  actions,  was  love. While

this  remained in  its  original  purity  and  perfection,

there  could  be  no  transgression  j  nor  any  cause  of

fear  or  shame.


P.  L  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  23

15.  But  When  man  rebelled  against  his  Creator,  CI*$f-
and  all  his  sweet  and  noble  disposition  and  affections  ,
became  converted  into  the  foul  and  rebellious  nature

of  the  serpent,  then  was  love  converted  into  lust,
and  made  the  principal  seat,  and  fountain  head  of  the
whole  serpent's  nature  and  influence  ;  the  sole  lead-
ing cause  of  every  vile  affection,  and  of  every  evil
work  ;  and  the  primary  object  of  man's  obedience.

16.  And  hence  it  is,  that  Christ  not  only  calls  the
fallen  race  of  Adam,  serfients,  and  a  generation  of  vi-
pers, but  further  says,  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  Devil,  ^"j.
and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do. And  hence  Johnviii.
Cruden  also among  many  others, calls lust,  "  that  concorf.
*  original  corruption  which  inclines  men  to  sin  and  j*££

<  evil."

17.  And  thenceforth,  even  from  man's  first  rebel-
lion, the  fallen  posterity  of  Adam  and  Eve,  could  call
lust,  by  the  name  ?of  love,  with  the  same  propri-
ety, and  through  the  same  old  deceitful  and  foul  spir-
it, by  which  the  first  deceived  woman,  could  call  a
murderer,  the  first  fruit  of  her  rebellion,  A  man  from  een.ir.fc
the  Lord  I

18.  And  herein  lies  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  and
the  very  mystery  of  iniquity,  in  believing  that  to  be
love,  which  in  truth  is  nothing  but  lust,  and  thus
pretending  to  claim  a  just  and  innocent  right  to  the
original  law  and  order  of  God,  as  though  it  had  never
been  violated.  Which  is  verily,  The  face  of  the  cov-  Isai#xxv<
cring  cast  over  all  fieojile,  and  the  veil  that  is  sfiread  ?•
over  all  n at ions.

19.  Doubtless  it  will  be  granted,  that  a  violation  of  the
good  and  wholesome  laws  of  a  nation,  in  a  case  of  trea-
son, is  a  political  iniquity  ;  and  that  the  man  who  ei-
ther directly  or  indirectly,  violates  the  laws  that  are
calculated  to  promote  the  peace  and  welfare  of  the
nation,  excludes  himself  from  any  active  part  in  the
administration  of  those  laws.

20.  And  further,  that  neither  he,  nor  his  confed-
erates, nor  any  of  their  descendants  in  the  same  line
of  treachery  and  rebellion,  could  ever  claim  any  ben*
efits  arising  from  those  laws,  under  any  pretext  what-
ever ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  whole  law  must  stand
$s  a  pointed  testimony,  to  judge  and  condemn  the  de*

F  2 '


24  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY, OR  P.  I.

eiiv.P'  l^quents,  and  to  show  them  the  foulness  of  their
-  crime.

2 1 .  And  should  these  traitors,  after  the  most  noto-
rious violation  of  the  laws  in  a  case  of  high  treason*
be  able  to  insinuate  themselves  into  the  government*
and  finally  supplant  the  nation  by  foreign  oppression*
under  pretence  of  supporting  its  original  rights  of
freedom,  here  indeed,  would  be  a  political  mystery  of
iniquity,

22.  Such  is  the  case  of  which  we  are  speaking.
And  such  is  the  nature  of  the  laws  of  men,  which
have  arisen  from  second  causes.  Then  shall  it  be
supposed,  that  the  original  and  perfectly  pure  and
just  laws  of  the  Most  High  God,  are  of  less  conse-
quence than  those  of  men  ?  Shall  they  be  violated
with  impunity,  and  that  too  under  a  pretext  of  obe-
dience, without  God's  notice  ?

Gai.vi.7.  23.  Nay  verily,  let  it  never  be  thought.  God  is  not
icor.vi.  mocked:  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also
9, 10. reap. He  that  soweth  to  his  flesh,  shall of  the  flesh

reafi  corruption.  The  unrighteous  shall  not  iytficrit  the
^ror.  xj.  icing(iom  Gj-  Qod. And  though  hand  join  in  hand)  the

ivicked  shall  not  be  unpunished.

24.  The  very  laws  of  nature,  being  given  of  God  in
their  pure  and  original  state,  were  in  themselves  eter-
nal, and  laid  man  under  the  most  solemn  obligation's
to  obedience,  and  that  precisely  according  to  the  di-
rections of  the  law-giver.

25.  And  as  the  law  was  in  itself  eternal,  and  per~
fectly  consistent  with  the  light  and  reason  of  his  living-
soul ;  therefore  every  part  of  it  must  be  punctually
obeyed  according  to  this,  and  not  according  to  the
dictates  of  the  serpent,  nor  the  animal  passions  of  an
inferior  nature.

26.  The  violation  of  the  law  of  God,  which  inclu-
ded the  violation  of  the  law  oi  nature,  by  Adam  the
first,  was  of  the  most  potent  and  universal  kind,  as  is
abundantly  acknowledged  by  many  sensible  writers.
Concerning  which  Boston  has  the  following  expres-
sions.

27.  "  Their  sin  was  a  complication  of  evils,  a  total
Itotef°pd  c  aPostacy  from  God,  a  violation  of  the  whole  law.
ves  &  ' *  By  it  they  broke  all  the  ten  commandments  at  once.


P.  I;  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED,  2S

*  They  chose  new  Gods. They  made  their  belly  their  *****
4  God,  by  their  sensuality;  self  their God,  by  their

<  ambition  ;  yea,  and  the  Devil  their  God,  by  believ-

*  ing  him,  and  disbelieving  their  Maker."'

28.  "  Though  they  received,  yet  they  observed  not
c  that  ordinance  of  God,  about  the  forbidden  fruit.
i  They  contemned  that  ordinance  so  plainly  enjoined
1  them,  and  would  needs  carve  out  to  themselves  how
4  to  serve  the  Lord."

29.  Again,  says  Cruden^  "  The  honour  and  majes-

c  ty  of  the whole  law, was  violated  in  the  breach  of  aSj  %

<  that  symbolical  precept : [of  eating  of  the  forbidden  FalL

*  fruit :]  many  sins  were  combined  in  that  single  act."

30.  "  Infidelity  :  This  was  the  first  step  to  ruin.
1  When  he  distrusted  the  fountain  of  truth,  he  gave
'  credit  to  the  father  of  lies.  This  sin  included  in  it
'  prodigious  /iride.  No  sooner  created  but  he  aspired
4  to  be  as  God." -

31.  "Horrid  Ingratitude: Now  in  the  midst  of

*  such  variety  and  plenty,  to  be  inflamed  with  the  in-
4  temperate  appetite  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  to
4  break  a  command  so  equal  and  easy,  what  was  it  but
4  a  despising  the  rich  goodness  of  his  great  bene-
4  factor?"

32.  "  Unaccountable  and  amazing  folly  :  What  a
1  despicable  acquisition  tempted  him  out  of  his  hap-
4  piness  ! — That  the  pleasures  of  taste  and  curiosity
i  should  outvie  the  favour  of  God — is  the  reproach  of
4  his  reason,  and  makes  the  choice  so  criminal."

33.  "  A  bloody  cruelty  to  himself  and  to  all  his  fios*
4  terity :  Giving  a  ready  ear  to  the  tempter,  he  be-
4  trayed  his  trust,  and  at  once  breaks  both  the  tables

*  of  the  law,  and  becomes  guilty  of  the  highest  im-
4  piety  and  cruelty."

34.  Then  certainly,  it  must  be  evident  that  the  sin
of  Adam,  including  his  posterity,  who  still  continue  in
the  same  line  of  sin  and  rebellion,  is  in  a  spiritual
sense,  at  least  equal,  if  not  far  superior  in  magnitude,
to  what  might  be  called  the  highest  treason  in  a  politi-
cal sense.

35.  And  therefore,  the  fallen  and  still  sinning  pos-
terity of  Adam,  could  never  after  the  fall,  claim  any
iwore  right  to  those  once  violated  laws  of  heaven*


26  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY*  OR  P. I,


CHAP.
IV.


under  any  pretence  whatever  of  keeping  them,  than
__.  Benedict  Arnold  and  his  confederates,  could  have
claimed  an  active  part  in  the  free  government  of
America,  after  the  most  pointed  violation  and  breach
of  national  trust,  by  his  notoriously  treacherous  con-
duct at  West-Point.

36.  What  the  ain  of  Adam  and  Eve  was,  and  how
that  sin  has  been  propagated  by  their  posterity,  has
been  very  pointedly  hinted  at  by  many  candid  and  sensi-

SThes.H.  ]}je  men  :  kut  now  that  sin  has  been  kept  concealed
under  a  veil,  has  not  been  brought  to  light ;  nor  could
it  be,  until  the  time  appointed  of  God.

37.  At  present,  the  strict  demands  of  light  and  truth
require  the  veil  to  be  removed,  and  the  mystery  of  sin
to  be  revealed.  Of  what  some  have  written  particu-
larly on  this  subject,  a  few  things  may  here  be  noticed.

38.  "  The  scripture"  says  Crutfen,  "  proves  in
c  many  places,  that  the  sin  of  Adam  was  communica-
'  ted  to  all  his  posterity,  ["  by  ordinary  generation"}

Eph.il  3.  <  anc|  that  it  has  infected  and  corrupted  it. We  are  by
4  nature  the  children  of  wrath  ;  that  is,  liable  to  pun-
Rom.  v. ?  ishment,  and  that  hath  relation  to  guilt. By  one
12#  4  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin,  and

4  so  death  passed  ufion  all  men,  as  a  just  sentence  upon
4  the  guilty,  for  that  all  have  sinned. Job  describes
Jobxiv.4.  4  this  sin, Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  un-

4  clean  ?  not  one"

^lick?' 39.  "  It  is  the  universal  law  of  nature,  that  every

sin. 4  thing  produces  its  like,  not  only  in  regard  of  the

4  same  nature,  that  is  propagated  from  one  individual

Article *  t0  anot^ier>  without  a  change  of  the  species,  but  in

corrupt  4  respect  of  the  qualities with  which  that  nature  is

**• <  eminently  affected."

40.  Again,  says  JDavies,  "  Flesh  of  flesh,  and  spir-
al, hl  4  it  of  spirit.  This  is  according  to  the  established
Ser.  48. t  jaws  Q£  generafion5  DV  which  every  thing  begets  its

4  like."  And  therefore  by  the  works  of  generation,
sin  must  be  propagated,  and  nourished  by  the  indus-
try of  its  propagators,  otherwise  sin  could  not  be  in
x&t.  of  the  world.  Hence  the  words  of  Edwards  are  very
p.  48^*  true,  when  speaking  of  Adam  and  Eve,  he  saith,
44  All  their  posterity,  by  ordinary  generation,  are  par-
4  takers  of  the  fall,  and  of  the  corruption  of  nature  that
4  followed  from  it."


P.  I.  THE  MAN  OF  SiN  REVEALED.  $?

41.  Again,  says  Ostcrwald,  that  sin  is  "  propaga-  CI*£P-
ted  by  the  body,  which  pollutes  the  soul,  may  be  pro-


4  ved  from  scripture,  which  ascribes  the  fountain  of  Gai.r.io,
*  sin  to  the  body,  and  the  ilesh  ;  »and  therefore  exhorts  &c-
4  us  to subdue the flesh. Dearly beloved — abstain  iPet.ii.n
i  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  sow:/.— Adam  Gen.  ifr
4  and  Eve  sinned  freely,  and  voluntarily, being  de- 6'  7*
4  ceived  by  the  Devil  and  their  own  lust."

42.  "  That  the  cause  of  sin  is  to  be  found  in  man  ch.Theo.
4  alone,  is  evident,  not  only  from  the  history  of  Adam's  p;1j^iU'
4  fall,  but  likewise  from  our  own  experience.  For  us,  u$*
4  we  sin  in  the  same  manner  as  Adam  did,  viz.  against

4  the  divine  law,  voluntarily,  and  being  seduced  by  our
4  own  lusts."

43.  Again,  says  Boston,  "  The  corruption  of  na-
ture is  the  river-head,  which  has  many  particular
4  lusts,  in  which  it  runs. — What  doth  it  avail  to  re-
4  form  in  other  sins,  while  the  great  reigning  sin  re*
4  mains  in  its  full  power  ?  What  though  some  partic-
4  ular  lust  be  broken  ;  if  that  sin,  [namely,  the  lust  of
4  the  flesh,]  the  sin  of  our  nature,  keep  the  throne,  it
4  will  set  up  another  in  its  stead — and,  while  it  stands
4  entire,  there  is  no  victory."

44.  44  It  is  an  hereditary  evil, — propagated  in  na-  Fourfold
4  ture,  [or  "  conveyed  by  natural  generation."]  Con-  States  p-
4  sider  the  confession  of  David,  Behold  I  was  shafien  107, iqs.
4  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me.

4  Here  he  ascends  from  his  actual  sin  to  the  fountain
4  of  it."

45.  "  By  tliis  sin,"  [of  Adam  and  Eve]  says  the

4  Westminster  assembly,  "  they  fell  from  their  ori-  confer

4  ginal  righteousness,  and  communion  with  God,  and  of  Faitlw

4  so  became  dead  in  sin,  and  wholly  defiled  in  all  the

4  faculties  and  parts  of  soul  and  body. They  being

4  the  root  of  all  mankind — the  same  death,  in  sin  and

4  corrupted  nature,  was  conveyed  to  all  their  poster-

4  ity,  descending  from  them  by  ordinary  generation.

4  From  which  original  corruption,  do  proceed  all  ac-

1  tual  transgressions."

46.  All  of  which  is  strictly  true,  as  they  have  abun-
dantly proved,  not  only  from  matters  of  fact,  but  from
the  most  pointed  testimony  of  the  sacred  writings  ;
such  as  the  following.


2S  THE  MYSTERY  OF.INIQUITY,  OR  P.  T.

CHAP. 4ft  «  j$nci  tjie  eyes  Qf  them  froth  were  ofiened,  and
___  '  they  knew  that  they  were  naked  :  and  they  sewed  fig-


Gen.in.7.  '  leaves  together  and  made  themselves  afirons.  That
John  iii. i  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh." And,  u  Every

4  man  is  temfited  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  lusty
,Tam.i.i4»  i  and  enticed.  Then  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bring-
X5t  '  eth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth

< forth  death" And  many  more  proofs  to  the  same

purpose.

48.  Certainly  then,  were  it  not  that  some  misgui-
ded and  sanctimonious  priesthood  had  invented  si
scheme  to  gratify  Lust,  under  the  alluring  and  spe-
cious pretext  of  fulfilling  an  original,  and  afterwards
basely  violated  law  of  nature,  which  God  gave  to
Adam  in  his  state  of  innocence  ;  it  would  verily  seem,
that  the  very  seat  and  fountain  head  of  all  sin  and  cor-
ruption, might  have  been  discovered  at  once,  to  open
view,  by  no  more  than  the  bare  removal  of  a  fig -leaf

49.  For  they  have  pointedly  proved,  that  the  sin  of
Adam  and  Eve  was  conveyed  to  their  posterity  by  the
works  of  natural  generation  ;  that  all  their  posterity-
are  shapen  in  iniquity  and  conceived  in  sin  ;  that  the
original  corruption  of  Adam  and  Eve,  which  con-
ceived and  brought  forth  sin,  was  Lust ;  and  that
when  Lust  had  conceived  and  brought  forth  sin,  the
eyes  of  them  both  were  opened)  and  they  knew  that
they  were  naked.

50.  What  could  they  have  said  plainer  ;  unless  they
had  pointedly  said,  that  their  eating  the  forbidden
fruit,  was  the  very  act  by  which  Adam  knew  Eve  his
wife,  when  she  conceived  and  brought  forth  a  mur-
derer?

51.  Here  then  is  the  mystery  of  the  iniquity  ;  first
pointedly  and  clearly  showing  what  the  very  root  of
all  sin  is,  and  how  sin  is  propagated  ;  and  then  again
concealing  the  whole  matter  under  the  specious  pre-
text of  a  command  or  an  ordinance  of  God,  so  abun-
dantly acknowledged  to  have  been  most  basely  vio-
lated. What !  is  God  the  author  of  sin  ?  Nay,  in  nc»
wise  ;  the  same  writers  have  justly  proved  that  he
is  not !

52.  It  is  certain  that  the  law  of  nature  which  forms
a  cloud,  unci  spreads  it  over  the  earth,  creates  it  for


P.  L  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  29

the  purpose  of  watering  the  earth,  and  causing  it  to  ci*ap.
be  fruitful.

53.  And  it  is  equally  certain,  that  the  law  of  the
eternal  word,  which  created  man  soul  and  body,  male
and  female,  intended  by  the  very  law  of  their  crea-
tion, that  they  should  be  fruitful  and  multifily,  and
rejilenish  the  earthy  and  subdue  it.

54.  For  this  very  purpose,  they  were  endowed  with
those  animal  faculties  and  sensations,  which  in  due
subordination  to  the  law  and  command  of  God,  would
have  innocently  constituted  them  one  flesh,  in  the  work
of  generation.

55.  But  it  is  as  certain  and  positive  a  truth,  that
those  instincts  of  nature,  or  animab  properties  never
were  intended  to  lead  and  govern  the  soul,  or  even
to  act*  without  the  soul's  decided  approbation.  And
therefore,  while  the^soul  kept  its  first  rectitude,  and
subdued  every  inferior  passion,  which  might  arise  in
consequence  of  his  state  of  probation,  there  never
could  have  been  the  least  cause  or  foundation  for
shame.

56.  And  thus,  while  the  man  and  the  woman  stood
in  uprightness  and  innocence,  they  were  both  naked,
and  were  not  ashamed,  "  which  certainly  implies,"
says  a  judicious  author,  "  not  only  that  their  naked-

*  ness  was  no  just  cause  of  shame,  but  that  they  nev-
c  er  could  have  known  it,  had  their  innocence  con-
<  tinned."

57.  «  Before  the  fall,  they  doubtless  knew  that  they
c  had  no  cloathing  ;  but  now  their  eyes  were  opened,

*  and  they  had acquired  a  criminal  Knowledge,  and  Hkt.  of

*  became sensible  of  a  passion,  to  which they  had  p.  70™''
1  ever  before  been  strangers,  nan  oly,  shame."

58.  "  The  origin  of  this  will  be  easier  to  account
'  for,  if  we  suppose  with  some,*  t^;at  the  juice  of  this
4  tree  was  inebriating  [i.  e.  intox  ath)g  ;]  since  we
'  know  from  common  observation,  that  juice-  of  such

*  a  quality  will excite debauchery,  produce strange

-*  Miiton  gives  a  rtrikihg  description  of  the  effects  of  the  forbidden  fruit  on
Adam  and  Eve,  in  the  following  lines :

« ■ ■ But  that  false  fruit

u  Carnal  desire  inflaming- ;  he  on  Eve
u  Began  to  cast  lascivious  tves,  :\ him
**  As  wantonly  repaid ;  in  lust  they  burn."

Por^dm  Lost,  Book  IX.


SO  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  OP.  P.X

Cr^p-  c  commotions  in  the  animal  frame,  and  give  a  strong
.  f  predominancy  to  the  animal  appetites."

5£.  "  Under  these  circumstances  we  need  not  won-
i  der  at  the  subterfuges,  [tricks  or  evasions]  to  which

<  they  ran,  since  it  is  never  expected  that  the  conduct
4  of  persons  under  the  power  of  intoxication,  or  the

<  oppression  of  guilt,  should  be  perfectly  consistent
'  with  the  rules  of  cool  reflection."

60.  According  to  the  above,  shame  was  the  effect
of  a  criminal  knowledge,  which  is  most  strictly  true.
By  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  they  knew  that  they
were  naked  ;  and  hence  that  shameful  act  is  so  com-
monly expressed  by  the  term  knowing.

61.  Adam  knew  Eve  his  wife.  Doubtless  he  was
well  acquainted  with  her  before  ;  but  now  he  knew
her  in  a  shameful  and  criminal  manner,  in  conse-
quence of  which  they  walked  naked,  and  their  shame
appeared.  And  from  hence  the  above  author  makes
the  following  plain  observation.

62.  "  It  is  remarkable,  that  the  custom  of  covering
Kedemp.  i  the  private  parts  should  so  generally  obtain,  even
v' n' c  among  barbarous  nations  ;  an  entire  disuse  of  cloath-

4  ing  in  both  sexes,  is,  perhaps  no  where  practised,
'  except  where  promiscuous  intercourse  is  also  allow-
i  ed,  and  men  and  women  couple  like  the  brutes."

63.  Therefore  as  shame  is  the  effect  of  a  criminal
knowledge,  and  as  the  seat  of  that  criminal  know-
ledge is  manifest  by  the  universal  practice  of  all  na-
tions in  hiding  it ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  the  crimi-
nality of  that  knowledge,  arose  from  an  unseasonable,
and  untimely  use  of  those  bodily  organs  and  animal
faculties,  which  were  created  to  be  under  the  govern-
ment and  direction  of  a  superior  law.

64.  And  as  the  first  transgressors  of  the  human
race,  covered  the  parts  with  fig-leaves,  through  whkh
they  had  violated  the  command  of  God  ;  so  under  a
specious  pretext,  sin  has  reigned  since  the  fall,  and
deceived the nations of the earth. And this is

M  £ brought  to  light  that  the  words  of  God  might  be  fill-
W-  ' '  filled  : The  Lord  will  discover  their  secret  parts.

65.  And  yet  that  Lawless  and  unruly  passion  of
Lust,  in  polluting  and  corrupting  the  order  of  crea-
tion, has  claimed  either  the  law  of  nature,  or  the  ex-


P, I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  31

press  command  of  God  for  its  authority  ;  although  it  c*™r*
is  so  evident  that  by  the  very  first  act  of  that  kind  in  ...

which  man  went  forth,  he  violated  not  only  the  law  of
nature,  but  God's  express  command  !

66.  It  is  also  generally  acknowledged,  (as  we  have
shown  from  eminent  authorities,)  that  shame  is  the
effect  of  sin,  and  that  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve  is
conveyed  to  their  posterity  by  the  very  act  of  natural
generation  !

67.  Kow  then  is  it,  that  the  fallen  posterity  of  A-
dam,  have  under  the  sacred  pretext  of  a  command  or
ordinance  of  God,  pretended  to  solemnize  that  which
in  itself  is  profane,  and  to  sanctify  that  unclean  thing,
out  of  which  they  have  proved  to  a  demonstration  that
they  can  bring  nothing  clean  ?

68.  Well  therefore  said  Boston:  "  Adam  confes-  F^£ld

<  scth  his  nakedness*  which  he  could  not  get  denied  ;  p.  49,50.
4  but  not  one  word  he  says  of  his  sins :  here  was  the

i  reason  of  it,  he  would  fain  have  hid  it  if  he  could.
4  Adam's  children  need  not  be  taught  this  hellish  pol-
1  icy  ;  for  before  they  can  well  speak  (if  they  cannot

*  get  the  fact  denied)  they  will  cunningly  lisp  out
i  something  to  lessen  their  fault,  and  lay  the  blame

*  upon  another  1"

69.  "  Nay,  so  natural  is  this  to  men,  that  in  the
f  greatest  of  sins,  they  will  lay  the  fault  upon  God
1  himself — And  was  not  this  one  of  Adam's  tricks  af-

*  ter  his  fall  ?  The  man  said,  The  woman  whom  thou
k  ga-vest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I
i  did  eat.  He  "makes  his  apology  in  the  first  place  r
'  and  then  comes  to  his  confession  !  His  apology  is
i  long,  but  his  confession  is  very  short !  as  if  he  was

*  afraid  his  meaning  should  have  been  mistaken  1"

70.  "  The  woman,  says  he  ;  or  that  woman  I  as  if

<  he  would  have  pointed  the  judge  to  his  own  work —
i  There  was  but  one  woman  then  in  the  world ;  yet
4  she  is  as  carefully  marked  out  in  his  defence,  as  if

<  there  had  been  ten  thousand  !

71.  "  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  me1. Here  he

*  speaks  as  if  he  had  been  ruined  with  God's  gifts  !
'  and  to  make  the  shift  look  the  blacker,  it  is  added

*  to  ail  this,  Thou  gavest  to  be  with  ??ie>  to  stand  by  me

G


32  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  OR  P. I,

crap, c  as  a  helper  !  as  if  he  would  have  fathered  an  ill  de-
' c  sign  upon  the  Lord,  in  giving  him  this  gift !

72.  "  He  says  not,  The  woman  gave  me,  but,  The
y  woman  she  gave  me  !  emphatically,  as  if  he  had  said,
4  She  even  she  gave  me  of  the  tree.  This  much  for
4  his  apology  :  But  his  confession  is  quickly  over. —
4  And  I  did  eat.  And  there  is  nothing  here  to  point
4  to  himself,  and  as  little  to  shew  what  he  had  eaten  : —
4  How  natural  is  this  black  art  to  Adam's  posterity  ?
4  He  that  runs  may  read  it."

73.  So  plainly  have  discerning  men  pointed  out  the
very  root  and  foundation  of  all  iniquity,  and  proved
their  remarks,  not  only  from  the  sacred  writings,  but
from  common  observation,  drawn  from  the  most  no-
ted and  universal  facts.


553


CHAPTER  V.

The  subject  continued.


AFTER  all  that  has  been  said  concerning  the  root
of  human  depravity,  yet  such  is  the  deceitful*
ness  of  that  lawless  and  corrupt  nature  of  the  serpent,
which  man  imbibed  by  the  fall,  and  such  is  the  depth
of  that  Mystery  of  Iniquity,  as  to  claim  its  right  of
indulgence,  under  the  covert  of  the  original  law  of
God  !  An  ordinance  of  heaven  i

2.  And  not  only  so,  but  whenever  it  is  molested  by-
God's  claim  to  the  principal  seat  of  man's  affections,
it  has  the  impertinence  to  question  :  u  How  could
Adam  violate  the  law  of  nature  in  knowing  his  wife,
when  she  was  designedly  made  for  him,  and  nature
had  furnished  them  with  those  faculties  by  which  they
came  together  in  that  order  ?"

3.  Those  who  have  light  and  reason  enough  to
know  what  the  perfect  law  of  nature  requires,  will
not  ask  this  question,  knowing  that  God  is  not  the
author  of  sin,  nor  of  that  lawless  instinct  which  gives
the  predominancy  to  the  animal  appetites,  and  which
debases  the  dignity  of  man  below  the  order  of  the
brutes,  while  it  is  not  governed  by  a  superior  law.


P. I.  *HE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  33


CHAP.
V.


4.  But  to  such  as  (according  to  what  is  written)  know
nothing-  but  what  they  know  naturally,  and even in .  __,
those  things -corrufit  themselves,  and  that  under  a  pre-  j^€  jq,
tended  cloak  of  obeying  God's  command,  the  answer

is  plain  and  evident  from  the  following  natural  simili-
tudes

5.  Would  it  not  be  just  and  right  in  a  wise  and
prudent  parent,  who  had  planted  an  apple  tree  among
the  trees  of  his  garden,  more  excellent  than  the  rest,
for  the  express  use  of  his  children,  to  lay  them  under
an  entire  prohibition  from  eating  or  touching  that  tree,
until  the  fruit  was  fully  ripe  ?  And  would  it  not  be
time  enough  for  that  prohibition  to  be  taken  oif  when
the  fruit  was  ready  for  use  ?

6.  And  should  the  children,  through  some  disor-
derly influence  upon  their  youthful  appetites,  be  so
deceived  by  the  appearance  of  the  blossoms  or  green
fruit,  as  to  pluck  and  eat  them,  would  not  this  be  an
express  violation  of  the  law  of  nature  in  that  case,  as
-Well  as  of  the  express  command  of  their  parent?

7.  Here  then  would  be  the  deceitfulness  of  the
transgression,  in  corrupting  their  blood,  and  continu-
ally abusing  the  tree  and  themselves,  under  the  pre-
tence that  their  father  gave  it  to  them,  and  neither
suffering  their  tree  to  bring  forth  ripe  fruit,  nor  them-
selves to  enjoy  that  benefit  from  it  which  their  father
intended.

8.  The  smallest  capacity  may  apply  this  to  the  ori-
ginal and  present  state  of  Man.  The  law  of  nature
established  in  the  creation  of  man,  could  not  be  infe-
rior to  the  law  established  in  the  tree  yielding  fruit,
whose  seed  is  in  itself;  and  being  regulated  by  the
times  and  seasons  of  God's  appointment,  must  bring
forth  fruit  according  to  that  appointment.

9.  Thus  in  the  creation  of  man,  his  seed  was  in.
himself  by  the  very  law  of  his  existence.  And  had
his  conduct  been  regulated  according  to  God's  ap-
pointment, he  would  have  propagated  his  own  species
agreeable  to  the  perfect  will  of  the  Creator,  and  also
according  to  the  perfect  lav/  of  nature,  in  the  times
and  seasons  which  he  appointed.

10.  Therefore,  by  the  very  existence  of  the  laws
of  creation,  Adam  and  Eve  were  forbidden  to  com*


$4>  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  OH  P. I.

chap.  t0  the  knowledge  of  generation,  until  the  time  ap-
■.  pointed  by  the  Creator. But  as  they  did  not  like  to

retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  and  were  influenced
by  the  serpent  to  counteract  his  laws  ;  hence  they
were  unseasonably  led  into  the  knowledge  of  genera-
tion by  the  devil,  instead  of  being  led  or  directed  by
the  law  of  God.

1 1 .  And  hence  all  the  motions  and  actions  of  man
in  the  works  of  nature,  are  corrupt,  and  contrary  to
the  pure  law  of  the  Creator  ;  yet  deceitfully  covered
under  the  pretence  of  fulfilling  the  original  law  of  na-
ture ;  or  more  deceitfully  and  shamefully  cloaked  un-
der the  plausible,  but  hypocritical  pretence  of  obeying
the  original  commands  of  God,  so  basely  violated.

12.  Again,  take  the  following  similitude.  In  the
year  1302,  the  convention  of  the  state  of  Ohio  form-
ed a  constitution,  in  which  is  the  following  sentence.

Art.  vii.  "  But  no  alteration  of  this  constitution  shall  ever  take
Set.  5. <  piace?  so  as  to  introduce  slavery  or  involuntary  ser-
4  vitude  into  this  state."

13.  Then  in  consequence  of  this  article,  the  citi-
zens of  Ohio  are  forever  secured  in  the  possession  of
their  rights  of  liberty  and  freedom.

1 4.  But  should  a  foreign  slave-holder  infuse  his  prin-
ciples into  the  governor  of  Ohio,  and  he  should  publish
his  sentiments  in  favour  of  slavery,  must  he  not,  upon
the  very  principles  of  the  constitution,  be  deposed
from  his  office  ?  And  should  he  himself  be  determin-
ed to  hold  slaves,  must  he  not  go  entirely  out  of  the
state  ?  And  when  he  is  out  of  the  state,  can  he  have
any  thing  more  to  do  with  the  constitution  or  laws  of
Ohio  ?  or  they  with  him  ?

15.  The  case  is  plain  to  a  demonstration  :  and  al-
though he  may  do  many  things  which  appear  like
what  the  laws  of  Ohio  enjoin,  yet,  while  he  holds
slaves,  and  lives  in  a  slave  country,  these  laws  can
have  no  influence  upon  him,  because  he  is  not  under
their  jurisdiction.

16.  And  should  he  even  take  a  copy  of  the  laws
with  him  into  a  slave  country,  yet  he  could  not  enjoy
the  common  privileges  of  a  citizen  of  Ohio,  for  the

Art.Yin  constitution  expressly  declares  that,  "  There  shall  be
sec  2.  4  neither  slavery  nor  involuntary servitude  in  this


P I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED*  *J

<  state." And  he  is  neither  in  the  state  of  Ohio,  nor  CH*P-
subject  to  its  laws.  r -

17.  Again,  it  is  declared  by  the  same  constitu-
tion, "  That  all  men  have  a  natural  and  indefeasible
4  right  to  worship Almighty  God,  according  to  the

*  dictates  of  conscience  ;  that  no  human  authority  can,  &£'&

*  in  any  case  whatever,  controul  or  interfere  with  the
4  rights  of  conscience — and  that  no  preference  shall

*  ever  be  given,  by  law,  to  any  religious  society  or
4  mode  of  worship."

18.  Here  again,  the  word  ever,  forever  secures  to
the  citizens  of  Ohio,  free  liberty  of  conscience  in
matters  of  religion.

19.  But  should  any  society  remove  out  of  the  bounds
of  the  state,  and  form  a  new  settlement,  where  they
could  establish  their  religion  by  law,  and  institute  the
most  cruel  modes  of  persecution  ;  could  they  claim
any  relation  to  the  iaws  of  Ohio,  because  they  had
once  lived  in  that  state,  and  removed  out  of  it  ?  The
deceitfulness  of  such  a.  pretence  would  be  at  once
manifest.

20.  Then  what  higher  pretence  can  fallen  man
have  to  the  original  constitution  and  commands  of
God  which  he  was  under  before  his  disobedience  ?
Did  he  not  violate  them,  and  become  guilty  of  the
highest  impiety  ?

21.  Nay,  more,  was  he  not  condemned  as  a  trait-
or ?  Yea  veriiy,  and  actually  banished  from  any  right

to  the  tree  of  life. As  it is written, Therefore  the  Gen.  ft.
Lord  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  Eden —  Heb!iii.2.
So  he  drove  out  the  man. And  another  was  appointed  {f^JJ
in  his  stead,  who  faithfully  kept  all  his  Father's  com- 'XV'
mandments — every  one  of  them  !

22.  But  now  fallen  man,  being  banished  from  his
native  soil,  might  take  with  him  a  copy  of  a  basely
violated  law,  together  with  a  corrupt  and  deceitful
spirit  of  the  serpent  whom  he  had  obeyed.  And  in
that  same  corrupt  and  deceitful  spirit  he  might  now
go  forth  and  be  fruitful,  under  pretence  of  obeying
the  command  of  God,  given  in  his  state  of  innocence  ;
and  at  the  same  time,  fill  the  earth  with  corruption
and  violence  I Blood  crying  unto  blood ! while  the

G  2


36  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INiqUlTY,  OR  P. I.


CHAP,
V.


beasts  of  the  field,  more  orderly  than  he,  were  able
-  to  set  him  an  example  of  times  and  seasons  !

23.  Now  Cain  also  might  claim  his  right  to  that
original  and  pure  law  of  nature,  and  obey  the  com-
mand of  God,  to  multtfily  and  replenish  the  earthy  and
at  the  same  time,  abstract  one  from  the  number,  by
imbruing  his  hands  in  his  brother's  blood  !

24.  So  inconsistent,  cruel,  devilish,  and  supreme-
ly deceitful  are  the  demands  of  lust  !  And  yet  it  has
been  gracefully  propagated  under  a  specious  pretext,
by  modern  divines  called,  "  An  holy  ordinance  of
God  ;"  or  concealed  under  the  very  modest  covering
of  a  fig-leaf^  called,  "  The  sin  of  our  Nature  /"

25.  Again,  take  the  following  similitude.  Dr.
JDomes-  Buchan  observes,  that  "  The  Jews,  by  their  laws,
cine.p.27  '  were,  in  certain  cases,  forbid  to  have  any  manner  of
Vj797El'  f  commerce  with  the  diseased  ;  and  indeed  to  this  all

i  wise  legislators  ought  to  have  a  regard.  In  some
'  countries,  diseased  persons  have  actually  been  for-
1  bid  to  marry.  This  is  an  evil  of  a  complicated  kind,
•  a  natural  deformity,  and  political  mischief."

26.  Then,  admitting  such  a  law  to  exist,  as  only
permitted  the  healthy  and  firm  to  propagate  the  spe-
cies, and  some  one,  after  obtaining  licence  by  law,
should  fall  under  a  mortal  consumption,  would  he  be
actuated  by  a  just  regard  to  the  law  in  going-  forth  and
begetting  a  son  in  his  own  likeness  ?  a  partaker  of  his
consumptive  blood  ?  Surely  not.  He  must  be  actu-
ated by  some  other  motive  than  to  fulfil  the  law.

27.  Yet  if  he  chose,  he  might  cover  his  base  mo-
tive with  the  licence  which  he  had  received  while  in
a  state  of  health,  until  he  was  actually  brought  into
judgement,  and  his  character  made  manifest,  that  he
is  not  now  the  person  to  whom  the  licence  was  first
given.

28.  Or  should  his  deplorable  offspring  keep  his  li-
cence, and  try  to  prove  that  the  court  had  licensed
them,  by  licensing  their  once  healthy  father  ;  the  de>-
ceitfulness  of  their  pretext  would  still  be  worse.  And
although  they  might  say,  their  licence  was  given  ac-
cording to  law,  and  therefore  what  they  did  was  law-
ful ;  yet  the  law  could  never  notice  them,  unless  to
reject,  and  cut  them  off  from  the  communion  of  tire
healthy.


P. I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  S7

29.  The weakest  capacity  may  apply  this  case  to  chap.
the  fall  of  man,  and  see at  once  the  deceit  fulness  of ' r
sin,  and  the  subtle  means  by  which,  like  a  strongman
armed,  he  hath  kept  his  palace,  and  his  goods  in  peace.

30.  And  such,  verily,  are  the  deceitful  means  by
which  sin  has  been  concealed  in  a  mystery,  and
kept  the  whole  creation  under  death  and  bondage  ;
servants  to  sin,  and  those  secret  works  of  darkness
which  are  far  beneath  the  perfect  law  of  nature,  and
infinitely  beneath  every  law  and  attribute  that  can  pos-
sibly endure  the  light  or  presence  of  that  God  who  is

A  CONSUMING  FIRE.

3  I.  It  must  be  granted  by  all,  that  God  formed  the
woman  for  the  man,  and  gave  her  to  him,  and  com-
manded them  to  be  fruitful :  at  least,  it  was  a  natural
law  established  in  them  by  the  order  of  creation.  But
how  were  they  fruitful  ?  Did  God  own  that  for  real
fruit  which  they  brought  forth  ?

32.  The  effect  must  be  like  its  cause.  J  good  tree
cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit.  Their  first  fruit  was
a  murderer,  which  proyed  that  the  cause  from  which
he  sprang,  was  something  wholly  different  from  the
original  and  pure  law  of  nature. As  it  is  written,

Cain  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother:  uoiufju;
hence  it  is  certain  that  he  was  not  begotten  of  God,  nor 12-
according  to  his  will,  but  through  the  lusts  of  the  wick-
ed one.

33.  Therefore,  as  the  first  fruit  was  corrupt,  and
proved  itself  the  fruit  of  a  corrupt  tree  ;  hence  it  fol-  i  Cor.  v,
lows,  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  the  whole  lump  of e*
the  fruit  which  that  tree  brought  forth  ever  after,  was

also  corrupt.  Flesh  of  flesh,  foul  spirit  of  foul  spirit,
and  corruption  of  corruption,  according  to  the  estab-
lished, corrupted,  and  perpetually  violated  laws  of
natural  generation.  Hence  it  is,  that  Christ  tells  the
seed  of  Abraham,  «  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,
and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do."

34.  Nevertheless,  the  law  and  the  commandment,
which  God  gave  to  man,  was  in  itself  eternal,  and  al-
though corrupted  and  changed,  as  they  changed  the  R0m.  %
truth  of  God  into  a  lie  ;  yet,  it  could  not  be  destroyed,  23>  2*
but  stiii  remained  as  a  witness  against  the  transgres-


33  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  OK  P. I,

chap. sor# Hence  it  is  written,  The  law  is  holy,  and  the


commandment  holy,  and  just,  and  good.


Rom.  vii.  35'  fr  was  a  just>  h°ly>  and  good  God,  that  com-
*£  manded  man  to  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth.
And  man  was  also  his  pure- offspring.  Of  course,  the
commandment  was  like  him  that  gave  it,  and  him  to
whom  it  was  given,  and  therefore  required,  as  the
fruit,  a  just,  holy,  and  good  seed,  and  without  this,  the
demands  of  that  law  could  never  be  answered.

36.  But  when  man  was  seduced,  by  the  nature  of
the  serpent  in  the  woman,  he  became  carnal,  and  sold
under  sin,  and  led  captive  by  a  law  in  his  member  s^
which  was  contrary  to  the  original  law  of  his  mind.

37.  Therefore,  the  commandment,  which  was  in
itself  spiritual,  and  given  to  one  who  was  pure  and
upright,  and  called  for  the  same  kind  of  fruit,  could
by  no  means  apply  to  one  who  was  fallen  from  his  first
rectitude,  and  whose  very  nature  was  corrupt.

38.  Yet,  as  the  law  of  nature  stood,  being  in  itself
eternal,  and  the  commandment  was  intended  to  stand,
until  the  true  spiritual  seed  should  appear,  it  gave  oc-
casion to  the  greatest  possible  deception ;  as  saith  St.

.Hom.vii.  Paul  concerning  the  law  of God. Sin,  taking  occa-
*2j123.1  '  sion  by  the  commandment,  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of
concupiscence. For  sin,  taking  occasion  by  the  com*
mandment,  deceived  me,  and  by  it  slew  me,

39.  Was  then,  that  which  is  good  made  death  unto
me  ?  By  no  means  :  But  sin,  that  it  might  appear  sin,
'working'  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good  ;  that  sin  by
the  commandment  might  become  exceeding  sinful.  For
I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man.  But
I  see  another  law  in  my  members  warring  against  the
law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  the
law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members,

40.  And  thus,  while  the  original  law  and  com-
mandment required  upright  man  to  be  fruitful,  it
could  only  work  in  fallen  man  all  manner  of  concu-
piscence.

41.  And  so  long  as  he  imagined,  by  that  deceitful
and  corrupt  nature  of  the  serpent,  that  the  command
was  to  him,  he  was  essentially  deceived,  and  the  very
fruit  of  his  pretended  obedience  stood  as  a  witness  to
condemn  him,  and  to  prove  that  he  was  not  the  one


P. I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  39

who  could  answer  the  demands  of  a  perfectly  holy  and  Chap.
just  law.  __

42.  The  very  design  of  sin,  through  the  instigation
of  the  Devil,  was  to  bring  death,  and  destroy  the  crea-
tion ;  and  had  not  God  retained  in  his  own  power,  the
eternal  law  and  nature  of  man,  the  human  race  must
have  become  extinct,  and  no  flesh  could  have  been
saved.

43.  For  the  very  nature,  and  whole  drift  of  that
lawless  lust,  which  came  from  the  serpent,  was  to  run
into  all  manner  of  concupiscence,  to  corrupt  the  law
of  God,  to  give  the  predominancy  to  man's  animal  and
inferior  appetites,  to  excite  debauchery,  to  debase  the
dignity  of  man,  and  ruin  the  soul  1

44.  And  therefore,  by  the  original  law  of  a  perfectly
pure  and  holy  God,  the  whole  must  have  been  subject-
ed to  immediate. destruction  from  the  glory  of  his  pre-
sence, had  it  not  been  that,  for  wise  purposes,  he  in-
tended to  prolong  man's  life.

45.  For  the  strictest  laws  that  were  ever  given
among  men,  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  were  far
short  of  the  original  brightness  of  that  pure  and  inflex-
ible nature  of  God,  which  like  a  flaming  sword,  stood
pointedly  against  every  sensation  of  a  carnal  mind.

46.  Hence  it  is  written,  The  wrath  of  God  is  reveal-  Romila
edfrom  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteous-
ness of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness.

47.  And  how  could  they  hold  the  truth  in  unright-
eousness ?  Manifestly  in  holding  that  the  commands  of
God,  which  were  true  and  righteous  in  themselves,
and  given  to  upright  man  in  a  state  of  innocence,  were
still  to  them,  though  in  a  fallen  state,  and  in  that  cor-
rupt nature  of  the  serpent,  which  is  unrighteousness
in  the  very  abstract.

48.  Thus,  they  could  hold  the  truth,  that  man  and
woman  were  commanded  to  multiply  and  replenish
the  earth,  and  use  this  as  a  sacred  covering  for  the  life
of  ail  their  most  hidden  abominations,  and  "  freely,' '
says  Boston,  "  do  that  in  secret,  which  they  would  be
*  ashamed  to  do  in  the  presence  of  a  child  ;  as  if  dark-
4  ness  could  hide  from  an  all-seeing  God  1"

49.  Well  therefore  said  God  by  the  prophets, Wo  j. .
unto  them  that  uek  deeji  to  hide  their  counsel  from  the  is* "


46  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY,  ©X  P. I.

CI^P< Lord,  and  their  works  are  in  the  dark  !  Shall  I  not  vis-

______  it  for  these  things  ?  Shall  not  mij  soul  be  avenged  on

Jer.v.  9.  such  a  nation  as  this  ?

•  50.  It  is  certain  that  God,  from -time  to  time,  de-
stroyed the  rations  of  the  earth  for  their  acts  of  abom-
ination, through  the  lust  of  concupiscence  ;  and  if  so
many  thousands  and  millions  were  actually  destroyed,
according  to  the  measure  of  God's  righteous  law,  re-
vealed from  time  to  time,  for  such  acts  as  were  open-
ly committed  ;  what  must  have  become  of  the  world,
if  all  the  secret  actions  of  every  individual,  had  been
brought  naked  into  judgment,  and  laid  open  to  view  ?

Ho*\.vii.  How  truly  was  it  said,  that,  Sin  wrought  death  by  that
which  is  good  J

51.  Surely  then,  had  God  openly  denounced  his
wrath  and  just  displeasure,  against  corrupt  and  fallen
Man,  personally,  to  the  extent  of  his  deserts,  his
punishment  and  weight  of  condemnation  must  have
been  more  than  he  could  have  been  able  to  bear.

52.  But  the  purpose  of  God,  in  the  creation  of  man,
being  in  itself  eternal  and  unchangeable,  could  not
be  frustrated,  although  the  pure  and  perfect  law  of
nature  itself  was  violated  and  corrupted.

53.  It  was  therefore  in  mercy  to  fallen  man,  whose
life  was  intended,  for  wise  purposes,  to  be  prolong-
ed, that  God  denounced  the  curse  upon  the  serpent
above  all  cattle,  as  an  emblem  or  figure  of  that  mis*
erable  race  which  he  had  infected  with  his  poison.

54.  Hence  it  is  justly  observed,  by  the  judicious
H&t.  of  author  before  mentioned,  that,  "  God  intended  this
^72^3!  *  debasement  of  it,  [the  serpent]  not  so  much  to  ex-
Note'q. <  press  his  indignation  against it,  as  to  make it a

4  monument  of  man's  apostacy,  a  testimony  of  his  dis-
i  pleasure  against  sin,  and  an  instructive  emblem  to
1  debar  all  future  ages  from  the  commission  of  that
c  which  brought  such  vengeance  along  with  it."

55.  "  In  the  Levitical  law,  we  find,  that  if  a  man
c  committed  any  abomination  with  a  beast,  the  beast
4  was  to  be  slain  as  well  as  the  man,  and  by  parity  of
i  reason  the  serpent  is  here  punished — at  least  to  re-
i  mind  the  delinquents  themselves  of  the  foulness  of
*  their  crime. "

56.  The  pure  law  of  nature,  which  God  placed  in


Ler.  xx
15.


P. I.  THE  MAN  OJ*  SIN  REVEALED.  41

man,  as  well  as  in  the  animal  or  brutal  creation,  when  C1*^p-
he  commanded  them  to  be  fruitful  and  multiply,  was  .
at  the  beginning,  holy,  just,  and  good,  being  given
by  a  perfectly  just  and  holy  God,  as  hath  been  observed.

57.  So  that  before  man  hearkened  to  a  brute,  and
fell  below  him  in  the  order  of  nature,  there  could  be
no  unclean,  lascivious,  or  inordinate  desire  of  the
flesh,  to  rule  his  animal  faculties  ;  nothing  but  mo-
tives perfectly  pure,  and  consistent  with  the  law  of
God,  in  his  mind.

58.  Hence,  a  pure  and  simple  desire  of  planting
seed,  and  raising  a  crop,  is  entirely  different  and  dis-
tinct from  the  curious  researches  of  the  naturalist,
who  searches  out  all  the  properties  and  qualities  of
the  ground  in  which  the  seed  is  planted.  An  honest
farmer  may  perfectly  discharge  his  duty,  without  any
of  the  curious  knowledge,  or  experiments  of  the
philosopher.

59.  But  Adam  knew  his  wife,  and  she  conceived
and  bare  Cain.  The  sacred  text  doth  not  say,  he  be-
gat Cain  ;  or  that  he  knew  her  for  the  purpose  of  be-
getting ;  that  was  not  his  motive,  and  Cain  was  of
that  wicked  one  :  But  he  knew  his  wife  and  she  con-
ceived :  and  what  was  the  fruit  of  that  conception  ?
A  murderer  I

60.  The  plowing  of  the  wicked  is  sin. God  causeth  Pror.xxi
his  sun  to  rise Upon  the evil,  and  sendeth  rain  upon  £jatt  T
the  unjust. Yet  saith  unto  such,  I  never  knew  you. 45,m*3?

61.  Then  might  not  Adam  have  fulfilled,  in  God's
appointed  time  and  season,  the  pure  and  innocent
law  of  nature,  without  intruding  into  that  beastly  and
forbidden  knowledge,  which  destroyed  his  dignity,
and  degraded  him  below  the  order  of  the  beasts  of  the
field  \

62.  But  when  Lust  had  conceived  it  brought  forth
sin.  Then  the  Eyes  of  them  both  were  opened,  and
they  Knew  that  they  were  naked. And  he  Knew  his

!  wife  and  she  conceived. And  then,  and  not  till  then,

!  he  could  say,  I  see  another  law  !  Rom.v'fc

63.  Then  the  pure  law  of  nature  was  converted
il  into  this  other  law,  a  law  of  sin  i  a  man  of  sin  !
■  a strong man armed  ! A law of sin,  warring

I  against  the  law  of  his  mind,  and  bringing  into  captiv-


42  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY, OR  P. I.

chap,  ity  his  noblest  affections,  his  reason,  his  judgment,
' and  every  sensation  and  faculty  of  his  mind  and  body-
to  the  law  of  sin  in  his  members.

64.  Then  did  the  Man  of  Sin  set  himself  in  the
temple of  God,  ordering  the  faculties,  and  claiming

Lukexvi.  t^ie  highest  affections  of  man,  to  that  which  is  highly

w.  esteemed  among  men,  which  is The  lust  of  the  flesh,

the  root  of  all  evil,  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.

65.  And  thus  did  the  Man  of  Sin,  that  corrupt
law  of  the  serpent,  set  himself  in  the  place  of  the
pure  law  of  God ;  and  under  a  sacred  cloak  of  pre-
tended love  and  obedience  to  the  only  true  God,  con-
cealed the  fountain  of  Iniquity  in  a  Mystery,
shewing  himself  that  he  is  God,  by  alluring  through
the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  pretending  that  God  ought
to  be  so  worshipped.

66.  Therefore  we  say,  if  there  be  a  man  and  wo-
man now  existing  on  the  earth,  honestly  united  in  a
covenant  of  promise  to  each  other,  who  have  so  much
of  the  fear  of  God,  as  neither  to  touch,  taste,  nor,
handle  the  unclean  thing  ;  who  never  gratify  the  de-
sires of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,  in  any  manner
whatever,  but  barely  and  conscientiously  to  propagate
their  species  :  and  that  with  the  sole  motive  to  obey
the  will  of  God  ;  they  are  verily  an  honour  to  the  ori-
ginal law  of  nature,  a  blessing  to  themselves  and  pos-  •
terity,  and  an  example  to  the  human  race.

67.  And  therefore,  even  with  regard  to  the  law  of!
nature,  which  is  inferior  to  the  law  of  grace,  such,,
and  none  but  such,  under  any  pretext  however  sacred, .
need  ever  expect  to  answer  a  clear  conscience,  before

isakkvi  *iiat  just  and  perfect  law -giver,  who  will  render  his
J5*  anger  with  fury,  and  his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.

68.  But  we  say  moreover,  that  none  under  the  cov-
enant of  the  flesh  since  the  fall  of  man,  no  not  one,
ever  did  before  God,  keep  that  law  ;  nay,  even  those]
who  profess  to  be  under  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  make
the  most  sanctified  outward  appearance  before  men,j
do  more  or  less  violate  the  perfect  law  and  order  of
nature,  and  by  a  contrary  law  of  evil  concupiscence,
do  that  which  their  light  and  conviction  forbids. For]
the  truth  of  this  we  appeal  to  the  consciences  of  alii
men.


P. I.  THE  MAN  OF  SIN  REVEALED.  4o

69.  Here we shall  make  one  remark, which is  chap.
worthy  the  observation  of  all  good  men,  or  such  as


desire  to  be  so:  and  that  is,  that,  God  is  light,  and  lJohni.
in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.  And  were  it  pointedly  5-
declared  by  an  angel  commissioned  from  heaven,  that
every  secret  action  which  is  now  performed  under  the
cloak  of  an  ordinance  of  God,  should  be  openly  and
publicly  performed,  it  would  be  detested  by  the  wick-
edest men  on  earth.*

70.  Then,  from  what  hath  been  said,  let  not  any
of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  fallen  Adam,  think  to
escape  the  severity  of  God's  righteous  law,  by  im-
puting the  blame  of  their  own  sins  to  the  original
transgression  of  th  eir  father,  while  they  themselves

are  guilty  of  the  same  sin,  and  violate  the  same  law  : m .
J'or  as  is  the  rooty  so  are  the  branches.  16.

7 1 .  Neither  let  any  be  guilty  of  such  horrid  impie-
ty, as  to  imagine  that  a  just  and  righteous  God  will
impute  Adam's  original  sin  to  his  posterity,  unless
they  violate  the  same  law,  and  commie  the  same  sin
by  actual  transgression.  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  in-
iquity of  the  father,  neither  shall  the  father  bear  the
iniquity  of  the  son.  As  I  live  saith  the  Lord  God—
the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die.

72.  It  therefore  remains  with  all  those  who  make
a  sacred  profession  of  God's  law,  and  do  not  live  up
to  it,  either  to  remove  the  fig-leaf,  the  veil  of  their
sin,  and  the  sacred  cloak  of  a  profession,  and  candid-
ly acknowledge  their  loss  from  God  and  ignorance  of
his  law  :  or  otherwise,  perfectly  to  keep  that  law  in
every  jot  and  tittle. — Honesty  is  the  best  policy,  in  the
'sight  of  God,  angels,  and  just  men.

73.  For  certain  it  is,  that  God  will  require  his  own
with  usury,  and  not  with  abuse,  and  that  according  to

his  unchangeable  purpose,  he  will  destroy  in  thismoun-  l«ai.sa»
tain  the  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all  Jieofile,  and
the  veil  that  is  sjiread  over  all  nations.

*  Lost  as  mankind  are  in  the  lust  of  the  fiesh,  yet  even  their  little  remaining
sense  of  puriiy  niu  ~t  teach  them,  that  a  Gal  who  is  worshipped  by  siich  acts  :is
cannot  endure  the  light  of  the  sun,  nor  the  sight  of  men,  n.i.st  be  a  God  ofrlark*
rwss,  and  not  of  light.  By  this  let  every  candid  person  discriminate  between  those
acts  which  are  acceptable  to  that  God*  who  it  light*  in  whom  i-  no  dcrlncss+imA
those  which  are  congenial  to  darkness  itself;  aiid  by  this  criterion,  let  ail  men
judge  what  kind  of  a  God  they  worship.

H


44  THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY, ScC.  P. I.

chap. 74^  por  although  man  has  become  a  captive  to  that

law  of  sin,  and  fallen  entirely  under  its  dominion  ;

and  notwithstanding  it  works  in  him  all  manner  of
concupiscence,  and  contrary  to  the  law  of  light,  leads
him  into  the  most  secret  and  abominable  actions  ;
which  cannot  even  bear  the  presence  of  an  innocent
child,  or  a  fellow  creature,  and  much  less  the  inflex-
ible light  and  purity  of  a  just  and  holy  God.

75.  Yet  this  very  law  of  sin  has  the  effrontery  to
call  itself  the  original  and  fiure  law  of  nature,  and  to
vindicate  its  existence  and  lawless  actions, by  spe-

.  clous  reasonings  from  a  claim  to  the  original  command
or  ordinance  of  God,  Be  fruitful.  The  deepest  de-
ception !  A  very  mystery  !

76.  For  unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  What  hast  thou
Psalm  l. to  do  to  declare  my  statutes,  or  that  thou  shouldest  take
taja^18*  mV  covenant  into  thy  mouth  ?  seeing  thou  hatest  instruc-
tion, and,  easiest  ?ny  words  behind  thee. When  thou
sawest  a  thief  then  thou  consentedsi  with  him,  and  hast
been  a  partaker  with  adulterers.

77.  These  things  hast  thou  done,  and  I  kept  silence  ;
thou  thoughtcst  that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thy-
self: but  I  will  reprove  thee,  and  set  them  in  order  be-
fore thine  eyes. Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  Gody

lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver.

73.  I  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right  seed  ;

sj4.ii.2i,  how  then  art  thou  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant  of  a

strange  vine  unto  me  ?  For  though  thou  wash  thee  with

nitre,  aud  take  thee  much  soap,  yet  is  thine  iniquity

marked  before  me,  saith  the  Lord  God.

79.  Thus  far  concerning  that  mystery,  which  as
a  veil  hath  covered  the  iniquity  of  all  nations.


P. I. THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY.  4  f>

CHAPTER.  VI.

TTie  principal  Seat  of  Human  Depravity.

IT  is  granted  that  sin  is  the  first  cause  of  shame  ; CIy£p'
for  when  Adam  and  Eve  stood  in  a  state  of  inno- _

cence,  they  were  both  naked,  and  were  not  ashamed.
But  no  sooner  had  they  transgressed,  than  they  felt
shame,  and  made  themselves  aprons  of  fig-leaves,  to
cover  and  hide  something  from  each  other.

2.  And  as  they  begat  children  in  their  own  likeness  j
from  thence  it  is  decided  by  the  practice  of  all  nations,
what  part  that  was  which  they  covered,  and  of  course,
where  the  seat  of  sin  is.

3.  But  what  was  the  matter  with  that  part  ?  Why
did  the  shame  occasioned  by  sin,  fall  particularly
there  ?  If  their  transgression  is  to  be  considered  in  a
literal  sense,  and  not  as  represented  in  a  figure,  why
did  not  the  shame  fall  upon  the  hand  that  took  the
fruit,  and  the  mouth  that  ate  it  ?

4.  Bat  it  does  not  appear  that  God  took  any  notice
of  the  hand,  or  the  mouth,  in  pronouncing  the  curse
which  they  had  merited  ;  but  laid  it  on  the  same  part
which  they  covered,  and  of  which  they  were  ashamed.

5.  And  God  said  unto  the  woman,  /  will  greatly  Gen.iii,
multiply  thy  sorrow ■,  and  thy  conception  ; — ihij  desire  *  see
(or  lust*)  shall  be  to  thy  husband^  and  he  shall  rule  ^j^;"'3.

Over  thee.  Cruden,

6.  Why  multiply  her  sorrow  and  her  conception  ? joesk-e.
Why  not  punish  her  some  other  way  ?  God  distributes
punishments  according  to  the  nature  of  the  crime.

7.  The  Israelites  lusted  for  flesh,  and  their  pun-  Num.  x*.
ishment  was  to  have  their  fill  of  it,  till  it  turned  into  33>34-

a  great  plague,  and  they  died  with  it  between  their
teeth. As  it  is  written,  he  gave  them  their  own  desire  ; J^i™
the  if  were  not  estranged  from  their  lust,  ^  30*

8.  Hence,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  curse  de-
nounced upon  the  woman,  it  is  easy  to  see  wherein
the  offence  lay  :  a  curse  of  which  her  child-bearing
daughters  have  had  more  or  less  sorrowful  experience
even  to  this  day.


AS  THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY. P.  I.

C*vi.P'  9'  And  unto  the  serpent  the  Lord  God  said,  Be*
___  cause  thou  hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cat-
G-en.  iii.  ^ — >And  I 'will  put  enmity  between  the e  and  the  woman,
14,  i5.  anci  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed;  it  shall  bruise  thy
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel.

10.  Now  if  this  serpent  is  to  be  understood  literal-
ly, as  a  natural  serpent  or  snake,  and  the  seed  of  the
woman  is  Jesus  the  Christ;  when,  or  how,  was  ever
the  thing  literally  fulfilled  ?  Where  did  ever  Jesus
bruise  the  head  of  a  rattle-snake,  or  adder,  or  any
thing  of  the  kind,  more  than  any  other  man  ?

1 1.  The,  truth  is,  the  words  of  God  to  the  serpent,
are  to  be  understood  in  a  figurative  sense.  And  the
serpent  here  meant,  is  that  old  serpent  the  Devil,  and
Satan,  who  deceiveth  the  nations :  for  he  it  is  that
Christ  came  to  destroy.

12.  But  when  we  say,  the  serpent,  whose  head
Christ  was  to  bruise,  was  not  a  natural  serpent  or
snake,  this  is  not  saying,  that  there  was  no  natural  ser-
pent in  the  question.  To  say  the  figure  of  a  thing  ia
not  the  substance,  is  not  saying  there  was  no  figure.

13.  It  need  not  be  disputed  that  the  Devil  spake
through  the  serpent,  or  that  the  subtilty  of  the  ser-
pent was  made  use  of,  to  charm  and  allure  the  wo-
man, to  listen  to  his  words.

14.  Neither  need  it  be  disputed,  that  Adam  and
Eva  were  placed  on  a  certain  beautiful  spot  of  ground  ;
or  that  the  Lord  caused  to  grow  out  of  the  ground,
every  tree  that  was  good  for  food  ;  and  the  tree  of  life
also  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and  the  tree  of  the
knowledge  of  good  and  evil.

15.  And  admitting  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of
good  and  evil,  with  its  pleasant  fruit,  to  have  answer-
ed the  serpent  as  a  figure,  to  represent  to  the  view  of
the  woman,  the  desirableness  of  that  which  was  for-
bidden, so  that  she  was  thereby  beguiled  ;  this  would
not  make  the  figure  the  substance,  nor  would  the  sub-
stance destroy  the  figure.

16.  But  if  the  tree  of  life,  and  the  tree  of  the
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  here  spoken  of,  are  to
be  understood  in  a  literal  sense,  as  natural  trees,  then
where  are  those  trees  at  this  time  ?

17.  It  is  evident  from  the  scriptures  of  truth,  that


P.  I. THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY,  4T

the tree  of  life  was  not  destroyed,  but  still  remains.  c**;£p~
As  it  is  written,  Blessed  are  they  t hat  do  his  command- '
ments,  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life. The  Rev.xxli.
tree  of  life  is  the  way  of  life.  14*

18.  Then,  as  life  is  represented  by  a  tree,  so  is
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil ;  and  so  also  the  ser-
pent hath  his  head,  and  the  woman  her  seed,  in  a
figure.

19.  It  is  certain,  that  the  nature  and  image  of  the
serpent  is  formed  in  fallen  man  ;  from  whence  Christ
said,  Ye  serpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers  I  And  as  it
is  by  means  of  certain  passions  or  affections  that  man
is  formed,  it  must  be  among  these  that  the  serpent's
head  is  to  be  found.

20.  The  head  of  any  thing,  is  the  highest  or  up-
permost part ;  that  which  is  superior  to  any  other
part.  And  that  which  forms  or  produces  a  thing,
must  be  its  superior,  and  proper  head.

2 1 .  Therefore,  as  man  is  not  literally  a  serpent  or  a
snake,  it  cannot  be  literally  his  head  that  is  to  be
bruised.  But  as  the  body  is  made  up  of  different  mem-
bers or  parts  ;  so  in  these  is  represented  that  system,
or  body  of  affections,  desires  or  propensities,  by  which
man  is  led  and  governed.

22.  And  if  the  affections  and  desires  of  fallen  man,
are  low,  mean  and  base,  resembling  the  serpent ;  then
it  must  be  among  these,  that  we  are  to  look  for -the
serpent's  head  ;  and  this  must  be  his  highest  affec-
tion ;  that  in  which  he  finds  the  most  supreme  de-
light.

23.  The  whole  body  of  the  serpent  was  formed  ill
man  by  the  fall  ;  but  the  head  of  this  body  is  not  the
inferior,  but  the  superior  part ;  and  every  part  of  the
body,  though  of  one  nature,  must  be  distinguished
from  the  head,  and  are  all  dependant  on  it,  and  sub-
ject to  it.

24.  Hence it  is written, Mortify your  members  Coi.iii.  s;
which  are  upon  the  earth;  fornication,  uncleamiess,  in- 8> <Jt
ordinate  affection,  evil  concupiscence,  and  covetousness,
which  is  idolatry. But  now  yefiut  off  all  these  ;  anger,
"wrath,  malice,  blasphemy,  filthy  communication  out  of
your  mouth — seeing  ye  have  fiut  off  the  old  man  with  ch ^
his  deeds— >in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  u»

H2


48  THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY. P. I.

CvlP" 25.  Every  one  knows  that,  anger,  wrath,  malice,

covetousness, uncieanness, and  such  like,  are  not

members  of  the  human  body  ;  yet  they  are  members
of  that  body  which  is  called,  The  body  of  the  sins  of
the  flesh.  And  as  every  body  must  have  a  heady  and
as  these  members  or  affections  are  of  a  low,  base,  ser-
pentine nature  ;  of  course,  their  head  must  be  that
head  of  the  serpent  which  Christ  was  to  bruise.

26.  Then  as  the  leading  part  of  the  serpent's  im-
age,^which  was  formed  in  man,  can  exist  only  in  the
principal,  leading  part  of  man*s  affections,  of  course,
it  may  easily  be  determined  where  it  is  that  the  head
of  the  serpent  lies.

27.  Every  part  of  man  is  possessed  of  some  sen-
sitive quality,  yet  his  affections  are  not  inherent  in
him,  but  are  created  by  means  of  certain  objects  pre-
sented to  him.

28.  Thus,  he  has  a  sense  of  seeing,  hearing  and
feeling  ;  but  he  cannot  see  where  there  is  no  light,  he
cannot  hear  where  there  is  no  sound,  nor  feel  where
there  is  nothing  to  feel  ;  so  neither  can  he  love  where
there  is  nothing  lovely,  nor  be  pleased  where  there  is
nothing  pleasing.

29.  And  although  man  is  composed  of  so  many  capa-
cities and  organs  of  sense,  yet  they  cannot  be  all
equal ;  there  must  be  a  ruling  sense  ;  some  one  that
is  counted  more  noble,  that  is  quicker  in  its  motion,
and  affords  superior  enjoyment  in  its  gratification.
And  as  this  ruling  sense  is  capable  of  being  moved
only  by  some  other  object ;  so  that  which  creates,  or
gives  life  to  this  sense,  must  also  be  the  supreme
object.

30.  Then,  what  is  there  in  the  universe,  within
the  comprehension  of  man,  that  has  so  sensible,  so
quick  and  ravishing  an  operation,  as  a  corresponding
desire  of  the  flesh  in  the  different  sexes  ?  And  in
proportion  as  that  desire  is  manifested  by  words  or
actions  in  either  ;  so  much  the  more  is  that  head  or
chief  passion  quickened  and  inflamed.

31.  As  a  gusling  fountain  is  more  powerful  in  its
operations  than  an  oozing  spring  ;  so  that  desire  of
carnal enjoyment, that mutually  operates  between


P.  I. THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY.  49

male  and  female,  is  far  more  powerful  than  any  other  CI^jP'
passion  in  human  nature.  ,

32.  Man  under  its  influence,  bears  every  thing  be-
fore him  with  impetuosity.  No  other  object  that  can
be  presented,  attracts  his  notice  while  that  is  in  view  ;
his  ears  are  stopped  to  every  other  sound,  but  the
voice  of  his  charmer ;  he  is  insensible  to  every  other
pleasure.

33.  Surely  then,  that  must  be  the  fountain  head*
the  governing  power,  that  shuts  the  eyes,  stops  the
ears,  and  stupifies  the  sense  to  all  other  objects  of
time  or  eternity,  and  swallows  up  the  whole  man  in
its  own  peculiar  enjoyment.

34.  And  such  is  that  feeling  and  affection,  which
is  formed  by  the  near  relation  and  tie  between  the
male  and  female  ;  and  which  being  corrupted  by  the
subversion  of  the  original  law  of  God,  converted  that
which  in  the  beginning  was  pure  and  lovely,  into  the
poison  of  the  serpent ;  and  the  noblest  affection  of
man,  into  the  seat  of  human  corruption.  To  which
the  following  words  of  Boston,  will  justly  apply.

35.  "  A  disease  affecting  any  particular  member  of  Fourfold
4  the  body,  is  ill ;  but  that  which  affects  the  whole,  ioI^io^
4  is  worse. The  corruption  of  nature  is  the  poison  108,

4  of  the  old  serpent,  cast  into  the  fountain  of  action  ;
4  and  so  affects  every  action,  every  breathing  of  the
4  soul."

36.  M  It  is  the  cause  of  all  particular  lusts  and  ac-

•  tual  sins  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  It  is  the  spawn
4  which  the  great  Leviathan  has  left  in  the  souls  of
4  men  ;  from  whence  comes  all  the  fry  of  actual  sins
1  and  abominations. It  is  the  bitter  fountain  ;  partic-

*  ular  lusts  are  but  rivulets  running  from  it ;  which
4  bring  forth  into  the  life  a  part  only,  and  not  the
4  whole  of  what  is  within."

37.  44  Now  the  fountain  is  still  above  the  streams  ;

#  so  where  the  water  is  good,  it  is  best  in  the  foun-
tain ;  where  it  is  ill,  it  is  worst  there.  The  cor-
4  ruption  of  nature  being  that  which  defiles  all,  itself
4  must  needs  be  the  most  abominable  thing."

38.  "  It  is  virtually  all  sin  :  for  it  is  the  seed  of  all
4  sins,  which  want  but  the  occasion  to  set  up  their
i  heads,  being  in  the  corruption  of  nature,  as  the  ef-


50  THE  PRINCIPAL  SEAT  OF  HUMAN  DEPRAVITY. P.  I.

C  vi.P; '  fect  m  tne  virtue  of  its  cause. It  is  the  cursed
r  i  ground  fit  to bring  forth all manner  of  noxious

4  weeds."

39.  "  As  the  whole  nest  of  venomous  creatures
4  must  be  more  dreadful  than  any  few  of  them  that
4  come  creeping  forth  ;  so  the  sin  of  thy  nature,  that
4  mother  of  abominations  must  be  worse  than  any
i  particular  lusts,  that  appear  stirring  in  thy  heart  and
4  life."

40.  "  Look  thou  into  thy  corrupt  nature,  and  there
4  thou  mayest  see  all  and  every  sin  in  the  seed  and
4  root  thereof.  There  is  a  fulness  of  all  unrighteous-
4  ness.  There  is  atheism,  idolatry,  blasphemy,  mur-
4  der,  adultery  and  whatsoever  is  vile.  The  sin  of
4  our  nature  is,  of  all  sins,  the  most  fixed  and  abiding
4  — It  remains  with  meu  in  its  full  power  by  night
4  and  by  day,  at  all  times,  fixed  as  with  bands  of  iron
4  and  brass."

41.  "  Pride,  envy,  covetousness,  and  the  like,  are
*  not  always  stirring  in  thee.  But  the  proud,  envious
4  carnal  nature  is  still  with  thee  ;  even  as  the  clock
4  that  is  wrong,  is  not  always  striking  wrong  ;  but  the
4  wrong  set  continues  with  it.  It  is  the  great  reign-
4  ing  sin  (like  Saul  among  the  people)  higher  by  far
4  than  the  rest — commonly  called  one's  predominant
4  sin — which  never  loseth  its  superiority  over  partic-
4  ular  lusts,  that  live  and  die  with  it  and  by  it."

42.  "  Surely  then  the  word  should  be  given  against
4  this  sin,  as  against  the  king  of  Israel,  Fight  neither
4  with  small  nor  great  save  only  with  £///.9.— For,  (as
4  the  writer  justly  concludes)  while  it  stands  entire
4  there  is  no  victory."


P.  Ik THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD WORLD,  51

CHAPTER  VII.

The  Cause  of  the  Destruction  of  the  Old  World.

AN  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  old  world  is  chap.
very  particularly  stated  in  the  sacred  writings  ; .
from  whence  the  chaise  may  also  be  very  clearly  un-
derstood.

2.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  men  began  to  multi-  Gen.  ri
fihj  ;"  that  is,  according  to  the  agreeable  sense  of  mod-  *»  2*
ern  Divines,  so  called,  when  men  began  to  fulfil  the
command or  ordinance  of  God, Be  fruitful,  "  and
daughters  were  born  unto  them,  that  the  sons  of  God
(who  were  not  corrupted  by  a  mixed  generation)  saw

the  daughters  of  men,  that  they  were  fair;  and  they
took  them  wives  of  adl  which  they  chose."  For  the
daughters  of  men  were  under  no  controul,  either  to  the
law  of  nature  or  of  God,  for  their  first  mother  had  vio-
lated both.

3.  And  as  the  first  deceived  woman,  saw  that  the  tree  Gen,$,k
was  goodforfood,  and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes  ;"

so  these  sons  of  God,  "  saw  the  daughters  of  men,
that  they  were  fair  ;"  and  according  to  their  own  cor-
rupt will,  they  took  them  wives,  not  of  some  particu-
lar tribe  or  family,  but  "  of  all  which  they  chose,  and  eh  ^
Went  in  unto  them,  and  they  bare  them  children  :  the  2,5,8,13.
same  became  mighty  men,  which  were  of  old,  men
of  renown."

4.  "  And  the  earth  was  corrupt  before  God,  and
filled  with  violence  through  them — for  all  flesh  had  cor-
rupted his  way  upon  the  earth.  And  God  saw  that
the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and
that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart
was  only  evil  continually.  And  it  repented  the  Lord
that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,  and  it  grieved  him
at  his  heart.  And  the  Lord  said,  I  will  destroy  man,
whom  I  have  created."

5.  "  But  Noah  found  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.
And  God  said  unto  Noah,  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come
before  me  ;  lor  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through
them  :  and  behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth."

6.  Then  as  there  must  be  an  evident  distinction


52  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  P.  I.

Cvn.P" Detween  the  works  of  these  mighty  men  of  renown,

who  corrupted  the  earth  and  filled  it  with  violence,

and  the  works  of  Noah,  Avho  found  grace  in  the  eyes
of  the  Lord ;  it  may  be  proper  to  observe  wherein  that
distinction  lay.

7.  The  old  natural  creation  was,  from  the  beginning,
set  in  order  to  subserve  the  purpose  of  God,  in  rela-
tion to  a  new  and  spiritual  creation  ;  and  the  old  was
to  continue  no  longer  than  to  subserve  that  pin  pose.
The  state  of  man  on  this  earth  was  by  no  means  to  be
his  final  state.  Man  was  created  from  the  beginning,
for  a  more  glorious  and  eternal  purpose.

8.  And  therefore  a  line  was  drawn,  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  old  Creation,  to  the  beginning  of  the  new  ;
which  for  the  time  then  present,  pointed  out  two  man-
ner of  people,  and  in  things  of  a  temporal  nature,  dis-

*  tinguished  between  the  disobedient  and  obedient,  the
wicked  and  the  righteous  ;  showing  the  nature  of  that
creation  which  must  finally  pass  away,  and  of  that
which  would  be  eternal.

9.  This  line  may  not  improperly  be  called,  a  line
of  promise,  pertaining  to  such  as  were  counted  right-
eous or  perfect  in  their  generations,  and  through
whom  as  pertaining  to  the  flesh,  Jesus  the  Christ
came.

10.  And  in  this  line  were  exhibited  promises,  types,
and  figures,  which  pointed  to  the  spirit  and  substance
of  the  new  creation  ;  at  least,  to  the  adjusting  or  set-
ting in  order  a  new  age  or  spiritual  seed,  of  which
Christ  Jesus  was  in  the  fulness  of  time,  the  true  and
real  beginning.

11.  But  until  Christ  appeared,  there  could  be  no
real  difference  in  the  nature  and  disposition  of  any.

Actsxvii.  For  of  one  blood,  were  made  all  nations  of  men,  to
26,  27.  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  God  determined
the  times  before  appointed,  and  the  bounds  of  their
habitation  ;  that  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply
they  might  feel  after  him  and  find  him,  though  he  be
not  far  from  every  one  of  us.

12.  Then  as  all  nations  of  men  on  the  face  of  the
whole  earth,  were  made  of  one  blood,  that  they  might
seek  the  Lord  and  find  him,  it  is  evident  that  in  their
natural  state,  there  is  no  difference ; they  are  M


P.  I.  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  53

equally  out of the way,  and  equally distant  from c^p-
God.  _

13.  To  speak  plainly  ;  in  their  natural  state,  there
was  no  difference  between  Cain  and  Abel  ;  both  were
conceived  in  the  same  corrupt  nature  of  opposition
to  God,  and  both  descended  from  the  same  parents
who  had  corrupted  their  blood,  by  their  obedience
to  the  serpent,  and  basely  violated  the  law  of  nature.

14.  In  their  natural  state,  and  in  their  conception
and  birth,  there  was  no  difference  between  Noah,  and
those  who  were  destroyed  by  the  flood — between
Abraham,  and  his  father's  house — between  Lot,  and
the  men  of  Sodom — between  Moses,  and  Pharoah —
between  the  Israelites,  and  Canaanites.

15.  All  nations  of  men  were  of  one  blood,  and  that
was  corrupted  by  the  fall  ;  nor  could  it  be  cleansed
until  the  times  determined  were  accomplished. — As

it  is  written,  "  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have  not  JoelmJi
cleansed" And  again,  "  /  will  call  them  my  people,  25?U'
which  were  not  my  people"

16.  But  here  was  the  difference  in  all  ages.  While
the  generality  of  the  world  gave  themselves  up  to  lux-
ury and  sensuality,  and  according  to  the  deceitful  law
in  their  members,  were  corrupting  themselves  through
the  lust  of  uncleanness,  and  filling  the  earth  with  vio-
lence through  ambition  and  the  love  of  dominion  ;
there  were  those  who  were  chosen  to  maintain  the
belief  of  one  true  God,  in  order  to  subserve  his  wise
purpose,  and  keep  up  the  distinction  between  good
and  evil,  until  the  true  foundation  of  final  and  eternal
redemption  should  be  laid.

IT.  Therefore,  God  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  Heb.  i.  i»
manners,  delivered  special  commands  and  ordinances
to  certain  individuals,  which  related  to  their  temporal
oeconomy,  and  were  productive  of  temporal  good
to  such  as  were  thereunto  obedient.  And  such  as
were  obedient  to  whatever  was,  in  any  way  or  manner,
or  at  any  time,  revealed  to  them  in  this  respect,  were,
in  every  age,  a  repository  for  the  faith  and  worship  of
one  living'  and  true  God.

18.  And  by  their  obedience  they  found  justification  2Pet  -
according  to  the  nature  of  what  they  were  taught,  and  5,6,7,8,9*
by  which  they  condemned  the  world,  who  lived  in  cor-  Heb.xi.r.


54  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  P.  I.

CvnP'  rupti°n  anc*  injustice.  These  became  heirs  of  that
* righteousness  which  is  by  faith  and  obedience  ;  while

Jude  11.  tne  wicked  and  rebellious  were  ever  counted  as  the

Jer.xxia.  see(j  of  Cain,  and  as  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  and
Dtm. Gomorrah,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles.

xxxu.  32.  ,<^  According  to  the  scriptures,  the  difference  be-
tween the  works  of  Noah,  and  of  those  who  corrup-
ted the  earth,  was  just  this  :  Noah  was  five  hundred
years  old,  before  he  begat  his  three  sons ;  which  was
not  till  twenty  years  after  he  was  called  to  preach  re-
pentance to  the  world.

20.  This  particularly  shows  the  time  and  manner
of  Noah's  life,  in  regard  to  the  works  of  the  flesh.—
And  his  walking  in  obedience  to  what  he  was  com-
manded, shows  that  what  he  did  was  by  special  order

Oh.yI.9,  from  God. As  it  is  written,  Noah  was  a  just  man,
10*  and  fierfect  in  his  generations,  and  JVoah  walked  with

God. Jind  JYoah  begat  three  sons.

21.  He  was  "  perfect  in his generations." His
Cx?i©.1'  gcnerations  were,  "  Shem,  Ham  and  Japheth." And

unto  them  were  sons  born  alter  the  flood,  but  not  be-
fore :  nor  even  then  did  they  attempt  to  multiply  until
they  were,  at  least,  permitted  so  to  do.
chap.  ix.  22.  And  God  blessed  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said
unto  them,  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  replenish
the  earth/'  Also  the  Lord  said  ;  u  Whoso  sheddeth
man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  :  for  in
the  image  of  God  made  he  man."  But  how  soon  af-
ter, they  again  corrupted  the  earth,  and  filled  it  with
violence,  till  the  cry  of  their  sins  reached  up  to  heav-
en, is  another  thing.

23.  Noah  was  obedient  to  the  law  of  Revelation,
which  is  positive  whether  Mediate  or  Immediate,*
whether  given  to  an  individual  only,  or  through  an  in-
dividual to  a  nation  ;  and  is  to  be  obeyed  precisely  ac-
cording to  the  directions  of  the  lawT-giver,  by  those

*  Mediate  Revclr/lion,  is  that  which  m  given  through  one  to  wether,  such  si
was  given  through  Moses  to  the  ration  oi'  the  Jews.  Exo.  iii.  15—18.  And  such
was  the  Revelation  of  Jesus  Chiist,  which  Got',  gave  unto  bin.— and  he  sent  and
signified  it  by  his  angel  onto  his  sensnt  John.  And  John  to  the  seven  churches
ot  Asia.  He  v.  i.  1—4.  Immediate  #cv< liaun  is  such  as  was  given  to  Abraham
*'  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed  ;  and  thou  shalt  call  Ins  name  Isaae;
and  1  will  establish  my  covenant  with  him — and  with  his  seed  after  him."  Gen.
xvii.  19.  And  *»lterw'ards,  *  Take  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac,  whom
thou  lovest,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  ot  Moriah ;  and  oiler  liim  there  lor  a
burnt  offering.*  Geu.  xxii.  2.


1,6


P.  I.  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  58

unto  whom  it  is  given,  and  by  no  other  nation,  peo-  Cy^p*
pie  or  individual  under  heaven.  v

24.  The  revelation  which  God  gave  unto  Noah  was
immediate. "  The  end  oi  all  flesh  is  come  before  me  ;  Gen  ^
for  the  earth  is  tilled  with  violence  through  them  :  and  is,  14.
behold,  I  will  destroy  them  with  the  earth. Make

thee  an  ark  of  gopher- wood,  &x. Thus  did  Noah  ac-
cording to  all  that  God  commanded  him,  so  did  he."

25.  u  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Noah,  Thee  have  I  chap.vS.
found  righteous  before  me  in  this  generation." And  h

in  all  this,  both  with  regard  to  the  law  of  nature  and
revelation,  was  Noah  pointedly  distinguished  from  the
mighty  men  of  renown,  who  neither  regarded  the
law  of  nature  nor  revelation,  but  took  them  wives  of  chap.  ru
all  which  they  chose,  and  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  h  4>  5-
men,  and  they  bare  children  to  them  :  which  is  the
principal  sin  that  is  charged  upon  the  old  world,  in  the
sacred  writings.

26.  And  this  they  did,  not  by  any  command  or  di-
rection from  God,  but  according  to  their  own  lusts  of
uncieanness,  through  which  they  corrupted  the  earth.
This  was  the  root  of  their  wickedness,  and  the  source
of  all  their  depravity  ;  and  from  which,  as  from  an
overflowing  fountain  of  corruption,  they  filled  the
earth  with  violence,  tyranny  and  oppression.

27.  It  is  therefore justly  observed  by  Osterwald,

that,  "  The  first  and  principal  sin,  which  introduced  p.'i^." °

4  that  general  depravity,  was  impure  lusts. — Murder,

4  arid  injustice,  were  other  sins,  which  they  were  guil-

4  ty  of. Concerning  this,  let  Josefihus*  be  consulted.  *b.i.

4  Since  impure  lusts,  and  fraud,  carry  along  with  them  ch*  3*

4  innumerable  vices,  it  is  easy  to  conceive,  how  great

4  the perversity  of  men must have  been in those


times."


139.


28.  The  expressions  of  Robinson,  concerning  the  Eceioa-
revolutions  of  the  earth,  are  to  the  purpose :  "  How  j£sea£.
*  wonderfully  wise  is  the  construction  of  this  world  !  <*j»«  p*
4  How  instructive  the  history  of  the  rise  and  the  ruin
4  of  great  empires  1  Many  are  the  opinions  of  learned
4  men  on  the  origin  of  civil  society."

29.  "  If  this  subject  be  investigated,  as  it  ought  to
4  be,  in  true  historical  facts,  it  will  appear  very  proba-
4  ble, that  it  originated  with bad  men,  who  being

I


56  TPIE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  OLD  WORLD.  P.  I.

i

Cyl\v' c  strong,  subdued  the  weak  for  the  sake  of  living  idly

'  on  the  plunder."

30.  "  Cain  stained  with  his  brother's  blood,  was  the
i  first  who  built  a  city.  The  mighty  men  before  the
c  Hood  were,  tyrants,  oppressors,  thieves,  and  robbers,
who  filled  the  earth  with  violence.

Kcci.Re.  31.  And  alter  the  fl< >od  ;  "  Nimrod,  as  his  name
i  implies,  was  an  insolent  captain  of  a  band  of  rob-
c  hers  ;  and  most  nations  make  their  first  appearance
4  as  a  banditti,  sallying  out  under  a  leader,  to  pillage
4  and  destroy."

32.  "  Abraham  red  the  patriarchs  affected  no  em-
4  pire,  but  were  strangers  in  a  strange  land,  confede-
4  rating  with  one  another  for  purposes  of  piety,  and
4  with  their  neighbours  for  their  own  defence."

33.  Besides  the  corruptions,  tyranny,  and  oppres-v
sion  of  the  mighty  men  before  the  flood,  they  were

ivn.iw.  disobedient  to  the  preaching  of  righteous  Noah,  when

the  long  suffering  of  God  waited  for  them  to  repent,

while  the  ark  was  preparing. As  also  saith  a  modern

Hist,  of writer,  u  One  hundred  and  twenty  years,  had  the  di-

j^'\l^?*  '  vine  patience  waited — one  hundred  and  twenty  years

Note  in. i  hacj  the  holy  prophet  warned  that  perverse  genera-

'  tion  ;  but  in  vain."

34.  Here  was  the  cause  why  God  preserved  Noah
by  his  mercy.  He  feared  God — He  was  righteous  in
his  generation  ;  according  to  all  that  God  commanded
him,  so  did  he.  And  as  the  Lord  found  the  fruits  of
righteousness  in  Noah  ;  so  Noah  found  grace  in  the
eyes  of  the  Lord. And  therefore  the  justice  of  God

zVevH.5.  spared  not  the  old  world,  but  saved  Noah,  the  eighth
person,  and  brought  a  flood  upon  the  world  of  the
ungodly,  and  destroyed  them  all.

35.  And  hence  the  solemn  warning  of  Christ. For
3*^*9^  as  in  the  days  that  were  before  the  flood, they  were  eat-

ing  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,
until  the  day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  and  knew
not  until  the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away ;  so  shall
also  the  coining  of  the  Son  of  man  be.


P.  I. THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM.  57

CHAPTER  VIIL

The  Call  of  God  to  Abraham  :  what  it  signified.

GOD  destroyed  the  world  of  the  ungodly  out  of  chap.
the  earth  by  a  Hood  of  water  ;  but  the  flood  of  ___
►water  did  not  destroy  the  root  of  ungodliness  out  of
the  heart  of  man.

2.  Every  imagination  and  purpose  of  man's  heart,  Gen.*
after  the  fiuod  as  before,  was  evil,  and  that  continual-
ly, from  his  youth  ;  through  which  the  earth  was  soon
again  corrupted,  and  filled  with  idolatry  and  wicked-
ness ;  and  the  cry  of  their  sin  became  grievous  before

God.

3.  This  is  evident  from  the  sin  of  Sodom. And  the
wickedness  of  the  nations  was  siili  increasing,  as  it  1\™W
was  said  of  them  after  the  calling  of  Abraham,  "  The  xv*  1D-

<  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."

4.  Hence  the  observation  of  Edwards. "  So  prone  gist,  or

*  is  the  corrupt  heart  of  man  to  depart  from  God,  and  p.e<£>™p*
i  sink  into  the  depths  of  wickedness  ;  and  so  prone  to

4  darkness,  delusion,  and  error,  that  the  world,  soon
i  after  the flood,  fell  into gross  idolatry  ;  so  that  be-

*  fore  Abraham,  the  distemper  was  become  almost
i  universal. The  earth was  become  very  corrupt  at

*  the  time  of  the  building  of  Babel."

5.  Which  is  well  expressed  in  the  words  of  Es-  1  E*ira$
dras  :  "  That  when  they  that  dwelt  on  the  earth  be-  5.1**
gan  to  multiply — they  began  again  to  be  more  ungodly

than  the  first.  For  the  first  Adam  bearing  a  wicked
heart  transgressed,  and  was  overcome  ;  and  so  be  all
they  that  are  born  of  him.  Thus  infirmity  was  made
permanent ;  and  the  law  (also)  in  the  heart  of  the
people  with  the  malignity  of  the  root  :  so  that  the
good  departed  away,  and  the  evil  abode  still."

6.  And  what  is  still  more,  the  very  line  of  the  pa-
triarchs, through  whom  Christ  according  to  the  flesh
descended,  was  corrupted  with  idolatry  before  Abra-
ham was  called  from  among  them.

7.  This  is  evident  from  the  words  of  Joshua  to  the
children  of  Israel. "  Your  fathers  dwelt  on  the  oth-  JS?*
er  side  of  the  flood [Jordan]  in  old  time,  even  Te-


53  THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM. P.  I.

CvniP* rjm>  t^ie  fatner  °f  Abraham,  and  the  father  of  Nahor,
.  and  they  served  other  gods.9'

8.  While  the  generality  of  the  world  were  thus
perpetually  sinking  into  idolatry  and  wickedness,  God
in  his  wisdom,  from  time  to  time,  separated  from
among  them,  such  as  were  willing  to  maintain  the
faith  and  worship  of  one  only  living  and  true  God.
These,  for  benevolent  purposes,  were  called  to  standi
as  witnesses  of  the  truth,  until  the  true  seed  of  prom-
ise should  appear,  and  accomplish  the  work  of  final
redemption.

9.  And  therefore  it  was  that  God  said  unto  Abra-
Gen.  xii.  ham,  "  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy
l>2> 3> kindred,  and from  thy father's house,  unto aland

that  I  will  shew  thee  ;  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a
great  nation,  and  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy
name  great ;  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing.  And  I
will  bless  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that
curseth  thee  :  and  in  thee  shall  all  the  families  of  the
earth  be  blessed."
*om.  iv.  10.  And  Abraham  obeyed  God  ;  and  as  an  examfile
22,  of  that  faith  and  obedience,  through  which  all  the  fam-

ilies of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,  he  left  his  coun-
try, his  kindred, and  his  father's  house  ;  and  went
Heb.xi.8.  QUt  fry  fQith,  not  knowing  whither  he went. And  in
obedience  to  his  faith  he  was  justified  ;  and  by  works
20—24."' was  faith  made  perfect.

Gen  xiii 1 1#  Again  the  Lord  said  unto  Abraham,  "  Lift  up

24,15,16.'  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the  place  where  thou

art, — for  all  the land  which  thou  seest,  to  thee  will  I

give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  forever. And  I  will  make

thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the'  earth,93  for  number.

chap.  xv. 12*  Again  the Lord  said  unto Abraham,  "  Look

*s  e. now  towards heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be

able to  number  them — So  shall  thy  seed  be." And

he  believed  in  the Lord ;  and  his  faith  was  counted

to  him  for  righteousness.

13.  But before the  time  of  the  promise  came  for
i^'S*'  tlie  one  t0  ^e  begotten,  in  whom  the  tiue  spiritual

seed  should  be  called  ;  Sarai,  Abraham's  helper,  de-
ceived him,  and  gave  him  her  handmaid,  Hagar,  who
was  a  bond  woman.

14.  "  And  he went  in  unto  Hagar,  and  she  con-


P.  I. THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM.  5$

ceived." And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  of  him  that  ™£*-
was thus conceived, u  He  will  be  a  wild  man  ;  his  __
hand  will  be  against  every  man,  and  every  man's  hand
against  him." Thus  was  Abraham  deceived  through
Sarai,  as  Adam  was  deceived  through  Eve.

15.  For  although  God  had  expressly  said  to  Abra-
ham, that,  "  He  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thine  own  Gen.  xv>
dowels shall  be  thine  heir  ;"  yet no fleshly  or  carnal  4-
gratification  could  fulfil  the  promise,  (not  even  in  an
allegory,)  concerning  a  spiritual  seed,  in  whom  all

the  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.

16.  And  truly, this first born was  his  heir,  and  Gen.xxi.
properly,  his  seed,  after  the  covenant  of  the  flesh,  as  13,

all  the  rest of his  natural  posterity  were, of  whom
Christ  said,  "  I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed."  37.

17.  This  shows  that,  Hi  reality,  the  first-born  of
Abraham  as  well  as  the  second,  were  both  one  seedy
and  that  in  a  natural  sense,  there  was  no  difference
between  the  posterity  of  Ishmael  and  Isaac,  both
were,  strictly  speaking,  the  seed  of  Abraham.

18.  But  as  it  respected  the  promise  which  God
made  to  Abraham,  the  order  and  manner  of  their
birth,  and  other  concomitant  circumstances,  it  served
as  an  allegory  or  figure,  to  signify  the  difference  be-
tween the  old  and  new  creation.

19.  In  the  order  of  God's  work,  in  the  creation  and
redemption  of  man,  "  that  was  not  first  which  is  spir-
itual,  but  that  which  is  natural ;  and  afterwards  that  lCor.xr.
which is  spiritual." So  in regard  to  the  allegory  40*
which  represents  both  the  natural  and  spiritual  seed.

20.  The  first  covenant  that  God  made  with  man,
was  a  natural  covenant.  This  was  broken  at  the
fountain  head,  which  was  man's  fall  from  his  first
rectitude.

21.  But  a  promise  followed  :  The  seed  of  the  wo-  Gen
man  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head  ;  which  intimated  15.
a  recovery.  Yet,  this  promise  was  not  to  be  fulfilled
according  to  the  order  of  the  first,  or  old  covenant,
but  according  to  a  new  covenant.  But  to  signify  the
state  of  the  old  creation  under  the  first  covenant,
Abraham,  through  the  influence  of  Sarai,  begat  a  son

by  a  bond  woman :  which  is  counted  his  seed  after
the  flesh.

I  2


60  THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO ABRAHAM.  P.  I


CHAP.
YIIL


22.  Then  after  this,  concerning  another  seed,  God

said  unto  Abrarn,  "  Thy  name  shall  be  called  Abraham  :

oen.xvii  (*•  e.  the  father  of  a  multitude  :)  for  a  father  of  many
6>  °* nations  have  I  made  thee— and  kings  shall  come  out

of  thee."  And  of  Sarai  he  said,  Sarah  (i.  e.  the  prin-
cess of  a  multitude)  shall  lirr  name  be — and  she  shall
be  a  mother  of  nations  ;  kings  of  people  shall  be  of  her.

23.  The  first  promise  was  made  to  Abraham  ma-
ny years  before  the  true  heir  could  be  born  in  whom
his  seed  should  be called  ;  and  it  had  been  expressly

«rt£P- said,  /  will  certainly  return unto  thee  according  to  tfic
time  of  life  ;  and,  lo, Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son.

24.  Yet,  to  show  plainly  that  the  true  seed  could
...  not  be  begotten  after the will  of  the  flesh,  Abraham

n,&xJ!  aHd  Sarah  were  aid,  when  the time for  the  fulfilling
**  of  the promise  came,  and  it ceased  to be  with  Sarah

after  the  manner of  women.-~—And  the  Lord  did unto

Sarah  as  he  had  spoken.

25.  When  nature  had  finished  its  course,  and  the
mere desire of  carnal gratification  could  claim  no

Wefc.  xi. share in  the promise  ; then  it  was  "  through  faith,
ll-  that Sarah received  strength to  conceive  seed,  and

was  delivered  of  a  child  when  she  was  past  age."
Gal.  vr. 26.  M  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  two  sons  ;
£3,33,24.  t|ie  ORe  |^  a  bon(j  mai(|5  the  other  by  a  free  woman.

But  he  who  was  of  the  bond  woman,  was  bom  after
the  flesh  ;  but  he  of  the  free  woman  was  by  promise.
Which  things  are  an  allegory  :  for  these  are  the  two
covenants.''9  The  first  answering  to  the  old  covenant
of  the  flesh,  or  old  creation,  which  gendereth  to  bond-
age ;  the  second  to  the  new  covenant  or  new  creation,
which  is  free.

27.  All  the  natural  posterity  of  fallen  Adam  are,
by  nature  and  birth,  strangers  and  aliens  to  God,  and-
are  the  children  of  the  bond  woman,  being  servants
to  sin.

28.  The  seed  of  Hagar  (i.  e.  a  stranger)  was  cast
JcS*&  out  of  the  inheritance  ;  also  all  the  rest  of  the  seed
***• e* of Abraham, who  were begotten  after  Isaac was

born,  were  sent  away  with  small  gifts,  that  might
serve  for  the  present :  for  the  fashion  of  this  world
passeth  away  !

29.  In  this  was  prefigured  the  state,  and  portion


P.  I. THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM.  61

of  all  the  natural  seed  or  posterity  of  man  born  after  C}**J'

the  flesh,  both  before  and  after  the  true  seed  appear-  _

ed.  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac.  But
the  bond  woman,  who  was  given  to  be  his  wife,  and
her  son,  were  sent  away  with  bread  and  water  ;  which
was  a  figure  of  the  best  portion  of  the  children  of
this  world.

30.  There  was  another  heir,  born  of  a  free  woman,
who claimed the inheritance  by  promise — another
birthright. That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh. —  John  iff*
Marvel  not  that  I  say  unto  youy  ye  must  be  born  again, '  r*

31.  But  after  Abraham  had  been  in  unto  the  bond
woman,  and  she  had  conceived  after  the  flesh  ;  the
Lord  again  renewed  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  to
show,  that  the  promise  of  the  true  inheritance  of  the
new  creation,  could  not  be  supplanted  or  rendered
void  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.

32.  And  to  show  wherein  the  new  creation  of  God
should  take  place,  Abraham  received  the  seal  of  cir-  ^'^
cumcision,  as  a  token  of  that  new  covenant ; which  24.
was  an  outward  cutting  round  about  the  flesh  of  the
foreskin.

33.  But  why  was  he  commanded  to  receive  a  token  of
the  covenant  particularly  there  ?  Why  did  he  not  re-
ceive it  elsewhere  ?  The  truth  is,  that  token  was  of
special  signification,  and  pointed  directly  to  the  very
seat  of  sin  ;  there  lay  concealed  the  hidden  mystery
of  human  depravity — -the  secret  pleasure  of  that
which  is  most  highly  esteemed  of  all  men  in  their  nat-
ural and  fallen  state.

34.  And  this  outward  token  of  circumcision,  signi-
fied the  cutting  off  that  fleshly  and  carnal  pleasure,
taken  through  that  part,  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ  coi.ii.ii,
in  the  heart,  made  without  hands,  in  all  the  true  heirs

of  that  new  covenant.

35.  The  real  substance  of  the  covenant  which  God
made  with  Abraham,  was  neither  to  him,  nor  to  nat-
ural Isaac,  nor  Isaac's  natural  posterity  :  this  is  plain
from  the  tenor  of  it.

36.  "  My  covenant  will  I  establish  with  Isaac — for

an  everlasting  covenant^  and  with  his  seed  after  him."  ^n2*vli
Again  : "  In  Isaac  shall  thy seed be called" And  g^  ™-
again :  «  Neither  because  they  are  the  se ed  of  Abra-  7,T*


62  THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM.  P.  I.

C\tlii.' ham>  are  they  all  children  :  but  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed

___  be  called.  That  is,  they  which  are  the  children  of  the
flesh,  these  are  not  the  children  of  God :  but  the  chil-
dren of  the  promise  are  counted  for  the  seed."

GaUii.i6.  37.  "  He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of  many  ;  but
as  of  one,  And  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ."  And
alluding  to  that  seed,  he  said,  I  will  establish  my  cove-
nant with  him  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  with  his
seed  after  him.  The  covenant  is  therefore  with
Christ  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  with  his  spir-

Johnxiv.  itual  seed  who  are  in  him. As  Christ  said,  "  Ye  shall

20

know  that  I  am  in  my  father,  and  you  in  me,  and  I  in
you."

38.  Then  consider  what  was  further  signified  by
the  token  of  the  everlasting  covenant  made  with  Abra-
ham. He  whose fiesh  of  his  foreskin  was  not  cir-

Gen.xvii.  cumcised,  "  that  soul  (saith  God)  shall  be  cut  off  from
13.  14.  kis  people  ;  he  hath  broken  my  covenant."  Which
signified,  that  he  who  is  not  circumcised  in  heart,
with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  the  same
hath  broken  God's  everlasting  covenant,  and  while  re-
maining uncircumcised,  is  cut  off  from  Christ,  and
from  the  inheritance  of  everlasting  life.

39.  Then ,  from  what  hath  been  said,  it  may  ap-
pear evident  that  the  covenant  which  God  made  with
Abraham,  was  only  temporary,  and  pointed  to  an
everlasting  covenant,  or  spiritual  seed  yet  future.
Therefore  this  temporary  covenant  did  not  save  those
who  kept  it  from  the  indwelling  root  and  nature  of  sin,
received  by  the  fall ;  but  pointedly  prefigured  what
would  save  them  when  the  true  seed  should  appear
who  was  called  in  Isaac.

40.  Nevertheless,  as  many  as  were  obedient  to  the
outward  signs  of  that  covenant,  and  to  whatever  else
pertained  thereunto,  obtained  temporal  blessings —
possessed  the  gates  of  their  enemies — multiplied  ex-
ceedingly— and  in  all  outward  things  were  blessed,
while  their  obedience  continued.

nom.  ii. 41-  ^ut  wnen  tne  true  first-born  of  the  promise  ap-

3^29.  r  peared  ;  neither outward circumcision availed  any

thing,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature.

42.  The  land  of  Canaan  was  only  a  temporal  bles-
sing to  Abraham's  seed:  it  was  not  heaven  itself;


Oal.vi.15


IP.  I. THE  CALL  OF  GOD  TO  ABRAHAM.  63

1  and  therefore  the  highest  place  it  could  have  in  the  ^^

I  covenant  of  promise,  was a shadow of  better  and

|  more  durable  things  to  come.

43.  Abraham's  natural  posterity  were  no  better  than
the  rest  of  mankind  ;  only  as  they  were  obedient  to
the  revelation  of  God,  made  known  from  time  to  time,
they  maintained  and  preserved  the  faith  of  one  true
God,  and  served  as  a  figure  of  that  seed  who  should
possess  a  spiritual  and  everlasting  kingdom.

44.  And  although  they  were  comparatively,  accord-
ing to  the  literal  sense  of  the  promise,  as  the  stars  of
the  sky  for  multitude,  and  as  the  sand  by  the  sea  shore
innumerable  ;  yet  it  is  expressly  said,  These  all  died  Hek  xi.
in  faith,  not  hiving  received  the  promises  ;  but  having  l  'lo'  *
seen  them  afar  off,  and  were  persuaded  of  them,  and
embraced  thcmj  and  confessed  that  they  were  strangers

and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.

45.  They  honestly-confessed  that  they  were  stran-
gers and  pilgrims,  as  much  in  the  land  of  promise  as
elsewhere,  and  thereby  declared  plainly  that  they
sought  another  country,  and  had  not  received  the
substance  of  the  thing  promised.

46.  Therefore  it  was  not  the  country  of  Judea,  nor
the  city  or  temple,  whose  builder  and  maker  was  Da-
vid or  Solomon,  which  they  looked  for  ;  but  that  city  Rev.xx„
and  temple,  made  without  hands,  which  God  promi-  2-

sed  to  build  in  the  latter  days,  of  which  Christ  Jesus
was  the  chief  corner  stone.

47.  But  to  signify  the  oppression  and  bondage,  un-
der which  the  true  seed  of  God  should  be  held,  be-
fore the  time  of  real  deliverance  should  come,  the  ^i6xv*
seed  of  Abraham  were  led  into  Egypt,  and  kept  un-

|  der  tyranny  and  oppression,  for  a  certain  limited  time,
before  their  temporal  and  outward  deliverance  could
be  accomplished.

48.  And  as  they  were  to  increase,  and  did  increase,
according  to  the  purpose  of  God,  it  could  not  escape
the  notice  of  an  oppressive  government  ;  whose  poli-  Ex.  i.  i«.
cy  it  was  to  destroy  all  the  males,  who,  according  to
the  command  of  God,  were  to  receive  the  tokens  of
that  covenant,  which  promised  a  seed,  as  the  stars
for  multitude. No  matter  about  the  females.


22.


64  THE  TRUE  END  AND  DESIGN  OF P.  I.

€?xP" ^*  But  however  wise  their  plans,  the  foolishness  of

God  is  wiser  than  men,  who  through  a  woman  of  the

3  Cor.i. house  of  Levi,  began,  according  to  promise,  to  re-
25*  deem  his  people  from  the  cruel  power  and  policy  of

Egypt,  until  he  had  parted  the  sea,  and  destroyed
, the  nations  before  them.

50.  Great  is  the  mystery  of  God's  dealings  with
Ex.  ii.3,  men  I  The  power  and  wisdom  of  God  manifested
&c* through  one,  who,  by  a  woman,  was  preserved  in  an

ark  of  bulrushes  !


CHAPTER  IX.

The  true  End  and  Design  of  the  Law  given  by  Moses


T


lHE  express  purpose  of  the  law,  was  to  search
out  and  condemn  sin,  root  and  branch.  "  For
Rom.  v.  until  the  law,  sin  was  in  the  world  ;  and  death  by  sin
13,14.  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even  over  them  that
had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgres-
sion, who  is  the  figure  of  him  that  was  to  come."
That  is,  of  Christ  Jesus,  through  whom  salvation
should  be  obtained,

2.  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin — As  it  is
©hap.  Hi.  written,  /  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law  :  for  I  had
ao,&\ii.7  noi  known  lust,  except  the  law  had  said, Thou  thalt

not  covet.

3.  And  although  the  law  went  to  search  out  and
condemn  sin,  yet  it  could  not  save  the  soul  from  its
reigning power,  until  Christ  the first-born  in  the

Gai.in.i9  work  °f  Redemption  should  appear. And  therefore
Horn.  v.  the  law  was  added  because  of  transgressions,  that  the

offence  might  abound,  till the  seed  should  come to

whom  the  promise  was  made.

4.  It  is  impossible  for  souls  ever  to  find  a  full  sal-
vation, without  a  full  discovery  of  their  loss.  In  vain
is  freedom  sought  for,  in  any  government,  where  the
very  seat  and  centre  of  action  in  the  government  it-
self, is  established  in  monarchy,  tyranny  and  oppres-
sion, by  the  consent  of  the  people.


P. I.  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BY  MOSES.  65

5.  In  vain  is  every  attempt  to  change  the  nature  of  c"x.P'

an  evil  tree,  by  lopping  off  the  branches, while  the

body  and  root  of  the  tree  remain  entire  ;  or  by  any
means  ever  to  expect  good  fruit  from  a. corrupt  tree  :
so  in  vain  are  pure  waters  expected  from  a  corrupt
fountain.

. 6.  "  Doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same  place  ^n\e|/u*
.sweet  water  and  bitter  ?  Can  the  fig-tree  bear  olive
berries  ?  either  a  vine  figs  I  so  can  no  fountain  both
yield  salt-water  and  fresh. Do  men  gather  grapes  of  w

r.  „  ....  °  P j ,  Matt.  vii.

thorns,  or  hgs  oi  thistfees  r  even  so  every  good  tree  16-18.
bring eth  forth  good  fruit ;  but  a  corrupt  tree  bringeth
forth  evil  fruit. A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil
fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit."

7.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love  ;  pure  and  perfect  GaLva2
love. The  first  of  all  the  commandments  is,  u  Hear

O  Israel ;  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  :  And  thou  MaskiS.
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God with  all  thy  heart,  and  *#M»-
with  all  thy  soul3  ami  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all
thy  strength."

8.  "  And  the  second  is  like  unto  it  ;  Thou  shalt  love
thy  neighbour*  as  thyself.  There  is  none  other  com-
mandment greater  than  these."  This  comprehended
the  spirit  and  real  intention  of  the  whole  law,  and  was
all  that  God  required.

9.  But  man  in  his  natural  and  fallen  state,  is  held
under  the  dominion  of  other  objects.  And  as  the  law
was  added  because  of  transgressions,  that  the  offence
might  abound;  and  was  given  to  the  Israelites,  as  a
school-master,  to  teach  them  the  nature  and  purity  of

.the  promised  Mesiah's  kingdom  ;  it  was  necessary  to
point  out  particularly,  what  kind  of  fruit  this  spirit  of
love  would  naturally  produce,  and  what  would  as  nat-
urally flow  from  the  want  of  it.

1.0. The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit. Then  if  man
.was  the  uncorrupted  fruit,  or  offspring  oipure  and
perfect  love, he  certainly  would  discover  no  other
fruit  in  ail  his  life  and  actions. Cut  both  the  law  of Deut
Moses  and  the  prophets  plainly  discovered,  that  the  xxxn.  *.
tree  and  the  fruit  are  both  corrupt,  or  in  other  words,  jer.'iui.
that  man  in  his  natural state  is  a  corrupt  creature,  V1,  28*
and  descended  from  a  corrupt  and  degenerate  stock.
1 1 .-  This  was  going  to  the  root  of  the  matter. It


Gad.  iii.
24.


66  THE  TRUE  END  AND  DESIGN  OF P.  L

C?xP* was  more  tnan  cutting  round  about,  or  teaching  how

, __  the  Messiah  should  lop  off  the  outside  branches  of  a

corrupt  tree.  The  root  of  human  depravity  is  laid
naked,  and  open  to  view,  in  plain  words,  written  on
tables  of  stone,  and  delivered  by  the  special  command
of  God.

12.  And  not  only  so,  but  with  repeated  and  solemn
Lev.  xx.  injunctions:  "Ye  shall  therefore  keep  all  my  stat-
ist, vi.  utes'  anc*  a^  my  judgments,  and  do  them  ;  that  the
17. land,  whither  I  bring  you  to  dwell  therein,  spue  you

not  out ;  thou  shait  not  learn  to  do  after  the  abomina-
tions of  those  nations."

13.  The  law  pointedly  condemned  every  fleshly
immo.  gratification  ;  such  as  lying  with  a  beast — lying  with
£«24Xxii  anotnei's  wife*  &c- — defiling  an  unmarried  virgin,  &c.

and  in  many  cases,  punished  such  with  death.

14.  Stoning  to  death  was  the  penalty  for  such  like
Lev.  xx.  abominations.  And  if  a  man  took  a  wife  and  her
xxi.  9. mother,  or  if  the  daughter  of  any  priest  committed

whoredom,  such  were  to  be  burnt  with  fire.
Deut.xvii 15.  Idolatry, giving  seed  to  Molech, witchcraft,
Lev." xx. blasphemy, murder, disobedience to  parents, &c.
xkiv!"if. were  condemned  by  the  law  as  evil;  the  spirit  of  the
17,  law  was  therefore,  holy,  just  and  good  ;  condemning

^cut.xM.  notnmg  |3Ut  sm#

1 6.  Yet,  however  severe  the  punishments  that  were
inflicted  for  sin,  they  only  lopped  off  the  branches  of  a
corrupt  tree,  while  the  root  and  foundation  of  all  the
abominations  that  were  committed  in  the  earth,  re-
mained entire.

17.  But  when  the  law  proceeded  to  take  cogni-
zance of  the  very  nature  of  man,  and  condemned  that
as  sinful  and  unclean,  which  might  have  been  suppo-
sed to  be  lawful  and  right,  then  the  fountain  of  evil
began  to  be  uncovered.

13.  Observe:  "  The  law  is  not  made  for  a  right-

i  Tim.  i.  ecus  man,  but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient ;  for  the

ungodly  and  for  sinners." The  spirit  of  the  law  was

"  Thou  shait  love  the Lord  thy  God  with all  thy

heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and thy  neighbour  as

19.  When  therefore,  any  punishment  or  penalty
was  inflicted,  it  is  evident  that  it  was  for  the  trans-


P. I.  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BY  MOSES.  6f

gression  of  the  law,  and  that  the  true  end  and  design  **£*-
of  the  law  had  not  been  answered  in  that  particular

thing*.

20.  The  law  not  only  prohibited  all  carnal  and
abominable  intercourse  between  man  and  beast,  upon
pain  of  death  ;  but  the  sexes  were  wholly  prohibited
from  cohabiting  on  pain  of  being  excommunicated,
for  a  time,  from  the  congregation  of  such  as  were
counted  clean.

21.  And  as  this  statute  respected  the  only  motive,
and  manner,  in  which  a  man  and  woman  were  tole-
rated to  cohabit,  it  sufficiently  showed  that  the  very
order  of  nature  was  corrupted,  and  could  never  enter

that  new  creation,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  There  shall  Rev^
in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  defileth."  27.  '

22.  There  was  no  possible  case,  in  which  a  man  Num.xk.
and  woman  could  lie  together,  with  seed  of  copula-  2^;#
tion,  and  hold  their  union  with  the  congregation  with-  **&.  v,
in  the  camp  of  Israel. The  very  act  cut  them  off,  seexmw.
and  exposed  them  to  the  reproaches of  those  who  j^b!  muT
were  unclean  without  the  camp. Nor  could  they  be  u-
again  accepted  until  they  were  cleansed  :  for  nothing
unclean  could  abide  in  the  camp.

23.  And  lest  the  serpent  should  try  to  cover  his  Lev.**.
head  under  a  cloak,  by  some  false  gloss  upon  the  act  ^4,5,
of  copulation,  the  nature  of  man's  seed  is  ascertained  6-

in  its  simple  state,  before  appropriated  to  the  purpose
of  procreation,  and  there  p renounced  unclean.

24.  Nay  worse,  it is  expressly  said,  that,  Every  <***?.«*-
garment^  and  every  skin,  whereon  is  the  seed  of  cofiu-  Ju.de 28.
lation,  shall  be  washed  with  water,  and  be  unclean  un-
til the  even.

25.  And  concerning  the  act  itself,  the law said,

The  woman  also  with  whom  man  shall  lie  with  seed  f/ Jf*'-**
copulation,  they  shall  both  bathe  themselves  in  water,
and  be  unclean  until  the  even. This  was  going  at  once
to  the  groundwork  of  man's  depravity.

26.  And  that  something  more  than  uncleanness  ac-
companied the  act  of  begetting  and  conceiving  seed
according  to  the  flesh,  is  evident  from  the  statute  re-  ^in-
specting women  after  child-bearing,  by  which  they
also  fell  under  the  penalty  of  excommunication.

27.  The woman  who  brought  forth  a  paan-child,

K


2—7.


68  THE  TRUE  END  AND  DESIGN  OF  P.  I.

C"xP*  was  unc^ean  seven  days,  according  to  the  days  of  her
;, m(m  separation  for  her  infirmity  ;  and  thenceforth  to  con-
tinue in  the  blood  of  her  purifying  three  and  thirty
days,  and  to  touch  no  hallowed  thing,  nor  come  into
the  sanctuary,  until  the  days  of  her  purifying  were
fulfilled  ;  which  were  forty  days  :  and  eighty  days
separation,  if  she  brought  forth  a  female.

28.  And  in  order  to  be  restored,  she  was  required
to  bring  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  sin  offering,  to  make
an  atonement ;  a  sin  offering  unto  the  Lord  made  by
fire. And  with  all  their  offerings  they  were  com-

iey.ii.i3.  rnanded  to  offer  salt.

29.  The  whole  of  which  was  nothing  short  of  sig-
jiai.m.2,  nifying5  m  the  most  pointed  manner,  that  all  such
Luke  xii.  carnal  and  fleshly  things  as  were  contrary  to  the  pure
*Jh.vi  nature  of  God,  should  be  kept  at  a  distance  from  the
Mkrk  h.  lrue  seec*  °f  promise,  and  be  finally  offered  up  and
*%  5o.  '  consumed  by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the

incorruptible  word  of  God,  and  the  salt  of  the  earth
in  the  children  of  the  regeneration,  and  the  new  birth.

30.  If  therefore,  this  concefition-si?ij  and  this  birth*
tin  be  overlooked, and  made  something  contrary  to  »
what  God  hath  signified  it  to  be,  it  is  in  vain  to  look
any  further  for  a  distinction  between  good  and  evil  ;  ,
seeing  that  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.

31.  The  patriarchs  did  not  overlook  it,  when  they*
#,9.*  "  held  their  separate  tents. Moses  did  not  overlook  it, ,
£*  S when  by  the  command  of  God  from  Mount  Sinai,  he
Exo.  xhs.  solemnly  charged  the  people,  saying,  Come  not  at^  your

wives. If  something  there  had  not  been  offensive  to
God,  why  was  this  charge  ?

32.  God  did  not  overlook  this  as  inoffensive,  when
he  commanded  that  a  woman  should  not  touch  any  ho-
ly thing,  nor  come  into  the  sanctuary  of  the  congre-
gation, for  the  space  of  forty,  or  even  eighty  days ;
and  when  he  commanded  that  she  should  bring  a
burnt  offering,  and  a  sin  offering,  to  make  an  atone-
ment.

33.  David  did  not  overlook  it  when  he  said,  "  There
JxviTs,  is  no  rest  in  my  bones  because  of  my  sin— My  loins
7, Sella,  are  £jjeci yyifa  a  ioathsome  disease — Wash  me  tho-

rouahlv  from  mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my


P.  I.  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BY  MOSES.  69

j  sin — Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity  ;  and  in  sin  did c^x.P*
my  mother  conceive  me."

34.  Jesus  did  not  overlook  it  when  he  said,  "  That  j0hniii.s.
which  is  born  of  the flesh  is  flesh,"— And,  "  The  viii  ■"•
lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do." — Nor  Paul  when  he  icer.xt,

I said,  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  50*
of  God ; neither  doth corruption inherit incorrup-
tion." — Nor  James,  when  he  said,  "  When  lust  hath  Jam.iu.
conceived  it  bringeth  forth  sin."

35.  It  is  written  of  the  Lord  God,  that  his  work  is DenY
perfect ;  for  all  his  ways  are  judgment :  a  God  of  truth)  xx>i»  4.
and  without  iniquity  ;  just  and  right  is  h?.

36.  And  if  so,  will  the  God  of  perfect  justice,
judgment,  and  truth,  do  that  which  is  contrary  to  his
own  nature  and  attributes  ?  Will  he  inflict  punish*
ments  without  a  cause  ?  or  grieve  willingly  the  chil-
dren of  men  ?  Will  he  count  that  unclean,  which  is
not  unclean  ?  or  require  an  offering  for  sin,  where
there  is  no  sin  I  By  no  means.

37.  Then  it  is  certain,  that  where  God  command-
ed any  one  not  to  touch  any  thing  that  was  counted  ho-
ly, there  was  something  offensive  to  his  Divine  na-
ture :  and  that  wherein  he  required  an  offering  for  sin
from  any  one,  there  certainly  was  sin  in  that  case  ;
either  in  the  whole  case,  in  the  nature  or  motive  to
an  unclean  action,  or  in  the  act  itself.

38.  Therefore,  let  that  which  God  hath  counted
both  sinful  and  unclean,  be  both  sinful  and  unclean  ;
that  God  may  be  just,  and  every  man  a  corrupter,  un-
til he  fulfils  the  very  spirit  of  the  law,  by  loving  God
supremely ;  and  till  no  inferior  object  can  take  pos-
session of  the  highest  seat  in  his  affections.

39.  Thus  the  true  end  and  purpose  of  the  law  will
be  answered,  and  it  will  not  be  said  in  vain,  The  law
was  our  school-master  to  bring  us  to  Christ.  And  al-
though it  be  a  severe  and  mortifying  school-master  to
the  pride  of  fallen  man,  yet  it  is  a  true  and  faithful
one.

40.  The  law  condemned  many  things  as  either  sin-
ful or  unclean,  which  arose  from  natural  causes,  and
were  figurative  of  the  heinous  nature  of  sin.  Such
as  the  leprosy,  which  had  a  striking  reference  to  the
plague  of  sin — touching  a  dead  body— -eating  unclear


7fr  THE  TRUE  END  AND  DESIGN  OF  P.  I.

Cnc.P' Dcasts  and  fowls  ;  and  many  such  like  things,  which

,  prefigured  the  abominations  of  man,  and  which  were

to  be  destroyed  under  the  law  of  grace,  by  the  gospel.

Jfcni'i7* ^** ^e  wa%  &iven  by  Moses, but  grace  and

truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ.  And  Christ  came  not  to
destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it  ;  not  by  observing  its
external  rites  and  ceremonies,  but  by  loving  and  serv-
ing God,  as  the  supreme  object  of  his  affections  ;  and
by  teaching  the  same  to  others.

42.  Then  which  of  these  two  requires  the  greatest
purity  ;  the  ceremonial  law  given  by  Moses  ;  or  the
law  of  grace  and  truth  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ  ?
Undoubtedly  the  latter,  it  must  be  granted.

43.  Therefore,  let  those  who  disregard  the  law,
because  they  imagine  they  are  under  grace,  at  least,
be careful  to  examine  their  fruits  or  works  by  the,

jimesu. iaw  Qf  grace# Yov  faith without works  is  dead.—
Rom.  ii. And  as  many  as  sin  without  iaw  shall  also  perish  with-
out law.

44.  And  further,  let  such  as  imagine  they  are  un-
der grace,  at  least  regard  that  superior  reason  and
dignity,  by  which  God  hath  exalted  man  above  the
order  of  the  brutes  ;  and  not  defile  themselves,  nor
gratify  the  inclinations  of  a  corrupt  and  inferior  na-
ture, with  any  woman,  after  she  hath  conceived  seed.

45.  And  besides,  after  nine  months,  according  to
the  common  time  of  pregnancy,  let  the  same  restric-
tion be  continued,  for  the  space  of  eighty  days  longer,
according  to  the  time  which  God  prescribed  to  Is-
rael.

46.  And  finally,  let  such  as  imagine  that  they  are
free  from  the  law,  and  under  grace,  never  gratify  the
sensual  and  fleshly  appetites  of  their  corrupt  animal
nature,  at  any  time  or  season,  nor  in  any  manner
whatever,  but  barely  for  the  propagation  of  their  spe-
cies, and  that  with  the  sole  motive  to  honor  and  glo-
rify God.

47.  Then  they  will  show  how  much  grace  and
truth  lies  at  the  bottom !  But  if  they  fail  in  the  at-
tempt, then  it  may  be  understood  why  kings  and
prophets  desired  to  see  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man.

48.  It  was  not  because  they  expected  Christ  to
come,  with  some  extraordinary  grace,  to  daub  over


27.


P.  L  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BT  MOSES.  71

their  secret  corruptions,  that  they  might  lire  in  them c"x,p*
with  impunity  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  they  looked  for  _

a  day  of  full  redemption  from  that  predominant  na-
ture of  evil,  root  and  branch,  to  which  they  were
held  in  bondage.

49.  But  in  vain  will  the  fatal wound  of  man's  de-
pravity be  covered  over,  by  the  superficial  ornaments
of  an empty  profession  of grace, when  God  shaft
bring  every  work into  judgment y  with  every  secret  Sccl.^a.
fhing  I  u'

50.  In  vain  may  souls  groan  for  dellverence  from
the  bondage  of  sin,  till  they  drop  into  eternity,  while,
by  some  plausible  reasonings  to  enjoy  a  momentary
pleasure,  they  willingly  conceal  the  very  core  of  their  Mat.xxin
corruptions  !

5  1.  It  was  nothing  short  of  supreme  and  perfect
love  to  God,  that  could  ever  order  and  regulate  the
actions  of  man  so  as' to  render  them  well  pleasing  to
Him  ;  and  therefore,  where  any  action  was  condemn-
ed, or  any  atonement  required,  it  proved  that  the  na-
ture from  which  that  action  proceeded,  was  evil.

52.  And,  until  that  which  was  the  spring  or  cause
of  the  evil  was  removed,  the  same  evil  action  would
be  repeated  :  for  the  effect  is  like  its  cause,  and  the
same  cause  must  continue  to  produce  the  same  ef-
fect.

53.  And  hence  came  those  perpetual  offerings  and
burnt  off-rings  for  sin,  in  which  God  had  no  fileasure  ;
but  they  were  added  that  the  offence  of  sin  might
abound,  until  the  cause  should  be  removed,  by  Christ
the  true  seed,  in  whom  only,  the  promise  of  final  re-
demption was  made.

54.  Therefore,  the  design  of  the  ceremonial  law,
was  not  to  fulfil  the  real  law  of  God,  but  to  point  out
the  way  in  which  it  should  be  fulfilled  :  first,  by  dis-
covering that  object  which  stands  in  competition  with
God,  and  engrosses  the  highest  affections  of  man  ;
and  then  to  have  that  object  taken  out  of  the  way.
And  until  that  was  done,  the  soul  could  never  be  free
from  bondage  and  captivity  to  sin.

5  5.  In  every  respect,  the  law  given  by  Moses,  went
to  search  out  the  root  of  man's  depravity.  Many
tilings  pertaining  to  the  same  nature,  besides  those

K2


Heb.  x.  5,
6.


72  THE  TRUE  END  AN©  DESJGN  OF  P.  I,


CHAP
IX,


10.
Lev.  xv.


that  ^ere  actual,  were  counted  either  as  sinful,  or
-  unclean,  or  both  ;  and  were  to  be  purged  away  ac-

cording to  the  statutes  of  the  law.

56.  Such  was  the  uncleanness  of  man,  that  chanced

him  by  night,  his  seed  going  from  him,  and  the  like

carnal  and  fleshly  things,  which  polluted  every  thing

they  touched,  and  required  divers  washings  to  atone.

Gen. 57.  The voluntary,  and unnatural crime of  self

7^10- pollution,  was  ever  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of

2?°S - ^*0(* :  anc*  so  was  ll*so  *ka*  °f  defiling  themselves  with
limU.  mankind.

58.  Even  things  that  were  necessary  to  life,  and
as  conducive  to  health  as  animal  food  to  the  body,

i^l^a."  were  not  excepted :  Such  as  the  uncleanness  of  a
woman's  natural  courses,  which  occasioned  a  separa-
tion of  seven  days.

59.  So  that  the  strictest  ceremonies  of  the  law,
were  nothing  more  nor  less,  than  to  show,  that  the
very  root  and  fountain  of  man's  nature,  in  his  fallen
state,  was  corrupt  before  God,  and  offensive  to  his
pure  nature.

60.  Thus  the  law,  not  only  distinguished  between
good  and  evil  actions,  but  searched  out  the  cause,  and
the  different  motives,  from  which  actions  proceeded.
And  it  discovered  the  root  of  all  evil  to  be  in  the  ve-
ry nature,  in  which  man  was  begotten.

61.  For  while  the  spirit  of  the  law  required  per-
fect love  to  the  invisible  God,  as  the  only  justifying
motive  in  the  soul  of  man  ;  it  immediately  excluded
that  inferior  instinct,  which  led  Sodom  and  Egyfth
and  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  to  the  perpetration  of
the  most  horrid  and  unnatural  crimes,  through  lusty
merely  for  the  sake  of  its  own  gratification,  or  the  mo-
mentary pleasure  which  it  afforded.

62.  Moses  plainly  demonstrated,  that  this  instinct,
by  which  man  was  begotten  in  his  fallen  state,  was  in-
consistent with  perfect  love  to  God,  from  its  motions
and  actions,  being  lawless,  under  no  government,
&nd  subject  to  no  controul.

63.  This  passionate  and  lawless  instinct  was  blind
to  the  law  of  God,  and  the  law  of  nature,  and  regard-
less of  the  objects  of  its  choice  or  refusal :  so  that  it
moved,  with  equal  freedom,  to  any  object  that  could


P. I.  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BY  MOSES.  73

afford  it  the  gratification  of  its  own  agreeable  and  cor-  c**£1p.

rupt  self  ;  whether  that  object  was  animate  or  in-  ^

animate,  brutal  or  human  !

64.  All  this  is  most  strikingly  evident  from  the  law

of  Moses,  as  well  as  from  the  prophets. And  after  Lev.xvik
Moses  had  given  a  numerous  list  of  the  abominations,  **• ,
which  all  sprang  from  one  and  the  same  source  of
human  corruption,  he  adds,  For  all these abomina-  xviiL37i
tions  have  the  men  of  the  land  done  I

65.  And  to  show  that  the  natural  seed  of  Abraham,
had  the  same  corrupt  inclinations  of  other  nations,  it

is  asrain  added,  And  ye  shall  nit  walk  in  the  manners chap.
of  the  nations  which least  out  before  you  :  for  they  De'ut.is.
committed  all  these  things,  and  therefore  I  abhorred  4«5»**
them,

66.  Then,  if  that  propensity  of  the  natural  man,
was  so  blind  and  lawless,  that  it  would  move  toward
a  neighbour's  wife,  a*  sister,  a  father's  wife,  a  mother,
a  daughter,  a  fellow  man,  a  four-footed  beast,  a  dumb
idol,  a  lifeless  stock,  or  a  stone  ;  could  any  thing  pro-
duced by  it,  be  any  better  than  itself  ?

67.  Here  again,  we  may  see,  that  the  true  design
of  the  law,  was  to  discover  the  distinction  of  objects,
and  the  chief  motive  from  which  actions  proceeded.

68.  As  ev«ry  external  object  upon  which  man  pla-
ced his  affections,  was  more  or  less  offensive  to  God,
and  merited  punishment  according  to  the  degree  of
the  offence  ;  so  the  whole  law  went  pointedly  to  dis-
cover that  no  motive,  or  affection,  fixed  upon  any  ex-
ternal object  whatever,  could  satisfy  the  real  spirit  of
the  law  :  and  that  nothing  could  do  it,  short  of  per-
fect love  to  God,  as  the  supreme  object  of  man's  af-
fections.

69.  And  therefore,  until  the  reigning  power  of
that  lawless  corruption  was  taken  out  of  the  way,  how
could  the  soul  love  God  supremely,  and  his  neighbour
as  himself?  For  on  these  two  hang  all  the  law  and  the
prophets.

70.  Christ  Jesus  was  the  first  that  ever  fulfilled  the
spirit  of  the  law  ;  and  thereby,  he  put  an  end  to  all
those  external  rites  and  ceremonies,  meats  and  drinks,
and  divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances  ;  and  set
the  example  for  others  to  do  the same. Nothing


74  THE  TRUE  END  AND  DESIGN  OF  P. I.

CixP'  tiieref°re>  but perfect  obedience to  his command-

^  ments,  could  ever  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  law.

7 1.  A  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  of  Christ,  walk-
ing in  his  very  footsteps,  travelling  in  the  work  of
regeneration,  and  denying  self  of  every  actual  and
sensual  gratification,  as  he  did,  released  every  mem-
ber of  his  body,  from  all  the  external  obligations  of
those  carnal  ordinances.
hSTv  1"  7<2'  As  lt  ls  written  :  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law
for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth.  Not  to
such  as  believe  only,  but  he  became  the  author  ofeter-
nal  salvation  to  all  that  obey  him.

73.  Thus  far,  we  have  opened  the  nature  of  man's
loss,  and  the  fundamental  cause  of  his  depravity  and
separation  from  God,  and  the  design  of  the  law  to
search  it  out,  from  its  true  origin  :  not  superficially,  '
nor  in  disguise,  but  faithfully,  and  with  that  plainness
which  the  importance  of  sacred  and  solemn  truth  de-
mands. It  is  the  truth  only,  that  ever  will,  or  ever
can  make  souls  free.

74.  And  here  we  may  add  a  few  very  just  observa-
tions from  a  respectable  writer.  They  may  discover^
in  some  measure,  a  spirit  of  willingness  and  candour
to  acknowledge  and  expose  the  root  of  evil  ;  and  on
the  contrary,  a  general  principle  of  disguise  to  con-
ceal it.

"Wiibe*  ?5-  "  But  though  these  effects  of  human  depravi-
SdHon  l  ty'"  savs  *'ie  wr*ter5  u  are  every  where  acknowledg-
Bost?Ed,  <  ed  and  lamented,  we  must  not  expect  to  find  them
p.  17,  is.  i  traced  to  their  true  origin. Causa  latet,  vis  est  no-

4  tissima :"  i.  e.  The  cause  lies  concealed,  the  effect

is  notorious.

76.  "  Prepare  yourself  to  hear  rather  of  frailty  and
4  infirmity,  of  petty  transgressions,  of  occasional  fail-
4  ings,  of  sudden  surprisals,  and  of  such  other  qualify-
4  ing  terms  as  may  serve  to  keep  out  of  view  the  true
4  source  of  the  evil,  and — may  administer  consolation
4  to  the  pride  of  human  nature."

77.  "  Far  different  is  the  humiliating  language  of
4  Christianity.  From  it  we  learn  that  man  is  an  apos-
4  tate  creature,  fallen  from  his  high  original,  degrad-
4  ed  in  his  nature,  and  depraved  in  his  faculties — that
4  he  is  tainted  with  sin,  not  slightly  and  superficially,
4  but  radically,  and  to  the  very  core."


P.  I.  THE  LAW  GIVEN  BY  MOSES.  7*5

78.  "  These  are  truths  which,  however  mortifying  9*£p-
<  to  our  pride,  one  would  think  (if  this  corruption  did


4  not  warp  the  judgment )  none  would  be  hardy  enough  wiiber-
4  to  attempt  to  controvert."  Religion,

79.  "  How,  on  any  principles  of  common  reason-  p.  25, 26.
1  ing,  can  we  account  for  it,  [this  corruption]  but  by

*  conceiving  that  man,  since  he  came  out  of  the  hands
«  of  the  Creator,  has  contracted  a  taint,  and  that  the

<  venom  of  this  subtle  poison  has  been  communicated

*  throughout  the  race  of  Adam,  every  where  exhibit-

<  ing  incontestable  marks  of  its  fatal  malignity."

80.  "  Hence  it  has  arisen,  that  the  appetites  deriv-

*  ing  new  strength,  and  the  powers  of  reason  and  con-

*  science  being  weakened,  the  latter  have  feebly  and
i  impoteivtly  pleaded against those  forbidden  indul-

*  gences  which  the  former  have  solicited."

81.  "  Sensual  gratifications  and  illicit  affections
1  have  debased  our  nobler  powers,  and  indisposed  our
i  hearts  to  the  discovery  of  God. — By  a  repetition  of

*  vicious  acts,  evil  habits  have  been  formed  within  us,
1  and  have  rivetted  the  fetters  of  sin.  All  without  ex-
1  ception,  in  a  greater  or less degree,  bear  about

*  them,  more  visible  or  more  concealed,  the  ignomin-
i  ious  marks  of  their  captivity."

82.  "  Such,  on  a  full  and  fair  investigation,  must
c  be  confessed  to  be  the  state  of  facts  ;  and  how  can
'  this  be  accounted  for  on  any  other  supposition,  than
i  that  of  some  original  taint,  some  radical  principle  of

<  corruption  ?  All  other  solutions  are  unsatisfactory,

<  while  the  potent  cause which  has  been  assigned,

*  does  abundantly,  and  can  alone  sufficiently  account

*  for  the  effect."  So  says  Wilbcrforce  :  and  that  with
the  greatest  reason  and  truth. Then  let  it  be  so.

83.  To  this  subject  we  shall  only  add,  that  although
the  ceremonial  law  was  given  to  discover  the  root  and
fountain  of  all  evil,  yet  it  never  did  nor  ever  could  re-
move the  cause.  And  although  the  law  stood  only  in
meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  washings,  and  carnal  or-  10.  ' u*
dinances,  imposed  upon  the  people  until  the  time  of  re-  *•  *•

formation,  and  could  never  make  the  comers  thereunto
perfect ;  yet  it  was  never  intended  to  be  taken  out  of
the  way,  nor  destroyed  without  substituting  something
more  excellent  and  permanent  in  its  place.


76  THE  STATE  OF  ALL  MANKIND  P.  I.

crtAp,  84.  «  por  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  saith  Christ,  till
'  heaven  and  earth  fiass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no
y.18,  wise  fats  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled'9


Mat


CHAPTER  X.


The  State  of  all  Mankind  before  the  dfijiearing  of

Christ.

'O  be  saved  from  outward  dangers,  temporal
enemies,  and  such  like,  is  properly  called  sal-
vation. But  to  be  saved  from  the  power  and  practice
of  sin,  is  a  very  different  kind  of  salvation.  The
former  is  temporal,  and  the  latter  spiritual.

2.  The  Lord  saved  Noah  from  the  destruction  of

the  old world;  brought  Abraham  forth  out  of  Ury

(i.  e.  the  fire)  of  the  Chaldees  ;  and  saved  Lot  from

the  overthrow  of  Sodom.

i  Samuel 3.  The  children  of  Israel  saw  the  salvation  of  the

aUSJk. Lord  at the Red Sea. And  the Lord  frequently

27- wrought  a  great  salvation  for  Israel,  in  the  land  of

Canaan,  and  from  time  to  time,  gave  them  saviours^

who  saved  them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies.

4.  Yet  all  this  was  not  salvation  from  sin;  nor  were

the  saviours^  those  who  should  judge the mount  of

obad.21.  Esau,  when  the  kingdom  should  be  the  Lord's. As

sin  was  in  the  world  until  the  law  was  given,  that  the

offence  might  abound ;  so  it  remained  in  the  world

until  Christ  appeared.

Heb.x.4, 5.  For  it  is  not  possible  that the  blood  of  bulls  and

vX  27. of  goats  should  take  away  sins  :  even  the  high  priests

were  required  to  offer  sacrifices  for  their  own  sins,  a*

well  as  for  the  sins  of  the  people.

iPet  i. 6-  The  prophets  themselves  were  ignorant  of  that

10,11,12.  salvation,  and searched diligently to  know when  it

would  appear; unto whom it was revealed  that  it

was  not  unto  themselves  they  ministered  the  promise,

isaihii.  but  unto  another  people,  yet  to  come  ;  and  prophe-

ze'ch.  k.  sied  of  him,  in  whom  it  should  first  appear,  by  the

*'  spirit  of  Christ  that  was  in  them,


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  7f

7.  It  is  remarkable that  under  the covenant  of  Cl^p*
promise,  names and  characters  were  applied  to  ma-  .,,
ny  natural  men,  which  in  reality  could  be  applied  to
Christ  only.

8.  Thus,  God  said  unto  Abraham,  u  I  will  make
of  thee  a  great  nation — and  in  thee  shall  all  the  fam-
ilies of  the  earth  be  blessed."  And  of  Isaac  he  said,
u  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  hiin,  for  an  ever-
lasting covenant,  and  with  his  seed  after  him.  The
whole  of  which,  in  spirit  and  in  substance,  applies
to  Christ,  and  not  to  Abraham  and  Isaac,  nor  to  their
natural  seed.  The  thing  was  typical,  as  hath  been
shown.

9.  Again,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  Israel  is  my  son,  ExtKiv>-
even  my  first  born." This  is  also  typical,  and  in  re-  22.
ality  applies  to  none  but  Christ,  and  his  true  seed,  is!
who  are  in  him  by  obedience.  is!"1"1*

10.  And  after  the.  law  was  given  to  the  Hebrews,

"  the  whole nation," saith  Edwards^  u  by  this  law,  Redemp.
4  was  as  it  were,  constituted  in  a  typical  state  ;"  which  p<  "6*
is  true,  as  the  scriptures  abundantly  prove.

11.  Upon  which  a  certain  writer  justly  remarks,  p.  177,
that  "Christians  have  the  most  unequivocal  asser- KoteM*
4  tions  of  this  in  the  New-Testament. The  law  is

*  called  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.  And  the
4  whole  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  great  part  of
4  that  to  the  Galatians,  is  written  to  prove  and  illus-
4  trate  this  very  point."

12.  Another  writer  on  a  similar  occasion,  as  justly
remarks,  on  typical  characters  in  general,  that,  "  In  no&L  *
4  order  to  constitute  a  proper  type,  it  is  by  no  means

*  necessary,  that  the  person  who  answers  this  import-

*  ant  purpose, should possess perfect  moral  quali-

4  ties."  "  That  the  comparison  is  not  to  be  stated  and  **u™£r's
4  pursued  through  every  particular  incident  of  the  toLi.*'
4  life,  and  every  feature  of  the  person  typifying."  L275'

13.  Then,  as  the  line  of  the  patriarchs,  and  the
law  of  Moses,  were  only  typical  of  things  to  come,
and  were,  not  the  very  substance  of  the  thing  typified ;
therefore  let  not  the  shadow  of  a  thing  be  mistaken
for  the  substance.

14.  The  name  or  figure  of  a  thing  spiritual,  is  as
distinct  from  the  thing itself,  as  the  name  or  jiicturc


78  THE  STATE  OF  ALL  MAyKIND  P.  L

chap- of  the  sun,  is  distinct  from  the  sun  itself. The  high

priest of  the  children of Israel wore a  mitre  upon

.-  his head,  with  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  on  which was

36. '  engraved, Holiness to the  Lord. And  of  the

i>eut.AiY.  pe0pje  jt  was  saj^ Thou art an  holy  people  unto  the

Lord  thy  God.

15.  But  did  this  make  either  the  priest  or  the  peo-
ple holy  ?  By  no  means.  The  whole  nation  were  6z>z-
ners,  from  Moses  to  Christ,  both  priest  and  people,
and  this  their  sacrifices  and  offerings  for  sin,  year  by-
year  continually,  prove  beyond  all  contradiction.  And
the  same  prove  also,  that  they  were  perpetual  trans-
gressors of  the  moral  law,  the  nature  and  require-'
ments  of  which,  have  been  pointed  out  in  the  prece-
ding chapter.

16.  It  is  strictly  true,  however,  that  while  they
punctually  observed  all  the  external  rites  and  ordinan-
ces of  the  law,  they  were  counted  blameless,  and
were  blessed  of  God,  above  all  other  nations.

17.  And  in  all  those  blessings,  which  were  the
fruits  of  their  obedience,  they  verily  were  typical  of
what  they  were  called  ;  An  holy  and  peculiar  people,
sons  and  daughters  of  God,  and  many  other  terms,
that  might  serve  as  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.
Ail  of  which  is  clearly  evinced  in  the  New-Testa-
ment, particularly,  in  Paul's  epistles  to  the  Hebrews
and  Romans.

18.  And  when  it  is  said,  that  Enoch,  Noah  and
others,  walked  with  God  ;  it  means  nothing  more,
than  their  walking  in  obedience  to  the  commands  of
God  given  them  in  their  day.

19.  Thus,  Noah  walked  with  God  in  his  genera-
tion, in  building  an  ark,  &c. — Abram,  in  leaving  his
father's  house — Moses,  in  bringing  up  the  children  of
Israelii  out  of  Egypt. — Davia  was  a  man  after  God's
own  heart,  to  fulfil  all  his  will  ;  but  all  his  will  to
David,  was  not  all  his  will  to  another  ;  David  was  a
man  of  blood,  therefore  Solomon  was  chosen  to  build
the  temple. — Jehu  was  anointed  to  cut  off  the  house
of  Ahab — and  Cyrus  was  the  Lord's  anointed  to  sub-
due the  nations.  But  not  one  of  them  walked  with
God  under  the  cross  of  Christ;  nor  were  they  anoint-
ed with  power  to  save  them  from  their  sins.


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  79

20.  It  is  true,  that  the  Israelites  drank  of  that  spir-  Cl*£p-
itual  rock  that  followed  them  in  the  wilderness,  and


that  rock  was  Christ;*  or  in  other  words,  it  was  the  l  Coi%au
same  spirit  of  Christ,  that  spake  by  the  prophets,  and  4-
testified  of  his  coming.

2 1 .  But  observe,  instead  of  following  the  Spirit  of
Christ  in  Moses,  that  Spirit  followed  Mem,  and  strove
with  them,  while  they  remained  a  stiff-necked  and  re-
bellious generation. "  How  oft  did  they  provoke  him  Psalm
in  the  wilderness,  and  grieve  him  in  the  desert  1  Yea,  toBi
they  turned  back  and  tempted  God,  and  limited  the

Holy  One  of  Israel — And  about the  time  of  forty  Acts  ^
years,  suffered  he  their  manners  in  the  wilderness."  is.
So  far  distant,  then,  was  this  typical  Israel  from  being
the  true  Israel  of  God,  whom  they  typified.

22.  But  when  the  promised  Messiah  really  came,
instead  of  following  them,  he  exhorts  them  to  follow
him,  and  testified  that  unless  they  did,  they  could  not

be  his  discipies. And  further  said, If  ye  believe  not  j0hnviii,
that  lam  he,  (that  was  promised)  ye  shall  die  in  your  24-
si?is.

23.  Therefore,  it  was  not faith  in  a  Saviour  to  come,
that  ever  saved  any  people  from  their  sins  ;  neither
did  a  law  of  types  and  shadows  ever  save  any.  The
Tery  intent,  and  substance  of  all  that  was  typified,  and
promised  to  Israel,  was  salvation  from  all  sin,  by
Christ,  when  he  should  appear,  and  not  before.  Ev-
ery thing  else,  without  a  full  una1  present  salvation  GaLiv  9#
from  sin,  call  it  what  you  please,  is  nothing  but  an
empty  shadow  ;  and,  as  Paul  justly  expresses  it,  weak

and  beggarly  elements.

24.  Then  how  mistaken  are  they  who  imagine,  that
God  saved  one  good  man  from  his  sins  here,  and  an-
other there  ;  and  from  Adam  to  Christ,  doomed  all
the  rest  of  the  innumerable  multitudes  of  the  human
race  to  eternal  destruction,  while  it  was  impossible

*  The  children  of  Israel  drank  of  no  other  spiritual  rock  than  that  which
dwelt  in  Moses  :  for  the  apostle  saith,  They  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the
cloud,  and  in  the  sea.  1  Cor.  x.  2.  But  will  any  one  say,  that  Moses  was  very
Christ  ?  The  truth  is,  that  in  Moses  dwelt  a  spirit  of  prophecy, and  that  spirit  was
I  a  medium  through  which  the  law  of  God  was  manifested  to  Israel :  so  that  Mos-
es was  a  mediator  between  God  and  the  people  of  Israel,  and  an  eminent  type  of
Jesus,  who  was  constituted  the  real  Christ— Therefore,  in  partaking  of  that  spir*-
it  which  dwelt  in  Moses,  they  might  be  said  to  drink  of  that  spiritual  rock,  and
that  rock  was  Christ.

L


30  THE  STATE  OF  ALL  MANKIND  P.  I.

chap, {-ha{-  ever  one  0f  them  could  be  really  saved,  having
mm  no  real  Saviour.

25.  For  how  then  could  the  scripture  be  true,  which
saith  ; God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  unbelief?  And

llom.xi.  again: The  scripture  hatfi  concluded  k~li*  under  sin,
oil  iiig"  ^mi  the  promise  by  faith  in  Christ  might  be  given  to
Heb.v.9.  them  that believe. Not that  did  believe,*  but that
?iow  believe. And  who  not  only  believe  but  obey.

26.  It  is  evident  from  the  plain  history  of  facts,  that
the  real  state  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  was  equally,
and  impartially  considered,  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  and
that  all  stood  in  equal  need  of  a  Saviour,  from  Moses
to  Christ.

27.  The  descendants  of  Abraham  were  taught  the
.  faith  and  worship  of  One  true  God  ;  but  very  early,

i^S  was  idolatry  introduced  among  them.  Rachel  stole
the  gods  of  her  father,  brought  them  to  Mount  Giie-
ad,  and  artfully  contrived  to  keep  them.
zxx\.  2,  28.  Afterwards,  however,  Jacob  required  his  house-
n>4-  hold,  and  all  that  were  with  him,  to  put  away  the
strange  gods  that  were  with  them  ;  accordingly  they
were  given  up  to  Jacob,  with  all  their  ear-rings,  and
he  hid  them  under  an  oak  by  Shechem.

29.  And  after  this  again,  in  Egypt,  they  served
Kmm  strange  gods.  And  even  after  they  were  delivered^
25, 20. from  the  bondage  of  Egypt ;  forty  years  did  the  house

of  Israel  carry  in  the  wilderness,  the  tabernacle  of
Moloch,  and  Chiun,  their  images,  the  star  of  their  god,
which  they  made  to  themselves  ;  as  saith  the  prophet
Ac.tsvii.  Amos.  Stephen  explains  it  by  calling  them  figures,
42,  43.  or  images,  which  they  made  to  worship  the  host  of
heaven.

30.  To  this  agree  the  words  of  Joshua,  who,  after
having  settled  the  Israelites  in  the  land  of  promise,

Joshua assembled  them  together, and  said,  Put away the
&23* 14>  g°d$  which  your  fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the
food,  and  in  Egypt  ;  and  serve  ye  the  Lord.

31.  It  was  therefore  justly  observed,  that  it  was
?esUt6  &  not  because  of  the  righteousness  of  the  Israelites,  nor
2«- '  ' for  the  uprightness  of  their  hearts,  that  they  inherits

*  The  Jews  did  believe  in  a  Messiah  to  come  ;  but  their  past  belief  was  ren-
dered ineffectual,  by  their  unbelief  in  him  whan  prevent  among  them.


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.


81


ed  the  land  of  promise  ;  but  to  subserve  the  purpose x •

of  God  in  regard  to  a  spiritual  sued. For  Moses  de-

Glared  that  they  were  a  stiff-necked  people,  and  that
they  had  been  rebellious  against  the  Lord,  from  the
day  that  he  knew  them.

32.  The  conduct  of  the  Israelites  as  a  people,  af-
ter they  were  in  possession  of  the  promised  land,  both
under  the  judges  and  kings,  need  not  be  more  clearly
expressed  than  it  is  by  Robinson.  srarJue-T

33.  "  Moses  and  the  Levites  had  put  to  death  about  fcSjJft?
c  three  thousand  men  for  setting  up  the  golden  call ;  s*

4  but  he  had  not  extirpated  idolatry :  it  was  practised j*^

4  all  his  time;  and  it  was  practised in  the  time  of^xi-15^

4  Joshua ;  and  it  continued  to  be  practised  under  the

4  judges  through all this period. The people  iWjjfS*

4  serve,  and  would  serve  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  ;  and  al-

4  though  Gideon  checked  foreign  idolatry,  yet  he  set  vi.25,3s.

<  up  an  idol  of  his  own  ;  and  as  soon  as  he  was  dead,  J^24'27*

4  the  people  turned  again  to  Baalim,  and  made  Baal-

4  berith  their  god."

34.  "  Samuel the last  of  the  judges,  observes  lSftm/vii.

*  that,  in  his  time,  they  served  strange  gods  and  Ash-  3,&\*.»
4  taroth : so that idolatry was practised through:

4  this  whole  period."  Under  the  kings,  is  exhibit-
ed a  code  of  statutes, like  the former  ; "  Which

*  made  idolatry  and  several  vices  capital  crimes,
4  and  an history  of  the perpetual violation of  it.

*  The  kings  were  arbitrary,  but  far  from  enforcing
4  the  law,  they  broke  it  themselves, and  protected

*  others  in  doing  so."

35.  "  David,  who  was  an  enemy  to  idolatry,  com-  iKing*
1  mitted  adultery  and  murder  with  impunity.  Sol-  ^f:^
1  omon, who  built a  temple for  Jehovah on one

*  mountain  at  Jerusalem,  built  also  an  high  place
4  for  Chemosh,  the  abomination  of  Moab,  on  anoth-
4  er ;  and  though  he  sacrificed  three  times  a  year
4  to  Jehovah,  yet  at  other  times  he  went  after  Mo-
4  loch,  the  God  of  Amnion,  and  Ashtaroth,  the  god-
1  dess  of  Zidon."

36.  44  Jeroboam,  who  reigned  over  ten  tribes,  set

1  up  calves  of  gold,  made  high  places and  priests,  u-$3?

4  ordained  festivals,  and offered sacrifices  to idols.

4  And  Rehoboam,  who  reigned  over  the  other  two3  xjv.23^4,


82  THE  STATE  OF  ALL  MANKIND.  P.  L

CI*AP- 6  either  built,  or  suffered  the people  to  build  high

, ,  i  places, and set  up images, and to consecrate

4  groves,  and  to  do  all  the  abominations  of  the  an-
'  cient  inhabitants  of  the  land. In  this  manner,  in

<  general,  they  conducted-themselves  through  all  this

*  period/'

37.  u  It  is remarkable that  the  royal reformers
i/ai!!*'  i  were  idolaters  themselves:  for  Jehu  departed  not

'  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  the  golden  calves  that

l  Kin  s '  were  m  Bethel  and  in  Dan. Asa,  who  dethroned

xv.  13,14.  '  his  mother,  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a  grove,"

xmv-!?8—  i  did  not  take  away  the  high  places  ;  and  Joash  not

9a* i  only  left  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  served  groves

'  and idols,  but  murdered Zechariah — for remon-

i  strating  against  idolatry,  in  the  court  of  that  very

i  house  of  the  Lord,  which  he  had  pretended  to  puri-

i  fy  from  idolatry  by  shedding  the  blood  of  his  moth*

*  er  and  the  Baalites. It  is  observable,  further,  that

<  the  people,  who  put  others  to  death,  did  not  reform

*  themselves."

38.  It  is  true,  that  through  the  Hebrew  nation,  God
hath  verily  performed  his  promise  made  unto  Abra-
ham, in  raising  up  that  seed  in  which  all  the  families
of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  But  when  the  long
suffering  patience,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God,  in
dealing  with  that  nation,  in  order  to  fulfil  his  promise,
is  rightly  considered,  it  will  appear  marvellous  indeed.
Through  perpetual  changes  of  judgments  and  mer-
cies,  was  his  name  upheld.

39.  And  it  is  certain,  that  although  in  some  ex-
traordinary instances,  some  walked  blameless,  as
touching  the  external  law  ;  yet  as  touching  the
internal  work  of  redemption  by  Christ,  they  were
not  blameless :  Witness  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the
Gentiles.

40.  And  it  is  also  certain,  that  as  a  people,  they
were  as  prone,  and  when  not  restrained  by  judg-
ments, as  active,  to  commit  all  the  abominations  of
the  earth,  as  any  other  nation  under  heaven.  Their
whole  history  proves  this.

4 1 .  And  as  to  the  internal  work  of  salvation,  their
real  state  and  standing,  in  the  sight  of  God>  was  con-


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRrST.  83

sidered  no  better  than  other  nations  :  which  is  most  ei^p#
manifest  from  the  prophets.


42.  Thus  saith Isaiah:  "  Ah  sinful  nation,  a  peo-  isai.  1 4>
file laden  with  iniquity, a  seed  of  evil  doers,  children  10~ 15«
that  are  corrupters  ! — Hear  the word of  the  Lord,

ye  rulers  of  Sodom  ;  give-  ear  unto  the  law  of  our
God,  ye  fieo/ile  of  Gomorrah,  To  what  purpose  is
the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  saith  the
Lord — your  hands  are  full  of  blood.

43.  "  Write  it  before  them  in  a  table, and  note  chap.xx*
it  in  a  book,  that  it  may  be  for  the  time  to  come  for

ever  and  ever  ;  that  this  is  a  rebellious  fieofile,  lying
children,  children  that  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the
fiord."

44.  Thus  said  God  by  Jeremiah,  "  I  have  seen  also  Jer.xxiu.
in  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  an  horrible  thing :  they  14'
commit  adultery,  and  walk  in  lies  ; they  strengthen

also  the  hands  of  evil-doers,  that  none  doth  return
from  his  wickedness :  they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as
Sodom,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  as  Gomorrah"

45.  Thus  said  the  Lord  God  by  Ezekiel  concern-  Ezek.v.
ing  Jerusalem. "  She  hath  changed  my  judgments  £v  47^
into  wickedness  more  than  the  nations,  and  my  stat-  52.
utes  more  than the countries  that are  round  about

her;  for  they  have  refused  my  judgments,  and  my
statutes,  they  have  not  walked  in  them."

46.  And  by  Micah. "  There  is  none  upright  among  mCt  vii#
men  :  they  all  life  in  wait  for  blood  :  they  hunt  every  2»  4-
man  his  brother  with  a  net — The  best  of  them  is  as  a
brier  ;  and  the most upright  is  sharper  than  a  thorn
hedged

4*7.  And  by  Zephaniah. "  Woe  to  her  that  is  fl-  zeph.i*.
thy  and  polluted,  to  the  oppressing  city  !  Her  princes  1>3>4-
within  her  are  roaring  lions ;  her  judges  are  evening
wolves — Her  prophets  are  light  and  treacherous  per-  22.&U3I
sons;  her  priests  have  polluted the  sanctuary,  they
have  done  violence  to  the  law"

48.  And  by Malachi. "  Ye  are cursed with  a  Mai.iu.9.
curse  :  for  ye  have  robbed  me,  even this whole  na-
tion" To  this  agrees  what  Christ  testified  ;  u  all  Jobnx.8.
that  ever  came  before  me  are  thieves  and  robbers  "

49*  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  had  to  confess  "  There

L2


84  THE  STATE  OF ALL  MANKIND  P.  I.

CI^AP* is  no  man  that  sinneth  not." And  David  also  declared
.  under  the  law,  u  Every  one  of  them  is  gone  back)  they

1  Rings are  ^together  become  filthy  ;  there  is  none  that  doeth
iv'.!46',^  3*00^'  no  not  one' Their throat  is  an  often  sepulchre  ;
20.  ' with  their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit  ;  the  fioison  of
Kmn^hL*  #*A*  *<*  under  their  lifts  : Whose  mouth  is  full  of  curs*
13—18. fag  anci  bitterness  : Their  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood  :
Destruction  and misery  are  in  their  ways  : And  the
way  of  fieace  have  they  not  known  : There  is  no  fear  of
God  before  their  eyes."

50.  How  uniform  and  evincing  are  the  testimonies
of  the  law  and  the  prophets  !  "  Now  we  know,  saith
Paul,  that  what  things  soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith
to  them  who  are  under  the  law  ;  that  every  mouth
may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty
before  God."  Were  then  the  Jews  under  the  law
any  better  than  the  Gentiles  ?  "  No,  (saith  the  apos-
tle,) in  no  wise  ;  for  we  have  before  ftroved  both  Jews
and  Gentiles,  that  they  are  all  under  sin."

51.  Hence  it  was  justly  observed  of  the  Jews,  by
the  prophet  Isaiah,  that  although  God  had  increased
the  nation,  and they  had  been  in  pain  like  a  woman

^5-18^  *n  trava^  >  yet  tBey  na(l  as  n  were  brought  forth  wind,
and  had  not  wrought  any  deliverance  in  the  earth.  A
more  just  and  true  expression  was  never  uttered  by  a
prophet !

52.  At  the  birth  and  appearing  of  Jesus  the
Christ,  the  state  of  the world,  in  regard  to  piety

Uofcnv.  and  virtue,  was  very  deplorable. The  whole  world
lay  in  wickedness. In  particular,  the  world  is  divi-
, ded  into  four  parts,  and  their  situation  justly  stated
p.  33,  34!  by Robinson,  as  each  is  described  in  the  holy  scrip-
tures.

53.  "  The  first  contains  the  uncivilized  part  of
4.  '  i  mankind,  and  these,  who  are  alike  in  all  ages,  are
loIim'1'  i  depicted  in  miniature  by  the apostle  of  the  Gen-

'  tiles,  and  at  large  by  the  legislator  of  the  Jews,  and

1  both  are  justified  by  profane  writers."

lct.xv*. 54,  " ^ne  b&rbaraas  ceremonies,  and  the  beastly

21,82,2$,  i  and  unnatural  crimes  of these  people,  excited  in

■  l  Moses  such  indignation,  that  he  seems  at  a  loss  for"

4  language  to  express  it,  and  he  exclaimed,  of  on£


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  85

4  vice,  it  is  abomination,  of  another,  it  is  confusion, CH^P*
4  and  of  the  whole,  it  is  wickedness."  _

$5.  "  In  a  second  division, we  may  consider  the

*  civilized part of the world, the accomplished

*  Greeks,  the  polite  Romans,  and  all  others,  who
4  had  been  reclaimed  from  brutality  and  instructed
4  in  the  arts  of  regular  life.  It  is  but  justice  to  al-
4  low,  that  their  taste  for  all  the  arts  was. elegant  in
4  the  highest  degree ;  but  the  same  justice  obliges
4  us  to  affirm,  that  they  were  devoid  of  all  religion
4  and  virtue."

56.  "  The  apostle  Paul  describes  this  class  of  men,  f£%£
4  in  the  latter  half  of  the  first  chapter  of  the  epistle

*  to  the  Romans,  and,  to  say  nothing  of  books,  we
4  have  an  undeniable  proof,  and  a  full  illustration  of
4  what  he  affirms,  in  the  ruins  of  the  famous  cities  of
4  Harculaneum  and  Pompeii."

57.  u  About  twenty  years  after  Paul  wrote  h's
4  epistle  to  the  Romans,  a  sudden  eruption  of  mount

,4  Vesuvius  buried  these  two  places  with  all  the
4  inhabitants.*  They  were  first  covered  with  ashes
4  and  cinders,  and  then  glazed  over,  as  it  were,
1  with  the  burning  lava  of  the  mountain.  Secured
4  by  this,  and  future  eruptions,  from  the  action  of
4  the  air,  the  whole  lay  undiscovered,  and  some
4  parts  unhurt,  for  1641  years."  The  discovery  was
made  in  1720,  "and  all  the  statues,  vases,  pictures,
4  and  buildings  confirm  the  two  truths  just  now
4  mentioned,  that  the  inhabitants  had  an  exquisite
4  taste  for  the  arts,  and  a  total  ignorance  of  religion
4  and  virtue."

58.  "  Judea  in  general,  may  be  considered  as  a
4  third  class. — The  governors  were  unprincipled  tools
4  of  pagan  Rome  ;  the  chief  priests  were  Sadducees,
4  who  believed  no  future  state  ;  the  expositors  of  the
4  law  rendered  the  text  obscure  by  traditions."

59.  "  Those  hungry  hypocrites,  the  Pharisees,
4  were  the guides  of  the  common people  ;  and  the

*  people  themselves  were  abominable  and  disobedient,  Tims*
4  and  to  every  good  work  reprobate. Their  own  his-  1C*

»  Paw!  wrote  in  58. The  citias  buried  in  79. Duoorered  by  Prince  Elben^
And  punned  by  the  king  of  Naples.


86  THE  STATE  OF  ALL  MANKIND  P.  X.

chap,  c  torians say  all  this,  and  much  more to  the  same
4  purpose. According  to  Josephus — they  trampled


Jose,  de ;  upon  all  human laws, derided  divine  things,  and
Bel.  lib. i  made  a  jest  of  the  oracles  of  the  prophets,  as  of  so*

it.  cap.6.  .  J  , _ ■  rt  jt a

4  many  dreams  and  fables.  \
johni.n. 60*  "  *n  a  fourth  division  we  put  the  devout  Jews.
Man.  xx.  <  These were  few,  and they  had  very  imperfect  no-
Acts  i%.  '  tions  of  that  kind  of  kingdom,  which  their  ancient
4  prophets  had  foretold  God  intended  to  erect ;  and  of
4  that  sort  of  Messiah,  by  whom  the  great  event  was
4  to  be  effected. Hence  it  was,  that,  when  he  came
4  to  his  own,  his  own  received  him  not."

61.  To  this  may  be  added  the  following  extracts  from
tory,'voi"  Mosheim.  And  first,  concerning  the  Pagans.  "  The
^p.26,28,  i  rites  usecj  m  their  worship  were  absurd  and  ridicu*

4  lous,  and  frequently  cruel  and  obscene. — For  the
4  gods  and  goddesses,  to  whom  public  homage  was
4  paid,  exhibited  to  their  worshippers  rather  exam-
4  pies  of  egregious  crimes,  than  of  useful  and  illus-
trious virtues.  The  consequences  of  this  wretched
4  theology  were  a  universal  corruption  of  manners
4  which  discovered  itself  in  the  impunity  of  the  most
4  flagitious  crimes."

62.  "  It  is  also  well  known,  that  no  public  law
4  prohibited  the  sports  of  the  gladiators,*  the  ex-
4  ercise  of  unnatural  lusts,  the  licentiousness  of  di-
4  vorce,  the  custom  of  exposing  infants  [to  wild
4  beasts,]  and  of  procuring  abortions,  nor  the  front-
4  less  atrocity  of  consecrating  publicly  stews  and
4  brothels  [i.  e.  bawdy  houses]  to  certain  divinities."

Jbidp.38,  63,  u  The  state  of  the  Jews  was  not  much  better
and  40.  '  4  than  that  of  other  nations  at  the  time  of  Christ's
4  appearance  in  the  world.  They  were  governed  by
4  Herod — his  government  was  a  yoke  of  the  most
4  vexatious  and  oppressive  kind.  The  priests,  and
4  those  who  possessed  any  shadow  of  authority,  were
4  become  dissolute  and  abandoned  to  the  highest
4  degree  ;  while  the  multitude,  set  on  by  these  cor-

*  The  gladiators  were  persons  appointed  to  fight  each  other  with  the  sword,
for  the  entertainment  of  the  nobility  and  people.  The  fighters  generally  con-
sisted of  slaves,  prisoners  of  war,  he.  who  were  stripped  naked  to  the  waist  and
sent  into  the  amphitheatre  or  place  appointed,  to  fight  till  death.  In  this  way
▼ast  numbers  were  slain,  while  thousands  of  spectators  looked  on  to  see  wi«
sport  I


P.  I.  BEFORE  THE  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  87

*  rupt  examples,  ran  headlong  into  every  sort  of  in-  chap-
1  iquity."  '

64.  Such  then,  as  hath  been  stated,  was  the  real
situation  of  all  mankind,  from  Adam  to  Moses,  and
from  Moses  to  Christ.  Not  all  of  them  at  all  times
alike,  in  name  or  appearance,  nor  equally  corrupt  in
practice.  But  all  of  them,  patriarchs  and  families,
kings  and  prophets,  priests  and  people,  from  Adam
to  Christ,  were  destitute  of  the  real  internal  power
of  salvation  from  all  sin.  It  is  testified  by  the  law
and  the  prophets,  and  confirmed  by  the  most  undeni-
able facts.

65 And  hence,  the  conclusion  of  the  holy  scrip-
tures, before  the  appearing  of  Christ ;  "  Remember  MaUv.4,
ye  the  law  of  Moses my servant,  saith  God,  which  5»6*
I  commanded  unto  him  in  Horeb  for  all  Israel,  with
the  statutes  and  judgments."

66.  "  Behold  I  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet,  before
the  coming  of  the  great  day  of  the  Lord.  And  he
shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  father's  to  the  children,
and  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers,  lest  I
come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse.


THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  IL

THE  FIRST  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST— THE

BEGINNING  AND WORK  OF  A  NE  W

CREATION

CHAPTER I.

Christ  introduced  by  John  the  Baptist.  *

MANKIND  being  universally  sunk  in  depravity,  chap,
and  the  Jews  themselves,  who  in  the  times  of L
their  obedience  and  prosperity,  had  figuratively  stood  "— "—
as  God's  chosen  people,  being  totally  ignorant  of  that
kind  of  Messiah  and  his  kingdom,  which  their  ancient
prophets  had  foretold  ;  it  was  highly  necessary,  that
the  way  for  the  coming  of  Christ  should  be  prepared,
before  he  could  be  received  by  any.

2.  The  angel  Gabriel  had  informed  Zachariah  ofi,uke5.
the  birth  and designation of  John,  that he  should  15>16>17
drink  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink,  but  should  be
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,  Matt. ft.
and  turn  many  of  the  children  of  Israel  to  the  Lord  3*
their  God — That  he  should  go  before  him,  in  the  spir-  Mark  i  2*
it  and  flower  of  Elias — and  make  ready  a  people  pre-' '
flared  for  the  Lord.

3.  It  was  in  the  last  days  of  the  Jewish  common-
wealth, and  in  their  worst  state  of  depravity,  that
John  the  Baptist  appeared.  His  parents  were  both
aged,  like  Abraham  and  Sarah.  And  John,  like  Isaac,
was  born  according  to  promise.

4.  It  is  every  where  observable  in  the  sacred  histo-
ry of  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  that  his  ways  are


90  CHRIST  INTRODUCED  BY  P.  II.

chap.  not  man's  ways. John  did  not  make  his  appearance
* to  the  world,  from  among  the  learned  doctors,  nor
Lukei. tf*c  great  Sanhedrim  of  the  Jews;  but  abode  in  the
so-  deserts  until  the  day  of  his  testimony  unto  Israel.

5.  And  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  John
received  his  mission  from  Almighty  God,  and  went

Matt.  i».  forth  with  the  solemn  cry,  Kc/ient  ye  ;  for  the  king-
*  5~  *  dom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.  Then  went  out  to  him
multitudes  from  Jerusalem,  and  from  other  parts  of
Judea,  particularly  from  the  region  round  about  the
river  Jordan,  and  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan,
confessing  their  sins.

6.  But  when  he  saw  many  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sad-
ducees  coming  to  his  baptism,  he  said  unto  them,  O
generation  of  vifiers  !  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee
from  the wrath  to come  ? Bring forth, therefore,

fruits  meet  for  repentance  :  and  think  not  to  say  within
yourselves, We  have  .Abraham  to  our  father.

7 '.  The  Jews  had  been  long  accustomed  to  confess
their  sins,  one  by  oi.e,  to  the  priests  appointed  for
that  purpose  ;  and,  in  times  ot  calamity,  they  had  ac-
quired an  old  trick  of  feigning  repentance,  and  claim-
ing their  right  to  the  premises  made  to  faithful  Abra-
ham ;  while  they  themselves  continued  to  bring  lorth
the  fruits  of  sin,  and  perpetual  rebellion  against  God,
and  wrere  abominable,  and  to  every  good  work  repro-
bate.

8.  But  this  feigned  repentance,  and  confessing  sins
without  forsaking  them,  and  this  pretended  submis-
sion to  what  John  taught,  by  being  baptized,  while
they  had  no  sincere  intention  of  reforming,  was  too
thin  a  mask  to  conceal  the  hypocrisy  of  those  blind
guides  from  that  burning  and  shining  light  which  pen-
etrated their  secret  motives.

Lukevii. 9-  ^  was  llot  tne  ri^ers  who  believed,  or  wished  to
30-  believe  the  testimony  of  John  ;  on  their  parts  they  re-

jected him.  It  was  the  common  people  that  were
the  most  disposed  to  receive  his  testimony.  And
while  they  came  to  him  from  every  quarter,  and  were
baptized,  confessing  their  sins,  such  an  affair  could
not  escape  the  notice  of  the  rulers,  without  their  ta-
Mark  xi  king  cognizance  of  it ;  but  fearing  the  multitude,  who
32. all  held  John  as  a  prophet,  they conducted  them-


P.  II.  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST.  91

selves  with  caution,  and  sent  priests  and  Levites  to  CH£P-
examine,  and  if  possible  to  detect  him.

10.  The  deputies  found  John  in  Bethabara,  beyond
Jordan,  where he  was baptizing. And  they  asked  Johnil9
him,  Who  art  thou  ?  He  acknowledged,  lam  not  the  -27.  '
Christ. And  they  asked  him,  What  then  ?  Art  thou
Elias  ?  And  he  said,  I  am  not. Art  thou  that  proph-
et ?  And  he  answered,  No.

1 1 .  Then  said  they,  "  Who  art  thou  ?  What  say-
est  thou  of  thyself?"  He  said,  "  I  am  the  voice  of
one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Make  straight  the  way
of  the  Lord,  as  said  the  prophet  Esaias."

12.  This  was  enough,  had  they  been  honest.  But,
added  they,  "  Why  baptizest  thou  then,  if  thou  be
not  that  Christ,  nor  Elias,  neither  that  prophet  ?"
This  was  equal  to  saying,  If  thou  art  not  an  extraor-
dinary person,  immediately  commissioned  by  God,
why  dost  thou  introduce  a  new  rite,  which  is  not  in-
stituted in  the  law,  arid  for  which  thou  hast  received
no  authority  from  us  ?

13.  John  answered  them,  "  I  baptize  with  water  :
but  there  standeth  one  among  you,  whom  ye  know
not;  he  it  is,  who,  coming  after  me,  is  preferred  be-
fore me."

14.  And  John  bare  record  that  he  saw  the  Spirit  johm.3%
descending  from  heaven  like  a  dove,  and  abiding  33-
upon  him;  and  also  freely  acknowledged  of  himself,
saying,  and  I  knew  him  not ;  but  he  that  sent  me  to
baptize  with  water,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Upon
whom  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descending  and  re-
maining on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  ba/aizeth  with

the  Holy  Ghost.

15.  The  next  day  after  John's  answers  to  the  Phar-
isees, he  saw  Jesus  coming,  and  introduced  him  as
the  Saviour  of  mankind,  saying,  Behold  the  Lamb  of
God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  !

16.  This  was  the  testimony  of  John  from  the  begin-
ning,  "  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  repen-  11,12.  *
tance  :  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier  than

I,  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear  ;  he  shall  baji-
tize you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  f  re  :  Whose  fan
is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  thoroughly  purge  his  floor,

M


§2  CHRIST  INTRODUCED  BY  P.  II.

•hap. and  gather  his  wheat  into  the  g-arner ;  but  he  will


burn  uji  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  Jire \


joh*i.7 l^"  J°nn  was  a  burning  and  shining  light ;  yet  he
*.  was  not  that  true  light,  but  was  sent  to  bear  witness

of  him  :  So  the  baptism  with  water,  was  not  the  true
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire  ;  but  the  former
was  a  striking  figure  of  the  latter.  As  baptizing,  dip-
ping, or  washing  in  water,  cleanses  the  body  from
outward  pollution,  so  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost
and  fire  cleanses  the  soul  from  sin.

18.  The  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire,  had
been  prefigured  under  the  law,  and  spoken  of  by  the
prophets,  but  by  nothing  in  a  more  striking  manner
than  by  John's  baptism  ;  particularly  the  prophet  Mal-
achi,  who  said  of  Christ,  He  is  like  a  refiner's  jire—

Mai. iu.2,  an(j  jie  s^an  sit  as  a  rt>jinert ^nd  mankind  had  been

encouraged  to  long  and  thirst  for  that  day  of  God  that
t*.ap.iv.i  should  burn  as  an  oven.

19.  Of  course,  when  that  day  commenced,  the
sign  could  be  of  no  further  use,  nor  could  it  be  contin-
ued, except  it  were  with  those  who  ignorantly  wished
to  continue  under  a  comfortable  deception.

20.  Here  lay  the  mystery  :  the  baptism  of  John
was  no  more  like  that  of  Christ,  than  water  is  like
fire  ;  and  the  only  comparison  that  could  be  drawn  be-
tween them  was,  that  as  water  is  refreshing  to  a  thirs-
ty man,  so  is  the  fire  of  truth  to  a  soul  thirsting  for
salvation.  And  as  water  is  of  a  cooling,  cleansing
nature,  so  it  is  the  nature  of  fire  to  burn  and  con-
sume ;  and  therefore,  what  was  ceremonially  cleansed
under  the  law,  must  needs  be  consumed  under  the
gospel. — Such  then  is  the  difference  between  the  shad-
ow and  substance.

Matt.iH. 2  *•  Jesus  himself  came  to  be  baptized  of  John  ;  but

13,14,15.  John  said,  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and

com  est  thou  to  me  ?  Jesus  said,  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,

for  thus it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness.

Then  he  suffered  him.

22.  And  when  Jesus  was  baptized,  and  came  up
out  of  the  water,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  descended  on
him  like  a  dove  ;  (which  appearance  served  as  a  visi-
ble sign  to  John,  that  this  was  the  son  of  God,  who
should  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire  ;)  then


P.  II.  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST.  93

was  John's  mission  fulfilled  consequently  he  must  c^p*
thenceforth  decrease.  ..


23.  John  was  a  faithful  witness,  and  plainly  testifi-  j0hni§.
ed  of  Christ. He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease  :  30t
and  therefore,  as  soon  as  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,

and  the  baptism  of  lire  commenced,  there  was  no  fur-
ther need  of  the  baptism  of  water.  Nor  could  it  be
used  as  a  binding  institution,  unless  it  were  through
ignorance,  or  cunning  deceit,  to  ease  the  pain  and
prolong  the  life  of  that  sinful  nature,  which  the  Jire  ^

of  naked  truth  had  begun  to  consume. For  this  was  49.
the  fire  which  Christ  came  to  kindle  on  earth.

24.  It  was  the  testimony  and  baptism  of  John  that
first  attracted  the  multitude.  And  some  of  John's
disciples  left  him,  and  followed  Jesus.  From  this  it
may  easily  be  inferred  why  the  disciples  of  Jesus  bap-
tized.

25.  Jesus  himself-baptized  not,  and  whether  he
commanded  his  disciples  to  baptize  with  water,  or
not,  the  sacred  text  doth  not  say,  but  prudence  itself
would  have  dictated  it,  while  the  faith  of  the  multi-
tude was  so  strenuously  fixed  on  the  economy  of  John,
and  the  disciples  themselves  were  as  yet  ignorant  of
the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

26.  And  even  after  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  it  is
evident  enough,  that  the  apostles,  in  some  instances,
used  water  baptism  ;  and  it  is  as  evident  that  they  used
circumcision,  and  other  Jewish  ceremonies ;  but
never  once  as  a  binding  institution.

27.  It  is  evident,  from  the  gospel  of  the  circum-  Oal.S.7;
cision  being  committed  to  Peter  ;  and  Paul's  circum-  8#
cising  Timothy,  and  baptizing  when  he  had  no  com-
mand, that  outward  ceremonies  were  frequently  used,

in  order  to  make  the  truth  accessible  to  the  blind  and
bigoted,  who  were  yet  unable  to  see  beyond  the  shad-
ow, to  the  end  of  that  which  was  to  be  abolished.

28.  Jesus  commanded  his  disciples,  saying,  "  Go  Matt.
ye  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  **T11,,
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."
But  here  was  a  mysteiy. They  had  first  to  tarry  at
Jerusalem,  and  know  for  themselves  what  it  was  to
be  in  the  Father,  and  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Holy  Actsj.4,
Ghost,  before  they  could  in  truth  baptize  in  that  name,


$4  CHRIST  INTRODUCED  BY,  &C.  P.  II.

<**£*• 29.  And  that  this  command  to  baptize  had  no  ref-
erence  to  water,  is  plain  from  the  words  of  Paul :  I


33


icor.  i. thank God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you,  but  Crispus ,
a4,  i6. anci  Qaius — jina\  J  baptized  also  the  household  of  Stc-A
fihanus  ;  besides,  I  knoiiynot  whether  I  baptized  any
other.

30.  Would  Paul  have  thanked  God  for  not  doing
what  Christ  commanded  him  ?  In  no  wise.  But  he
immediately  tells  what  was  commanded  him,  when  j
he  says,  Christ  sent  vie  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach
the  gospel.  The  truth  is,  that  in  every  age,  and  in
every  nation  under  heaven,  mankind  were  justified
and  accepted  of  God  according  to  the  degree  of  their
obedience  to  the  light  they  were  under.

6  1 .  Those  who  were  commissioned  to  preach  the
gospel,  never  bound  mankind  to  any  thing  beyond  the
conviction  of  their  own  consciences.  Jesus  himself
Mark iv.  spake  the  word  as  they  were  able  to  hear  it.  Hence  it
was,  that  circumcision  was  made  use  of  in  the  days
of  the  apostles,  and  such  as  gladly  received  the  word,
were  baptized  ;  but  neither  of  them  was  the  sub-
stance of  the  thing  signified.

32.  Outward  circumcision  could  never  destroy  th<j
root  of  sin  ;  nor  could  the  external  baptism  or  wash-
ing with  water,  ever  take  away  the  internal  pollution
of  the  soul.

33.  The  mission  of  John  the  Baptist,  was  to  pre-
pare the  way  for  the  Messiah,  and  was  not  to  increase,
but  to  decrease,  whenever  the  ministry  of  the  Messi-
ah commenced.  Hence,  from  John's  mission  as  a
witness  of  that  light,  that  all  men  through  him  might
believe,  it  is  evident  that  Christ  could  not  have  been
revealed  to  the  world  without  a  witness.
,  34.  John  bore  testimony  to  a  kingdom  of  heaven  at
hand.  From  which  it  is  clear  that  he  himself  was
not  in  that  kingdom.  And  from  the  testimony  of  Je-
sus, it  is  easy  to  infer  that  those  who  were  before  John,
were  still  more  remote  from  the  kingdom  than  he.

Matt,  xl  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  among  them  that  are  born  ofwo~
men,  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Bap-
tist ;  notwithstanding,  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  is  greater  than  he.


xl-


P.  II.  JESUS  THE  CHRIST.  9$

CHAPTER  II.

The  Ministry  of  Jesus  the  Christ.


B


EFORE  the  first  appearing  of  Christ,  long  ex-  chap,


IL


perience  had  proved,  that  no  redemption  from
the  n.iture  and  effects  of  the  fall,  had  yet  been
wrought  among  the  human  race.  No  law,  however
severe  against  sin,  had  ever  yet  saved  the  soul  from
its  reigning  power.

2.  From  Adam  to  Moses,  and  from  Moses  to
Christ,  the  true  cause  of  virtue  and  freedom  was  un-
known. Sin  through  the  instrumentality  of  Man,
had  continued  to  corrupt  the  world.  Oppression,
civil  and  religious,  had  still  continued  to  pervade  the
earth,  and  destroy  the  peace  and  happiness  of  man-
kind.

3.  As  the  whole  posterity  of  fallen  man,  had  thus
continued  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  unrighteousness,
the  produce  of  an  evil  nature^  and  instead  of  being
reclaimed  from  the  depravity  of  the  fail,  the  world
had  waxed  old  in  wickedness,  it  was  necessary  that
the  axe  should  be  laid  to  the  root  of  that  corrufit  tree,
before  the  cause  of  sin  could  possibly  be  removed,
or  the  effect  cease.

4.  As  sin  entered  into  the  world  by  the  first  man's
disobedience,  and  all  his  posterity,  in  the  same  nature
of  rebellion,  continued  to  follow  his  example,  by
which  the  whole  became  separated  and  fallen  from
God,  it  required  a  life  and  example  directly  contrary
to  theirs,  in  order  to  their  recovery.

5.  And  as  the  very  nature  of  mau  was  corrupt,  and
stood  in  direct  enmity  against  God,  it  was  impossible
for  him  to  find  redemption,  but  through  that  media-
tor, the  Lord  Jesus,  who  took  upon  him  the  same
nature  and  enmity,  and  thereby  became  united  to  the
fallen  race,  that  he  might  crucify  that  nature,  and
slay  the  enmity,  in  order  to  become  the  captain  of
their  salvation.

6.  Hence  it  is  written,  "  Forasmuch  as  the  chil-
dren are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  Heb  ..
likewise  took  part  of  the  same  \  that  through  death  ivi!*

M  2


96  JE3US  THE  CHRIST.  P.  IL


CHAP
II.


he  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,
that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver  them,  who,  through
fear  of  death,  were  all  their  life  time  subject  to  bon-
dage."

7.  It  is  evident  from  the  scriptures,  that  the  man
Jesus,  who  was  ordained-  and  anointed  of  God  to  be
the  Saviour  of  mankind,  was  not  begotten  after  the
Mat.i.25.  flesh  ;  or  in  other  words,  by the works  of  natural
Lukei. generation  ;  but  he  was  begotten  by  the  eternal  Word
of  the  Father,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  the  medi-
um of  a  woman,  who  with  the  rest  of  mankind,  was
under  the  law  of  a  corrupt  nature.
_  . .  8.  Through  the  medium  of  a  woman  he  took  upon

s.  him,  not  the  nature  ot  angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abra-

ham ;  and  in  this  he  became  united  to  mankind  in
Heb.^ii. their  fallen  state  :  the Word  was  made  or  cloathed
Jokn£i4.  with  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  men,  that  he  might  re-
deem them  from  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin.

9.  It  is  certain,  that  if  Christ  Jesus  had  been
shapen  in  iniquity,  and  conceived  in  sin,  as  the  rest
of  mankind  were,  he  never  could  have  been  their  re-
deemer :  and  consequently,  such  as  were  counted
righteous  in  the  order  of  what  is  called  natural  gen-
eration^ might  as  well  have  found  redemption  with-
out him,  as  with  him.

10.  But  before  Christ  there  was  no  judgment  in
the  earth — There  was  no  man  who  could  bring  salva-
ge!*"  ti°n* ^nc^  tne  Lord  saw  it,  and  it  displeased  him

that  there  was  no  judgment.  And  he  saw  that  there
was  no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no  inter-
cessor ;  therefore  his  own  arm  brought  salvation.

1 1.  After  man  had  once  lost  the  image  of  God,  and
his  very  nature  stood  at  enmity  against  God,  had  his
life  been  prolonged  to  succeeding  millions  ©f  ages,
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  him  to  have  recov-
ered from  his  fallen  state,  without  an  entire  new  or-
de;  of  things,  properly  called  the  adjusting  of  a  new
age,  or  a  new  creation.

12.  And  from  generation  to  generation,  while  man
remained  in  the  order  of  the  first  creation,  as  it  stood
after  he  fell,  it  was  justly  said  of  him,  that  when  he
multiplied,-  The  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the
earth. And  instead  of  subduing  and  replenishing  the


P.  II,  JESUS  THE  CHRIST.  9f

earth,  he  corrupted  it,  and  brought  it  under  a  double  CI^P'
condemnation.  __.

13.  Therefore  it  was,  that  Jesus  was  not  begotten
after  the  order  of  natural generation, according to

the  will  of  man  ;  nor  made  an  high  priest  over  the  Heb.vfi.
household  of  God,  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  command-  16'18,
ment,  but  after  the  fiower  of  an  endless  life. — For  that
which  was  carnal,  was  by  him,  and  in  him,  verily
disannulled  snd  made  void.

14.  For  if  he  had  been  begotten  after  the  order  of
that  creation  which had  waxed  old  in wickedness,

he  could  not  have  been  the  beginning  of  a  new  crea-  ReT .
Hon,  as  it  is  testified  that  he  was  The  beginning  of  the  14.  '
creation  of  God.  Neither  could  he  have  been  the
head  and  first  born  of  many  brethren  ;  the  first  Adam3
who  was  of  the  earth  earthy,  must  still  have  had  the
pre-eminence.  But  Christ  Jesus  was  the  second
Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven.  In  this  the  distinction
was  made  plain  between  the  first  heads  of  the  old
and  new  creation.

15.  It  is  evident  from  the  history  of  Jesus,  that
from  his  infancy,  he  possessed  that  wisdom  and  un-
derstanding which  was  superior  to  any  of  the  human
race  ;  when  at  twelve  years  of  age,  he  questioned  with

the  learned  doctors,  who  were  astonished  at  his  un-  Luke  a
derstanding  and  answers ; and  when answering  his  46"~4*»
parents,  who  had  sought  him,  Wist  yc  not  that  I  must
be  about  my  Father's  business  ?

16.  Jesus,  in  the  first  stage  of  his  life,  fulfilled
the  law  of  nature  :  He  was  subject  to  his  parents.
He  fulfilled  the  moral  law  by  the  purity  of  his  life  and
manners  :  His  flesh  saw  no  corruption  by  reason  of
sin.  Hence  he  put  an  end  to  the  external  ceremo-
nies of  the  law,  and  nailed  them  to  his  cross  of  self-
denial.

17.  And  when  about  thirty  years  of  age,  he  went
to  John,  acknowledged  his  mission  to  be  of  God,  and
fulfilled  it.  And  being  baptized  with  water,  the
heavens  were  opened  unto  him,  and  lo,  a  voice  !  say-
ing, This  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  fileased.
And  having  received  an  abiding  power  from  on  high,
which  was  not  given  him  by  measure,  he  went  forth
to  do  the  will  of  his  Father — to  teach  mankind  by


98  JESUS  THE  CHRIST.  P.  IL

c  i^P* precept  and  example,  the  way  to  the  fountain  of  true
' felicity  and  eternal  life.

18.  In  his  public  discourses,  he  unfolded  that  di-
vine wisdom  to  the  multitude,  which  he  had  receiv-
ed from  God,  the  Father  of  all  wisdom  and  good-
ness. By  the  spirit  of  truth  and  love,  he  found  ac-
cess to  the  hearts  of  the  sincere,  and  fixed  that  con-
viction in  their  minds  which  human  wisdom  could
never  inspire  nor  dissolve.

19.  Jesus  knew  by  that  divine  wisdom  which
dwelt  in  him,  that  very  few  were  disposed  to  hear,
and  much  less  to  obey  what  he  was  commissioned  to
teach  ;  and  therefore  he  frequently  retired  to  the
mountains  and  desarts,  from  the  cabals  and  clamours
of  the  chief  priests  and  rulers,  who  kept  the  people
under  bondage  and  fear.

20.  To  such  as  wished  to  hear,  and  were  honestly
seeking  for  salvation,  he  taught  the  gospel  of  his
kingdom,  and  to  no  others.  To  those  who  followed
him,  he  first  opened  the  little  narrow  way  of  self-
denial,  and  laid  before them  those  characters  which

Matt-v are  truly  blessed,  namely: The  poor  in  spirit,  the
a-is.  " mourner,  the  seeker  after  righteousness,  the  meek,

the  merciful,  the pure in  heart,  the  peace  makers,

and  such  like.

2 1 .  Long  experience  had  proved,  that  this  blessed-
ness was  not  to  be  attained  by  the  external  rites  of
the  law  ;  it  was  therefore  necessary  that  he  should
show  them  a  more  excellent  way.

22.  He  bore  a  swift  testimony  against  every  kind
of  vice,  and  tyranny  in  every  form.  He  manifested
the  truth  of  his  testimony  to  the  world,  by  his  exam-
ple of  piety  and  virtue.  He  strictly  observed  and
kept  all  the  commandments  of  God  his  Father,  taught
others  to  do  the  same  by  following  his  example  ;  and
confirmed  the  truth  of  his  divine  mission  by  his  mi-
racles.

23.  Although  Jesus  came  to  fulfil  the  true  intent
of  the  law,  he  knew  that  his  testimony  would  be  per-
verted, for  he  knew  what  was  in  man  ;  and  therefore
said,  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  law
or  the  prophets :  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to
fulfil. For  I  say  unto  you,  that  except  your  righV"


Matt.  t.
X7— 48.


P.  II.  JESUS  THE  CHRIST.  99

eousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  c,*Ap'

and  Pharisees,  (which  is  of  the law,)  ye  shall  in  no

case  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."

24.  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them  of
eld  time,  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  and  whosoever  shall
kill  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment :  But  I  say
unto  you,  That  whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother
without  a  cause,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment."

25.  "  Ye  have  heard that  it  was said by  them  of  Matt#w#
old  time,  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery  :  But  I  say  27.
unto  you,  That  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust
after  her,  hath  commitfed  adultery  with  her  already

in  his  heart.  And  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck
it  out  and  cast  it  from  thee  :  For  it  is  profitable  for
thee  that  one  of  thy  members  should  perish,  and  not
that  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into  hell."

26.  Again,  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said  %$£;
by  them  of  old  time,  Thou  shalt  not forswear  thy-
self, but  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths :

But  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all.  Ye  have  heard
that  it  hath  been  said,  An  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth
for  a  tooth  :  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  resist  not
evil."

27.  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said,  Thou
shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy  :  But
I  say  unto  you,  love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that
curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray
for  them  which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute
you  ;  that  you  may  be  the  children  of  your  Father
which  is  in  heaven. — Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even
as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."

28.  Thus  the  life  and  ministry  of  Jesus,  both  by
precept  and  example,  was  that  which  never  before
had  either  been  understood  or  practised  by  mankind.
The  true  intent  of  the  law  was  wholly  unknown,  and
the  letter  itself  was  but  the  sayings  of  those  of  old
time.  i(

29.  Who  then,  of  all  the  human  race,  ever  fulfil-
led the  law  of  God  until  Jesus  fulfilled  it  ?  He  was
the  first  who  kept  his  Father's  commandments.  By
him  the  divine  perfections  of  the  great  first  cause
were  first  taught.

30.  In  him  were  fpund  the  treasures  of  true  wis*


*O0  JESUS  THE  CHRIST.  P.  II.

chap. ^om  anc|  knowledge. In  him  was  the  example  of
patience,  meekness,  long-suffering,  universal  benev-
olence and  love,  and  every  practice  that  became  the
Son  of  God,  the  Prince  of  peace. And  such  an  one
it  behoved  to  be  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  who  was
Heb.vii. holy ,  harmless,  undefiled",  and  separate  from  sinners.

31.  It  is  evident  from  the  sacred  writings,  con-
cerning the  life  and  ministry  of  Jesus,  that  he  was
the  Christ  ;  that  is,  that  he  was  the  anointed  of
God,  to  bring  salvation  to  men — that  he  came  to  re-
deem the  souls  of  men  from  under  the  bondage  of
sin,  and  from  oppression  of  every  kind.

32.  And  it  is  further  evident,  that  Christ  Jesus
was  the  beginning  of  a  new  creation,  the  first  founda-
tion and  chief  corner-stone  of  a  spiritual  kingdom,
which  had  no  connexion  with  the  generation,  popu-
lation, increase,  or  government  of  this  world,  but
merely  as  it  respected  the  redemption  of  mankind.

^  33.  Jesus  knew  that  his  testimony  would  cost  him  j
his  life  ;  but  seeing  that  for  the  cause  of  righteous-
ness he  came  into  the world,  he  willingly  chose  to  ]
suffer  and die  in  the  accomplishment  of  that  very
design,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.
Luke  34#  **e  foretold  his disciples  that  he  must  suffer

kvS.  25. many  things,  and  be  rejected  of  this  generation,  and
Mark °f  the  elders,  chief  priests,  and  scribes,  [or  writers,}
via.  3i. __that  they would  put  him to death, and that  he
should  rise  again  the  third  day. In  all  of  which  his
followers  would  be  included  according  to  his  saying,
John  xv. If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  persecute  you  also.

35.  And  accordingly,  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,
through  the  envy  of  the  chief  priests  and  rulers,  he
rose  again  the  third  day  :  and  by  many  infallible  proofs
shewed  himself  alive  after  his  passion,  unto  his  dis-
ciples, whom  he  had  instructed  during  the  time  of
his  ministry,  and  chosen  to  be  witnesses  of  his  name  ;
appearing  to  them  forty  days,  and  speaking  of  the
things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God.

36.  And  having  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  given
commandment  to  his  apostles,  to  teach  all  nations  in
his  name,  beginning  at  Jerusalem,  charged  them  to


Luke


xxiv.47—  tarry  there  until  they  should  be  endued  with  power
** from  on  high ;  and  having  led  them  out  as  far  as


P.  II.  THE  INSTITUTIOX  OF,  ScC.  lOI

Bethany,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  and  blessed  them.
And  while  he  blessed  them,  a  cloud  received  him  out
of  their  sight,  and  they  worshipped  him  ;  and  re-
turned to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy,  and  continued
there  with  one  accord  until  the  day  of  Pentecost.


CHAPTER  III.

The  Institution  of  the  Primitive  Church.

IT  is  evident  from  the  scriptures,  that  the  apostles
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  had  received  no  real
spiritual  understanding  of  the  nature  of  his  kingdom,
until  they  were  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  *"

2.  Although  it  is  written,  that  John  was  filled  with
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  Zechariah  and  Elizabeth  were
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  the  prophets  and
holy  men  of  God  in  old  time,  spake  as  they  were  mo-
ved by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  yet  after  all  this,  it  was  said

that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  because  that  Johavfc
Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified.  3**

3.  When  therefore,  the  prophets  or  holy  men  of
God  are  represented  as  having  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the
spirit  of  Christ,  before  Christ  was  fully  made  mani-
fest in  the  church  his  true  body,  it  means  nothing
more  than  their  being  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  influenced  them,  at  certain  times,  to  prophesy
of  things  to  come,  but  did  not  abide  and  remain  in
them,  as  the  constant  spring  of  all  their  actions.

4.  There  was  evidently  an  extraordinarv  measure
and  manner,  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  be  re-
ceived according  to  the  promise  of  Christ,  which
could  not  possibly  take  place,  until  the  work  of  re-
generation was  completed  in  him,  and  till  he  was  fo-
rmed, and  received  that  fulness  of  the  Spirit  which
was  the  promise  of  the  Father,  and  which  was  to  flow
from  htm,  to  such  as  were  united  to  him  by  faith  and
obedience,  as  members  of  his  body.

5.  Jesus  could,  and. did  administer  a  measure  of
*us  spirit  to  his  disciples,  while  he  was  with  them ;


102  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  P.  II.

CjKlP'  and  they  could  go  forth  in  faith,  and  speak  in  his
...  '  .  ■  name  ;  and  in  the  power  of  that  spirit  which  they  re-
ceived from  him,  they  could  cast  out  unclean  spirits,
and  perform  many  miracles.  But  they  had  not  the
fountain  abiding  in  them,  from  which  that  power
flowed  ;  and  therefore  they  followed  Jesus  from  place
to  place,  and  received  their  ministrations  from  him.

6.  This  was  signified  by  the  tabernacle  of  Moses

in  the  wilderness,  which  was  followed  by  the  children

of  Israel,  until  the  ark  of  the  testimony  found  a  fixed

habitation  in  the  temple  of  Solomon.

Feb.  viii. 7.  Christ  Jesus,  while  in  the  body  of  his  flesh,  was

I'c*'  "'  ^le  true  taDtrnai:^e  which  the  Lord  pitched  and  not

10.  man. And  the  Primitive  Church was  the  temfile  of

the  living  God,  where  his  mind  and  will  was  made

known  ;  which  was  prefigured  by  the  first  temple  at

Jerusalem.

S.  Christ  Jesus,  while  visible  on  earth,  asked  his
Matt.xvi..  disciples,  saying,  "  Whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  And
Simon  Peter  answered  and  said,  Thou  art  the  Christ,
the  Son  of  the  living  God.5'

9.  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said  unto  him,  "  Bless-
ed art  thou  Simon  Bar-jona  : for  flesh  and  blood  hath
not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  in
heaven. And  I  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  art  Peter?
and  upon this  rock  I  will  build my  church,  and  the
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it. And  I  will;
give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heeiven  :
and  whatsoever  thou shalt  bind on earth,  shall  be'
bound  in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on
earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."
nuet.  10.  "  God  is  the  rock. For  other  foundation  can  no\

i  cor.tii.  man  toy  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ. The  J
"•  Revelation  of  God  through  Christ,  was  therefore  the

rock,  upon  which  he  promised  to  build  his  church.1
pvph.it. And  though  this revelation  was  in  all  the  apostles,pl
and  was  the  same  by  which the  prophets  had  proph-
esied of  Christ ;  yet> according to  the promise of

*  His  former  name  was  Simon,  and  the  name  Peter  (in  the  original  Petrw.,  I
i.e.  a  Rock  or  Stone)  "was  given  him  by  Christ,  signifying  that  in  him  should  be'
manifested,  the  Revelation  of  God  ;  and  by  this  Rtvelaiion  through  Christ,  he  a\5i*
constituted  the  foundation  or  chief  corner  stone  of  the  Primitive  Church  aftei
Christ,  and  the  leader  of  the  twelve  apostles.  See  Matt.  x\i.  18.  and  John  i.  42.
N,  B.  Kcphqs.  or  as  it  is  in  our  translation  Cep/ms,  is  said  to  be  a  Syriac  word,
ard  signities  the  same  tl  iig  which  Peter  does  in  Grtek,  namely,  a  Rockov Stone.


29


f.  II.  TUB  PRIMITIVE  CHU&C1T*  10'3.

Christ,  Peter  was  ordained  to  be  the  leader  among cfjJp'
the  apostles  in  the  Church.  wfm

11.  At  the  same  time  that  the  disciples  of  Jesus
manifested  their  faith  concerning  him,  he  charged  *.
them  to  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Jesus  the  Christ.  By  w.  ***"
which  it  may  be  clearly  seen,  that  although  he  had
given  them  great  authority  from  time  to  time,  respect-
ing their  future  mission  ;  yet  while  he  was  visibly
present  with  them,  they  could  not  exercise  that  au-
thority, until  they  had  received  an  abiding  seal  of  the

Holy  Ghost.

12.  Christ  could  never  be  seen  by  mortal  eye,  nor
the  nature  of  his  kingdom  be  understood  by  human
wisdom.  He  was  only  known  by  Revelation.  The
disciples  of  Jesus  themselves,  were  far  from  having
a  perfect  understanding  either  of  Christ  or  his  king-
dom, until  the  day  of  pentecost,  after  they  had  re-
ceived the  spirit  of  promise,  by  which  they  remem-
bered and  understood  what  Jesus  before  had  taught
them.

13.  When  Jesus  spake  to  them,  that  he  must  suf-  Matt.—,
fer  many  things  oi  the  elders,  and  chief  priests,  and  21~23*
scribes, and  be killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third

day  ;  Peter  began  to  rebuke  him,  saying,  Be  it  far
from  thee  Lord  :  this  shall  not  be  unto  thee.  But  he
turned  and  said  unto  Peter,  Get  thee  behind  me  Satan  ;
thou  art  an  offence  unto  me  :  for  thou  savourest  not
the  things  that  be  of  God,  but  those  that  be  of  men."

14.  The  disciples  believed,  and  knew  that  Jesus
was  the  Christ  of  God,  but  he  had  often  occasion  to
complain  of  the  dulness  of  their  apprehension. How  XTi-  W
is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand  ?

15.  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Yet  a  little  while,  and
the  world  seeth  me  no  more  ;  but  ye  see  me  :  be-
cause I  live,  ye  shall  live  also. At  that  day  ye  shall  John  lfcfc
know  that  I  am  in  the  Father ,  and  you  in  me,  and  lin  19>20-
you. And  again  : These  things  have  I  spoken  to  you  xvi  2*
in  proverbs  ;  but  the  time  cometh,  when  I  shall  no  more
speak  to  you  in  proverbs,  but  I  shall  shew  you  plainly

of  the  Father.

16.  From  which  it  is  plain  that,  although  they
knew  that  he  came  from  God,  yet  they  did  not  know
what  it  was  to  be  in  Christ,  and  to  have  Christ  dwel-

N


104  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  P.  II.

cg^p- ling  in  them  :  nor  did  they  as  yet,  in  reality,  know  the

t  Father.

17.  Even  after  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  unto  the
last,  when  he  was  about  to  take  his  leave  of  his  liitie  fam-
ily, whom  he  had  made  heirs  of  his  kingdom  by  promise,
they  still  remained  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  that  king-
dom. For  being  assembled  together  in  his  last  inter-
view with  them,  they  asked  him,  saying,  Lord  wilt
thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Isi'ael  ?

Acts!  6, 18.  The  only  answer  they  received,  was,  "  It  is

7*  *•  not  for  you  to  know  the  times,  or  the  seasons,  which
the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power.  But  ye  shall
receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come
upon  you  :  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me,  both  in
Jerusalem  and  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto
the  utmost  part  of  the  earth."

19.  It  is  evident  that  they  were  still  intent  upon  an

xxiv.21,  earthly  kingdom — that  they  still  imagined  the  Messi-
ah would  deliver  their  nation  from  under  the  Roman
government,  and  restore  again,  that  kingdom  to  Is-
rael, which  in  the  days  of  David  and  Solomon,  stood
in  its  highest  degree  of  earthly  glory :  although
Wi»  Christ  had  plainly  told  them,  That  his  kingdom  was
not  oj  this  world.

vctsn  20,  ^l]t  wnen  *ne  sound  came  from  heaven,  as  of

4.  ' a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  filled  all  the  house  where

they  were  sitting—- and  they  were  all  filled  with  the

Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,

as  the  spirit  gave  them  utterance.

21.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  they  began  to  know
the  truth  of  Christ's  words,  relating  to  the  design  of
his  work,  and  the  nature  of  his  kingdom.  This  was
the  Spirit  of  anointing  with  which  Jesus  himself  was
anointed  ;  and  which  he  had  promised  to  send  them,  i
to  lead  them  into  ail  truth,  and  which  brought  to
their  remembrance  whatever  he  had  taught  them,  ei«"
ther  by  precept  or  example.

22.  Here  then  was  the  true  institution  of  the  Prim-
itive Church  ;  even  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  re  vela-  j
tlon.  of  God  given  to  the  apostles,  was  the  foundation  j
upon  which  the  Church  was  built: — The  anointing  oi  \
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  Christ  himself,  being  the  i
chief  Gorner-stone  :  Christ  dwelling  in  his  people,  j
toitd  they  in  him,  according  to  promise.


P.  II,  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  105

23.  And  as  tongues  were  for  a  sign,  and  the  apos- c^p*

ties  received  this  gift,  in  the  first  out-pouring  of  tne  ,

Spirit;  this  gift  was  therefore  the  true  and  proper  Markxvi
seai  of  their  commission,  to  go  and  teach  ail  nations,  *£orxivjt
to  baptize  them  with  tiie  same  Spirit,  and  teach  them  21,23.
to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  Jesus  had  command-
ed them.

24.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  Primitive  Church
was  not  buiit  upon  any  human  system  whatever,  art-
fully formed  by  man's  device  ;  but  upon  the  inspira-
tion of  the  living  God,  made  manifest  in  the  hearts
of  living  and  chosen  witnesses.

25.  The  first  apostles  were  plain,  honest,  illiterate  Johnvii
men,  who  cared  for  no  other  knowledge  than  what  is.
they received  from Jesus, who himself  also, had
never  learned  letters,  according  to  the  order  of  the
Jewish  priesthood.

26.  Jesus  had  promised  them,  saying,  "  I  will  pray  chap,
the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  x,v^d
that  he  may  abide  with  you  forever  ;  even  the  Spirit  xvi  l8*
of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive." "  When

he  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  in-
to ail  truth  :  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but
whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak ;  and
he  will  shew  you  things  to  come."

27.  This  was  the  Spirit  which  the  apostles  receiv-
ed on  the  day  of  pentecost — This  was  the  rule  of
their  faith,  the  bond  of  their  union,  and  the  spring  of
their  actions.

28.  The  work  of  Christ  was  spiritual :  and  there-
fore what  Moses  wrote  upon  hewed  stone,  Christ  Je-
sus wrote  upon  the  hearts  and  minds  of  his  true  fol-
lowers :  and  in  the  same  manner  the  testimony  of
truth  was  conveyed  from  the  apostles  to  others.

29.  Christ  Jesus  taught  his  apostles,  saying,  "  If

ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments. — As  the  Father  i5.nxiT"
hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved  you  :  continue  ye  in .
my  love. If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall  9,10,14.
abide  in  my  love  ;  even  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's
commandments,  and  abide  in  his  love. — Ye  are  my
friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."

30.  Nothing  then  was  necessary  to  the  government
of  the  Church,  but  for  those who  had  learned  of


>7


106  THE  INSTITUTION  OP  P.  II.

CmP*  Christ,  t0  walk  even  as  he  walked  ;  to  follow  his  ex-
.  ample  ;  and  to  let  their  light  so  shine,  that  others  see-

Matt,  v.  ing  their  good  works,  might  learn  to  copy  after  them,
icor  xi  ^s  s^tn  tne  aPostle,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even
i.  as  I  also  am  of  Christ." .And  again,  "  Brethren,  be

phii.ui.  f0i|owers  together  of  me,  and  mark  them  which  walk
so,  as  ye  have  us  for  an  example."

3 1 .  And  thus  while  the  spirit  of  love  and  obedience
flowed  from  Christ  the  head,  through  every  member
of  his  body,  which  was  his  Church,  they  became  one
with  Christ,  as  Christ  was  one  with  God.  And  hence
the  followers  of  Christ  could  say  in  the  spirit  of  truth,

iJohniv.  As  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world,

32.  Herein  was  the  prayer  of  Christ  Jesus  answer-
ed,  That  they  may  be  one  ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,

ai7~  '  and  I  in  thee  ;  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us  :  that
the  world  may  believe  thai  thou  hast  sent  me.

33.  It  is  very  evident  that  the  Spirit  which  the
apostles  received  on  the  day  of  pentecost,  did  actually
produce  the  kind  offices  of  love  and  benevolence,  and
every  good  work,  in  those  who  received  the  apostle's
word.

34.  The  effects  of  that  Spirit  with  which,  and  into
which  they  were  baptized,  were  manifest  to  the  hon-
est hearted,  as  flowing  from  a  good  cause  ;  while  to
the  blind  and  dishonest,  they  appeared  as  the  effects
of  intoxication.  Justice  and  freedom,  harmony  and
peace,  reigned  in  them  and  among  them  :  and  they
were  united  together,  not  by  human  systems  or  the
laws  of  men,  but  by  the  cords  of  faith  and  love.

JiSiJ"  35.  "  And  all  that  believed  were  together,  and  had
all  things  common  : — and  breaking  bread  from  house
to  house,  did  eat  their  meat  with  gladness  and  single-
ness of  heart. — And  the  Lord  added  to  the  church
daily  such  as  should  be  saved."

<fcap.ir. 36.  "  And  the multitude of  them that  believed

32—35  .  •

were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul  :  neither  said  any
of  them  that  ought  of  the  things  which  he  possessed
was  his  own  ;  but  they  had  all  things  common.  ;  And
with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witness  of  the  re-
surrection of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  and  great  grace  was
upon  them  all.  Neither  was  there  any  among  them
that  lacked  ;  for  as  many  as  had  possessions  of  lands


|P.  II..  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  10f'

br  houses  sold  them, — and  distribution  was  made  unto  ^fj^*
every  mail  according  as  he  had  need."


37.  Such  then  was  the  spirit  of  harmony,  love,  jus-
tice and  equality,  that  was  manifest  in  the  Primitive
Church  at  Jerusalem  ;  after  which  the  Gentile  church-
es more  or  less  copied,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.
The  whole  work  was  evidently  wrought  by  the  inter-
nal operation  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  ; — a
work  which  no  human  wisdom  nor  power  on  earth
:ould  ever  have  affected.

38.  It  is  further  evident,  that  the  apostles  exercised
10  authority  over  the  conscience  or  conduct  of  any
jne,  to  force  them  to  believe  or  practice  any  thing
beyond,  or  contrary  to  their  own  convictions  and
choice.

39.  This  is  clear  from  the  case  of  Ananias,  can-  Acts  r*
cerning  the  joint  interest  of  the  Church  ;  who  having  1^4'
sold  a  possession,  came  deceitfully  to  give  up  a  part,
under  a  pretence  of  giving  up  the  whole. But  Peter
reproved  him,  saying,  "  While  it  remained,  was  it

r\ot  thine  own  ?  and  after  it  was  sold,  was  it  not  in
thine  own  power  ?  Why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing "
in  thine  heart  ?  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto
Bod."

40.  From  which  it  may  also  be  observed,  that  such
was  the  burning  and  penetrating  light  of  God,  in
those  who  were  commissioned  with  the  true  gospel,
is  entirely  excluded  the  feigned  believer  and  the  hyp-
bcrite,  from  any  part  or  lot  in  that  matter,

41.  Those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  true  spirit  that
governed  the  followers  of  Christ  after  the  day  of  pen-
tecost,  might  assign  many  reasons  for  the  conduct  of
the  apostles  and  the  Primitive  Church,  in  selling  their
possessions,  and  making  distribution  among  the  be-
lievers, as  every  man  had  need,  and  possessing  all
:hings  common.

42.  But  in  truth,  it  was  impossible  for  those  who
were  of  one  heart. and  of  one  soul,  to  act  otherwise.
They  were  members  of  Christ's  body,  and  were  ac-
tuated by  one  spirit, and  therefore, if  one  member  icor.rii.
mftcred, all  the  rest  suffered with  it ; and  if  one  **>**>"'
Tiember  rejoiced,  all  the  rest  rejoiced  with  it.

43.  The  xpy  spirit  of  justice,  equity  and  love,  by

N  2


Acts  TU
1-3.


10&  THE  INSTITUTION  OF, ScC.  P.  II.

C?n.P* which  they  became  of  one  heart,  and  of  one soul,
-  was  the  moving  cause  of  their  conduct. Their  con-

duct was  the  only  true  seal  of  their  profession,  and
the  only  true  evidence  that  they  had  given  up  all  for
Christ  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake  ;  as  Peter
plainly  asserted  that  he  fcnd  the  rest  of  the  apostles
had  done,  before  Jesus  left  them.

44.  The  word  of  God,  through  the  ministry  of  the
apostles,  was  propagated  first  at  Jerusalem.  And
believers  having  greatly  multiplied,  seven  deacons,
men  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  wisdom,
were  chosen  by  the  advice  of  the  apostles,  to  take
the  charge  of  the  temporal  economy  of  the  church,
•hap.viii.  45.  "  At  that  time  there  was  a  great  persecution
**  against  the  church  which  was  at  Jerusalem  ;  and  they

were  all  scattered  abroad  throughout  the  regions  of
Judea  and  Samaria,  except  the  apostles."

46.  Soon  after  this  the  gospel  was  opened  to  the
Gentile  nations,  principally  by  the  ministry  of  Paul,
who  had  received  his  mission  from  Christ,  through
Ananias,  a  member  of  the  church,  and  churches
were  planted  among  the  Gentiles.
.  47.  But  the  Gentile  churches  were  very  different
from  that  which  was  first  founded  by  the  twelve  apos-
tles at  Jerusalem.  The  church  at  Jerusalem  was
of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul ;  whereas  diversity  of
sentiments  and  manners  prevailed  among  the  church-
es of  the  Gentiles.

48.  Such  however,  was  the  spirit  and  nature  ofthej
gospel,  that  none  were  ever  compelled  to  believe  oi
practise  any  thing  contrary  to  their  own  understand
ing  and  choice.


I  P.  II.  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY, &C.  109


CHAPTER  IV.

The  Cross  maintained  by  the  Primitive  Church.

ALL  who  believed  the  doctrines  taught  by  the chap,
apostles,  and were  reclaimed from the open %

practice  of  vice,  were  received,  and  counted  as  be-
lievers, whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  how  much  soever
they  differed  in  many  things.

2.  It  was  indeed  a  marvellous  work,  that  brought
down  those  Gentiles,  with  all  their  learning  and  wis-
dom, in  any  degree  to  accept  of  the  humiliating  gos-
pel of  a  despised  and  persecuted  Nazarene  ; — that
reclaimed  them  from  their  heathenish  and  lascivious
practices  ; — from  a  plurality  ot  wives,  to  be  content-
ed with  one  wife  ;  and  from  their  pagan  idolatry,  to
serve  the  living  and  true  God.

3.  The  gospel  that'  Christ  taught,  was  a  gospel  of
self-denial  and  mortification  to  a  carnal  nature  ;  which


is  called  the Cross  of Christ. "  He  that  taketh  not  Matt.*
his  cross  and  followeth  after  me,  said  Jesus,  is  not
worthy  of  me."

4.  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  xvi.24,
himself,  and  take up, his  c?'oss and  follow  me. For
whosoever  will  save  his  life,  shall  lose  it  ;  and  who-
soever will  lose  his  life  for  my  sake,  shall  find  it."
* 5.  u  If  any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his  fa-  Lukeiir.
ther,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and  breth- *
ren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  can-
not be  my  disciple. And  whosoever  doth  not  bear  his
cross,  and  come  after  me,  cannot  be  my  disciple."

6.  Such  were  the  precepts  of  the  gospel  taught  by
Jesus,  and  confirmed  to  his  followers  by  his  own  dai-
ly life  of  self-denial  and  the  cross.  And  his  apostles
obeyed  his  precepts  and  followed  his  example,  deny-
ing themselves  of  every  sensual  and  carnal  work  of -
the  flesh  as  he  did,  and  preached  the  same  to  others  ;
which  was  a  stumbling  block  to  the- Jews,  and  to  the
Greeks  foolishness.

7 .  The  former  were  superstitiously  bigoted  to  the
rites  of  Moses,  and  hated  the  idea  of  a  Messiah  and
his  kingdom,  that  would  not  bring  every  other  nation


110  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY  P.  II."

chap, and  kingdom  into  subjection  to  them. The  latter

;  were  basely  licentious,  and rivetted  to  the  pompous

and  superstitious  ceremonies  of  their  pagan  gods  and
goddesses,}  and  hated  the  piety  and  simplicity  of  the
gospel.

8.  A  Messiah  who  would  have  tolerated  mankind
in  licentiousness,  and  in  shedding  each  other's  blood,
and  who  could  have  proved  by  miracles,  that  the
practice  of  vice  and  every  carnal  pleasure,  was  the
readiest  way  to  heaven,  would  have  given  little  or  no
offence  to  Jews  nor  Pagans.

9.  But  this  was  not  the  case  :  Jesus  said  to  his
joIuqy».  kinsmen,  "  The  world  cannot  hate  you  ;  but  me  it
7- hateth,  because  I  testify  of  it,  that  the  works  thereof

xv.  is,  are evil." And  to  his disciples he  said, "  If  the
19*20' world  hate  you,  ye know  that  it  hated  me  before  it
hated  you."

10.  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would
love  his  own  :  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,
but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the
world  haleth  you.  Remember  the  word  that  I  said
unto  you,  The  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord.
If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute
you."

11.  The  fundamental  cause  of  all  the  offence  in
Christ  and  his  immediate  followers,  and  of  all  the
persecutions  against  them,  was  their  lives  of  virtue
and  eif-denial,  by  which  they  were  pointedly  separa-
ted and  distinguished  from  the  children  of  this  world.

12.  To  speak  after  the  common  manner  of  men,
Christ  Jesus  himself  was  not  married ;  and  such  of
the  apostles  as  had  wives,  when  they  came  to  follow
Christ  in  the  spiritual  work  of  regeneration,  had
nothing  more  to  do  in  the  works  of  natural  generation.
And  such  of  them  as  were  single  when  they  were
first  caiied  to  follow  Christ,  ever  after  remained  so,  in
regard  to  the  practice  of  the  world.  And  all  his  real
followers  without  exception,  took  up  their  cross,  and
denied  themselves  of  every  carnal  gratification  of  the
flesn.

\3.  And  herein  the  words  of  Christ  to  his  Father,

diap. concerning  his  followers,  were  strictly  true  :  "  1  have

xvfi.  14. given  ^em  ^y  word ;  and  the  world  hath  hated  theni,


fm  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  Ill

because  they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  CI*Ap.
>f  the  world."  ■

14.  The  word  which  Christ  gave  to  those  whom
le  had  chosen,  was,  Follow  me  ;  and  in  following
lim,  they  walked  even  as  he  walked,  and  denied
hemselves  as  he  did.  Here  was  the  cause  of  every
offence,  of  every  evil  suspicion,  and  false  construc-
;ion  upon  their  lives  and  conduct.

15.  The  Pharisees  came to  Jesus,  tempting  him \  Uatt1^
md  saying  unto  him,  Is it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  3-ia.
iway  his  wife  for  every  cause  ?  As  though his  doc-
Tine  led  to  a  licentious  variety  :  for  they  had  no  bet-

er  esteem  of  it.

16.  He  answered  and  said  unto  them,  "  Have  ye
tot  ready  that  lie  which  made  them  at  the  beginning,
iiade  them  male  and  female  ;  and  said ',  Fortius  cause
>hall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother,  and  cleave  unto
lis  wife  ;  and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh  ?  What
.herefore,  God  hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put
isunder.  They  say  unto  him,  Why  did  Moses  then
command  to  give  a  writing  of  divorcement^  and  to  put
her  away  ?"

1 7.  From  which  it  is  plain  that  they  did  not  under-

Irtand  him.  Jesus  did  not  refer  them  to  the  history
)f  the  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  Jews,  nor  to  the
listory  of  mankind  in  general,  who  after  the  fall  had
corrupted  the  earth  ;  but  he  referred  them  to  what
Was  said  at  the  beginning,  when  man  stood  in  a  state
j)f  innocence.

18.  "  He  saith  unto  them,  Moses,  because  of  the
hardness  of  your  hearts,  suffered  you  to  put  away
|rour  wives  :  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so.
\nd  I  say  unto  you,  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his
vife,  except  it  be  for  fornication,  and  shall  marry
mother,  committeth  adultery  ;  and  whoso  marrieth
ler  which  is  put  away,  committeth  adultery."

19.  By  this  he  exposed  the  hidden  cause  of  put-
ing  away  their  wives,  and  marrying  others.  His
lisciples  understood  him,  and  said,  "  If  the  case  of
he  man  be  so  with  his  wife,  it  is  not  good  to  marry"

20.  Jesus  approved  of  their  understanding,  and
nanifested  it  to  be  a  gift  of  God,  by  observing,—-
'  All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save  they  U


112  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY  P.  II.

chap, whom  it  is given. For there are  some  eunuchs,
...  which  were  so  born  from  their  mother's  womb  ;  and

there  are  some  eunuchs,  which  were  made  eunuchs
of  men  ;  and  there  be  eunuchs,  which  have  made
themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's
sake. He  that  is  able  to  reaive  it^let  him  receive  it."

21.  Jesus  knew  that  all  men  did  not,  and  would
not  receive  his  sayings  :  the  generality  closed  their
eyes,  iest  they  should  see,  and  slopped  their  ears,  lest
they  should  hear,  and  be  converted  from  the  evil  of
their  doings.

22.  He  knew  that  none  but  such  as  willingly  deni-
ed themselves,  and  followed  his  example,  of  choice,
were  worthy  to  be  his  disciples  :  and  therefore  he
never  forced  any  to  receive  his  sayings,  nor  to  follow
him,  by  any  human  authority  whatever.

23.  He  felt  it  his  duty  to  reprove  hypocrites  ;  and
to  teach  those  who  had  ears  to  hear,  what  was  neces-
sary to  be  done,  in  order  to  obtain  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  And  when  he  said,  He  that  is  able  to  receive
it,  let  him  receive  it,  he  left  it  with  themselves  either
to  choose  or  refuse.

24.  And  when  he  said,  "  If  any  man  come  to  me,*
and  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and
children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own
life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple" — was  it  either
their  souls  or  their  bodies  that  were  to  be  hated?  In
no  wise.  But  it  was  that  selfish  disposition,  and  flesh-
ly, earthly  tie  of  a  corrupt  nature,  which  rivalled
God's  claim  to  the  principal  seat  of  man's  affections.
This  he  taught  his  disciples  to  hate.

25.  He  came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save
joimHi. them. God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  con*

17.  a

demn  the  world  ;  but  that  the  world  through  him
might  be  saved.

26.  It  is  clear  from  the  circumstance  of  the  mar*
riage  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  to  which  both  Jesus  and  his
disciples  were  called,  that he  did not  condemn  the

©hap.vH.  most  darling  practice of  the  world. Neither  did  he
ll' condemn  the  adulteress,  although  she  was  taken  in
the  very  act.

27.  Christ  Jesus  was  not  of  this  world  ;  and  there-
fore it  was  not  his  concern,  either  to  justify  or  con-


(P. II,  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  113

lemn  their  conduct.* His  being  at  a marriage  in c**£p.

Cana,  and  turning water  into  wine,  was  for  a  better  .

purpose. As  it  is  written,  a  This  beginning  of  mi-  joknfc
racles  did  Jesus  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  manifested  "•
forth  his  glory  ;  and  his  disciples believed on  him"
This  was  the  true  end  and  design  of  his  being  there. —
Not  to  confirm  the  practice  of  the  world,  but  to  con-
firm the  faith  of  his  followers-.

28.  And  what  was  that  glory  which  he  showed  un-
to them,  but  a  manifestation  of  his  own  glory,  and  the
glory  of  his  Father,  in  which  he  was  to  come  with

all  his  holy  angels,  at  the marriage of  the  Lamb  ?  *ev*  ***
For  Jesus  himself  was  not  yet  glorified.

29.  And  his  turning  water  into  wine,  was  nothing
less  to  his  disciples,  than  a  seal  of  the  certainty  of  the
future  accomplishment  of  his  own  marriage  ;  and  a
figurative  manifestation  of  that  wine  which  he  after-
wards promised  to  drink  with  them  in  his  Father's  Matxxvi

29.

kingdom.

30.  It  is  therefore  a  mistake,  among  those  who
profess  to  be  his  followers,  to  suppose,  that  because,
as  they  say,  he  graced  a  marriage  with  his  presence,
he  thereby  gave  any  one  the  more  latitude  for  the  car-
nal gratification  of  the  flesh.

31.  On  the  same  mode  of  carnal  reasoning,  might
it  not  with  equal  propriety  be  said,  that  because  he,
turned  so  much  water  into  wine,  after  men  had  well
drunk,  he  also  encouraged  drunkenness  ?

32.  When  he  graced  with  his  presence  the  assem-
blies of  publicans  and  harlots,  and  eat  and  drank  with*
them,  did  he  thereby  encourage  them  in  injustice  and
whoredom?  For  his  enemies  had  no  better  sense  of

his  life  and  conduct,  who  called  him,  A  wine  bibber,  a  Matt.xi.
gluttonous  man,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.

33.  But  shall  we  not  rather  say,  that  he  took  those
opportunities  of  being  with  them,  in  order  to  teach  or
show  them,  by  his  example,  a  better  way  of  living  ?
For  he  came  not  to  call  the  self-righteous  to  repen-
tance, but  sinners.

•  Jesus  Christ  utterly  refused  to  intermeddle  in  the  civil  or  T?olki:a!  affairs  of
tins  world.  "  Man  who  made  me  a  judge  or  a  divider  over  your  said  he  to  one
who  applied  to  him  for  that  purpose  See  Luke  ii  14.  The  truth  is,  his  king-
dom was  not  of  this  world ;  and  therefore  he  Mould  neither  he  a  kiug  nor  a  judge :
his  time  was  not  come;  and  whatever  those  who  followed  the  course  of  tke
world  chose  to  do,  ke  did  not  interfere  to  frustrate  taoir  designs.


U4  THE  CROSS  MAIXTAINED  BY  P.  IL

chap. 34.  And  what  more  shall  we  say,  when  he  graced
_  with  his  presence  the  dark  abodes  of  the  spirits  in

a  Pet.  in Prison>  wno  were  disobedient  under  all  the  long-suf-
19,  20. lering  of  God  in  the  clays  of  Noah  ?  Shall  we  say  that
he  encouraged  them  still  to  continue  in  their  disobe-
dience ?  Or  shall  we  not  rather  say  that  he  preached
unto  them  repentance  ?

35.  It  is  an  undeniable  fact,  that  Christ  Jesus  and
his  apostles  did  actually  deny  themselves  of  all  the
carnal  works  of  the  flesh — that  they  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  works  of  generation,  and  neither  married
nor  gave  in  marriage,  as  did  the  children  of  this  world.

36.  And  it  is  as  undeniable,  that  when  the  gospel
was  preached  among  the  Gentile  nations,  who  had  ac-
customed themselves  to  licentiousness  and  a  plurality
of  wives,  every  man,  who  could  not  refrain,  was  per-
mitted to  have  his  own  wife,  and  every  woman  hei
own  husband.

iTim.ih. 3<K  Instructions  were  given  by the  apostle  of  the
^r12'. Gentiles  concerning married  bishops  and  deacons
e, 7. that  such  should  be  the  husband  of  one  wife,  ruling!
their children  and  their  own  houses well,  having
Eph.v. them in  subjection. — That  the  husband  should  lov<
his  wife  even  as  himself,  and  the  wife  see  that  she  i
reverence  her  husband.

3-8.  From  which  it  is  evident  that  none  were  fori
bidden  to  marry.  The  apostles  themselves  copied
the  example  of  Christ,  and  took  up  a  full  cross  agains  |
the  flesh  ;  but  there  were  many  professing  Christ  h
the  apostle's  days  who  did  not.  The  gospel  was  evejj
a  matter  of  free  choice,  and  not  of  compulsion.

39.  Nevertheless,  a  plain  distinction  is  made  bj
the  sacred  writers,  between  that  which  was  accepta-
ble to  the  Lord,  and  that  which  was  of  the  world
This  distinction  is  particularly  made  in  Paul'**  firs
epistle  to  the  Corinthians  ;  unto  whom  he  writes  a
unto  a  carnal  people,  and  not  as  unto  spiritual.

40.  The  third,  fourth,  fifth  and  sixth  chapters  con
tain  their  character,  which  is  very  different  from  tha
given  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem.  The  seventh  con
tains  a  diversity  of  instructions  concerning  the  marri
ed  and  unmarried  ;  and  concerning  which,  it  appears
they  had  written  to  him  before.


33


p.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  M5


CHAP.
IV.


41.  The  instructions  of  the  apostle  were  adapted  to
the  state  of  the  people.  There  were  few  among  them
who  were  able  to  bear  the  doctrines  of  the  cross,  and
as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  he  had  fed  them  with
milk,  because  they  were  not  able  to  bear  meat ;  and
therefore,  however  plain  and  pointed  he  speaks  in
one  sentence,  m  another  he  indulges  them  with  per-
missions.

42.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  seventh  chapter,  he  an-  lCw#^
swers  them  very  pointedly,  saying,  "  It  is  good  for  a  1-8.
man  not  to  touch  a  woman." [Gr.  yvvectxog,  a  wift.J

In  the  next  verse  he  speaks  by  permission,  saying,
"  Nevertheless,  to  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man
have  his  own  wife,  and  every  woman  her  own  hus-
band," and  so  on.

43.  Then  again  he  pointedly  says,  "  I  would  that
all  men  were  even  as  I. myself :  but  every  man  hath
his  proper  gift  of  God,  [or  measure  of  faith,]  one  af-
ter this  manner,  and  another  after  that.  I  say,  there-
fore, to  the  unmarried  and  widows,  it  is  good  for  them
if  they  abide  even  as  I.  But  if  they  cannot  contain,
let  them  marry  :  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burii."

44.  This  was  the  best  instruction  the  apostle  could
give  the  Corinthians  in  such  circumstances.  They
might  now  live  a  little  longer  in  the  gratification  of
their  flesh,  or  take  up  a  full  cross  and  follow  his  ex-
ample, as  he  followed  the  example  of  Christ.

45.  "  It  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burn,"  says  he.
He  well  knew  their  licentious  dispositions,  and  that
it  was  better  for  them  to  be  contented  with  one  wife,

than  to  burn  in  their  lusts  one  towards  another,  or  de-  *  c°r.  vi
tile  themselves  with  mankind,  as  some  of  them  had
formerly  done.

46.  The  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire  de-
troys  that  nature  and  power  of  lust,  which  is  the
ause  of  that  burning  ;  so  that  he  that  is  dead  to  dn,  *om-
annot  live  any  longer therein,  being  delivered  and

ade  free  from  that  burning  of  the  flesh,  which  is
the  first  and  moving  cause  to  sin.

47.  As  long  therefore,  as  any  wPre  under  the  ne-
ssity  of  making  any  provision  for  the  flesh*  it  was

an  evidence  that  the  affections  and  lusts  of  the  flesh
ere  never  yet  crucified,  nor  destroved  by  the  bap-

O


v»


116  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY  P.  II.

C^P-  tism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  fire,  with  which  the  apos-
*  ties  and  all  the  true  and  real  followers  of  Christ  were
Gal.v.24.  baptized.  As  it  is  written,  They  that  are  Christ's^
have  crucified  thejleshj  with  the  affections  and  lusts.  *
iCer.vii.  48.  Concerning  those  who  were  married,  the  apos-
10-15. t|e  say,  a  Let  not  t}ie  wjfe  depart  from  her  husband.

But  and  if  she  depart,  let  her  remain  unmarried,  or
be  reconciled  to  her  husband  :  and  let  not  the  hus-
band put  away  his  wife."

49.  And  by  permission  he  said,  "  If  any  brother
hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not,  and  she  be  pleased  to
dwell  with  him,  let  him  not  put  her  away.  And  the
woman  which  hath  an  husband  that  believeth  not,  and
if  he  be  pleased  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not  leave
him.  For  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by
the  wife,  and  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by
the  husband  :  else  were  your  children  unclean ;
but  now  are  they  holy.  But  if  the  unbelieving  de-
part, let  him  depart.  A  brother  or  a  sister  is  not  un-
der bondage  in  such  cases  :  but  God  hath  called  us
(believers)  to  peace."

50.  This  instruction  applies  to  the  truth  of  Christ's
kukexa.  words,  "  Suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace  on
5i' 52, earth  ? I  tell  you, Nay  ; but  rather division  :  For

from  henceforth  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  divi-
ded, three  against  two,  and  two  against  three. — And
Mattx. a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  household."

51.  But  here  the  remedy  is  prescribed  by  the  apos-;
tie  :  which  is  nothing  less  than  for  the  parties  to  allow
each  other  the  free  exercise  of  their  faith  in  matters
of  conscience  ;  to  be  kindly  aflfectioned  one  towards
another  ;  and  by  love  and  good  works  serving  one  an--
other,  and  setting  the  same  example  before  their
children.

52.  Thus  the  unbelieving  husband  may  be  sanctifi-
ed by  the  wife,  the  wife  by  the  husband,  and  the  chil-

lCor.vii.  dren  by  the  parents. As  it  is  written,  "  For  what
16,25-27.  lowest  thou,  O  wife,  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy

husband?  Or,  how  knowest  thou,  O  man,  whether

thou  shalt  save  thy  wife  ?"

53.  Concerning  virgins,  the  apostle  gives  his  judg-
ment, as  one  that  had  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to
be  faithful :  saying,  "  I  suppose,  therefore,  that  this


p.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  1  17

is  good  for  the  present  distress. Art  thou  bound  unto  chap,

a  wife  P  seek  not  to  be  loosed. Art  thou  loosed  from  a  ,

wife  ?  seek  not  a  wife.

54.  What  was  this  present  distress  ?  Was  it  perse-
cution ?  By  no  means.  It  was  not  concerning  perse-
cution that  they  had  written  to  him  ;  but  the  very
subject  on  which  he  was  writing  through  the  whole
of  his  seventh  chapter.

55.  By  marrying  they  might  avoid  a  great  deal.of
persecution  ;  but  it  was  not  to  avoid  persecution,  but
to  avoid  fornication,  according  to  their  sense  of  the
matter,  that  the  apostle  said,  "  Let  every  man  have
his  own  wife."

56.  After  all  the  indulgence  which  the  apostle  gave
them,  in  their  carnal  state,  the  sentiments  which  he
held  up  foremost  to  their  view,  was  the  very  cause 4
of  persecution.

57.  This  is  plain  from  the  words  of  Christ, There  Marks,
is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  .  '

or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands,
for  my  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive  an
hundred  fold  now  in  this  time,  houses,  and  brethren*
and  sisters,  and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with
persecutions  ;  and  in  the  world  to  come,  eternal  life.

$8.  Here  persecutions,  are  put  instead  of  father
and  wife,  and  every  necessary  blessing  preserved
both  in  this  world,  and  that  which  is  to  come.  Here
was  the  cause  of  persecutions  : — A  stumbling  block
to  the  cruel  Jews,  who  could  no  longer  see  any  way
to  uphold  wars  and  fightings,  for  the  want  of  a  posterity
of  murdering  Cains,  to  involve  the  earth  in  blood  and
oppression — >A  rock  of  offence  to'  the  licentious
Greeks,  and  a  mortifying  stain  to  all  flesh.

59.  The  readiest  way  to  avoid  persecution,  would
have  been  to  advise  those  who  professed  faith  in
Christ,  not  to  live  contrary  to  the  children  of  this
world,  but  to  run  with  them  to  the  same  excess  of  ri-
ot and  ruin  ;  but  far  different  is  the  humiliating  lan-
guage of  the  gospel.

60.  Except  a  man  deny  himself,  said  Jesus,  and
hate  even  his  own  life,  and  take  up  his  cross  daily  and

follow  me,  he cannot be my disciple. Take away,
therefore,  the  precepts  of  Christ,  and  all  obligations


118  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED BY  P.  II.

c**£p- of  following-  his  example,  and  the  offence  of  the  cross


immediately  ceases.


icor.  vii. 61.  a  But if  thou marry,  said  the apostle,  thou

28- hast  not  sinned  ;  and  if  a  virgin  marry,  she  hath  not

sinned  :  nevertheless  such  shall have  trouble in  the

Jlesh." The  truth  of  this  is  so  abundantly  proved  by

experience,  that  it  entirely  excludes  the  propriety  of

any  contradiction.

62.  "  But  I  spare  you,"  says  he. This  agrees  with
chap.  Ui.  what  he  had  told  them  before,  "  I  have  fed  you  with

milk,  and  not  with  meat :  for hitherto  ye  were  not
. ..  able  to  bear  it,  neither  yet  now  are  ye  able." "  But

otiap.  vii. .  '  * .  • ,  *  .

2*-n.  this  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  is  short :  it  remameth,
that  both  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had
none  ;  and  they  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept  not ;
and  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced  not ; —
and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing  it :  for
the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."

63.  Observe,  they  that  have  wives,  shall  be  as
though  they  had  none  ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,
as  not  abusing  it.  Can  this  be  said,  where  the  silent
grave  has  inclosed  the  one  and  left  the  other  in  deso-
late widowhood  ?  or  where  the  souls  of  both  inhabit
eternity  ?  Or  can  it  be  said,  where  the  tomb-stones
over  their  bodies  have  sealed  their  separation  from  all
the  works  of  time  I  By  no  means.  The  apostle  al-
ludes to  the  time  for  which  Christ  taught  his  disciples

Matt.vi.  to  pray :  Thy  kingdom  come;  thy  will  be  done  in
earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.

64.  And  this  time  had  already  come  to  the  apos-
tle, and  all  the  true  followers  of  Christ,  as  he  tells
them  in  the  same  epistle,  when  speaking  of  the  idol
atries,  and  fornications,  and  murmurings  of  the  Jews,

l  Car.  x.  for  which  they  were  destroyed;  saying,  "Now  all
these  things  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples  :  and
they  are  written  for  our  admonition,  [the  followers
of  Christ,]  upon whom  the  ends  of the  world


are  come."


65.  Whatever  degree  of  indulgence  was  extendedr
to  some  among  the  Gentile  nations,  who  professed'
faith  in  Christ,  because  they  were  not  able  to  bear*
the  whole  truth  ;  yet  the  truth  did  not  conceal  the
pointed  distinction  which  Christ  made  between  his
own  true  followers,  and  the  children  of  this  world.


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  119

66.  "  But  I  would  have  you  without  carefulness,"  c**tv*«
saith  the  apostle,  "  He  that  is  unmarried  careth  for  ,.

the  things  that  belong  to  the  Lord,  how  he  may  please  x  ConviL
the  Lord:  [His  noblest  and  principal  affections  are  32,33^4.
there.] But  he  that  is  married  careth  for  the  things
that  are  of  the  world,  how  he  may  please  his  w;fe."
The  wife  is  put  in  the  place  of  the  Lord,  as  the  first
object  of  his  affections.

67.  "  The  unmarried  woman  careth  for  the  things
of  the  Lord,  [upon  whom  she  places  her  affections,]
that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  in  spirit :  but  she
:hat  is  married  careth  for  the  things  of  the  world,
how  she  may  please  her  husband."  She  places  her
first  affections  upon  her  husband,  instead  of  the  Lord.

68.  The same pointed distinction is made by
Christ ;  not  only  when  he  says  of  his  disciples, They  Lukexx.
ire  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not of  the  world  ;  g^37"
nit  in  answering  the  gad&ucees, who  denied,  and  sTnT
mew  not  that  he  was  the  resurrection,  he  says, The  xf^.
hildren  of  this  world  marry,  and  are  given  in  mar-  ^Coi-ii.
'iage  ;  but  they  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  ob-  1,2.  &*"
ain  that  world, and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  i/sJSJ*
leither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage. "  Neither

an  they  die  any  more ;  for  they  are  equal  unto  the
ingels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the  chil-
dren of  the  resurrection. "

[I.  69I  After  the  aP0StIe  hac*  pointedly  shown  the  Co-
flinthians  the  distinction,  between what  belonged  to
lie  world,  and  what  was  of  the  Lord,  so  careful  was
lie,  lest  they  should  stumble  at  the  truth,  that  he  adds,
And  this  I  speak  for  your  own  profit;  not  that  I  icoi-,va.
fiay  cast  a  snare  upon  you,  but  for  that  which  is  come-  35*
7,  and  that  ye  may  attend  upon  the  Lord  without
istraction."

70.  In  his  epistle  to  the  Galatians,  he  shows  the  r «•
mse  of  this  distraction. It  was  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  *

V  which  they  were  bewitched.  They  held,  as  it
ere,  the  flesh  in  their  right  hands,  and  the  faith  of
hnst  m  their  left ;  and  the  spirit  could  but  feebly
lead  against  the  flesh  ;  hence  they  could  profess  to
jheye  one  thing,  and  practise  another,  and  never
•actise  what  their  own  faith  taught  them.

71.  But  the  apostle  prescribes  to  them  the  remedy,

0  2  7


120  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY  P.  II.

CiTvP#  when  he  says, Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  notfuU

fil  the  lust  of  the  Jlesh. For  the  flesh  lusteth  against

Gal.  v. tne  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh  :  and  these

26, 17. are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  ;  so  that  ye  cannot

do  the  things  that  ye  would. "

72.  How  many  soever  there  were  among  the  Gen-
tiles, who  professed  faith  in  Christ,  and  did  not  walk
in  the  Spirit,  but  after  the  flesh  ;  yet  it  is  evident
that  there  was  a  certain  number,  properly  called  the
Ghurch,  who  did  take  up  a  full  cross  against  all  the
carnal  works  of  the  flesh,  after  the  example  of  Christ
and  the  apostles.

73.  And  whether  this  number  were  scattered
abroad,  or  lived  in  different  families  or  connexions,
and  possessed  all  things  common,  after  the  manner
of  the  church  first  planted  at  Jerusalem,  the  sacred
writings  do  not  say.
„  _.  74.  Of  this  number  St.  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  say-

o-i2.  mg,  "  Let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  number  un-
der threescore  years  old,  having  been  the  wife  of  one
man,  well  reported  of  for  good  works  ;  if  she  have
brought  up  children,  if  she  have  lodged  strangers,
if  she  have  washed  the  saints  feet,  if  she  have  dili-
gently followed  every  good  work.  But  the  younger
widows  refuse  ;  for  when  they  have  begun  to  wax?
wanton  against  Christ,  they  will  marry  ;  having  dam-
nation, because  they  have  cast  off  their  first  faith."

75.  It  is  certain  then,  that  their  first  faith  which
they  had  received  in  Christ,  was  not  to  live  after  the*
common  course of  the  world  in the works  of  the
flesh  ;  else  how  could  they,  by  casting  off  their  first
faith,  have  damnation  in  marrying  ?

76.  And  if  their  first  faith  in  Christ  did  not  require
them  to  take  up  a  full  cross  against  every  lust  of  the
flesh,  how  could  it  be  said,  that  when  they  would
marry,  it  was  because  they  waxed  wanton  against
Christ  ?  For  the  whole  of  it  pointedly  shows  what  the
faith  of  Christ  was,  and  what  it  was  that  stood  against
Christ.

77.  It  is  a  mistake,  therefore,  to  suppose,  that  the
number  here  spoken  of,  was  a  number  of  widows
who  were  taken  into  the  church  to  be  supported  onlj
in  temporal  things. It  was  not  the  immediate  con-


P. II.  THE  PRIMITIVE CHURCH.  121

cern  of  the  spiritual  teachers  of  the  cl  urch  to  regu-  c^p-
late  that  matter  ;  this  belonged  to  the  deacons,  in  un- *
ion  with  the  apostles,  bishops,  or  elders  ;  as  may  be  Acts  vit
seen  by  the  first  institution  to  regulate  the  temporal  2»3»4-
affairs  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem.

78.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  would  be  very  unreason-
able to  suppose,  that  a  widow  having  true  faith,  who
was  a  widow  indeed,  and  who  stood  in  need  of  tempo-
ral support,  could  not  receive  help,  because  she  was
not  yet  sixty  years  old.

79.  Nature  itself,  and  much  more  the  gospel  of
perfect  justice  and  equity  teaches,  that,  if  a  widow  of
no  more  than  thirty  years  old,  be  in  distress,  and  stand
in  need  of  as  much  help  as  one  of  sixty  years  old,  she
ought  to  be  relieved.  And  supposing  a  widow  of  six-
ty years  old,  who  had  true  faith,  to  have  had  even  five
husbands,  would  this,  according  to  the  spirit  and
equity  of  the  gospel,  have  shut  up  the  bowels  of  com-
passion, in  those  who  believed,  from  administering
to  her  necessities  ?  Certainly  not.

80.  The  truth  is,  the  apostle  had  here,  a  particular
reference  to  that  certain  number  whose  faith  it  was  to
live  after  the  example  of  Christ,  and  not  after  the
common  course  of  the  world.  And  he  admitted  that
all  such  as  had  already  proved  themselves  continent,
strong  in  the  faith,  and  had  diligently  followed  every
good  work,  might  have  a  privilege  to  enjoy  the  free
exercise  of  their  faith  with  this  number,  where  they
might  be  supported  in  temporal  things  also.

81.  And  in  a  strict  sense, this  number  only  was
properly  called  the  Church, as  is  evident  from  the
words  of  the  apostle  that  follow  :  If  any  man  or  wo-  iTim.r.
man  that  believeth  have  widows,  let  them  relieve  them,  16*
and  let  not  the  church  be  charged  ;  that  it  may  relienc

them  that  are  widows  indeed,

82.  This  further  shows,  as  before  observed,  that
there  were  those,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  who
were  counted  as  believers,  who  did  not  take  up  a  full
cross,  but  more  or  less  followed  the  common  course
of  the  world,  in  living  after  the  flesh.  And  these
could  only  find  access  to  the  church,  as  the  Gentiles,
under  the  Mosaiac  dispensation,  found  access  to  the
temple  by  coming  into  the  outer  court,  but  could  not
enter  within  the  temple.


122  THE  CROSS  MAINTAINED  BY  P. If,

ghaj*-  83.  Of  this  sort  of  believers  were  the  young  wi-
'\  clows  just  mentioned,  who  were  refused  admittance
into  the  church  ;  not  only  because  when  they  waxed
wanton  against  Christ  they  would  marry  ;  but  withal
they  learned  to  be  idle,  going  about  from  house  to
house;  tattlers  also,  and  "busybodies,  speaking  things
which  they  ought  not.

84.  It  was  for these and  such like  reasons  only,
iTim.v.  that  the apostle said,  u  /  will, therefore, that the

'  '  '  younger  women  marry,  bear  children,  guide  the  house,
give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproach-
fully. For  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan."

85.  From  which  it  is  evident,  that  some  had  al-
ready been  proved,  who  had  professed  to  take  up  their
cross,  and  had  turned  aside  from  their  first  faith,  and
turned  against  Christ ;  and  wherein  they  turned  aside
after  Satan,  is  made  sufficiently  clear  by  the  apostle.

86.  It  was,  therefore,  far  better  for  them  to  mar-
ry, and  live  after  the  common  course  of  the  world,
to  be  keepers  at  home,  to  bear  children,  to  guide  the
house,  and  so  let  their  profession  be  according  to  their
practice,  than  to  make  a  great  profession  of  faith  in
Christ,  and  then  again  turn  against  him  by  their  con-
trary practice,  and  give  occasion  to  the  adversary  to
speak  reproachfully.

87.  From  what  hath  been  said  concerning  the
Primitive  Church,  it  may  evidently  appear,  that  all
who  were  counted  believers  in  that  day,  did  not,  strict-
ly speaking,  constitute  that  Church,  which  was  the
real  spiritual  body  of  Christ — the  temple  %>f  the  liv-
ing God.

88.  The  apostles  were  commissioned  to  go  and
teach  and  baptize  all  nations  ;  and  as  the  true  and
abiding  seal  of  their  divine  commission,  they  them-
selves were  first  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
fire.  And  being  baptized  with,  and  into  one  and  the
same  Spirit  into  which  Christ  Jesus  was  baptized,  they
were  able  to  follow  his  example,  and  to  teach  others
to  follow  them,  as  they  followed  Christ.

89.  But  were  all  the  nations  baptized?  Did  all  re-
ceive their  testimony  ?  Did  all  follow  the  same  ex-

icor.i. ample?  In no  wise. It  is evident  throughout  the
*** writings  of  the  apostles,  that  there  wjere  many  unto


|p, II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHITRCH.  123

cvhom  the  preaching  of  the cross  was  foolishness. CH**«
<\nd  even  many  who  believed,  or  professed  to  believe  __
n  Christ,  walked  directly contrary  to  his  example.
3f  this  sort  St.  Paul  wrote,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Phil-
'ififiians.

90.  After  having  exhorted  them,  Brethren,  be  ye  Phil.«.
followers  of  me,  and  mark  them  which  walk  so,  as  ye  I7,i8,i9.
have  us  for  an  ensam/ile  :  he  adds,  Par  many  walk,  of
whom  I  have  told  you often,  and  now  tell  you  even
veefiing, that they are the  enemies  of  the cross of
Christ :  Whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  God  is  their

)elly,  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mind  earth-
y  things.

91.  The  same  depravity  of  faith  and  manners  is  ob-
servable under  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  Multitudes
followed  him  because  they  were  fed  with  the  loaves

md  fishes  :  but  when  he  told  them  about  eating  his  Johnvi;
lesh,  and  drinking  his' blood,  and  that  this  was  the  3§-fie.
rue  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven,  many,
,ven  of  his  disciples,  were  offended,  and  walked  no
nore  with  him.


CHAPTER  V.

The  Attainments  of  the  Primitive  Church.

TTf  THATEVER  they  were  called,  who  professed
V  V  faith  in  Christ,  whether  believers,  disciples,
>rethren,  christians,  churches,  or  saints  ;  none,  strict-
y  speaking,  were  the  true  followers  of  Christ,  but
>uch  as  received  his  word  and  continued  therein,  were
>aptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  led  by  that  Spirit,
ind  followed  the  very  example  of  Christ  Jesus  in  all
us  moral  perfections.

2.  Christ  came  to  bring  salvation  from  sin,  and  to
•elease  souls  from  the  bondage  and  condemnation  of
t ;  and  he  taught  his  followers  how  to  obtain  that  in-
estimable prize  of  true  felicity  and  eternal  life.  And
his  salvation,  which  is  the  very  essence  of  all  moral
Perfection,  was  attainable  only  by  keeping  all  his  com-


124  THE  ATTAINMENTS  OF  P.  II.

CI^AP-  mandments,  as  he  kept  the  commandments,  of  his
-:•'"' Father. As  Jesus  said,  "  If  ye  keep  my  command-


John  xv.  tnents,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love  ;  even  as  I  have  kept
10. my  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  his  love."

3.  Hence  his  true  followers  who  copied  his  exam-
iMm  i.  pje?  could  freely  testify  to.  others,  "  That  which  we

have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you,  that  ye  also
may  have  fellowship  with  us  :  and  truly  our  fellow-
ship is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus
Christ."

4.  "  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.
If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk
in  darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth  :  But  if  we
walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fel-
lowship one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."

_ .. 5.  "  He  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and keefiethnot  his

chap.  u.  ,  .  ,.  . .  7 ..*♦..  .

4,5,6. commandments )  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him.
But  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in  him  verily  is  the  love
of  God  perfected  :  hereby  know  wre  that  we are  in
him. He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him,  ought  himself
also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he  [Christ]  walked ."
•hap. iii. 6.  "  Little  children, let  no  man  deceive you:  he
7,8# that doth righteousness is  righteous, even as he
{[Christ]  is  righteous. He  that  committeth  sin  is  of
the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning."
ehap.iv. ^*  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time. If  >ye
12,13.  '  iove  one  another,  God  dwelieth  in  us,  and  his  love  is
perfected  in  us. Hereby  we  know  that  we  dwell  in
him, and  he  in  us,  because  he  hath  given  us of  his
ehap.v. Sfiirit. By  this  we  know  that we  love  the  children
%>3' of  God, when  we  love  God,  and  keep  his  command*
ments. For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we do  keefi
his  commandments  j  and  his  commandments  are  not
grievous."

8.  Here  is  the  character  of  a  true  follower  of  Christ,
a  transcript  of  the  moral  perfections  of  the  Son  of
God — a  true  copy  of  his  holy  life,,  transcribed  by  obe-
dience— by  receiving  his  word,  his  commandments,
and  his  Spirit,  and  walking  therein,  even  as  he  walked.
Herein  was  the  whole  law  fulfilled,  not  in  Christ  on-
ly, but  in  every  one  of  his  true  followers,  without  the
failure  of  one  jot  or  tittle.


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  135

9.  Thus,  while  sin  and  death  reigned  from  Adam  chap.
to  Moses,  and  the  law  brought  wrath  and  condemna-  _

tion,  and  made,  as  it  were,  the  very  life  and  exist-
ence of  the  transgressor,  offensive  to  God  ;  Christ
came  and  burst  the  bands  of  sin  and  death,  and
brought  forth  the  prisoners  out  of  their  prison  houses,
and  the  captives  out  of  their  dungeons,  saying,  in  the
language  of  the  Spirit,  Deny  yourselves,  and  follow  me.

10.  And  by  obedience  to  his  commands,  following
his  example,  and  walking  even  as  he walked,  salva- •
tion  from  ali  sin  was  obtained  by  every  one  of  his  true
followers,  the  love  of  God  verily  perfected,  and  the
whole  law  fulfilled.

1 1.  Such  then,  were  the  nature  and  effects  of  Man's
Redemption,  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel  of  Christ
Jesus,  and  manifested  to  his  church,  his  true  follow-
ers, and  members  of  his  body,  who  saw,  and  tasted*
and  handled  of  the  Word  of  Life.

12.  The  work  of  Redemption  by  Christ,  in  his
followers,  did  not  consist  in  any  change  in  the  posi-
tion of  their  natural  bodies,  but  in  the  disposition  of
their  souls.  Their  dispositions,  affections,  lives  and
manners,  were  changed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  through
faith  in  Christ,  and  in  obedience  to  his  law.

13.  The  nature  and  work  of  redemption,  is  a  per-
fect contrast  to  the  nature  and  manner  of  man's  fall
from  his  first  rectitude.

14.  The  first  Adam  lost  his  union  and  relation  to
God  by  disobedience  to  his  righteous  law,  and  be-
came a  captive  to  the  desires  and  works  of  the  flesh  ;
and  all  his  posterity,  being  begotten  in  that  nature,
were  led  captive  by  the  same,  and  continued  to  fall
with  him,  in  the  same  line  of  disobedience.

15.  Christ  the  second  Adam,  who  was  the  begin-
ning of  a  new  creation,  and  by  whom  all  things  were
made  and  created,  did  not  come  to  condemn  man-
kind, but  to  redeem  and  save  them  from  that  which
was  their  loss  and  separation  from  God.

16.  And  therefore  he  set  the  example  of  perfect
obedience  to  the  law  of  God  his  Father,  and  of  com-
plete self-denial,  and  a  final  cross  against  all  the  car-
nal desires  of  the  flesh,  and  the  actual  works  cf  nat-
ural generation. And  all  his  true  followers  found


126  THE  ATTAINMENTS  OF  P.  II.

CI**P# their  union  and  relation  to  God,  through  Christ,  in

.  the  same  line  of  obedience  with  him.

17.  And  herein  it  was,  that  he  and  his  kingdom,
and  his  true  followers,  were  not  of  this  world.  And
herein  lay  the  secret  cause  of  all  the  enmity  between
those  who  were  born  after  the  flesh,  and  those  who
were  born  again,  of  the  Spirit.  For  this  cause  Christ
was  hated.

,  v  ... 18.  God  did  not  hate  the  world,  but,  "  so  loved  the

John  iu.  .

ie.  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who-

soever believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have
everlasting  life."

19.  He  created  man  at  the  beginning  for  1  is  own
honour  and  giory,  and  in  his  first  creation,  as  he  pro-
ceeded immediately  from  the  fountain  of  all  goodness,
there  was  nothing  in  his  soul  or  body  that  was  offen-
sive to  the  pure  nature  of  God  his  Creator.  But  man
receiving  by  his  disobedience,  a  foul  and  rebellious
spirit  against  God,  which  lusted  to  envy,  it  was  this
that  ever  stood  in  opposition  to  God's  holy  and  pure
law,  and  was  the  object  of  his  just  indignation.

20.  By  this  the  soul,  with  all  its  noble  affections,
was  led  captive  into  sin ;  but  ever  remained  the  ob-
ject of  God's  love,  and  became  punishable  only  as  it
yielded  to  the  influence  of  sin.

21.  Through  the  influence  of  this  foul  and  rebel-
lious spirit,  the  natural  body,  with  all  its  faculties,
became  polluted,  directed  and  improved  to  an  evil
use,  contrary  to  the  pure  law  of  God.  But  the  nat-
ural body,  simply  considered  in  itself,  remained  the
same  after  the  fall  as  it  was  before,  with  all  the  form,
natural  properties  and  propensities  thereof,  and  only
shared  with  the  soul  in  its  punishments,  by  reason  of  \
sin.

22.  The natural body of  Man, comprehending
male  and  female,  being  of  the  earth,  earthy,  and  crea- i
ted  for  time,  stood  in  need  of  temporal  food  for  its
subsistence,  before  the  fall,  as  wreii  as  after. And  so^
in  regard  to  the  formation  of  his  body,  and  its  natural
properties,  for  the  increase  of  posterity,  simply  con-j
sidered  in  itself,  there  was  no  change,  it  remained |
the  snme  after  the  fall  as  it  was  before  :  the  change
wns  in  his  inclination  to  sinful  actions,  and  in  his  obe-
dience thereto.


P.  H.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  12f

23.  In  the  beginning  God  saw  every  thing  that  he CH^P-

had  made,  and  behold  it  was  very  good  ;  and  he  never

found  any  fault  with  his  own  work  since  ;  but  as  Man

had  corrupted  himself  and  the  earth,  by  reason  of  sin,  2  Pet  ...
therefore  he  promised  to  create  new  heavens,  and  a  13.
new  earth,  wherein  should  dwell  righteousness.

24.  When  therefore,  the  law  went  to  condemn  any
property,  as  sinful  or  unclean,  either  in  male  or  fe-
male, which  was  necessary  in  the  natural  creation,  it
was  not  because  there  was  any  evil  in  the  thing  sim-
ply considered  in  itself;  but  because  it  was  corrupted,
and  must  be  redeemed  from  that  corruption  before  it
could  ever  come  into  the  new  creation.

25.  The  Son  of  God  himself,  the  Redeemer  of
mankind,  although  he  was  not  of  this  world,  yet  he
was  found  in  fashion  like  other  men,  touched  with  a
feeling  of  their  infirmities,  and  tempted  in  all  points
as  they  were,  subject  to  hunger,  and  weariness,  and
stood  in  need  of  temporal  subsistence.  But  he  knew
no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth.

26.  And  it  is  enough,  said  Jesus,  that  the  disciple
be  as  his  master,  and  the  servant  as  his  Lord.  And
in  his  prayer  to  his  Father  for  his  disciples,  he  says,
"  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the
world.  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest  take  them  out  qf  Johnxvin
the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  14»15»&C-
evil.  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  :  thy  word  is
truth.

27.  And  hence  the  words  of  the  apostle, The  very  iThes.r.
God  of  peace  sanctify  you wholly:  and I  pray  God

your  whole  spirit  and  soul,  and  body,  be  preserved
blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

28.  The  apostle  did  not  pray  that  God  would  change
the  form  or  properties  of  their  bodies,  or  the  facul-
ties of  their  souls  from  what  he  had  made  them  at
the  beginning  ;  nor  did  he  pray  that  the  corruption  of
nature  might  be  sanctified  ;  but  that  their  souls  and
bodies,  which  at  the  beginning  were  pure,  innocent
and  lovely,  might  be  wholly  sanctified  and  cleansed
from  sin,  the  cause  of  every  corruption  and  offence.

29.  Christ  Jesus  was  a  man,  who  had  no  other  bod-
ily appearance  than  that  of  other  men.  And  his  fol-
lowers were  men  and  women,  like  other  men  and

P


128  THE  ATTAINMENTS  OF  P.  II.

<Hi^p-  women,  who  possessed  all  their  former  properties,
*  and  faculties  of  body  and  mind  with  which  they
were  at  first  created.  But  the  change  which  was
wrought  in  the  followers  of  Christ,  by  the  gospel,
consisted  in  their  being  saved  from  sin  ;  and  hence
the  cause  of  every  offence  between  God  and  them
was  removed.

30.  And  by  receiving  his  word  and  abiding  in  it,
they  received  his  Spirit,  and  had  power  to  become
the  Sons  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ  in  his
kingdom — were  freely  justified  by  his  grace,  and
were  no  longer  under  the  guilt  and  condemnation  of

fcom.viu,  the  law. As  it  is  written, There  is  therefore,  now  no

•2-10. condemnation  to  them  which  are  in Christ  Jesus,  who

w&lk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  They  are

made  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death,  by  the  law

of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.

31.  The  law  could  never  save  the  soul  from  sin,
and  therefore  the  guilt  and  condemnation  of  sin  re-
mained ;  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  because
those  who  were  under  it,  lived  in  the  gratification  of
the  flesh.

32.  Hence  it  is  written  :  "  What  the  law  could  not
do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  send-
ing his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and
for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  ;  that  the  right-

• cousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk
not  after  the  flesh,  but, after  the  Spirit  J9

33.  "  For  they  that  are  after  the  flesh,  do  mind  the
things  of  the  flesh  ;  but  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit,
the  things  of  the  Spirit.  For  to  be  carnally  [fleshly]
minded  is  death  ;  but  to  be  spiritually  minded  is  life
and  peace  :  Because  the  carnal  [fleshly]  mind  is  en-
mity against  God  ;  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of
God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  So  then,  they  that  arc
in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."

34.  "  But  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,
if  so  be  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you.  Now  ij
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his.
And  if  Christ  be  in  you,  the  body  is  dead  because  of
sin  ;  [Christ  and  sin  cannot  dwell  together ;  where
he  has  the  lead  and  government  of  the  mind,  the  bo-
dy is  dead  and  inactive  to  sin  ;]  but  the  Spirit  is  alive
because  of  righteousness."


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH,  129

35.  This  answers  to  what  the  apostle  had  before CHVAP-

stated,  when  he  showed  what  it  was  to  be  crucified  m

and  dead  with  Christ. "  Knowing  that  our  old  man  Rom.  ^
is  crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  [not  the  J^1^
natural  body,  nor  any  part  or  property  of  it]  might  be  r.  u. '
destroyed^  that  henceforth  ive  should  not  serve  sin. For

he  that  is  dead  [to  sin  J  is  freed  from  sin.9'

36.  "  Likewise  reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead
indeed  unto  sin  ;  but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord.  Let  not  sin,  therefore^  reign  in
your  mortal  body^  that  ye  should  obey  it  in  the  lusts
\thereof.  Neither  yield  ye  your  members  as  instruments-
\of  unrighteousness  unto  sin  ;  but  yield  yourselves  unto
\God,  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead  ;  and  your
members  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God."

37.  "  For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  ;

for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  What  u^u.
khen  ?  shall  we  sin  because  we  are  not  under  the  law,
but  under  grace  ?  [Gr.  Mtj  ysvoiro.']  Let  it  not  be.
Know  ye  not,  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves  ser-
(vants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey  ;
whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto  right-
eousness ?"

38.  Did  then  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus  come  to
pount  all  mankind  under  grace  who  did  not  come  un~
jder  its  influence  ?  In  no  wise.  The  distinction  is
jmade  plain  between  those  who  are  yet  under  the  law,
land  those  who  are  under  grace.

39.  The  law  was  given  because  of  sin,  that  the  of-
(fence  might  abound,  and  served  as  a  school-master,
(until  faith  and  obedience,  grace  and  truth,  were  made
(manifest  by  Jesus  Christ.  And  after  Christ  came,
those  who  received  him  by  faith,  and  became  his  by
pbedience,  were  no  longer  under  that  school-master,
put  were  under  grace.

40.  But  who  were  released  from  that  school-master  ?
jThose  who  continued  to  commit  sin  with  a  gracious
Reluctance  ?  Nay,  in  no  wise.  For  the  law  was  given
by  reason  of  sin,  and  the  testimony  of  scripture  is
plain  and  pointed  :  "  Now  we  know  that  what  things  Rom.ifi.
|soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  19,
Ithe  law  ;  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all

fhe  wrld  may  become  guilty  before  God,


130  THE  ATTAINMENTS  OF  P.  IL

chap. 4i#  ^nci  again: Whosoever  committeth  sin trans-
r  gresseth  also the  law  :  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of


iJohniii.  ^l€ law* Therefore  we conclude, that whosoever

4>6- committeth  sin,  whether  he  be  called  Christian,  Jew,

or  Gentile,  he  is  yet  under  the  guilt  and  condemnation

of  the  law,  and  hath  not  .seen  Christ,  neither  known

him.

42.  And  as  the  law  of  Moses  was  given  to  convey
the  knowledge  of  sin,  that  all  the  world  might  be-

Aom.iii.  come  guiity  before  God,  therefore,  by  the  deeds  of
Aetata.  t^ie  lutTJ^  snatt  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight.  But  by
&•  Christ  all  that  believe,  are  justified  from  all  things,

from  which  they  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of

Moses.

43.  Christ  is  become  the  end  of  the  law  for  right  A

Boxn.x.4.  . j  J  12./

eousness  to  evertj  one  that  belie veth  ;  and  he  became
Heb  v9  ^le  auih°r  °f  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey
him.  Therefore,  there  is  no  difference,  all  who  be-
lieve and  obey  him,  are  equally  justified  in  his  sight,-,
and  equally  accepted  of  him,  whether  male  or  female,
bond  or  free,  Jew  or  Greek  ;  and  the  righteousness  of
the  law  is  fulfilled  in  them,  because  they  walk  not  after
the  flesh,  but  after  the  S/iirit.

44.  And  it  is  through  the  Spirit  they  do  mortify  and
Mn."**  crucify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  and  live  unto  God.
<;ii.  v. For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are

the  sons  of  God,  and  are  not  under  the  law,  but  arc
made  free,  and  set  at  liberty,  being  the  children  of
God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ.

45.  What  then,  because  they  are  made  free  from
«»i.vjfi4  l^e  law?  ky  the  Spirit  and  cross  of  Christ,  shall  they

therefore  live  any  longer  in  the  gratification  of  the
flesh  ?  Nay,  in  no  wise  ;  their  liberty,  and  their  peace,
is  through  the  cross  of  Christ,  by  whom  the  world
is  crucified  unto  them,  and  they  unto  the  world,
•hap.r.  46«  Hence  saith  the  apostle,  "  Ye  have  been  called
j?,  14.  unto  liberty  ;  only  use  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the
flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one  another.  For  all  the  law
is  fulfilled  in  this  one  word  ;  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh-
bour as  thyself.

47.  For  the  greatest  reason  then,  because  the  Spir-
Romviii.  lt  °f  Christ  dwells  in  them,  by  which  the  whole  law
^om.viifc  ^ fulfilled,  the  apostle concludes,  " Therefore,  we
are  not  debtors  to  the  fleshy  to  live  after  the  flesh.


,


II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  1W


CHAP.
VI.


48.  And  as The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruity  so  the
Efiirit  by  which  the  Primitive  Church  was  led,  was  _
Evidently  distinguished  by  such  fruits  as  are  briefly  Gal.v,22
Lmmed  up  by  the  apostle,  namely  :  love,  joy,  peace,  33.

ong-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, meekness

emfierance  :  against  such  there  is  no  law.


CHAPTER  VI.

The  Order  and  Power  of  the  Primitive  Church.

CHRIST  JESUS  our  Saviour,  during  the  time
of  his  ministry  on  earth,  took  great  pains  to  in-
truct  his  disciples,  concerning  the  design  of  his
:oming  into  the  world—the  nature  of  his  kingdom-
he  order  and  place  in  which  he  stood,  as  the  light  of
lhe  world — the  salt  or  Saviour  of  the  earth,  for  their
lalvation  and  redemption — and  the  order  in  which  his
fchurch  should  stand  as  his  body,  for  the  same  purpose,
lifter  his  decease,  or  departure  from  them.

2.  "  No man  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven,  said  join  .*.
Fesus,  but  he  that  came  down  from  heaven,  even  the  Jgjjj
Son  of  man,  who  is  in  heaven. — .He  that hath  seen  Jo&nxiv.
ne,  hath  seen  the  Father. — Believe  me  that  I  am  in ' '
;he  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me." Here  was  God

md  heaven  made  manifest  in  earth.

3.  "  The  Father  himself  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath . ...

I  ...  .  .  civup.  III.

fcjiven  all  things  into  his  hand. — The  Father  judgeth  no  35.
nan  ;  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son  :  Je2*?,''


;


hat  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  hon-
our the  Father.  He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son,  non-
pure  th  not  the  Father  which  sent  him."

4.  "As  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  he
jgiven  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself ;  and  hath  giv-
en him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because
pe  is  the  Son  of  man."  He  is  the  Son  of  man,  because
jhe  dwells  in  man,  and  takes  the  lead  and  government
pf  man's  affections,  and  is  therefore  capable  of  exerci-
sing true  judgment,  in  opposition  to  the  man  of  sin,
the  son  of  perdition.  '

P2


132  THE  ORDER  AND  POWER  OF  P.  II.

C1yi.P* 5.  "  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  said  Jesus,  I  am
_ the  light  of  the  world — I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,


jehnix. and  the  life  :  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by
*jv  6 me." From  all  which  it  is  evident  that  in  his  human
coi.  i.  19,  body,  dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  God  the  Father,  pertain-
ing to  man's  redemption.

6.  Through  the  same  power  and  authority  of  the
Holy  Ghost  with  which  Jesus  was  invested, he  corn-
Man, tnanded  his  disciples,  saying,  "  All  power  is  given  unto

xxvi*.  is.  mc  in  neaven  anci  {n  earth.  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach
all  nations."  And  he  promised  to  endow  them  with
the  same  power  to  perform  their  mission  :  which
promise  he  fulfilled  on  the  day  of  pentecost.

7.  And  as  his  disciples  and  immediate  followers,
stood  nearest  to  him  in  point  of  union,  therefore  the
descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  properly  the  descent
of  all  that  he  had  :  so  that  whatever  order,  lot  or  of*
fice  he  had  received  from  the  Father,  relative  to  the
world,  the  same  pertained  also  to  the  church  who
received  his  fulness.

johnxir.  8-  Then  they  knew  in  truth,  that  the  Father  was  in
*°-  Christ,  and  he  in  them,  and  they  in  him  ;  and  that
they  had  both  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Then  God,
Rom.xii.  anc*  Christ,  and  the  Church  became  one.  And  such
e5A'22  as  ^e^eve^  and  were  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
13^  '  '  being  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul,  were  the  true  body
chap.  v.  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular  ;  members  of  hi*
$°-  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.

9.  So  that  according  to  the  measure  of  that  dispen-
sation, the  Church  was  as  really  the  body  of  Christ,
a  body  as  really  anointed,  as  the  man  Jesus  was,
while  visible  on  the  earth  ;  and  God  did  as  really
dwell  in  the  one  as  in  the  other.

10.  And  as  Christ  was  the  only  light  of  the  world,
the  only  salt  of  the  earth,  by  which  men  could  be  sav-
ed, and  was  now  really  and  actually  in  the  Church  as
his  true  body,  he  in  them,  and  they  in  him,  and  they  were
perfect  in  one  ;  therefore  they  were  now  the  only  light
of  the  world,  the  only  salt  of  the  earth.

11.  Of  this  Jesus  had  told  them  while  he  was  yet
with  them,  before  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  saying,

Watt.v. «  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  ;  but  if  the  salt  have  lost
l3' u% its  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be  salted  I  it  is  thence-


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  133

forth  good  for  nothing,  bat  to  be  cast  out,  and  to  be CIJ£P'
trodden  under  foot  of  men. — Ye  are  the  light  of  the ."


world. A  city  set  upon  a  hill  cannot  be  hid."

12.  By  which  he  plainly  intimated  the  order  in
which  they  were  to  stand,  with  regard  to  the  salva-
tion of  others,  and  that  the  world  could  not  be  saved
without  them.  And  as  the  salt  of  the  earth  is  the  on-
ly saviour  of  the  body,  the  Church,  so  all  the  salvation
that  was  within  the  reach  of  the  world,  was  in  the
Church,  and  the  Church  remained  to  be  the  only  true
saviour  of  the  world,  according  to  the  sayings  of
Christ.

13.  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  ftfctttffrj
more;  but  ye  see  me:  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  l%tllj
also. — And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world,  but  these  22,**.
are  in  the  world — And  the  glory which  thou  gavest

me,  I  have  given  them ;  that  they  may  be  one,  even
as  we  are  one  :  I  in  them  and  thou  in  me."

14.  Hence  the  Church  was  in  possession  of  what
Christ  called  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;
for  heaven  was  really  upon  earth,  in  them,  and  they
sat  in  heavenly  places,  in  Christ  Jesus.  .  And  this  or-
der Jesus  gave  them  when  he said  of  the  Church,

"  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  Materia
earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  ye  x8»l9»aa
shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."

15.  "  Again  I  say  unto  you,  that  if  two  of  you
shall  agree  on  earth,  as  touching  any  thing  that  they
shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father
which  is  in  heaven.  For  where  two  or  three  are
gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the
midst  of  them."

16.  Now  although  the  world  could  see  the  Son  of
man^no  more  in  the  body  and  flesh  of  Jesus,  yet  his
power,  which  he  had  while  visible  on  earth,  was  not
diminished  in  his  followers,  but  increased,  according

to  his  promise  :  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  John**,
that  believeth  on  me,  [and  keepeth  my  command-  u"
ments,]  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and
greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do  ;  because  I  go
to  my  Father."

17.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  had  reasoned  against
Jesus,  because  he  forgave  sins,  saying,  Who  is  this  m.  eT*


134  THE  ORDER  AND  POWER  OF  P.  II.

€vlP* *^at  sflea^etn  blasphemies  ? Who  can  forgive  sins  but
. God  alone  ?


18.  But  that  power  was  not  diminished  after  Jesus^
left  the  world  ;  the  true  and  real  members  of  the
Church  or  body  of  Christ,  had  the  same  power  on
earth  that  Jesus  had  ;  according  to  his  words,  Whose

Jokaxx. soever  sins  ye remit,  they  aYe remitted  unto them;
and  whose  soever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained.

19.  Hence  saith the apostle to the  Corinthians,
2  Cor.  ii.  «  To  whom  ye  forgive  any  thing,  I  forgive  also  :  for

if  I  forgave  any  thing,  to  whom  I  forgave  it,  [gr.
$)&  u[JLciq.~\  by  you  forgave  I  it,  in  the  person  of  Christ."
iQor.y.  And  again,  "  In  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
wrhen  ye  are  gathered  together,  and  my  spirit,  with
the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  deliver  such  an  one
to  Satan."

20.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  Church  and  messen-
gers of  Christ  stood  in  his  very  character,  and  acted
by  the  very  same  spirit  and  power  of  the  Lord  Je-
sus, which  he  had  received  from  his  Father,  and  giv-
en unto  them.  Whatsoever  they  taught,  was  taught
of  God,  and  whosoever  received,  despised,  or  reject-
ed them,  received,  despised,  or  rejected  not  man,
but  God.

i  The*.  2*»  Hence  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  God  hath
iv.  7,8.  not  called  us  to  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness.  He,
therefore,  that  despiseth?  [or  rejecteth,]  despiseth
4M9?"*  B[°r  rejecteth]  not  man,  but  God."  "  He  that  re-
jecteth me,  said  Jesus,  and  receiveth  not  my  words,
hath  one  that  judgeth  him:  the  word  that  I  have
spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day.
For  I  have  not  spoken  of  myself;  but  the  Father
which  sent  me,  he  gave  me  a  commandment  what
I  should  say,  and  what  I  should  speak."

22.  And  whatsoever  Jesus  spake  of  himself,  per-
tained also  to  his  followers  :  for  all  that  the  Father
gave  unto  him,  he  gave  unto  them,  even  eternal  life  :
as  he  expresses  it  in  his  address  to  the  Father.

23.  "  Now  they  have  known  that  all  things,  what-
soever thou  hast  given  me,  are  of  thee. For  I  have

Johnxvii  given  unto  them  the  Words  which  thou  gavest  me,  and
i78i8'&  tney  ^ave  receiyed  them. — I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray
20,22,23.  not  for  the  world. Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth  5


P. II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  135

thy  Word  is  truth.  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  CJ^P*
world,  even  so  have  I  sent  them  into  the  world.  Nei-  ..
ther  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which
shall  believe  on  me  through  their  word — And  the  glo-
ry which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them  ;  that
they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one  :  I  in  them,  and
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one  ;
and  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou  hast  sent  me,
and  hast  loved  them,  as  thou  hast  loved  ?ne."

24.  In  the  same  order  which  his  Father  had  placed
him,  he  also  placed  them,  as  his  joint  body,  and  en-
dowed them  with  the  same  power  and  authority.

25.  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  re-  j©hnx«,
ceiveth  whomsoever  I  send,  receiveth  me  ;  and  he  ^.S?^^
that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent me. As

my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you."  Then  as
the  Father  was  revealed  in  Christ  ;  so  in  the  same
manner  is  Christ  revealed  in  his  Church,  as  his  true
body.  And  as  God  is  the  head  of  Christ  ;  so  is  Christ
the  head  of  his  Church.

26.  And  as  whatever  was  done  by  Christ,  was  done
by  the  Father  ;  so  whatever  is  done  by  the  true  Church
and  body  of  Christ,  is  done  by  Christ  himself.

27.  And  as  the  Father  judged  no  man,  but  committed  j»h»  y>
all  judgment  to  the  Son  ;  so  in  like  manner,  when  the  22#
Son  had  finished  the  work  on  earth  which  was  given
him  to  do,  he  committed  all  judgment  to  the  saints,

in  whom  he  promised  to  dwell,  and  out  of  the  Church

he  judgeth  no  man. Know  ye  not, saith  the  apostle,  ic©*.ti

that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?  ' '

28.  And  as  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  but
the  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Fa-
ther, hath  declared  him  ;  so  no  man  hath  seen  the  Son
in  his  glorified  state,  at  any  time  ;  but  his  only  begot-
ten saints,  who  are  in  him,  and  he  in  them,  they  have
declared  him  in  his  true  character.  God  is  a  Spirit,
and  cannot  be  seen,  known,  or  worshipped,  but  by  and

in  the  Spirit. For  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  a.0'***'
but  the  Spirit  of  God,

£9.  Then,  as  Christ,  that  is,  the  Anointing,  with
which  Jesus  was  anointed,  alone  knew  the  Father,
being  a  quickening  Spirit,  one  with  the  Father  ;  it  is
evident  that  no  man  can  know  the  things  of  Christ,


136  ^Hfc  ORDER  AND  POWER  0*  P.  IL

c**£p-  but  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  in  his  truly  begotten
' followers.

30.  The  Church,  or  body  of  saints,  which  Christ
♦  himself  had  begotten,  which  was  in  his  bosom,  as  he
was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  was  the  only  salt  of
the  earth — the  light  of  the. world— -the  only  house,  or
temple  of  the  living  God  on  earth,  and  the  only  pillar
and  ground  of  truth  among  men  :  therefore  it  was
impossible  for  any  soul  to  find  God  or  Christ  to  salva-
tion, in  any  other  place,  or  through  any  other  medium,
than  through  the  Church,  or  saints,  the  true  mem-
bers of  his  body,  in  which  he  dwelt.
Acts*.  31.  This  is  clearly  proved  by  the  case  of  Cornelius
P*  the  centurion,  a  devout  man,  and  one  that  feared  God
with  all  his  house,  which  gave  much  alms  to  the  peo-
ple, and  prayed  to  God  alway.  But  he  was  not  yet
saved.  And  the  angel  who  came  to  Cornelius^  could
inform  him  that  his  prayers  and  alms  were  come  up
for  a  memorial  before  God,  and  intimate  to  him  that
he  was  not  yet  saved,  and  that  in  order  to  obtain  sal-
vation, he  must  send  for  Simon  Peter.

32.  But  why  could  not  the  angel  administer  salva*
tion  to  him,  without  being  beholden  to  Peter  ?  The
truth  is,  it  was  not  in  his  power  ;  that  power  was
committed  unto  the  Church,  as  hath  been  shown,

33.  Salvation  was  only  in  and  by  Christ,  and  Christ,
from  the  beginning,  had  not  taken  on  him  the  na-
ture of  anges,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  was,
and  still  continued  to  be  manifested  in  the  flesh,  and
dwelt  in  his  temple  or  earthly  tabernacle,  where  he
promised  to  dwell.

34.  Therefore  the  most  that  the  angel  could  do  for
this  devout  man,  was  to  inform  him  where  he  could
find  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  di-
rect him  to  that  temple,  or  habitation  of  God,  from
which  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesusy
could  be  communicated.

35.  And  us  Peter  was  a  real  member  of  the  body
of  Christ,  who  had  Christ  the  Word  and  power  of
salvation,  and  eternal  life,  dwelling  in  him,  with  au-
thority to  transmit  the  same  to  others  ;  therefore  the

ufi^ii,  angel  said  to  Cornelius,  "  Send  men  to  Joppa,  and
call  for  Simon,  whose  surname  is  Peter,  who  shall  tell


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CKURCK.  137

thee  words,  whereby  thou  and  all  thy  house  shall  be  C**AF-
saved.  __ _*.

36.  And  when  Peter  came  to  Cornelius,  and  those
who  were  with  him,  and  preached  unto  them  that
Word,  which  he  had  in  him,  which  God  had  appointed
to  be  the  judge  of  both  quick  and  dead,  the  Holy  Ghost
fell  on  them,  as  it  did  on  the  apostles  at  the  beginning  ;
and  they  were  translated  from  darkness  to  light,  and
from  the  power  of  Satan  into  the  kingdom  of  God's
dear  Son.

37.  By  this  circumstance,  together  with  what  hath
been  said,  it  is  verified  beyond  all  contradiction,  that

unto  the  angels  God  hath  not  subjected  the  world  to  Heb.ii.$>
come,  or  the  building  of  his  habitation  among  men.
Nor  was  there  any  angel,  or  spirit  in  heaven  or  on
earth,  that  could  open  and  administer  the  true  way
and  power  of  salvation  and  eternal  life,  but  that  Spir-
it and  power  which  abode  in  the  Church.

38.  It  was  in  the  Church  that  Christ  was  set  upon  Compare
the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  in  heavenly  places,  far  Eph.i.3.
above  all  principality  and  power,  and  might,  and  do-  21**22,33,
minion,  and  every  name  that  is named,  not  only  in

this  world,  but  in  that  which  is  to  come.  Here  God
the  Father  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  Christ
was  given  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,
which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  lilleth  all
in  all.

39.  And  that  the  Church  was  the  only  medium,  Acts  a.
through  which  the  gospel  of  salvation  and  eternal  life '  J
could  be  administered  to  mankind,  is  also  manifest
from  the  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  while  on  his

way  to  Damascus,  breathing  out  threatnings  and
slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord.

40.  If  it  be  supposed  that  Saul  at  that  time,  in  re-
ality, saw  Christ  Jesus,  it  is  a  mistake. Saul  was  not
at  that  time  in  a  situation  to  see  Christ,  for  he  was
sinning  against  him  ;  and  John  testifies,  He  that  sin-  1  j0hn«,
neth  hath  neither  seen  him  nor  known  him.  16*

41.  Christ  is  the  true  light,  who  coming  into  the
world,  enlighteneth  every  man.  But  the  light  that
shone  upon  Saul  blinded  him  :  and  moreover  no  man
can  even  call  Jesus  Lord,  and  much  less  see  him,  but
by  the  Holy  Ghost. And  Saul  neither  received  his


138  THE  ORDER  AND  POWER  OF P.  II.

C  vi.P' s*Snt>  nor  ^ie Holy  Ghost,  until  three  days  after,
.  when  he  received  both,  through  Ananias  a  member

of  Christ's  body.

42.  But  Saui  himself  relates  his  seeing  a  vision,
and  hearing  a  voice,  saying,  Saul,  Saul,  why  fierse-
cutest  thou  me  ?  Who  then  was  he  persecuting  ?  Not
that  light  that  struck  him  blind,  nor  that  voice  that
reproved  him.  These  he  respected  as  the  glory  and
voice  of  the  Lord,  as  much  as  his  fathers  had  respec-
ted the  cloud  of  glory  which  covered  the  mercy  seat ;
but  Christ  in  his  real  habitation  he  had  not  respected,
but  persecuted  him  in  the  true  members  of  his  body.

43.  He  had  persecuted  Christ  in  Stephen  the  mar-
tyr, and  he  had  persecuted  him  in  those  men  and  wo-
men, whom  he  had  hauled  forth  and  committed  to
prison.  And  it  was  only  in  the  members  of  Christ,
that  he,  or  any  other  could  either  love  or  hate  him,
bless  or  curse  him,  receive  or  reject  him  ;  according

Mat.xxT.  to  Christ's  own  words  : Verily I  say  unto  you,  In  as
^  45- much  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these
my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me.

44.  And  therefore,  as  Christ  dwelt  no  where  for
true  salvation  to  men,  but  in  his  living  witnesses,  the
vision  could  only  direct  him  where  to  find  Christ,  and
through  whom  he  must  receive  his  instructions,  say-

Actsix.6,  ing,  Arise  and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  be  told
&17-2Q.  t/iee^  w}iat  thou  must  do.

45.  When  therefore  Saul  was  obedient  to  the  heav-
enly vision,  and  Ananias  also  followed  the  instruc-
tions which  he  had  received  through  another  vision,
and  actually  laid  his  hands  on  Saul,  in  the  very  Spirit
and  power  of  that  Jesus  whom  he  had  seen  in  vision
on  the  way,  then  Saul  received  his  sight,  and  was  fil-
led with  the  Holy  Ghost  :  and  then,  and  not  till  then,
did  he  know  Christ :  and  abiding  certain  days  with
the  disciples,  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the
synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God.

46.  It  is  evident,  that,  by  finding  his  union  to  An-
anias, a  member  of  the  Church,  he  found  his  union  to
Christ,  and  became,  himself,  a  member  of  Christ's
body,  and  a  joint  heir  to  the  promised  inheritance.
And  thus,  having  Christ  in  him, he  was  thereby  qual-
ified to  preach,  among  the  Gentiles,  the  same  gos-


P.  II.  THE  PRIMITIVE  CHURCH.  139

pel  of  salvation  and  eternal  life  ;  and  to  administer  CHV^P-
the  same  to  others  which  he  himself  had  received,  „ , mmg
not  as  of  man's  wisdom,  but  as  a  medium  of  revela-
tion.

47.  Hence  he  says  to  the  Galatians,  "  I certify,
brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of  me,  ^1,,,n,
is  not  alter  man. For  I  neither  received  it  of  man,
neither  was  I  taught  it,  but  by  the  revelation  of  Je-
sus Christ."

48.  And  in  the  same  sense  the  Galatians received
him,  not  as  man,  but  as  an  angel,  even  as Christ  Je-  chap.ir.
$us. And  to  the  Thessalonians  he  says,  "  When  ye  Jr^S
received  the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,  ye  i39i4,
received  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  (as  it  is  in  truth)

the  word  of  God. — For  ye  became  followers  of  the
churches  of  God,  which  in  Judea  are  in  Christ  Jesus.'*

49.  Thus  the  gospel  of  salvation,  in  its  Spirit  and
power,  was  conveyed  from  the  living  witnesses  and
members  of  Christ's  body,  to  those  who  had  it  not ;
and  among  those  who  received  faith,  the  younger
copied  the  example  of  the  elder  ;  and  by  the  one  un-
divided Spirit  which  they  received,  they  became  one
in  Christ,  as  Christ  and  God  are  one.

50.  It  was  the Word  of  God,  even  the  mystery,
■which  had  been  hid  from  ages,  and  from  generations,  ^Vand
that  was  made  manifest  unto the saints — which is  »•  2>3-.
Christ  in you,  saith  the apostle,  the  hope  of  glory.  6,7.
The  mystery  of  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ  ;

in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowl-
edge. And  this  treasure  was  committed  to  earthen
vessels.

51.  Then  where  else  could  that  wisdom  or  knowl-
edge be  found  but  in  that  mystery  ?  and  where  could
that  mystery  be  found  but  in  those  earthen  vessels  to
whom  it  was  committed?  There  is  no  salvation  in

any  other,  but  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  it  is  written,  "  For  Aetaiv.
there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven,  given  among  12t
men  whereby  we  must  be  saved."

52.  And  as  Christ  Jesus  was  revealed,  and  made
manifest  for  salvation,  in  his  saints  only,  and  unto  them
was  com  mined  all  power  to  remit  and  retain  sin,  and
ill  that  pertained  to  eternal  life  and  godliness  ;  there-
fore, without  the  boundary  of  the  church,  true  salva-

Q


140  THE  RISE  OF  ANTICHRIST  PREDICTED.  P.  II.

CvnP* ^on  was  never  found,  nor  separate  from  it,  could  one

soul  ever  find  deliverance  froth  the  reigning  power

of  sin.

.  53.  And  hence  are  the  words  of  St.  Peter  verified  ;

2Pet.i.3.  "  According  as  his  divine  power  hath  given  unto  us

ail  things  that  pel  tain  unto  life  and  godliness,  through

the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath  caiiea  us  to  glory  and

Uohnv.  virtue. " And  hence  also  those  of  St.  John  :  "  We

39'20* know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  that the  whole  world

lieth  in  wickedness. And we  know  that  the  Son  of

God  is  come,  and  hath  given us  an  understanding,

that  we  may  know  him that  is  true  ;  and  we  are  in

him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  So?i  J$su*  Christ. This

IS  THE  TRUE  GOD, AMD ETERNAL  LIFE.


CHAPTER  VII.

The  Rise  of  Antichrist  predicted.

T  is  certain  th?vt  neither  Christ  nor  the  apostles  ex-
pected the  continuance  of  that  order  and  povi  er,
in  which  the  Primitive  Church  stood  ;  but  on  every
occasion,  spake  of  the  work  in  which  they  were  en-
gaged, as  not  only  subject  to  be  corrupted,  but  plain-
ly foretold  that  it  would  be  supplanted,  by  a  false  spir-
it and  power,  which  would  prevail  against  the  truth,
and  overcome  it  for  a  certain  limited  time.

2.  And  in  this,  the  spirit  of  prophecy  which  was
in  them,  agreed  with  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,
who  had  spoken  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  of  a
beastly  dominion  that  was  to  arise,  and  make  Mar
against  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  and  overcome
and  triumph  over  them  for  a  season,  before  the  ulti-
mate glory  of  Christ's  kingdom  should  be  fully  estab-
lished.
*>a*.ii.  ^*  r^na  prophet  Daniel  gives  a  very  plain  and  stri-
51-45.  kim;  represent  it  ion  of  this,  in  opening  Nebuchad-
nezzar's vision  of  the  image,  which  represented  four
oppressive  kingdoms  or  earthh  governments,  the
last  of  which  was  to  be  more  universally  destructive
to  the  saints  than  any  of  the  former.


P. II.  THE  RISE  OF ANTICHRIST PREDICTED.  14i


CHAP.
Vll.


4.  The  same  was  also  shown  by  the  vision  of  four
great  beasts,  the  last  of  which  was  dreadful  and  ter-
rible, and  prefigured  an  oppressive  power  that  was  to  Daa.viL
devour  the  wht>le  earth,  and  tread  it  down,  and  break

it  in  pieces.

5.  To  Daniel  also  was  pointed  out  the  cutting  off  chap.  k.
of  the  Messiah— the  taking  away  of  the  daily  sacri-  ^^
fice — the  setting  up  of  the  abomination,  which  would
make  the  truth  desolate;  and  the  period  of  time  it  seeEae.
would  stand. And  most  of  the  prophets'have  spoken  *»▼«.
of  the  same  things,  particularly  Ezekiel.

6.  Christ  in  his  instructions  to  his  disciples,  is  very
pointed,  in  showing  them,  not  only  that  his  work  of
that  day  would  be  supplanted,  but  by  whom,  and  in
what  manner  it  would  be  effected.

7.  He forewarns them of  the coming of  false
christs,  [i.  e.  anti-christs,]  and  false  prophets,  who  Mt£1d>fnr"
would  shew  signs  and  wonders,  and,  if  k  were  possi-  ****/*
ble,  deceive  the very  elect— that  many  (not  a  few)  Lukesaa
would  come  in  his  net  me,  saying  /  am Christy  and
would  deceive  many.

8.  He  also  forewarns  them  that  Jerusalem  [literal-
ly and  spiritually]  would  be  compassed  about  with  ar-
mies, and  finally  taken,  and  the  abomination  of  deso-
lation spoken  of,  set  up  in  that  very  city  which  the
Saints  had  possessed,  and  from  which  they  should  flee
as  from  the  deepest  sink  of  corruption.

9.  And  St.  Paul,  in  his  epistie  to  the  Thessalonians,
concerning  the  day  of  Christ's  second  comings  says,

"  That  day  shall  not  come,  except  there  come  first  a  2Thes.
falling  away." — And  to  Timothy,  the  apostle  wrote  JjiinK-
of  the  Spirit's  speaking  expressly,  that  in  the  latter  i.
times  some  would  depart,  [or  stand  off]  Iron)  the  faith,
giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils.

10.  St.  John  also,  in  the  latter  days  of  his  time,
represents  the  true  Church,  in  his  book  of  Revelation,  Rer.siii
as  already  swiftly  on  the  decline,  as  may  be  seen  by

his  solemn  warnings  to  the  seven  churches  of  Asia.

11.  He  likewise  describes  the  growing  power  of
corruption  and  oppression,  under  the  figure  of  two
wild  beasts,  the  first  as  coming  up  out  of  the  sea,  and

the  second  out  of  the  earth,  which  exercised  all  the  R€V'*1&
power  of  the  first,  to  show the  continuance  of  the
same  beastly  power  in  another  form.


142  THE  RISE  OF  ANTICHRIST  PREDICTED.  P.  II.


CHAP.
VII.


12.  And  lastly,  he  represents  this  whole  compound

of  monstrous  wickedness,  under  the  figure  of  a  scar-

tter.xvii.  *et  coloured  beast,  whose  power  was  universal,  car-
rying a  Mother  of  Harlots,  with  whom  the  kings  of
the  earth  committed  fornication  and  lived  deliciously.

13.  It  is  clearly  manifest  from  all  that  is  recorded
in  Church  History,  that  such  an  apostacy  did  take
place,  as  entirely  excluded  the  Spirit  and  power  of
Christ  from  what  was  called  his  Church,  and  that  a
false  spirit  aiid  power  prevailed  in  that  church,  for
many  ages,  after  the  days  of  the  apostles.

14.  But  it  may  be  asked  whether  this  church  really
descended  from  the  Primitive  Church  of  Christ,  and
had  still  a  measure  of  the  same  spirit .? — or  whether
it  originated  wholly  from  another  source  ? — or  wheth-
er God  had  a  people  in  that  church  which  he  owned
as  the  church  of  Christ,  distinct  from  the  main  body
of  professors  I — or  whether  there  were  a  pure  church
preserved  on  the  earth,  vested  with  the  apostolic
power,  altogether  distinct  from  that  corrupt  body  ?
These  are  questions  which  have  furnished  matter  of
great  debate,  and  many  researches  ;  but  could  never
be  decided  by  all  the  powers  of  argument.

15.  For  the  prophecies,  being  mostly  sealed  up
3^2030.  llTK^er  tne  figurative  language  of  the  inspired  writers,
2  p'et.  ii.  were  liable  to  any  application  which  the  ingenuity  of
«hap  iH.  the  learned  might  contrive  ;  they  were  therefore  not
l'joh-ai  intended  to  be  understood,  any  faster  than  they  were
is  iv  3.  actually  fulfilled,  that  the  truth  of  things  might  be  es-
Jpde4,i8  tabiished  by  an  appeal  to  matters  of  fact.  As  said  the
j>»n..Mi.  angei  to  the  prophet  Daniel,  "  Go  thy  way  Daniel;

for  th<  words  arc  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  time  of
the  end."

16.  Therefore,  as  the  time  of  the  end  is  actually
come  in  which  those  predictions  have  had  their  time
and  accomplishment,  it  will  be  proper  and  necessary
to  discover  the  true  source  and  influence  of  that  false
power  called  AntichH?t,by  which  the  nations  and  king-
doms of  the  earth  were  deceived  for  ages,  and  brought
into  bondage  the  most  wicked  and  oppressive,  and  by
which  the  cause  of  true  virtue  was  trodden  under  foot,

.' „ and  became  unknown — that  now,  the  thoughts  of  ma*
as.  ny  hearts  may  be  revealed.


%  -  — -I «

THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  III.

THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF
ANTICHRISTS  KINGDOM.

CHAPTER  I.

The  Work  of  Antichrist,  by  false  Teachers*

THE word Antichrist,  was  first  used by  the  C**AP*
afiostles,  and, -doubtless,  what  gave  occasion  to *
it,  took  its  rise  in  their  day. This  singular  name  is
compounded  of these  two Greek words,  otvrt  and
X?l?°Sy*  which signify  against Christ; so  that  the * Anti
term  Antichrist,  includes  whatever  is  against  Christ;  chmtos.
but  was  originally  intended  to  apply,  more particu-
larly,  to  such  as  under  a  pretence  of  acting  in  the
name  of  Christ,  acted  with  a  spirit  directly  against  the^
Spirit  of  Christ.

2.  Therefore  this  term,  as  used  by  the  apostles,
had  no  reference  to  the  superstitious  Jews,  nor  idol-
atrous Pagans,  who  made  no  profession  of  faith  in
Christ ;  but  was  generally  confined  to  such  as  through
a  pretence  of  faith  in  Christ  and  obedience  to  the  gos-
pel, claimed  an  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Church,
and  thereby  took  occasion  to  pervert  and  corrupt  it.
And  as  there  were  many  of  this  description,  who
rose  up  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  St.  John  express-
ly says,  Even  now  are  there  many  Antichrists ;  where-'.  J8.
by  we  know  that  it  is  the  last  time.

3.  As  if  he  had  said,  There  are  already  many  in
the  world,  who  profess  Christ,  but  do  not  possess
him  ;  who  own  him  in  words,  but  deny  him  in  works  ;
who  talk  about  the  spirit,  but  walk  afur  the  feshy

Q2


Rom.  x.


144  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST, BY  P.  III.

chap. anc|  confess  not  th.H  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  :

vhis is tti.tt spirit of Antichrist) whereof  ye  have

Uotm  heard  that  it  should  come,  and  even  now  already  is  it
iv,3«  in  the  world.  Whereby  we  know  that  h  is  the  last
time  Satan  shall  ever  take  the  advantage  of  a  revela-
tion from  heaven,  to  corrupt  and  supplant  the  work
of  God,  as  these  hypocrites  are  doing.  They  went
out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us  ;  for  if  they
had  been  of  us,  they  would  have  continued  with  us.

4.  From  this  it  is  evident,  that  Antichrist  was  not
a  particular  man,  but  a  spirit,  which  assumed  the
name  and  authority  of  Christ*  and  made  its  way  into
many  deceitful  and  false-hearted  men,  who  pretend-
ed to  be  the  followers  of  Christ,  while  their  practice
was  pointedly  against  him  :  and  from  the  very  nature
of  the  work  of  Christ  in  that  day,  it  seems  that  such
impositions  were  unavoidable.

5.  According  to  the  commission  of  the  apostles,
the  gospel  was  to  be  preached  to  every  creature,  and
no  distinction  made  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek,

J£  the  learned  and  the  unlearned  ;  and  as  it  was  receiv-

ed, at  least  in  word,  by  ail  characters  ;  so  none  were
prohibited  from  teaching  to  others,  what  they  them-
selves had  learned.

6.  Hence  many  false  teachers  took  occasion,  to
modify  the  doctrines  of  Christ  according  to  their  own
carnal  taste,  or  that  of  others,  and  to  explain  them,
in  such  a  manner,  as  to  avoid  those  persecutions,  to
which  the  honest  and  faithful  were  exposed.  In  par-
ticular, many  of  the  Jews,  whose  rites  and  ceremo-
nies had  become  honourable  in  the  world,  continued
to  practise  those  superstitious  rites  which  had  no
further  connexion  with  the  faith  or  practice  of  the
gospel.

7.  Thus,  by  putting,  as  it  were,  a  piece  of  new
cloth  upon  the  old  garment,  they  claimed  their  re-
lation to  the  Church,  and  at  the  same  time  retained
the friendship of the world. Hence St.  Paul  ob-

Gal.  vi. £crveS; — As  many  as  desire  to  makr  a  fair  sh^nv  in  the
flesh,  they  constrain you to  be  circumcised ;  only  lest
thy  ih rata f:  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ.

8.  Many  also  of  the  profligate  Pagans,  who  were
Convicted  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  and  constrained


P.  III.  FALSE  TEACHERS.  145

to  seek some  measure  of  union  to  the followers  of  cr*AP-

Christ,  early  took  the same  deceitful  liberty  of  per-

verting  the  truth,  and  mixing  it  with  their  carnal
reasonings, •  and  even  introducing*,  under  the  chris-
tian mime,  their  licentious  doctrines,  and  impious
festivals,  and  committing  such  abominations  as  were
not  so  much  as  named  among  other  Gentiles.

9.  Hence  it  is  jusily  remarked  by  Qster%vald,  that,

"  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  there  were  carnal  men,  ch.The«

4  who,  under  the  pretext  of  grace,  and  christian  lib-  p*

4  erty,  introduced  licentiousness,  refused  to  suffer  per-

i  secutions,  and who  gave  themselves  over  to  carnal

*  lusts. These  were  in  a  spirited  manner  opposed  by *

i  James,  Judc,  Peter,  in  his  second  epistle,  and  John\

4  in  his  epistles,  and  Revelation."

10.  As  Christ  began  to  prepare  the  way  for  his
kingdom,  by  leaching  his  followers  to  deny  ungodli-
ness and  worldly  lusts  ;  so  on  the  other  hand,  Anti-
christ began  his  work,  by  false  teachers,  and  false
doctrines.  Such  were  the  first  means  employed  in
corrupting  and  weakening  the  truth  ;  and  such  have
had  a  principal  hand  in  establishing  that  kingdom*
which  is  Christ's  in  name,  but  Antichrist's  in  its  very
nature.  ■

1 1.  It  was  not  only  foreseen  and  testified  by  Christ,
that  such  deceitful  workers  would  come  ;  but  the
apostles,  who  were  anointed  from  heaven  as  witnesses
of  the  truth,  testified  that  they  had  already  appeared
in  their  day  :  which  may  be  seen  from  the  slightest
examination  of  their  writings.

12.  The words  of  Jesus  are plain:  "  Beware  of  Matt.  v&
false  fir ofthets,  which come to  you  in  sheep? s  clothing,  15' l6*

hut  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves. Ye  shall  know
them  by  their  fruits. — Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  XX2r'  '
you  ;  for  many  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am-
Christ ;  and  shall  deceive  many."

13.  The same thing  was  predicted  by  St.  Peter,  2pet.ff.
saying,  "•  There  shall  be  false  teachers  among  you,  1~18,
who  privily  shall  bring  in damnable heresies,  even
denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  and  bring  upon
themselves switt  destruction. And many  shall  fol-
low their  pernicious  ways  ; by  reason  of  whom  the

way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of. — -Sporting  them-


146  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST,  BY  P.  III.

chap.  seives  with  their  own  deceivings. — Having  eyes  full
mmmmmmam  of  adultery,  and  that  cannot  cease  from  bin  ;  beguil-
ing unstable  souls. — For  when  they  speak  great  swel-
ling words  of  vanity,  they  allure  through  •the  lusts  of
the  flesh,  through  much  wantonness,  those  that  were
clean  escaped  from  them  who  live  in  error."

14.  These  same  false  teachers,  according  to  the
testimony  of  St.  Jude,  had  already  made  their  ap-
pearance in  his  day.  Thus  says  he,  "  It  was  need-
ful for  me  to  write  unto  you,  and  exhort  you,  that  ye
should  earnestly  contend  for  the  faith  which  was  once

xudeM.  delivered  unto  the  saints.  For  there  are  certain  men
crept  in  unawares,  who  were  before  of  old  ordained
(described*)  to  this  condemnation;  ungodly  men,
turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness,  and
denying  the  only  Lord.  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."

15.  This  plainly  implies  that  these  deceivers  were
neither  professed  Jews  nor  Pagans,  but  some  among
the  professed  followers  of  Christ,  who  in  fact  denied
both  God  and  Christ,  by  new-modelling  that  precious
faith  and  testimony  of  Jesus,  which  had  been  deliver-
ed, once  for  all,  to  the  apostles,  not  to  be  mended  or
expounded  by  human  wisdom,  but  to  be  punctually
obeyed.

16.  Again  :  St  Paul,  in  his  kst  address  to  the  EI-
Aetsxx.  ders  at  tifihesus,  delivers  this  plain  prediction  :  "  I
»9,3& know  this,  that  after  my  departing, shall  grievous

-wolves  come  in  among  you,  not  sparing  the  flock.
Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking
perverse  things,  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them."

17.  This  same  apostle  warns  the  Romans  against
^?8*Xiv!  some?  w^°  caused  divisions  and  offences,  contrary  to

the  doctrine  which  they  had  learned.  And  what  had
they  learned,  but  to  take  up  their  cross  and  follow  the
apostle,  as  he  followed  Christ  ?  To  this  plain  doc-
trine these  false  teachers  were  contrary.  Therefore
he  adds,  "  They  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  but  their  own  belly  ;  and  by  good  words

*  By  the  expression  in  the  original  (palai  ftrogegrammenoij  may  be  understood
those  who  wevefcnmerli/  described,  or  pointed  out  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
through  which  the  iniquities  of  the  latter  times  had  been  foretold,  together  with
tJbe  judgment  and  condemnation  that  would  fall  upon  those  who  lived  in  such
tilings.


P.  IIL  FALSE  TEACHERS.  147

and  fair  speeches  deceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple.  CH£P-
For  your  obedience  hath  come  abroad."

18.  Here  the  difference  is  visibly  marked  between
those  who  served  the Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  were
obedient,  and  those  who  corrupted  the  pure  precepts  Phii.au
of  the  gospel  from  their  original  meaning,  that  they  w*  '
might  take  the  liberty of  serving  their  own  beastly
bellies.

19.  Again: To  the  Corinthian? ,  he  speaks  of  ma~

ny  which  corrupt  the word  of  God — who  were,  false  2Cor.fi.
apostles, deceitful  workers, transforming themselves  xiis,  l*.

into  the  apostles  of  Christ ; ministers  of  Satan, —

transformed  as  the  ministers  of  righteousness  ;  whose
end  ^saysthe  apostle)  shall  be  according  to  their  works,

20.  The  same kind  of  deceivers  he  describes  to
Timothy,  as,  "  having  a.  form  of  godiiness,  but  de-  2Tim.i&
nying  the  power  thereof: from  such  (says  he)  turn  5>6,T*
away. For  of  this sort  are they which creep  into
houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  women  laden  with  sins,

led  away  by  divers  lusts;  ever  learning,  and  never
abie  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."

21.  And  to  Titus,  he  observes,—44  There  are  many  Tit.lio.
unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  they  n»&1§*
of  the  circumcision  : whose  mouths  must  be  stopped,

who  subvert  whole  houses,  teaching  things  which
they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake. — They  profess
that  they  know  God  ;  but  in  works  they  deny  him,  be-
ing abominable,  and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good
work  reprobate."  Can  there  be  a  plainer  description
of  an  Antichrist  ?

22.  It  would  be  almost  an  endless  work  to  enume-
rate the  marks  which  were  given  to  distinguish  these
perverters  of  the  truth  :  they  were  jusciy  called  Trai-  jT:m.SL
tors, heady, highminded, lovers of  pi 'azures, more 3— 4-
than  lovers  of  God.— Incontinent,  f  tree,  des /users  of
those  that  are  good.— -* Proud,  knowing  nothing,  in  re-  iTim.vi.
ality ,  but  doting  about,  questions,  and  strifes  cf  words, —  4>5-
perverse  disfiuters~-+men  of  corrupt  minds,  and  desti-
tute of  the  truth.

23.  Such  were  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ,— -

the  liars,  the evil  beasts,  the  slow  bellies,  who  were  Tit.  i.  12.
reproved  sharply  by  the  faithful  ;  but  whose  progress
was  not  stopped  by  all  the  authority  even  of  the  apos-
tles themselves.


148  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST,  BY  P.  Ill,

€H£P* 24..  John,  who  outlived  all  the  other  apostles,  and
-  had  the  greatest  opportunity  of  seeing  the  increase

and  fruits  of  these  false  teacher  s,  is  also  very  particu-
lar in  his  testimony  concerning  them.  His  three
episties,  which  were  written  near  the  close  of  the
first  century,  appear  to  have  been  written  for  the  pur-
pose of  distinguishing  between  the  followers  of  Christ,
and  Antichrist .

25.  Hence,  so  much  is  said  in  the  first  epistle,  to
establish  that  fundamental  truth,  that  the  followers  of

Uohniii.  Christ  do  not  commit  sin.  "  Little  children,  let  no
~~  **  man  deceive  you ;  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is
righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous.  Whosoever  abi-
deth  in  him  sinneth  not  :  whosoever  sinneth  hath  not
seen  him,  neither  known  him. — He  that  committeth
sin  is  of  the  Devil. — Whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth
not  commit  sin. — In  this  the  children  of  God  are  man-
ifest, and  the  children  of  the  Devil  :  whosoever  do-
eth not  righteousness  is  not  of  God.— He  that  keep-
eth  his  commandments,  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in
him."

26.  The  whole  of  this  epistle  plainly  shows  that
Christ  was  in  his  true  followers,  and  they  in  him;
not  by  imputing,  or  imagining  it  to  be  so,  but  by  a
vital  and  substantial  union  ;  which  was  manifest  by
comparing  their  fruits,  with  the  first  fruits  of  the
spirit  in  Jesus  :  and  consequently,  that  the  only  true
God  and  eternal  life,  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  as
visible  and  real  in  them,  as  formerly  in  Jesus  the
first  begotten  from  the  dead.

27.  While  on  the  other  hand,  these  false  teachers,
denied  Christ's  being  in  the  flesh,  and  put  him  at  a
distance:  instead  'of  denying  self  they  denied  both
the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  and  therefore  stiil  continued
in  their  former  wicked  works,  which  proved  that  they
were  yet  of  the  Devil,  and  not  even  begotten  of  God,

i  John  v.  for,  "  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  [gr.  r^pa,
strictly  ivatcheth]  himself  and  that  wicked  one  touch-
ed* him  not."

28.  This  is  the  testimony  of  St.  John  ;  and  we
know  that  his  testimony  is  true,  because  he  had  the
Spirit  of  truth,  from  both  the  Father  and  the  Son,
abiding  in  him.


13.


P.  III.  FALSE  TEACHERS.  Uf

29.  Again  :  In  his  epistle  to  the  elect  lady  and  her
children,  he  draws  trie  same  line  of  distinction.
"  This  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  command-
ments :"  as  if  he  had  said,  God  is  love — and  this
is  God,  that  we  walk  after  bis  commandments.
"  This  is  the  commandment,  that,  as  ye  have  heard
from  the  beginning,  ye  should  walk  in  it."

30.  u  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not
in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God  ;  he  that  abi-
deth in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Fa-
ther and  the  Son.  If  there  come  any  unto  you  and
bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your
[gr.  otKioiv^l  famihj  yor  communion,}  neither  bid  him
[gr.  %otipttv~]  rejoice."

3  1 .  "  i  oi  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world,
who  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the
flesh."  Who  walk  not  after  his  commandments,  but
after  their  own  lusts  ;  who  own  the  doctrine  of  Christ
to  be  from  heaven,  but  transgress  it,  and  keep  it  not :
and  whosoever  he  be  that  answers  to  this  character,
mark  it  weil ;  JCT*  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  Antichrist.  2  John  7.

32.  In  his  third  and  last  epistle,  the  beloved  apostle
makes  the  distinction,  if  possible,  more  plain  and  sim-
ple ;  in  which  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and  of  Antichrist,
are  manifested  in  their  respective  followers,  Gains,
and  Diotrefih&e.

33.  To  Gains  he  saith,  "  Beloved — I  rejoiced  great-  sj<*b$
ly  when  the  brethren  came,  and  testified  of  the  truth  4>5'
that  is  in  thee,  even  as thou  walkest  in  the  truth. I

have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children
walk  in  truth.  Beloved,  thou  doest  faithfully  what-
soever thou  doest  to  the  brethren,  and  to  str  ingers."

34.  Thus  it  is  evident,  that,  by  walking  in  the  truth,
and  faithfully  doing  the  commandments  of  Christ,
Gains  was  accepted  ;  and  particularly,  in  observing
that  saying  of  Christ  which  was  from  the  beginning  :
Verily  i  say  unto  yon,  in  as  miu h  as  ye  hive  done  it  Mat.xxv.
unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done

it  unto  me.

35.  But  how  manifest  is  the  contrary  character  ?

"  I  wrote  unto  the  church  :  but  Diotrefihcs>  who  iov-  3  j0hn#,
eth  to  have  the  pre-eminence  among  them,  recciveth  10>u«
us  not. Wherefore,  if  I  come,  I  will  remember  his


15©  THE  WORK  OF  AffTICHRST.  P.  III.

chap- deeds  which  he  doeih,  prating  against  us  with  mali-
' cious  words  ;  and  not  con'.cnt  therewith  ;  neither  doth
he  himself  receive  the  brethren,  and  forbitiueJi  them
that  would,  and  casteth  them  out  of  the  church."

36.  "  He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God;  but  he  that
doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God."  This  is  the  touch-
stone, and  by  this,  Diotnfihes  is  proved  to  be  an  An-
tichrist in  perfect  shape.  He  loved  to  have  the  pre-
eminence ;  not  widing  to  be  the  least  of  all,  and  ser-
vant oi  all — to  humble  himself,  and  esteem  others
better  than  himself,  according  to  the  gospel.

37.  Again  :  He  received  not  those  whom  John  had
sent ;  oi  course  he  received  not  John,  neither  him
that  had  sent  him,  nor  him  that  was  from  the  begin-
ning. Thus,  he  at  once  rejected  Christ,  and  subvert-
ed the  whole  order  of  the  gospel ;  and  having  nei-
ther the  Father  nor  the  Son,  what  could  he  have  but
the  spirit  of  Antichrist  ?

38.  The  reason  why  this  deceiver  did  not  receive
the  brethren,  is  particularly  noticed  by  the  apostle  :
Because  that  in  the  name  of  God  they  went  forth,  tak-
ing nothing  of  the  Gentiles.  Those  faithful  minis-
ters of  Christ,  would  neither  take  any  part  of  the  gen-
tile superstitions*  wherewith  to  corrupt  the  gospel,
and  accommodate  it  to  the  taste  of  the  wicked  ;  nor
would  they  take  any  hire  for  their  labours  in  the  gos-
pel ;  either  of  which  was  sufficient  to  stir  up  Biotre-
fihcs  against  them.

39.  For  Antichrist  never  could  endure  sound  doc-
trine, nor  bear  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  as  delivered
in  his  name,  without  any  mixture  or  false  covering  ;
neither  could  he  ever  support  his  dignity,  without  a
revenue  from  his  subjects.  Thus  we  see,  at  so  early
a  period,  not  only  the  distinction,  but  the  division,
between  Christ  and  Antichrist.

40.  For  if  Diotrephcs  cast  those  out  of  the  church,
that  would  receive  John  and  the  brethren,  what  k'nd
of  a  church  must  have  remained  ?  Must  it  not,  upon
the  plainest  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  have
been  a  united  body  of  fir oft ssed  Christians ,  who  would
neither  receive  the  Father,  nor  the  Son,  nor  even
hold  in  fellowship,  any  one,  who  would  receive  either?

41.  So  far,  then, did  the work  of  Antichrist  ad-


3  Jeirn  7,


P.  HI.  FALSE  TEACHERS.  151

vance  in  the  first  century,  that  he had  a  body,  in CH£P-

which  he  could  live,  and  by  which  he  could  work,  ac-

cording  to  his  own  deceitful  plan,  for  the  under-
mining, and  supplanting  the  true  spirit  and  power  of
the  gospel.

42.  And  it  further  appears,  from  the  revelation
to  John,  in  the  isle  of  Patmos,  that,  in  all  the  Gentile
churches  scattered  abroad,  Antichrist  had  more  or  less
of  his  subjects,  at  this  period,  who,  JDiotrefihes-like,
were  striving  for  the  pre-eminence.  This  will  rea-
sonably appear  to  have  been  the  case,  from  a  view  of
the  situation  of  the  seven  churches  of  Asia.

43.  The  angel  of  the  church  of  Efihesus^  had  to
contend  with  those  that  said  they  were  apostles,  and  Jf^o?'*1
were  not,  but  were  liars  ;  and  also  with  the  Nicolai-

tans,  who  held  a  community  of  wives.  At  Smyrna ,
were  similar  blasphemers,  who  said  they  were  Jews,
and  were  not  ;  but  in  reality,  were  of  the  synagogue
of  Satan.

44.  In  Perga??ios,  where  Satan  had  his  seat,  they
had  those  who  held  the  doctrine  of  Balaam — who
taught  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit
fornication  ;  and  also  those  who  held  the  doctrine
of  the  Nicolaitans.  At  Thyatira,  that  lying  Jeze-
bel, who  called  herself  a  prophetess,  was  suffered  to
seduce  the  professed  servants  of  Christ,  to  commit
fornication,  and  adultery,  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed
unto  idols.

45.  There  were  but  a  few  names  in  Sardis,  which  f1/?;*'
had  not  defiled  their  garments.  Philadelphia  had  but
a  little  strength  ;  and  Laodicea  was  lukewarm,  nei-
ther cold  nor  hot,  for  which  cause,  says  Christ,  "  I
will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."  Yet  amidst  all
the  deceitful  working  of  lying  apostles,  filthy,  de-
bauched and  lukewarm  professors,  there  remained
still  a  few,  who  had  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  said
unto  the  churches.


4,8,16.


R


152  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST,  BY  P.  III.

CHAPTER  II.

The  Work  of  Antichrist ,  by  Egyptian  Philosophers.

€IiiP' T^  ^e  Degmnm&>  ^od  9nose  the  foolish  things  of
* JL  the  world,  to  confound  the  wise,  and  weak  things
icor.  L of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty  ;  and  not  many
*•• wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  ma-
ny noble  were  called.

2.  But  in  process  of  time,  vther\  false  teachers  had
perverted  the  truth  from  its  original  simplicity,  and
modified  the  doctrines  of  Christ  to  suit  the  taste  of
the  wicked  ;  then  the  gospel,  as  it  was  called,  in  this
corrupted  state,  began  to  be  advocated  by  many
among  the  wise  and  prudent  of  the  world  ;  and  in
proportion  as  their  number  and  influence  increased,
the  order  of  things  was  changed,  and  the  wisdom  of
man  was  introduced  as  the  foundation  of  faith,  instead
of  the  power  of  God.

3.  The  true  order  of  God  required  living  witnesses,
who  were  united  to  Christ,  by  a  perfect  obedience  to
his  example,  and  none  could  stand  in  that  order,  as
Jesus  testified,  but  such  as  denied  themselves,  arid
took  up  their  cross  against  every  carnal  lust,  and
walked  even  as  he  walked.

CK.Theo 4*  ^ut Osterwald well observes, "  Carnal men
p.  332. <  could  not  endure  the  cross,  nor  divest  themselves

<  of  the  love  of  wealth  and pleasures,  and  by  these

*  means  corrupted  the  pure  doctrine  of  the  gospel."

5.  It  was  impossible  for  carnal  men,  who  lived  in
wealth  and  pleasures,  to  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ,
the  true  power  of  the  gospel,  abiding  in  them.  And
as  their  pride  and  presumption  prompted  them  to
stand  at  the  head  of  affairs,  they  wickedly  contrived
means  of  getting  a  false  power  ;  which  was  effected
by  substituting  the  letter  in  the  room  of  the  Spirit,
and  assuming  the  authority  of  expounding  the  wri-
tings of  the  apostles  by  the  rules  of  a  blind  philoso-
phy, which  carnal  men  like  themselves  had  invented.
**W1*  6.  Hence  says  Osterwald ;  "  From  the  time  that
4  the  tenets  and  methods  ot -philosophers  were  blen-

*  ded  with  tne  christian  religion,  which  is  very  sim-

<  pie,  all  things  began  to  degenerate."


P,  III.  EGYPTIAN  PHILOSOPHIES.  153

7.  As  early,  at  least,  as  the  second  century,  this  c"£p#

change  in  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  gospel  „

was  introduced,  that,  instead  of  receiving  and  treat-  seeEcci.
ing  those  that  were  sent  in  the  order  of  God,  as  an-  "p*'^'
gels  of  the  Lord,  even  as  Christ  Jesus,  the  whole

of  the  scriptures,  both  the  old  and  new  testament,  so
called,  were  adopted  as  the  basis  of  truth,  and  pub-
licly read  and  expounded  by  the  wicked  and  wise  of
the  world,  as  th*  great  rule  of  faith  and  manners.

8.  Those  vain  men  gradually  effaced  the  beautiful
simplicity  of  the  gospel,  by  the  laborious  efforts  of
human  learning,  and  the  dark  subtiities  of  imaginary  'Ij^vii,
science  ;  and  the  tenets  of  a  chimerical  fihilosofihy
were  incorporated  into  the  Christian  system  :  for,  as
Mosheim  says,  "  they  thought  it  a  very  fine  accom-

<  plishment,  to  be  able  to  express  the  precepts  of
4  Christ,  in  the  language  of  fihilosoflhersy  civilians^
i  and  rabbins"

9.  From  this  it  is  easy  to  see  what  kind  of  a  gospel
was  established,  when  the  whole  of  the  Jev/ish  scrip-
tures, which  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  themselves
could  not  understand,  together  with  the  writings  of
the  apostles,  were  explained  by  carnal  men,  whose
education  and  manners  rendered  them  as  widely  dif-
ferent from  the  apostles,  as  Belial  is  different  from
Christ.  Sureiy  such  a  revolution  could  effect  nothing
short  of  a  total  ship- wreck  of  the  living  faith  of  the
Son  of  God.

10.  This  change  was  gradually  introduced  ;  and
the  means  by  which  it  was  effected,  are  particularly
worthy  of  notice  ;  which  according  to  the  history  of
those  times,  consisted  in  substituting  human  learning
in  the  place  of  the  illuminating  influence  of  the  Holy
Ghost :  and  this  was  done,  not  by  any  council  from
the  apostles,  or  any  that  stood  in  the  order  of  God  ;
but  by  the  cunning  craftiness  of  men,  who  were  des-
titute of  the  truth.

1 1.  "  The  first,  and  the  most  fatal  of  all  events  to  Ecci.rn*
*  the  primitive  religion,  (says  Robinson,)  was  the  J*^**
4  setting  up  of  a  christian  academy  at  Alexandria,  in

«  Egufit.  Christians  had  been  reproached  with  iliit-
1  eracy,  and  this  seemed  a  plausible  method  to  get
«  rid  of  the  scandal."


1S4  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST,  BY  P.  III.


CHAP
II.


12."  This  school  was  first  kept  by  Pantaenus,  whom
4  Clement  first  assisted,  and  then  succeeded,  as  Origen
4  did  him.  Each  improved  upon  his  predecessor,  and
4  all  together  invented  questions  about  the  christian
4  religion,  sufficient  to  perplex  and  puzzle  the  whole
4  world." — To  this  may  be  added  the  following  ac-
count from  Moshcim,
»«.Hist.  13.  "  Towards  the  conclusion  of  this  [second]  cen-
1*4  \£i.  '  *-UIT>  a  new  sect  °f  philosophers  arose  on  a  sudden,
4  spread  with  amazing  rapidity  throughout  the  great-
4  est  part  of  the  Roman  empire,  swallowed  up  almost
4  all  other  sects,  and  was  extremely  detrimental  to
4  the  cause  of  Christianity."

14.  "  Alexandria  in  Egyfit,  which  had  been,  for  a
4  long  time,  the  seat  of  learning,  and,  as  it  were,  the
4  centre  of  all  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences,  gave  birth
'  to  this  new  philosophy  ;  which  was  embraced  by
4  such  of  the  Alexandrian  christians  as  were  desirous
4  to  retain,  with  the  profession  of  the  gospel,  the
4  title,  the  dignity,  and  the  habit  of  philosophers."
Bom. i.  15.  Thus,  professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they
became  fools,  even  vain  in  their  imagination  ;  and  as
they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,
God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  those
things  which  are  not  convenient.  -
Eeci.Ro  16.  It  is  stated  by  Robinson,  that,  "  From  a  wild
l».5i.  *  '  enthusiastical  philosopher  of  Alexandria^  named
4  Ammonius  Saccas,  these  men  imbibed  a  chaos  of
4  gross  errors  called  philosophy.  Vain  questions
4  about  matter  and  spirit ;  the  whole  and  the  parts,
4  human  souls,  demons,  he.  were  all  applied,  by  these
4  men,  to  the  christian  religion  ;  and  the  inspired
4  writers  put  upon  the  rack,  and  tortured  to  give  an-
4  swers  and  determine  points,  of  which  probably  they
4  had  never  heard  the  names,  and  never  entertained  a
4  thought."

17.  And  who  were  these  men,  but  the  highly  re-
spected Fathers  and  founders  of  that  which,  for  ma-
ny ages,  has  been  called  the  christian  system  ?  In  the
E«.iiist.  first  place,  this  new  philosophy  had  the  particular
15. *' P*  approbation  of  Athenagoras,  Pantaenus,  Clemens^
the  Alexandrian,  and  all  those  who,  in  this  century,
were  charged  with  the  care  of  the  public  school,
which  the  Christians  had  at  Alexandria.


*. III.  EGYPTIAN  PHILOSOPHERS,  1 5  2j

18.  "  The  title  and  dignity  of  philosophers  delight- C**£P.
eel  so  much  these  vain  men,  that,  though  they  were


advanced  in  the  church  to  the  rank  of  presbyters,  Eccl  Re
1  they  would  not  abandon  the  philosopher's  cloak. " p.^!**

19.  "  These  sages  were  of  opinion,  that  true  phi-

4  losophy,  the  most  salutary  gift  of  God  to  mortals,  tor£,'voT
4  was  scattered  in  various  portions  through  all  the  *•?•!«>•
4  different  [Pagan]  sects  ;  and  that  it  was  the  duty  of
'  every  wbe  man,  and  more  especially  of  every  chris-
4  tian  doctor,  to  gather  it  from  the  several  corners,
4  where  it  lay  dispersed,  and  to  employ  it,  thus  re-
4  united,  in  the  defence  of  religion."  From  hence
they  were  called  Eclectics,  [i.  e. Selecters.~]

20.  The  former  Egyfitian  fihilosofihers,  from  whom
these  Alexandrian  doctors  selected  the materials  of .,.,
their  system,  held,  "  That  in  every  sect  there  was  a  roi.i.p.
4  mixture  of good  and  bad,  of  truth and  falsehood,  16T*

4  and  accordingly  they  chose  and  adopted  out  of  each
\  of  them,  such  tenels  as  seemed  to  them  conformable
4  to  reason  and  truth,  and  rejected  such  as  they  thought
4  repugnant  to  both,,,

21.  Here  then,  appears  the  ground-work  of  what
has  long  passed  in  a  deceived  world,  under  the  hon-
orable name  of  Christianity,  and  upon  which  the
Alexandrian  Doctors  began  their  building.

22.  "  Ammonias Saccas, (says Maclaine^) was  a ibid

4  christian,  who  adopted  with  such  dexterity  the  doc-  Note[mj
4  trines  of  the  Pagan  philosophy,  as  to  appear  a  chris-
4  tian  to  the  christians,  and  a  pagan  to  the  pagans."
And  says  Mosheim  ;  "  As  his  genius  was  vast  and
4  comprehensive,  so  were  his  projects  bold  and  sin-
gular. For  he  attempted  a  reconciliation  or  coali-
4  tion  of  all  sects,  whether  philosophical  or  religious,
4  and  taught  a  doctrine,  which  he  looked  upon  as
4  proper  to  unite  them  all,  the  christians  not  except-
4  ed,  in  the  most  perfect  harmony."

23.  He  maintained,  that  the  great  principles  of  all ibW

4  philosophical  and  religious  truth,  were  to  be  found, p.  168,
equally,  in  all  sects  ;  that  they  differed  from  each

4  other,  only  in their  method  of  expressing  them,
and  in  some opinions  of  little  or  no  importance  ;

4  and  that  by  a  proper  interpretation  of  their  respec-

R2


156  THE  WORKS  OF ANTICHRIST,  BY  P.  III.

chap, i  tive  sentiments,  they  might  easily  be  united  into  one
.<  body."

24.  "  How  this  vast  project  was  effected  by  Am*
4  monius,  the  writings  of  his  disciples  and  followers,
4  that  yet  remain,  abundantly  testify. — All  the  gentile
4  religions,  and  even  the  christian,  were to  be  ex-

*  plained  by  the  principles"  of  this  universal  philoso-
4  phy  ;  but  that,  in  order to  this,  the fables  of  the

*  priests  were  to  be  removed  from  paganism,  and  the
4  comments  and  interpretations  of  the  disciples  of
4  Jesus  from  Christianity."

25.  How  evidently  does  this  deep  laid  scheme  of
Antichrist  strike  at  the  very  foundation  of  the  gospel,
by  excluding  the  disciples  of  Jesus  from  the  liberty
of  interpreting  their  own  original  doctrine !  And  if
the  foundation  be  destroyed  what  shall  the  righteous

feci. Re-  do  ? "  Some christians, (says  Robinson,) foresaw

p.a5i.e8*  i  the  mischief  that  this school would produce,  and

4  remonstrated  against  it ;  but  they soon  sunk into

4  neglect  and  contempt."

Ecci.His- 26-  "  The number  of  learned  men, (says  Mos-

i°lT'i72L  4  heim,) among  the  christians,  which  was  very  small

4  in  the  preceding  century,  grew  considerably  in  this,

4  [second  century  .J The most  part were  philoso-

4  phers  attached  to  the  EclecPk  system^  though  they

4  were  not  all  of  the  same  sentiments  concerning  the

4  utility  of  letters  and  philosophy."

?oH  27.  "  Hence  the  early  beginnings  of  that  unhappy

*'  i73* 4  contest  between  faith  and  reason,  religion  and  fihi-

4  losophy,  fiiety  and  genius,  which  increased  in the

4  succeeding  ages, and  is  prolonged, even  to our

4  times,  with  a  violence  that  renders  it  extremely  difn-

4  cult  to  be  brought  to  a  conclusion."

28.  "  Those  who  maintained  that  learning  and  phi-

*  losophy  were  rather  advantageous,  than  detrimen-
4  tal,  to  the  cause  of  religion,  gained,  by  degrees,  the
4  ascendant ;  and  in  consequence  thereof,  laws  were
4  enacted,  which  excluded  the  ignorant  and  illiterate
4  from  the  office  of  public  teachers.  The  opposite
4  side  of  the  question  was  not,  however,  without  de-
4  fenders  ;  [Heretics  ;]  and  the  defects  and  vices  of
4  learned  men  and  philosophers  contributed  much  to
4  increase  their  number."


P.  IH.  EGYPTIAN PHILOSOPHERS.  157

29.  Doubtless,  to  remedy  this  inconvenience,  these c^ap.
learned  Pharisees  invented  many  of  those  austere  and '
monkish  rules  of  discipline,  which  neither  they  nor
their  followers  ever  observed  ;  but  merely  to  blind  the

eyes  of  the  ignorant,  and  carry  the  appearance  of  sanc-
tity to  the  multitude,  they  taught  the  propriety  of  such
rules,  of  discipline,  as  a  necessary  part  of  their  system.

30.  "  To  this  monstrous  coalition  of  heterogeneous

c  doctrines, (says  Mosh.eim,)  its  fanatical  author ad-  t0ry,'voT

4  ded  a  rule  of  life  and manners,  which  carried  an  l-P-170«

4  aspect  of  high sanctity,  and  uncommon  austerity.

'  As  Ammonius  was born and  educated among  the

i  christians,  he set  off, and  even  gave  an  air  of  au-

4  thority  to  his  injunctions,  by  expressing  them  part-

4  ly  in  terms  borrowed  from  the  sacred  scriptures."

31.  But  what  follows?  u  He  ftcrmitted  the  fie v file  to
live  according'-  to  the  dictates  of  nature  ;"  Of  what
use  then,  was  either  this  laboured  philosophy,  or
those  rules  of  high  sanctity,  but  merely,  through  a
vain  show,  to  deceive  mankind  into  a  belief,  that  it
was  the  once  living  revealed  religion  of  Christ  Je-
sus, that  they  were  promoting,  while  their  own  inter-
est, honour,  and  pleasure,  were  at  the  bottom.

32.  Thus  the  gospel  was  evidently  supplanted,  both
as  to  faith  and  practice ;  from  which  time  the  church
assumed  entirely  a  different  visible  form.  The  acad-
emy became  the  head  of  influence,  the  learned  reas-
oner  was  respected  as  the  oracle  of  truth,  and  the
admirers  of  a  vain  philosophy,  garnished  with  the
words  of  scripture,  constituted  the  body.  Titles  of
honour  were  adopted,  offices  of  dignity  created,  coun-
cils called,  and  the  vote  of  the  majority  established  as
the  test  of  truth.

33.  This  compound  of  clashing  principles,  in  its
very  constitution  and  laws,  excluded  the  disciples  of
Jesus  from  any  part  or  interest  in  it :  hence,  as  Ro-
binson  expresses it, "  Modest  plain people  retired  Ecci.R*
and  kept  at  due  distance."  iSS&Si

34.  A  general  division,  both  in  faith  and  practice,
evidently  appears.  Historians  say,  that  genuine  Chris-
tianity had  almost  disappeared,  that  solid  piety,  at
this  time,  was  scarcely  to  be  found  in  the  church,  that
-little  remained  but  a  motley  spectacle  of  superstition.


158  THE  WORK  OF  ANTICHRIST,  BY &X.  P.  III.

chap.  35.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  the  evident  truth  of
'  these  assertions,  this  same  church,  this  numerous
party,  who  called  themselves  the  catholic  and  orthodox
church,  is  distinguished  as  the  legitimate  descendant
from  the  apostolic  order  ;  while  such  as  followed  the
precepts  and  examples  of  Christ,  in  any  degree  of
simplicity,  and  kept  their  proper  distance  from  those
subtle  deceivers,  are  known  and  distinguished  by  the
odious  name  of  Heretics.

36.  But  who  has  a  right  to  give  names  ?  And  who
is  to  be  credited  in  this  case  ?  Admitting  the  princi-
pal matters  of  fact  to  have  been  correctly  handed  down
in  history,  it  is  little  matter  what  those  high  sound-
ing professors  called  either  themselves  or  others.
Names  cannot  alter  the  nature  of  things,  they  may
blind  and  dazzle  the  eyes  for  a  season  ;  but  each  par-
ty must  finally  be  distinguished  by  their  merits,  and
named  and  rewarded  according  to  their  works.

37.  However,  from  what  has  been  already  stated,
it  is  evident,  that,  in  the  second  century,  there  was
a  vast  distinction  between  those  who  stiied  themselves
Catholics,  and  those  who,  by  this  compound  body,
were  treated  as  Heretics  ;  and  the  most  evident  marks
of  this  distinction  are  worthy  of  notice  at  this  early
period.

38.  Besides  that  vast  and  extensive  body  that  was
ruled  by  the  influence  of  learned  bishops,  arch-bishops,
patriarchs,  and  councils,  history  furnishes  an  account
of  Marcionites,  Valentinians,  Ba&ilidians,  and  others,
who  were  so  far  from  meditating  a  coalition  with  the
general  mass  of  Pagans,  Jews  and  christian  philos-
ophers, that  they  stood  as  common  objects  of  hatred
to  them  all.

39.  It  is  difficult,  at  this  distance  of  time,  without
the  writings  of  those  reputed  heretics,  to  ascertain
precisely  their  faith  and  practice  in  every  particu-
lar ;  the  most  that  can  be  collected,  is  from  the
writings  of  their  adversaries,  who  frequently  contra-
dict each  other.

40.  But  notwithstanding  all  the  learned  labours  of
Catholic  philosophers  and  historians,  in  support  of
their  own  orthodoxy,  and  in  blackening  the  characters
of  those  who  differed  from  them,  they  nevertheless,


P.  III. THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN, ScC.  159

furnish  sufficient  matter  to  show  who  they  were  that c*^p-
retained  the  greatest  degree  of  the  gospel,  according >
%o  its  primitive  simplicity  and  truth.


CHAPTER  III.

The  first  Distinction  between  Catholics  and  Heretics.

rT^HE  title  of  Catholic,  which  signifies  universal)
JL  appears  to  have  been  first  adopted  by  those
:hristian  faih-ira,  so  called,  who,  iu  the  second  ceil"
Lury,  embraced  the  philosophy  of  the  Alexandrian
school;  which  distinguishing  title  answered  well  to
:he  system  of  Ammonius  Saccas,  who  proposed  to  in«r
:orporate  all  sects  and  denominations  of  mankind  into
5ne  body,  or  universal  church.

2.  Hence  the  writings  of  those  renowned  fathers,
lave  been  considered,  through  all  succeeding  ages,
is  the  only  key  to  open  the  scriptures  ;  as  the  only
exposition  of  the  words  of  God,  and  the  only  test  of
;ruth,  by  which  all  controversies  were  to  be  decided.

3.  Consequently,  those  writings  have  been  pre-
served by  their  successors,  as  the  most  precious  foun-
:ain  of  light,  without  which,  the  scriptures  must  be
^in  their  esteem)  entirely  useless.  Then  it  must  be
Tom  the  writings  of  these  fathers,  that  the  real  foun-
lation  of  the  Catholic  church  is  to  be  ascertained,
ind  the  spirit  from  which  it  originated,  made  manifest*

4.  Among  the famous  foundation pillars  of  this  ec«i.rw
Catholic  building,  may  be ranked  Justin, Irenaeus*  ^'Jfj
dthenagoras, Theofihilus,  Pantaenus, Clement,*  and
Origen. There  were also  many  other  learned  com-
mentators  of less  note. Clement the  Alexandrian,

who  succeeded  Pantaenus  in  the  care  of  the  chris-
tian school,  wrote  several  books  which  are  yet  extant.
Mosheim  says,  they  show  the  extent  of  his  learning
ind  the  force  of  his  genius,  but  at  the  same  tame  ac-

*  His  name  wa*  Titus  Flavius  Clemem,  usually  called  St.  Clement of  Aleocafr-
Ha,  to  distinguish  lrim  from  Clernmt  of  Jio?nei  mentioned  ia  Paul's  epistle  to  *he
Wippians.  Se«  Phil.  iv.  3.


160  THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  III.

Cui.P* knowledges, that  his excessive  attachment  to  the
__  reigning  philosophy  led  him  into  a  variety  of  perni-
cious errors.
Jj^te? 5'  Origen  succeeded  him. "  This  rash  young
p.*4. *  4  man, (says Robinson,) came quibbling  into  the
4  church  when  he  was  about  eighteen. Old  Clement^
4  and  the  pedants  emboldened  him. — He  persecuted
4  the  world  with  an  endless  number  of  books,  and
4  wrote  twenty  tomes  to  explain  the  hidden  mysteries
4  of  the  gospel  of  John. At  length  death  forced  him
4  to  quit  his  delightful  work  of  disputing  and  wrang-
4  ling,  in  the  year  two  hundred  and  fifty-four."

6.  To  this  agree  the  following  observations  of  Mos-
EccLHk.  *#?*•  "  This  new  species  of  philosophy,  impru-
LiL'rn'.  '  Gently  adopted  by  Origcn>  and  many  other  christians*

4  was  extremely  prejudicial  to  the  cause  of  the  gos-
4  pel,  and  to  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  its  celestial

*  doc  trine  s."

7.  u  For  hence  it  was,  that  the  christian  doctors
4  began  to  introduce  their  subtle  and  obscure  erudition;
4  into  the  religion  of  Jesus,  to  involve  in the  dark-

*  ness  of  a  vain  philosophy,  some  of  the  principal
4  truths  of  Christianity,  that  had  been  revealed  with

*  the  utmost  plainness,  and  were  indeed  obvious  to
1  the  meanest  capacity,  and  to  add  to  the  divine  pre-
4  cepts  of  our  Lord,  many  of  their  own,  which  had
1  no  sort  of  foundation  in  any  part  of  the  sacred  wri-
4  tings."

Ibid  p,  8.  u  Pantaenus,  the  head  of  the  Alexandrian  school*
4  was  probably  the  first  who  enriched  the  church  with
1  a  version  of  the  sacred  writings.  All  were  unani-
4  mous  in  regarding  with  veneration  the  holy  scrip*

*  tures,  as  the  great  rule  of  faith  and  manners.'1
Clement  wrote  a  Commentary  upon  the  canonical  e/iis'
ties,  or  those  epistles  which  have  been  selected  for  a
canonical  purpose  by  his  learned  master  Pantaenus*
He  is  also  said  to  h^ve  explained  in  a  compendious
manner,  almost  all  the  sacred  writings.

^r1;*6"  9-  u  Every  effect,  (says  Robinson,)  produced  by
p.  51,52.  *  these  causes,  became  itself  the  cause  of  another  ef-
Mo^in,  i  feet;"  Oigen  broached  a  new  and  universal  max-
Eeci.HH.  im  m  explaining  the  scriptures.  This  was,  "  that
ip.  i83.j i  scripture  had  a  double  sense ,  the  one  obvious  and  lit-


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  161


eral,  the  other  hidden  and  mysterious, which  lay  C**£F*
concealed,  as  it  were,  under  the  veil  of  the  outward  _
Ietter.,,

10.  "  The  former  they  treated  with  the  utmost
1  neglect,  and  turned  the  whole  force  of  their  genius

and  application  to  unibid the latter ; or in  other
words,  they  were  more  studious  to  darken  the  holy
;  scriptures  with their  idle fictions,  than  to  investi-
gate their  true  and  natural  sense."

11.  "  Some  of  them  also  forced  the  expressions  of
sacred  writ  out  of  their  obvious  meaning,  in  order
to  apply  them  to  the  support  of  their  philosophical
systems  ;  of  which  dangerous  and  pernicious  at-
tempts, Clemens  is  said  to  have  given  the  firsi  ex-
ample. The  Alexandrian  version,  commonly  cal-
led the  Sefituagint,  they  regarded  almost  us  of  di-
vine authority."

12.  This,  in  conjunction  with  such  of  the  apostle's
writings  as  these  Eclectics  chose  to  select,  formed

N  the  orthodox  canon,  or  law. From  Jews  x>nd  Pagans
Nfhey  received,  and  adopted  the  maxim,  u  That  it  was  ecc1.Hm~
not  only  lawful,  but  even  praise-worthy,  to  deceive,  ^pJ'^J*

4  and  even  to  use  the  expedient  of  a  lit,  in  order  to
advance the  cause  of  truth  and  piety." Doubtless

or  this  practice  their  double  sense  of  scripture  open-
ed a  large  field. "  Such  (says  Robinson,)  were  the  Ecd.R*
jl  benefits  which  the  Alexandrian  school,  and  chiefly  p.**!***
i* s  Origen, conferred on the Primitive [Catholic J

'  Church  !"

13.  "  Justin  Martyr  (says  Mosheim )  had  frequented  Ecci.Hi*

*  all  the  different  sects  of  philosophy,  in  an  ardent  and  X!il'vn>
'  impartial  pursuit  of  truth  ;  but  finding,  neither  in

J '  the  Pythagorean  nor  Platonic  sch'ools,  any  satisfac-

*  to ry  account  of  the  perfections  of  the  Supreme  Be-
f  ing,  and  the  nature  and  destination  of  the  human

soul,  he  embraced  Christianity  ,  on account  of  the

*  light  which  it  cast  upon  these  interesting  subjects."

14.  He  wrote  in  defence  of  t\ie  Christians,  and  even
presented  an  Apology  to  the  F^nperor  in  their  behalf.  ibklp.ll7
His  apologies  are  said  to  be  " most  deservedly  held  in

high  esteem;"  notwithstanding,  "  he  shows  himself  see  icor,

*  an  unwary  disputer,  and betrays  a  want  of  acquaint-  '-20*
«  ance  with  ancient  histr,rv." And  where  is  the  dis-
puter of  this  world  ?


c


165  THE  FIRST  BISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  III.

Ciyp# 15.  Irenaeus  turned  his  pen  against  those  whom*
Mosheim  calls,  "  the  internal  and  domestic  enemies


Ecci.His- 6  of  the  church,"  to  which  his  labours  are  said  to  have
tory,voi.  been "  singularly  useful;"  for  he  wrote  fiv  e  bcoks
against  heresies,  and  refuted  the  whole  tribe  of  here-
tics.

16.  Mhcnagoras  wrote*./*  Treatise  upon  the  Resur-
rection, and  an  Apology  for  the  Christians. — "  He  was1.
*  a  philosopher  of  no  mean  reputation,"  says  Mosheimy
'  and  desen  es  a  place  among  the  '  estimable  writers' of
1  the  second  century:"  of  course  he  could  not  be  an
apostle,  hated  of  all  men,  and  counted  as  the  filth  and-
off-scouring  of  all  things.

17.  But  who were those estimable  writers?  and
what  are  the  merits  of  their  works  ?  Mosheim  himself-

»bid confesses  that,  "  they  abound  with  stoical  and  acad-
_p.i86.i87  4  emicai  dictates,  vague and  indeterminate  notions,


P


(  and,  what  is  yet  worse,  with  decisions  that  are  ab-
i  solutely  raise,  arid  in  evident  opposition  to  the  pre-

*  cepts  of  Christ."  Such  is  the  heterogeneous  de-
scription of  qualities  which  truly  belong  to  the  Fa-
thers, the  se.U-stiled  orthodox,  and  first  founders  and
defenders  of  the  Catholic  faith,

iiidvoi.i.  18.  u  Theophilus,  bishop  of  Antioch,  wrote  three
^te£q.]  c  books  in  defence  if  Christianity— ?l Commentary on  /

*  the Proverbs — another on the Four Evangelists, j
'  He  also  wrote  against  Marcion  and  Hermcgenes,  and

*  refuting  the  errors  of  these  Heretics,  he  quotes  sev-
i  eral  passages  of  the  revelations. He  was  the  first

*  who  made  use  of  the  word  %C7*  Trinity  to  express
4  the  distinction  t>f  what  divines  [or  rather  demoni-
c  acs]  call,  Per  sores  in  the  Godhead."

fcidvoi. 19.  "  The Christian  church, (says  Maclaine) is

cjiFdnoi7'  i  velT  utt*e  obliged  to  him  for  his  invention. The

Table.'  <  use  of  this  and  otK  er  unscriptural  terms,  to  which

•***■ iU i  men  attach  either  no  ideas,  or  false  ones,  has  wound-

4  ed  charity  and  peace, without  promoting  truth  and

<  knowledge.  It  has  produced  heresies  of  the  very
'  worst  kind."

Fed m*  20*  "Nothing  more  itviurious  can  be  conceived
ton,' vol  <  thai:  the  terms  of  comer/apt,  indignation,  and  re±
N?teoS  '  proach,  which  the  Heather^  employed  in  expressing

<  tlieir  hatred  against  the  Chilians,  who  were  called


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  163

*  by  them  Atheists,  because  they  derided  the  heathen  c^£p#
4  Polytheism  ;■*  magicians,  because  they  wrought  mir-


acles ;  self-murderers,  because  they  suffered  cheer-  *i.e.piu.
1  fully  for  the truth;  haters of  the  light,"  because  r^ot'
1  they  held  religious  assemblies  in  the  night :  "  with
i  a  multitude  of  other  ignominious  epithets."

2  1 .  Then  what  could  ever  have  induced  such  in-
dignant despisers  to  embrace  a  religion  against  which
they  had  such  indignation  ?  The  truth  is,  they  never
did  receive  it ;  they  quarrelled  about  the  name,  for
the  sake  of  honour  and  promotion  ;  but  the  power
and  substance  of  the  religion  of  Christ  they  never
knew  nor  received.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  any  thing
about  the  miraculous  power  of  God,  for  of  this  the
learned  doctors. professed  to  stand  in  no  need.

22.  "It  was  (says  Robinson,)  an  enormous  compii-  eccLr*.
i  ment,  which  these  gentlemen  paid  themselves."  f^*163*
**  The  gospel, (said  they,) is  evidently  divine,  be-

*'  cause  nothing  but  -the  miraculous  power  of  God
"  could  support  it  in  the  hands  of  illiterate  men."  As
i  if  they  and  their  quirks,  were  to  all  succeeding  ages,
i  to  supply  the  place  of  the  miraculous  power  of
*  God."  Doubtless  the  quirk  of  Theojihilus  removed
much  of  the  Pagan  indignation  and  contempt,

23.  The  following remarks  of  Mosheim,  on this
subject,  are  worthy  of  singular  notice. "  The  reli-  Eed.Hi^
4  gious  sentiments  of  the  first  Christians  were  most T^'iso"
1  unjustly  treated,  and  most  perfidiously  misrepresent-
ed to  the  credulous  multitude,  who  were  restrained

by  this  only  from  embracing  the  gospel."  Here  the
Doctor  seems  to  have  forgotten  that  the  carnal
mind  is  enmity  against  God,  and  in  love  with  gods
many  ;  but  observe  what  follows.

24.  "  Those  therefore,  who,  by  their  apologetic
writings  in  favour  of  the  Christians,  destroyed  the
poisonous  influence  of  detraction,  rendered,  no
doubt,  signal  service  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  [he
ought  to  have  said,  to  the  doctrine  of  Saccas,~]  bf
removing  the  chief  impediment  that  retarded  its
progress."

25.  «  Nor  were  the  writings  of  such  as  combated
with  success  the  ancient  Heretics  without  their  use.
For  the  insipid  and  extravagant  doctrines  of  these

S


164  THE  FIRST DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  Ill,

CniP* C  sectaries,  and  the  gross  immoralities  with which


4  they  were  chargeable,  were  extremely  prejudicial
4  to  the  Christian  religion,  by  disgusting  many  at
4  whatever  carried  the  Christian  name.

26.  "  But  when  it  was  known,  by  the  writings  of
4  those  who  defended  Christianity,  that  these  corrvfit
4  heretics  were  held  in  aversion,  instead  of  being  pat-
4  ronized  by  the  true  followers  of  Christ,  then  the
4  clouds  that  were  cast  over  the  religion  of  Jesua
*  were  dispersed,  and  the  prejudices  that  had  been
4  raised  against  it  were  fully  removed."

27.  How  Dr.  Mosheim  could  give  the  name  of  Je-
sus Christ,  to  the  followers  of  that  system,  which  he
else  where  denominates  a  motley  spectacle  of  supersti-
tion, is  a  mystery  ;  but  granting,  th:4  it  was  the  reli-
gion forged  in  the  Alexandrian  school,  that  the  learn-
ed fathers  rescued  from  the  indignation  and  contempt
of  the  Pagans  against  the  Christian  name,  his  state-
ment is  doubtless  correct.

-  28. To  us,  (said  the  followers  of  Christ  from  the

xii.  i.  beginning)  there  is  but  one  God.  This  was  detraction
enough  ;  it  overthrew  at  once  the  whole  Pagan  sys-
tem. This  must  surely  be  charged  to  the  followers
of  Saccas,  if  they  assume  the  name  of  Christians.
To  remove  this  disgraceful  charge,  they  apply  Ori-
gen's  two-fold  sense  of  scripture  ;  according  to  this
the  literal  sense  must  be,  One  God,  and  the  mysteri-
ous sense, Three  Persons  ;  and  so  of  the  rest.

29.  Thus  it  appears  that  the  Catholics  hold  that
more  persons  than  one  may  be  called  God  and  wor-
shipped. This  doctrine  they  establish  by  a  council  of
learned  Bishops,  Doctors  and  Patriarchs,  from  which
the  illiterate  must  be  excluded,  and  into  which  none
of  the  comments  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus  on  the
scriptures  can  be  admitted.  Here  the  Jew,  the  Pa-
gan, and  the  Christian,  are  incorporated  into  one,  and
why  not  admit  that  three  persons,  each  true  God,  by
a  mystical  union,  may  also,  be  incorporated  into  one  ?

30.  This  is  according  to  the  true  Catholic  faith,  and
he  that  disputes  this  doctrine  must  be  called  a  heretic.
Heretics  are  held  in  aversion,  they  are  not  patroni-
zed— They  are  charged  with  the  most  extravagant,
&nd  execrable  doctrines,  and  the  most  gross  immo-


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND IIEKETICS.  16


ralities.  This  was  enough  to  rouse  the  persecuting
vengeance  of  both  Pagans  and  Catholics  to  extermi-
nate* them  from  the  earth,  while  the  correspondent
faith,  and  co-operating  practice  of  their  joint  perse-
cutors, declared  them  both  to  be  the  servants  of  one
master.

31.  Then  as  Christian  Heretics  alone  are  cut  oflf
from  the  general  bond  of  union,  and  marked  out  for
destruction,  it  may  be  proper  to  notice  the  account
that  historians  give  of  them.


CHAP.
IV.


CHAPTER  IV.

The  Subject  continued.


"  TTERESY,  in  Greek,  fsays  Lardner,  in  his  His-  L&rdnew
X  JL  tory  of  Heretics,) signifies  election  or  choice ,  v^°[^

4  and  is  used  for  any  opinion  which  a  man  chuseth  as  223.

4  best,  or  most  probable. The  same word is  also  v.i7— "v?

4  translated  sect.}"  §"£?*'

3.  "  It  is  generally  allowed,  that  a  Heretic  is  one  xxviji.22,

4  who  professes  to  be  a  Christian,  but  is  not  supposed  p.220!

4  to  be  of  the  Church,  having  either  separated  him-

4  self  from  it,  or  been  excluded  from  it  by  others.

4  They  believe  what  they  profess  to  be  true.— As  they  r,  227.

4  are  Heretics  in  our  esteem,  so  are  we  in  theirs.

3.  "  During  the  first  three  centuries,  (says  Robin-  eccLRc-
1  son, J  Christian  congregations,  all  over  the  east,  **J^%\
4  subsisted in separate independent bodies,  unsup-

4  ported  by  government,  and  consequently  without
4  any  secular  power  over  one  rxnother.  Qfiinionists,
4  or  to  use  the  Greek  style,  Heretics,  formed  church-
4  es,  taught  their  own  doctrines,  and  held  separate
4  assemblies  every  where. "

4.  "  Marcionites)  Valentinians,  Basilidians,  and  great
4  numbers  more  who  followed  their  own  convictions,
4  taught  churches,  and  probably  were  men  of  more
4  zeal  than  that  most  numerous  party — who  calumni-
4  ated  all  the  rest  as  Heretics  who  troubled  the  peace
4  of  Israel."


U6


THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN


P.  III.


CHAP.
IV.


Lardner*

Works,

vol.  ix.  p.

235,237,


ibid.
p.  239.


p.  240.


ibid

p.  241.


Eccl.His-
to.y,  vol,
i.  p.  73.


ibid

2f  ote  [m]


5.  "  Heretics,  (says  Lardner,)  have  often  been
treated  with  much  harshness  and  great  severity  of
expression.  Some  seem  to  have  reckoned  that  they
had  a  right  to  say  the  worst  things  of  Heretics  which
they  could;  and  others,  have  thought  themselves
obliged  to  believe  all  the  evil  that  has  been  reported
of  them.

6.  "  One  thing  laid  to  the  charge  of  many  of  those
Heretics  is  Magic — another  thing  is  lewdness,  and
all  manner  of  wickedness,  and  likewise  teaching  it,
There  is  no  small  agreement  between  the  charges
brought  against  the  first  Christians  in  the  beginning
of  the  second  century,  and  the  charges  against  the
Heretics  in  later  authors  ;  which  may  create  a  sus-
picion that  these  last  were  formed  upon  the  model
of  the  former,  and  consequently  are  without  ground.5'

7.  u  What  the  crimes  were,  which  were  laid  to
the  charge  of  the  Primitive  Christians,  we  know
from  divers  writers,  Greek  and  Latin — From  whom
it  appears  that,  besides  atheism,  or  impiety  to  the
established  deities,  they  were  charged  with  having
their  wives  in  common,  with  promiscuous  lewdness
in  their  assemblies,  with  incest,  and  eating  human
flesh,  especially  young  children,  whom  they  first
killed  and  then  ate,  at  their  nocturnal  meetings,
where  persons  of  each  sex,  and  every  age  were
present."

8.  "  Turner  says,  these  calumnies  seem  to  have
begun  with  Christianity  itself.  Tacitus,  speaking
of  the  Christians  in  the  time  of  Aero,  says,  they
were  generally  hated  for  their  wickedness  ;  that  is,
they  lay  under  a  bad  character  with  the  people."

9.  "  The  Romans,  (says  Mosheim^)  concluded,
that  the  christian  sect,  [i.  e.  heresy,"]  was  not  on-
ly unsupportably  daring  and  arrogant,  but,  more-
over, an  enemy  to  the  public  tranquility,  and  every
way  proper  to  excite  civil  wars  and  commotions  in
the  empire."

10.  "  Tacitus,  reproaches  them  with  the  odious
character  of  haters  of  mankind,  and  styles  the  reli-
gion of  Jesus  a  destructive  superstition.  Suetonius
speaks  of  the  Christians,  and  their  doctrine,  in
terms  of  the  like  kind."  He  calls  Christianity  "  a
poisonous  and  malignant  superstition"


P.  HI.  CATHOLICS  AND HERETICS.  l*f


CHAP.
IV.


11.  What  is  here  added, may  sufficiently show
upon  what  ground  the  charge  of  heresy  was  excited
and  continued  against  the  Heretics. Thus  says  Paul :
I  confess,  that  after  the  way  which  they  call  heresy,  ss  Actsx*iv
worship  I  the  God [not  gods] of  my  fathers. And

it  was  predicted  by  Christ  Jesus  himself,  that  his  fol-
lowers should  have  their  name  cast  out  as  evil,  and  all
manner  of  evil  spoken  against  them  falsely.

12.  From  which  it  appears,  that  while  the  apolo-
gists, the  honorable  Catholic  Fathers,  cleared  them-
selves of  those  ridiculous  charges,  by  uniting  with
the  universal  faith  and  manners  invented  by  Saccas,
they  rolled  over  the  burden  of  reproach  upon  those
who  would  not  conform  :  Of  course  a  heretic  in  the
second  or  third  century,  according  to  the  universal
opinion,  must  be  a  magician,  an  atheist,  a  lewd  inces-
tuous man-eater.

13.  According  to  Lardner,  St.  Jerome  scruples  not  L*rd^,M
to  say,  "  They  are  worse  than  heathens,  the  worst  of  voLi*.
"  all  men  ;  and  if  they  are  free  from  all  reproach  in p-225,
"  their  lives,  yet  they  have  only  the  shadow  and  ap-

"  pearance  of  virtue,  not  the  truth." "  This  is  cer- p. 23$.
i  tain,  (says  Lardner,)  that  as  bad  things  were  said
i  of  the Primitive Christians  by  Jews  and  heathens,
*  as  ever  were  said  of  the ancient  heretics  by  Cath-

<  plies."

14.  And  we  might  add,  that  as  bad  things  were
said  by  Jews,  heathens,  and  Catholics,  against  Christ
and  his  followers,  in  the  three  first  centuries,  as  can
be  said  by  Antichristians,  against  the  followers  of
Christ  in  this  latter  day  ;  which  may  appear,  not  on-
ly from  those  general  charges  which  have  been  men-
tioned, but  from  many  things  of  the  like  nature,
which  were  published  to  the  world,  with  some  ap-
pearance of  authority  ;  of  which  the  following  may
serve  as  a  specimen.

15.  Celsus,  an  Epicurean  Philosopher  of  the  se-
cond century,  wrote  a  book  against  the  Christians,
entitled  "  The  true  Word."  Lardner  thinks  it
was  a  time  of  persecution  when  he  wrote,  [about  the
year  of  Christ  176]  because  he  several  times  speaks
of  the  Christians  as  teaching  their  principles  private--

S3


108  THE  FIRST DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  III.

CIJyP* ly,  and  holding  assemblies  contrary  to  law,  and  hiding

. themselves.

SeeL's. 16.  The  following  extracts  of  this  subtle  writerare

Works, copied  from  Lardner's  Jewish  and  Heathen  Testimonies.
vol.  vm. m  J;

p.  9,18.  4i  I  could  say  many  things,  (says  Celsus,  personating
"  a  Jew)  concerning  the  affairs  of  Jesus,  and  those
"  true  too,  different  from  those  written  by  his  disci-
"  pies,  but  I  purposely  omit  them. — It  is  but  a  few
44  years  since  he  [Jesus]  delivered  this  doctrine,  who
44  is  now  reckoned  by  the  Christians  to  be  the  Son  of
"  God."  "  In  another  place,  Celsus  calls  Jesus  "  the
"  first  author  of  this  sedition."
ibid  17.  "  After  this he brings  in  his  Jew, arguing

*  19'  '  against  Jesus  in  this  manner.  First,  that  he  prc-
4  tended  he  was  born  of  a  virgin  :  then  he  reproaches
4  him  with  his  birth  in  a  Jewish  village,  and  of  a  poor
4  woman  of  that  country,  who  subsisted  by  the  labour
4  of  her  hands. "

18.  "  And  he  says,  she  was  put  away  by  her  hus-
4  band,  who  was  a  carpenter  by  trade,  he  having  found,
4  that  she  was  guilty  of  adultery.  Then  he  says,  that
4  having  been  turned  out  of  doors  by  her  husband,
4  she  wandered  about  in  a  shameful  manner,  till  she
4  had  brought  forth  Jesus,  in  an  obscure  place  ;  and
4  that  he  being  in  want,  served  in  Egypt  for  a  liveli-
4  hood  ;  and  having  there  learned  some  charms,  such
4  as  the  Egyptians  are  fond  of,  he  returned  home  ;
4  and  then  valuing  himself  upon  those  charms,  he
4  set  up  himself  for  a  God."

19.  Again— u  That  the  mother  of  Jesus,  being
4  great  with  child,  was  put  away  by  the  carpenter,  who
•4  had  espoused  her,  he  having  convicted  her  of  adul-
4  tery  with  a  soldier  named  Pantheras. — Afterwards
4  Celsus  goes  on  :  "  Was  the  mother  of  Jesus  hand-
44  some,  that  God  should  be  in  love  with  her  beauty  ?
44  It  is  unworthy  of  God,  to  suppose  him  to  be  taken
u  with  a  corruptible  body,  or  to  be  in  love  with  a  wo-
44  man,  whether  she  be  of  royal  descent  or  otherwise."

20.  44  In  another  place  Celsus  says  :  a  But  if  God
"  would  send  forth  a  spirit  from  himself,  what  need
"  had  he  to  breathe  him  into  the  womb  of  a  woman  ?
i4.For,  since  he  knew  how  to  make  men,  he  might
44  have  formed  a  body  for  this  spirit,  and  not  cast  his
"  own  spirit  into  such  filth."


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  169

21.  Upon  what  principle could  this  Epicurean  as- C1*£p-

cribe  filth  to  the  womb  of  a  virgin  ?  Must  it  not  have  _

been  from  the  debauched  state  of  his  own  carnal  mind,
which  could  conceive  nothing  clean,  where  the  un-
clean and  brutal  passions  of  human  nature  might  be
gratified  ?

22.  And  why  does  he  call  in  question  the  beauty  of
the  mother  of  Jesus  ?  Is  it  to  prove  that  God  can
have  nothing  to  do  with  a  woman  ?  or  is  it  not  ra-
ther to  cast  contempt  upon  that  particular  woman,
who  was  chosen  for  a  higher  purpose  than  to  grati-
fy the  carnal  desires  of  man  ?  Admitting  that  she
was  not  beautiful,  but  even  ugly,  in  the  eyes  of  an
Epicurean  ;  this  could  be  no  reasonable  objection  to
the  gospel,  which  came  not  to  promote  either  the
lust  of  the  flesh,  or  the  lust  of  the  eye  :  but  doubtless
this  was  the  secret  cause  of  his  enmity,

23.  "  Afterwards  the  Jew  in  Celsus,  addresses  Je-  Larttwr,
4  sus,  and  says:  "  What  occasion  had you,  when  an  ^.iu

"  infant,  to  be  carried  into  Egypt,  lest  you  should  be
"  killed  ?  A  God  has  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of  death.
"  And  now  an  angel  comes  from  heaven  to  direct  you
"  and  your  relations  to  flee  into  Egypt,  lest  you  should
"  be  taken  up  and  put  to  death  ;  as  if  the  great  God,
M  who  had  already  sent  two  angels,  upon  your  ac-
"  count,  couid  not  have  preserved  you,  his  own  Son,
"  in  sstfety  at  home."

24.  "  In  another  place Cekm  has these  words  :  ibkLpae>
"  But  if  he  [Herod] was  afraid,  that  when  you  was

"  come  of  age,  you  should  reign  in  his  stead  ;  why
M  did  you  not  reign  when  you  was  of  age  ?  But  so  far
"  from  that,  the  Son  of  God  wanders  about,  cringing
"  like  a  necessitous  beggar,  or  sculking  from  place
"  to  place,  as  if  he  was  afraid  of  being  taken  up."

25.  Again:  "  Celsun  says,  "  That  Jesus  taking  to  ibid.p.ax
"  himself  ten or  eleven  abjects,  vile  publicans  and

"  sailors,  went  about  with  them  getting  his  subsist-
"  ence  in  a  base  and  shameful  manner."  u  In  anoth-
4  er  place  the  Jew  in  Celsus  says,  "  Jesus  set  out  with
"  ten  profligate  publicans  and  sailors."

26.  Again,  concerning  the  disciples  of  Jesus, Cel-  ibj^B#16,
sus  has  these  words  : "  Some  of  them  say  :  Bo  net

"  examine,  but  believe  :  and,  thy  faith  (shall  save  thee  :


170  THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  Ill,

«hap-  "  and,  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  evil,  and  folly
*  "  good."  And  again  :  "  These  are  their  institutions  :
"  Let  not  any  man  of  learning  come  hither,  nor  any
w  wise  mail)  nor  any  man  of  prudence  ;  but  if  any
u  man  be  unlearned,  if  he  is  ignorant,  if  he  is  silly,
"  let  him  come  without  fear.  Thus  acknowledging",
"  that  these  are  the  men  who  are  acceptable  to  their
"  God  ;  and  thereby  manifesting,  that  they  are  neither
"  willing,  nor  able  to  gain  any  but  the  foolish,  the
"  vulgar,  the  stupid,  slaves,  women  and  children. "

27.  In  such  a  manner,  this  learned  sophist  runs
through  a  great  part  of  the  New-Testament,  and  by
such  kind  of  reasoning  as  would  even  carry  a  show
of  sanctity,  he  endeavours  to  show  to  the  world,  that
Jesus  and  his  followers  are  unspeakably  below  them,
in  meanness,  and  all  manner  of  low  debauchery.

„  , ...  , 28.  The  following  is  also from  Lardner :  "  C<ecil~

Vol.  V1H.  '  °

p,  3.  Dia-  *  ius  JsTatalis,  a  heathen,  arguing against  the  Chris-

Mmutius  '  tians,  speaks  to.  this  purpose  :  "  As  for  the  feast,  it

FeHx- "  is  a  well  known  thing  :  every  body  talks  of  it. They

riA^n. "  come  together  upon  an  appointed  day,  with  all  their

210. «  children,  their  sisters  and  mothers  ;  persons  of  each

"  sex,  and  of  every condition. And  after  feeding

"  plentifully,  when  the  lights  are  put  out,  they  prac-

"  tise  promiscuously,  incest,  and  all  manner  of  un-

14  cleanness."

29.  These  and  such  like,  were  the  reproaches  of
Christ,  of  which  the  learned  Catholic  fathers  had
to  clear  themselves,  in  order  to  lay  the  foundation  of
their  honorable  kingdom.  But  this  they  could  never
have  effected,  had  they  not  first  proved  to  the  world,
by  their  practice,  and  their  writings,  that  they  reject-*
ed  that  singular  manner  of  life,  which  had  first  given
occasion  to  such  false  and  blasphemous  reports.

30.  And  therefore,  while  they  maintain  the  inno-
cence of  Jesus  and  his  first  followers,  they  unite  with
the  same  old  spirit  of  falsehood,  in  rolling  off  these
reproaches  from  themselves,  and  loading  the  living
heretics  of  their  day  with  the  scandal ;  and  under  a
deceitful  mask  they  try  to  make  it  appear,  that  they,
and  not  the  heretics,  stand  related  to  the  once  despi-
sed Jesus,  and  have  the  only  right  to  the  distinguish-
ing name  of  Christians.


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  1?1


31.  "  Justin  says,  that  their accusers  themselves C1*$p*
scarcely  believed  the  charges  brought  against  them  :  ,

*  and  where  these  had  in  some  measure  been  credit-  Larfner,
i  ed,  it  arose from  the  wickedness  of  the  heathens,  if^™'*'

which  disposed  them  to  believe  such  things  of  other
people  as  they  practised  themselves."

32.  Moreover,  "  He  assures  us,  that,  in the  time Ult
of  his  heathenism,  he  thought  it  impossible  that  the

4  Christians  should suffer  with  such  constancy  and
4  resolution  as  they  did,  if  they  had  been  man-eaters,
4  and addicted to lewdness. Athenagoras plainly  p,  243.
4  says,  that  the general  wickedness  of  the  heathen

*  people,  was  the  ground  of  their  charging  such  base
4  practices  upon  the  Christians,  who  were  exampla-
4  rily  virtuous."

33.  "  It  appears  from Tertulliany  that  in  his  time 244f
4  it  was  not  known  that  any  among  Christians  were

4  guilty  of  such  crimes  as  were  imputed  to  them  by
4  their  adversaries.  The  only  ground  of  these  char-
4  ges  according  to  him  was  common  fame,  and  un-
4  certain  report,  without  any  proof."

34.  "  You  tax  us  (says  he)  with  killing  and  eating  Eoci.Re.
44  children.  The  charge  is  absurd  and  cruel  in  the  searches,
44  extreme,  and  we  cannot  conceive  how  you  came  to  p"

44  invent  such  a  scandalous  calumny.  We  defy  you
44  to  prove  it.  Why  do  not  the  magistrates  examine
44  us  on  this  subject  ?  What  glory  would  redound  to
44  any  governor  who  could  produce  a  Christian  who
44  had  eaten  an  hundred  infants."

35.  "  But  you  hate  us,  even  the  bare  name  by
44  which  we  are  called,  and  without  giving  yourselves
44  any  trouble  to  examine,  you  say  all  manner  of  evil
44  of  us."  These  words  of  Ter'ullian  are  quoted  by
Robinson.  What  follows  is  taken  from  Lardner's
History  of  Heretics.

36.  "  Tryfiho  the  Jew,  beiner  asked  by  Justin  wheth-  La^ner,

Ll.l-.il  J  •  Vol.  IX.  p,

*  er  he  believed  the  common  reports  concerning  the  244,245.
4  Christians,  readily answered, They  are  incredible ;

4  human  nature  is  not  cafiable  of  such  things.

37.  u  The  same  arguments  will  serve  for  the  here-
4  tics,  for  they  are  charged  by  later  writers  with  the
4  same  things  which  were  before  imputed  to  the
6  Primitive  Christians. If  then  they  are  incredible


172  THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  Ill


CHAP.
IV.


with regard  to  the one,  they  are  so  likewise  with


6  regard  to  the  other."


Lardner,  38.  "  When  all  this  is  considered,  (says  Lar drier,)
p,fj*'  '  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is  too  much  jus-
1  tice  in  Mons.  Bayle's  satire.  "  When  we  read  these
"  things  in  the  fathers  of  nhe  church,  one  can  scarce
"  forbear  thinking  that  the  case  was  the  same  with
"  them  in  respect  to  Heretics,  as  with  the  heathens
"  in  respect  to  Christianity.39

39.  "  The  heathens  imputed  to  Christianity  an  hun-
"  dred  extravagances  and  abominations  that  had  no
"  foundation.  The  first  who  forged  these  calumnies
"  were  undoubtedly  guilty  of  the  blackest  malice  ;
"  but  the  greatest  part  of  those  who  vented  them
"  abroad,  after  they  had  been  so  maliciously  sown,
"  were  only  guilty  of  too  much  credulity  ;  they  be-
w  lieved  common  fame,  and  never  troubled  them"
"  selves  to  dive  into  the  bottom  of  it."

40.  "  Is  it  not  more  reasonable  to  believe  that  the
"  fathers  did  not,  with  all  the  patience  requisite,
"  thoroughly  inform  themselves  of  the  real  principles
"  of  a  sect,  than  it  is  to  believe  that  those  very  men,
"  who  held  that  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  death,  was  tlfe
"  Saviour  of  mankind,  should,  at  the  same  time,
"  hold  that  the  beastliest  pleasures  are  the  ready  way
"  to  paradise  ?"  So  far  Mons.  Baylc.

41.  Then  according  to  this  plain  and  candid  state-
ment, let  every  stone  be  gathered  and  united  to  its
own  foundation.  Let  the  fathers  of  the  church  be
known  by  the  church  which  they  fathered,  and  let  the
churches  own  their  fathers  and  grandfathers  whose
image  they  bear.  But  to  show,  more  particularly,
the  first  distinction  between  the  church  of  the  fathers,
and  that  of  the  heretics,  we  shall  state  a  few  of  the
most  material  points,  upon  which  they  stood  divided  :
and  if  Christ  is  not  divided,  it  must  follow  that  one
or  the  other  was  Antichrist.

42.  The  following  extracts  from  Lardner,  contain
some  of  the  most  unfavourable  things  against  Here-
tics that  could  be  collected  from  the  writings  of  their
adversaries,  particularly  against  the  Marcionites.

43.  Of  all  the  ancient  Heretics  the  most  extraor-


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  1<"3

jdinary  was  Marcion.* "  He  flourished  about  the ci*ap«
4  year  130  or  very  soon  after. Marcion  had  many  fol-


4  lowers.  Efiifihanius  says  that  he  deceived  multitudes  Lardner,
4  of  fieofile,  and  that  his  heresy  still  subsisted  in  his  JJl"  mi**
«  time  at  Pome,  in  Italy,  Egypt,  Palestine,  Arabia,
4  and  Syria,  in  Cyprus,  Thebais,  Persia,  and  other
4  places."  The  first  character  given  of  this  Heretic
is  that  of  a  deceiver,  which  must  imply  that  he  firor
fessed  to  follow  Christ,  but  did  not :  and  to  prove
this,  his  moral  character  is  next  impeached.

44.  Efiifihanius  has  an  account  of  his  admitting  an
affection  for  a  young  woman,  and  of  having  been  guil-
ty of  uncleanness  with  her. "  The  story  (saysZartf- ibid.  p.

...  •  363  364

4  ner,)  of  his  deceiving  a  young  woman  is  held  doubt- '
4  ful  by  many. — Beausobre  has  a  long  argument  upon
4  this  point,  taken  from  the  silence  of  ancient  writers,
4  and  consisting  of  many  particulars." — All  of  which
tend  to  prove  Marcion's  innocence.

45.  "  Eusebius  injbrms  us  of  many  authors  who
*  had  written  against  Marcion  :  Justin  Martyr,  Di-
4  onysius  of  Corinth,  Theofihilus  of  Antioch,  Philifi  of
4  Gortyna,  Modestus,  Melito,  and  Afio/Iinari?.  He
4  had  read  their  writings.  Nevertheless  he  makes  no
4  mention  of  this  scandalous  action  of  Marcion, — Je-
4  rome  would  not  have  omitted  it,  if  he  had  known

4  any  thing  of  it :  since  he  omits  not  even  conjectures v
4  and  the  slightest  reports  that  tend  to  blacken  the
4  reputation  of  a  heretic"

46.  "  Teriullian  wrote  five  books  against  Marcion.
4  He  did  not  neglect  any  occasion  to  decry  his  adver-
4  sary  ;  nevertheless  he  says  nothing  of  this  scanda-
4  lous  adventure.  The  story  of  Marcion9 s  fall  is  not
4  in  Philaster,  which  shews  that  he  never  knew  it>-^
4  which  may  lead  persons  a  little  suspicious,  to  miv
4  trust  that  Efiifihanius  himself  is  the  author  of  the
4  story." So  says  Lardner.

47.  The  following  is  the  character  of  the  Marcion- 8&L
«>€?  given  by  Lardner. "  The  manners  of  the  Mar- p'°

4  cionites  were  virtuous,  and  they  had  many  martyrs. —

*  Marcim  was  a  disciple  of  Cerdon,  whose  doctrine  he  embraced  at  Rome.
The  Catholic  historians  say  that  Marcion  joined  himself  to  tin impostor  Cordon
while  he  was  preaching  at  Rome.  Cerdon  flourished  between  the  years  125  and
150.-— His  doctrines  are  blended  with  those  of  Marcion.  The  faith  and  manners,
therefore,  of  Cerdon  and  his  followers,  may  be  considered  the  same  as  those  un-
der the  description  of  the  Marcionires.


174  THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  P.  III.

chap,  c  They  are  not  charged  by  their  adversaries  with  be-
'  i  ing  vicious. — They  had  respect  to  the  will  of  God*
i  and  were  desirous  of  obtaining  his  favour  as  the
*  greatest  good.  They  did  not  allow  themselves  in
'  indulging  carnal  desires,  though  their  adversaries
4  said  that  their  principles"  led  directly  to  the  gratify -
4  ing  them.55

Lardner, 48.  "  In  short,  it  is  evident  that  these  people  were

™\ll'.  ' *n  general  strictly  virtuous ;  that  they  dreaded  sin  as
i  the  greatest  evil,  and  had  such  a  real  regard  for
i  Christ,  as  to  undergo  martyrdom  rather  than  offer
'  incense  to  idols.  They  seem  indeed  to  have  had  a
1  great  number  of  martyrs."  :

49.  We  come  now  to  the  principal  charge  of  here-
sy which  exposed  them  to  the  rage  of  their  persecu-
tors. u  They  contemned  marriage,  and  highly  extolled
i  -virginity ."  Clement,  in  particular,  fills  up  almost
all  his  third  book  of  Stromata,  in  rehearsing  and  con-
futing the  arguments  of  Marcion,  and  other  Encra-
tites  [i.  e.  continent  persons]  against  marriage,
ibid  50.  "  These  proud  men,  (says  Clement,)  boast  of

v'  4*  "  imitating  our  Saviour,  who  never  married,  and  pos-
"  sessed  nothing  in  this  world.  But  they  should
"  know  that  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace
"  to  the  humble.'5  This  is  a  comment  on  the  scrip-
tures truly  worthy  the  mystic  predecessor  of  Origen.
Had  he  in  truth  brought  out  what  he  couched  under
the  outward  veil  of  the  letter,  it  must  have  been,  that
"  God  resisteth  the  sincere  and  harmless  imitators  of

<  Christ,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  aspiring  followers  of
'  Saccas."

51.  "  St.  Efihrem  lived  at Edessa. — There  were

<  many  Marcionites  in  that  country;  which  induced
i  him  to  write  against  them. — He  says  that  "  Marci-
"  on's  a/iostles  were  wolves,  but  they  had  sheets  cloth"
"  ing  :  and  that  the  Devil  put  a  cowl  upon  him,  that
"  he  might  deceive  the  children  of  light."

52.  Unhappily  this  Saint  who  covered  himself  wifli
the  outward  veil,  or  cowl  of  the  letter,  left  out  the
most  important  part  of  the  sacred text :  By their

fruits  ye  shall  know  them.
ibid  53^  u  According to St. Jerome the Marcionites

6  seem  to  have considered  the  connubial  state,  not


ibid
p.  165.


p.  387


P.  III.  CATHOLICS  AND  HERETICS.  ITS


CttAP.
IV.


*  merely  as  less  perfect,  but  even  as  sinful,  impure,

*  and  odious  in  the  eyes  of  their  God ;  whom  they  .
1  call  a  hater  of  marriage."

54.  Had  this  canonized  father  of  the  Church  adop-
ted but  one  sense  to  the  scriptures,  most  likely  he
would  have  represented  the  God  of  the  Marcionites
as  a  hater  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh  ;  but  with  all  their
learned  authority,  and  compound  philosophy,  it  is  easy
to  see  their  misrepresentations.

55.  "  Clement  supposeth  them  to  abstain  from  mar-
1  riage,  that  they  might  not  people  the  world  of  the

*  Creator  :  which  is  a  reason  similar  to  that  which  fee
i  assigns,  for  their  offering  themselves  voluntarily  to
4  martyrdom,  namely,  out  of  hatred  to  the  Creator."

56.  "  Another  of  their  institutions  was  fasting,  es-

{  pecially  on  the  Sabbath  or  seventh  day,  which  had vol.  i*.*
<  been  a  day  of  rest  to  the  Creator,  or  God  of  the p* 3*8'
(  Jews,  whom  they  .despised. This day  therefore,
;  they  kept  as  a  fast,  because  they  were  inclined  to  do

*  every  thing  contrary  to  what  would  shew  the  least
4  respect  for  him."

57.  Here  then  is  about  the  heaviest  charge  of  athe-
ism, and  impiety,  fixed,  by  the  Catholic  fathers,  upon
the  ancient  Heretics  ;  which  may  be  more  clearly  un-
derstood by  what  follows.

58.  It  is  said,  that  Marcion  rejected  the  Old  Tes- ^id
tament. — He  also  objected  to  the  appointment  of  sac-  p-38'*
rifices — and  likewise  said  that  many  parts  of  the  New
Testament  were  writings  not  for  Christians,  but  for
Jews. He  is  also  charged  with  altering  many  places

to  suit  his  own  principles,  and  of  putting  a  wrong-
sense  upon  others :  one  particular  point  as  a  speci-
men, is  here  inserted  from  Lardner.

5\).  "  In  the  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  ch. ibiJ
'  iv.  4.  Marcion  understood  by  [0jro$  rx  ul£vos  txtv,'] p.  4qs>
f  the  god  of  this  world,  the Creator,  and  considered
6  him  as  here  opposed  to  the  good  God,  or  the  Father

*  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  the  God  of  the
i  Christians.  In  opposition  to  this,  Irenaeus,  Tertul-
'  lian,  and  others,  who  wrote  against  the  Marcionites,
1  were  for  placing  a  comma  after  €>*©$,  and  referring
f  aiavo$  txtx  to  anis-at,  and  so  read  it  u In  Vih%m

T


176  THE  FIRST  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN,  &X. P.  Ill,

chap, c  Qocf  /mt/t  biincied  the  eyes  of  the  unbelievers  of  this
«  world."

60.  u  To  us  of  the  present  day,  (says  LardncrJ)
6  this  sense  appears  very  harsh,  and  is  one  instance,
4  among  many  others,  how  far  the  heat  of  controversy
i  will  carry  men." — But  harsh  as  it  is,  this  comment
of  these orthodox Fathers  lias  been  retained  as  a

*SeePbn.  Catholic  doctrine  down  to  the  present  day — that  it  is
Fauifch  tne  °f&ce  °^  God,  as  a  righteous  judge,  to  blind  and
v.See.vi.  harden  the  wicked.*

61.  And  yet,  after  all  they  have  said  concerning
the  Heretics9  rejecting  the  scriptures,  the  whole  of
the  charge,  even  according  to  their  own  account,  is,
that  they  perverted  them.  As  an  evidence  of  this,
Lardner  produces  what  was  said  by  one  of  the  bish-

Lardner,  ops  of  the  ccuncil  of  Carthage. "  I  am  of  opinion
pfiVS' "  &at  blasphemous  and  wicked  Heretics,  who  per-

"  vert  the  sacred  and  adorable  words  of  the  scriptures,

"  ought  to  be  accursed."

62.  That  they  did  not,  in  every  point  of  view,  re-
ject the  scriptures,  is  manifest  from  the  accounu  of
their  enemies. f  The  truth  is,  they  rejected  the  ca-
tholic sense  of  them.  What  was  said  of  those
early  Heretics,  was  probably  the  same,  in  substance,
that  was  said  cf  other  Heretics  after  them.

63.  This  general  charge  against  ancient  Heretics,
of  rejecting  the  scriptures,  is  .judiciously  stated  by
Robinson  in  the  following  words,  which  relate  to  He-

Ecei.  Re-Vetics  of  a  later  period. "  The  fact  is,  they  knew  the

search  "
p.  90.


' <  Old  Testament  economy  was  dissolved  and  abolish


t  Among  the  many  evidences,  which  Lardner  produces,  to  prove  that  tin
heretics  did  r.ot  reject  the  scriptures,  we  notice  the  following.  "  Augumn  often
4  blajr.es  the  heretics  for  perverting  the  scripture  in  favour  or  then-  triors ;  not
4  that  they  rejected  or  despised  die  scriptures,  but  that  the}  misunderstood  them,
*  and  put  wrong  interpretations  upon  them.  All  heretics,  he  says,  endeavour
4  to  defend  tht  ir  false  opinions  by  the  authority  of  the  chine  scriptures.— In  hkc


*  manner  St.  Jcr$w  says-~that  heretics  strive  to  support  UieiruocUn.es  by  que-
'  tations  of  scripture-^that  they  eoiTUpt tbe  truth  oi  tlie  gospel,  by  Wrongmteivj
1  pretatiohs. Tamilian  speaks  much  to  the  same  purpt  sc.— .  ivibrfstastcr  *  do-.

*  scriptkin  of  heretics  is,  that  they  are  men  who  endeavour  tc  support  their  opin-
'ions  by  scripture,— attempting  to  defend  their  en  ors  by  theauthonty  oi  the  sop
e  ere-,  writings, Vicentiux  Linmtisis  ttstifies  the  same  thing,  informmg  us  that-

*  some  in  his  days,  who  were  called  heretics,  inade  great  use  of  scripture,  and
'continually  answered  tJuir  adverss  tries  and  calumniators  by  quotations  from
»tl  e  sacred  with  gs.  H<  indeed  says,  "  It  is  the  deAil  who  pus  these  aignmentj
«  into  their  mounts  i  rid peaks  by  them." I  rom  which  probably  seine  wib  con*

•p.

'Si  to

particulars  ;  sumce  u  to  mention  one  lusutjivc  ;  a  *>.*-;  «»^«vw  «tt.mst
4  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ftom  St  Paul's  woids:  1  Co*r.  xv.  50.'  loruncrr
vai.  k.  p.  152,  153,  U4,


«  into  their  mouths  and  speaks  by  them/'  1  rom  wmcii  pioaaory  scoiu  v  m  c«
1  elude,  [and  perhaps  ven  justly  too,]  that  inanj  of  their  arguments  frpn  sew
4  turo,  were  such  as  the!  i  u  %  could  not  a)  swer.—lt  wolild  be  endKsi

'.enter  into  particulars ;  suffice  it  to  iuentiou  one  instance :  'lhey  argued  agaw


P.  III.  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED BY, kc.  I7t

i  ed,  and  therefore  they  rejected,  not  as  history,  but c^^

■  as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice  to  Christians,  all  the

(  books  of  the  Old  Testament  down  to  Job. — They
'  saw  that  people,  who  did  not  make  this  distinction,
1  confounded  Christianity  with  Judaism."

64.  "  The  schools  under  pretence  of  expounding
'  Genesis,  filled  the  church  with  vain  disputes  about

<  matter  and  spirit,  the  origin  and  duration  of  the
6  world.  They  saw  the  priests  set  up  Exodus,  Num-
'  bers,  Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy,  as  the  rules  of  an

<  hierarchy,  never  intended  to  tnke  place  among;  Chris-
'  tians. They  heard  them  employ  kings  to  kill  and

<  slay  for  Jesus,  on  the  ground  of  the  book  of  Samuel,

*  Kings  and  Chronicles  :  and  they  discovered  their
c  wisdom  by  renouncing  all  sich  sophisms,  and  the
1  consequences  deduced  from  them/'

65.  "  They  placed  religion  in  what  it  really  con-  Ecd.Re
i  sists,  piety  and  virtue. They  had  neither  sophistry  ^jj*8*

*  in  their  doctrine,  nor  tyranny  in  their  government.
i  They  are  said  to  have  been  bad  expositors  of  scrip-

*  ture,  and  to  have  abounded  in  allegory  : but  assur-

<  edly,  the  vilest  of  all  expositors  is  he1,  who  finds  in

*  the  gospel  of  peace  a  divine  commission  to  spill  the

*  blood  of  his  fellow  creatures."

66.  Thus  far  for  the  first  distinction  between  Cath-
olics and  Heretics.  It  now  remains  to  pursue  those
progressive  steps  by  which  the  power  of  Antichrist
was  finally  established.


CHAPTER  V.

Antichrist  established  by  Roman  JEm/iCrors.

THE  design  of  Antichrist  from  the  beginning,
was  to  get' the  name,  the  seat,  and  reputed  au-
thority of  Christ,  and  convert  that  light  and  revela-
tion which  was  given  through  the  Son  of  God,  into
a  source  of  wealth  and  honour,  to  the  carnally-wise
and  wicked  of  the  world.

2.  The  enemy  of  God  and  man,  had  been  always


178  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BY  P.  III.

•hap. reac]y  to  pervert  and  corrupt  whatever  had  been  re-

m  vealed from  heaven,  by getting  it  into  the  hands  of

proud  and  wicked  priests,  who  could  accommodate  it
to  their  own  carnal  ends,  for  the  purpose  of  promo-
ting still  higher  degrees  of  wickedness,  until  it  was
Biade  manifest,  that  such  "doctrines  and  institutions,
whatever  they  were  at  firsts  could  not,  in  their  cor-
rupted state,  be  of  God.

3.  The  Jewish  and  Pagan  religions,  at  the  time  of
Christ's  first  appearing,  were  quite  sunk,  as  to  any
spiritual  authority,  and  the  priests  were  so  notoiious-
ly  wicked,  that  they  had  quite  lost  their  credit  with
the  people,  as  ministers  of  God  ;  nor  could  they
raise  sufficient  evidence,  upon  their  corrupted  forms
and  superstitions,  to  regain  their  influence  over  the
people.
JCw  ,  4.  Under  the  ministry  of  Jesus  and  his  followers,
x9s2$.  the  wisdom  of  these  impostors  was  turned  into  fool-
ishness, and  their  strength  became  weakness.  Their
violent  opposition  against  those  harmless  characters,
•which  their  own  prophets  and  poets  had  described  as
the  people  of  God,  made  it  manifest,  that  in  all  their
religious  zeal,  they  were  actuated  by  no  higher  mo-
tive than  a  regard  to  their  own  honour  and  interest.

5.  And  therefore,  when  all  men  were  likely  to  de-
sert them,  and  withdraw'  from  them,  not  only  their
ill-gained  salaries,  but  that  religious  reverence  which
they  had  deceitfully  gained  by  their  splendid  super-
stitions, there  remained  no  possible  way  ior  them  to
regain  their  credit  and  influence,  but  by  hypocritical-
ly embracing  that  religion,  which  was  confirmed  to
the  people  by  the  power  of  God.

6.  By  this  means  they  could  change  their  ground
to  advantage,  and  rise  in  wealth  and  honor,  above
their  former  standing,  in  proportion  as  this  new  rev-
elation was  superior  to  any  that  was  past.  This  was
to  be  the  last  time  for  their  aggrandizement.  God
had  sent  his  Son  into  the  world,  who  was  exalted
above  all  principality  and  power  ;  and  what  could  be
greater,  than  for  them  to  become  the  sons  of  God  ?

7.  Honest  souls  set  out  for  this  prize  by  taking  up
their  cross,  and  following  Christ.  They  entered  by
the  door  pf  selMenial ;  but  these  thieves  and  robbers


P. HI.  ROMAS  EMPERORS*  1*9

sought  means  to  climb  up  some  other  way. Simon ciJap-

Magus  was  the  first;  he  stood  ready  to  embrace  the  _,

gospol  in  the very  start,  and  even  to  purchase  with
money,  that  power  which  would  raise  him,  in  the  es-  £et*  vfe
teem  of  the  people,  to  a  level  with  the  apostles.

8.  Diotrephes  gained  the  pre-eminence,  and  ma-
ny followed  his  pernicious  ways.  The  Alexandrian
school  furnished  a  new  race  of  apostles,  whose  la-
bours, through  a  great  part  of  the  second  and  third
centuries,  consisted  in  forming  a  new  church,  whol-
ly different,  even  in  its  outward  appearance,  from
the  Primitive  Church  of  Christ.

9.  And  this  was  effected  by  holding  councils,  ap-
pointing offices,  and  assuming  titles,  condemning  he-
retics, and  disputing  among  themselves  about  their
self-invented  doctrines.  Thus,  from  one  thing  to  an-
other, they  altered,  expunged,  and  added,  until  their
Christian  religion,  so  called,  demanded  the  most  hon-
ourable seat  in  the  Roman  Empire,  and  its  promoters
became  exalted  to  the  utmost  pitch  of  pride,  luxury,
and  temporal  dominion  ;  by  which  the  nations  of  the
earth  have  been  deceived,  even  to  the  present  day.

10.  The  followers  of  the  Orthodox  Fathers,  have
generally  agreed,  that  the  establishment  of  the  Chris-
tian religion,  so  called,  by  the  Roman  emperors,  was
an  introduction  to  the  reign  of  Christ  upon  earth.
They  have  generally  agreed,  that  Constantine  the
Great,  was  the  man-child,  spoken  of  in  Revelations,  Rev-  **•
who  was  to  rule  the  nations :  and,  that  the  church
which  brought  him  forth,  was  the  true  church  of
Christ,  which,  at  the expiration  of  twelve  hundred

and sixty  years, would appear  in  her latter-day-
glory  ; when  all  heresies,  or  false  doctrines,  (which
are  to  be considered as  the  flood  of  the  dragon,)
should  be  swallowed  up,  and  taken  out  of  the  way  of
Catholic  Truth.

11.  It  is  well  known  that  this  is  the  general  faith
of  Protestants,  as  well  as  that  of  their  Mother  Church,
and  that  all  parties  in  the  great  Catholic  division,  con-
sider Constantine  the  Great,  as  the  most  eminent
father,  and  founder  of  their  religion  and  government.
The  following  remarks  of  President  JLdivards,  arc

T2


180  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED BY  P.  III.


CHAP.
V.


conformable  to  the  general  opinion  of  protestant  wri-
ters on  this  subject.
Hist.  He.  12.  In  his  History  of  Redemption,  he  says,  M  I
p.  4n.  4  come  now  in  the  fourth  place,  to  the  great  revolu-
4  tion  that  was  in  the  world  in  the  days  of  Constantine,
4  which  was,  in  many  respects,  like  Christ's  appearing
4  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  to  save  his  people,  and  judge
4  the  world. "

13.  "  The  people  of  Rome,  being  weary  of  the  gov-
4  eminent  of  those  tyrants  to  whom  they  had  lately
4  been  subject,  sent  to  Constantine,  who  was  then  in
4  the  city  of  York  in  England,  to  come  and  take  the
4  throne.  And  he  being  encouraged,  as  is  said,  by  a
4  vision  of  a  pillar  of  light  in  the  heavens,  in  the  form
*  of  a  cross,  in  the  sight  of  his  whole  army,  with  this
4  inscription,  By  this  conquer  ;  and  the  night  follow -
4  ing,  by  Christ's  appearing  to  him  in  a  dream  with
4  the  same  cross  iij  his  hand,  who  directed  him  to
4  make  a  cross  like  that  to  be  his  royal  standard,  that
4  his  army  might  fight  under  that  banner,  and  assured
4  him  that  he  should  overcome.**

14.  "  Accordingly  he  did,  and  overcame  his  cne-
1  mies,  took  possession  of  the  imperial  throne,  em-
4  braced  the  Christian  religion,  and  was  the  first
4  Christian  emperor  that  ever  reigned.  lie  came  to
*■  the  throne  about  320  years  after  Christ.  There  are
4  several  things  which  I  would  take  notice  of,  which
4  attended  or  immediately  followed  ConstantinSs  com-
4  ing  to  the  throne."

15.  "  First.  The  Christian  church  was  thereby
4  wholly  delivered  from  persecution. — Christians  had
4  no  persecutions  now  to  fear.  Their  persecutors
«  now  were  ail  put  down,  and  their  rulers  were  some
4  of  them  Christians  like  themselves.  Second.  God
4  now  appeared  to  execute  terrible  judgments  on  their
4  enemies. — So  that  what  now  came  to  pass,  might

. 4  very  fitly  be  compared  to  their  hiding  themselves
1^16,17.  4  in  the  dens  and  rocks  of  the  mountains.5'

16."  Third.  Heathenism  now  was  in  a  great  meas-
4  ure  abolished  throughout  the  Roman  empire.  Ima-
4  ges  were  now  destroyed,  and  heathen  temples  pul-
4  led  down.  Images  of  gold  and  silver  were  melted
4  down,  and  coined  into  money. — The  heathen  priests
*  were  dispersed  and  banished."


P.  III.  R0MA2C  EMPERORS.  181

17.  Fourth. u  Now  all  heathen  magistrates  were chap.

<  put  down,  and  only  Christians were advanced  to *
4  places  of  authority  all  over  the  empire. They  had

i  now  Christian  presidents,  Christian  governors,  Chris-
4  tiin  judges  and  officers,  instead  of  their  old  heathen-
'  ish  ones.  Constantine  set  himself  to  honour  the
'  Christian  bishops  or  ministers,  and  to  build  and
'  adorn  churches  ;  and  now  large  and  beautiful  Chris?

*  tian  churches  were  erected  in  all  parts  of  the  world,
'  instead  of  the  old  heathen  temples."

18.  "  This  was  the  greatest  revolution  in  the  face.
4  of  things  that  ever  came  to  pass  since  the  flood. —
<-  Satan  tempted  Christ,  and  promised  to  give  him
'.the  glory  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  ;  but  now
c  he  is  obliged  to  give  it  to  him  even  against  his  will.

<  This  wds  a  glorious  fulfilment  of  that  promise  which  Isa.  n&
c  God  made  to  his  Son,  that  we  have  an  account  of  in  12-
'Isaiah."

19.  "  This  was  a  great  fulfilment  of  the  prophe-
'  cies  of  the  Old  Testament  concerning  the  glorious
i  time  of  the  gospel,  and  particularly  of  the  proph-
'  ecies  of  Daniel.  Now  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is
'  come  in  a  glorious  degree.  It  pleased  the  Lord
j  God  of  heaven  to  set  up  a  kingdom  on  the  ruins  of
4  that  of  Satan. — And  now  see  to  what  a  height  that
6  glorious  building  is  raised,  which  had  been  building

<  ever  since  the  fall."

20.  Many  things  more  might  be  added  from  this
author,  and  also  from  others,  to  show  the  high  repu-
tation, in  which  Constantine  is  held* — that  he  is  con-
sidered as  the  greatest  birth,  that  had  ever  been  pro-
duced since  the  flood  :  and  this  idea  is  still  more  in-
geniously stated  by  Whist on ,  and  after  him  by  Bishop
Newt o?i  thus :

21."  For  as  the  time  of gestation  from  the  con-  Dissert.
1  ception  to  the  birth  in  woman  with  child,  is  known  ^lIS*-
4  to  be  forty  weeks,  or  two  hundred  and  eighty  days  ; P- lSe-

<  so  it  is  well  known,  that  from  the  first  rise  of  our

*  The  following  comment  (on  Rev.  mi.  5.6,  8cc.)  by  certain  learned  divines,  so
called,  may  also  serve  as  a  striking  proof,  to  show  the  e>aited  veneration  in
whiah  ConjtaiUine  and  his  successors  are  held  by  the  defenders  of  his  faith— vis.
A  man-child  vaught  up  to  God  and  his  throne  :] ""Meaning  (say  they)  Constantine

*  and  his  successors  to  the  Roman  empire,  and  made  Crod's  deputies,  tilting  as  it

*  were  on  his  throne'*—  War  in  heaven  :~\  4i  A  great  battle  in  the  Church  of  God.*'
J.  e.  in  the  Church  of  the  Catholics— Micliael  and  his  Angels ;]  "  Constantine  a»'I

*  ftr;  soldiers,  &*.''' See  Asscrrityy's  Ann«k$km  on  the  place. Lob.  Ed.  TO*!.


1&2  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BY  P.  Ill,


GHAP.

V.


<  Saviour's  kingdom,  A.  D.  33.  till  the  famous  proo
(  lamation  and  edict,  for  the  universal  liberty  and  ad-
'  vancement  of  Christianity  by  Constantine  and  Licin-

<  ius,  A.  D.313,  was  exactly  two  hundred  and  eigh-
4  ty  years.  Reckoning  according  to  the  prophetic  ac-
t  count,  a  day  for  a  year."

23.  That  Constantine  laid  the  foundation  of  a  vast
kingdom,  a  Catholic,  or  universal  empire,  is  not  dis-
puted. But  whether  it  was  the  kingdom  of  Christ,
or  of  Antichrist,  is  the  question.  And  should  it  be
found  to  be  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  which  he  set
in  order,  then  his  descent  must  be  reckoned  from
Simon  Magus,  who  was  cotemporary  with  the  apos-
tles, and  not  from  Jesus  of  A'azareth.

23.  If  Christ  Jesus  was  truly  the  Son  of  God,  and
if  the  Primitive  Church  was  his  real  body,  so  long
as  that  Church  remained,  and  Christ  Jesus  reigned
in  it,  what  need  could  there  be  of  another  birth  or
bringing  forth  of  the  same  ?  And  if  it  is  established,
that  another  gestation  commenced  in  the  very  year
that  Simon  the  sorcerer  professed  faith  in  Christ,  and
offered  to  purchase  the  power  of  God  with  money,
and  that  birth  took  place  in  the  same  year  that  Con-
stantine and  Licinius  proclaimed  universal  liberty,
then  what  could  it  be  but  the  birth  of  Antichrist  ?

24.  And  especially,  if  it  is  found  that  both  the
body  and  spirit  brought  forth  in  this  latter  period,  is
essentially  different  from  the  former,  then  it  must
follow,  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  the  latter  is  the
body  and  spirit  of  Antichrist,  and  of  course,  that  all
such  as  have  sprung  from  that  body  and  spirit,  or
claim  any  relation  thereto,  are  properly  members  of
Antichrist's  kingdom,  and  stand  in  no  relation  to
Christ  the  true  Son  of  God.

25.  Is  it  not  surprising,  how  any  sensible  men  could
avoid  seeing  the  plain  contrast  between  the  spirit  and
works  of  Constantine,  and  those  of  the  Primitive
Christians  ?  And  how  could  any  have  the  confidence
to  appropriate  the  name  of  the  true  God,  or  of  Christ
his  Son,  to  a  haughty,  and  blood-thirsty  Pagan,  who,
through  scenes  of  human  butchery,  established  him-
self at  the  head  of  a  religion,  of  which  he  knew  no-
thing but  the  name  ?


P.  III.  ROMAN  EMPERORS.  183

26.  Where  is  the  least  resemblance  of  the  inno- c^p«
cent  Jesus,  even  according  to their  own  account?  __.
Was  it  in  accepting  the  gloiy  of  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  ?  Surely  here  the  contrast  is  perfect :  and  so  it
continues  in  every  branch  of  his  proceedings.

27.  This  is  manifest  from  his  conduct  in  spreading
desolation  and  destruction  through  the  empire,  butch-
ering or  banishing  his  former  brethren,  taking  tbeir
property,  and  coining  their  gold  and  silver  into  money
for  his  own  use — in  honouring*,  and  promoting  the
same  kind  of  men  to  posts  of  honour  and  profit — in
building  temples,  different  in  name,  but  as  magnifi-
cent, and  ornamented  with  as  splendid  images,  as
those  which  he  destroyed.  And  all  this  they  ascribe
to  the  mighty  power  of  God,  above  ail  that  had  ever
appeared  since  the  flood,  Jesus  and  his  apostles  not
excepted  ?

28.  How  is  it  possible  that  any  man  of  sense  could
be  so  imposed  upon,  as  to  believe  that  the  sacred
scriptures,  written  by  the  persecuted  John,  was  ful-
filled in  the  frighted  nonconformists'  hiding  them-
selves in  the  dens  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  mountains,
from  Lord  Constantine,  who  sat  upon  the  throne
of  Augustus,  and  from  the  wrath  of  that  wild  and
furious  emperor,  who  first  had  the  assurance  to  shed
human  blood,  under  the  ensign  of  a  cross.

29.  Happily,  the  tree  is  kn^xvn  by  its  fruit:  and
therefore,  we  shall  observe  a  little  more  particularly,
the  fruits  of  this  great  revolution  ;  from  which  it  will
appear  still  more  evident,  that  it  was  not  Christ ,  but
Antichrist,  who  accepted  of  that  temporal  honour,
power  and  preferment,  by  which  he  adjusted  matters
in  his  Catholic  or  Universal  Church,  so  as  to  prepare
for  his  unlimited  spiritual  reign,


184  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BY  P.  III.

CHAPTER VI.

The  Subject  continued.

€viP* A CCORDING  to  Mosheim  raid  others,  Comtan*

±\. tine  proiessed  to  be  convened  to  the  Christian

Ecei.His-  faith,  about  the  year  313,  while  on  his  march  toward
1°p  3i2I#  ^ome'  to  decide  by  a  bloody  battle  with  Maxentius,
which  of  them  should  be  the  greatest.  And  having
defeated  his  antagonist,  he  was  instated  on  the  impe-
rial throne  ;  soon  after  which,  he  repealed  those  laws
which  had  been  enacted  agednst  the  Christians.

2.  But  in  all  this,  what  evidence  appears  to  prove
that  it  was  the  true  faith  of  the  Son  of  God  that  he
embraced  ?  His  followers  say,  that  he  saw  the  appear-
ance of  a  Cross  in  the  heavens,  and  that  Christ  ap-
peared to  him  in  a  dream,  with  the  same  cross  in  his
hand,  with  this  inscription  on  it :  ( Hac  vince)  By
this  conquer.

3.  But  why  did  not  Christ  come  to  him  with  a
sword  in  his  hand,  and  tell  him  to  conquer  by  that  t
Was  it  by  the  cross,  or  by  the  sword  that  he  conquer-
ed ?  *[f  by  the  sword,  then  he  mistook  the  vision  al-
together.

4.  But  it  seems  he  made  a  sign  of  that  visionary
cross,  and  set  it  up  as  a  standard  to  fight  under  ;  and
herein  he  manifested  the  very  spirit  of  his  Catholic
Christianity,  by  establishing  an  outward  sign  or  ap-
pearance of  Christ,  under  which  he  could  act  in  direct
opposition  to  the  nature  and  spirit  of  the  Lamb  of  God.

5.  The  fact  is,  if  Christ  Jesus  appeared  to  Constan-
tine,  and  gave  him  authority  to  draw  the  sword,  and
force  his  way  to  the  throne,  through  scenes  of  blood
and  carnage  ; — if  he  commissioned  him  to  repe al  ci-
vil laws  and  statutes — to  pull  down  temples  and  build
them  again — to  banish  heretics,  promote  proud  bish-
ops, and  so  on,  he  must  first  have  repealed  all  the
laws  he  ever  gave  his  disciples,  and  contradicted  all
that  he  ever  taught.

Heb.  xiii. 6*  But  if  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and

_  *• ...  forever — if  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  v/orld — if  his

36. servants  will  not  fight — if  they  are poor  m  spint>


P.  HI.  ROMAN EMPERORS.  185

meek,  merciful,  peace-makers — and  if  the  fruits  of  CI*£P-
his  spirit  are  iove,  joy,  peace,  and  such  like  ;  then  it


follows,  that  it  was  neither  Christ  Jesus,  nor  any  of  m^.  v.
his  lollowers,  tha«  repealed  or  contradicted  his  doc-  2*  9-
trines,  but  cunning  deceivers  who  crept  in  unawares.

7.  If  there  was  any  truth  in  the  story  of  Constan-
tino's seeing-  a  vision,  it  was  not  Christ  that  appear-
ed to  him,  to  encourage  him  to  the  battle  ;  but  the
father  of  deception  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light.

8.  It  is  readily  granted,  that  Constantine  effected
a  great  revolution,  by  incorporating  together  the  civil
and  ecclesiastical  powers  under  the  name  of  Christ ;
for  which  ills  followers  exalt  him  above  all  that  had
been  called  God  :  yet  they  are  greatly  mistaken,  when
they  suppose  that  his  motiey  empire  exceeded  in  tern-
poral  glory,  the  kingdom  of  Solomon.*  The  fact  is,  ch.  U.
it  fell  unspeakably  siiort :  then  with  how  much  less
propriety  must  it  bear  any  comparison  to  the  spiritual
kingdom  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  !

9.  Instead  of  being  greater  than  Solomon,  this
great  head  of  the  orthodox  Churches  must,  in  fact,
appear  less  than  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;

that  is,  such  a  one  as  in  no  case  can  enter  into  it,t  l"8^****

.  v.  1Q  20.

as  is  most  strikingly  evident  from  the  following  con-
cession,
i 10.  "  It  must  indeed  be  confessed,  (says  Mosheim,)  KecLKi*-

. i  ■,  *  •  p  ,  .  r , .  .  tor1.",  vol.

*  that  the lite  and actions  ot this prince,  were  not  iplau,
4  such  as  the  Christian  religion  demands  from  those  S14'

4  who  profess  to  believe  its  sublime  doctrines.  It  is
4  also  certain,  that  from  his  conversion  to  the  last  pe-
4  riod  of  his  life,  he  continued  in  the  state  of  a  cau-
4  fhumen^  and  was  not  received  by  baptism  into  the
4  number  of  the  faithful,  until  a  few  days  before  his
4  death,  when  that  sacred  rite  was  administered  to  him
4  bt-JVicomedza,  by  Euscbins,  bishop  of  that  place."

11.  "  For  it  was  a  custom  with  many,  in  this  cen-

*  tury,  to  put  off  their  baptism  to  the  lust  hour,  that

4  thus  immediately  after  receiving  by  this  rite  the  re-  .
4  mission  of  their  sins,  they  might  ascend  pure  and
4  spotless  to  the  mansions  of  life  and  immortality. "

12.  So  far  the  principles  and  practices  of  this  Cath-
olic emperor  are  simply  stated  ;  the  next  thing  then
is  to  garnish  over  the whited  sepulchre,  and  prove


186  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BY  P.  III.

chap, him  a  sincere Christian. And to  effect  this,  his

, wicked  life  and  actions  are  covered  up  in  such  false

"  and  unscriptural  reasoning  as  the  following.

13.  "  Nor  are  the  crimes  of  Constantine  any  proof
4  of  the  insincerity  of  his  profession,  since  nothing
4  is  more  evident,  though  it  be  strange  and  unac-
4  countable,  than  that  many  who  believe,  in  the  firm-
4  est  manner,  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  gospel,
4  yet  violate  its  laws  by  repeated  transgressions,  and
*  live  in  contradiction  to  their  own  inward  principles."
'14.  Was  there  ever  a  plainer  mark  of  an  Anti-
christ ?  Who  can  be  more  justly  entitled  to  that  char-
acter than  a  man,  who  believes  the  truth  and  divinity
of  the  gospel,  and  yet  lives  in  contradiction  to  his
own  inward  principles?  And  because,  under  the  doc-
trines of  Christ,  this  had  become  common,  there-
fore, it  must  be  used  as  an  apology  for  Constant ine's
atari,  wickedness  !  «  Wo  to  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the
LqrV)  that  take  counsel,  but  not  of  me ;  and  that
cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  spirit,  that  they
may  add  sin  to  sin.3'

15.  If  it  were  granted  that  Christianity  came  to
Conslamine,  through  the  mongrel  bishops,  in  such
a  dress,  and  that  neither  he,  nor  his  civil  officers,
ever  heard  the  true  gospel  from  a  living  man  of  God,
(which  was  most  likely  the  case,)  this  might  be  some
excuse  for  his  professing  to  be  a  Christian,  while  his
practice  was  directly  contrary  to  his  profession.

16.  But  even  admitting  that  his  principles  were
formed,  in  any  sense,  according  to  the  doctrine  of
Christ ;  yet  if  he  lived  in  contradiction  to  his  princi-
ples,^ it  must  have  constituted  him  an  Antichrist ;
that  is,  having  Christ  in  principle,  and  living  against
him  in  practice.

17.  They  that  have  not  Christ  in  some  sense  or
other,  cannot  crucify  him.  But  apprehending  him
by  faith,  and  living  a  life  contrary  to  his  life,  is  both
crucifying  him  afresh,  and  putting  him  to  an  open
shame. — |C7*  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  Antichrist  ;
and  this  is  the  most  prominent  character  of  the
cheat  constantine,  even  as  exhibited  by  his  friends
and  followers.

18.  It  probably  was  the  inward  principles  of  this


P.  III.  ROMAN  EMPERORS.  18F

great  man  to  live  in  peace,  but  this  he  found  impossi-  C1**p*
ble  at  the  head  of  an  avaricious,  contentious,  and  as-  ,
piring  priesthood.  He  found  it  impossible  to  serve
two  masters,  and  therefore,  when  he  set  himself  to
honour  and  promote  the  bishops,  he  must  of  course,
at  the  same  time,  set  himself  to  dishonour  the  name
of  Jesus,  and  put  away  the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel.

19.  Hence  all  his  mighty  works,  which  he  wrought
under  the  influence  of  these  sanctimonious  deceivers,
are  such  as  will  be  eternally  disclaimed  by  every  fol-
lower of  the  meek  and  lowly  Saviour.  Even  while
the  corrupters  of  the  gospel  were  exulting  in  the
great  advancement  of  their  church,  established  un-
der Christian  Presidents,  Christian  Magistrates,  and
Christian  Officers  of  every  rank,  there  were  many
souls  who  viewed  this  event  as  a  horrible  prelude  to
the  total  overthrow  of  the  pure  doctrine  and  manners
of  the  apostolic  church.

20.  Nor  did  those  catholic  betrayers  of  the  rights
of  conscience  long  enjoy  their  ill-founded  confidence

of  universal  empire  :  for  a  house  divided  against  it-  Matt.  x«,
self  cannot  stand. It  was  but  a  little  while  before  the  25'
chief  promoters  of  the  Catholic  cause were  up  in
arms  against  each  other.

21.  "  The  joy,  (says  Mosheim,)  with which  the  EcHwt.
1  Christians  were  elated,  on  account  of  the  favourable  J^1**
i  edicts  of  Constantine  and  Licinius,  was  soon  inter-

*  rupted  by  the  war  which  broke  out  between  these
'  two  princes."  Here  this  great  man-child,  as  they
call  him,  enters  the  list  with  his  own  colleague,  and
in  the  year  314,  by  a  pitched  battle,  they  settle  the
point,  which  of  them  shall  be  the  greatest.

22.  Next,  the character of  Constantine  must be m.
buiit  upon  the  ruins  of  that  of  Licinius,  and  even  Ju-  NoteM
lian,  whom  they  call  the  apostate,  is  quoted  to  prove

that  Licinius  was  an  infamous  tyrant,  a  profligate ',
abandoned  to  all  sorts  of  wickedness.  It  is  easy  to  see
how  much  honour  is  reflected  on  the  Catholic  cause
from  this  character  of  one  of  its  principal  pillars.

23.  But  if  facts  will  demonstrate  a  character  as
clearly  as^  words,  then  we  may  judge  from  the  follow-
ing whether  Licinius,  or  Constantine  was  the  most  in-
famous tyrant We  find  it  stated  by  Mosheim^  that,

XI


188  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BIT  P.  III.

Cyfv* "  After  several  battles  fought  between  them,  Liciniua

' i  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  throwing  himself

Ec.  Hist.  l  at  tne  victor's  feet,  and  imploring  his  clemency  j

vei.i.  p. 4  which,  however,  he  did  not  long  enjoy  ;  for  he  was

<  strangled  by  the  orders  of  Constantine,*  in  the  year

<  325."

24.  Much  has  been  said  about  David's  murdering
Uriah,  that  he  might  enjoy  his  wife  \  David  only  had
Uriah  placed  in  the  front  of  the  battle,  yet  it  is  called
murder  ;  then  what  shall  be  said  of  the  conduct  of
Constantine  toward  his  former  colleague,  and  now
humble  suppliant  Licinins^  in  ordering  him  to  be
strangled  ?  Truly  it  may  be  said  that,  Cain  like,  he
alenv  his  brother.

25.  Was  this  breaking  one  of  the  least,  or  one  of
the  greatest  commandments  ?  /  came  not  (says  Christ,)
to  destroy  the  law,  neither  to  destroy  men's  lixei-—
Thou  shalt  not  kill.  It  may  be  said  JLicinins  was  an
enemy. But  where  did  Christ  say  ihcu  shalt  kill  thine

^^44  enem^es'  ar'c*  slay  them  that  despitefully  use  you  ?f

26.  Here  then  is  so  manifest  a  difference  between
Christ,  and  the  Roman  Emperor,  that  the  one  came
to  save  men*s  lives,  and  the  other  to  destroy  even  the
humble  suppliant,  who  cast  himself  at  his  feet  im-

*  According  to  Lcrdncr,  it  appears  that  Lirh-ivs  (to  wbero  Ccnstantine,\v.  the
time  of  tlitir  friendship,  bad  given  his  wstet  Ccnstuntia  in  marriage)  was  put  to
death  at  Thessulonka,  after  Cchstantmc  had  reduced  him  to  a  private  condition,
and  promised  him  his  life. Lardner  observes  that,  "Many  ancient  writers

*  charge  Cow  tontine  with  a  breach  of  faith  in  this  matter."  Tsor  is  this  the  only  <
crime  of  the  kmd  alleged  against  Constantine.  He  had  already  dispatchf dibs
father  in  law,  Maa.ir,:uml  whose  son  MuxenLws,  lie  was  at  war  with,  at  the  time
•1  his  pretended  concision.  Alter  tl  is,  (in  314,  or  315.)  he  put  to  death  Eas*
sianus,  to  whom  he  had  married  his  sister  Anasicsia.  In  the  year  326,  he  put  I
!to  death  his  son  Crtepus,  and  his  nephew  Lkmianvt,  or  Liiittius  the  ym.vytr  :
the  former  about  twenty-five  years  of  age,  and  the  latter  about  eleven.  Nextj
eomes  Fausta  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  Ntuhnicn^ho  was  put  to  death  not  long  ;
after  the  two  last.  After  giving  an  account  oi  these  three  last,  Larmier  adds,
"  These  are  the  executions,  which  above  ail  others,  casta  reflection  upon  the

1  reign  of  Constantine  ;  though  there  are  also  hints  p.  the  death  o<  some  others  -

*  about  the  same  time,  with  whom  Constantine  had  till  then  lived  in  friendship."
See  Lardner's  Works,  Vol.  IV.  p.  172— 176.

The  causes  which  excited  Constantine  to  put  to  death  so  many  of  his  relations,
-appear  to  be  veiled  in  obscurity ;  and  perhaps  designedly  so,  in  older  to  conceal
from  the  world  crimes  which  the  friends  of  Constcntwc  eould  not  justify,  and
dare  not  condemn.  From  the  hints  given  by  various  writers,  Ltifinti  thinks  it
likely  that,  the  death  oi  Lirihius  and  his  son,  was  brcught  about  by  Constantine
in  oxder  to  secure  the  empire  in  his  own  family  :  aid  that  the  death  oJ  Ciisptti
was  probably  occasioned  by  the  instigations  of  his  step-mother  FtMSta  ;  who,  lor
the  same  reasons  that  Constantine  was  desirous  to  secure  the  empire  in  hisowij
family,  was  concerned  to  secure  it  to  his  issue  by  her,  in  preference  to  Ciispvs,
who  was  his  soli  by  ft  former  wife.  Among  the  causes  to  which  Icvstu'*  ele^th  is
attributed,  the  account  given  by  Zosimiis  seems  not  unlikely:  viz.m*  Helena,  the
w  mother  of  Constantine,\x.ii.g  extremely  grieved  at  the  death  p£€ri*pu*i  otited
"  Constantine  to  revenge  it  on  Fausta,  the  advise  r  oi"  it."  H  is  asserted,  fcy  the
sa*ie  author,  that  he  sect  and  bad  her  suffocated  in  a  bath.


P.  IIL  ROMAN  5MPERORS.  189

ploring  his  clemency. Here  was  a  fair  opportunity  CIJAP-
of  proving  the  spirit  of  Constantino  __.

27.  Was  he  possessed  of  the  meek  and  merciful
spirit  of  Chri&t,  or  with  the  cruel  and  merciless  spirit
of  a  tyrant,  when  he  ordered  Licinius  to  be  strang-
led ?  For  his  manifest  object  was  to  possess  his  do-
minions and  reign  sole  lord  of  the  empire  :  which  he
did  from  that  period  until  his  death.

28.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  might  argue
some  degree  of  candour  in  Constantine,  to  decline
being  numbered  among  the  faithful  till  he  was  past
committing  such  bloody  crimes  :  but  who  could  as-
sure him  that  his  blood-guiltiness  could,  in  the  end,
J)e  washed  away  with  a  little  water  ?  Surely  this  de-
lusion of  Antichrist  belonged  to  the  priesthood.

29.  It  will  further  appear  evident,  beyond  dispute,
that  it  was  not  the  cause  of  Christ  that  Constantine
espoused,  if  we  consider  the  fruits  of  his  spirit,  which
appeared  in  his  successors.

30.  "  After  the  death  of  Constantine,  which  hap-  Kcd.ir*

/  i«i  «~~ t  • i  •-*  . toiy,  vol*

•  penea  in  the  year  337,  ins  three  sons,  Constantine  i.p.3ifc
1  II.  Const  an  tius,  and  Constant,  were,  in  consequence  ,>l0'

1  of  his  appointment,  put  in  possession  of  the  em-
1  pire,  and  were  all  saluted  as  emperors  and  Augustii
4  by  the  Roman  senate/'

31.  "  There  were  yet  living  two  brothers  of  the
4  late  emperor, -viz.  Constantius  Dalmatius,  and  Juli-
i  us  Constantius,  and  they  had  several  sons. These

♦  the  sons  of  Constantine  ordered  to  be  put  to  death,
i  lest  their  ambitious  views  should  excite  troubles  in
1  the  empire.  And  they  all  fell  victims  to  this  barba-
1  rous  order,  except  Gatlus  and  Julian,  the  sons  of

*  Julius  Constantius,  the lntter  of  whom  rose  after-

*  wards  to  the  imperial  dignity."

32.  Here  then  is  the  first  fruits  of  that  spirit  which
flowed  from  this  imperial  head  of  the  Catholic  church
to  his  successors — A  cruel  massacre  of  their  nearest
relations,  from  a  sordid  thirst  oi  empire  I  And  what
was  the  language  of  this  horrid  and  barbarous  act  t#
the  subordinate  members  of  their  motley  govern-
ment ?  Surely  it  must  be  this,  Be  ye  followers  of  us,
fven  as  we  arc  of  Constantine.

33.  The bloody murderers,  however,  could  not


199  ANTICHRIST  ESTABLISHED  BY,  ScC. P.  III.

c**£p- long  agree  among  themselves. "  The  dominions  al-
4  lotted  to  Constantine,  were  Britain,  Gaul  and  Sfiain  ;


Ecci.His-  '  but  he  did  not  possess  them  long,  for,  having  made

?jM2o!'  i  ^lmse^  master,  by  force,  of  several  places  belong-

4  ing  to  Constans,  this  occasioned  a  war  between  the

4  two  brothers,  in  the  year  340,  in  which  Constantino

f  lost  his  life."

34.  Constans  the  conqueror,  now  became  sole
master  of  all  the  western  provinces,  of  which  he  re-
mained in  possession  until  the  year  350,  when  he
was  cruelly  assassinated  by  Magnentius,  one  of  his
commanders,  who  afterwards,  in  a  fit  of  rage  and
despair  at  his  ill  success  in  a  war  against  Constantius^
laid  violent  hands  upon  himself:  and  lastly,  Constan-
tius  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  year  361,  at  Mofisucrenc,
as  he  was  marching  against  Julian,

35.  Such  were  the  successors  of  Constantine,
whom  the  Christian  world,  so  called,  respect  as  the
great  fiillars  of  their  religious  establishment.  And*
though  guilty  of  the  most  horrid  and  barbarous  crimes*
yet  are  honoured  and  applauded  under  the  beautiful
mask  of  a  Christian  profession,  following  the  exam*
pie  of  their  father,  (as  Mosheim  expresses  it)  "  in
4  continuing  to  abrogate  and  efface  the  ancient  super*
4  stitions  of  the  Romans  and  other  idolatrous  nations,
4  and  to  accelerate  the  progress  of  the  Christian  reli-
4  gion  throughout  the  empire."

36.  But  observe  what  follows  :  "  This  flourishing
*  progress  of  the  Christian  religion  was  greatly  inter-
4  rupted,  and  the  church  reduced  to  the  brink  of  de-
4  struction,  when  Julian,  the  son  of  Julius  Constan-
4  tins  was  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs. "

37.  What  is  the  matter  now  ?  This  prince,  though
he  had  been  educated  in  the  principles  of  Christiani-
ty, "  yet,  (says  Mosheim,)  he  apostatized  from  that
4  divine  religion. "  And  pray  what  was  the  cause  of
this  apostacy  ?  The  answer  is,  "  It  was  partly  owing*
4  to  his  aversion  to  the  Constantine  family,  who
4  had  embrued  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  his  father,
4  brother,  and  kinsmen. **  It  was  therefore,  not  from
the  religion  of  Jesus  that  he  apostatized,  but  from

^ that  of  bloody  murderers.
JK32S. s$.  «  Jwlian (adds  the  doctor,)  affected,  in  general,


P.  HI.  GENERAL  MARKS  OF, &C  l$l

4  to  appear  moderate  in  religious  matters,  unwilling c***p*
4  to  trouble  any  on  account  of  their  faith,  or  to  seem  _,

4  averse  to  any  sect  or  party." And  because  he  al-
lowed equal  liberty  to  all,  or  as  Robinson  expresses
it,  "  The  just  and  gentle  Julian^  because  he  headed  Eeci.i^
4  neither  party,  and  put  off  the  purple  unstained  with  s©arch«4
4  the  blood  of  Heretics,  both  sides  agree  to  execrate  p*
4  him  as  a  diabolical  apostate."

39.  And  strange  as  it  may  seem,  this  mild  and
equitable  government  under  Julian,  is  by  some  of
the  most  eminent  orthodox  divines,  included  in  the
flood  which  the  dragon,  i.  e.  the  devil,  poured  out  of
his  mouth  to  destroy  the  woman,  i.  e.  the  church,
and  her  son,  the  Roman  emperor.

40.  But  having  examined  this  man-child,  which
they  have  exalted,  not  only  to  God  and  to  his  throney
but  above  all  that  is  called  God,  we  shall  leave  him  at
present,  and  examine  a  little  further  into  the  spirit
and  conduct  of  her  that  bare  him.


555


CHAPTER  VII.

General  Marks  of  the  Catholic  Religion.

T  \  THOEVER  examines  the  accounts  given  by  his-
V  V  torians,  of  the  nature  and  genius  of  that  reli-
gion which  was  established  by  the  Catholic  Fathers,
under  the  name  of  Christianity,  will  find  that  it  dif-
fers as  widely  from  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in
the  Primitive  Church  of  Christ,  as  did  their  imperial
forms  of  government.

2.  In  fact,  their  religion  was  all  of  a  kind;  and
therefore,  instead  of  retaining  that  divine  power,
which,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  manifested  itself
in  every  good  word  and  work,  they  adopted  a  vain
parade  of  external  rites  and  ceremonies,  resembling
those  of  the  Jews  and  Pagans.

3.  These  they  united  to  their  corrupt  doctrines  ;
and  for  the  support  and  propagation  of  both,  they,  in
process  of  time,  raised  the  arm  of  persecution  against

U  2


192  GEWKRAL  MAUKS  OF  P.  Ill,


CHAP.

VII.


all  such  as  were  so  far  enlightened  as  to  differ  from
them,  and  so  presumptuous,  in  their  esteem,  as  to
think  and  act  for  themselves.

4.  From  the  first  formation  of  the  Catholic  system,
before  ever  Constantine  ascended  the  throne,  the
principal  account  that  is  given  of  the  religion  of  the
seif-stiled  orthodox,  is,  their  either  practising  old
rites  and  ceremonies,  or  inventing  new  ones,  which
put  them  stiil  at  a  greater  distance  from  every  appear-
ance of  the  humble  followers  of  Jesus.

5.  Many  there  were,  however,  who  could  not  con-
form to  these  absurd  innovations,  who  consequently
were  looked  upon  as  persons  of  no  religion,  and  against
whom  the  most  bloody  persecutions  were  raised,  as
soon  as  the  aid  of  civil  power  was  attained  ;  the  cru-
el and  lawless  spirit  of  which  has,  more  or  less,  con-
tinued to  the  present  day.

6.  From  all  that  has  been  written  concerning  the
rise  and  progress  of  this  catholic  religion,  even  by
their  own  historians,  it  is  plain,  that  the  most  dis-
tinguishing marks  of  it,  are,  Superstition  and  Perse-
cution :  of  which  we  shall  here  insert  a  brief  account
from  their  early  beginning.

7.  By  superstition  is  meant,  any  religious  offering,
act,  or  performance,  for  which  there  is  no  present
order,  or  command  from  heaven  ;  but  which  is  either
invented  or  practised  to  serve  the  selfish  ends  of
some  human  priesthood  :  and  hence,  the  vain  super-
stitions of  the  catholic  church,  took  their  rise,  with
those  bishops  and  priests,  who  substituted  their  own
natural  wit  and  learning,  in  the  room  of  the  spirit  of
inspiration,  from  which  alone  the  mind  of  God  could
be  known.

3.  It,  therefore,  made  no  difference  what  they  set
\jp  for  religion  ;  whether  it  was  some  new  invention
of  their  own,  or  some  rite  and  ceremony,  which
•/night  formerly  have  been  of  divine  appointment ;
in  as  much  as  there  was  no  express  command  of
God,  to  them,  in  the  case  :  of  course,  whatever  they
Introduced,  must  be,  to  them,  a  matter  of  their  own
superstition  ;  which  will  manifestly  appear  from  what
is  stated  concerning  their  reasons  of  first  introducing
superfluous  rites  and  ceremonies  into  the  catholic
dmrch.


P.  IIL  THE  CATHOLIC  RELIGION;  *93


CHAP.

VK.


9.  Mosheim  says,  "  In  this  [second]  century,  many

*  unnecessary  rites  and  ceremonies  were  added  to  the

4  Christian  [i.  e.  Catholic^  worship  ;  the  introduction  EccLHi*.
4  of  which  was  extremely  offensive  to  wise  and  good  \^^'
4  men. These changes,  while  they destroyed the

4  beautiful  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  were  naturally
4  pleasing  to  the  gross  multitude,  who  are  more  de-
4  lighted  with  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  external
4  institutions,  than  with  the  native  charms  of  ration-
<  al  and  solid  piety,  and  who  generally  give  little  at-
4  tention  to  any  objects  but  those  which  strike  their
4  outward  senses."

10.  "  It  is  not  improper  to  remark  here,  that  this "Md.
4  attachment  of  the  vulgar  to  the  pomp  of  ceremo-

*  nies,  is  a  circumstance  that  has  always  been  favour*
4  able  to  the  ambitious  views  of  the  Romish  [i.e.
4  Catholic]  clergy,  since  the  pomp  of  religion  natu-
4  rally  casts  a  part  of  its  glory  and  magnificence  upon

*  its  ministers,  and  thereby  gives  them,  impercepti-
4  bly,  a  vast  ascendant  over  the  minds  of  the  people. "

11.  Then  as  an  aspiring  and  self-interested  clergy
have  had  the  modelling  of  this  Catholic  religion  from
the  beginning,  it  is  evident  that  its  rites  and  ceremo-
nies, throughout,  are  merely  the  fruits  of  human  am-
bition, and  not  of  any  divine  appointment.  This  is
evidently  implied  by  Moahdm,  when  he  says,  *4  That  JSHg-
4  the  bishops  augmented  the  number  of  religious  rites

4  by  way  of  accommodation  to  the  infirmities  and  pre-
4  judices  of  both  Jews  and  Heathens,  in  order  to  fa-
'  ciiitite  their  conveision."

12.  "  Both  Jews  and  Heathens  were  accustomed  to
4  a  vast  variety  of  pompous  and  magnificent  ceremo-
4nies  in  their  religious  service.  And  as  they  consid-
4  ered  these  rites  as  an  essential  part  of  religion,  it
4  was  but  natural  that  they  should  behold,  with  in-
4  difference,  and  even  with  contempt,  the  simplicity
4  of  the  Christian  worship,  which  was  destitute  of
4  those  idle  ceremonies  that  rendered  their  service  so
4  specious  and  striking."

13.  "  To  remove  tnis  prejudice  against  Christiani-
4  ty,  the  bishops  thought  it  necessary  to  increase  the
4  number  of  rites  and  ceremonies."  And  by  this
means  it  seems  they  also  designed  "  to  remove  the


194  GhBNKRAL  MARKS  OF  P.  Ill,

CvnP" 6  opprobrious  calumnies,  which the  Jewish  and  Pa-
' 4  gan  priests  cast  upon  the Christians,  on  account  of

<  the  simplicity  of  their  worship,  esteeming  them  lit-

*  tie  better  than  Atheists,  because  they  had  no  temples^

<  altars,  victims,  flviestsj  nor  any  thing  of  that  exter-

<  nal  pomp  in  which  the  vulgar  are  so  prone  to  place
'  the  essence  of  religion."

14.  Can  any  thing  be  plainer,  than,  that  this  cath-
olic religion  principally  consisted  in  reviving  their  an-
cient superstitions  under  a  new  name  ?  And  there-
fore, as  early  as  the  second  century,  the  followers
of  Saccas  adopted  the  Jewish  titles  of  chief  priests,
priests,  and  Levites.
St,'?oi"  15*  "But  in  a  little  time,  (says  Mo  she im,)  these
ip/199.  '  titles  were  abused  by  an  aspiring  clergy,  who  thought
'  proper  to  claim  the  same  rank  and  station,  the  same
4  rights and  privileges,  that were conferred, with

*  those  titles,  upon  the  ministers  of  religion  under
1  the  Mosaic  dispensation. "

16.  "  Hence  the  rise  of  tithes,  first  fruits,  splen-
i  did  garments,  and  many  other  circumstances  of
i  external  grandeur,  by  which  ecclesiastics  were  em-
i  inently  distinguished.''  In  like  manner  the  com-
parison of  the  pious  gifts  of  Christians,  with  the
Jewish  victims,  oblations  and  sacrifices,  produced  a
multitude  of  unnecessary  rites,  "  and  was  the  occa-
1  sion,  (says  Mosheim,)  of  introducing  %CJ*  that  er-

*  roneous  notion  of  the  Eucharist,  which  represents

*  it  as  a  real  sacrifice  "  And  under  this  erroneous
notion  it  has  been  continued  among  the  Catholics  to.
the  present  day.

foid.  17.  "  The profound  respect  that  was  paid  to  the

$.200.  (  Greek  and  Roman  mysteries,  and  the  extraordinary
4  sanctity  that  was  attributed  to  them,  induced  the
<  Christians  [or  rather  the  Catholic  bishops']  to  give
c  their  religion  a  mystic  air,  in  order  to  put  it  upon
4  an  equal  foot  in  point  of  dignity,  with  that  of  the
4  Pagans."  For  this  purpose  the  Eucharist,  or  as
some  call  it,  the  Lord's  supper,  and  baptism  were  de-
nominated mysteries.

13.  They  used  in  those  institutions  the  very  terms
employed  in  the  heathen  mysteries  ;  and  proceeded
so  far,  at  length,  as  even  to  adopt  some  of  the  rites


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC RELIGION.  135

and  ceremonies  of  which  these  renowned  mysteries Cy^F*
consisted. So  that  a  great  part  of  the  service  of  the  __
church,  in  this  century,  had  a  certain  air  of  the  hea-
then mysteries,  and resembled  them  considerably  in
many  particulars.

19.  As  early  as  the  second  century,  the  Catholics  Ecci.m*.
celebrated  anniversary  festivals  in  commemoration  of  ,\°p!'2o%
the death awd resurrection  of  Jesus. That  which  2Q**
was  observed  as  the anniversary  of  his  death,  they
called  the  fiaschal  day,  or  passover. They  fasted  du-

ring  the  great  week,  (as  they  called  it)  in  which
Christ  was  crucified  ;  and  afterwards  celebrated  a
feast,  like  the  Jews,  at  which  they, distributed  the
paschal  lamb.

20.  This  was  the  great  festival ;  but,  unhappily,
they  could  not  agree  about  the  time  of  celebrating
it ;  which  was  a  particular  means  of  setting  them  to
quarrelling  among  themselves,  and  striving  who
should  be  that  Great  High  Priest,  to  whom  all  the
rest  must  be  subject.

21.  Robinson says,  "  Victor,  bishop  of  Rome,  was  Keel.  n&
1  an  African,  and  he  was  the  first  bishop  who  presu-  p.^^?*

*  med  to  send  an  order  to  all  the  churches  of  Mia  to
i  keep  the  passover  when  he  did,  for  he  kept  it,  for-

*  sooth,  when  Peter  did.  Polycrates,  bishop  of  li{ihe-
i  sua,  sent  him  word  in  the  name  of  all  tne  A  iron*

*  of  Asia,  that  they  would  noc  alter  their  custom,  for
c  they  kept  the  passover  when  John  kept  it."

22.  "  Victor,  with  true  African  rage,  got  together
'a  few  neighbouring  Levi'es,  and  held  a  meeting
6  which  he  named  a  council,  and  excommunicated  all

*  the  bishops  of  the  East.  Cyfirian  that  other  Car-
*.  thagenian  zealot,  excommunicated  St  fihen  bishop.
<  of  Rome  because,  truly,  he  would  not  re-baptize
1  Heretics  as  the  African  ordered  him.  Ste/ihen  re-
c  turned  the  compliment,  and  in  this  manner  they
4  cursed  and  combated  till  the  Roman  bishop  obtain-
'  ed  the  victory."

23.  Thus,  their  mysteries  arid  festivals  were  adopt-
ed as  their  main  articles  and  terms  of  communion,
instead  of  righteousness  and  fieace,  and  a  set  of  profli-
gate gentry,  no  better,  in  reality,  than  Pagans,  were
set  up,  to  enlorce  and  administer  these  empty  ritea


196  GENERAL  MARKS  O*  P.  HI.

C vil' to  a  deluded  multitude,  as  the  great  and  only  means

L  of  salvation.

Ecci.nis- 24.  In  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist,  the  bread

S^aoe.'  anc*  wme  was  C(>n^ecrated  by  the  prayers  of  the  bish-
'  ops.  The  wine  was  mixed  with  water,  and  the  bread
divided  into  several  portions.  A  part  of  the  conse-
crated bread  and  wine  was  carried  to  the  sick  or  ab-
sent members,  and  as  it  was  considered  essential  to
salvation,  it  was  administered  even  to  infants,  during
this  century.

25." Bafitism  was  administered  publicly  twice  a  year,
at  the  festivals  of  Easter  and  Pentecost. "  The  per-

<  sons  that  were  to  be  baptized,  (says  Mosheim,)  after
*  they  had  repeated  the  Creed,  confessed  and  renoun-

<  ced  their  sins— -were  immersed  under  water."

26.  Alter  baptism  they  received  the  sign  of  the
cross,  were  anointed  with  oil,  consecrated  by  fir ay ers
and  imfiosition  of  hands,  and  received  milk  and  honey ^

poSoV,  which  concluded  the  ceremony.  jCT*  Godfathers
were,  at  this  time,  instituted  to  answer  for  adult  per-
sons, and  afterwards  even  for  infants.

27.  In  the  third  century,  their  superstitions  still
increased.  Their  places  of  public  worship  were  em-
bellished wich  images  and  other  ornaments,  and  the
discourses  addressed  to  the  people,  were  wholly  of  .a
different  cast  from  taose  of  the  simple  and  sincere
followers  of  Christ.

kid  28.  "  For,  not  to  say  any  thing  of  gCJ"*  Orige^,

p.  282.  <  who. introduced  long  sermons,  and  was  the  first  who

6  explained  the  scriptures  in  his  discourses,  several

, i  bishops,  who  h  <d  received  their education  in the

1  schools  of  the  rhetoricians,  were  exactly  scrupulous,

i  in  adapting  their  public  discourses  to  the  rules  of

4  Grecian  eloquence. And  this  method  gained  such

c  credit,  as  to  be  soon,  almost  universally  followed."

29.  Those  who wei'e in  a  fieniicniial  state,  and

those  who  had  not  received  the  sacrament  of  bafitism

were,  at  this  time,  debarred  from  their  sanctimonious

•liM sup/nr  ; "  and  i'  is  not  diiTicult (says  Mosheim,)  to

p.  2g*3.  i  perceive,  tnat  these  exclusions  were  an  imitation  of

4  what was practised in the heathen mysteries."'

This  pompous  rite,  was,  at  this  period,  administered


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC RELIGION.  197

in  golden  and  silver  vessels  : and  by  all,  it  was  con-  c^p*
sidered  as  essential  to  salvation.  *

30.  A  long  course  of  trial  and  preparation  was  now
deemed  necessary  in  order  to  baptism,  and  the  remis-
sion of  sins  was  thought  to  be  its  immediate  and  hap-
py fruit.  It  was  administered  only  in  the  presence  of  '
those  who  had  been  initiated  into  the  mystery  of  the
supper. "  And  we  have  only  to  add,  (says  Mosheiin,)  Ecci.Hi*

*  that  none  were  admitted  to  this  solemn  ordinance,  ^ry\Z0}'
i  until,  by  the  menacing-  and  formidable  shouts  and

*  declamation  of  the  exorcist,  they  had  been  deiiver-
i  ed  from  the  dominion  of  the  prince  of  darkness."

31.  "  The  origin  of this  superstitious ceremony

*  maybe  easily  traced,  when  we  consider  the  prevail-

*  ing  opinions  of  the  times" — -which  according  to  the
Egyptian  philosophy,  attributed  all  the  corrupt  pro-
pensities and  evil  actions  of  men  to  the  influence  and
impulse  of  a  certain  spirit  or  evil  being  within  them*
"  who  was  perpetually  compelling  them  to  sin*"

32.  u  The  driving  out  of  this  demon  was  now  con- j^

*  sidered  as  an  essential  preparation  for  baptism,  after  v* -*w.

*  the  administration  of  which,  the  candidates  returned

*  home,  adorned  with  crowns,  and  arrayed  in  white
i  garments — -emblems  of  their  purity,  and  victory  over
i  sin  and  the  world."  A  consistent  writer  would  rath-
er have  stiled  them  masks  of  hypocrisy,  whereby  they
might  cover  their  inward  corruption  and  guilt,  while
they  lived  in  sin,  and  perfect  union  with  the  world.

33.  Great  sanctity  was  now  attributed  to  the  prac-
tice of  fasting  ;  and  u  the  sign  of  the  cross  was  sup- &«/

*  posed  to  administer  a  victorious  power  over  all  sorts  P-m-
'  of  trials  and  calamities, and  was  more  especially

i  considered  as  the  surest  defence  against  the  snare>
'  and  stratagems  of  malignant  spirits."

34.  Hud  the  Church  of  Christ  degenerated  into
this  dark  and  senseless  superstition,  Satan  might  have
triumphed  indeed  ;  but  all  he  had  to  boast,  was  mere-
ly of  leading  the  subjects  of  his  own  dark  kingdom
into  grosser  darkness  ;  and  even,  turning  into  dark-
ness, those  reflections  oi  light,  which  they  had  re-
ceived from  the  saints.  It  was  the  work  only  of  evil
men  and  seducers,  who  waxed  worse  and  worse,  de-
ceiving and  being  deceived*


!§•  TfiE  GENERAL  MARKS  OF  P.  III.

*vn.P* 55.  In  the  fourth  century,  their  vain  superstitions
surpass  description. Mosheim  says,  "  It  would  be


p.  382.


Eeci.His-  i  almost  endless  to  enter  into  a  minute  detail  of  all  the
t^'m'  i  different  parts  of  public  worship."  The  rites  and
institutions  of  the  Greeks-  and  Romans  were  adopted
by  the  Catholic  bishops  with  some  slight  alterations,
fo*^  36.  They  imagined  that  the  nations  would  embrace
their  doctrines  and  come  under  their  government
with  more  facility,  when  they  saw  the  rites  and  cere*
monies  to  which  they  were  accustomed,  adopted  by
their  church,  and  the  same  worship  paid  to  Jesus  and
his  martyrs,  which  they  offered  to  their  fictitious
gods  and  heroes.

37.  Could  they  possibly  have  taken  a  readier  way
to  disgrace  the  mmie  of  Christ  ?  Was  it  not  in  effect
placing  him  on  the  same  list  with  those  beastly  char-
acters whom  the  Heathens  worshipped  as  gods,  and
whose  worse  than  brutal  actions  they  commemorated
in  their  festivals  and  acts  of  worship  ?  or  was  it  not
in  reality  setting  up  the  same  spirit  of  beastly  wick-
edness, and  worshipping  the  beast  and  his  followers
under  the  perverted  names  of  Christ  and  his  faithful
martyrs  ?

38.  Thus,  while  they  called  themselves  Orthodox
Christians,  they  practised  Paganism,  and  to  the  wick-
ed, became  more  wicked,  that  they  might  subject
the  wicked  to  their  ungodly  dominion. "  Hence  it

*•  m#  i  happened,  (says  Moshei?n,)  that,  in  these  tines,  the
i  religion  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  differed  very  lit-
c  tie,  in  its  external  appearance,  from  thtit  of  the
i  Christians"  [He  ought  to  have  said,  from  that  of
these  hypocrites,  from  what  follow s.]

39.  "  They  had  both  a  most  pompous  and  splendid
i  ritual.  Gorgeous  robes,  mitres,  tiaras,  wax-tapers,
4  crosiers, processions,  lustrations,  images,  gold  and  sil"
i  ver  vases,  and  many  such  circumstances  of  pageant-
i  ry,  were  equally  to  be  seen  in  the  heathen  temples,
c  and  the  Christian  [i.  e.  Catholic]  churches."

t*tf.  40.  "  No  sooner had Const antine the  Great

** 383# <  abolished the superstitions  of  his ancestors,  than

*  magnificent churches were every where  erected

i  for  the  Christians,  which  were  richly  adorned  with

4  pictures  and  images,  and bore  a  striking  resem-


t>id.


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC  RELIGION.  199

i  blance  of  the  Pagan  temples,  both  in  their  outward  c^p*
i  and  inward  form/'  -—

4i.  "  Some  of  these  churches  were  built  over  the

*  tombs  of  martyrs,  and  were  frequented  only  at  sta-

*  ted  times  ;  while  others  were  set  apart  for  ordinary
'  assemblies.— Both  of  them  were  consecrated  with

*  great  pomp,  and  with  certain  rites  borrowed,  most-
4  ly,  from  the  ancient  laws  of  the  Roman  pontiffs,"  or
Pagan  Priests,

42.  "In  consequence  of  a  peculiar  law  enacted  by  Ecci.Hi*
1  %CT*  Constantine,  the  first  day  of  the  week  was  l^s^
i  observed  with  more  solemnity  than  it  had  formerly  386»

*  been.* The  psalms  of  David  were  now  received

*  among  the  public  hymns  that  were  sung  as  a  part  of
<  divine service. — Their  prayers  degenerated  into  a

*  vain  and  swelling  bombast."

43.  "  The  sermons  addressed  to  the  people — were

*  rather  adapted  to  excite  the  stupid  admiration  of  the
1  populace,  who  delight  in  vain  embellishments,  than
4  to  enlighten  the  understanding,  or  to  reform  the
4  heart."  Five  yearly  festivals  were  at  this  time  es-
tablished, none  of  which  were  kept  with  so  much
superstition  as  the  fourteen  days  appointed  for  the
commemoration  of  Christ's  resurrection.

44.  " But  the  unlucky  success,  (says MosheimJ) frjk
4  which  some  had  in  discovering  the  carcases  of  cer-

i  tain  holy  men,  multiplied  the  festivals  and  commem-
i  orations  of  the  martyrs  in  the  most  extravagant
"*  manner. — Nor  was this all :  certain tombs  were «£!.

*  falsely  given  out  for  the  sepulchres  of  saints  and p<  357,
4  confessors  ;  the  list  of  the  saints was augmented

4  with  fictitious  names,  and  even  robbers  were  con*

*  verted  into  martyrs."

45.  Nor  were  these  festivals  employed  in  any  man-
ner that  either  Christ  or  any  of  his  followers  could
approve,  but  "  were  squandered  away  in  indolence,

*  It  appears  that,  in  the  second  century,  there  were  various  opinions  concern-
ing the  day  of  the  week  proper  to  l)e  kept  as  a  day  of  worship.  Some  observed
the  sixth  day,  in  remembrance  of  the  crucifixion  ;  others  the  fourth,  the  day  on
which  Christ  was  betrayed :  some  observed  thejffrtf*  hi  memory  of  the  resur-
rection ;  and  others  retained  the  Jewish  sabbath.  But  what  must  we  thiuivot*
Constantine V  law  enjoining  more  solemnity  to  the  first  day  of  the  week  ?  Wasjt
really  intended  that  the  people  should  be  more  solemnly  engaged  in  the  worship
of  God  on  that  day  ?  or  was  it  not  rather  intended  to  make  the  celebration  of
the  day  equal,  in  pomp  and  splendour,  to  the  magnificence  of  Lis  Church^,
vrhwh  were  so  richly  adorned  v ilh pictures  and  images i

w


300  GENERAL  MARKS  OF  P.  Ill,

™uf'  voluptuousness,  and  criminal  pursuits,  and  in  the  in-

L.  diligence  of  sinful  passions" — as  it  is  to  this  day.

Bed.Hfc.  46-  We  might  add,  their  establishing  net  fasts,  at
iTf*m'  tn*s  period,  by  express  laws,  of  which  the  lent  fast
M9«  '  was  held  more  sacred  than  all  the  rest — erecting  bap-
tismal fonts  in  the  porch  of  each  church — casting  salt
into  the  mouth  of  the  baptized  person,  as  an  emblem
of  something  which  they  had  not  in  possession-
Using  a  double  anointing — celebrating  their  mystical
supper,  at  the  tombs  of  the  martyrs,  and  holding  up
the  bread  and  wine  to  the  ignorant  multitude  as  ob-
jects of  adoration-— performing  masses  in  honour  of
the  saints,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  dead  :  and  many
such  vain  superstitions  which  their  own  historians
consider  too  numerous  and  contemptible  to  b£  related.

47.  It  is  therefore  an  undeniable  fact,  justly  stated
by  Mosheim,  that  (in  the  fourth  century,)  "  the  pro-
'  gress  and  the  baleful  influence  of  superstition,  was
4  now  become  universal  I"  And  yet  this  is  the  Church
which,  for  many  ages,  has  pretended  to  be  the  light
©f  the  world,  and  this  the  kind  of  religion  that  has
been  artfully  substituted  in  the  place  of  that  true  ho-
liness of  heart  and  life,  which  distinguished  the  Prim-
itive Church.

48.  But  whoever  will  take  the  pains  to  examine
the  spirit  of  their  religion,  will  find  that  this  vain  pa-
rade of  Jewish  and  Pagan  superstition,  had  no  rela-
tion to  the  spirit  and  work  of  Christ,  and  that  the
church  in  which  it  was  established,  stood  in  perfect
contrast  to  the  real  church  of  Christ,  and  was  a  per-
petual disgrace  to  the  mame  which  they  assumed.


CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Subject  continued.


PEPvSECUTION  is  the  next  general  mark  of  the
Catholic  religion.  This  was  founded  upon  the
supposed  orthodoxyj  and  sacred  authority  of  the  ca-
tholic priesthood  :  and  this  authority  they  received  in


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC RELIGION.  201

a  proper  line  of  succession  from  their  Pagan  ances-  C^JJ;
tors,  by  whose  diabolical  influence,  the  blood  of  those -
same  martyrs  was  shed,  whom  their  Catholic  succes-
sors deceitfully  pretended  to  worship.

2.  It  is  proper  to  observe  against  whom  this  spirit
of  persecution  was  directed,  and  in  what  manner  it
operated  at  different  periods.  It  was  not  before  the
fourth  century,  that  the  Catholic  bishops  personally
engaged  in  the  unnatural  and  beastly  work  6f  destroy-
ing heretics  for  their  religion,  but  it  is  certain,  that
they  had  ail  along  contributed  much  to  the  flame  of
persecution  by  their  tongues  and  pens.

3.  According  to  the  kind  and  degree  ofpower  they
possessed,  so  at  different  periods,  they  manifested,
by  their  works,  that  it  was  not  for  the  promotion  of
truth  and  virtue,  but  for  its  destruction,  that  their  or-
thodoxy was  established  ;  and  as  far  as  orthodoxy  was
considered  the  chief  and  most  honourable  virtue,  se
far  hersy  was  made  the  principal  and  only  crime.

4.  Amidst  the  dark  and  senseless  superstitions  that
prevailed  in  the  Catholic  Church  during  the  second
and  third  centuries,  there  were  many  under  different
names,  who  maintained  the  practice  of  true  virtue,
according  to  the  precepts  and  example  of  Christ.
These  are  all  distinguished,  in  history,  under  the  one
general  name  of  Heretics.

5.  In  the  third  century,  Moshnm  says,  "  The  Mon-
4  tanist8  [i.  e.  those  who  assembled  for  religious  wor-
4  ship,  among  the  mountains,  to  avoid  their  persecu-
4  tors]  Valentinians,  Marcionites  and  other  heretics
4  continued  still  to  draw  out  their  forces."

6.  Adelfihius  and  Aguilinus,  were  at  this  time  the  Ecci.JBs-
greatest  disturbers  of  the  catholic  peace.  Mosheim  Kj*jJ
says,  "  They  were,  however,  opposed  not  only  by  the

4  [pretended]  Christians,  but  also  by  Plotinus,  the
4  greatest  Platonic  philosopher  of  the  age,  who,  fol-
4  lowed  by  a  numerous  train  of  disciples,  opposed
4  them,  and  others  of  the  same  kind,  with  as  much
4  vigour  and  success  as  the  most  enlightened  [Catho-
4  lie]  Christians  could  have  done."

7.  It  seems  that  the  opinions  of  these  heretics,  dif-
fered widely  from  the  doctrines  of  Plato,  and  on  this
account,  44  The  disci/iles  of  Jesus,  and  the  follower*


202  GENERAL  MARKS  OF  P.  III.

Cyui.' i  °f  ^^or/NUSj  joined  together  their  efforts  against
. .  '  them"  and  by  their  united  force  soon  destroyed  their

credit  and  authority,  and  rendered  them  contemptible

in  the  estimation  of  the  multitude.

8.  But  this  circumstance,  if  there  was  no  other,
is  altogether  sufficient  to  show  that  it  was  not  the  dis-
ciples of  Jesus,  but  of  Saccas,  who  joined  forces  with
Piotinus  and  his  numerous  train,  and  if  the  name  of
Jesus  had  any  just  application  in  the  case,  it  must
have  belonged  to  those  of  the  contrary  side,  who  were
hated  and  persecuted  by  both  Pagans  and  Catholics.

9.  However,  unhappily  for  the  united  forces  of  the
Catholic  and  Platonic  doctors,  when  they  seemed  just
u  upon  the  point  of  obtaining  a  complete  and  decisive

<  victory,  a  new  enemy,  (says  Mosheim^  more  vehe-

<  ment  and  odious  than  the  rest,  started  up  suddenly,
c  and  engaged  in  the  contest."

10.  This  was  Mani,  by  birth  a  Persian.  His  char-
Ecei.Hw-  acter  follows  in  the  old  orthodox  form.  "  Many  were
Xplsto.  'deceived  by  the  eloquence  of  this  enthusiast,  by  the

i  gravity  of  his countenance,  and  the innocence and
L  simplicity  of  his  manners :  so  that,  in  a  short  time,

*  he  formed  a  sect  not  utterly  inconsiderable  in  point

*  of  number."

11.  To  whom  then,  could  gravity,  innocence,  and
simplicity  of  manners  be  an  odious  and  vehement  en-
emy ?  Surely  not  to  Christ,  but  to  Antichrist,  and  his
idolatrous  superstitions  ;  and  therefore,  these  unre-
proachable  qualities  of  this  reputed  heretic,  could  not
defend  him  against  the  united  hatred  of  the  pretend-
ed Christians,  Philosophers,  Jews  and  Pagans.

12.  According  to  the  Greek  writers,  he  was  for
some  time,  protected  in  a  strong  castle,  which  the
Persian  monarch  had  erected  between  Bagdat  and
Suza,  to  serve  him  as  a  refuge  against  those  who
persecuted  him  on  account  of  his  doctrine  ;  yet  he
was  afterwards  delivered  up,  and  fell  a  victim  to  the
rage  of  his  persecutors.

Ibid#  13.  His  adversaries  complain  that,  "  The  rule  of

i?.3P4. i  life  and  manners  which  he prescribed  to  his  disci-

1  pies,  was  most  extravagantly  rigorous  and  austere."

If  the  rule  which  he  prescribed  to  perfect  Christians^

wasj  as  they  say,  an  entire  abstinence  from  wine  and


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC RELIGION,  203

wedlock,  from  all  intoxicating  drink,  and  all  amorous  Cy1^

gratifications,  it  need not be thought  strange,  that  ip- ,

such  a  debauched  and  superstitious  age  should  revile
him,  not  only  as  a  heretic,  but  as  the  most  dangerous
fanatic  or  madman.

14.,  And  in  fact,  the  principal  respect  that  is  paid
to  this  class  of  heretics,  by  those  false  judges  of  true
virtue,  is,  that  the  weaker  sort  of  this  sect,  or  those
who  were  denominated  hearers,  were  allowed  to  pos-
sess houses,  lands,  and  wealth,  and  to  enter  into  the
conjugal  bonds  :  u  But  (say  they)  this  liberty  was  giv-
i  en  them  with  many  limitations,  and  under  the  strict*
1  est  conditions  of  moderation  and  temperance."

15.  Doubtless  there  was  nothing  but  liberty  in  the
case,  and  all  were  allowed  to  act  according  to  their
own  choice  ;  and  though  the  adversaries  of  Mani
would  seem  to  insinuate  that  he  used  some  kind  of
compulsion  ;  yet  it  is  very  evident  that  it  was  not  he,
but  his  persecutors,  that  lorded  it  over  the  conscience  ;
and  that  the  only  means  which  constrained  this  peo-
ple to  a  life  of  mortification  and  abstinence,  was  the
exemplary  innocence  of  their  leaders.

16.  "  The  celebrated  Hieraxs  from  whom  came  j^^
1  the  Hieracites,  was  a  native  of  Egyfit,  and  a  Chris-  starch**,
(  dan (says  Robinson,) of the true primitive  cast. x>

i  He  was  a  man  of  eminent  abilities,  both  natural  and
4  acquired — and  what  is  more  to  his  honour,  his  bit-
i  terest  enemies applaud  his distinguished  piety  and

*  virtue."

17.  "  This  poisonous  rejitile,  as Saint  Efii/ihanms

*  is  pleased  to  call  him,  had  the  misfortune  to  hold
i  two  or  three  errors,  for  which  he  was  anathemati-
1  zed  with  all  his  followers,  and,  if  the  last  judgment

*  be  directed on  the  principles  of  Greek councils,

*  they  will  all  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire."

18.  "  In  brief  he  was  a  Manichean.  Mosheim  says,
\  he  differed  considerably  from  Mani ;  but  Bcausobre
4  more  accurately  observes  that  Mani  and  Hierax,
i  from  whom  came  the  Spanish  Heretics,  differed  on-

*  ly  as  two  drops  of  water  differ  from  each  other. It

*  was  a  difference  of  quantity,  not  of  nature."

19.  "  In  the  fourth  century  the  Hieracites  were  ve- ita

4  ry  numerous  in  Mgyflt* One  of  them  named  Mark, p.  m

W  2


20^  GENERAL  MARKS  OF  P.  HI.

Cyai: '  of  the  city  of  Memfihis,  went  into  S/wi?i,  where  he
. _  '  was  entertained  by  a  lady  named  Agafie — and  Helfii*

1  dins,  a  rhetorician  :  but  the  most  famous  of  all  his

4  converts  was  Priscillian'*

20.  "  In  the  religious  assemblies  of  all  the  Mani-

i  cheans,  adoration  of  God  was  the  whole  of  the  wor-

4  ship. This was performed  in  the  natural  way  of

*  prayer,  and singing hymns — the scriptures were
4  read,  and  some  discoursed  on  the  nature  and  obliga-

*  tions  of  virtue  to  inform  the  rest."

Ecei.  Re-  2 1  •  "  Priscillian  did  so,  and  many  of  noble  families,
seaJ^es'  \  and  common  people,  and  crouds,  especially  of  wo-
4  men,  attended  and  imbibed  the  doctrine.  In  a  short
4  time  it  spread  all  over  Spain  :  and  some  bishops
4  embraced  it,  who,  laying  aside  the  vices  of  the
4  world,  and  the  superstitions  of  the  [Catholic]  cler-

*  &y>  applied  themselves  wholly to the  practice  of
4  piety,  and  a  course  of  virtue."

22.  Thus  far  has  Robinson  stated  the  occasion  of
the  first  Catholic  persecution,  which  began  about  the
year  380,  at  the  instigation  of  Idacius  and  Ithacius^
two  cruel  and  persecuting  ecclesiastics.

23.  Their  first  step  was,  to  call  a  council,  for  the
purpose  of  suppressing  the  heresy  of  Priscillian.
With  twelve  bishops  they  pass  a  decree,  that  no  man
should  assume  the  rank  of  a  teacher  without  leave
first  had  and  obtained  from  them.  Priscillian  in  the
mean  time  continued  to  teach.  Enraged  at  this  con-
tempt of  their  assumed  authority,  their  next  recourse
was  to  the  civil  magistrate  for  aid.

Ecei.Hig-  24.  And  after  a  process  of  several  years,  the  bloody
¥!7'4u'  Ithacius  obtained  an  order  from  the  Catholic  emperor
Maximus,  for  the  execution  of  Priscillian  and  his  as-
sociates. In  consequence  of  which,  in  the  year  384,
Priscillian  and  many  more  were  put  to  death.  Some,
says  Robinson,  were  put  on  the  rack,  others  had  all
their  property  confiscated,  and  others  were  banished,
25.  And  who  were  Ithacius  and  Maximus,  that
they  should  agree,  for  the  honor  of  religion,  to  de-
stroy the  inoffensive  Priscillian,  and  those  who  adop-
ted his  harmless  manner  of  life  ?  Maximus  came  to
C-he  throne  by  means  of  procuring;  the  murder  of  the


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC RELIGION.  20$

emperor  Gratian  ;  and  even  the  party  to  which  It  ha-  c^^m
cius  belonged  gave  him  the  following  character.


26.  "  He  was  a  man  abandoned  to  the  most  cor-  ecc1.hu.
"  rupt  indolence,  and  without  the  lea3t  tincture  of  {°7'4™u
44  true  "piety.  He  was  audacious,  talkative,  impu-  Noie[n»3
44  dent,  luxurious,  and  a  slave  to  his  belly. He  ac-

u  cused  as  Heretics,  and  as  protectors  of  Priscilliaru
K  all  those  whose  lives  were  consecrated  to  the  pur-
"  suit  of  piety  and  knowledge,  or  distinguished  by
44  acts  of  mortification  and  abstinence."

27.  However,  in  all  this  he  only  proved  himself  to
be  a  true  son  of  the  Catholic  Church  ;  and  his  intro-
ducing persecution  into  his  mother's  house,  was  noth-
ing more  than  improving  the  liberty  which  she  had
granted  her  sons,  by  the  Theodosian  creed,  formed
about  the  same  period  in  one  of  her  general  councils
at  Constantinople,  in  the  year  38  I.

28.  "  An  hundred  and  fifty  bishops,  (says  MosheimJ)  ft>id.
4  who  were  present  at  this  council,  gave  the  finish-  p<  s
4  ing  touch  to  what  the  council  of  Nice  had  left  im-

*  perfect,  and  fixed,  in  a  full  and  determinate  man-
4  ner,  the  doctrine  of  jO°"  three  persons  in  one  God,
4  which  is  as  yet  received  among  the  generality  of
4  Christians  :"  [i.  e.  professed  Christians  or  Catholics.

29.  This  venomous  council  did  not  stop  here  ;— *
44  They  branded,  with  infamy,  all  the  errors,  and  set
4  a  mark  of  execration  upon  all  the  heresies,  that
4  were  hitherto  known."

30.  Thus,  sufierstition  became  the  established  re-
ligion, and  persecution  the  principal  means  of  sup-
porting it,  which  furnished  the  most  distinguishing
and  evident  marks  of  a  corrupt  hierarchy,  founded
upon  the  unnatural  and  pernicious  coalition  of .  the
civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers,  under  the  name  of  a
Christian  government,


S06  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  IIL

CHAPTER  IX.

The  established  Order  of  the  Catholic  Chnrch.


Ctx.P' nr^HE  continuation  of  a  thing  in  its  own  place,  na-
,  X ture and  properties,  is  very  different  from a

succession  of  things  rising  up  and  filling  the  place  of
another;  yet  it  is  rather  according  to  the  latter  idea
that  the  religion  of  Christ  has  been  supposed  to  con*
tinue  in  the  world  to  the  present  day.

2.  But  to  every  reasonable  mind  the  distinction
must  be  self-evident :  and  if  so,  then  it  may,  doubt-
less, with  propriety  be  said,  that  certain  men  have,
in  every  age  through  the  Christian  sera,  appeared
either  as  Christ,  or  in  his  place,  and  that  either  the
real  church  of  Christ,  or  one  in  its  place,  has  con-
tinued to  exist  upon  earth.

3.  And  if  any  man  and  any  church  did  actually  rise
up  in  the  room  of  Christ  and  his  church,  then  it  must
be  evident  that  neither  Christ  nor  his  church  remain-
ed upon  earth :  for  admitting  that  the  church  of
Christ  existed  upon  earth,  it  must  have  been  in  its
own  place  :  of  course  another  could  not  stand  in  its
place,  at  one  and  the  same  time.

4.  When  Solomon,  king  of  Israel,  died,  the  king-
dom was  divided  between  Rehoboam,  and  Jereboam,
but  neither  of  them  reigned  fully  in  his  stead.  Nor
was  there  any  kingdom  or  empire  established  upon
earth  in  the  room  of  Solomon's,  until  the  last  re-
mains of  that  was  rooted  out  and  the  seat  of  gov-
ernment established  at  Babylon  by  Nebuchadnez-
zar.

5.  Then  it  might  be  said  that  there  was  a  kingdom
established  in  the  room  of  Solomon's  and  a  king
reigned  in  his  stead,  but  this  was  not  a  continuance
either  of  Solomon  or  his  kingdom,  but  something  in
their  place,  that  in  some  respects  resembled  them,
but  was  essentially  different  and  distinct.

6.  This  may  serve  as  a  comparison  between  Gon-
stantine  the  Great,  and  Jesus  Christ.  For,  as  the  wild
and  frantic  Nebuchadnezzar  was  born  to  the  wise  men
of  Babylon,  and  grew  up  and  established  a  kingdom.


F.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  207

©r  empire,  according  to  their  council,  in  the  place  of  €^£p%
Solomon's  ;  so  in  the  same sense was Constantine  __
born  to  the  Catholic  Church,  and  grew  up  and  acted
in  the  place  of  Jesus  Christ.

7.  And  although  the  empire  or  church  which  Cm*
*t  an  tine  founded,  stood  as  perfectly  in  the  place  of  the
Church  of  Christ,  as  the  Babylonian  empire  stood  in
the  place  of  the  kingdom  of  Solomon  ;  yet  it  will  ap-
pear beyond  dispute,  upon  the  slightest  comparison,
that  the  church  which  was  iounded  and  established
by  Constantine  the  Great,  was  not  a  continuation  of
the  church  of  Christ,  but  the  very  reverse.

8.  And  if  it  be  granted  that  the  heads  and  fathers
of  the  Catholic  church  stood  in  the  place  of  Christ
Jesus  and  his  apostles,  and  did  not  in  reality  fill  the
very  character  of  those  whom  they  pretended  to  re-
present, then  the  conclusion  must  be  evident,  that
neither  Christ  nor  his  apostles,  in  reality,  were  man^
ifest  on  earth,  but  certain  pretenders  in  their  place.

9.  Of  course,  that  church  of  which  they  were  the
heads  and  fathers,  must  have  been  as  distinct  from
the  Primitive  Church  of  Christ,  as  they  themselves
were  distinct,  in  point  of  character,  from  those  whom
they  are  said  to  represent.  If  any  evidence  is  want-
ing to  confirm  these  plain  principles,  it  will  appear
from  the  following  account  of  the  establishment  of
the  Catholic  church,  under  Constantine  and  his  suc-
cessors.

10.  "  Constantine  the  Great,  in  order  to  prevent  Ecci.Hfe.
€  civil  commotions,  and  to  fix  his  authority  upon  so-  t^wS'
i  lid  and  stable  foundations,  made several  changes,

*  not  only  in  the  laws  of  the  empire,  but  also  in  the

*  form  of  the  Roman  government.  And  as  there
6  were  many  important  reasons,  which  induced  him

<  to  suit  the  administration  of  the  church  to  these

<  changes  in  the  civil  constitution,  this  necessarily  in-
i  troduced,  among  the  bishops,  new  degrees  of  emi-
i  nence  and  rank." So  says  Dr.  Mosheim,

1 1.  And  further  :  "  Though  Constantine  permitted
i  the  church  to  remain  a  body  politic,  distinct  from
i  that  of  the  state,  as  it  had  formerly  been,  yet  he  as-
'  sunaed  to  himself  the  supreme  power  over  this  sa*
«  cred  body,  and  the  right  of  modelling  and  goveia^


20$  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  III.

C ?xP* '  *n£  **  *n  sucn  a  manner>  as  should  be  most  conda-

i  cive  to  the  public  good. This right  he  enjoyed

Ecci.Hw-  '  without  any  opposition,  as  none  of  the  bishops  pre-
k*ya£s'  i  sumec^ t0  ca^  n*s  authority  in  question."

12.  Here  we  see  that  the  first  step  was  to  incorpo-
rate the  church  and  the  world  into  one  body,  to  be
governed  by  one  head  f  so  that  notwithstanding  the
church,  for  certain  purposes,  was  kept  a  distinct  body
politic,  yet  it  was  as  closely  united  to  the  civil  gov-
ernment, and  as  much  one  with  the  empire,  as  the
harlot  is  one  flesh  with  him  that  is  joined  to  her  ;  and
from  this  union  proceeded  that  high  degree  of  emi-
nence and  rank  to  which  the  bishops  arose.

13.  How  strong  a  temptation  this  must  have  been
for  the  wickedest  men  to  seek  the  highest  rank  in  so
honorable  a  church  !  Here  we  may  justly  apply  that

J?**5,  saying  of  the  prophet  Daniel :  Such  as  do  wickedly
against  the  covenant,  shall  he  corrufit  by  flatteries.
3tze.  xvi  By  tne  prophet  Ezekiel  such  a  union  is  compared  to
30~*38*  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman.  Or,  as  a
wife  that  commit teth  adultery,  taketh  strangers  instead
of  her  husband  :  But  with  this  difference  :  They  give
gifts  unto  all  whores  ;  but  thou  givest  thy  gifts  to  all
thy  lovers,  and  hirest  them,  that  they  may  come  unto
thee  on  every  side  for  thy  whoredom.  Arid  I  will  judge
thee,  as  women  that  break  wedlock,  and  shed  blood,  are
judged.

14.  In  thus  uniting  and  incorporating  the  church
with  the  civil  government,  the  Emperor  met  with  no
opposition  ;  it  was  on  all  sides  a  spontaneous  confed-
eracy, entered  into  with  the  universal  consent  of  the
bishops,  as  representatives  of  the  church,  and  the

l  Roman  senate,  as  the  great  fathers  of  the  people  ;
all  agree  in  joint  compact,  that  a  man-slayer,  a  proud
ambitious  Emperor,  who  had  neither  seen  Christ  nor
known  him,  should  be  the  common  head  of  influence
to  the  whole  body.

15.  In  consequence  of  this  unnatural  union,  the
government  of  the  church,  in  all  her  parts,  assumed
the  form  and  likeness  of  the  civil  government.  Four
bishops,  viz.  of  Ko?ne,  Antioch,  Alexandria,  and  Con-
stantinople enjoyed  a  certain  degree  of  pre-eminence
©ver  the  rest  of  the  episcopal  order. "  These  four


T. III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  SOf

4  prelates, (says Mosheim,) answered  to the four  CY£P*

4  fiiaetorian  prefects  created  by Constantine;  and  it  m

'is  possible  tnat,  in  this  very  century^  [iv.]  they  ecCi Hi*.
4  were  distinguished  by  the  Jewish  title  of  fiatri-  *g>3y£
4  archs."

16."  After  these,  followed  the  exarchs,  who  had
4  the  inspection  over  several  provinces,  and  answered
4  to  the  appointment  of  certain  civil  officers  who  bore
4  the  same  title.  In  a  lower  class,  were  the  Metro-
4  politans,  who  had  only  the  government  of  one  pro-
4  vince,  under  whom  were  the  archbishops,  whose
4  inspection  was  confined  to  certain  districts."  In
the  next  grade  below,  were  the  bishops,  and  so  down
to  the  chorcpiscopi,  or  superintendants  of  the  country
churches.  These  dignified  orders  were  doubtless
created  to  fill  the  place  of  evangelists, apostles,  elders,
&c.  but  that  they  were  men  of  like  spirit  their  histo-
rians dare  not  say.

17.  Thus  we  see  the  form  of  the  church,  fitly
joined  together  and  compacted  with  a  wicked  world,
and  holding  for  its  head  a  wicked  man,  whose  crimes
deterred  him  from  using  even  the  most  distant  sha-
dow of  purity.  But  we  shall  proceed  to  observe
something  concerning  the  maimer  of  the  government
of  this  pretended  church.

18.  Mosheim  says, "  The administration of  the ?*>&.

4  church  was  divided,  by Constantine himself,  into  p*340*3*1

4  an  external  and  an  internal  inspection. The  latter,

4  which  was  committed  to  bishops  and  councils,  rela-

4  ted  to  religious  controversies  ;  the  forms  of  divine

4  worship,  ;  the  offices  of  the  priests  ;  the  vices  of  the

4  ecclesiastical  orders, &c. The  external  administra-

4  tion  of  the  church  the  emperor  assumed  to  him-

4  self."

19.  44  This  comprehended  all  those  things  that  re-
4  late  to  the  outward  state  and  discipline  of  the  church  ;
4  it  likewise  extended  to  all  contests  and  debates  that
4  should  arise  between  the  ministers  of  the  church,
4  superior  as  well  as  inferior,  concerning  their  pos-
4  sessions,  their  reputation,  their  rights  and  privileges^
4  their  offences  against  the  laws,  and  tilings  of  a  like
4  nature.

^  20.  "  In  consequence  of  this  artful  division,  Con-


210  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  Ill*

C?x?* C  famine  and  his  successors  called  councils,  presided
.  <  in  them,  appointed  judges  of  religious  controver-

sies, terminated  the  differences  which  arose  be-
4  tween  the  bishops  and'the  people,  fixed  the  limits
4  of  the  ecclesiastical  provinces,  took  cognizance  of
4  the  civil  causes  that  subsisted  between  the  ministers
4  of  the  church,  and  punished  the  crimes  committed
4  against  the  laws,  by  the  ordinary  judges  appointed
4  for  that  purpose."

2  k  In  ail  this,  the  Emperor  still  appears  the  su-
jiremc  lucid,  and  no  other  impulse  of  government  is
so  much  as  hinted  at,  in  all  the  account,  but  the
sovereign  will  and  authority  of  this  unbaptized  usur-
per Let  such  a  government  be  said  to  arise  in  the
room  of  the  apostolic  power ;  but  let  no  one  imagine
that  it  was  one  and  the  same,  or  had  any  relation  to
that  divine  order  in  which  nothing  was  passed  but
what  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  those  who
had  been  therewith  baptized.

22.  Although  the  bishops  were  intrusted  with  the
principal  management  of  their  church  affairs,  and
were  appointed  by  the  emperor,  as  judges  in  points
of  religious  controversy  ;  yet,  in  every  punctilio,  they
were  subject  to  his  controul :  so  that  at  best,  these
pretended  fathers  could  only  be  tools  to  form  and
modify  such  a  religious  doctrine  and  worship  as  would
best  suit  the  purposes  of  civil  government,  and  please
the  taste  of  a  debauched  and  corrupt  empire.

23.  Could  this  be  that  sin-condemning  gospel
which  Jesus  sent  by  his  apostles  to  all  the  world  as  a
testimony  against  them  ?  Who  cannot  see  the  infinite
difference  ?  Behold  a  set  of  lordly  ecclesiastics,  bred
in  the  schools  of  religious  contention,  living  in  idle-
ness, luxury  and  lust,  employed,  supported,  and  en-
riched by  civil  government,  for  the  purpose  of  ren-
dering the  religion  of  Constantine  universally  accep-
table to  all  his  subjects  !  Is  not  such  a  religion  a  libel
upon  the  name  of  Christianity  ?

24.  Before  ever  Constantine  assumed  the  reins  of
church  government,  the  contending  fathers  had  dis-
putes and  controversies  prepared,  which  all  his  im-
perial wisdom  and  power  could  never  settle.  Be-
sides reputed  heretics,  a  numerous  party  had  separa-


P.  Ill,  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  211

ted  from  the  Catholic  body,  called  Donatists. They C*T£P-
disputed  with  the  main body  about  the  sanctity  of


p.  403.


bishops,  and the  gifts of  the Holy Ghost. They  Ee«a.i&-
avoided communion with all  other  churches: of  ?°J*™!;
course  their  principles were  pronounced  seditious.
JYovatus  and  his  followers  also  much  troubled  their
Catholic  peace.

25.  And  this  was  not  all :  deplorable  divisions  were
kindled (says Mosheim,)  throughout the Christian £f9'9t
world,  on  the  subject  of  jCT"*  Three  persons  in  the
Godhead. The  dispute  on  this  subject  took  its  rise

at  Alexandria,  that  seat  of  vain  philosophy,  and  was
differently  modified  and  prolonged  by  Alexander  and
Arius.  The  doctors  themselves  could  not  decide  the
point.  The  emperor  admonishes  them  by  letter  to
end  their  dispute,  but  without  effect.  And  seeing
the  flames  of  controversy  daily  spreading  through
the  empire,  he  at  length  assembled  a  general  coun*  itfjj
cil,  in  the  year  325,  at  Nice,  in  Bithynia.

26.  A  general  council  is  supposed  to  consist  of  com-
missioners from  all  the  churches  in  the  Christian
world,  which  represents  the  church  universal.  These
were  established  by  the  authority  of  the  emperor ;  ib^
though  it  is  probable  his  judgment  was  directed  by
that  of  the  bishops.  The  general  council  is  assem-
bled at  Nice.  Here  the  whole  Christian  world,  so
called,  is  represented  with  the  Emperor  at  their  head,

to  dispute  concerning  the  persons  in  the  Godhead  ;
to  decide  the  manner  of  Christ's  union  with  the  Fa-
ther ;  to  compose  schisms,  heal  divisions,  suppress
heresies,  and  establish  the  orthodox  faith.

27.  This  they  call  Church  Government.  And  what
did  this  universal  council  effect  ?  Doubtless  that  glo-  ,
rious  building  called  the  Catholic  church,  had  here
arisen  to  the  greatest  height  which  it  attained  during
the  reign  of  Constantmc  :  for  a  house  divided  against,
it  a  elf  cannot  sta?id.

28.  By  this  council  the  Arian  party  were  condemn-
ed, the  consubstantial  doctrine  established — 4rius
banished — a  creed  formed,  and  his  followers  compel-
led to  give  their  assent  to  it.  Five  years  after,  the
emperor  changes  sides,  recalls  Arius  from  banish-
ment, espouses  his  doctrine,  and  uses  all  his  influ-
ence to  promote  it.

X


212  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  HL

€7xP' 29,  ^  a  counc*1  held  at  ^V™*  ln  the  year  335,  he
.  deposed  and  condemned  Jthanasius  his  greatest  an-

tagonist, and  afterwards  had  hirn  banished  into  Gaul  ;
soon  after  which,  this  great  head  of  the  church  fin-
ished his  race,  having  rereived  a  baptism  of  water
from  Eusebius  of  jYicomedia^  the  principal  supporter
of  the  Avian  cause.

30.  The  order  of  the  Catholic  church  (if  order  it
might  be  called)  had  long  been  preparing,  but  by  the
council  of  Nice  it  was  established.  Here  the  first
Catholic  Confession  of  Faith  was  confirmed  by  the
united  authority  of  bishops  and  civil  rulers,  the  church
and  the  world  in  one.  Here  it  was  first  decreed,  by
the  same  authority,  that  the  Son  was  consubstantial
with  the  Father.  But  their  doctrine  couid  not  be
completed  without  a  third  person  ;  and  as  the  rulers
tf  the  church  and  civil  officers  were  consubstantial
with  the  emperor  ;  so  the  odd  number  of  Three  was
soon  after  established  in  the  Deity,  and  the  second
and  third  proved  by  a  majority  of  votes  to  be  consub-
stantial with  the  first.

31.  Two  could  never  agree  in  the  kingdom  of  An-
tichrist, therefore  three  became  necessary  to  form  a
council,  in  order  to  a  casting  vote.  Here  the  patri-
arch, the  papa,  that  is  fitftf  or  father  must  have  all
power  in  his  hand,  ;<nd  sway  the  sceptre  uncontroll-
ed ;  and  whether  his  vote  is  in  favour  of  truth  or  er-
ror, virtue  or  vice,  his  counsel  must  stand,  and  he
will  do  all  his  pleasure.

32.  By  this  fatal  error,  which  was  founded  on  their
own  carnal  reasoning,  and  the  motley  compound  of
civil  and  ecclesiastical  power,  the  council  of  Nice,
instead  of  uniting  in  harmony  the  contending  parties,
laid  a  lasting  foundation  for  errors  of  every  kind.  In
consequence  of  which,  council  was  formed  against
council,  and  shameful  and  scandalous  debates  promo-
ted, until  they  increased  to  severe  scourging,  banish-
ment, and  even  bloodshed  ;  while  the  jarring  opinions
and  contradictory  decrees  of  this  only  Catholic  church,
seemed  to  claim  a  divine  authority  to  drive  the  world
into  the  utmost  confusion.


F.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  2*&

CHAPTER  X.

The  Subject  continued.

THE  Emperor,  at  the  time  of  the  first  universal  «*£*•
council,  was  acknowleged  as  the  head  of  the  '
Church  ;  but  as  he  afterwards  changed  sides,  and  es-
poused the  doctrine  against  which  the  orthodox  uni-
verse had  passed  its  decrees  at  Nice,  it  gave  occa-
sion to  call  in  question  his  right  to  the  headship,  and
excited  the  Catholic  bishops  to  contend  for  the  pre-
eminence ;  that  the  decision  in  all  matters,  both  tem-
poral and  spiritual,  might  be  infallibly  sanctioned,  as
coming  from  the  representatives  of  the  holy  apostles>
and  of  Christ,  whose  authority  was  only  spiritual  and
divine.

2  This  point,  the  cunning  priesthood  finally  gain-
ed, whereby  they  duped  the  emperor  out  of  his
throne,  supplanted  the  whole  civil  authority,  and  en-
grossed the  administration  into  their  own  hands.
This,  however,  was  not  effected  in  an  instant,  but
required  more  than  a  hundred  years  labour  of  the
ingenious  doctors,  who  were  continually  commenting
and  improving  upon  the  canons,  decrees,  and  estab-
lished doctrines  of  the  Mcene  council.  This  leads
us  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  character  and  doc*
trines  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  fathers,  who
succeeded  this  first  universal  council.

3.  St.  Athenasius  says,  "  Whosoever  will  be  Gwm)l^
1  saved,  before  all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he  hold  ofcatfc,
'  the  Catholic  faith.  Which  faith,  except  every  one  Doct'**2"
*  do  keep  whole  and  undefiled,  without  doubt  he  shall

i  perish  everlastingly."  This  may  serve  as  an  intro-
duction :  it  then  remains  to  find  out  in  whom  such  a
Catholic  faith  is  deposited  ;  whether  in  the  Nicene  or
Ariart  party,  in  the  Donatists,  the  JYestorians>  the
Palagkms,  or  in  the  Manichean  and  Marcionite  he-
retics.

4.  The  Catholics,  however,  have  a  right  to  claim
what  they  call  the  Catholic  faith,  that  is,  such  a  faith
as  they  are  able  to  impose  upon  mankind  by  the  al-
lurements of  eloquence,  or  the  power  of  the  secu-
lar arm. Let  us  enquire  then  what  this  faith  was  in


214  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  IIP.

chap. jfS  £rsj-  stages  of  authority,  and  who  they  were  that

' formed  it,  and  gave  it  the  awful  sanction.

Ecd.His- 5-  Ef»hraini  the  Syrian,  acquired  an  immortal  name

Spiro'  ty  tne  mu^itu^e  of  his  .writings,  in  which  he  com-

351,552.'  bated  the  sectaries. Hilary,  bishop of  Poictiers,  is

immortalized  by  his  twelve  books  concerning  the  I'rin-

itt,  which  he  wrote  against  the  Avians.

6.  Rufinus,  presbyter  of  Aquileia,  was  famous  for
his  commentaries  on  several  passages  of  the  holy
scriptures,  and  his  bitter  contest  with  St.  Jerome.
44  He  would  (says  Mosheim,)  have  obtained  a  very
4  honourable  place  among  the  Latin  writers  of  this
*  century,  had  it  not  been  his  misfortune  to  have  the
4  powerful  and  foul-mouthed  Jerome  for  his  adver-
4  sary."

7 .  But  the  glory  of  these,  and  almost  all  the  other
writers  of  this  age,  was  eclipsed  by  St.  Augustin,
(Modhtim  says,)  "  The  fame  of  Augustin,  bishop  of
4  Hippo,  in  Africa,  filled  the  whole  Christian  world."
He  gained  much  honour  by  his  contest  with  Pelagius,
suppressing  the  Pelagian  heresy  almost  in  its  very
beginning,  and  establishing  the  Catholic  doctrines  of

W' ICT3*  The  imputation  of  original  sin — Election  and  re-
*7,  89. '  probation,  and  of  salvation  by  mere  grace,  without  any
foresight  of  faith, or  regard  to  good  works,  which
have  darkened  the  earth  even  to  the  present  day.

8.  The  African  bishops,  with  Augustin  at  their
head,  maintained  the  Catholic  faith,  even  against  the
Bishop  of  Rome,  who  estemed  Ptlagius  sound  in  the
faith,  and  by  their  exhortations,  letters  and  writings,
gained  over  U\e  Roman  pontiff  to  their  side.  Pela-
gius  and  his  doctrines  are  condemned  with  the  utmost
severity  at  Rome. Likewise  in  the  famous  council

fott;  at  Ephesus,  A.  D.  431.  "  In  short,  (says  Moshcim])
4  the  Gauls,  Britons,  and  Africans  by  their  councils,
4  and  the  emperors  by  their  edicts  and  penal  laws,  de-
4  molished  this  sect  in  its  infancy."
Bed. Re-  9.  But  this  was  not  all  :  Robinson  says,  44  While
*Srioi.S'  4  Genseric  was  defending  the  [_Ariari]  faith  at  the
4  head  of  eighty  thousand  men,  Augustin  who  had
4  now  no  command  over  the  sword,  was  inflaming
4  his  hearers  with  violent  passions,  by  urging  them
4  to  hate  one  another  for  their  speculations."

10.  In  a  part  of  one  of  his  sermons  the  following


P.. III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  215

is  worthy  of  notice. The  discourse  is  about  the  strait  CI*£P-

gate  ;  and  this  according  to  the  Catholic  faith,  cannot  __

be  good  works,  or  obedience to  the  law  of  Christ ;

but  the  wounded  side  of  Jesus. 44  By  this  strait  gate

44  of  the  side  of  Christ,  (says  St.  Augustin,)  the  con-

"  verted  thief  entered,  the  penitent  Jew,  every  con-

"  verted  Pagan,  but  the  wicked  heretic  Arian  turns

"  his  back  on  him  and  goes  out. He  is  one  of  those

"  of  whom  St.  John  says,  they  went  out  from  us— •

"  O  you  Arian  heretic  I"

11.  "  Several  Catholic  historians,  (says  Robinson,)  Ecci.Re^
4  observe,  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  honour  of  p#a[^»
4  his  providence,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  church,

4  that  the  very  day  on  which  Pelagius  was  born  in
4  Britain  to  shed  darkness  over  the  empire,  Saint
4  Monico  lay  in  with  St.  Augustin  in  Africa,  to  dis-
4  pel  the  darkness,  and  throw  light  and  sunshine  and
4  midday  splendor  over  the  minds  of  all  mankind."

12.  "  Just  so,  say  they,  when  heretics  appeared  in
4  the  western  world,  did  God  by  his  spirit  excite
4  pope  Innocent  to  erect  the  most  holy  office  of  the
4  Inquisition.  From  [Augustin~]  this  bitter  and  bloody
4  fanatic  of  Africa,  proceeded  two  hundred  and  thirty-
4  two  pamphlets.— He  understood  the  ten  command-

4  ments  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and, Thou  shaft  not  kill, plbjJ3#
4  signified,  thou  shalt  not kill  ail  orthodox  believer.
4  The  command  did  not  protect  the  life  of  a  heretic"

13.  "  This  Saint  Augustin  had  as  line  a  scent  for
4  this  sort  of  game  as  ever  saint  had. — He  reckoned
4  up  no  less  than  eighty-eight  sorts  of  these  poor  be-
4  ings,  whom  he  and  other  such  holy  men  doomed
4  to  utter  destruction. "  He  had  a  little  parish  in  his
own  diocese  infested  with  heresy,  which  is  briefly
described  in  his  own  words,  as  follows.

14.  "  There  is  a  certain  rustic  heresy  in  our  dis- ibid.

44  trict,  of  Hi/ifio — in  one  small  village,  we  may  call  NyteM
44  them  Abdites. — .They  are  not  mixed  with  wives,
44  yet,  according  to  the  decree  of  the  sect,  it  is  not  al-
44  lowed  them  to  live  separate  from  wives.  There-
44  fore  males  and  females  dwelling  together,  under  a
44  profession  of  continence,  they  adopted  to  them-
44  selves  a  boy  and  a  girl,  as  their  future  heirs  in  the  cov*
44  ena^t  of  the  same  conjunction  ; each  and  every

X  2


-

216  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  III.

chap, a  one  going  before  by  death,  others  are  sought  out
"  to  fill  their  place."

15.  a  Moreover,  provided  that  either  parent  being
"  dead,  one  remaining,  the  children  served  until
«  their  departure  also,  after  whose  death,  they  (the  sue-
"  cessors)  adopted  boy  and  girl  in  like  manner :  nor
"  was  there  ever  any  lack  from  whence  they  might
"  adopt,  their  neighbours  generating  on  all  sides,
"  and  freely  giving  up  their  needy  children  upon  the
"  hope  of  heirship  to  the  property  of  strangers."

16.  "  This  (says  Robinson,)  afflicted  the  chaste
^  bishop  so  greatly,  that  he  corrected  them  till  they
<  became  Catholics."  Most  likely  this  great  saint
cleared  his  diocese  of  such  kind  of  heretics  ;  how-
ever, he  could  neither  expel  them  from  the  earth,
nor  reduce  them  to  a  conformity  to  his  hypocritical
life  and  manners.  But  as  long  as  orthodoxy  was  the
established  -virtue  of  the  Catholics,  heresy,  which
must  of  course  be  the  established  vice,  remained  as
the  principal  object  of  their  hatred  and  persecution.

17.  The  very  constitution  of  the  Catholic  Church,
from  the  period  of  the  JVicene  council,  inspired  the
priesthood  with  a  growing  ambition  to  ^clear  the  em-
pire of  every  object  that  would  expose  their  hypoc-
risy, or  weaken  their  lordly  influence  over  a  benight-
ed world.  Heretics  stood  principally  in  their  way ;
therefore  the  greatest  champion  in  detecting  and  root-
ing out  heretics,  however  contrary  to  the  precepts
of  the  gospel  the  means  he  used,  stood  highest  on
the  list  of  Catholic  heroes,  or  canonized  saints.

18.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  there  could  be  no  room,
either  for  truth  or  virtue,  where  the  continual  strife
was,  who  should  be  the  greatest.  And  the  source  of
revenue,  which  flowed  from  the  head  of  influence
to  these  ministers  of  darkness,  prompted  them  to
still  higher  degrees  of  ambition,  by  which  the  rus-
tics, as  they  are  called,  or  common  people,  were
trampled  under  foot,  or  at  best  considered  as  neces-
sary tools  for  promoting  their  opulence  and  grandeur,
and  supporting  them  in  luxury  and  idleness.

19.  To  show  that  this  was  the  true  genius  of  this
r&ed.Bis-  imperious  hierarchy,  the  following  particulars  may
ffi'w-  suffice. "  Many  of  the  privileges,  (says  Mosheim,)

i  wVrieh  had  formerly  belonged  to  the  presbyters  and.


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  21?

people,  were  guilder Constantinc:~\  usurped  by  the CJ^P«
bishops.— Their  first  step  was  an  entire  exclusion  .

of  the  people  from  all  part  in  the  administration  of
ecclesiastical  affairs. "

20.  "  In  the  episcopal  order,  the  bishop  of  Rome  Ecci.His-
was  the  first  in  rank,  and was  distinguished  by  a  t^^'.
sort  of  pre-eminence  over  all  other  prelates. Pre-
judices, arising  from  a  great  variety  of  causes,  con-
tributed to establish  this superiority  ; but  it  was
chiefly  owing  to  certain  circumstances  of  grandeur

and  opulence,  by  which  mortals,  for  the  most  part,
form  their  ideas  of  pre-eminence  and  dignity."

21.  "  The  Bishop  of  Rome  surpassed  all  his  breth-
ren in  the  magnificence  and  splendor  of  the  church
over  which  he  presided  ;  in  the  riches  of  his  reve-
nues and  possessions  ;  in  the  number  and  variety  of
his  ministers ;  in  "his  credit  with  the  people  ;  and
in  his  sumptuous  and  splendid  manner  of  living.
These  dazzling  marks  of  human  power  had  such  a
mighty  influence  upon  the  minds  of  the  multitude,
that  the  see  of  Rome  became  a  most  seducing  ob-
ject of  sacerdotal  ambition. "

22.  "  Hence  it  happened,  that  when  a  new  pontiff
was  to  be  elected  by  the  suffrages  of  the  people,  the
city  of  Rome  was  generally  agitated  with  dissentions,
tumults,  and  cabals,  whose  consequences  were  of-
ten deplorable  and  fatal."  The  intrigues  and  dis-
turbances that  prevailed  in  that  city  in  the  year  366,
when,  upon  the  death  of  Liberius,  another  pontiff
was  to  be  chosen  in  his  place,  are  a  sufficient  proof
of  what  we  have  now  advanced."

23.  "  Upon  this  occasion,  one  faction  elected  Da- ibs*
masua  to  that  high  dignity,  while  the  opposite  party p>  *&>
chose  Ursicinusj  a  deacon  of  the  vacant  church,  to
succeed  Liberiw. This  double  election  gave  rise

to  a  dangerous  schism,  and  to  a  sort  of  civil  war
within  the  city  of  Rome,  which  was  carried  on  with
the  utmost  barbarity  and  fury,  and  produced  the
most  cruel  massacres  and  desolations.  This  inhu-
man contest  ended  in  the  victory  of  Damasus."

24.  Such  was  the  degree  of  lawless  power,  which
those  degenerate  plants  of  the  vine  of  Sodom  had  al-
ready attained,  and  which  evidently  proceeded  from
fhe  Antichrist ian  authority  which  had  been  reposed


318  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF  P.  Ill

chap, in  the  emperor,  that  head  of  the false church,  as


will  appear  from  what  follows.


Ecc1.hu-  25.  "  The  additions  made  by  the  emperors  and
lory,346'  '  0t^ers  to  the  wealth,  honours  and  advantages  of  the
'  clergy,  were  followed  with  a  proportionable  aug-
4  mentation  of  vices  and  luxury,  particularly,  among
4  those  of  that  sacred  order,  [or  rather  according  to
4  their  fruits,  that  satanic  order,]  who  lived  in  great
4  and  opulent  cities  ;  and  that  many  such  additions
4  were  made  to  that  order  after  the  time  of  Constan-
4  tine,  is  a  matter  that  admits  of  no  dispute."  So
4  says  Mosheim.

26.  Here  then  was  the  source  of  all  their  ambi-
tion :  A  sordid  thirst  for  temporal  glory  !  And  hence
few. the  historian  observes, — "  The  bishops,  on  the  one
4  hand,  contended  with  each  other,  in  the  most  scan-
4  dalous  manner,  concerning  the  extent  of  their  re-
4  spective  jurisdictions  ; while on the other, they
*4  trampled  upon the rights  of  the  people,  violated
4  the  privileges  of  the  inferior  ministers,  and  imita-
4  ted,  in  their  conduct  and  in  their  manner  of  living,
4  the  arrogance,  voluptuousness,  and  luxury  of  mag-
4  istrates  and  princes."
ibid. 27.  44  This  pernicious  example  was  soon  followed
*.339/  t  Dy  tjje  severai  ecclesiastical  orders. — The  bishops  by
4  degrees,  divested  the  presbyters of  their ancient
4  privileges,  and  their  primitive  authority,  that  they
4  might  have  no importunate protesters  to  control
4  their  ambition,  or  oppose  their proceedings  ;  and
4  principally,  that  they  might  either  engross  to  them-
4  selves,  or  distribute,  as  they  thought  proper,  the
4  possessions  and  revenues  of  the  church."

28.  "  Hence  it  came  to  pass,  that,  at  the  conclu-
4  sion  of  this  [iv.]  century,  there  remained  no  more
4  than  a  mere  shadow  of  the  ancient  government  of
4  the  church."  Admitting  that  there  did  remain  a
mere  shadow,  there  must  be  an  essential  difference
between  that  and  the  substance.

29.  But  it  must  appear  evident  that  there  did  not
remain  the  most  distant  resemblance  of  the  Primitive
Church,  if  we  compare  the  arrogance,  voluptuous-
ness and  luxury  of  the  clergy,  and  the  barbarity,  fu-
ry, inhuman  contests  and  cabals  of  their  subjects  with
what  Jesus  taught  his  true  disciples.


P.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  £i$

30.  But  Jesus  called  them,  and  saith  unto  them. Ye Cf^p-
know that they  which  are accounted to  rule over


the Gentiles  exercise  lordshifi  over them ;  and their  ^^  x>
Great  ones  exercise  authority  ufion them. But  so  42,43.
shall  it  not  be  among  you:  but  whosoever  will  be  great
among  you,  shall  be  your  [gr.  S'lctxevos^]  deacon:*  and  *wntT
whosoever  will  be  the  chief  est  shall  be  servant  of  all.

31.  How  diametrically  opposite  appears  the  whole
course  of  the  Catholic  order! — The  bishops  lording
it  over  the  presbyters, — the  presbyters  over  inferior
officers — and  the  lower  class  of  rulers  setting  them-
selves up  as  great  ones  over  the  common  people  ;  and
priests  and  people  tyranizing  with  relentless  cruelty-
over  reputed  heretics,  whose  lives  of  virtue  exposed
them  alone,  as  a  common  prey  to  the  avaricious  and
beastly  power  of  Antichrist.

32.  This  is  the  Church  which  has  been  represented
as  the  blessed  mother  of  saints,  and  of  Great  saints,
and  even  of  Constantine  the  great,  under  whose
reign  that  great  building,  which  had  been  erecting
ever  since  the  fall,  arose  to  so  great  a  height !  This
is  that  great  hierarchy,  and  these  the  effects  of  that
Catholic  gospel,  for  which  even  President  Edwards  See  Hi*
could  affirm,  that  no  other  cause  could  be  devised  but  R™i?mp,
the  power  of  God. Doubtless  that  proverb  is  true.  P^4^
There  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a  man  ;  but  the  12.
end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  defalk.

33.  Under  the  influence  of  a  false  education,  and
a  deep  rooted  prejudice  in  favour  of  the  chain  of  or-
thodoxy, the  most  sensible  modern  writers  have  la-
boured to  prove  that  to  be  the  work  of  God,  which
was  evidently  the  work  of  wicked  and  aspiring  men.

34.  And  lest  the  soundness  of  modern  Christianity
should  be  called  in  question,  the  Protestant  firi.st-
hood  have  universally  laboured  to  establish  the  credit
and  authority  of  the  Catholic  church,  in  every  age.
But  they  have  manifested  the  greatest  degree  of  par-
tiality, in  charging  the  w  oie  guilt  of  apostacy  upon
the  Bishop  of  Rome,  while  they  themselves  claim  a
relation  to  that  very  sink  of  corruption,  out  of  which
he  arose  to  the  papal  dignity.

35.  Although  these  modern  doctors  would  seem
to  content  themselves  with  a  less  degree  of  power
than  the  bishop  of  Rome  attained,  and  support  their


223  THE  ESTABLISHES  ORDER  OF  P.  III.

€^£P' union  only  with  such  of  the  fathers  as  preceded  him  ;

,  yet,  in  claiming  and  supporting  this  relation,  they

show  that  if  they  had  the  same  opportunity,  they
would  not  stop  short  of  universal  supremacy,  any
more  than  their  fathers  did.

36.  Hence  that  very  way,  which  was  invented  by  the
Alexandrian  firieslhood^  and  established  by  Conatantine^
seemeth  even  to  this  day,  to  be  right ;  and  kindred
bishops  and  doctors  love  to  have  it  so,  and  by  false  ar-
guments and  bold  assertions,  try  to  prove  it  to  be  so.

37.  Each  improving  upon  his  predecessor,  furnish-
es new  arguments  for  those  that  follow.  So  this  an-
cient way  of  mixing  religion  and  politics,  still  seemeth
to  be  right,  although  after  so  long  a  proof,  even  accord-
ing to  their  own  accounts,  it  has  evidently  branched  out
into  many  ways  of  confusion,  persecution  and  death.

38.  Under  all  their  pomp  and  vain  glory,  their  com-
pound of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  tyranny,  their  confu-
sed and  contradictory  jargon,  which  they  called  art  ho*
doxy*  it  is  plain  that  a  subtle  priesthood  were  aspiring
to  the  entire  headship  over  both  church  and  state.

ReeLHis-  39.  In  the  fifth  century,  Mosheim  says,  M  The  vices
iTiMi!*  6  °f  tne  clergy  were  carried  to  the  most  enormous
<  lengths.  The  writers  of  this  century  are  unanimous
1  in  their  accounts  of  the  luxury,  arrogance,  avarice*
1  and  voluptuousness  of  the  sacerdotal  orders."  And
further  observes  that,  "  These  opprobrious  stains,  in
*  the  characters  of  the  clergy,  would  never  have  been
1  endured,  had  not  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  been
J  sunk  in  superstition  and  ignorance."

40.  What  was  there,  then,  to  prevent  these  basest
of  all  deceivers  from  setting  up  a  false  god,  a  false
Christ,  false  teachers,  false  saints,  and  the  like  ?  The
superstitious  and  ignorant  multitude  were  at  their  con-
troui ;  the  civil  authority  was  on  their  side  ;  the  here-
tics were  rooted  out  from  among  them,  and  were  ei-
ther banished,  or  voluntarily  retreated  to  mountains
or  deserts,  where  they  might  enjoy  the  free  exercise
jpf  piety  and  uninterrupted  peace,  remote  from  this
Babylonish  mixture  of  confusion.

41.  Nothing  in  fact  remained  to  prevent  this  syna-
gogue of  satan  from  establishing  any  religion  or  gov-
ernment which  they  could  agree  upon  among  them-


P. III.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  221

selves. The  only  difficulty  they  had  to  surmount,  was,  chap.
to  determine  which  of  them  should  be  the  greatest. __

42.  Mosheim  says,  that  even,  "  the  office  of  a  fires-  Eccl#Hig.

*  byter  was  looked  upon  of  such  a  high  and  eminent  na-  tpry,  vol
<ture,  that  Martin,  bishop  of  Tours,  was  so  audacious  lup'

c  as  to  maintain,  at  a  public  entertainment,  that  the  Em-

*  peror  was  inferior,  in  dignity,  to  one  of  that  order.'*
How  then  must  the  bishops  have  appeared  ?

43.  Nor  were  the  bishops  themselves,  at  this  time
the  highest  order  of  ecclesiastics.  Five  wer«  distin-
guished from  the  rest,  under  the  name  of  Pat,  iarchsy
namely,  the  bishop  of  Rome,  Constantinople,  Alex-
andria, Antioch  and  Jerusalem  ;  whose  office  it  was
to  consecrate  inferior  bishops,  assemble  yearly  coun-
cils in  their  respective  districts,  and  regulate  the  af-
fairs of  the  church  universal.

44.  But  Antichrist  must  needs  have  a  supreme
head  ;  and  as  this  had  hitherto  been  vested  in  the  em-
perors, and  the  ecclesiastics  were  now  aspiring  after
the  supremacy,  it  became  necessary  that  one  of  that
order  should  have  power  to  rule  the  rest.  Hence  jbk».
ambitious  quarrels,  and  bitter  animosites  arose  amonf  ?•*>-
the  patriarchs  themselves,  which  produced  the  most
bloody  wars,  and  the  most  detestable  an^l  horrid  crimes.

45.  It  would  be  endless  to  trace  the  artful  meas-
ures which  these  ungodly  tyrants  pursued,  from  time
to  time,  to  supplant  one  another,  in  order  to  attain
the  last  and  highest  degree  of  pre-eminence.  Howr-
ever, u  None  of  the  contending  bishops,  (says  Mo- iDkl>

*  sheim,)  found  the  occurrences  of  the  times  so  fa- ?,arr*
4  vourable  to  his  ambition  as  the  Roman  pontiff?'

46.  And — "  Among  all  the  prelates  who  ruled  the

<  church  of  Rome  during  this  century,  there  was  none

<  who  asserted,  with  such  vigour  and  success,  the
c  authority  and  pretensions  of the  Roman  pontiff,  as

i  Leo,*  commonly  surnamed  the  Great  ;"  whose  su-  ^jj^
preme  authority  was  particularly  owned  by  the  gen-
eral council  assembled  at  Chalcedon,  A.  D.  451.

47.  About  this  time  anew  controversy  arose,  occa-
sioned by  certain  doctrines  advanced  by  Eutyches,  a
monk  at  Constantinople. Eutyches  maintained,  that

in  Christ, there %vas  but  one  nature,  viz.  that  of  the  E<*1.H*.
incarnate  word :  for  which  he  was  accused  of  heresy,  \\.?\n,


2&2  THE  ESTABLISHED  ORDER  OF,  &X.  P.  III.

C*x^P* *n  a  council assembled  at  Constantinople,  A.  D.  448,
___ __  by  Flavianus,  the  Patriarch  of  that  city.

48.  By  a  decree  of  this  council,  Eutyches  was  or-
dered to  renounce  the  above  mentioned  opinion.  He
obstinately  refused  ;  for  which  he  was  excommuni-
cated and  deposed.  He  appealed  to  a  general  coun-
cil, which  Mas,  accordingly,  by  order  of  the  empe*
ror  Theodosius,  assembled  at  Ephetus,  A,  D.  449,
in  which  Ijioscorus,  the  Patriarch  ot  jHexandria^Tpxt-
sided,  who  was  of  the  same  opinion  with  Eutyches.
Ecci.His-  49.  By  the  order  of  this  council,  Eutyches  was
fcp.'T?.1"  acquitted  of  the  charge  of  error;  and  the  patriarch
EUn'ianus,  rmblicly  scourged  in  the  most  barbarous
manner,  ana  banished  10  Lpipas,  a  city  of  Eydiay
where  he  soon  after  died  of  his  wounds.  But  pre-
vious to  his  death  he  appealed  to  Leo  the  Great,
who  took  up  the  cause,  and  demanded  of  Theodo-
sius, another  general  council,  which  this  Lmperor
couid  not  be  prevailed  upen  to  grant.

50.  Upon  his  death,  however,  his  successor  Mar-
cianus  consented  to  Leo's  demand,  and  called,  in
the  year  45 1 ,  the  council  of  Chalcedon.  In  this  coun-
cil the  legate,  or  representative  of  Leo  presided  ;  the
decrees  of  the  council  of  Ephesus  were  annulled  ;  an
epistle,  which  Leo  had  written  to  Flavianus  on  the  sub-
ject of  debate,  was  received  as  a  rule  of  faith  ;  Eutyches
was  condemned  ;  and  the  following  doctrine,  "  which
i  (says  MoshiemJ)  is  at  this  time  almost  generally  receiv-
4  ed,  was  inculcated  upon  Christians  [i.  e.  Catholics]

ftte. i  as  an  object  of  faith,  viz.  %CJ*  "  That  in  Christ  two
p.  75. «  distinct  natures  were  united  in  one  per son ,  and  that
"  without  any  change?  mixture  or  confusion.*'

51.  "  A  great  number  of  Oriental  and  Egyptian
6  doctors,  united  in  opposing,  with  the  utmost  vehe-
6  mence,  the  council  of  Chalcedon,  and  the  epistle  of

<  Leo,  which  it  had  adopted  as  a  rule  of  faith. —
c  Hence  arose  deplorable  discords,  and  civil  wars,
4  whose  fury  and  barbarity  were  carried  to  the  most
6  excessive  and  incredible  lengths. "

»bid.  52.  "  But  the  Roman  pontiff,  far  superior  to  them

p'27' <  all,  in  wealth  and  power — daily  added  new  degrees

4  of  influence  and  authority  to  the  Roman  see,  ren-

<  dered  it  every  where  respected,  and  thus  impercep-
'  tibly  established  its  supremacy"


THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING,
PART  IV.

THE  REIGN  AND  DOMINION  OF
ANTICHRIST.

CHAPTER I.

The  Be  ginning 'of  the  Reign  of  Antichrist.

THE  precise  period  in  which  Antichrist  began  his  chap.
reign,  has  been  a  matter  of  great  search  ;  and  L
there  are  but  few  subjects  on  ^  which  the  learned  are
more  divided.  What  has  rendered  this  point  so  ex-
tremely difficult  to  ascertain,  was  the  great  length  of
time  that  was  taken  up  in  laying  the  foundations  of
his  kingdom,  and  the  gradual  manner  in  which  Ms
dominion  arose  to  its  greatest  height.

2.  Although  the  intimate  connexion  and  resem-
blance between  the  preparatory  work,  and  actual
reign  of  Antichrist,  has  rendered  the  precise  begin-
ning of  his  reign  a  matter  of  such  various  conjecture  ;
it  has  notwithstanding  been  agreed  to  by  all,  that
there  was  such  a  period,  and  that  the  beginning  of
his  dominion  would  finally  be  ascertained  by  the  end,
and  confirmed  by  corroborating  circumstances.

3.  It  is  further  agreed,  that  the  reign  of  Antichrist
b«gan  with  the  Papal  hierarchy,  or  supremacy  of  the
bishop  of  Rome  ;  but  it  is  evident,  that  they  must  be
greatly  mistaken,  who  fix  the  date  of  this  hierarchy
at  the  period  when  the  bishop  of  Rome  had  gained
the  entire  ascendancy,  and  exercised  all  the  power  of
k  temporal  monarch,  on  the  supposed  grant  of  Saint
Peter  and  Con&tantine  the  Great.

y


224  THE  BEGINNING  OF  P.  IV.

chap. 4t  Xf  he  must  needs  reign,  for  the  purpose  of  bring-
* ing  every  enemy  into  subjection,  his  reign  must  have
begun  long  before  this  period  ;  therefore  the  main
question  is,  when  did  he  begin  to  exercise  that  pow-
er by  which  he  was  exalted  to  so  great  a  height  ?  In
order  to  open  this  matter  in  its  proper  light,  the  fol-
lowing facts  are  particularly  worthy  of  notice,  as  re-
*  lating  to  what  has  already  been  stated  concerning  the
ambitious  views  of  Leo  the  Great.
Kewton. 5<  According  to  Mcde  and  others,  in  the  year  456,
Dprerih  ^e  R°mLin  empire  was  overrun  by  the  Barbarians,
voi.ip.'  and  the  city  of  Rome  sacked  by  Gcmseric  king  of  the
Vandals :  and  the  year  following  the  empire  was  di-
vided into  ten  kingdoms.
»cuiis* 6.  Moshcim  says,  "  The  incursions  and  triumphs
li^-27,1'  '  °*  tne  Barbarians  were  so  far  from  being  prejudi-
28.  «  cial  to  the  rising  dominion  of  the  Roman  pontiff,

'  that  they  rather  contributed  to  its  advancement.
4  For the  kings,  who penetrated into the  empire,

*  were  only  solicitous  about  the  methods  of  giving  a
i  sufficient  degree  of  stability  to  their  respective  gov-
i  ernmeius. And  when  they  perceived  the  subjec-

<  tion  of  the  multitude  to  the  bishops,  and  the  depen-

*  dance  of  the  bishops  upon  the  Roman  pontiff,  they

*  immediately  resolved  to  reconcile  this  ghostly  ruler

*  to  their  interests,  by  Loading  him  with  benefits  and

*  honours  of  various  kinds."

7.  Likewise  the  wars  and  contentions  that  had  long
existed  among  the  patriarchs,  -»x\£\  their  appealing
for  redress  to  the  bishop  of  Rome,  had  most  certain-
ly given  hifn  an  entire  superiority  over  all  the  episco-
pal orders.  The  authority  of  general  councils  was,
moreover,  almost  universally  acknowledged ;  and
what  greater  mark  of  superiority  could  be  shown  to
the  Roman  pontiff  than  to  adopt  his  letter  to  Flavia-
nus  as  a  rule  of  lakh  ?

8.  M'sshiim  also  observes  that,  "  The  declining
4  power  and  supine  indolence  of  the  emperors,  left

<  his  authority  almost  without  controul."  Then  add
to  all  this?  that  in  the  year  45  7,  the  emperor  Marci-
a?uis  died  ;  the  same  emperor  who  had  yielded  to  the
•lordly  demand  of  Leo.  It  must  then  appear  very  ev-
ident, that  another  emperor  could  not  succeed  him,


I\  IV.  THE  REIGN  OF  ANTICHRIST.  *  225

who  could  possibly  rise  in  the  public  esteem  to  an CH£P-
equal  degree  of  dignity  and  power  with  the artful  ,

bishop  of  Rome.

9.  Upon  the  authority  of  these  facts,  it  is  doubt-  Dan-™'
less,  wich  the  greatest  propriety,  that  some  have  re-  Rey.xiir.
ferred  to  this  period,  the  rise  of  the ten  horns of
Daniel's  fourth beast*  and also of the first beast
mentioned  by  John,  which  came  up  out  of  the  sea.

10.  This  beast,  as  it  appeared  to  Daniel,  dreadful
and  terrible,  was  a  figure  of  the  Roman  empire,  in
its  tyrannical  and  persecuting  power,  under  the  Pagan
emperors.  To  John,  the  same  tyrannical  power  ap-
peared as  a  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  sea,  which
was  evidently  fulfilled  in  that  motley  change  of  the
empire^  which  took  place  under  Constantine  the  Great.

1 1 .  Here  the  monMer,  still  more  dreadful  and  te r-
rible,  and  more  unlike  any  thing  that  had  ever  been
before  it,  rose  up  out  of  the  sea  of  troubles,  commo-  v

•  •  »  Rev  xvii

t ions  and  conflicts  among  different  kindreds,  tongues  15.  ' *
and  people. Notwithstanding, through  the whole
reign  of  Constantine  and  his  immediate  successors,
this  beast exhibited  a  plurality  of  heads,  and  these
heads  inspired  to  the  most  beastly  conduct.

12.  Yet  the  monster  was  not  complete  in  all  his
parts  ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  period  of  which  we  are
speaking,  that  his  ten  horns  appeared,  which  the  an-
gel expressly  interpreted  to  be  ten  kings  :  and  it  was
not  till  these  ten  horns  appeared,  that  the  little  horn
could  rise  up  among  them.

13.  Now  observe,  this  last  horn,  which  had  eyes  Dan.vli
like  the  eyes  of  a  man,  and  a  mouth  sfieaking  great  8»
things,  was  little  at  first  ;  and  the  same  horn,  which

in  another  vision  of  the  same  Jthing,  is  said  to  repre-
sent the  last  king,  appeared  at  first  a  little  horn,  which  vfc.*,:!*
waxed  exceeding  great — even  to  (or  according  to  the
original  against)  the  host  of  heaven.

14.  Then  as  this  last  horn,  which  was  a  figure  of
the  Pafial  hierarchy,  was  little  in  its  rise,  and  a&£*-'
wards  waxed  great,  it  answered  well  to  the  Roman
pontiff,  who  in  his  rise,  was  scarcely  visible  among
the  ten  ruling  powers,  who  at  first  loaded  him  with
benefits  and  honours,  and  over  whom  he  afterwards
exercised  unlimited  authority.


226  THE  BEGINNING  OF  P.  IV.

chap. i5#  bU£  however  imperceptible  in  the  beginning,

-  he  was  certainly  known  and  distinguished  among  the

ten  kings,  and  possessed  a  degree  of  power,  in  his

very  rising up,  by  which  he might,  with  as  great

propriety  be  said  to  reign,  as  any  of  the  other  kings.

16.  When  a  prince  or  governor  can  pursue  his  own
measures,  without  any  real  obstruction,  he  may  pro-
perly be  said  to  reign.  What  then  remained,  alter
the  death  of  Marcianus,  that  was  any  obstruction  to
the  growing  influence  and  dignity  of  Leo  the  Great  ?

17.  Before  this  period,  the  bishops  were  continu-
ally rivalling  each  other  ;  different  systems  and  parties
clashing,  and  emperors  and  ecclesiastics  standing  in
each  others  way,  rendered  it  doubtful  which  or  who
-should  be  raised  to  the  highest  degree  of  promotion.
But  after  the  rise  of  Leo,  all  the  strife  and  conten-
tion that  abounded,  only  contributed  the  more  to  aug-
ment his  power,  and  raise  to  higher  degrees  of  re-
spect, his  growing  authority.

18.  The  fact  is,  that  no  object  or  pursuit  was,  at
this  time,  of  so  public  and  influential  a  nature  as  that
in  which  the  priesthood  were  engaged  ;  and  no  rev-
olution, either  in  civil  or  ecclesiastical  affairs,  was
considered  of  any  great  importance,  further  than  as
it  related  to  the  affairs  of  that  church,  in  which  the
bishop  of  Rome  filled  the  highest  seat.  And  this  is
doubtless  sufficient  to  establish  his  supremacy,  at  this
period  ;  how  much  soever  inferior  incidents  may  be
magnified  by  the  ingenuity  of  designing  men,  and  ur-
ged as  arguments  to  the  contrary.

19.  We  shall  now  consider  the  nature  of  this  do-
minion of  Antichrist,  in  its  first  beginning  ;  and  if
every  thing  begets  its  own  likeness,  it  can  present
nothing  to  view  essentially  different  from  the  spirit
and  works  of  Constantine.

20.  The  doctrine  of  Three  persons  in  one  God,
neei.Hb-  "  which,  (says  Mosheim,)  in  the  three  preceding  cen-
iT'svJ!  i  Juries,  nac*  happily  escaped  the  vain  curiosity  of  hu-

*  *  man  researches,"  was  introduced  as  the  fundamen-
tal faith  and  gospel  of  the  Catholic  church  under  Con-
stantine the  Great.  And  something  as  mysteri-
ous remained  to  be  introduced  as  the  Catholic  gospel,
by  Leo  the  Great,  namely,  Two  distinct  natures  in


P.  IV.  THE  R'EIGX  OF  A'NTICHfclST.  227

one  Christ. And  this  catholic  doctrine,  (as  observed CH£P-
in  the  preceding chapter,) was  established  in  the  __
council  of Chalcedony assembled by  the emperor
Marc i anus,  upon  Leo's  demand.

2  1 .  And  when  this  great  fundamental  doctrine  was
established,  could  there  be  any  thing  too  mysterious
to  make  a  test  of  orthodoxy,  or  too  contradictory  to
reconcile  ?  Well  might  the  Lion  and  the  Lamb  be
united,  Pagan  and  Christian,  saint  and  sinner,  yea,
heaven  and  hell  be  blended  together  without  change,
mixture  or  confusion.

22.  Therefore  it  was  well  said  of  the  little  horn,  or  Da».\«.
last  king,  of  fierce  countenance,  that he  should  un-  24*
derstand  dark  sentences,  and  practise  and  prosper,  and
destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  people* So far  his  *0r,//w
power  could  extend, as  to  abuse  and  pervert  what  pt%*l£Qf
had  been  published  abroad  by  the  apostles,  and  thus  enes.  see
tread  the  sanctuary  or  holy  place  under  foot.

23.  It  is  further  observable,  that  although  this  king
was  mighty,  yet  it  was  not  by  his  own  power  ;  but
through  the  supine  indolence  of  the  emperors,  the
transgressions  of  the  patriarchs  and  people  which  had
come  to  the  full,  and  the  favour  of  the  Barbarian
kings,  that  he  was  exalted.

24.  And  by  such  means,  without  any  hostile  exer-  Dap.  viii.
tions  of  his  own  power,  he  waxed  great,  even  against '

the  host  of  heaven  ;  and  cast  down  some  of  the  host
and  of  the  stars  to  the  ground ;  [such  as  had  the
brightest  reflections  of  the  true  light,]  and  magnified
himself  against  the  prince  of  the  host.

25.  He  even  magnified  himself  in  the  character
and  stead  of  Christ,  and  from  him  the  daily  sacrifice
was  taken  away,  and  the  place  of  his  sanctuary  was
cast  down.  Every  occasion,  either  of  sacrificing  s in,
or  sacrificing  for  sin,  was  removed,  as  soon  as  the
two  distinct  natures  could  be  united  without  any
change  ;  and  jfche  very  place  of  the  sanctuary,  or  or-
der of  distinction  between  the  holy  and  profane,  was
cast  down,  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gentiles
forty-two  months.

26.  Therefore  an  host  [or  time]  was  given  him
ngainst  the  daily  sacrifice,  by  reason  of  the  proneness
of  the  people  to  transgress  ;  every rank  of  church

y  2


228  THE  BEGINNING  OF,  ScC.  P.  IV.

chap. 0fftcerS)  anc|  civii  rulers,  reposed their  power and
''  ■  uj confidence  in  him,  that  by  his  ghostly  authority,  they
might  be  furnished  with  power  to  crush  and  debase
their  inferiors  to  the  lowest  degree  of  wretchedness.
And  thus,  by  making  peace  with  the  great,  and  re-
ceiving them  under  his  Catholic  authority,  he  encour-
aged them  to  destroy  many.
Rev.  xfii. 27.  The  Roman  empire,  the bloody dragon,  now
2t  grown  old  in  wickedness,  bloodshed  and  cruelty,  and

under  a.  mortal  declension,  overrun  with  Barbarians,
and  no  further  life  to  be  derived  from  supine  and  in-
dolent emperors,  gave  up  the  antient  seat  of  Pagan
power  to  the  ghostly  bishop  of  that  city,  together
with  as  great  authority  as  emperors  had  ever  posses-
sed.

28.  And  under  his  sanctimonious  influence,  the
same  beastly  superstitions  were  pushed  on,  under  the
name  of  religion,  with  numberless  additions,  and  with

Ecel.His-  increasing  authority. JMosheim  says,  " To  enume-
*LpT' 53!'  4  ra*e  tne  r*tes  ar>d  institutions  that were  added,  in

4  this  century, — would  require  a  volume  of  a  consid-

4  erable  size."

29.  Among  the  most  note,d  of  which,  was  a  change
in  the  manner  of  confessing sins,  introduced by  a

ibW. permission  f rem  Leo  the  Great. u  By  this  change,
j.  ss. i  (gays  the  historian,)  one  of  the  greatest  restraints

4  upon  licentiousness,  and  the  only  remaining  barrier

4  of  chastity,  was  entirely  removed."

30.  Then  if  the  reign  of  Antichrist  began  with  a
gospel  and  government,  under  which  licentiousness
had  no  restraint,  and  chastity  no  barrier  of  protection,
how  disagreeable  must  be  the  task  to  pursue  such  a
beastly  dominion  through  all  its  progress  ?  And  what
historian  could  unfold  all  the  branches  of  wickedness,
perpetrated  therein,  through  a  reign  of  one  thou-
sand two  hundred  and  sixty  years  ?

3!.  From  the  variety  of  matter  which  historians
have  selected  out  of  the  infinite  mass,  we  shall  only
present  a  few  of  the  outlines  of  this  growing  hierar-
chy ;  that  by  its  most  manifest  fruit,  it  may  be  distin-
guished from  the  righteous  and  peaceful  dominion
of  the  L*amb.


P.  IV.  THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PlfOPAG  A  TED  UNBER,5cC. 229


CHAPTER II.

The Catholic Gospel  propagated  under the  Reign  ef

Antichrist.

MUCH  has  been  said,  by  modern  writers,  about chap.
the  benign  religion  of  Jesus,  and  about  the  sal- IL
utary  rays  of  the  gospel's  enlightening  the  barbarous  — -—
nations,  even  through  the  doleful  ages  of  the  Papal
hierarchy;  as  if  the  reason  of  man  must  be  forever
insulted  with  the  influence  of  names  and  sounds.

2.  When  we  hear  of  the  religion  of  Jesus,  the
Christian  doctrine,  the  light  of  the  gospel,  the  lamp,  of
celestial  truth,  and  of  thousands  being  converted,  and
embracing  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  what  ideas  are  we
to  affix  to  such  words  ?  Must  we  take  it  for  granted
that  they  are  always  used  in  their  original  sense  ?

3.  Or,  shall  we  not  rather  examine  the  naked  ob-
jects, to  which  these  dignified  names  are  given,  and
denominate  them  according  to  what,  in  reality,  they
are  ?  And  what  is  this  victorious  gospel,  this  celestial
light,  and  benign  religion,  but  at  best  a  vain  philoso-
phy, and  a  motley  spectacle  of  superstition  ?

4.  Long  have  the  mere  inventions  of  carnal  and
wicked  men  been  imposed  upon  the  ignorant  for  the
light  of  truth — Long  have  mankind  been  deceived
with  their  senseless  jargon  about  God,  and  Christ ;
the  origin  of  the  world  ;  the  destiny  of  human  souls  ;
the  resurrection  of  the  body  /—about  death,  and  demons ,
and  divine  decrees,  m\<\  grace,  and  purgatory,  'and  pen-
ance  ; — about  the  virtue  of  priettly  prayers,  ?cad  pil-
grimages, and  oil  from  the  lamps  which  burned  over
the  tombs  of  the  martyrs— o[  a  wooden  cross,  of  cream
and  spittle,  and  salt  and  holy  water,  of  vows,  and  r<?-
licks,  and  monastic  rules  ;  and  whatever  else  might
excite  the  blind  reverence,  and  stupid  awe  of  their
deluded  followers.

5.  These  inventions  have  served  no  higher  purpose
than  to  furnish  a  wicked  priesthood  with  sufficient
authority  to  tyrannize  over  the  common  people,  and
live  in  luxury,  lust  and  idleness,  upon  their  property.
This,  in  reality,  was  their  benign  gospel,  which  will


230  THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PROPAGATED  UNDER P.  IV.

CIJ£P-  appear  from  the  manner  in  which  it  was  propaga-
ted.

6.  A  gospel  can  never  be  established  or  propagated
among  mankind,  unless  it  brings  with  it  sufficient  au-
thority to  render  it  acceptable.  The  true  gospel  of
Christ  Jesus  was  intended  to  save  mankind  from  their
sins,  by  leading  them  into  the  practice  of  piety  and
virtue.

7.  Therefore,  when  Christ  and  his  followers  set
the  example,  the  native  excellence  of  their  piety  and
virtue  had  the  greatest  authority  that  ever  the  gospel
claimed  over  mankind,  and  was  the  principal  and
most  salutary  means  by  which  it  was  propagated.

8.  But  far  different  was  the  case  of  Antichrist.
Instead  of  a  virtuous,  upright  and  pious  example,
the  civil  sword  was  the  salutary  means  which  he  em-
ployed to  recommend  his  celestial  light,  and  which
tended  only  to  increase  unto  more  ungodliness,  those
barbarous  works,  which  Christ  Jesus  came  to  destroy.

9.  Great  numbers  of  the  Vandals,  Sueves,  Goths,
and  Burgundians,  are  said  to  have  embraced  Chris-
tianity, of  their  own  accord,  in  the  fifth  century.
But  from  what  follows,  it  is  not  difficult  to  judge  what
it  was  that  they  embraced.

Ecei.His- 10.  Mosheim  says,  "  All  these  fierce  and  warlike

HTpJ?1'  '  nations  judged  a  religion  excellent,  in  proportion  to

4  the  success  which  crowned  the  arms  of  those  that

*  professed  it,  and  esteemed,  consequently,  that  doctrine
4  the  best,  whose  professors  had  gained  the  greatest

*  number  of  victories.  When  therefore,  they  saw  the
4  Romans  possessed  of  an  empire  much  more  exten-
4  sive  than  that  of  any  other  people,  they  concluded
4  that  Christ,  [or  rather  Antichrist^  their  God,  was  of
4  all  others  rhe  most  worthy  of  religious  homage.5*

11.  Clovis,  king  of  the  Franks,  was  at  this  peri-
od, the  most  famous  trophy  of  their  Catholic  grace.
iWd.p.  6.  "  His  conversion  to  the  Christian  religion,  is  dated
4,  from  the  battle  he  fought  with  the  AUmans,  in  the
4  year  496 — in  which,  when  the  Franks  began  to  give
4  ground,  and  their  affairs  seemed  desperate,  he  im-
4  plored  the  assistance  of  Christ,  and  solemnly  enga-
4  ged  himself,  by  a  vow,  to  worship  him  as  his  God,
4  if  he  rendered  him  victorious  over  his  enemies."


P.  IV.  THE  REIGN  OF  ANTICHRIST.  231

12.  Victory  ensued. — Clovis  was,  the  same  year,  CH^P'
baptized  at  Rheims,  with  three  thousand  of  his sub-  __
jects,  who  followed  his  example. It  is  said  that  Re-
migius,  bishop  of  Rheims,  having  preached  to  Clovis,

and  those  who  had  been  baptized  with  him,  a  sermon
on  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Jesus  ;  the  king  in
hearing  him,  cried  out  "  If  I  had  been  there  with
my  Franks^  that  should  not  have  happened."

13.  This  may  serve  as  a  specimen  to  show  the  spir-
it that  animated  these  bloody  converts,  as  well  as  their
ignorance  of  Christ  and  his  harmless  religion.  But
this  is  not  all :  wonderful  miracles  are  said  to  have
been  wrought  at  the  baptism  of  this  first  Christian
king  of  France ;  which  lying  tales,  Mosheim  ob-
serves, "  are  utterly  unworthy  of  credit.5'  He  fur-
ther adds,  that,  "  Pious  frauds  were  very  commonly  Ecd.ftv-
1  practised  in  Gaul  and Sfiain  at  this  tin^e,  in  order  J^'™^

*  to  captivate  the  minds  of  a  rude  and  barbarous  peo-
i  pie,  who  were  scarcely  susceptible  of  a  rational
i  conviction."

14.  "  The  impudence  of  impostors,  in  contriving  ibid.p.l«*

<  false  miracles,  was  artfully  proportioned  to  the  cre-

*  dulity  of  the  vulgar  ;  while  the  sagacious  and  the

*  wise,  who  perceived  these  cheats,  were  obliged  to

<  silence  by  the  dangers  that  threatened  their  lives
1  and  fortunes,  if  they  detected  the  artifice.— The
i  prudent  are  silent,  the  multitude  believe,  and im-

*  postors  triumfih."

15.  In  the  sixth  century,  the  conversion  of  several ibid,
barbarous  nations  is  dated. Among  whom  were  the  P-91>9**
Abasgi,  the Heruli,  the Alans,  the  Lazi  and Zani,
Mosheim  says, "  These  conversions, indeed,  how-

!  ever  pompously  they  may  sound,  were  extremely

*  superficial."

16.  "  All  that  was  required  of  these  darkened  na-

*  tions,  amounted  to  an  oral  profession  of  their  faith
i  in  Christ,  to  their  abstaining  from  sacrificing  to  the
4  gods,  and  their  committing  to  memory  certain  forms
c  of  doctrine. — So  that,  even  after  their  conversion
4  to  Christianity,  they  retained  their  primitive  ferocity
i  and  savage  manners,  and  continued  to  distinguish
i  themselves  by  the  most  horrid  acts  of  cruelty  and  ra-
{  pine,  and  the  practice  of  all  sorts  of  wickedness/'


232 THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PROPAGATED  UNDER P.  IV.

chap. 17>  Surely,  when such religion as this  is  called
-  Christianity  ;  and  such  ferocious,  savage,  horrid,  cru-

el; and  rapacious  wretches  are  called  Christians  ;  it
should  seem  that  the  meek,  mild  and  harmless  fol-
lowers of  Jesus  ought  to  have  some  other  name  :  ra-
ther call  them  heretics,  fanatics,  wild  enthusiasts,  or
persons  disordered  in  their  brains.  And  must  not  the
whole  succeeding  history  of  christianizing,  convert-
ing, illuminating,  and  churching  the  nations,  appear
as  great  a  romance  in  the  eyes  of  sensible  men,  as
the  Arabian  Nights,  or  Fairy  Tales  ?

18.  In  this  (sixth)  century  also,  a  vast  multitude  of
Jews  were  converted  to  Christianity,  and  added  to  the

Ecci.ms-  church. "  Many  (says  Mosheim,)  were  brought  over
ftp' si  ■  to  tne  truth,  by  the  persuasion  and  influence  of  the

*  emperor  Justinian"  That  these  pretended  Chris-
tians were  converted  to  the  darkest  scheme  of  hy-
pocrisy, and  brought  over  into  error  worse  than  the
first,  let  Mosheim  himself  testify.

19.  "  It  must  however  be  acknowledged,  (says  he)
i  that  of  these  conversions,  the  greatest part  were

*  owing  to  the  liberality  of  Christian  princes,  or  to

*  the  fear  of  punishment,  rather  than  to  the  force  of

*  argument  or  to  the  love  of  truth.  In  Gaul,  the
6  Jews  were  compelled  by  Childeric  to  receive  the  or-
'  dinance  of  baptism  ;  and  the  same  despotic  method
'  of  converting  was  practised  in  Sfiain."

20.  About  the  same  time,  this  Catholic  gospel  was
propagated  in  Britain,  among  the  Anglo-Saxons,  the
Picts  and  Scots  ;  and  also  in  Germany,  among  the
Bohemians, Thuringians,  and  Boii. But  it  must  be

35L93  94  con^essec^  even  by  Mosheim,  "  That  the  converted
'  '  '  nations,  now  mentioned,  retained  a  great  part  of
i  their  former  impiety,  superstition  and  licentious-
i  ness  ;  and  that,  attached  to  Christ  by  a  mere  out-
i  ward  and  nominal  profession,  they,  in  effect,  re-
4  nounced  the  purity  of  his  doctrine,  and  the  author-
'  ity  of  his  gospel,  by  their  flagitious  lives,  and  the
f  superstitious  and  idolatrous  rites  and  institutions
4  which  they  continued  to  observe."

21.  Here  then,  we  have  a  fair  statement  of  the  na-
ture of  these  great  conversions.  These  barbarous
nations,  through  the  despotic  power  of  their  more


P.  IV.  THE  REIGN  OF  ANTICHRIST.  233

barbarous  conquerors,  are  compelled  to  make  a  mere  CI*£P'

outward  and  nominal  profession  of  Christianity,  with-

out  mending  their  lives  or  quitting  their  former  idol-
atries !  What  can  such  christianizing  be  but  the  beast-
ly work  of  Antichrist,  at  the  head  of  which  stood  the
bishop  of  Rome  ?

22.  Gregory  the  Great  sent  into  Britain^  A.  D.
596,  forty  Benedictine  monks  with  Augustin*  at  their
head.  "  After  his  arrival  in  England  (says  Mac-
i  lai?ie1)  he  converted  the  heathen  temples  into  places

*  of  Christian  worship. "  And  Gregort  The  Grea^
in  his  epistle  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  converts,  permits
them  to  sacrifice  to  the  saints,  on  their  respective  ho-
lidays, the  victims  which  they  had  formerly  offered
to  the  gods.

23.  The  same  account  of  the  celestial  light  and  the  EccLHiV
divine  gosfiel  runs  through  the  seventh  century  ;  and  gJTiSl
St. Gal^  St.  Kilian}  and  other  Great Saints  are  said

to  convert  Franks^  Frieslandtrs  and  other  nations  to
the  religion  of  Jesus.

24.  But  again  Mosheim  confesses  cf  these  gospeli- ibid.
zers,  that,  "  Many  of  them  discovered,  in  the  course p* 152,
4  of  their  ministry,  the  most  turbulent  passions^ — ar-

4  rogance  and ambition  ^— avarice  and  cruelty. And

*  instead  of  gaining  souls  to  Christ,  they  usurped  a
4  despotic  dominion  over  their  obsequious  proselytes  ;
4  and  exercised  a  princely  authority  over  the  countries
4  where  their  ministry  had  been  successful."

25.  "  The conversion  of  the Jews  seemed  at  a ibkL

€  stand in this century. — Though in  many  places, p-  162>
'  they  were  barbarously  compelled  by  the  Christians,
4  [or  rather  Aniichristzans^j  to  make  an  outward  and
4  feigned  profession  of  their  faith  in  Christ."

26.  "  The  emperor  Heraclius,  incensed  against
4  that  miserable  people,  by  the  insinuations,  as  it  is
4  said,  of  the  Christian  doctors,  persecuted  them  in  a

*  cruel  manner,  and  ordered  multitudes  of  them  to
1  be  inhumanly  dragged  into  the  Christian  churches,

*  in  order  to  be  baptized  by  violence  and  compulsion.
4  The  same  odious  method  of  converting  was  practi-
1  sed  in  Sfiain  and  Gaul."

*  This  monk  Ai^gustin,  on  account  of  his  labours  hi  propagating-  the  catholic
spel  in  Britain,  is  stiled  the  Bihtih  Ajwlle,  and  was  *he  first  Archbishop  cf
' 'bury%


234- THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  TROPAGATED  UNDER P.  IV.

ci*ap. 27.  In  the  eighth  century,  "  Boniface,  on  account

* c  of  his  ministerial  labours  and  holy  exploits,  was  dis-

Ecci.His-  '  tinguished  by  the  honourable  title  of  the  Jfiostle  of

*ory,^i.  i  tjl€  German'**" — But  notwithstanding  the  "  eminent

S.  p.  201.  °

4  services"  he  is  said  to  have  rendered  to  Christianity,
Mosheim  confesses,  that  he  "  often  employed  vio-
4  lence  and  terror,  and  sometimes  artifice  and  fraudt
4  in  order  to  multiply  the  number  of  Christians."

28.  It  would  be  endless  to  pursue  these  Catholic
gospelizers  through  all  their  tyrannical  movements.
Chatlemagne,  in  the  same  century,  commenced  hos-
tilities in  behalf  of  the  church,  against  those  Saxons

?bid. who  inhabited  Germany  :  "  That  valiant  people,  (says
?* ' 4  Mosheim,')  whose  love  of  liberty  was  excessive,  and

4  wrhose  aversion  to  the  restraints  of  sacerdotal  au-

4  thority  was  inexpressible."

29.  Yet  this  valiant  people,  who  had  hitherto  stood
their  ground  against  the  fraud  and  violence  of  monks

p.2oi  8c  and  bishops  ;  at  last  overcome  by  the  terror  of  pun-
Note  £ij  jshmeDt?  and  the  imperious  language  of  victory,  they
suffered  themselves  to  be  baptized,  though  with  the
greatest  reluctance.  For  according  to  the  iniquitous
law  which  these  bloody  gospelizers  had  enacted,  "  ev-
kt  ery  Saxon,  who  contemptuously  refused  to  receive
44  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  was  to  be  punished  with
44  death."

30.  Such  were  the  exploits  of  Charlemagne  in  the
'ijAt service  of  Christianity,  for  which,  "  succeeding  gen-

p.  204.  t  erations  (says  Mosheim,)  canonized  his  memory,  and
4  turned  this  bloody  ivarrior  into  an  eminent  saint'*
If  Dr.  Mosheim  truly  saw  the  absurdity  of  such  an
impious  turn,  how  was  it  possible  that  he  could  can-
onize millions  of  such  beastly  characters,  in  his  his-
tory, under  the  name  of  Christians,  and  turn  their
absurd  and  ridiculous  doctrines,  with  their  pernicious
effects,  into  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  benign  rcli~
gicn  of  Jesus  ?


P.  IV.  THE  REI0N  OF  ANTICHRIST.  235

CHAPTER  III.

The  Subject  continued.


N


EAR  the beginning of  the  eleventh  century,  chap


hi.


Boleslaus,  king of  Poland, entered  into a
bloody  war  with  the  Prussians,  and  "  obtained  by  the  EcclHj$.
4  force  of  penal  laws  and  of  a  victorious  army,  what  tory,voi.
4  Adalbert)  bishop  of  Prague,  could  not  effect  by  ex-  lu^425'
4  hortation  and  argument. He  dragooned  this  savage
4  people  into  the  church."

2.  "  Waldemar  I.  king  of  Denmark,  unsheathed  ibid.  vol.
4  his  sword,  (in  the  twelfth  century)  for  the  propa-  11,-p-2>3>4
4  gation  and  advancement  of  Christianity  ;  and  where-

*  ever  his  arms  wer£  successful,  there  he  pulled
4  down  the  temples  and  images  of  the  gods,  destroy-
c  ed  their  altars,  laid  waste  their  sacred  groves,  and
4  substituted  in  their  place,  the  Christian  worship,
4  which  deserved  to  be  propagated  by  better  means
4  than  the  sword."

3.  These  are  the  words  of  Mosheim,  and  he  might
with  more  propriety  have  said  that,  their  beastly  and
bloody  religion  deserved  to  be  called  by  some  other
name  than  that  of  Christianity.  But  he  continues  his
narrative  in  the  same  catholic  strain.  "  The  island
4  of  Rugen  submitted  to  the  victorious  arms  of  Wal-
4  demur,  A.  D.  1168;  and  its  fierce  and  savage  in-
4  habitants,  who  w*ere,  in  reality,  no  more  than  a
4  band  of  robbers  and  pirates,  were  obliged,  by  that
4  prince,  to  hear  the  instructions  of  the  pious  and
4  learned  doctors  that  followed  his  army,  and  to  re-
4  ceive  the  Christian  worship."

4.  44  The  Finlanders  received  the  gospel  in  the
4  same  manner — they  were  also  a  fierce  and  savage
4  people. — After  many  bloody  battles,  they  were  to-
4  tally  defeated  by  Eric  IX.  and  were  commanded
4  to  embrace  the  religion  of  the  conqueror,  which
4  the  greatest  part  of  them  did,  though  with  the
4  utmost  reluctance.  The  founder  and  ruler  of  this
4  new  church  [of  fierce,  savage  robbers  and  pirates,]
4  was  Henry,  archbishop  of  Ufisal,  who  accompanied
4  the  victorious  monarch  in  that  bloodv  campaign."

Z


8 £6 THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PROPAGATED  UNDER P.  IV.

€iuP*  5.  But  Henry,  for  his  severe  treatment  of  his
*,  young  converts,  was  by  them  assassinated  ;  and  thus
procured  the  honours  of  saint  ship  and  martyrdom,
from  pope  Adrian  IV.  Can  the  heathen  mythology
furnish  greater  monsters  than  doctor  Moaheim's
bloody  Christianity,  his  pious,  learnt d,  tyrannical  doc-
tors, his  Jierce  and  savage  Christians,  and  his  lordly
archbishop ^saints  and  martyrs  ?

6.  But  let  us  pursue  the  track  of  this  wild  beast  a
little  further,  and  see  what  gospel  or  good  news  he
spread  among  the  Livonians.  Mosheim,  in  his  usual
style,  says,  "  The  propagation  of  the  gospel  among
4  the  Livonians  was  attended  with  much  difficulty,  and
4  also  with  horrible  scenes  of  cruelty  and  bloodshed."

7.  "  Mainard,  a  regular  canon  of  St.  Augustin,
4  £  having  attempted  the  conversion  of  that  savage  na-
4  tion  without  success,]  addressed  himself  to  the  Ro-
4  man  pontiff  Urban  III.  who  consecrated  him  bishop
4  of  the  Livonians,  and,  at  the  same  time,  declared
4  a  holy  war  against  that  obstinate  people."

jrcei.HU-  8.  "  This  war,  which  was  at  first  carried  on
aTp.T.1'  i  against  the  province  of  Esthonia,  was  continued
4  with  still  greater  vigour,  and  rendered  more  univer-
4  sal  by  Berthold,  abbot  of  Lucca,  who  left  his  monas-
4  tery  to  share  the  labours  and  laurels  of  Mainard,
4  whom  he,  accordingly,  succeeded  in  the  see  of
1  Livonia."

9.  "  The  new  bishop  marched  into  that  province
4  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  army  which  he  had  raised
4  in  Saxony,  preached  the  gospel  sword  in  hand,  and
4  proved  its  truth  by  blows  instead  of  arguments.'*
Beyond  all  dispute,  he  proved,  by  his  unmerciful
blows,  that  his  religion  and  his  gofpel  were  a  brutal
imposition  on  the  reason  and  right*  of  man.

10.  Albert,  canon  of  Bremen,  became  the  third
4  bishop  of  Livonia,  and  followed,  with  a  barbarous
4  enthusiasm,  the  same  military  methods  of  conver-
i  sion.' — He  entered  Livonia,  A.  D.  1198,  with  a  fresh
4  body  of  troops,  drawn  out  of  Saxony  ;  and  encamp-
4  ing  at  Riga,  instituted  there,  by  the  direction  of  the
4  Roman  pontiff,  Innocent  III.  the  military  order  q/
4  the  knights  sword-bearers,  who  were  commissioned
4  to  dragoon the  Livonians into the  profession  of


P.  IV.  THE  REIGN  OF  ANTICHRISTf  237

1  Christianity,  and  to  oblige them,  by  force  of  arms, c{i£p*
t  to  receive  the  benefits  of  baptism. M  ,. * i

11.  "  New  legions  were  sent  from  Germany  to  se-  EcciHw-
€  cond  the  efforts,  and  add  efficacy  to  the  mission  of  g^'  J*
i  these  booted  apostles  ;  and  they,  together  with  the

i  knights  sword-bearers,  so  cruelly  oppressed,  slaugh-
i  tered,  and  tormented  this  wretched  people,  that  ex-

*  hausted,  at  length, and  unable  to  stand  any  longer

*  firm  against  the  arm  of  persecution,  they  abandon-

*  ed  the  statues  of  their  Pagan  deities,  and  substitu-
1  ted  in  their  place  the  images  of  the  saints. "

12.  Mosheim  at  length  closes  his  account  of  this
wonderful  progress  of  the  Catholic  gospel  among  the
JLivonians,  in  his  usual  murky  manner.  "  But  while
i  they  received  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  they  were,
1  at  the  same  time,  deprived  of  all  earthly  comforts  ;
i  for  their  lands  and  possessions  were  taken  from,
'  them  with  the  most  odious  circumstances  of  cruelty
i  and  violence,  and  the  knights and  bishofis  divided

*  the  spoil.,,

13.  Such  curses  of  Antichrist's  dominion,  retailed
out  by  Catholic  doctors  and  divines,  under  the  name
of  gjs/iel-blessingsi  have  driven  many  men  of  honest
principles  to  discard  the  name  of  Christianity,  and
all  its  votaries,  with  the  utmost  abhorrence;  and
justly  they  might  discard  a  religion  that  claimed  the
most  distant  relation  to  such  a  bloody,  oppressive,  and
beastly  hierarchy.

14.  But  the  votaries  of  such  a  religion  have  no-
thing to  do  either  with  Jesus  Christ  or  any  of  his
followers.  The  true  and  genuine  gospel  of  Christ
never  was  preached  with  sword  in  hand  ;  but  with
the  inward  power  and  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  is  a  Spirit  of  peace,  long-suffering,  meekness,
and  mercy.

15.  And  when  the  gospel  was  preached  by  the  true
messengers  of  Christ,  every  creature  had  full  liberty
of  choice  ;  and  if  any  embraced  the  truth,  it  was
upon  their  own  inward  conviction,  and  their  estima-
tion of  its  value,  without  any  compulsion  from  any
other  quarter.

1 6.  Neither  did  Christ  Jesus,  nor  any  of  his  follow-
ers, ever  enact  laws  to  bind  those  who  did  not  be-


238 THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PIIOPAGATED  UNDER P.  IV.

C?nP" ^eve  >  nor  did  they  ever  persecute  or  practise  war

i and  bloodshed  to  promote  their  cause,  or  increase

their  number;  nor  compel  anyone  to  receive  their
testimony,  by  any  force,  violence  or  cruelty  whatever.
These  tilings  are  true  and  cannot  be  denied.

17.  But  what  shall  be  said,  when  such  booted afios-
tlesy  and  bishops,  with  their  sword-bearers,  drunk
with  ambition  and  zeal  for  dominion,  are  pushing
on,  in  every  direction,  to  extend  the  limits  of  their
lawless  empire,  and  spreading*  calamity  and  distress
where  ever  they  go  ?

IS.  Can  any  real  friend  of  either  God  or  man  look
on  with  indifference,  or  try  to  amuse  a  distressed
world  with  flowery  tales  about  a  divine  gosfiel — a  be*
nign  religion— and  a  celestial  light  ?  Or  must  not  rea-
son and  conscience  speak  out,  and  testify  that  all  such
gospelizing  is  the  cursed  deception  of  antichristian
tyrants  ?  Such  awful  scenes  of  merciless  tyranny,
under  the  mask  of  a  Christian  profession,  are  the
most  noted  achievements  of  Catholic  emperors,
popes,  bishops,  and  monks,  through  the  whole  reign
of  Antichrist.

19.  Many  volumes  could  not  contain  a  full  account
of  all  the  arts  of  deception,  the  pious  frauds,  the
bloody  wars  and  horrid  massacres,  the  secret  wick-
edness and  open  crimes,  which  have  been  practised
in  this  beastly  kingdom  under  the  sacred  names  of
God  and  Christ,  and  under  a  cloak  of  pious  motives
and  holy  ends  ;  but  happily,  such  monsters  of  iniqui-
ty are  to  be  clearly  known  by  their  fruits,  their  own
historians  being  witnesses.

20.  To  say  no  more,  their  holy  war  with  the  infi-
del Saracens,  as  they  called  them,  was  sufficient  to
demonstrate  to  all  ages,  that  it  was  not  the  gospel,
nor  the  spirit  of  Christ  that  they  possessed,  but  a
spirit  and  gospel  directly  contrary.

21.  By  the  influence  of  fio/ie,  and  emperor,  of
bishops,  dukes,  monks  and  all  the  ecclesiastical  pow-
ers, an  army  was  raised  in  the  eleventh  century  to
force  their  gospel  into  Palestine.  Eight  hundred
thousand  men,  each  with  a  consecrated  cross  on  his

Be.  Hist,  right  shoulder,  set  out  for  Constantinople  in  the  year
429, &£' 1096. "  This  army  (says  Moshcim,)  was  the  greatest,


P.  IV.  THE  REIGN  OF  ANTICHRIST.  239

c  and  in  outward  appearance  the most  formidable,  c^jf

?  that  had  been  known  in  the  memory  of  man." This

was  but  the  beginning  of  this  Catholic  army,  which
is  characterized  as  follows.

22.  "  This  army  was  a  motley  assemblage  of  monks,

*  prostitutes,  artists,  labourers,  lazy  tradesmen,  mer-
1  chants,  boys,  girls,  slaves,  malefactors,  and  profli-
6  gate  debauchees — who  were  animated  solely  by  the
i  prospect  of  spoil  and  plunder,  and  hoped  to  make
4  their  fortunes  by  this  holy  campaign. "

23.  Dr.  Maclaine,  from  the  best  authority,  states  EeeLHfc,
that, "  the  first  divisions  of  this  prodigious  army  •j*J;J£j;

*  committed  the  most  abominable  enormities  in  the  Note[s.]

*  countries  through  which  they  passed,  and  that  there
4  was  no  kind  of  insolence,  injustice,  impurity,  bar-
i  barity,  and  violence,  of  which  they  were  not  guilty."

24.  "  Nothing  perhaps  in  the  annals  of  history  can
1  equal  the  flagitious  deeds  of  this  infernal  rabble."
So  says  Madeline.  And  truly,  if  this  rabble  was  in-
fernal, it  was  but  a  part  of  the  infernal  kingdom  of
Antichrist,  which  was  governed  by  an  infernal  priest-
hood ;  and  what  could  such  infernals  ever  communi-
cate to  their  successors,  even  to  the  latest  ages,  but
the  same  infernal  spirit  of  deception  and  fraud,  under
the  name  of  a  gospel  ?

25.  M  We  pass  in  silence,  (says  MosheimJ)  the  va- »t>ki.
c  rious  enormities  that  were  occasioned  by  these  cru- p"

4  sades,  the  murders,  rapes,  and  robberies  of  the
1  most  infernal  nature,  that  were  every  where  com-
4  mitted  with  impunity,  by  these  holy  soldiers  of  God
i  and  of  Christ,  as  they  were  impiously  called."

26.  And  in  this  infernal  manner,  did  this  last  horn
of  the  monstrous  beast  wax  exceeding  great ;  so  that
at  the  sight  of  his  army  and  horsemen,  which  were
like  the  sand  upon  the  sea  shore  for  multitude,  it
might  justly  have  been  said,  Who  is  like  unto  the  *ev°Xi*>
beast  ? Who  is  able  to  make  war  with  him  ?

27.  The  habitable  and  most  populous  parts  of  the
globe  were  the  principal  objects  of  his  ravaging  pow-
er ;  and  all  whose  habitation  was  upon  the  earth,  or
who  contended  for  its  honours,  pleasures  and  prefer-
in  ents;  were  obliged  to  worship  him,  whose  iniouU

Z2


240 THE  CATHOLIC  GOSPEL  PROTAGATED  UNDER, &CC.  P.  IV.

CmP* tous  names  anc^  characteristics never  were  written
_  in  the  book  of  the  innocent  life  of  the  Lamb.

28.  They  worshipped  this  beast,  not  only  by  en-
riching him  with  their  substance,  but  by  conferring
upon him such  names  and  titles  of  blasphemy  as,

Hist*™!*.  ®ur  £°rd  G°d  the  Pofie — another  God  ufion  earth —
ii.p.  339,  King  of  kings  arid  Lord  of  lords—The  same  is  the  do-
Hist.  Re-  minion  of  God  and  the  Pofie — Lord  of  the  universe,  ar~
^432  biter  °f*  the  fate  of  kingdoms  and  empires,  and  su*
Kutcfk.]  fir  erne  ruler  over  the  kings  and  firinces  of  the  earth,

29.  Agreeable  to  these  blasphemous  titles,  his  vo-
?roph?"  tar*es  maintain  that,  "  Thefiowerofthe  Pofie  is  great-
vol.  ii.p.  er  than  all  created  flower,  and  extends  itself  to  things

1,7  '  celestial,  terrestrial  and  infernal:"  that  he  is  not  only
bishop  of  Rome,  but  of  the  whole  world,  and  is  con-
stituted judge  in  the  place  of  God,  which  he  fills  as
the  vicegerent  of  the  most  high ;  that  he  "  doeth
whatsoever  he  listeth,  even  things  unlawful  !  and  is
more  than  God."

30.  "  Such  blasphemies  are  not  only  allowed,  but

*  are  even  approved,  encouraged,  rewarded  in  the
4  writers  of  the  church  of  Rome  ; and  they  are  not

*  only  the  extravagances  of  private  writers,  but  are
i  the  language  even  of  public  decretals  and  acts  pf
4  councils." So  says  Newton.

31.  Thus,  he  was  not  only  blasphemously  worship-
ped, but  he  magnified  himself  against  the  prince  of

'Eed.His-  princes,  saying,  that  neither  princes,  nor  bishops,
^.''398',  civil  governors  nor  ecclesiastical  rulers,  have  any
aTp.Yci  lawful  power  in  church  or  state,  but  what  they  de-
304.  '  rive  from  him  :  that  both  the  kingdoms  and  souls
of  kings  were  tender  his  dominion,  and  that  he  had
fiower  to  bind  them,  doth  in  heaven  and  ufion  earth.

32.  Such  was  that  combination  of  mutual  blasphe-
my and  wickedness  that  centred  in  the  head  of  this
last  beastly  kingdom  ;  and  such  was  that  power  that
was  given  him,  not  of  God,  but  of  all  the  ranks  and
orders  of  men  that  existed  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth.  They  gave  their  power  to  the  beast,  to  estab-
lish the  dignity,  honour,  power,  greatness  and  glory
of  fallen  man,  both  in  a  temporal  and  spiritual  view ;
in  all  which  they  expected  to  have  a  share.

33.  It  is  no  marvel  then  that  such  a  hypocritical,


P.  IV.  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF, ScC.  24 1


CHAP.
IV.


bloody  and  cruel  hierarchy  should  be  represented,  by
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  under  the  figure  of  a  scarlet
coloured  beast,  full  of  names  of  blasphemy,  on  which
was  seated  a  woman  arrayed  in  purple  and  scarlet  co-
lour, and  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stones  and
pearls,  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand,  full  of
abominations  and  filthiness  of  her  fornication  :  And
upon  her  forehead  a  name  written,  MYSTERY,
BABYLON  THE  GREAT,  THE  MOTHER  OF  *•**•*
HARLOTS  AND  ABOMINATIONS  OF  THE
EARTH.


CHAPTER  IV.

The  Abominations  of  the  Mother  of  Harlots.

THE  kingdom  of  Antichrist  was  first  founded  and
established  under  the  authority  of  names,  and
always  abounded  with  names  of  blasphemy,  as  the
principal  means  of  deception.  To  spoil  this  corrupt
Babylon  of  her  names,  would  in  fact  be  taking  away
her  whole  artillery,  and  divesting  her  of  every  weap-
on of  defence.

2.  According  to  St.  John,  when  only  the  tenth  part  Rev.  &
of  the  city  fell,  there  were  slain  [gr.  h^o^%rcL\  names  18,

of  men  seven  thousand;  but  how  many  thousands  of
names,  titles,  and  words  have  been  corrupted  in  the
whole  extent  of  this  corrupt  church,  and  unjustly
exposed  to  be  hated  and  destroyed  from  any  further
use  among  mankind  !

3.  By  such  means,  with  deep  artifice,  and  diabol-
ical fraud,  did  Antichrist  practise  and  prosper  in  de-
ceiving the  nations  into  a  belief  in  the  holy  Catholic
church,  her  holy  bishops,  holy  monks,  and  holy  vir-
gins— her  holy  institutions,  holy  ordinances,  and  above
all,  her  holy  wars,  her  holy  inquisitions,  and  persecu-
tions.

4.  But  who  is  the  Pope  ?  and  what  is  the  Catholic
Church  ?  that  they  should  be  ornamented  with  vain
titles,  under  pretence  of  their  conveying  to  later  ages


242  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OP  P.  IV.

€hap. a  reiigion  of  which  they  were  in  every  respect  des-

1_  titute  !

5.  And  what  are  we  to  think  of  those  modern  wri-
ters, who,  to  preserve  their  dying  authority,  and
maintain  their  unjust  titles,  and  offices  of  dignity  and
profit,  have  imposed  upon  the  ignorant  by  their
smooth  words,  to  make  them  believe  that  the  Church
of  Rome ,  that  sink  of  corruption,  and  den  of  vipers,
could  spread  the  light  of  the  glorious  gosfiel  of  Christ
among  the  nations  ?

6.  Are  we  to  believe  that  she  was  able  to  purge
the  Catholic  Church  from  errors  and  heresies  ;  ex-
clude from  the  kingdom  of  heaven  dangerous  fanatics^
schismatics^  and  enthusiasts  ;  and  transmit  the  undefi-
led  truth  to  her  latest  posterity  ?  Is  the  superstitious
authority  of  names  and  titles,  popish  decretals  and
catholic  dogmas  sufficient  to  bind  reason  and  con-
science, and  every  principle  of  humanity  and  justice,
and  hold  them  forever  upon  the  rack  ?

7.  If  the  Catholic  Church  contained  such  enormi-
ties as  are  stated,  which  none  of  her  children  pretend
to  deny,  then  where  can  either  she  or  her  offspring
find  the  least  shadow  of  pretence  for  calling  their  re-
ligion by  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  Surely,  of  all
their  abominations,  this  must  be  the  greatest,  and
most  provoking  in  the  eyes  of  a  just  and  righteous  God.

8.  But  seeing  her  pretensions  to  sanctity  have  been
so  high,  and  her  resemblance  to  the  true  church  of
Christ  so  strenuously  insisted  upon,  we  shall  notice
some  of  the  most  essential  points  in  which  this  sup-
posed resemblance  consisted,  and  see  how  far  the
pretensions  will  hold  good.

9.  It  is  said  that  the  chief  bishop,  in  the  Catholic
•rounds  church  was  the  representative  of  Jesus  ;  and  that  in-
Doc/p^'  ferior  bishops  represented  the  apostles,  who  renoun-
23,48. cec|  tne  bands  and  fetters  of  a  carnal  nature,  did  not

marry  nor  live  after  the  flesh, but  devoted them-
selves wholly  to  the  service  of  God,  to  labour  for  the
salvation  of  souls. Wherein  then  consisted  the  re-
semblance ?
Diss. on 10*  Bishop  Newton  observes  that,  "  As  long  ago
rroph. <  as  the  year  386,  Siricius  held  a  council  of  eighty
IK99.1* c  bishops  at  Rome,  and  forbade  the  clergy  to  cohabit


P.  IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  243

<  with  their  wives. This  decree  was  confirmed  by €I*Ap.

i  Innocent  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  ;  and

*  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  was  fully  decreed  by  Greg*
i  ory  VII.  in  the  eleventh  century  ;  and  this  hath
4  been  the  universal  law  and  practice  ever  since."

1 1.  Siricius  was  not,  however,  the  first  who  per-
ceived the  absurdity  of  the  professed  ministers  of
Christ  living:  in  the  works  of  natural  generation  ;  for

the  council  of  Nice  had  almost  come  to  a  resolution  tory,  vol.
of  imposing  upon  the  clergy  the  yoke  of  perpetual  l' p#  405a
celibacy,  when  Paphnutius  (an  old  cripple  with  one
eye,)  put  a  stop  to  their  proceedings.

12.  Constantine,  though  he  exercised  no  au-
thority in  the  ease,  manifested  sufficiently  which  side

he  favoured,  saying,  "  Ego plane,  si moechantem  Ecei.Re-
"  episcopum  viderem,  scelus  obtegerem  paludamen-  marches.
"  to." i.  e. Surely  if  I  should  see  a  bishop,  commit*  Note[k]
ting  adultery, I  should  cover the  dirty  action  ruith
my robe. This was  great indulgence  on  the  side
of  the  emperor,  which  from  every  evidence,  was  by
the  bishops  infinitely  improved.

13.  The  Nicene  creed  was  introduced  into  Spain  ibid.
in  the  fifih  century,  professedly  for  the  sake  of  con-
demning  the  Priscillianists^  in  which  there  is  a  canon
to  allow  every  Catholic  to  keep  at  his  choice  a  wife,
a  woman,  or  a  concubine.  St.  Augustin  expounded
it,  and  distinguished  the  concubine  of  a  Catholic
from  other  concubines.

14.  Where  then  was  the  great  effect  produced  on
the  side  of  purity  by  their  boasted  councils  and  de-
crees ?  Could  they  render  an  adulterous  bishop  a  fit
representative  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  his  holy  apos-
tles by  covering  his  filthy  actions  with  the  most  spot-
less robe  ?  or  by  allowing  him  to  keep  a  woman,  or  a
concubine  in  place  of  a  wife  ?

15.  If  not,  let  Catholics  forever  cease  to  disgrace
the  sacred  name  of  Christ  or  apostle,  with  their  sain-
ted bishops,  and  monks,  and  their  Catholic  concubines.
JsTor  can  their  cause  appear  in  any  better  light  under
the  permanent  law  of  celibacy  imposed  by  Pope  Greg*
ory,  if  we  consider  the  circumstances  under  which
that  law  was  established,  and  the  effects  which  flow-*
ed  from  it.


544  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P.  IV.

C^v^' *6'  ^ne  licentious  and  scandalous  conduct  of  the

,.  monks  and  clergy  was  enormous,  with  respect  to  con-

Ecci.His-  cubinage  in  particular. Moshcim  says,  "  It  was  prac-

t!%\  4oo*  '  ^sec^  to°  °Penlv  to  admit  of  any  doubt. The  priests,

401. '  <  and  what  is  still  more  surprising,  even  the  sancti-

4  monious monks, fell victims to the  triumphant

4  charms  of  the  sex,  and  to  the  imperious  dominion

4  of  their  carnal  lusts  ;  and,  entering  into  the  bonds

4  of  wedlock  or  concubinage,  squandered  away  in  a

4  most  luxurious  manner,  with  their  wives  and  mis*

4  tresses,  the  revenues  of  the  church."

i?Sv. *^*  "  There  was  a  prodigious  number  of  ecclesias-

Kote[p.j  i  tics  throughout  all  Europe,  not  only  of  priests  and

4  canons,  but  also  of  monks,  who  kept,  under  the  ti-

4  tie  of wives,  mistresses  which  they  dismissed  at

4  pieasure  to enjoy  a  licentious  variety,  and  who  not

4  only  spent,  in  the  most  profuse  and  scandalous  man-

4  ner,  the revenues  and  treasures  of  the  churches

4  and  convents  to  which  they  belonged,  but  even  dis-

4  tributed  a  great  part  of  them  among  their  bastards.'*

|8.  Such were the  circumstances  under which

Gregory,  in  the  year  1074,  assembled  a  council  at

Rome,  in  which  it  was  decreed,  u  That  the  sacerdo*

4  tal  orders  should  abstain  from  marriage  ;  and  that

4  such  of  them  as  had  already  wives,  or  concubines,

4  should  immediately  dismiss  them,  or  quit  the  priest-

4  ly  office."

Sbid.p.  19-  But  no  sooner  was  the  law  concerning  the  ce-
489, 490.  Hhacy  of  the  clergy  published,  than  those  deceitful
hypocrites,  who  were  covering  over  their  foul  actions
with  the  robes  of  indulgence,  and  living  in  their  lusts
with  mistresses  under  the  title  of  wives,  and  hired
concubines,  raised  the  loud  complaint  against  their
Lord  God  the  Pofie  ;  charged  him  with  too  great  se-
verity, "  and  excited  the  most  dreadful  tumults  in
the  greatest  part  of  the  European  provinces."
l^  20.  Gregory  and  his  adherents  were  branded  with

i>.  49i.  the  odious  name  of  Manicheans  ;  and  many  chose  ra-
ther to  abandon  their  priestly  honour,  their  religion,
and  their  God,  than  their  sensual  pleasures  ;  and  to
quit  their  benifices  that  they  might  live  in  the  full
gratification  of  their  lusts.

2 1 .  Some  contended  for  the  right  of  matrimony  a.t


P.  IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  245

least,  and  urged  the  authority  of  St.  Ambrose,  but  in c,*ap.

vain  ;  Gregory  continued obstinate  ; and  the  fact '  ^

was,  that without  such a  revolution, his Cathoiic  eccI.Hm.
priesthood  must  have sunk  into  eternal  infamy,  and  g^^f
forfeited  forever,  all  pretensions  of  being  the  follow-  NoteM
ers  of  the  apostles  : such were  the monstrous  de-
grees of  wantonness  and  debauchery  into  which  that
beastly  order  had  run

22.  Yet  severe  as  the  law  was,  which  obliged  the
sacerdotal  orders  to  "  abstain  from  marriage,"  ?nd
dismiss  their  wives  and  concubines,  or  quit  the  priest-
ly office,  it  only  turned  the  abominations  of  the  Moth-
er of  Harlots  into  a  more  extensive  channel,  and
opened  the  door  for  indulgences  of  a  more  secret  and
general  kind.

23.  Let  it  be  granted,  that  the  bead  bishops  of
Rome  did  not  marry  ;  and  did  they  resemble  Jesus
Christ  or  his  apostles  any  the  more  for  that  ?  The
most  beastly  drunkard  might  abstain  from  drinking
liquor  in  his  own  house,  or  liquor  which  he  had  pur-
chased and  made  his  own ;  but  could  he  argue  from
this  that  he  resembled  a  perfectly  sober  man  who
never  tasted  spirituous  liquor  at  all  ?

24.  But  it  seems  the  catholic  fathers  and  their
councils  were  under  the  necessity  of  enacting  laws
of  ceiibacy  and  continency,  and  of  using  arbitrary
measures  to  enforce  obedience.  Hence  it  is  evident,
that  their  laws  and  decrees,  and  all  their  transactions
to  support  the  outward  appearance  of  sanctity,  were
plain  and  demonstrative  firocfs^  that  their  pretended
holy  orders  and  holy  institutions  were  spurious  and
rotten  at  the  very  core.

25.  Christ  Jesus  and  his  apostles  had  no  necessity
for  any  such  laws,  nor  for  any  secular  power  to  en-
force obedience  ;  for  they  had  that  spirit  of  purity
dwelling  in  them,  which  gave  them  an  overcoming
power  over  every  unclean  and  hateful  lust.

26.  But  as  the  very  institutions  of  this  Mother  of
Harlots  were  false  ;  so  her  catholic  counsellors  were
totally  destitute  of  that  spirit  which  regulated  the
conduct  of  the  apostles  of  Christ  ;  and  therefore
they  had  recourse  to  those  arbitrary  laws  which  could
neither  check  the  ambition  of  deceivers  from  push-


246  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P.  IV.

chap, ing  into  office,  nor  curb  their  lawless  passions  when
' in  office  :  of  course,  their  pretended  institution  of  ce-
libacy was,  m  every  sense,  contrary  both  to  the  con-
vincing* law  of  Moses,  and  the  redeeming  power  of
the  genuine  gospel.

27.  Hence  their  mock  institutions  were,  eventually,
productive  of  millions  of  lazy,  useless  beings,  who
for  ages  were  a  common  pest  to  civil  society.  True
these  monastics  and  conventuals  professed  continence,
and  chastity,  and  virginity,  and  under  this  profession
claimed  a  sumptuous  living  from  more  virtuous  citi-
zens.

28.  But  how  abundantly  was  their  hypocrisy  detec-
ted, and  their  horrid  licentiousness  exposed !  So
much  indeed,  that  a  convent  or  nunnery  is  a  very
proverb  of  contempt  to  this  day  !  And  not  only  they,
but  every  rank  of  the  priesthood,  even  to  the  pope
himself,  bore  the  same  general  character,  and  gave
the  most  unlawful  reins  to  secret  debauchery,  which
has  rendered  the  very  name  of  continence  and  chastity
odious  to  the  sense  of  a  long  deceived  world.

29.  If  the  Catholic  Church  had  been  truly  convin-
ced of  the  abominations  of  a  carnal  nature,  and  had
possessed  the  power  of  salvation,  there  would  never
have  been  occasion  for  those  indulgences,  which  the
bold  blasphemers  dared  to  dispense  through  the  pre-
tended virtue  of  Christ's  blood.

30.  But  such  was  the  degree  of  presumption  and
SSemp.  wickedness  in  this  Mother  of  Harlots,  that  she  could
p-434-  .,  fix  her  fees of  absolution,  license, and indulgence

for  the  perpetration  of  the  most  horrid  crimes;  and
publish,  so  much  for  defiling  a  virgin — for  lying  with
mother  or  sister for  a  priest  who  keeps  a  concu-
bine— for  lying  with  a  woman  in  the  church — for  per-
jury— forgery — robbery,  and  even  for  murder  ;  and
this  presumptuous  merchandize  she  carried  on  un-
der the  pretended  seal  of  the  court  of  heaven.

31.  Could  then,  any  crime  be  too  enormous  to  be
committed,  when  money  could  discharge  the  guilt  ?
And  could  money  be  wanting  whiie  orthodoxy  mark-
ed out  the  more  frugal,  industrious  and  virtuous  part
of  mankind  as  objects  of  destruction,  of  prey  and  spoil,
to  those  booted  apostles,  and  their  infernal  monkish
rabble  ?


J. IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  247

32.  Had  this  sink  of  corruption  let  the  rest  of  man-  C*JAP.
kind  alone,  her  abominations  would  have  been  more  __
tolerable  ;  but  how  deeply  tinged  are the  crimes  of

this  scarlet  coloured  whore,  when  her  thirst  for  blood
is  as  insatiable  as  her  love  of  pleasure  !

33.  And  I  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood  Rev.xrii.
of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Je-
sus. Blood  was  always  a  principal  part  of  the  Cath-
olic feast. And  so  fond  were  these  ravenous  beasts

of  this  kind  of  drink,  that  they  fancied  they  could
even  turn  wine  into  blood,  and  drink  it  in  memory
of  the  bloody  actions  of  their  forefathers,  who  had
slain  the  true  witnesses  of  God.

34.  Jesus  never  taught  his  disciples  either  to  shed
blood  or  to  drink  it,  or  any  superstitious  emblem  of  it.
He  gave  them  a  cup  to  drink,  but  it  was  to  be  no  more
of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  :  and  the  New-Testament,  or
testimony  which  they  received,  was,  that  instead  of  su-
perstitious rites  and  ceremonies,  they  were  to  eat  their
bread  and  drink  their  cup,  in  singleness  of  heart,  and
in  a  life  of  innocence  and  virtue,  after  his  example.

35.  But  the  Mother  of  Harlots  had  another  kind  of
cup,  which  contained,  frst,  the  filthiness  of  every
abominable  action  ;  next,  a  superstitious  commemo-
ration of  the  blood  of  saints  and  martyrs,  from  which
she  grew  raving  mad  with  orthodoxy  ;  and  lastly,  her
cup  of  filth  must  needs  be  mingled  with  fresh  blood
from  the  veins  of  those  who  retained  the  least  appear-
ance of  the  real  life  and  virtuous  manners  of  the  ancient
saints.

36.  Paul  of  Samosata,  in the third century,  had  EceLHfc.
been  condemned  and  deposed  by  a  council  of  Catholic  i.  $>?sw."
fathers,  for  his  wrong  noiions  about  God  and  Christ  :
nevertheless  he  left  behind  him,  a  numerous  train  of
followers,  called  Pa ulicians,  who  greatly  troubled  the
church. Cons  tans, Justinian  II.  and  Leo the  Isauri*

an,  exerted  their  zeal,  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  cen*  roi. a.'?,
turies,  against  the  Paulicians  with  a  peculiar  degree 354~
of  bitterness  and  fury.

37.  The  cruel  rage  of  persecution,  which  had  been
for  some  years  suspended,  broke  forth  with  redoubled
violence  in  the  ninth  century,  under  the  reigns  of  Cu-
ro/ialates}  and  Leo  the  Armenian,  who  caused  the  strict-

Aa


248  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P.  IV.

chap. est  search  to  be  made  after  those  heretics in  all  the
* Grecian  provinces  ;  and  death  was  the  certain  doom
of  all  such  as  refused  to  conform  to  the  abominable
superstition  of  the  times.
Ecci.His- 3S-  ^ut  tne  cruelty  of  these  bloody  heresy-hunter*
tory,  vol.  surpassed all  bounds,  under  the  furious  zeal  of  the
'  empress  Theodora. In  one  campaign  into  Armenia,
these relentless persecutors,  after  confiscating the
goods  of  above  a  hundred  thousand  Paulicians, put
their  possessors  to  death  in  the  most  barbarous  man-
ner, and  made  them  expire  slowly  in  a  variety  of  the
most  exquisite  tortures.

39.  Such  as  escaped  were  driven  to  madness,  and
finally  into  the  most  desperate  measures  of  defence,
after  escaping  to  the  more  humane  Saracens,  by  whom
they  were  protected  against  the  rage  of  their  Catho-
lic persecutors.
H&.  40.  The Manicheans,  in  the fourth  century,  are

iT°39o sa*c* to  k'ave  increased  above  the  other  denominations
of  Here  tics  in  their  influence  and  progress. During
Ecci.Re-  the  lime  of  their  existence.;  "  The  civil  and  canon  laws
marches,  i  0f  those  times  (says  Robinson,)  mention  seventy  or
P* * i  eighty  sorts  of  Heretics" — of  whom  the  penal  stat-
utes say, "  The  Donatists  and  Manicheans  were  the
4  worst."

41.  St.  Augustin,  that  Catholic  oracle  of  Africa,
had  once  himself  been  a  professed  Manic  hean,  and
had  he  remained  a  heretic,  he  might  have  continued
a  stranger  to  the  diabolical  work  of  persecuting  others
for  their  sentiments,  and  been  exempted  from  the
just  and  highly  merited  charge  of  insulting  the  reas-
on and  abusing  the  rights  of  mankind.
Fcci.Hk-  42.  But  when  he  "  returned  from  his  errors,"  (as
^ry39oL  fi&oshevm  is  pleased  to  express  it,)  and  became  a  true
orthodox  Catholic,  then  indeed,  the  whole  force  of
his  much  admired  genius  and  flowing  eloquence,  was
employed  to  stir  up  persecution  against  the  heretics,
and  he,  and  other  such  godly  men,  endeavoured  to  in-
flame the  passions  of  those  in  power,  to  extirpate  the
root  of  this  "  horrible  disease"  which  so  much  troub-
led their  catholic  peace,
ibid.  43.  Through  the  influence  of  such  bloody  and  boot-

N«to[c]  e(j  saints  as Augustin,  severe  laws  were  enacted  by


P.  IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  24$

the  emperors  against  the  Manicheans.  Their  assem-  c^£p*
blies  were  prohibited — heavy  penalties  were  imposed  .
on  their  teachers — they  were  branded  with  infamy,
and  deprived  of  all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  citi-
zens :  besides  many  edicts  more  dreadful,  which
are  said  to  be  recorded  in  the  ancient  histories  of
those  times.

44.  The  Donatist8  also  suffered  immense  cruel-
ties— numbers  were  sent  into  banishment,  and  many
of  them  were  persecuted  with  brutal  barbarity,  un-
til they  enjoyed  some  peace  under  the  reign  of  the
Pagan  emperor  Julian,  who  permitted  the  exiles  to
return  to  their  country,  and  restored  them  to  the  en-
joyment of  their  former  liberty.

45.  But  no  sooner  did  the  self-stiled  orthodox  ec-
clesiastics recover  the  dominion,  than  the  scene  chan-
ged ;  and  who  more  fit  to  heighten  the  crimson  dye
of  the  scarlet  beast  in  causing  the  blood  of  heretics  to

be  shed  than  St.  Aurustin  ?  "  He  (says  Mosheim,)  Ecc1.h*i
4  animated  against  them,  not  only  the  province  ot  i.p4398.
\  Africa,  but  also  the  whole  christian  world,  and  the  a?p?$*i.
*  imperial  court/'

46.  The  Mother  of  Harlots  could  not,  at  that  age
of  apostacy,  have  conceived  and  brought  forth  a  more
genuine  offspring,  to  help  fill  up  the  cufi  of  her  abom-
inations, than  that  "  learned  and  ingenious  prelate3'
St.  Augustin — a  divine  oracle  to  her  adulterous  seed  ;
but  the  most  contemptible  tool  in  the  eyes  of  the
virtuous.  He  sent  a  Spanish  presbyter  into  Pales-  ibid.p.M.
tine  to  accuse  Pelagius,  who  was  favored  by  the  bishop

of  Jerusalem. — And  he  it  was,  who,  atthe.head  of  the
African  bishops,  inflamed  the  Gauls,  Britons,  and
Africans,  by  their  councils,  and  the  emperors,  by  their
edicts  and  penal laws,  to demolish  the Pelagians.

47.  The  Donatists  had  expressly  remonstrated
against  appeals  to  the  civil  power  in  cases  of  religion.

"  The  implacable  Austin  (says  Robinson,)  had  spent  Ecci.iu.
6  almost  half  a  century  in  banishing,  butchering  and  *e#&io4.eS3
<  driving  all  dissenters  into  corners,  and  there  he
c  stood,  crowing  to  hail  the  return  of  day."  But  the
Donatist's  recovered  their  former  liberty  and  tran-
quility by  the  protection  they  received  from  the  Van-
dals, who  invaded  Africa  j  but  as  the  Vandal  king-


250  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P. IV.

€^p; dom  was  brought  to  a  period  in  the  year  534  ;  hence,

___  '•  Orthodoxy  and  persecution  once  more  overwhelm-

3Ecci.Re-  '  ecl tnat  ill-fated  country  Africa. Councils,  canons,

p  nom  '  edicts  anc^  a^  imaginable  instruments  of  oppression

4  came  rolling  in  like  a  tide."

ibid.  48«  "  One  name  given  to  the  Donatists  was  Mon-

$.  \v%. <■  tenses,  because in  the  caves of  the  mountains,  in

4  times  of  oppression,  they  held  their  religious  assem-

4  blies. About  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,

4  pope  Gregory  wrote  to  two  African  bishops  to  exert

4  themselves  to  suppress  them. Marked  out  thus  for

4  vengeance they  disappeared — and  the  presumption

4  is  (says  Robinson,)  that  they  went  among  the  Pagans

4  for  a  liberty  which  the  pretended  followers  of  Jesus

4  refused  to  grant  them."

ibid.  49.  Robinson  says  of  Gregory,  who  sent  Avgustin

** 16J the  monk  to  preach  his catholic gospel  in  Britain^

"  In  spite  of  his  title, St.  Gregory  the  Great,

4  the  blood  of  more  than  two  thousand  British  Chris-

4  tians,  whom  he  a  foreigner,  had  the  impudence  to

4  condemn,  and  the  brutality  to  cause  to  be  butcher-

4  ed, cries  to  heaven  against  him,  and  his  accom-

4  plice  Augustin the monk." It appears  that St.

Gregory  had  studied  the  great  African  oracle — Thou

shalt not  revile  the  gods, that is,  says  Gregory,  the

priests*

ibid.  50.  "  Arabs,  and  others  called  infidels,  never  per-

*• ll3, c  secuted  till  the  orthodox  taught  them. It  is  allow-

4  ed  by  all,  that  the  infernal cruelties  of  pretendedly

4  orthodox,  both  in  the  eastern  and  western  empires,

4  had  rendered  the  name  of  Christianity  hateful."

51.  "  The  Saracens  persecuted  nobody.  Jews  and
4  Christians  of  all  parties  lived  happy  among  them."
Ecci.His-  Of  course,  those  infernal  cruelties,  together  with  44  the
i^!i67.  4  bitter  dissentions  and  cruel  animosities  that  reigned
6  among  the  Christian  sects" — dissentions  that  filled  a
great  part  of  the  east  with  carnage  and  assassinations,
may  be  ranked  among  the  causes  that  contributed  to
the  rapid  progress  of  the  more  mild  and  rational  reli-
gion of  Mahomet.


P. IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  251

CHAPTER  V.

The  Subject  continued.


I


N  the  eleventh  century,  Europe  was  greatly  infested  chap.
with  heretics.  They  spread  through  many  provin-  *
ces.  They  were  reputed  Manicheans  :  In  Italy  they
were  called  Paterini  or  Cathari,  that  is,  the  pure  :  In
Prance  they  were  called  Albigenses,  Bulgarians,  and
other  names,  sometimes  according  to  the  names  of
the  country  in  which  they  resided.

2.  Their  dangerous  doctrine  was  first  discovered  Ecci.nfo
by  a  certain  priest  named  Heribert,  and  a  Norman  no-  ^'^;
bleman,  upon  which  Robert,  king  of  France,  assem-
bled a  council  at Orleans,  to  devise  methods  for  re-
claiming those  harmless  people,  not,  truly,  from  the
error, but, from the  innocence  of  their  ways  ;  but

they  remaining  obstinate,  were  at  length  condemned
to  be  burnt  alive.

3.  Their  enemies  acknowledge  the  sincerity  of  their iba.
piety;  and  say,  they  were  blackened  by  accusations P-***-
which  were  evidently  false. But  they  were  deemed
unsound  in  their  speculations concerning  God,  the
Trinity,  and  the  human  soul. Such  also  were  the  he-
retics of  the  succeeding  centuries  called,  Brethren

and  Sisters  of  the  free  spirit,  that  is,  free  from  the  %

law  of  sin  and  death  ;  the  Massalians  and  Euchites.,
i.  e.  a  people  who  pray  ;  the  Bogomilans,  i.  e.  such
as  call  for  mercy.  In  some  countries  the  same  class
of  heretics  were  called  Beghards.

4.  Catholic  writers  have  tried  to  enumerate  the  er-
rors of  these  heretics,  but  they  were  considered  too
numerous  ;  the  fact  is,  their  faith  and  practice  were
contrary  to  the  Catholic  establishment  in  every  thing  ;
of  course  it  would  be  endless  to  calculate  their  sup-
posed errors  concerning  baptism,  the  eucharist,  the
sanctity  of  churches,  alturs,  incen&e,  consecrated  oil,  /
bells,  beads,  bishops,  funeral  rites,  marriages,  induU
gences,  and  the  nvood  of  the  cross.

5.  Basilius  was  a  reputed  Manichean,  and  founder  y^^
of  the  sect  called  Bogomilans.  This  aged  and  ven-  p.  io&l
•rable  man,  being  treacherously  induced  to  unfold  S^*"

A  a  2


252  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P. IV.


CHAP.
V.


his  doctrine  to  the  bloody  emperor  Alexias,  was
condemned  as  a  Ii  ere  tic,  and  barbarously  burnt  at
Constantinople,  which  was  but  the  beginning  of  sor-
rows to  his  harmless  followers.
Eccl.His-  6.  Peter  dc  Bruys  was  another  who,  in  the  twelfth
lSfp.112*.  century,  troubled  the  Catholic  peace,  and  supplied
the  heresy 'hunters  with  fresh  blood.  They  say  "  he
4  attempted  to  remove  the  superstitions  that  disfigur-
4  ed  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  the  gospel.'5  He
would  baptize  only  such  as  were  come  to  the  full  usa
of  their  reason.

7.  He  rejected  the  notion  of  the  real  body  and  blood
of  Christ  in  the  eucharist,  the  virtue  of  the  wooden
cross,  and  other  instruments  of  superstition.  He
was  followed  by  great  numbers,  and  after  a  laborious
ministry  of  twenty  years,  was  burnt  at  St.  Giles's  in
the  year  1 130,  by  an  enraged  populace  set  on  by  the
clergy,
ibid.  8.  The  next  public  disturbance  arose  from  Htnry,

j.  ii3.  from  whom  came  the  Henricians.  He  travelled  from
place  to  place  declaiming,  it  is  said,  with  the  great-
est vehemence  and  fervour  against  the  vices  of  the
clergy  ;  at  length,  being  seized  by  a  certain  bishop.,
and  condemned  before  pope  Eugcnius,  he  was  com-
mitted to  a  close  prison  in  the  year  1148,  where  he
soon  after  ended  his  days  ;  leaving  a  train  of  heretics
behind  him  in  France,  to  supply  the  ravenous  priest-
hood with  blood  and  carnage.
Bid.  9,  Xn  Brabant  similar  commotions  were  excited  by

p.  114.  .  .

the  illiterate  Tanquelmus,  "  who  drew  after  him  a
4  numerous  sect."  Some  of  his  enemies  speak  the
worst  things  of  him,  others  say,  these  infamous
charges  are  "  absolutely  incredible — that  these  bias*
4  phemies  were  falsely  charged  upon  him  by  a  vindic-
4  tive  priesthood."  They  say  he  treated  with  con-
tempt the  external  worship  of  God,  and  the  sacra-
ments, held  clandestine  meetings,  and,  like  other  he-
retics, inveighed  agaifcst  the  clergy  ;  for  which  "  he
4  was  assassinated  by  an  ecclesiastic  in  a  cruel  man-


ner."


kid.  10.  Arnold  a  man  of  extensive  learning,  and re-

f.  lis. mark  able  austerity,  excited new  troubles in  Italy.

By  his  instigations,  it  is  said,  the  people  even  insult-


P. IV,  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  25$

ed  the  persons  of  the  clergy  in  a  disorderly  manner, chap.
He  was,  however,  seized  in  the  year 1155,  publicly *
crucified,  and  afterwards  burnt  to  ashes  ;  leaving  be-
hind him  a  great  number  of  disciples,  to  perplex  the
priesthood about  their overgrown opulence, fta/ial
revenues,  and  ungodly  authority.

11.  Spain  had  long  been  teeming  with  heresy  ;  even
from  the  time  that  Mark  the  disciple  of  Hierax  went
into  that  kingdom.  Sometimes  these  heretics  were
called  Gnostics,  sometimes  Manicheans,  sometimes
Priscillianists  ;  and  they  flourished  here,  under  the
last  name,  during  a  period  of  more  than  eight  hun-
dred years,

12.  Robinson  says,  "  This  body  of  people  knew  no
4  crime  of  heresy,  (among  themselves  ;)  they  suppo^
4  sed  very  justly,  that  persecution was oppression,

4  that  killing  for  the  faith  was  murder. — If  ecclesias-  Eeci.Re..

4  tics  had  never  created  a  virtue  called  orthodoxy,  the p.239/

4  world  would  never  have  heard  of  a  crime  called  he-

4  resy."  Councils  never  could  suppress  heresy  in  Spain,

but  the  inquisition  dSA. Innumerable  heretics  resided

in  Sfiain,  till  they  were  rooted  out  by  that  iniquitous

institution.

13.  After  this  the  Tallies  among  the  Pyrenean
mountains,  between  France  and  Spain,  became  the
sequestered  habitation  of  heretics.  To  these  retreats
they  fled  from  the  destructive  arm  of  persecution,
and  as  they  were  persecuted  and  driven  from  thence,
they  spread  through  France,  Germany,  and  other
provinces  of  Europe,  formed  societies  and  were  cal-
led by  different  names,  such  as  Paterini  Cat  hart,
Beghards,  Beguines  ;  but  were  more  generally  cal-
led Albigtnses  and  Waldenses.

14.  The  Mardcheans,  Priscillianists,  and  all  who
sprung  from  the  same  original  stock,  agreed  in  one
article,  and  that  was  baptism.  They  all  held  that  the
Catholic  corporation  was  not  a  church  of  Christ,  and
they  therefore  re-baptized  such  as  hud  been  baptized
in  that  community,  before  they  admitted  them  into
their  societies;  for  this  reason  their  most  common
name  of  distinction  was  Anabaptists.

15.  But  by  whatever  names  they  might  be  called
in  different  countries,  all  such  as  renounced  the  papal


254  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P.  IV.

GF£P- superstition,  and  placed  religion  in  the  practice  of
n virtue*  were  the  common  objects  of  persecution,  to
the  Mother  cf  Harlots.

16.  It  is  truly  astonishing  how  some  ecclesiastical
historians,  under  the  darkest  period  of  their  Church
history,  have  continued  to  stile  this  the  Christian
Churchy  with  all  her  train  of  vices  and  cruelties  ;  and
on  the  contrary,  have  defamed  and  blackened  the
characters  of  those  who  bore  a  practical  testimony
against  this  motley  spectacle  of  vice  and  superstition
as  Schismatics,  Heretics,  and  troublers  of  the  Church.
Instances  of  this  kind  are  not  uncommon  with  Moshcim.

17.  Mosheim,  and  after  him  Robinson,  has  given  a
fair  description  of  what  the  state  of  this  Church  was

Ecci.Re-  at  the  early  period  of  the  third  century.  u  The  most
^m?'  '  respectable  writers  of  that  age,  have  put  it  out  of
4  the  power. of  an  historian  to  spread  a  veil  over  the
4  enormities  of  ecclesiastical  rulers.  By  a  train  of
4  vices  they  were  sunk  into  luxury  and  voluptuous-
4  ness,  puffed  up with  vanity,  arrogance  and  ambi-

*  tion,  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  contention  and  dis-
4  cord,  and  addicted  to  many  other  vices. — The  ef-
4  fects  of  a  corrupt  ambition  were  spread  through  e\>

*  ery  rank  of  the  sacred  order."

18.  This  is  the  Church  which  the  Manicheansy
Movatians  and  other  heretics  so  much  troubled  in  the
third  century,  and  continued  to  trouble  in  the  suc-
ceeding centuries.  And  if  such  was  her  corrupt
state  at  the  early  period  of  the  third  century,  what
must  she  have  been  in  the  tenth  ?

Ecei.Kis.  19.  Mosheim  says,  "  The  clergy  were,  for  the
£?p.'38°9.'  '  most  pavt,  a  worthless  set  of  men, — equally  ensla-
4  ved  to  sensuality  and  superstition,  and  capable  of
4  the  most  abominable  and  flagitious  deeds. — The
4  pretended  chiefs  and  rulers  of  the  universal  church,
4  indulged  themselves  in  the  commission  of  the  most
4  odious  crimes,  and  abandoned  themselves  to  the
4  lawless  impulse  of  the  most  licentious  passions  with-
4  out  reluctance  or  remorse, — and  whose  spiritual
4  empire  was  such  a  diversified  scene  of  iniquity  and
4  violence,  as  never  was  exhibited  under  any  of  those
4  temporal  tyrants,  who  have  been  the  scourges  o£
4  mankind."


T. IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  255

20.  Robinson,  speaking  of  the supreme  rulers  of  CJ*£P-

this  universal  church,  the  bishops  of  Rome  in  partic-  „ .

ular,  says,  u  Of  the  sinners  it  may  truly  be  affirmed,  Ecd.Re-
4  that  they  were  sinners  of  size  ;  for  it  would  be  dim-  ^™f^*y
4  cult  to  mention  a  crime  which  they  did  not  com-

4  mit." Mosheim  says,  "  The  history  of  the  Roman  Ecei.His-
4  pontiffs that  lived in  this [tenth] century,  is  a  Jjj^jjj:
4  history  of  so  many  monsters,  and  not  of  men,  and
4  exhibits  a  horrible  series  of  the  most  flagitious,  tre-
4  mendous,  and  complicated crimes,  as  all writers
4  unanimously  confess."

21.  This  is the  description  and  character  of  that
spiritual  em/iire,  that Christian Church,  most  impi-
ously  so called, it  is  the  character  of  the  Great  Rev.xvS.
whore  who  sat  upon  many  waters  ruling  the  nations,

— with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  committed  forni-
cation, and  with  whose  wine  of  fornication  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  were  made  drunk.  Her  gilded
cuji,  her  specious  and  alluring  profession,  vrisjuli  oj
abominations  and  Jilthiness  of  her  fornication.  She
was  the  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS  AND  ABOM-
INATIONS OF  THE  EARTH.  She  was  drunk
with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the
tnartyrs  of  Jesus.

22.  Yet  those  Nonconformists,  who  would  not  be
intoxicated  with  the  wine  of  the  filthiness  of  her  for-
nication, must  needs  be  called  Heretics,  the  only  fit
objects  of  revenge  and  destruction. In  the  progress

of  this  beastly  power,  "  all  places  of  worship  were  Eeci.lc*
4  taken  from  heretic*)  and  they  punished  for  holding  s!)ar^s»
4  Conventicle*,  though  they  held  them  in  forests,  and
4  dens,  and  caves  of  the  earth."

23.  But  in  this  spiritual  empire  of  iniquity,  the  ru-
ling party  from  the  beginning,  "  declared  themselves
4  the  only  christians,  for  they  believed  the  Trinity,
4  and  all  the  rest  were  heretics,  bound  over  to  pre-
4  sent  and  eternal  perdition."  Notwithstanding,
44  thousands  (says  Robinson,)  set  all  penalties  at  defi-
4  ance,  and  lived  and  died,  as  their  own  understand*
4  ings  and  consciences  commanded  them,  in  the  prac-
4  tice  of  heresy  and  schism."

24.  "  In  the  year  1210,  these  Nonconformists  had  Ecci.Re-
become  so  numerous,  and so  odious,  that Ugo.  or  'p*1'^'


256  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  P.  IV.

€I^P* Hugh)  the  old  bishop  of  Ferrara,  obtained  an  edict
«^__  of  the  emperor  Otho IV.  for  the  suppression  of
them. Five  years  after,  pope  Innocent  III.  held  a
council  at  the  Latcran, and  denounced anathemas
against  heretics  of  all  descriptions,  and  against  the
lords  and  their  bailiffs,  who  suffered  them  to  reside
on  their  estates."
Ecci.His- 25.  Men  of  continual employment  were  now  in
jjiLp'JeJ;  quest  of  heretics  ;  bound  by  an  oath,  to  seek  for  them
&ote[c.j  in towns,  houses,  cellars,  woods,  caves and  fields,
and  to  purge  the  provinces  from  these  enemies  of  the
catholic  faith. Besides,  in  every  city,  a  council  of  in-
quisitors was erected,  consisting  of  one priest  and
three  lay-men.

26.  As  early  as  the  year  1233,  that  bloody  court
called  the  Inquisition,  had  a  permanent  establishment
in  Sfiain  and  France,  which  in  its  progress  heighten-
ed, to  the  utmost  degree,  the  crimson  colour  of  that
bloody  beast,  who  instituted  it,  and  the  infernal  rabble
by  whom  it  was  executed,  who  made  it  the  sole  bu-
siness of  life  to  steal,  to  kill,  and  to  destroy,
Ecci.Ro  27.  i;  In  the  kingdom  of  Castile  and  dragon,  there
pa^ges»  were  eighteen  inquisitorial  courts  ;  having  each  of
them  its  counsellors,  termed  apostolical  inquisitors' ;
its  secretaries,  Serjeants,  and  other  officers.  And  be-
sides these,  there  were  twenty  thousand  familiars
dispersed  throughout  the  kingdom,  who  acted  as
spies  and  informers,  and  were  employed  to  appre-
hend all  suspected  persons,  and  to  commit  them  for
trial  to  the  prisons  which  belonged  to  the  Inquisition"

28.  "By  these  familiars,  persons  were  seized  on
bare  suspicion  ;  and  in  contradiction  to  the  common
rules  of  law,  they  were  put  to  the  torture,  tried  and
condemned  by  the  inquisitors,  without  being  confront-
ed by  their  accusers,  or  with  the  witnesses  on  whose
evidence  they  were  condemned."

29.  "  The  punishments  were  more  or  less  dread-
ful, according  to  the  caprice  and  humour  of  the  judg-
es. The  unhappy  victims  were  either  strangled,  or
committed  to  the  flames,  or  loaded  with  chains  and
shut  up  in  dungeons  during  life.  Their  effects  were
confiscated,  and  their  families  stigmatized  with  in-
famy."


P.  IV.  CHE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  25f

30.  " Authors of  undoubted credit  affirm, and  chap.
Without  the  least  exaggeration,  that  millions  of  per-  .
sons  have  been  ruined  by  this  horrible  court. Moors  EccLRe,
were  banished  a  million  at  a  time  ;  six  or  eight  hun-  searches,
dred  thousand  Jews  were  driven  away  at  once,  and p*
their  immense  riches  seized  by  their  accusers,  and
dissipated  among  their  persecutors."

31.  u  Heretics  of  all  ranks  and  of  various  denom-
inations were  imprisoned  and  burnt,  or  fled  into  other
countries. — This  horrible  court  (says  Robinson,)  is
stiled  by  a monstrous  abuse  of  words,  "  The  Holt

4  and  Apostolic  court  of  Inquisition" Newton  says,  Djss/'oa
"  It  is  enough  to  make  the  blood  run  cold,  to  read  of  Proph.
4  the  horrid  murders  and  devastations  of  this  time  ;  p.  17Y&
4  how  many  of  these  poor  innocent  Christians  [i.  e.  175'
i  Heretics^  were  sacrificed  to  the  blind  fury  and  mal-
4  ice  of  their  enemies  i  It  is  computed  by  Mede,  from
4  good  authorities,  that  in  France  alone  were  slain  a
4  million."

32.  "  Against the Waldenses, (says Thuanus,  a

4  popish  historian,)  when  exquisite  punishments  avail—
4  ed  little,  and  the  evil  was  exasperated  by  the  reme-
4  dy  which  had  been  unseasonably  applied,  and  their
4  number  increased  daily,  at  length  complete  armies
4  were  raised  ;  and  a  war,  of  no  less  weight  than
4  what  our  people  had  before  waged  against  the  Sara"
4  cens,  was  decreed  against  them.  The  event  of
4  which  was,  that  they  were  rather  slain,  put  to  flight,
4  spoiled  every  where  of  their  goods  and  dignities,  and
4  dispersed  here  and  there,  than  that  convinced  of
4  their  error  they  repented."

33.  "  The  Waldenses  and  Albigenses  being  perse-
4  cuted  in  their  own  country,  fled  for  refuge  into  for-
4  eign  nations,  some  into  Germany,  and  some  into
4  Britain.  In  Germany  they  grew  and  multiplied  so
4  fast,  notwithstanding  the  rage  and  violence  of  croisa-
4  ders  and  inquisitors,  that  at  the  beginning  of  this
4  [fourteenth]  century  it  is  computed,  that  there
4  were  eighty  thousand  of  them  in  Bohemia,  Austria,
4  and  the  neighbouring  territories."  Yet,  compar-
atively, but  few  escaped  the  rage  and  fury  of  the
bloody  inquisitors.

34.  44  From  the  first  institution  of  the  Jesuits  to j?.  19V*


f  58  THE  AEOMINATIONS  OF  P. IV.

chap.  <  the  year  1580,  that  is,  in  little  more  than  thirty
'*  <  years,  nine  hundred  thou  sand  [reputed  heretics]  were
'  slain.  In  the  Netherlands  alone,  the  duke  of  Alva
i  boasted,  that  within  a  few  years,  he  had  dispatched
4  to  the  amount  of  thirty-six  thousand  souls,  and  those
i  all  by  the  hand  of  the  common  executioner."

35.  "  In  the  space  of  scarce  thirty  years,  the  Inqui-
6  sition  destroyed,  by various  kinds of  tortures,  an
i  hundred  and  Jifty  thousand  Christians." [i.  e.  he-
retics, such  as  Catholics generally  call  fanatics,  or
persons  disordered  in  their  brains^ Then  how  many
millions  may  we  suppose  it  destroyed,  in  the  course
of  200  years,  and  more,  from  the  period  of  its  first
institution.
Hiss.on S6.  It  is  therefore  a  just  remark  of  Newton,  that,
vJlpu.' U  ^  Rome  Pagan  hath  slain  her  thousands  of  inno-
p.  223. <  cent Christians, [i. e.  heretics'] Rome Christian
\  [Rome  Antichristian]  hath  slain  her  ten  thousands.
'  For  not  to  meniion  other  outrageous  slaughters  and
i  barbarities, the croisades against the Vfaldenses

*  and  Albigenses,  the  murders  committed  by  the  duke
4  of  Alva  in  the  Netherlands,  the  massacres  in  France
6  and Ireland,  will probably amount to above ten

*  times  the  number  of  all  the  Christians  slain  in  all
i  the  ten  persecutions  of  the  Roman  emperors  put
i  together."

57.  Thus  we  see  that  this  universal  bishop,,  this  in-
fallible  judge of  all  controversies,  this sovereign  of
kings  and  disposer of  kingdoms,  this vice-gerent  of
Christ  and  God  upon  earth,  has  plainly  manifested  his
diabolical  nature  by  his  furious  and  infernal  works.
And  thus  this  Mother  of  all  abominations,  has  evi-
dently exposed  her scarlet colour,  by  the  millions
whom  she  hath  persecuted  unto  death  by  every  mode
of  torture. Is it not then astonishing beyond  all
measure,  that  any  should  yet  be  so  blind  as  to  ima-
gine, that  the  pure  gospel  and  spirit  of  Christ  could
be  conveyed  to  future  ages  through  such  a  medium  ?
Eoel  He- S8-  "  1 >nat  kmd  of  religion  (says  Robinson,)  which
searches,  <  the  Catholics  always  propagated,  ought  to  be  con-
p*  203" '  sioered  as  it  really  is,  not  merely  a  religion,  but  as
4  a  species  of  government,  including  in  it  a  set  of  ty-
i  ranical  maxims  injurious  to  the  lives,  liberties  and


P. IV.  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  259

i  properties  of  citizens  in  a  free  state,  and  all  tending chap.
i  to  render  the  state  dependent  on  a  faction  called  the *
<  Church,  governed  from  age  to  age  by  a  succession
i  of  priests."

39.  And  such,  we  may  say,  was  that  kind  of  priest-
hood by  which  the  Catholic  church  was  organized  and
ruled,  from  the  beginning,  according  to  their  degree

of  power  and  influence. Simon  the  sorcerer  bewitch-  Acts  \H>
ed the people,  giving out that himself  was  some  Q*
Great  One,  when  therefore,  under  his  lucrative  mo-
tives, he  professed  to  be  a  Christian,  he  was  Anti-
christ in  the  seed.

40.  Diotrephes  was  a  Catholic  priest — Antichrist  in
the  blade — he  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence  ;  he
could  not  really  persecute,  but  he  prated  with  ma-
licious words  against  the  heretic  John  and  his  brethren,  See
and  cast  them  out  of  the  church.  Councils  are  but  a  *0J#ohn  *}
larger  growth  from  the  same  diabolical  root,  they  are
rulers  without  dominion,  inquisitors  without  an  inqui-
sition, and  may  be  justly  called  Antichrist  in  the  ear.

41.  "  Synods  of  three  or  four  bishops,  framing- eccI.Rc-
4  creeds  or  canons  for  conscience,  and  attaching  to  a  8ea2r5c^e'J
i  breach  of  them  ideas  of  guilt,  differ  from  the  In*

4  quisition  only  as  a  spark  of  fire  differs  from  a  city  in
6  a  blaze."  Thus  from  prating  they  proceed  to  sol-
emn anathamas,  which  happily,  cannot  yet  effect  the
ruin  of  the  dissenter.  Great  Ones,  however,  go
on  to  adopt  Great  Words,  and  as  their  numbers
and  authority  increase,  they  grasp  the  effectual  pow-
er by  faith,  and  form  an  Inquisition  in  their  dire  de-
crees.

42.  "  Their  language  used  to  be,  when  they  could
'  do  no  better,  "  If  any  fierson,  king,  nobleman,  pre*
"  late,  priest,  monk,  or  any  of  inferior  rank,  native
"  or  foreigner,  shall  at  any  time  deny  this  creed,  or
44  disobey  these  canons,  may  he  be  numbered  with  Judas,
"  Dathan  and  Abiram  ;  may  all  his  limbs  be  broken  ;
"  may  his  eyes  be  plucked  out  ;  may  his  entrails  be  torn
u  out  of  him  ;  may  he  be  smitten  with  the  leprosy,  and
"  other  diseases  from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  sole
"  of  his  Joot  ;  and  may  he  suffer  the  pain  of  eternal
"  damnation  with  the  Devil  and  his  angels,"

Bb


260  THE  ABOMINATIONS  Of  P.  IV*

CI^P- 43.  "  When  the  inquisitors  burnt  thirty,  sixty,  nine-
c  ty heretics  at  a  time  ; — stained  the  walls of  their


Ecci.Re-  i  torture  rooms  with  human  blood; — white  they  cloth-
v^ln**'  i  ec*  tne  wretched  sufferers  with  habits  and  caps,  on
'  which  were  represented  devils  a.ndfa?nes,  what  did
'  they  more  than  finish  and  colour  a  picture  of  which
i  the  most  ancient  and  sanctimonious  Synods  had
i  given  them  a  sketch  ;  a  picture  when  finished
*  so  dreadful,  that  even  the  artists  shuddered  at  the
4  sight  of  their  own  work  !  An  inquisitor  calls  it,
1  Horrendum  et  tremendum  spectaculum  !  A  horrid
c  and  tremendous  spectacle  !  but  liberal  men  (says  Ro-
i  binson,)  have  hardly  words  to  express  their  abhor-
4  rence  of  it."

44.  Here  this  great  fabric,  which  the  enemy  of
God  and  man  had  been  labouring  to  establish  ever
since  the  fall,  seems  to  have  attained  its  greatest
height ;  and  here  it  would  seern  that  the  councils,
decrees  and  prayers  of  the  whole  Catholic  priesthood
had  their  most  desirable  accomplishment.

45.  And  what  more,  in  reality,  could  their  Lord
God  the  Pope,  and  his  subordinate  legions  have  done,
in  answer  to  their  impious  wishes,  than  to  personate
the  Devil  and  his  angels,  in  tormenting  those  inof-
fensive heretics,  with  all  manner  of  torture,  as  long
as  they  had  it  in  their  power  ?

46.  But  high  as  this  Babel  of  confusion  had  arisen,
under  the  reign  of  emperors  and  popes,  by  the  la-
bours of 'false  teachers,  vain  philosophers,  lordly  bish-
ops, monks,  friars,  and  the  whole  infernal  rabble  ;  yet
its  builders  were  far  from  being  satisfied.  Even  in
their  greatest  victory  over  heresy,  and  the  most  ab-
solute uniformity  that  they  could  possibly  attain,  the
lordly  prelates  looked  upon  their  established  hierar-
chy to  be  quite  imperfect,  and  groaned  for  an  oppor-
tunity of  wresting  the  reins  of  government  out  of  the
hands  of  their  Lord  God,  in  order  to  reform  and  com-
plete the  work.

47.  The  fact  was,  their  mock  institutions  of  ce-
libacy, and  their  numerous  orders  of  monkery,  had
opened  such  an  ocean  of  depravity  and  corruption,
and  the  earth  was  so  overrun  with  sanctimonious  de-
bauchees, and  hypocritical  prostitutes,  whose  rage  for


P.  IV. THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS.  261

orthodoxy  had  become  so  excessive,  and  went  so  ef-  CH£p.

fectually  to  extirpate  every  honest  citizen  from  the  _.

earth, that  it  became  absolutely  necessary  for  civil  ru-
lers to  interpose  for  the  preservation  of  mankind,  and
rescue  the  world  from  speedy  and  final  ruin.

48.  But  without  some  religious  pretext,  the  de-
votees of  Papal  power  would  have  remained  forever
deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason  ;  hence  the  most  discern-
ing among  the  priesthood,  who  perceived  the  neces-
sity of  a  revolution,  were  ready?  as  soon  as  opportu-
nity offered,  to  furnish  the  rulers  of  the  earth  with  a
new  scheme  of  religion,  as  the  mainspring  of  their
reforming  enterprize.

49.  Schisms  were  common  in  the  Catholic  church.
Many,  at  different  periods,  had  grown  weary  of  the
superstitious,  and  bloody  religion  of  the  priests,  had
protested' against  it,  and  adopted  sentiments  and  man-
ners better  suited  to  honest  citizens  of  the  earth.
Such  had  laid  a  sufficient  foundation  for  an  appeal  to
patriarchal  authority  in  favour  of  a  revolution.

50.  Sufficient  matter  was  also  furnished  for  an  en-
terprizing  priesthood  to  form  a  new  system  of  ortho-
doxy, more  rational  and  consistent  in  the  eyes  of  a
long  deceived  multitude,  than  barefaced  fiofiery,  ob-
scene monkery rand  the  barbarous  inquisition;  and  thus
to  revive  and  continue,  under  a  new  dispensation  of
civil  and  religious  government,  the  dark  and  deplora-
ble reign  of  Antichrist*


THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  V.

THE  GRAND  DIVISION  IN  THE  KINGDOM

OF  ANTICHRIST,  CALLED  THE

REFORMATION.


CHAPTER I.

The  Cause  and  first  Means  of  Reforming  the  Catholic

Church.

A  REFORMATION  of  the  doctrines,  worship,  chap.
discipline,  and  government  of  the  corrupt  body, *•
church  or kingdom  of Antichrist,  and  a  restitution  -

of  all  that  order  and  glory,  which  God  by  his  holy
prophets,  promised  to  accomplish  in  the  latter-day,
are  two  very  different  things.

2.  It  has  been  made  manifest,  that  the  faith,  or-
der,  and  power,  together  with  the  whole  truth  and
simplicity  of  the  true  and  genuine  church  of  Christ,
was  totally  supplanted  and  trodden  under  foot  by
this  false  and  corrupt  church  ;  and  no  promise  either
of  a  reformation  or  restitution  of  the  false  was  ever
given ;  but  a  full  restitution  of  the  true  was  promi-
sed, though  not  to  take  place  until  Christ  should
make  his  second  appearance.

3.  Therefore,  what  has  generally  passed  under
the  name  of  the  Reformation,  implies  no  other  alter-
ation in  the  church  that  then  existed,  than  a  mere
change  of  form  ;  and  a  reformation,  or  forming  a
thing  over  again,  may  either  be  for  the  better  or  for
the  worse.

4.  The  Protestant  Reformed  Church,  which  took
its  rise  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  is  so  denomi*

Bb2


264  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V.

chap.  na(ec]  from  its  first  founders'  protesting  against  the
authority  and  form  of  government 'practised  by  the
pope  ;  while  they  proceeded  to  build  up  the  same
people,  in  the  same  faith,  upon  another  plan  of  gov-
ernment.

5.  And  from  the  fruitful  invention  of  these  reform-
ers and  their  successors,  innumerable  forms  of  gov-
ernment have  been  contrived,  sects,  parties,  and
churches  formed,  ail  differing  from,  and  protesting
against  their  Mother  Church,  and  against  each  other  j
yet  all  pretending  to  be  the  one  church  of  Christ.

6.  The  protest  was  by  no  means  entered  against
the  catholic  church,  nor  was  her  orthodoxy  ever  cal-
led in  question,  until  the  division  was  completed,
and  the  reforming  party  had  gained  sufficient  strength
to  claim  a  right  to  the  same  power  and  authority
with  which  the  church  universal  had  been  vested.

7.  Nor  even  then,  was  it  ever  maintained,  by  the
promoters  of  the  Protestant  cause,  that  the  catholic
church  was  not  the  true  orthodox  church  previous  to
this  revolution  :  as  may  appear  from  what  is  stated
by  Dr. Mosheim, concerning Luther, namely :

torCl"voT *"'  "  *le  seParat-ed  himself  only  from  the  church  of

iv.p'.  52.'  *  Rome, which considers the pope as infallible,

4  and  not  from  the  church,  considered  in  a  more  ex-

*  tensive  sense ;  for  he,  submitted  to  the  decision  of

*  the  universal  [or  catholic]  church, when  that  de-

*  cision  should  be  given  in  a  general  council  lawfully
4  assembled.3'

Mist,  of  8.  Now  this  general  council,  Luther  affirmed  to
S??l  p[  De  tne  representative  of  the  Catholic  Church ;  and
*»'•  therefore  must  have  considered  it,  as  representing
the  orthodox  church,  as  much  as  the  council  of  Nice
had  done  ;  so  that  the  protest  in  no  wise  respected
the  church,  but  her  head  ;  and  hence  it  necessarily
followed,  that  the  only  point  to  be  decided  between
the  reforming  party  and  the  pope,  was,  Who  should  be
the  head  ;  or  in  other  words,  Which  of  them  should  be
the  greatest.

9.  The  kingdom  of  Antichrist  was  full  of  animos-
ities and  divisions  from  the  beginning  ;  and  by  those
divisions,  and  a  thirst  for  temporal  glory  and  domin-
ion, the  church  that  was  established  for  the  domi-


P. V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  265


CHAP.
I.


neering  party,  by  emperors  and  general  councils,  has

been  sufficiently  proved  to  be  not  only  false,  but  to-  __

tally  corrupt  in  every  part.

10.  The  first  founders  of  the  Reformation  taught
no  new  doctrine  different  from  what  had  been  estab-
lished in  the  general  councils  of  this  corrupt  church.
Nor' had  they  any  divine  authority  for  their  conduct ;
but  were  actuated  by  the  suggestions  of  their  own
natural  sagacity  and  carnal  wisdom,  as  the  school  phi-
losophers, emperors  and  popes  had  been  before  them.
From  whence  then,  could  any  reformation  arise  for
the  better,  to  a  church  manifestly  false,  and  wholly
corrupt,  both  in  its  head  and  members  ?  An  evil  tree
cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.

1 1.  Hence  we  see  among  the  first  fruits  of  the  Re-
formation, that,  instead  of  putting  an  end  to  those
scandalous  debates  and  animosities,  which  had  con-
tinued in  the  church  for  many  ages,  divisions  and
sectaries  increased  and  multiplied  from  day  to  day.

This  may  be  seen  in  Dr.  Mosheim's  introduction  to  Eccl  u^
his  history  on  the  times  of  the  Reformation,  which  tory,v©i.
he  very  properly  calls,  times  of  discord. Yet  this  is  £**
denominated  the  Blessed  Reformation.

12.  It  is  not  even  pretended  that  the  first  reform-
ers had  any  divine  authority  for  their  conduct.  This
is  evident  from  the  plain  declarations  of  their  most
able  defenders,  who  pointedly  discard  the  very  idea
of  their  being  actuated  by  any  extraordinary  illumi-
nations of  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  claiming  any  other
light  or  power  than  that  which  had  all  along  been
preserved  in  the  church.

13.  Dr.  Mosheims&ys,  "  They  were  conducted  on-

i  ly  by  the  suggestions  of  their  natural  sagacity. — The  294?2?k.
*  Lutherans  were  greatly  assisted,  both  in  correcting
c  and  illustrating  the  articles  of  their  faith,  partly  by
i  the  controversies  they  were  obliged  to  carry  on  with
4  the  Roman  Catholic  doctors,  and  the  disciples  of
<  Zuingle  and  Calvin,  and  partly  by  the  intestine  di-
4  visions  that  reigned  among  themselves."  If  con-
tentions and  divisions  are  the  effects  of  the  true  gos-
pel, then  a  fountain  may,  at  the  same  place,  send
forth  both  salt  water  and  fresh.

14.  Dr.  Madame^  speaking  of  the  first  reformers^


266  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V,

chap. Says,  "  Those who  especially  merit  that  title,  were

__  <  Luther, Calvin,  Zuingle,  Melancthon,  Bucer,  Mar-


EccLHis-  *  fyr)  Bullinger, Beza, Oecolampadius  and  others."

tory,  vol.  And  he  very  justly  observes,  "  They  pretended  not  to

Appen-*  *  be  called  to  the  work  they  undertook  by  visions,  or

fc <  internal  illuminations  and  impulses  ; — they  never

1  attempted  to  work  miracles,  nor  pleaded  a  divine

i  commission  ; — they  taught  no  new  religion,  nor  laid

*  claim  to  any  extraordinary  vocation."

15.  Then  what  other  fruits  could  be  expected,  but
such  as  a  corrupt  and  aspiring  hierarchy  had  always
produced,  seeing  they  maintained  their  former  stand-
ing, and  derived  their  authority  from  the  same  cor-
rupt source  with  other  lordly  bishops  ?

16.  "  They  had  recourse  to  reason  and  argument,

*  (says  the  above  writer,)  to  the  rules  of  sound  criti-

*  cism,  and  to  the  authority  and  light  of  history.—
'  They  translated  the  scriptures  into  the  popular  lan-
i  guages  of  different  countries,  and  appealed  to  them
4  as  the  only  test  of  religious  truth."

17.  But  who  authorized  them  to  set  up  their  rea-
son, their  argument,  and  rules  of  criticism  above
their  fellows  ?  or  to  assert  that  their  translation  of  the
scriptures  is  the  only  test  of  religious  truth  ?  For  it
is  plainly  acknowledged  that  they  were  never  sent  of
God.  Therefore,  according  to  their  own  conces-
sions, they  rank  themselves  with  the  false  prophets
whom  God  spake  of  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah.

Jer.xir. 18. The  prophets  prophesy  lies  in  my  name  :  I  sent
l4% Ihem  not,  neither have I  commanded them,  neither
spake  I  unto  them  :  they  firofihesy  unto  you  a  false  vi-
sion and  divination,  and  a  thing of  nought,  and  the
A.xxfi.  deceit  of  their  own  heart. Again  :  In  the  latter  day%
so-28. ye  snan  consider  if  perfectly. I  have  not  sent  these
prophets,  yet  they  ran  :  I  have  not  s/wken  to  them,
yet  they  prophesied. And  again  : The  prophet  that
hath  a  dream,  let  him  tell  a  dream  ;  and  he  that  hath
my  word,  let  him  speak  my  word  faithfully. What  is
the  chaff  to  the  wheat  ?  saith  the  Lord.

19.  But  these  Erst  reformers,  according  to  the  wri-
tings of  their  ablest  defenders,  had  not  even  so  much
as  the  chaff,  not  even  so  much  as  a  dream  or  a  vision,
or  any  internal  illumination  of  the  Spirit  \  nothing


P. V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  *267

hut  the suggestions of  their own  natural  sagacity ,  CH£P«

which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  nothing  less  than  a  false

vision  and  divination,  the  deceit  of  their  own  heart  ;
and  how  much  less  then  had  they  that  eternal  word
which  is  as  a  fire  ?

20.  But  u  these  first  reformers,  were  all  men  of
1  learning — they  translated the scriptures into  the

i  popular  languages. " But  what  then  ?  where  is  the  icor.i.
scribe  ?  where  is  the  disputer  of  this world  ?  hath  ^iidalt
not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world  ?  hath  i*.
he  not  determined  that  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men
shall  perish  ?

21.  "  They  maintained  (says  Maclaine,)  that  the
1  faith  of  Christians  was  to  be  determined  by  the
c  word  of  God  alone."  And  what  was  this  word  of
God  alone,  but  the  scriptures  which  they  translated  ?
And  who  authorized  them  to  determine  the  faith  of
Christians,  even  by  the  words  of  the  inspired  writers,
without  having  themselves  any  inspiration  or  divine
commission  ?  The  fact  is,  they  had  stolen  the  words
from  their  neighbour  Catholics,  and  they  had  stolen
them  from  the  apostles  and  true  followers  of  Christ.

22.  Therefore,  well  said  the  Lord  by  Jeremiah  :  jer#3nlw>.
Behold,  I  am  against  the  firofihets,  that  steal  my  words  3o5*3i,3k
tvery  one  from  his  neighbour. Behold  I  am  against

the  firofihets,  saith  the  Lord,  that  use  their  tongues,
and  say,  He  saith.— Yet  I  sent  them  not,  nor  command-
ed them.

23.  That  such  were  the  first  reformers,  is  a  fact
that  cannot  be  disputed,  while  it  is  strongly  urged,
by  their  ablest  defenders,  that  they  were  conducted
only  by  the  suggestions  of  their  natural  sagacity,  and
had  no  divine  commission.  As  no  true  gospel  revolu*
tion  ever  was,  or  ever  can  be  effected  without  divine
authority,  and  as  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  first  re-
formers had  no  such  authority ;  therefore  we  must
look  for  a  very  different  cause  from  which  all  those
mighty  effects  of  the  Reformation  flowed.

24.  For  many  centuries,  the  enormous  power  of
the  pope,  and  the  horrid  crimes  and  corruptions  of
every  rank  and  order  of  the  catholic  church,  had  been
increasing  until  it  became  replete  with  tyranny  and
all  manner  of  wickedness  \  while  every  attempt  to


268 /  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P. V.

ctfAP. reform  those  open  and  scandalous  abuses,  had  proved


ineffectual,


Ecd.His- 25«  "  While  the  Roman  pontiff  slumbered  in  secu-

R.281'  '  Tlty  at  the  lieac^  °^  the  cnurcn>  (says  Mosheim,)  and

*  saw  nothing  throughout  the  vast  extent  of  his  do-

*  minion  but  tranquility  and  submission  ; — an  obscure
'  and  inconsiderable  person  arose,  on  a  sudden,  in  the
6  year  15  IT,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  this  long-ex-
i  pected  change,  by  opposing,  with  undaunted  reso-
6  lution,  his  single  force  to  the  torrent  of  Papal  am-
'  bition  and  despotism/'

26.  "  This  extraordinary  man  was  Martin  Lu-

*  therj*  a  monk  of  the  Augustinian  Eremites"
Who  also  saith  of  himself,  in  the  preface  to  his  works,
"  At  first  I  was  all  alone  ;"  or  as  Collier  hath  it  in  his
Historical  Dictionary,  under  Martin  Luther^  where
he  praises  his  magnanimity,  in  having,  "  opposed
himself  alone  to  the  whole  earth."

27.  The  beginning  of  the  Reformation  arose  from
the  private  contentions  of  two  monks,  concerning  the
traffic  of  indulgences,  and  the  pope's  power  in  regard
to  the  remission  of  sin.  This  contention  was  carried
on  with  usual  animosity,  between  Martin  Luther,
and  John  Tetzel  ;  the  latter  a  Dominican  monk,  who
by  public  authority  preached  those  famous  indulgen-
ces of  pope  Leo  X.

28.  From  this  private  quarrel,  proceeded  that
memorable  revolution,  called  the  Blessed  Reforma-
tion, The  causes,  and  first  means  of  its  promotion
are  briefly  stated,  by  that  noted  Protestant  writer  Dr.
Robertson,  in  the  following  words  :

Hist,  of  29.  "  It  was  from  causes  seemingly  fortuitous,  and
ToLy^  i  from  a  source  very  inconsiderable,  that  all  the  migh-
105,  107,  <  ty  effects  of  the  Reformation  flowed. — The  princes

208.  J  *

1  and  nobles  were  irritated  at  seeing  their  vassals
4  drained  of  so  much  wealth,  in  order  to  replenish
i  the  treasury  of  a  profuse  pontiff. — Even  the  most
4  unthinking  were  shocked  at  the  scandalous  behav-
i  iour  of  Tetzel  and  his  associates,  who  often  squan-
c  dered  in  drunkenness,  gaming,  and  low  debauche-

*  ry,  those  sums  which  were  piously  bestowed."

SO.  Such  then  was  the  favorable state  of  affairs^

*  The  place  of  Uw  birth  was  AUWsn,  in  Saxony)  Germany,


P. V.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  269

when  Luther  first  inveighed  against  the  traffic  of  in-  CH*F*
diligences. The  princes  and  nobles,  being  irritated '
at  seeing  their  vassals,  the  common  people,  whom
they  themselves  kept  as  slaves,  drained  of  so  much
wealth,  were  ready  to  protect  Luther's  cause  in  order
to  support  their  own  tyranny.

31.  Luther  published  ninety  -five theses  or  propo-  Rigt  rf
sitions  against  indulgences  ;  "  to  the  whole  (says  Ro-  charily
4  bertson^)  he  subjoined  solemn  protestations  of  his  \f^u-  *•
4  high  respect  for  the  apostolic  [i.  e.  the  papal]  see,
4  and  of  his  implicit  submission  to  its  authority."
. 32.  The  friars  of  St.  Angus  tin,  Luther's  own  or-
der, though  addicted  to  the  papal  see  with  no  less
ready  obedience  than  the  other  monastic  fraternities,
gave  no  check  to  this  publication. Luther  had  ac-
quired extraordinary  authority  among  his  brethren  ;
for  he,  as  well  as  they,  professed  the  highest  regard
for  the  authority  of  the  pope.

33.  "  And  as  a  secret  enmity,  excited  by  interest
4  or  emulation,  subsists  among  all  the  monastic  orders
4  in  the  Romish  church,  the  Augustinians  were  high-

*  ly  pleased  with  his  invectives  against  the  Domini-
4  cans,  and  hoped  to  see  them  exposed  to  the  hatred
4  and  scorn  of  the  people."

34.  "  Nor  was  his  sovereign  the  elector  of  Saxony, -^

*  dissatisfied  with  this  obstruction  which  Luther  threw P- 1*&
4  in  the  way  of  the  publication  of  indulgences. He

4  secretly  encouraged  the  attempt,  and  flattered  him-

*  -self  that  this  dispute  among  the  Ecclesiastics  them-
4  selves,  might  give  some  check  to  the  exactions  of
4  the  court  of  Rome,  which  the  secular  princes  had
4  long,  though  without  success,  been  endeavouring
4  to  oppose."

35.  It  was  therefore  not  from  religious  considera-
tions  that  Luther  was  countenanced  by  the  elector  ; v.  no.
his  protection  flowed  entirely  from  political  motives.

36.  "  Leo  regarded  with  the  utmost  indifference  jbid.p.
4  the  operations  of  an  obscure  friar,  who,  in  the  heart  H5,ne.
4  of  Germany,  carried  on  a  scholastic  disputation  in  a

4  barbarous  style.  Little  did  he  apprehend,  or  Luther
4  himself  dream,  that  the  effects  of  this  quarrel
4  would  be  so  fatal  to  the  papal  see.  Leo  imputed
4  the  whole  to  monastic  enmity  and  emulation,  [and


270  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P. V.

chap. (  sucj1  ^  rea]iy  was,]  and  seemed  inclined  not  to  inter-
__  4  pose  in  the  congest,  but  to  allow  the  Augustinian*
4  and  Dominicans  to  wrangle  about  the  matter  with
4  their  usual  animosity.'' So  says  Robertson,

37.  Here  then  was  the  first  cause  from  which  the
mighty  effects  of  the  Reformation  flowed  ;  from  guar-
relling,  *tvr  angling,  waA  animosity,  after  the  usual  man-
ner of  the  monkish  orders. The  princes  supported
the  cause  from  political  motives,  first  secretly,  and
then  openly,  and  at  last  by  force  of  arms.
Hist,  of 38.  These  contentions,  being  of  a  growing  nature,
vol! Mep[  became  at  length  a  matter  of  serious  concern  to  the
116,117.  pope,  who  in  July, 1518,  summoned  Luther  to  ap-
pear at  Rome  within  sixty  days,  and  at  the  same  time
wrote  to  the  elector  of  Saxony,  not  to  protect  him.

39.  The  professors  in  the  university  of  Wittembcrg,
after  employing  several  pretexts  to  excuse  Luther
from  appearing  at  Rome,  intreated  the  pope  that  his
doctrines  might  be  examined  by  some  persons  of
learning  and  authority  in  Germany.  The  elector  re-
quested the  same  thing  of  cardinal  Cajetan,  the  pope's
legate  or  representative,  at  the  diet  of  Augsburg.

40.  And  after  all  this  quarrelling,  and  wrangling  about
indulgences,  "Luther  himself  who, at  that  time,  was  so
4  far  from  having  any  intention  to  disclaim  the  papal  au-
4  thority,  that  he  did  not  even  entertain  the  smallest
4  suspicion  concerning  its  divine  original,  had  written
4  to  Leo  a  most  submissive  letter,  promising  an  un-
4  reserved. compliance  with  his  will."

41.  A  striking  evidence  this,  that  Luther  had  no
divine  commission  ;  but  that  he  had  altogether  been
influenced  by  his  own  ?iatural .sagacity,  and  his  usual
spirit  of  animosity,  as  the  promoters  of  his  cause
have  testified.
Uid.p.  42.  The  contention  was  now  carried  on  between
119,120,  Luther  and  Ccjctan  who  was  a  Dominican.  But  as  a
secret  enmity  prevailed  between  the  orders  of  St.  Au-
gustin  and  St.  Dominic,  the  dispute  remained  unde-
cided, and  Luther  secretly  retreated  and  published
an  appeal  from  the  pope  to  a  general  council ;  but
still  continued  to  express  no  less  reverence  than  for-
merly for  the  papal  see.

43.  Upon  this  retreat  of  Luther,  Cajetan  wrote  to


P. V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  2M

the  elector  of  Saxony,  to  send  that  seditious  monk  a  CH*P-

prisoner  to  Rome,  or  to  banish  him  out  of  his  territo-

ries. But  the  elector, who  had  secretly  protected  Hist.  or
Luther,  from  political  motives,  now  with  less  reserve,  {*££■*
but  under  various  pretexts,  and  with  many  profes-  121.
sions  of  esteem  for  the  cardinal,  as  well  as  reverence
for  the  pope,  not  only  declined  complying  with  ei-
ther  of  his requests,  but openly discovered great
concern  for  Luther's  safety.

44.  A  new  legate  was  now  appointed  by  the  court  Ecci.ms.
of  Rome.  This  was  Miltitz,  who  held  three  con-  ^'.In-
ferences with  Luther, two  in  the  year  1519, and

one  in  1520.  In  these  conferences,  Luther  mani-
festly discovered  the  gross  darkness  and  superstition
under  which  he  still  Jay,  and  that  his  conduct  was
influenced  by  a  spirit  of  animosity  and  resentment
against  the  Dominicans  with  whom  he  had  the  quarrel.

45.  "'For  he  not  only  offered  to  observe  a  profound ibid.
4  silence  for  the  future,  with  respect  to  indulgences, p*  41,

*  provided  the  same  conditions  were  imposed  on  his
4  adversaries,  but  he  went  still  farther  ;  he  proposed

*  writing  an  humble  and  submissive  letter  to  the  pope,
4  [which  he  accordingly  did,]  acknowledging  that
4  he  had  carried  his  zeal  and  animosity  too  far."

46.  "  He  even  consented  to  publish  a  circular  let-
4  ter,  exhorting  all  his  disciples  and  followers  to  re-

*  verence  and  obey  the  dictates  of  the  holy  Roman
4  church.  He  declared,  that  his  only  intention,  in
4  the  writings  he  had  composed,  was  to  brand  with
4  infamy  those  emissaries  who  abused  its  authority,
4  and  employed  its  protection  as  a  mask  to  cover
4  their  abominable  and  impious  frauds."

47.  "  Had  the  court  of  Rome  been  prudent  enough  ibid/
c  to  have  accepted  of  the  submission  made  by  Luther,  P-  4*
4  they  would  have  almost  nipped  in  the  bud  the  cause

4  of  the  Reformation,  or  would,  at  least,  have  con-
4  siderably  retarded  its  growth  and  progress."

48.  "  But  the  flaming  and  excessive  zeal  [or  ani-
4  mosity]  of  some  inconsiderate  bigots,  renewed  the
4  divisions,  which  were  so  near  being  healed,  and,
4  by  animating  both  Luther  and  his  followers — pro-
4  moted  the  principles, and augmented  the spirit,

Cc


272  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V.

chap. <  which  produced,  at  length,  the blessed  Reforma-
i  tion." Such  is  the  testimony  of  our  historian.

49.  But  the  fact  was,  that  the  flaming  and  exces-
sive zeal  or  animosity,  of  those  inconsiderate  bigots
who  animated  Luther  and  his  followers,  promoted
the  principles,  and  augmented  the  spirit,  which  pro-
duced, at  length,  an  innumerable  spawn  of  heresies,
seditions,  tumults,  blood  and  carnage,  and  every
evil  work.

50.  Thus  the  first  means  of  reforming  the  church
went  on,  and  was  promoted  from  one  degree  of  ani-
mosity and  contention  to  another,  until  the  Reforma-
tion was  completed  by  a  grand  division  between  pa*
pists  and  protestants.


CHAPTER  II.

The  Subject  continued.


o


NE  of  the  circumstances  that  contributed,  prin-
ciply,  to  render  the  conferences  of  Miltitz  with
Luther  ineffectual,  was  a  famous  controversy  carried  I
on  at  Leifisic,  several  weeks  successively,  in  the  year
1519,  between  a  Catholic  doctor  named  Eckius^  and
Luther  and  Carlostadt  his  colleague  and  companion.
MLHi*-  2.  "  The  military  genius,  of  our  ancestors  (says
^fp.43!'  '  Mosheim,)  had  so  far  infected  the  schools  of  learning,
4  that  differences  in  point  of  religion  or  literature,
'  when  they  grew  to  a  certain  degree  of  warmth  and
'  animosity,  were  decided,  like  the  quarrels  of  val-
'  iant  knights,  by  a  single  combat.  Some  famous
'  university  was  pitched  upon  as  the  field  of  battle*
f  while  the  rector  and  professors  beheld  the  contest*
c  and  proclaimed  the  victory."

3.  Eckius,  therefore,  in  compliance  with  the  spir-
it of  this  fighting  agey  challenged  Carlostadt  and  Lu-
ther to  try  the  force  of  his  theological  arms.  The
challenge  was  accepted,  the  day  appointed,  and  the
three  champions  appeared  in  the  field.

4,  Carlostadt  disputed  with  Eckius  concerning  the


P. V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  273

powers and  freedom  of the  human  will. Luther  GIJ£P*
disputed  concerning  the  church of  Rome  ;  that  in


earlier  ages  it  was  not  superior  to  other  churches,  ecci.hm-
and  combated  his  antagonist  from  the  authority  of  the  [^  ™1#
fathers,  and  from  the  decrees  of  the  Kicene  council. N©te[e.j

5.  These  disputes  were  carried  on  from  the  25th ibid.
of  June,  to the 15th  of  July following. Luther's  Np0'te4j^
cause was  left  undecided,  both  were confirmed in Hist,  at
their  own  opinions,  and  both  parties  boasted  of  hav-  vohV^
ing  obtained  the  victory.  125-

6.  In  the  mean  time,  the  dissentions  increased,  in-  Ecc1.h*.
stead  of  diminishing. For  while  Miltitz  was  treating  i^..^
with  Luther  in  Saxo?iy,  and  the  fairest  prospect  of
accommodation  was  offered,  as  has  been  observed,  Ec-

kius  hastened  to  Rome,  and  entered  into  a.  league  with
the  Dominicans,  who  were  in  high  credit  at  the  pa-
pal court,  and  entreated  Leo  to  excommunicate  Lu-
ther from  the  communion of  the  church.

7.  The  Dominicans,  desirous  of  revenging  the  af- ibid,
front  which their order  had  received  by  Luther's v'  *ft*
treatment  of  Tetzel,  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to
have  the  request  of  Eckius  granted.

8.  The  request  was  granted  ;  and  the  Roman  pon-  Hist.  of
tiff  issued  out  a  bull  against  Luther,  dated  the  15th  ^"^J
of  June, 1520,  in  which  all  persons  are  forbidden  to  127.
read  his  writings,  and  he  is  again  summoned  to  con-
fess and  retract  his  errors  within  the  space  of  sixty

days  ;  and  if  he  did  not,  is  pronounced  an  obstinate
heretic  ;  is  excommunicated,  and  delivered  unto  sa-
tan  for  the  destruction  of  his  flesh.

9.  In  some  cities,  the  people  violently  obstructed  iw<f,
the  promulgation  of  the  bull  ;  in  others,  the  persons  *•  rJI
who  attempted  to  publish  it  were  insulted,  and  the

bull  itself  was  torn  in  pieces,  and  trodden  under  foot.

10.  Luther,  who,  but  a  little  while  before,  had
declared  that  his  only  intention  in  the  writings  he
had  composed,  was  to  brand  with  infamy  those  emis-
saries, who  abused  the  authority  of  the  holy  Roman
church,  now  boldly  declared  the  pope  to  be  that  man
of  sin,  or  Antichrist,  whose  appearance  was  foretold
in  the  New-Testament.  He  declaimed  against  his
tyranny  and  usurpations  with  greater  violence  than
ever,  and  exhorted  the  princes  to  shake  off  that  igno*
minious  yoke.


274  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V.

chap. ii.  Leo  having,  in  execution  of  the  bull,  appointed

Luther's  books  to  be  burnt  at  Rome,  he,  by  way  of

Hist,  of  retflUatioft, (being  evidently  actuated  by  the  same
charieiy  spirit of  fury and resentment  which  influenced  his
teg. p'  adversaries,)  assembled  all  the professors and  stu-
dents of  the  university  of  Wittemberg, on the  10th
of  December  1520,  without  the  walls  of  the  city,  and
with  great  pomp,  in  presence  of  a  vast  multitude  of
spectators,  cast  the volumes  of  the canon  law,  to-
gether with the bull  of excommunication  into  the
flames;  and his  example was imitated  in several
cities  in  Germany.
Eeci.His- 12.  On  the  6th  of  January,  1 52  I,  a  second  bull  was
y/p'Ji*  issued  out  against  Luther,  by  which  he  was  expelled
from  the  communion  of  the church. Thus  Luther
furiously  opposed  the  power  of  the  pope,  and  as  fu-
riously did  the  pope  expel  him  from  the  communion
of  the  church,
ibid.  13.  «  It  is  not  improbable, (says  Mozhcim,)  that

*• 5U  <  Luther  was  directed,  in  this  critical  measure,  by
<  persons  skilled,  [not  in  the  gospel,  but]  in  the
i  law, who  are generally  dextrous  in  furnishing  a

*  perplexed  client  with  nice  distinctions  and  plausible
i  evasions.  Be  that  as  it  may,  (continues  the  doctor)
4  he  separated  himself  only  from  the  Church  of  Rome,

*  which  considers  the  pope  as  infallible,  and  not  from
4  the  church,  considered  in  a  more  extensive  sense  ;
4  for he submitted  to  the  decision  of  the  universal

,  *  [or  catholic]  church."

14.  Therefore  he  still  belonged,  and  professed  to
belong,  to  that  corrupt church  established  by  Con-

*  tan  tine,  from  which  the  Papists  originated,  and  to
which  the  Protestants  have  uniformly  with  them*
claimed  an  equal  relation.

15.  Here  then  was  at  length  effected,  that  grand
division  in  the  catholic  or  universal  church,  first
between  Luther  and  Leo,  and  consequently  be-
tween the  parties  who  espoused  the  cause  of  each.

16.  It  now  remained  to  be  decided  who  should
have  the  pre-eminence  ;  for  each  had  his  claim,  the
first  under  a  pretence  of  reforming  the  corruptions
of  the  church,  and  reclaiming  its  members  from  a
preposterous  hierarchy  ; and  the  second  under  pre-


P. V.  TtfE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  275

tence  of  holding,  by  a  lawful  succession,  the"  keys  of  c*£p'
«$/.  Peter,  as  Christ's  vicar  upon  earth.  ,

17.  The  true  and  genuine  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
was  never  preached  with  quarrelling,  and  wrangling,
and  animosity,  nor  protected  in  shedding  blood  with
the  sword  ;  but  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from
heaven,  and  the  fruits  of  that  Spirit  are  love,  joy,
peace,  long -suffering,  gentleness,  meekness,  goodness^
and  such  like  ;  to  the  whole  of  which,  every  pro-
ceeding of  the  Reformation,  stood  in  direct  opposi-
tion from  the  beginning.

18.  Nay  more,  the  first  reformers,  had  sufficient
reason  for  not  pretending  to  be  influenced  by  that
Spirit  of  goodness,  for  otherwise  their  conduct  would
immediately  have  discovered  to  the  eyes  of  every  be-
holder, the  falsity  of  .their  pretensions.*

19.  But  Luther  being  now  expelled  from  the  good  EecLi**
old  mother  church,  (as  Mosheim  calls  her)  instead  of  [^T;^
being  intimidated  by  the  laws  which  she  enacted  41«V,'
against  him,  "  they  led  him  to  form  the  project  of

*  founding  a  church  upon  principles  entirely  opposite
'  to  those  of  Rome'*  And  this  is  not  all,  they  led
him  to  establish  in  it,  a  system  of  doctrines  and  ec-
clesiastical discipline,  agreeable  to  the  suggestions
of  his  own  natural  sagacity.  %

20.  For  to  urge  that  the  first  reformers  had  no
divine  commission,  and  were  conducted  only  by  the
suggestions  of  their  natural  sagacity,  as  Protestant
writers  have  done,  and  at  the  same  time  to  pretend
that  they  conducted  agreeable  to  the  sfiir it  and  fire  -
cepts  of  the  gospel  of  truth,  is  a  palpable  contradic-
tion, and  only  acting  the  hypocrite  under  the  sacred
names  of  God  and  Christ.

*  Every  wise  and  candid  person  will  feel  it  a  matter  of  the  first  importance
to  examine,  with  the  utmost  care  and  attention,  that  foundation  on  which  he  is
called  to  build  his  hope  of  happiness  hereafter.  Let  such  view  the  effects  of
that  system  produced  by  the  first  reformers ;  let  him  carefully  examine  that
foundation  upon  which  all  the  protestant  sectaries  throughout  the  world  have
built  their  jarring- edifices,  from  which  they  have  drawn  their  clashing-  creeds,
and  let  him  judge  the  work  by  its  effects.  On  a  fair  examination  of  their  pro-
ceedings there  appears  scarcely  room  for  a  plea  of  sincerity  in  tht-ir  favour;
but  granting  that  they  were  even  sincere,  the  best  apology  that  can  be  made  in
their  behalf  is,  that  the  dark  power  of  Antichrist  had  covered  tiie  earth,  and
gross  darkness  had  blinded  the  eyes  of  the  most  sincere  among  them.  While
they  were  united  to  that  kingdom  whose  works  were  contention  and  strife,  they
must  have  been  grossly  deceived  to  imagine  that  they  were  the  subjects  of  the
Prince  of  Peace.  As  the  fruit  is  the  best  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  tree
which  produced  it ;  so  the  ungodly  practices  of  the  div  ided  and  contentious  pro-
testant sectaries  are  the  true  witnesses  of  the  source  from  whence  they  sprung

Cc2


276  'THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF REFORMING  1*.  V.

C1ilP' ^*  ^ne tnje Primitive Christians professed  to
,,  have,  and  in  truth,  had  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  by  which

they  were  led  ;  and  love  was  the  bond  of  their  union.
Whatever  they  suffered  by  cruel  persecutions,  and
the  most  ignominious  deaths,  they  sought  for  no  civil
powers  to  defend  their  cause,  at  the  expence  of  the
blood  of  their  fellow  creatures.

22.  But  after  the  Alexandrian  priesthood  had  cor-
rupted the  truth  and  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  and
these  dregs  of  Jewish  and  Pagan  superstition  were
converted  into  the  pretended  oracles  of  God,  and  set
up  as  a  religious  test  of  orthodoxy,  then  it  became
highly  necessary  that  civil  rulers  should  assume  the
supremacy  in  this  ecclesiastical  hierarchy,  in  order,
by  the  power  of  the  sword,  to  defend  its  test  and  pre*
serve  it  from  losing  ground.

23.  The  cause  of  Luther  stood  in  evident  need  of
such  help  to  prevent  it  from  falling  ;  and  the  pn>
ject  which  he  formed  of  founding  a  church,  upon
principles  opposite  to  those  of  Rome,  was  nothing
less  than  to  secure  the  aid  of  secular  princes  :  par-
ticularly of  John,  elector  of  Saxony,  and  successor  to
Frederick,  the  elector  before  mentioned.

eWi.hu-  24.  The  elector  John,  u  convinced  of  the  truth. of
i^i^ei!  J  Luther's  doctrine,  and  persuaded  that  it  must  lose
4  ground  and  be  soon  suppressed  if  the  despotic  au-
<  thority  of  the  Roman  pontiff  remained  undisputed
fi  and  entire,  without  hesitation  or  delay,  assumed  to
6  himself  that  supremacy  in  ecclesiastical  matters,
*  that  is  the  natural  right  of  every  lawful  sovereign."
So  says  Mosheim.

25.  That  this  sovereign  had  as  good  a  right  to  be
the  supreme  head  of  the  catholic  church  as  Constant
tine  or  the  fiofie,  is  not  disputed,  but  a  supremacy
over  the  church  of  Christ,  or  any  part  of  it,  was
never  given  him.  Like  the  kings  of  the  Gentiles,
he  might  exercise  lordship,  create  churches  and
priesthoods,  or  reform  part  of  the  old  church  over
again,  and  defend  it  by  the  sword,  and  when  he  had
done  all,  he  could  only  prove  by  so  doing  that  Christ
had  never  given  him  either  precepts  or  example  for
his  conduct.
i\»ki.  26.  The Elector  John ordered  a  body of  laws,

*'  *7, relating to the  ibrm  of  ecclesiastical  government,


p#  y#  THE  CATHOLIC CHUUClf.  27/


GHA1\
II.


the  method  of  public  worship,  the  rank,  offices,  and
revenues  of  the  priesthood,  to  be  drawn  up  by  Lu-
ther and  Melancthon,  and  pr  omul  gated  by  heralds
throughout  his  dominions  in  the  year  1527.

27.  The  example  of  this  elector  was  followed  by
all  the  princes  and  states  of  Germany,  who  renoun-
ced the  fiapal  supremacy.  Now  they  had  a  supremacy
of  their  own,  a  secular  prince  to  perform  the  func-
tions of  spiritual  supremacy  in  the  church.

28.  And  who  now  could  tell  the  difference  between
setting  up  a  religious  test  of  supremacy  at  Constan-
tinople, at  Rome,  or  in  Saxony  ?  If  there  was  any
difference  it  was  in  quantity  only,  and  not  in  nature,
for  all  blended  the  spirit  of  violence  and  the  sword,
with  the  pretended  gospel  of  Jesus.  Likewise  this
reformed  supremacy  a^ul  coalition  of  civil  and  eccle-
siastical powers,  like  the  decrees  of  Constantine,  ve-
ry soon  discovered  the  fruits  of  that  spirit  by  which
Luther  formed  his  projects.  < %

29.  Mosheim  says,  "  From  that  time,  the  religious  EcclH!^
■  differences  between  the  German  princes,  which  had  gfjfc^
4  been  hitherto  kept  within  the  bounds  of  moderation,

*  broke  out  into  a  violent  and  lusting  Same*"

30.  Well,  therefore,  said  the  prophet  Isaiah,  Wick-  i«u.  ix..
edness  burnetii  as  the  fire  : and James  ; Behold  how  jamesi3>
great  a  matter a little  fire  kindleth  I — and  setteth  on  5>6-
fire  the  course  of  nature  ;  and is  set on  fire  of  hell.

Such  was  the  fire  of  discord,  which  heated  the  spir-
its of  the  reforming  party,  and  produced,  at  length,
what  they  call  the  Blessed  Reformation  i

31.  So  Dr.  Mosheim  goes  on,  "  The  timorousness,  EcclH)^
I  of  Frederick  the  Wise,  who avoided  every  reso-  gf^gr
4  lute  measure that  might  be  adapted  to  kindle  the  tiJSu
*  fire  of discord,  had  preserved a  sort  of  external
4  union  and  concord  among  these  princes. But  as
1  soon  as  his  successor  made  it  glaringly  evident,  that
4  he  designed  to  withdraw  the  churches  in  his  domin-
4  ions  from  the  jurisdiction  of Rome,  and  to  reform
4  the  doctrine,  discipline,  and  worship  that  had  been
4  hitherto  established,  then  indeed  the  scene  changed."
32.  Their  specious  union  was  dissolved  of  a  sud-
den, the  spirits  heated  and  divided,  and  an  open  rup-
ture formed  between  the  princes,  of  whom  one  party


273  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V,

chap, adhered  to  the  superstitions  of  their  forefathers,  and
the other  embraced  the project  of  reforming  their


Ecci.Kis-  mother.  But  the  fruits  of  this  Reformation  contin-
^ory,v«i*  ue(3  to  be  such  as  to  reduce  the  state  of  things  to  vi-
6i.  olence  and  trouble,  the  natural  consequence  of  civil

and  ecclesiastical  combinations.
Ecci.Re- 33,  «  Thousands  of  volumes,  (says  Robinson^)  an*
p.  133.  '  '  cient  and  modern,  have  been  written  to  assort  and
4  conciliate  this kind  of government : but  it  never
4  can  be  exonerated  of  the  charge  of  inconvenience
4  to  two  parties,  and  injustice  to  a  third,  whose  in*
1  terests  are  unnaturally  separated  from  those  of  the
4  other  two,"
md.  34-  "  There  is  not  an  evil  that  can  blast  society,

p.  139.  <  which  is  not  contained  in  this  fatal  coalition.  Out
4  of  these  two  absolute  powers  in  one  kingdom,  rise
4  new  crimes,  new  claims,  new  disputes,  a  new  or-
4  der  of  men  to  investigate  them,  new  canons  of  law,
4  new  officers,  new  courts,  new  taxes,  new  punish-
4  ments,  a  new  world  all  in  arms,  animated  with  a
4  fury  that  never  slept,  and  never  cooled  till  one  par-
4  ty  subdued  the  other  into  silence.  There  was  no
4  peace  in  any  kingdom  where  this  system  was  adopt-
4  ed  till  either  the  prince  disarmed  the  priest,  or  the
4  priest  dethroned  the  prince."

35.  Such  were  the  blessings  to  mankind  for  which
the  Alexandrian  firiesthoocl  had  paved  the  way  when
Co7i8tantine  assumed  the  supremacy  in  the  church  ;
and  the  diabolical  farce  would  seem  to  have  been  com*
pleted  when  the  popes  assumed  the  reins  of  civil  and
ecclesiastical  government,  had  not  Luther  appeared
to  act  the  same  tragedy  over  again  by  his  projects
with  the  princes.

36.  By  a  diet  or  assembly  of  princes,  held  at  S/rire,
to^!^r  m  1526,  under  the  emperor  Charles  V.  who  was
it.  i>.  09.  a  Roman  Catholic,  after  long  debates  the  reforming

party  gained  the  majority  for  a  general  council  to  set-
tle their  controversies.  It  was  unanimously  agreed
to  present  a  solemn  address  to  the  emperor,  beseech-
ing him  to  assemble,  without  delay,  this  general  coun-
cil ;  and  it  was  also  agreed,  that,  in  the  mean  time,
the  princes  and  states  of  the  empire  should,  in  their
respective  dominions,  be  at  liberty  to  manage  eccle*


P.  V.  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  S79

siastical  matters  as  they  should  think  proper  ;  yet  so  ^^
as  to  be  able  to  give  to  God  and  to  the  emperor  an  ac-  ^

count  of  their  administration.

37.  But  in  another  diet  held  at  S/iire,  in  1529,  the  ^ccLHi*.
liberty  of  the  reforming  party  was  interrupted  ;  for  jv^p.  71)
by  a  majority  of  votes  the  former  agreement  was  re-  72'
voked,  and every change declared unlawful, that
should  be  introduced  into  the  established  religion,  un-
til the  determination  of  a  general  council  was  known.

38.  The  elector  of  Saxony,  who  had  assumed  the
supremacy  in  the  church,  considered  this  decree  as
iniquitous  and  intolerable  ;  as  did  also  the  landgrave
of  Hesse,  and  the  other  members  of  the  diet,  who
were  persuaded  of  the  necessity  of  a  reformation  in
the  church.  Therefore  they  entered  a  protest  against
this  decree,  and  still  appealed  to  the  emperor  and  to
a  general  council.  Hence  arose  the  denomination  of
Protestants.  Therefore,  from  this  period,  the  church
must  be  considered  as  divided  between  the  Pafiista
and  Protestants.

39.  In  the  year  1530,  a  diet  was  held  at  Augsburg ,
and  a  confession  of  faith  drawn  up  by  Luther  and
Melancthon,  called  the  Augsburg  Confession,  was  read
and  presented  to  the  emperor.

40.  "  The  creatures  of  the  Roman  pontiff,  (says *]*j^
4  Mosheim,)  who  were  present  at  this  diet,  employed

4  John  Faber,  Eckius,  and  another  doctor  named  Coch-
4  laus,  to  draw  up  a  refutation  of  this  famous  confes-
4  sion. — The  emperor  demanded  of  the  Protestant
4  members  that  they  would  acquiesce  in  it,  and  put  an
4  end  to  their  religious  debates."

41.  The  Protestants,  or  creatures  of  Luther,  de-
clared, on  the  contrary,  that  they  were  by  no  means
satisfied  with  the  reply  of  their  adversaries,  and  de-
sired a  copy  of  it  to  demonstrate  its  weakness.  "  This
4  reasonable  request  (says  Mushtim,}  was  refused  by
4  the  emperor."

42.  Yet  this  was  the  emperor  to  whom  they  had
appealed  ;  and  all  their  appeals  to  princes  and  coun-
cils were  of  a  like  kind,  and  produced  the  like  fruits
of  more  violent  contentions  and  discord  :  as  opposite
to  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  true  gospel,  as  mid-
night darkness  is  opposite  to  the  meridian  sun.


2$0  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V.

CHAPTER  III.

The  Subject  continued.

enAP.  4  CCORDING  to  Mosheim,  the  votaries  of  Rome,
XjL  had  recourse  to  measures  suited  to  the  iniquity

BccLHis-  °f  ^c  times)  though  they  were  equally  disavowed  by

tory,  vol.  the  dictates  of  reason  and  the  precepts  of  the  gospel.

tv.  p.  »5,  These  measures  were,  the  force  of  the  secular  arm,
and  the  authority  of  imperial  edicts.

2.  The  Protestants,  to  show  that  they  were  evi-
dently actuated  by  the  self-same  spirit  of  iniquity,  left
no  means  unemployed,  however  contrary  to  the  pre-
cepts of  the  gospel,  that  might  corroborate  to  form  a
league  for  the  purpose  of  repelling  force  by  force.

3.  An  alliance  with  Papists  against  other  Papists,
nay,  with  the  wickedest  of  popish  princes,  was  not
deemed  too  base,  provided  it  was  likely  to  answer
their  purposes.  And  instead  of  imperial  edicts,  Lu-
ther supplied  this  place,  by  exhorting  the  princes,
not  to  abandon  those  truths  which  they  had  lately  as-
serted with  such  boldness.

4.  After  the  diet  of  Augsburg  in  1530,  the  Protes-
fEst.  ©r  tant  princes  assembled  at  Smalcald.  "  There  they
vol  iiip.  '  concluded  a  league  against  all  aggressors,  by  which
6U '  they  formed  the  Protestant  states  of  the  empire  in-

4  to  one  regular  body,  and  beginning  already  to  con-
6  sider  themselves  as  such,  they  resolved  to  apply  to
i  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  and  to  implore
<  them  to  patronize  and  assist  their  new  confederacy."
So  says  Robertson.

5.  The  king  of  England  was  Henry  VIII.  the
tory,' voi!  most  licentious  and  wretched  character  of  that  age.
87  ioi.6*  ^nc^  tne  king  of  France  was  Francis  I.  a  professed

Papist,  a  blood-thirsty  and  cruel  tyrant,  who,  as  his
own  private  and  personal  views  required,  in  order  to
foment  sedition  and  rebellion,  could  enter  into  a  league
with  the  Protestants,  and  at  other  times,  when  he
had  no  more  occasion  for  their  services,  could  com-
mit them  daily  to  the  flames.* The  protestant  his-

*  He  was  indeed,  the  most  inhuman,  implacable  and  cruel  tyrant,  who  could
declare,  "  that  if  he  thought  the  blood  in  his  arm  was  tainted  with  the  Lutheran
"  heresy,  he  would  hare  it  cut  off;  and  that  he  would  not  spare  even  his  own
*  children,  if  they  entertained  sentiments  contrary  to  those  of  th*  Cathoiic
¥  Ck*r<ih.." Mnteim'i  £nl.  Virt.  Vol.  IF.  p.  87.  Note  M


P.  Vo  THE  CATHOLIC  CHURCH.  281

torians  have  themselves  given  these  two  princes  this  €hap.
character.  —/£:  ^

6.  This  confirms  what  has  been  just  now  stated,
that  a  confederacy  would  be  entered  into  by  Protes-
tants with  any,  however  base  or  wicked,  provided
by  it,  they  had  a  prospect  of  answering  their  own
purposes  against  their  former  brethren.

7.  And  what  still  more  eminently  discovered  an
antichristian  spirit  of  division,  of  enmity,  and  a  sor-
did thirst  for  pre-eminence,  in  the  reforming  party,

was  Luther's  refusing  to  comprehend  in  this  league,  tory,'y"!
the  followers  of  Zuingle^  and  those  who  had  adopted  jJ^Sf \
the  sentiments and confession of  Bucer,  although
they  were  his  brethren,  in  the  present  necessary  work
of  reforming  the  church.

8.  Time  and  contentions  roll  on,  and  more  violent  Hist,  of
and  iniquitous  measures  ensue. The  emperor,  con-  voTS^
federate  with  the  pope,  raised  an  army  of  thirty-six  ^if^l
thousand  men  in  order  to  reduce  the  Protestants  to  &Ecci.'
obedience. The  Protestants  far  superior  in  number,  [j!p.2£
amounting  to  eighty-five  thousand,  pushed  forward
their  armies,  and  cannonaded  the  camp  of  the  empe-
ror at  Ingolstadt,  but  their  long  fomented  divisions,
jealousies, and  spirit  of  contention among them-
selves, prevented  their  success.

9.  Had  the  Reformation  been  carried  on  under  the
name  of  a  political  revolution,  on  the  side  of  freedom,
things  might  have  been  kept  in  their  proper  order ;
but  when  divisions,  perfidy,  war  and  bloodshed,  make
up  the  greatest  part  of  their  transactions,  and  all  car-
ried on  under  the  name  of  the  Prince  of  Peacey  and
the  pretext  of  maintaining  his  religion,  the  truth  was
distorted  into  falsehood,  the  precepts  of  the  gospel
trodden  under  foot,  and  the  reason  of  mankind  in-
sulted.

10.  Whatever  credit  may  be  due  to  the  princes  in
the  defence  of  their  natural  and  civil  rights,  the  peace-
able religion  of  Jesus  is  manifestly  put  out  of  the
question  by  their  conduct :  and  whatever  deception
there  be  in  the  case  under  religious  pretexts,  the
honour  of  this  deception  is  due  to  Luther  and  the  rest
of  the  Protestant  priesthood.

11.  From  the  year  15 17,  in  which  the  Reformation


$32  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING  P.  V.

C'mP" commenced,  until  the  year 1546,  in  which  Luther

_  died,  nothing  but  the  fruits  of  corrupt  ambition  are

manifest  from  the  whole  face  of  history,  during  that
period of  more  than twenty-eight years. Endless
controversies,  debates  about  diets  and  councils,  vio-
lence and  wars,  are  the  distinguishing  marks  of  those
times  of  discord. And  even  the  means  by  which  the
Reformation  was  finally  established,  were  as  opposite
to  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  as  bloodshed  and  rob-
bery are  opposite  to  peace  and  good  will.
»ist.of 12.  While  the  Papists  and  Protestants,  and  their
voLiii.p.  armies,  were  concerting  plans  to  subdue  each  other
353,354.  ky  the  sword,  Maurice,  duke  of  Saxony, a  professed
Protest  ant,  and  a  perfect  master  in  the  art  of  dissim-
ulation, perfidiously  makes  a  league  with  the  empe-
ror, and  engages  to  take  up  arms  against  his  father-in-
law,  and  to  strip  his  nearest  relation  of  his  honours
and  dominions. John  Frederick,  elector  of  Saxo-
ny, was  his  uncle,  and  his  father-in-law  was  Philip,
landgrave  of  Nes^e.
*bid.  1  3.  Accordingly,  Maupice  having  assembled  about

p.  358.  tvvejve  thousand  men,  defeated  the  troops  which  the
elector  had  left  to  guard  his  country,  and  took  posses-
sion of  his  dominions.  The  news  of  these  conquests
soon  reached  the  camps,  and  filled  the  Papists  with
joy,  and  the  Protestants  with  terror.
%\)kt.  14.  The  maxims  of  the  princes,  with  regard  to  the

*•  343#  conduct  of  the  war,  differed  as  widely  as  those  by
which  they  were  influenced  in  preparing  for  it.  Per-
petual contrariety,  jealousy,  and  a  spirit  of  conten-
tion prevailed.  These  multiplied  dissensions  flowing
from  the  inconsistencyof  their  natural  tempers,  ren-
dered them  more  violent,

15.  It  was  but  a  little  while  before  Maurice  took
awi. possession  of  his  uncle's  dominions,  that  the  confed-
i>.  339. erated  Protestants,  "  declared  their  own  resolution
1  to  risk  every  thing  in  maintenance  of  their  religious
i  rig/its," But  a  spirit  of  discord and  anxiety  for
their  temporal  interest  and  safety,  manifestly  prevail-
ed to  put  religion  out  of  the  question.
iWd.i 16.  The  elector  returned  with  an army  towards
p.  364. Saxony,  and  the  greater  part  returned  with  their  re-
spective leaders  into  their  own  countries,  and  dispers-


P.  V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHUftCH.  283

cd  there. All  the  princes  in  person,  and  the  cities  C^AP#
by  their  deputies,  were  compelled  to  implore  mercy  ___
of  the  emperor  in  the  humble  posture  of  supplicants.  Hist.  or
City  after  city,  even  those  who  had  been  the  most  J^Jf^
highly  distinguished  for  their  zeal  in  their  way  of  re-  305.
formation,  now  submitted  to  such  conditions  as  the
emperor  was  pleased  to  give  them.

17.  For  no  sooner  was  the  example  set  of  desert-
ing the  common  cause,  than  the  rest  of  the  members
became  impatient  to  follow  it,  "  and  seemed  afraid, ibid. p.
4  (says  Robertson,)  lest  others,  by  getting  the  start  of '

4  them  in  returning  to  their  duty,  should,  on  thatac-
4  count,  obtain  more  favourable  terms. — Thus  a  con-

*  federacy,  lately  so  powerful  as  to  shake  the  impe-

*  rial  throne,  fell  to  pieces,  and  was  dissolved  in  the
4  space  of  a  few  we£ks."

18.  After  these  things  the  emperor  passes  on  to .^
Saxony,  and  the  elector  and  landgrave,  the  two  most p.  405,
powerful  protectors  of  the  Protestant  cause,  are  made
prisoners,  with  the  most  humiliating  and  aggrava-
ting terms  of  submission  ;  and  the  perfidious  Mau- feiff.
rice  becomes  elector  of  Saxony.  - p* '*

19.  Finally,  the  emperor  entered  Augsburg,  and ibid,
with  great  pomp,  re-established  the  rites  of  the  Ro- p*  431,
mish  worship.  .  And  a  creed  was  drawn  up  contain-
ing the  essential  doctrines  of  the  Romish  church.

20.  "  The  greatest  part  of  those  (says  Mosheim,)  Eccl.fcis-
4  who  had  the  resolution  to  dispute  the  authority  of  -y^ns*
4  this  Imperial  Creed,  were  obliged  to  submit  to  it

4  by  the  force  of  arms,  and  hence  arose  deplorable
4  scenes  of  violence  and  bloodshed,  which  involved
4  the  empire  in  the  greatest  calamities."  Thus  the
protectant  power  was  reduced  to  its  lowest  extremi-
ty, while  the  papal  power  seemed  to  recover  its  usu-
al strength.

21.  The  landgrave  of  Htese,  through  the  council ii>a.
of  his  treacherous  son-in-law  Maurice,  and  under  the  f'l™£1$
promise  of  liberty,  had  submitted to  the  unjust  de-  Note  e$
mands  of  the  emperor  ;  but  contrary  to  the  most  sol-
emn treaty,  he  was  perfidiously  imprisoned,  and  kept

for  several  years  in  a  close  and  severe  confinement ;
and  many  entreaties  were  made  for  his  liberty  from
time  to  time,  *by  marry  European  princes,  particular-
ly by  Maurice,  but  without  effect.

D  d


284  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMINGS'  P.  V»

chap. 22.  Maurice,  perceiving at  length  that  he  was
* duped  by  the  emperor,  entered  secretly  into  a  league
Ecci.His-  W^h  tne  king  of  France )  and  several  German  prin-
tory,Toi.  ces,  for  the  maintenance  of  their  rights  and  liber-
,r,p' '  ties  ;  and  by  secret  intrigue,  marched  a  powerful  ar-
my against  the  emperor,  and  surprised  him  unawares
at  Lnsfiruk,  where  he  lay  with  a  handful  of  troops,
and  without  the  least  apprehension  of  danger,
ibid.  vol. 23.  By  this  sudden  and  unforeseen  event,  was  that
118&274I  powerful emperor  brought  to  conclude  a  treaty  of
peace  with  the  Protestants,  which  was  done  at  Pas-
sau  in  the  year  1552. This  they  call  the  Bul-wark
of  peace  and  liberty  I And  thus,  by  the  sword  of  a
traitor  and  a  base  usurper,  did  the  beastly  power  of
papal  hierarchy  receive  a  deadly  wound.

24.  It  was  well  said,  by  Dr.  Robertson,  concern-
ing Maurice  and  his  perfidious  treaty  with  the  empe-

»ist.  of ror,  that  "  History  hardly  records  any  treaty  that  can
rXil '  De  considered  as  a  more  manifest  violation  of  the
*.  353» '  most  powerful  principles  which  ought  to  influence
'  human  actions."

25.  Yet  that  same  artful  dissembler,  the  treache-
rous Maurice,  who  entered  into  a  league  with  the
Papists  against  the  Protestants, — who  perfidiously
and  inhumanly  stripped  his  nearest  relation  of  his

pl^is.  honour  and  dominions  and  usurped  his  place, — whom
the  Protestants  branded  as  an  apostate  from  religion,
a  betrayer  of  liberty, — a  contemner  of  the  most  sa-
cred and  natural  ties  ; — that  same  perfidious  mon-
ster, according  to  the  projects  of  Luther,  must,  of  ne-
cessity, be  the  supreme  head  of  the  church  !

26.  Maurice,  however,  did  not  live  to  see  the  ef-
fects of  all  his  inglorious  and  treacherous  conduct,  for
he  died  the  following  year,  of  a  wound  received,
while  he  was  fighting  against  Albert  of  Branden-
burg.  Such  were  the  means  used  in  Germany  by
Luther  and  his  followers,  in  reforming  a  corrupt
church,  and  in  establishing  what  they  call  religion*
peace.

^r^of  27'  *n  SwitZ€rland  the  Reformation  was  also  carri-
tr.p.'sss.  ed  on  by  means  diametrically  opposite  to  the  precepts
G^uids  of  the  gospel.  Zuingle  (who  was  cotemporaty  with
otx.Doc.  Gutter)  fen  in  a  battle,  in  the  year  1,530,  while  he


J>. V.  THE  CATHOLIC CHURCH.  285

was  defending  his  reformed  gospel,  sword  in  hand,  c^p#
against  the  Papists.  .

3S.  The  Reformation  in  England,  took  its  rise  from
a  rupture  between  the  pope  and  king  Henry  VIII.
concerning  a  divorce  which  the  pope  refused  to  grant
this  licentious  monarch. "  A  prince  {^says  Mosheim)  Ecci.H».
1  who  in  vices  and  abilities  was  surpassed  by  none  i£r£wl".
1  who  swayed  the  sceptre  in  this  age."

29.  "  The  English  nation  was  delivered  from  the ibid.

4  tyranny  of  Rome,  by  Henry's  renouncing  the  juris-  p'  *^#
4  diction  and  supremacy  of  its  imperious  pontiff."
And  what  next  ?  "  Soon  after  this,  Henry  was  de-
*  clared  by  the  parliament  and  people  sufireme  head,
4  on  earth,  of  the  church  of  England ',  the  monasteries
4  were  suppressed,  and  their  revenues  applied  to  other
4  purposes."

30.  But  this  is  not  all,  he  extended  his  supremacy ibu.
^as  far  as  his  power  permitted. In  the year 1555, p'1?*

George  Brown,  a  monk  of  the  order  of  St.  Augustin,
he  created  archbishop  of  Dublin,  who  caused  the
king's  supremacy  to  be  acknowledged  in  that  nation.
44  Henry  shewed  soon  after,  that  this  supremacy  was
4  not  a  vain  title  ;  for  he  banished  the  monks  out  of
4  that  kingdom,  confiscated  their  revenues,  and  de-
1  stroyed  their  convents."

31.  Thus  the  same  means  that  had  been  used  by
'the  bloody  Constantine  and  his  successors,  in  abolish-
ing Paganism,  and  in  promoting  their  pretended  gos-
pel, were  also  used  by  the  Reformers,  under  pretence
of  abolishing  superstition,  and  restoring  pure  reli-
gion. As  their  fathers  did,  so  did  they.

32.  From  Diotrefihes  to  Constantine,  and  from  Con*
ttantine  to  Leo,  and  from  Leo  to  Luther,  and  so  along
down  through  the  Reformation,  one  and  the  same
spirit  of  antichristian  tyranny  is  manifest  from  the
whole  tenor  of  orthodox  history  ;  a  sordid  thirst  for
dominion  and  supremacy,  accompanied  with  a  cool
barbarity  towards  all  who  differ  from  the  ruling  party.

33.  To  the  above  words  of  Dr.  Mosheim  may  be
added  the  following  from  bishop Challoner,  "  The  Gmumla
4  foundations  of  the  Reformation of  England were  ofc.Do«.
4  laid  by  manifold  sacrileges,  in  pulling  down  monas- p*

4  teries,  and  other  houses  dedicated  to  God,  [upon


236  THE  FIRST  MEANS  OF  REFORMING, kc. P.  V.


CHAP.
III.


6  the  principles  of  their  own acknowledged  ances-

*  tors] rifling and pillaging  churches, alienating

8  church  lands,  Sec.  as  may  be  seen  in  the  history  of
'  the  Reformation  by  Br.  Ifeylin."

34.  "  Wheresoever  the  reformed  gospel  was
4  preached,  it  brought  forth  seditions,  tumults,  rebel-

*  lions,  &c.  as  appears  from  all  the  histories  of  those
4  times. — Insomuch that  in  France alone, the re-

*  formed  gospellers,  besides  innumerable  other  out-
worn. &  «  rages,  are  said  to  have  destroyed  no  less  than  twen-

p'ai68. l  ty  thousand  churches.* How  little  does  such  a  Re-
•fc.li?oc.  C  f°rmat»on  resemble  the  first  establishment  of  the
jp.  56. *  church  of  Christ  ?"

35.  The  Protestants  of  France  were  Calvinutsj
the  disciples  and  followers  of  John  Calvin,  whose
principles  were  to  defend  his  reformed  religion  by
the  sword,  and  put  heretics  to  death.  In  the  year
1560,  the  riotous  Calvinists  were  called  Huguenot*  j
[i.  e.  confederates]  and  it  was  but  natural  for  the
disciples  to  be  as  their  lord. Mosheim  observes  con-

£cci.HL>-  cerning  their  commotions  in  that  country,  that,  "  both
**?rj>'. 373'.  i  the  contending  parties  committed  such  deeds  as  are
'  yet,  and  always  will  be  remembered  with  horror."

36.  These  outrages,  however,  were  calmed  by
Henry  IV.  king  of  France*  who  renounced  protes-
tantism and  made  a  public  profession  of  popery.  Not-
withstanding by  an  edict  drawn  up  in  the  year  1598,
called  the  edict  of  JYantes,  he  gave  the  Protestants

JP>M^  liberty  of  conscience,  and  "  a  full  security  fsays  Mo-
u  ahdm^)  for  the  enjoyment  of  their  civil  rights  and
"  privileges,  without  persecution  or  molestation  from
«  any  quarter."

37.  The  honour,  therefore,  of  this  religious  liber-
ty, is  due  to  the  Papists,  and  not  to  the  Protestants.
But  it  must  be  observed,  that  this  liberty  proceeded
from  political  and  sinister  motives :  as  the  religious
peace,  of  Passau,  flowed  from  Maurice's  treacheries.

38.  Such  then,  as  have  been  stated,  were  the  first
means  which  the  Protestants  used,  in  reforming  a
base  and  superstitious  church  ;  and  reform  it  they
did,  into  as  many  different  shapes  and  forms,  as  have
been  sufficient  to  keep  the  whole  world  in  perplexity,
and  which  would  require  the  labour  of  a  life  to  ev
pose  to  full  view,


J».  373.


P. V. REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BY,  &C 2S7

39.  But  if  such  means,  as  those  by  which  the  Re-  c^p-

formation  commenced,  and  was  promoted,  and  final-  _^

\y  established,  under  the  name  of  Christ,  were  con-
trary to  the  precepts  and  example  of  Christ,  it  still
remained  an  incontcstible  truth,  that  the  whole  work,
from  beginning  to  end,  was  the  work  of  Antichrist.

40.  Seeing  that  "such  false  and  deceitful  terms  as
the  Blessed  Reformation,  a  religious  peace,  a  glorious
cause,  Ifc.  are  applied  to  quarrelling,  wrangling,  ani-
mosity, endless  dissensions,  perfidy ,  fraud,  usurpations^

fightings,  wars  and  bloodshed,  with  all  of  which  the
Reformation  was  replete  ;  and  seeing  that  the  pro-
moters of  such  a  cause  called  themselves  the  minis-
ters of  Christ  ;  then  with  the  strictest  justice  and  pro-
priety, may  also  the  following  titles  be  applied  to  such.

41.  For  such  arezfalse  apostles,  deceitful  workers,  2  cor,  it.
transforming  themselves  into  the  apostles  of  Christ.  iVMfc
And  no  marvel ;  for  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into

an  angel  of  light.  Therefore  it  is  no  great  thing  if
his  ministers  also  be  transformed  as  the  ministers  of
righteousness  ;  whose  end  shall  be  according  to  their
works.


CHAPTER  IV.


Reformed Churches established by the Works of
Antichrist.

THE  reformed  churches  sprang  immediately  out
of  the  papal  hierarchy  :  and  being  separated,
founded,  and  established,  and  their  doctrines,  dis-
cipline and  government,  reformed  by  works  contrary
to,  and  without  the  example,  precepts  or  command-
ments of  Christ,  are  properly  called  the  works  of
Antichrist.

2.  Christ  and  Antichrist  could  never  sit  together
on  one  throne,  nor  rule  in  one  kingdom  ;  therefore,
while  Antichrist  had  the  dominion,  Christ  had  it  not.
Antichrist,  in  the  time  of  his  dominion,  could  exer-

Dd2


283  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BT P. V,


CHAP
IV.


cise  his  authority  over  the  subjects  of  his  own  dark
kingdom,  but  such  as  never  claimed  any  relation  to
his  orthodoxy,  but  rather  suffered  death  under  his
tyranny,  were  never  his  subjects.

3.  Catholic  despotism,  under  the  name  of  ortho-
doxy, was  invented  by  the  Alexandrian  firiesthood,
and  from  thence,  like  the  torrent  of  one  mighty  river,
it  came  rolling  along'down  to  the  Reformation,  through
emperors  and  popes ;  and  this  despotic  hierarchy,
through  all  its  progress,  by  Protestant  as  well  as  Po-
pish writers,  is  called  the  Church.

4.  At  the  Reformation  this  one  great  church  is
divided,  and  soon  after  subdivided  ;  and  so  it  contin-
ued to  divide  and  subdivide,  until  innumerable
churches  were  formed  and  re-formed,  full  of  clashing
principles,  sectary  against  sectary,  each  claiming
the  greatest  evidence  of;  orthodoxy.

5.  And  what  is  still  more  remarkable,  all  those  di-
vided churches  still  continue  to  make  up  the  one
great  body  of  Christians,  the  one  great  Catholic  or
Universal  Church,  very  properly  called  the  Church
Militant )  that  is,  the  Fighting  Church.

6.  The  fiafial  hierarchy  naturally  arose  out  of  that
huge  mass  of  corruption  and  motley  sfiectacle  ofsu-
perstition,  established  by  Constantine,  and  called
the  Church  ;  which  from  the  setting  up  of  the  school
at  Alexandria,  until  the  time  of  Leo  the  Great,
is  by  all  her  conduct,  most  manifestly  proved  to  be
the  Church  of  Antichrist.  Over  this  self-stiled
Catholic  church,  the  bishops  of  Rome  took  the  su-
premacy.

toffem* 7*  From  about  the  year  756,  the  Protestants  have,
p.  431?"  generally,  dated  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Anti-
dote [h.]  christ,  and  have  taken  great  pains  to  prove,  that  the
Papal  power was Antichrist — that  the church of
rropii? Rome  was  the  Mother  of  Harlots,  by  whom  the  kings
api'/siJ!'  and  inhabitants  of the earth  were  made  drunk  with
the  wine  of  her  fornication — and  that  the  Papal  hie-
rarchy, church  or kingdom, over  which  the  popes
had  the supremacy, was  the wicked  Antichristian
kingdom.

8.  Yet  from  this  complicated  source,  this  self-stiled
holy  and  ever  orthodox  church,  this  kingdom  of  An-


P. V.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST.  289

tichrist  and  Mother  of  Harlots,  the  reformed  churches c^£p*
immediately proceeded, and took with  them,  the  __
same  doctrines,  sacraments,  manner  of  worship,  dis-
cipline and  government,  together  with  a  vast  increase
of  ill  nature  against  each other,  and  an  unmerciful
spirit  of  persecution,  as  will  yet  more  fully  appear.

9.  The  first  reformers,  at  the  commencement  of
the  Reformation,  particularly  Martin  Luther,  had  no
intention  of  separating  from  what  they  called  the  holy
Roman  church,  as  hath  been  observed  ;  his  only  in-
tention was  to  brand  with  infamy  those  emissaries
who  abused  its  authority.  A  reformation  of  the  same
corrupt  church  of  Antichrist,  was  the  highest  that
was  even  pretended.

10.  But  when  Luther  and  his  associates  were  ex-
pelled from  the  communion  of  the  church,  projects
were  formed  with  the  princes,  who  thereupon  with-
drew the  churches  in  their  dominions  from  under  the
papal  hierarchy.  These  churches  in  all  parts,  were
the  same  which  had,  for  many  ages,  professedly  be-
longed to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  popes  of  Rome.

11.  And  as  it  is  strongly  urged,  by  modern  Pro-
testant writers,  that  the  first  reformers,  Luther,
Calvin,  and  the  rest  who  merited  that  title,  plead-
ed no  divine  commission  ; — that  they  taught  no  new
religion,  nor  laid  claim  to  any  extraordinary  vocation  ;
it  therefore,  consequently  and  inevitably  follows,  that
these  churches  were,  and  continued  to  remain  the
churches  of  Antichrist ;  and  that  they  still  retained
the  same  religion,  doctrines,  discipline  and  govern-
ment,  which  they  had  been  taught  by  their  mother,
the  Mother  of  Harlots.

12.  The  church  of  Antichrist,  in  truth,  never  had
the  doctrine,  discipline  and  government  of  Christ  in
possession  ;  but  had  stolen  the  words  and  institutions
of  the  saints,  and  clothed  herself  with  their  profes-
sion. Her  doctrine  was  a  monstrous  abuse  of  sacred
words  ;  her  discipline  was  written  with  the  blood  of
the  innocent ;  and  her  government  was  the  grossest
insult  upon  the  rights  and  consciences  of  mankind.
As  was  the  mother,  so  were  her  daughters :  they
were  open  prostitutes,  who  could  show  no  true  de*
scent,  but  from  the  same  Mother  of  Harlots.


290  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BY P. V.

s

chap- 13.  A  late  Protestant  writer,  speaking  on  the  va-

rious  state  of  the  church,  very  justly  says  of  the  Rc-

chriman  fcnaationi  "  It  remained  imperfect,  which  is  mostly
Taeoio-  '  discernable,  in  the  diicipline  and  government  of  the
K)r»P-  '  '  *  church,  as  likewise  in  morals.  For  with  the  re-
4  formed,  the  true  government  of  the  church  was
*  changed,  apostolic  discipline  laid  aside,  and  the
i  whole  authority  engrossed  by  politicians  ;  so  that
4  at  present  the  most  grievous  abuses  are  flagrant
'  with  respect  to  the  vocation  of  ministers,  the  ex-
i  ercise  of  discipline,  the  use  of  sacraments, &c."

14.  Then  surely,  where  churches  were  established
without  a  divine  commission,  and  without  any  ex-
traordinary vocation  ;  where  apostolic  discipline  was
laid  aside  ;  and  where  the  whole  authority  was  en-
grossed by  earthly  politicians,  it  is  no  marvel  that
the  most  grievous  abuses  should  become  flagrant.

15.  The  Church  of  Rome  never  was  uniform  in
her  doctrines  ;  the  monastic  orders  held  sentiments
directly  contrary  to  each  other,  about  which  they
were  perpetually  quarrelling  and  wrangling  ;  yet  all
were  held  in  a  kind  of  subordinate  union,  so  long  as
they  professed  their  subjection  to  one  infallible  head.

16.  But  when  the  reformers  cast  off  the  pope's
supremacy,  and  still  retained  the  same  contentious
doctrines,  and  the  same  sordid  thirst  for  pre-eminence,
they  had  nothing  to  prevent  them  from  showing  out
their  divisions  to  their  utmost  extent.

IT.  The  scriptures,  which  they  adopted  as  the  Word
of  God,  and  only  test  of  religious  truth,  suffered  them
not  only  to  retain  their  former  respective  and  contra-
dictory doctrines,  but  to  wrangle  and  dispute  about
them  in  the  most  shameful  and  scandalous  manner,
and  to  give  the  most  positive  judgment  against  each
other,  followed  by  banishments,  imprisonments,  and
even  death.  If  such  is  the  only  test  of  truth,  it  is
indeed  a  strange  mystery,  and  mankind  might  forev-
er content  themselves  to  remain  in  darkness.

18.  Through  the  whole  progress  of  the  Reforma-
tion, the  same  doctrines  and  disputes  were  kept  up,
which  for  many  ages  had  existed  in  the  Romish
church,  concerning  The  Eucharist — The  Trinity —
The  Decrees  of  God — The  Vicarious  Atonement--
Imputed  Righteousness,  &c.  &c.  Sec.


I\ V.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST,  2§1

19.  So  that  in  all  their  divisions  and  controversies, c*™*
the  contending  parties  could  appeal  to  the  same  fa-  _
thers  and  general  councils  with  the  Papists,  and  al-
ternately boast  of  having  on  their  side,  the  decrees

of  the  council  of  Nice,  of  Chalcedony  or  Constantino  -
file  ;  or  the  ancient  writings  of  Origen,  St.  Ambrose,
or  St,  dugustin*

20.  And  while  each  made  their  appeal  to  their  blind
and  dumb  test  of  truth  for  the  orthodoxy  of  their  sen-
timents, and  laboured  hard  to  determine  what  the
faith  of  another  should  be,  an  impartial  spectator,
might  appeal  to  the  judgment  of  common  sense,  to
prove  that  their  systems  and  practices  were  all  a  per-
fect labyrinth  of  senseless  jargon.

21.  The  Antichri^tian  contentions  and  bitter  ani-
mosities, that  were  carried  on,  first  by  the  Papists,
and  then  by  the  Protestants,  concerning  the  manner
in  which  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  wre  fire  sent  in
the  eucharistj  make  up  a  great  part  of  the  history  of
the  Reformation.

22.  These  contentions,  concerning  the  body  and
blood  of  Christy  were  carried  on  by  the  Protestants
for  many  years,  which  finally  terminated  in  a  grand
division  between  the  reforming  parties,  one  of  which
claimed  MartIn  Luther,  as  the  established  found-
er of  their  church,  and  the  other  John  Calvin  ;  and
with  all  the  natural  sagacity  of  their  divines,  and  all
the  force  of  their  earthly  princes  and  civil  magis-
trates, they  have  never  been  able  to  heal  the  division
from  that  day  to  this.

23.  It  is  well  known  by  all  who  are  acquainted  with
the  conduct  of  the  first  reformers,  that  about  this
one  particular  doctrine,  (concerning  Christ's  body
and  blood,)  there  have  been  more  contentions,  bitter
animosities  and  bloodshed,  than  about  any  other.

24.  In  order  that  these  superstitious  debates  about
their  eucharist,  may  appear  in  their  true  colours,  it
will  not  be  improper  to  take  some  notice  of  their  rise
and  progress,  which  may  serve  as  a  further  evidence
that  the  first  reformers  taught  no  new  religion,  but

*  By  the  writings,  of  this  "  Utter  and  Woody  fanatic  of  Africa"  (from  whom
proceeded  232  pamphlets)  did  Luther,  OecolampHdius*  juidothw  reformers  e**
y»»wud  stricture. See  iLccl.  R&wrctws,  p.  102.


292  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BY P.  V.


CHAP.
IT.


the  same  that  was  taught  by  the  corrupt  church  of
___  Rome.

fcccl.Hi*.  25.  The  controversy  concerning  the  manner  in  which
JlTmo.'  ^l€  ^0(*y  anc^  M°°d  °f  Christ  were  present  in  the  eu-
charist,  was  first  set  on  foot  by  one  Radbert,  a  monk.
He  in  a  treatise  maintained,  "  that,  after  the  conse-
"  cration  of  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper,
"  nothing  remained  of  these  symbols  but  the  outward
"fgure,  under  which  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ
"  were  really  and  locally  present ;  and  that  the  body
"  of  Christ  thus  present — was  the  same  body  that  was
u  born  of  the  -virgin,  that  suffered  upon  the  cross,  and
M  was  raised  from  the  dead"

26.  This  treatise  was  composed  in  the  year  831,
at  a  time  when  universal  history  declares  the  church
of  Rome  to  have  been  the  most  abominable  sink  of
corruption,  and  her  rites  and  ceremonies  a  motley
spectacle  of  superstition,  when  the  papal  power  is
proved  to  be  Antichrist,  and  the  church  the  mother  of
abominations.

27.  Until  about  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  cen-
tury, those  jarring  opinions  were  proposed  on  both
sides, unrestrained  by the despotic  voice  of au-

tbid. thority. The  emperor  Charles  the  Bald  ordered

*>.  331. Ratramn and Scotus  to  draw  up  a  clear  explication

of  that  important  doctrine  which Radbert  seemed

to  have  so  egregiously  corrupted.

ibid.  28.  "  It  is  remarkable  (says  Mosheim,)  that  in  this

*' 33 i  controversy  each  of  the  contending  parties  were  at-

6  most  as  much  divided  among  themselves  as  they

'  were  at  variance  with  their  adversaries."- — Scotusf

pfWs. from  his  philosophical  genius,  declared  plainly  thate

the  bread  and  wine  were  the  signs  and  sy?nbols  of  the

absent  body  and blood of  Christ. The disputants

mutually  charged  each  other  in  their  turns  with  the

most  odious  doctrines  :  and  so  it  went  on.

Ibid.  p. 29.  Berenger,  a  scholastic  disputer,  and  afterwards

***'  *44, archbishop  of  Angers,  and  a  subtle  genius,  maintain*

ed  publicly  the  doctrine  of  Scotus,  in  the  year  1045,

and  opposed  the doctrine of  Radbert. No sooner

was  the  doctrine  of  Scotus  published  by  Berenger,

than  it  was  opposed  by  certain  doctors  in  France  and

Germany ;  and  pope  Leo  IX.  attacked  it  with  vehe*


P.  V.  THE  WORKS  OF  AHTICHRIST.  293


CHAP.
IV.


mence  and  fury  in  the  year  1050  ;  and  in  two  coun-
cils had  the  doctrine  of  Berenger  condemned,  and  __
the  book  of  Scotus,  from  which  it  was  drawn,  com-
mitted to  the  flames.

30.  This  example  was  followed  by  the  council  of
Paris,  and  one  party,  for  a  while,  reduced  the  other
to  silence,  by  threatnings  and  deprivations  of  reven-
ues, and  fines,  and  synodical  decrees. But  after  the  eccI.Rk*
death  of  Leo  IX.  the  flame  of  their  religious  dis-  ^;JjJ;
cord  rekindled,  and  the  popes  strove  in  vain  to  put

an  end  to  their  antichristian  debates.

31.  Pope  Innocent  III.  in  the  year  1215,  had  the  yol  a
honour of  introducing  the term transubstantiation.  236.
That  is,  in  the  eucharist  there is  a  conversion  (or
change)  of  the  whole  substance  of  the  bread  and  wine  ;  ^^Soc,
so  that  it  is  truly,  really,  and  substantially,  the  very  p. 24.
body  and  blood,  soul  and  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,

32.  The  grand  dispute,  however,  continued. For  Jj;cd^j£
although the pope had placed transubstantiation  iii.p!2iv
among  the  avowed  doctrines  of  the  church,  yet  the
authority  of  this  decree  was  called  in  question  by  ma-
ny. Some  adopting  the  doctrine  of  Berenger,  con-
sidered the  bread  and  wine  as  signs  or  symbols  of  the
absent  body  and  blood  of  Christ. Others  thought  it ibid,
sufficient  to  acknowledge,  what  was  termed  a  real p-25*
presence,  and  explained  the  manner  of  this  presence
quite  otherwise  than  the  pope  had  defined  it. Among
these  was  one  Pungens  Asinus,  a  subtle  doctor  of  the
university  of  Paris,  who,  towards  the  close  of  the
thirteenth century,  had the honour of  substituting
consubstantiation  in  the  place  of  transubstantiation.

33.  Thus  we  see  where,  and  when,  and  in  whom,
that  superstitious  rite  and  pernicious  error  took  its
rise,  invented  by  subtle  philosophers,  and  scholastic
disputants,  and  brought  forth  from  the  prolific  womb
of  the  Mother  of  Harlots,  the  sink  of  every  abomi-
nation and  all  sorts  of  wickedness.

34.  Luther  and  his  followers,  it  is  said,  rejected  roi.iv.p,
the  monstrous  doctrine  of  the  church  of  Rome  with  p*J|j!
respect  to  the  transubstantiation,  but  were  neverthe-
less of  opinion,  that  the  partakers  of  the  Lord's  Sup-
per received,  along  with  the  bread  and  wine,  the  real

tody  and  blood  of  Christ, "  This,  (says  Moshei?ny)


§94  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BT P.  V,


CHAP.
IV.


<  in  their  judgment,  was  a  mystery,  which  they  did
i  not  pretend  to  explain. M

KociHis- 35.  But  Madeline  says,  "  Luther  was  not  so  mo-

\v?i  if'  '  ^est as Dr'  Mfohdm here  represents  him. He

Kote[z.]  <  pretended  to  explain  his  doctrine  of  the  real  fire

i  sencc,  absurd  and  contradictory  as  it  was,  and  utter-

4  ed  much  senseless  jargon  on  this  subject. As  in

i  red-hot  iron,  said  he,  two  distinct  substances, viz.

4  iron  and  Jire,  are  united,  so  is  the  body  of  Christ

'  joined  with  the  bread  in  the  eucharist." This  Mac-

ibid, laine  very  properly  calls  the  u  nonsensical  doctrine  of

KPut?£h.3  '  toniutoitantiafiotiy"  which  was  first  invented  by  that

subtle  popish  doctor  Pur.gcns  Minus.

36.  VY herein  then  lay  the  difference?  It  can  be
found  only  in  a  slight  variation  of  high  sounding
words,  calculated  to  impose  upon  the  credulity  of  a
blinded  multitude,  and  to  add  the  greatest  number  to
the  party  who  could  use  the  most  cunning  deception,
in  explaining  the  most  pompous  sounds  of  nonsense,
•bid.  37. Carlostadt, who  was Luther's  colleague  and

f-Q2t  companion,  and  whose  doctrine  was  afterwards  con-
firmed by  Ziririgle,  maintained,  u  That  the  body  and
i  blood  of  Christ  were  not  really  present  in  the  eucha-
4  rist  ;  and  that  the  bread  and  wine  were  no  more
'  than  external  signs,  or  symbols"  This  was  the
doctrine  of  Scotus  just  mentioned,  who  had  invented
it  by  the  special  order  of  the  emperor,  who  was  then
under  the  dominion  of  Antichrist :  for  so  the  Protes-
tants call  the  pope,
ibid.  38.  This  opinion  of  Zvirgle  was  received  by  all

p*  03'  the  friends  of  the  Reformation  in  Switzerland,  and
by  a  number  of  its  votaries  in  Germany.  But  Mo-
sheim  says,  "  Luther  maintained  his  doctrine,  in  rela-

<  tion  to  this  point,  with  the  utmost  obstinacy  ;  and
i  hence  arose,  in  the  year  15  24,  a  tedious  and  vehe-
i  ment  controversy,  which  terminated,  at  length,  in
*  a  fatal  division."

jcor.x.  39.  Was  Christ  ever  divided?  He  was  the  bread
i0f  if*  of  life  that  came  down  from  heaven,  and  the  church,
his  true  followers,  by  their  fellowship,  union  and
communion,  became  that  one  biead,  and  were  parta-
kers of  that  one  body,  and  one  blood  ;  which  Anti-
christ, with  all  his  learning  and  philosophy,  could
never  yet  discern.


iP.  Y.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST.  295

CHAPTER  V.

The  Subject  continued.

THOSE  vehement  controversies  among  the  first  chap.
reformers,  which  finally  terminated  in  a  fatal  v-
division  between  them,  were  the  effects  that  natur-
ally  flowed  from  a  corrupt  ambition.  Diotrefihes-likc,
a  sordid  thirst  for  pre-eminence,  and  works  directly
contrary  to  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  were  distin-
guishing characteristics  in  .those  great  ones  upon
whose  jarring  systems  the  reformed  churches  were
finally  established.

2.  Carlostadt,  in  the  year  1522,  carried  on  the  Re-
formation by  taking  /lown  some  images,  while  Lu-  tory,'voH
ther  concealed  himself  from  the  rage  of  the  pope,  ^30!'
in  the  castle  of  Wartenberg. But  no  sooner  did  he

hear  of  it,  than  he  flew  from  his  retreat,  and had
Carlostadt  banished.

3.  "  It  is evident (says  Madeline,}  from  several  $bid.p.5*.

•  Note  ft  "*

*  passages  in  the  writings  of  Luther,  that  he  was  by  *J

<  no  means  averse  to  the  use  of  images. — But  per-

*  haps  the  true  reason  of  Luther's  displeasure at

*  the  proceedings  of  Carlostadt,  was,  that  he  could

<  not  bear  to  see  another  crowned  with  the  glory  of

*  executing  a  plan  which  he  had  laid,  and  that  he  was

*  ambitious  of  appearing  the  principal,  if  not  the  on-
'  ly  conductor  of  this  great  work. This  is  not  a  mere

*  conjecture. Luther  himself  has  not  taken  the  least

*  pains  to  conceal  this  instance  of  his  ambition."

4.  But  the  violent  rupture  between  these  two  first ftiM.
reformers,  who  had  been  expelled  from  the  coramu-  Note[b#
nion  of  the  church  together,  first  arose  from  a  more
important  point. Carlostadt  could  not  believe  as  Lu-
ther did,  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  in  the  bread  of

the  eucharist  as  fire  was  in  red-hot  iron.

5.  Such  were  the  divisions  and  animosities  among

the  reformers,  concerning  the  eucharist,  that  to  ter- *..
minate  this  controversy,  Philip,  landgrave  of  Hesse,  p.  73/74,
invited,  in  the  year  1529,  to  a  conference  at  Marfiurg,
Luther  and  Zuingle,  together  with  some  of  the  more
eminent  doctors,  who  adhered  to  the  respective  par-

Ee


296  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BY P.  V\

chap, tics  of  these  contending  chiefs. Here  they  disputed

* during  four  days,  and  their  dissension  still  remained  ;

"  nor  could  either  of  the.  contending parties  (says

4  Mosheim,)  be  persuaded  to  abandon,  or  even  to  mod-

4  ify,  their  opinion  of  that  matter."

6.  Pitiful  reformers  these,  who  needed  earthly  prin-
ces to  exhort  them  \o  peace,  and  who  would  neither*
reform  themselves,  nor  suffer  others  to  reform  them  !
Well  said  the  apostle,  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax
worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived.

Efcd.His- 7.  "  In  the  year  1544,  Luther  published  his  Con-

torv,  vol. j.  r ti • i •  i  i  n i

:v.p.35f.  'jession  ot  raith  in  relation  to  the  sacrament  of  the
4  Lord's  supper,  which  was  directly  opposite  to  the
4  doctrine  of  Zuinglc  and  his  followers. — The  doctors
4  of  Zurich  pleaded  their  cause  publicly  against  the
4  Saxon  reformer."  And  so  it  went  on.
!feid.  8-  John  Calvin,*  professor  of  divinity  at  Geneva,

Noterjfc  proposed  an  explication  of  the  point  in  debate,  and
made  use  of  all  his  credit  and  authority  among  the
Swiss  in  order  to  obtain  their  assent  to  it.  He  deni-
ed the  doctrine  of  Christ's  bodily  presence  in  the  eu-
charist,  and  at  the  same  time  expressed  it  in  almost
the  same  terms  which  the  Lutherans  employed  in  in-
culcating their  doctrine  of  Christ's  real  presence,  and
44  talked  of  really  eating  by  faiih  the  body,  and  drink*
44  ing  the  blood  of  Christ."

9.  Wherein  then  is  the  difference  between  the  doc-
trine of  the  pope,  and  that  of  Luther  and  Calvin?
The  pope  says,  that  the  bread  and  wine  are  changed
into  the  very  substance  of  that  same  body,  flesh  and
blood  of  Christ  that  was  born  of  a  virgin,  and  cruci-
fied of  the  Jews,  so  that  it  is  no  more  bread.

10.  Luther  says,  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  in,  and
with,  and  under  the  bread,  as  fire  is  in  a  red-hot  iron  ;
so  that  both  the  substance  of  the  bread,  and  of  the
body,  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  are  there  present.

1 1.  Calvin  says,  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  not  re-
ally, or  corporally  there,  and  yet,  that  by  faith,  the
body  of  Christ  is  really  eaten  !  If  therefore  the  first
be  monstrous,  and  the  second  nonsensical,  what  is  the
third  ?  And  how  by  faith  or  any  other  way,  could
they  really  eat  that  which  was  not  really  there  ?

*  Calvin  was  a  natire  »f  Noytn,  in  France.


P.  V.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST.  237


CHAP*
V.


12.  Thus  it  appears  that  Calvin  put  the  cap-stone
upon  the  fabric k  of  superstition,  when  he  persisted
in  denying  Christ's  real  presence,  and  yet  would  have
it  that  his  body  was  really  eaten,  although  it  was  re-
ally absent  from  the  eater.

13.  The  truth  is,  they  were  blind  guides,  who
knew  nothing  about  the  body  of  Christ;  and  how
could  they  describe  it  to  others  }.  But  how  to  wrangle
about  the  stolen  words  of  the  saints,  mixed  up  and
confused  with  their  own  inventions,  and  how  to  hat*
one  another,  they  understood  and  practised  in  a  very
extraordinary  manner,  as  their  works  abundantly  tes-
tify.

14.  The  real  presence  of  the  body  of  Christ  was
not  to  be  discerned  by  their  natural  sagacity,  it  was
far  beyond  their  hutnan  comprehension.  This  they
coniess,  and  well  they  might,  for  their  systems  have
fixed  him  a  local  body,  and  a  local  heaven,  far  be-
yond the  starry  regions.

15.  Mosheim  says,  "  Luther  maintained,  that  the  EcciHi^
4  body  and  blood  of  Christ  were  really  present  in  the  tory,  vol,

*  eucharist,  and  were exhibited  together with the  IV* p*
4  bread  and  wine,  though  in  a  manner  far  beyond  hu-

4  man  comprehension."

16.  Robert  Barclay  remarks,  that  Calvin,  "  after  Barclay's
4  he  hath  much  laboured  in  overturning  and  refuting  p!°4°5^
4  the  two  former  opinions,  plainly  confesseth,  that  he  J*cap!  7.
4  knows  not  what  to  affirm  instead  of  them. For*af- sec«V

*  ter  he  hath  spoken  much,  and at  last  concluded,

*  7Viat  the  body  of  Christ  is  there,  and  that  the  saints
4  must  needs  partake  thereof;  at  last  he  lands  in  these
4  words  :  "  But  if  it  be  asked  me,  how  it  is  ?  I  shall
44  not  be  ashamed  to  confess,  that  it  is  a  secret  too  high
"for  me  to  comprehend  in  my  spirit,  or  explain  in
■"  words."

17.  "  A  little  before,  in  the  same  chapter,*  he  ac-  *sec.ii-.
4  cuseth  the  schoolmen among  the  Papists,  In  that

4  they  neither  understand,  nor  explain  to  others,  how

4  Christ  is  in  the  eucharist :  which  shortly  after  he

4  confesseth  himself  he  cannot  do." How  justly  do

those  sayings  apply  to  such. But  why  dost  thoujudge  r^.^.

thy  brother  ?  Or  why  dost  thou  set  at  nought  thy  broth-  jti'i

er  ?  Thou  which  teachzst  another,  teachest  thou not  5,


29$  REFORMED CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  BY  P.  V.

chap, thyself? Thou  hypocrite  !  first  cast  out  the  beam  out
^^^^  oj  thine  own  eye  ;  and  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to

fiull  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye.
iTim.if  18.  Yet  these  reformers,  who  neither  understood
*' 7*  what  they  said,  nor  comprehended  the  things  where*
of  they  affirmed,  must  needs  kindle  the  flames  of  dis-
cord, foment  divisions,  seditions  and  tumults  among
the  multitude,  and  breathe  the  most  virulent  spirit  of
persecution  against  all  who  would  not  receive  their
contradictory  systems  of  senseless  jargon,  which
they  themselves  could  not  understand.

19. Calvin,  however,  effected  his  purposes  so  far,
^I'voi."  tnat  an  act  °f  uniformity  took  place,  by  which  the
iy. p. 257.  churches  of  Geneva  and  Zurich,  declared  their  agree-
ment concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  eucharist,
ibid  ». 20#  fy tne  industry of  Calvin,  the schools and
363,  *364,  churches  of  England  also,  became  the  oracles  of  Cat*
375.^ vinism,  and Geneva  was acknowledged  as  a  sister
church  ;  and  the  system  there  established  by  Cdlvin\
was  rendered  the  public  rule  of  faith in England^
without  any  change  in  the  form  of  their  episcopal
government. Thus  John  Calvin  became  the  prin-
cipal and  established  founder  of  the  Calvinistic  re-
formed churches,  in  opposition  to  those  of  Luther.
21.  The  flames  of  discord,  however,  between  the
Lutherans and Calvinists, were perpetuated with
greater  violence  and  fury  than  ever. They  laboured
hard  to  bring  about  peace  and  establish  a  union  ;  but
the  difficulty  was,  it  could  not  be  effected  upon  the
sordid and  antichristian principles of Diotrefihesy
who  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  and  therefore
peace  was  not  for  them.
JbH.  22.  In  the  year  1552,  West  filial,  pastor  at  Hamburg ,

|fote[kj  renewed  with  greater  vehemence  than  ever,  this  de-
plorable controversy  ;  he  was  an  obstinate  defender
of  the  opinions  of  Luther.  He  published  a  book
against  the  forementioned  act  of  uniformity,  which,
says  Maclaine,  "  breathes  the  most  virulent  spirit  of
*  persecution.'*
ibid.  23,  "  This  (says  Mosheim,)  engaged  Calvin  to  en-

&te[kO  '  ter  tlie  lists  w*th  Westflhali  whom  he  treated  with
i  as  little  lenity  and  forbearance,  as  the  rigid  Lutheran
«  had  shewed  towards  the  Helvetic  churches. — Calvin


P.  V.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST.  29£


CHAP,

V.


(  and  Westfihal  had  each  their  zealous  defenders  and
4  patrons  ;  hence  the  breach  widened,  the  spirits  were
i  heated,  and  the  flame  of  controversy  was  kindled
4  anew  with  violence  and  fury."  These  disputes
were  augmented,  and  tumults  excited  by  the  contro-
versy concerning  the  Decrees  of  God,  set  on  foot  by
Calvin,

24.  Is  it  possible,  that  such  violent,  furious  and
aspiring  men  could  have  any  relation  to  the  peaceable,
meek  and  humble  followers  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  Is  it
possible,  thai  such  ambitious  priests  as  were  perpet-
ually blowing  the  flames  of  discord,  and  stirring  up
strifes  and  contentions  among  each  other,  could  re-
form any  thing  for  the  better  ?  It  could  not  be.  From
their  own  confession,  princes,  earthly  politicians,  and
civil  rulers  were  perpetually  under  the  necessity  of
trying  to  put  a  stop  to  their  enormities.

25.  Augustus,  elector  of  Saxony,  and  John  Wil-  Ecci.HJs-
LIam,  duke  of  Saxe-  Weimar,  summoned the most  *°ry,J^
eminent  doctors  of  both the contending  parties  to
meet  at  Mienhurg,  in  the  year 1568,  that  it  might

be  seen  how  far  a  reconciliation  was  possible.  But
such  were  the  furious  and  antichristian  spirits  of
those  reforming  parties,  as  blasted  the  fruits  that
were  expected  from  this  conference.

26.  The  princes  now  undertook  another  method,  ibid. p.
and  ordered  a  Form  of  doctrine  to  be  composed,  in  i3?^34
order  to  terminate  the  controversies  which  divided

the  Lutheran  church,  and  to  preserve  that  church
against  the  opinions  of  the  Calvinists,  This  Form
was  begun  as  early  as  the  year  1569,  and  was  comple-
ted by  six  doctors,  about  seven  or  eight  years  after.

27.  In  the  mean time  Feucer,  the  son-in-law  of M-p-

330 331

Melancihon,  and  other  secret  Calvinists  in  Saxony,  *
were  aiming  to  abolish  the  doctrine  of  Luther,  con-
cerning the  eucharist,  and  the  fierson  of  Christ,  with
a  design  to  substitute  the  doctrine  of  Calvin  in  its
place,  and  published  their  opinions  in  the  year  1571,
which  produced  more  commotions  and  debates.

28.  Augustus,  elector  of  Saxony,  first  favoured &&
those  secret  Calvinists,  who were the disciples  of  jfj33.0;-.
Mtlancthon  ;  next  he  changed  sides,  and  committed  ly.  hzl
some  of  them  to  prison,  sent  others  into  banishment,  ^V^'3

Ee  2


300  REFORMED  CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED BY P.  V.


CHAP.
V.


and  engaged  others,  by  the  force  of  the  secular  arm,
to  change  their  sentiments.  Fencer,  on  account  of
denying  the  corfioral  presence  of  Christ  in  the  eucha-
rist,  was  cast  into  prison,  where  he  lay  in  confine-
ment ten  years,  accompanied  with  all  possible  cir-
cumstances of  severity.

29.  In  this  manner  the  princes  shook  off  the  igno-
minious yoke  of  tyranny,  according  to  the  former  ex-
hortations and  projects  of  Luther.  It  would  be  end-
less, and  indeed  unnecessary,  to  enumerate  all  the
cruelties  which  the  Protestants  practised  against  each
Ecci.His-  other. Severe laws and punishments,  violent tu-

tory,  vol.  :  ...  * .  , « «

i/.p.  :.4i,  mults  and  seditions,  imprisonments,  banishments,
3^'  and  death,  were  the  fruits  of  that  spirit  by  which  both
the  contending  parties  of  the  Reformation  were  ac-
tuated. Such  works  were  carried  on  in  Germany^
and  Switzerland,  where  the  Reformation  first  began,
and  also  in  England,  and  France,  as  will  appear  more
fully  hereafter.
ii>W.  30.  The  Form  of  doctrine  just  mentioned,  which

339.  was  intended  to  promote  peace,  when  finished  was
called  the  Form  of  Concord  ;  yet,  like  all  the  rest  of
Antichrist's  specious  and  deceitful  glosses,  the  title
was  found  to  be  false,  for  it  proved  to  be  a  Form  of
Discord,  and  a  source  of  new  tumults,  and  furnished
matter  for  the  most  violent  dissensions  and  contests,
even  among  those  who  instituted  it.

31.  This  form  of  concord,  which  condemned  the
sentiments  of  the  Calvinists,  was  received  by  the
greatest  part  of  the  Lutherans,  as  one  of  the  articles

&**• of  their  religion  ;  and  "  hence  (says  Moshtim,)  ari-
il' ' *  ses  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  all  schemes  of  recon-
i  ciliation  and  concord."

32.  Here  then  was  effected  that  fatal  division,  upon
which  the  reformed  churches  of  Luther  and  Calvin
were  established  in  opposition  to  each  other,  after
many  years  of  furious  contests  and  Antichristian
works  of  violence,  and  this  division  still  subsists  be-
tween these  two  protestant  parties,  and  each  still
claims  relation  to  its  first  founder.

•bid.  33.  The  form  of  concord,  falsely so called,  con-

•XMe[i'3  s*sts  °f  two  parts. "  In  the  first  (says  Maclaine,)  is

i  contained  a  system  of  doctrine  drawn  up  according


P.  V.  THE  WORKS  OF  ANTICHRIST.  301

4  to  the  fancy  of  the  six  doctors  "  who  had  received chap.
their  orders  from,  and  were  under  the  protection  of *
the  princes  ;  for  those  earthly  princes  were clothed  Seel)#278
with  the  dignity  of  ecclesiastical,  as  well  as  civil  su- ^  audrtl
firemacy,  according  to  the  established  principles  of
the  Reformation.

34.  "  In  the  second  is  exhibited  one  of  the  strongest
4  instances  of  that  persecuting  and  tyrannical  spirit,
4  which  the  Protestants  complained  of  in  the  church
4  of  Rome,  even  a  formal  condemnation  of  all  those
4  who  differed  from  these  six  doctors"

35.  "  This  condemnation  branded  with  the  denomi-
4  nation  of  heretics,  and  excluded  from  the  commu-
4  nion  of  the  church,  all  Christians,  of  all  nations,
4  who  refused  to :  subscribe  these  doctrines.  More
4  particularly,  in  Germany,  the  terrors  of  the  sword
4  were  solicited  against  these  pretended  heretics,  as
4  may  be  seen  in  the  famous  Testament  of  Brentius"

36.  A  modern  Protestant  Divine,  speaking  con-
cerning the  American  French  war,  and  referring  to  *>arie*
the  war  of  the  beast  against  the  Lamb,  spoken  of  in  voLm*^
the  book  of  Revelation, says,  "  Now who  can  tell,  ^?'  Se9?*
4  but  the  present  war  is  the  commencement  of  this

4  grand  decisive  conflict  between  the  Lamb  and  the
4  beast,  that  is,  between  the  Protestant  and  Po/iish
4  powers  ?*'

37.  The  same  divine,  in  a  succeeding  sermon  to
the  militia,  makes  the  following  remarkable  profes-
sion of  the  Protestant  religion  :  "  Follow  fieace  with
4  all  men,  is  one  of  the  principal  precepts  of  our  holy
4  religion.  And  the  great  Prince  of  Peace  has  sol-
4  emnly  pronounced,  Blessed  are  the  ficacc -makers"
But  what  follows  next  ?  The  sound  of  "  wars  and
4  fightings."  Plausible  reasonings.  "  The  God  of
4  peace  proclaims  u  To  arms  !"  Blessed  is  the  brave
4  soldier  ! — Cursed  is  he  that  keefieth  back  his  sword
4  fi%om  blood  I"

38.  This  may  serve  as  a  specimen  of  the  whole
Protestant  religion  from  beginning  to  end.  Alluring
names  and  titles,  Confessions  of  Faith,  and  forms  of
Concord  manifestly  false.  Specious  professions  of
the  religion  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  holy  religion
of  the  peaceable  Lamb  ;  all  contradicted  by  practice*
maintained  by  violence,  and  mingled  with  blood.


302  REFORMED CHURCHES  ESTABLISHED  3Y,  &C. P.  V.

chap. 39 Children  naturally  follow  the  example  of  their
.  parents  in  faith  and  practice. It  is  truly  painful  to  a

Davies feeling*  mind  to  see  the  contradictory  professions  of
voniS"18'  Protestant  divines,  so  called. While  on  one  page  of
414.  Ser.  their  works  you  see  their  plausible  professions  of  the
pure,  the  peaceable,  the  holy,  the  meek  and  merci-
ful  gospel  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  with  a  solemn  de-
claration that  bloodshed  is  not  the  pattern  for  imita-
tion under  the  gospel  j  on  the  next  you  may  see  the
ibid, m  important  duty of  shedding human  blood, upon
"  penally  of  failing  under  the  tremendous  curse  of
"  God." Such  is  the  deceitfulness  and  contradiction
of  a  false  religion.
"Doddr. 40.  The Protestants have stated,  and that very
xeuton  Just*Jr5  tnat  *ne  PaftaZ  fiowfr,  ~in  being  supported  by
©nProph  a  regular  clergy  and  secular  princes,  was,  according
Hist.'or'V'  to  prophetic  language,  a beast. Names and  titles
Redemp.  without  matters  of  fact  to  support  them,  are  shadows

jp.  431.  .  . ■  ,  rr

without  substance.

41.  It  was  the  beastly  and  tyrannical  conduct  of
Cortstantine  and  his  successors  which  supported  the
Catholic  power,  arising  out  of  the  commotions  of  the
peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and  tongues,,
that  constituted  the  beast  that  came  up  out  of  the  sea  :
and  it  was  the  cruelty  and  insatiable  thirst  for  blood,
that  constituted  the  same  a  scarlet  coloured  beast  un-
der  the  Papal  power.

42.  But  there  was  another  beast,  which  came  up
out  of  the  earth.  Then,  as  the  Papal  power  consti-
tuted a  beast,  in  being  supported  by  the  unnatural
combination  of  the  regular  clergy  and  secular  prin-
ces ;  so  the  Protestant  power  as  evidently  constituted
a  beast,  in  being  supported  by  the  like  unnatural
combination  of  secular  princes  and  a  regular  clergy.

43.  The  Reformation  was  divided  into  two  princi-
pal and  contending  powers,  each  professing  the  pure
and  peaceable  gospel  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  sup-
ported their  cause  by  shedding  blood  :  and  while  they
practised  imprisonments,  banishments,  and  putting
men  to  death  for  their  sentiments,  and  presented  the
terrors  of  the  sword  against  those  who  differed  from
them,  wherein  did  they  differ  from  the  Papists  ?

44.  And  what  then  was  the  Protestant  power,  bf


P.  V. PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY, &X.  303

which  they  established  their  divided  and  contentious  CI*£P*

churches,  but  a  fulfilment  of  that  prophecy,  And  I "

beheld  another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  earth  ;  and  rcv.x^
he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  as  a  drag-  n.ia*
an  ?  And  he  exercised  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast.


CHAPTER VI.

Particula)'  Changes  effected  by  the  Reformation,

THE  first  change  of  importance  which  the  Pro-
testant Reformers  established,  was  that  which
went  to  supply  the  office  of  the  pope  ;  without  which
the  Reformation  must  have  appeared  essentially  de-
ficient.

2.  Universal  experience  and  observation  had  con«*
firmed  the  necessity  of  a  common  head  of  influence.
A  body  without  a  head  is  a  monster  in  nature,  and  no
less  so  in  civil  or  religious  society.  The  titles,  offi-
ces, and  power  of  the  pope,  or  universal  father,  were
never  called  in  question  ;  but  it  was  professedly  for
the  perversion  of  the  sacred  office,  the  abuse  of  pow-
er, and  the  false  amplication  of  titles,  that  the  re-
formers protested  against,  and  separated  from  the
church  of  Rome.

3.  Doubtless  all  parties  agreed  that  the  church
ought  to  have  a  Lord  God,  a  God  on  earth,  a  judge
of  all  controversies,  &c.  but  the  Protestants  denied
that  this  dignity  belonged  to  the  bishop  of  Rome  ;  it
therefore  remained  for  them  to  point  out,  to  whom  it
did  belong.

4.  It  must  be  a  matter  of  the  utmost  importance,
for  a  nation  to  change  their  God.  The  high  preten-
sions of  the  Roman  pontiff,  as  the  vicc-gerent  of
Christ  on  earth,  were  not  to  be  supplanted  by  trifles.
He  had  too  long  bewitched  the  people,  giving  out
that  himself  was  some  great  one,  and  had  gained  too
deep  an  interest  in  the  faith  of  the  multitude,  to  be
rivalled,  at  once,  by  a  monk  or  a  friar.


304  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

CI*£P-  5.  The  powerful  and  superstitious  empire  had,  for
*  ages,  been  accustomed  to  receive  the  word  of  God,
as  they  supposed,  from  their  prime  bishop,  their  apos-
tolic  vicar,  by  whom  kings  reigned,  and  princes  de-
creed judgment ;  of  course,  when  his  authority  was
disannulled  by  men  of  an  inferior  rank,  it  behoved
them  to  furnish  the  people  with  the  true  judge  of  all
controversies,  the  true  God  on  earth,  who  should  de-
liver the  true  word  instead  of  the  old  false  one.

6.  And  what  could  the  natural  sagacity  of  man  de-
vise, so  suitable  for  the  purpose  as  those  sacred  and
adorable  words,  which  the  most  ancient  catholic
churches  received  from  the  pens  of  the  learned  Fa-
thers, and  which  Angustin  and  other  great  saints  de-
nominated the  Canon  of  Scripture  ?*
Kcci.Re-  7.  When  the  Reformation  commenced,  it  is  said,
jr^s?8*  "  the  ignorance  of  the  priests  was  extreme.  Num-
i  bers  could  not  read, — and  the  very  best  seldom  saw
1  the  bible. Many  doctors  of  the  Sar bonne  declared,

*  and  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,  that  though  they  were
i  above  fifty  years  of  age,  yet  they  had  never  known

*  what  a  New-Testament  was.*'

8.  "  Luther  never  saw  a  bible  till  after  he  was  twen-

*  ty-one  years  of  age,  and  had  taken  a  degree  in  arts.
■  Carlostadt  had  been  a  doctor  of  divinity  eight
4  years  before  he  read  the  scriptures."  Now  when
these  very  learned  and  sagacious  doctors  had  found
those  inestimable  records  of  truth,  it  is  not  easy  to
imagine  how  great  a  field  of  reformation  they  would
naturally  present  to  view,  in  their  conflicting  circum-
stances.

S.  And  what  could  there  be  within  the  compre-
hension of  human  reason*  that  might  so  justly  fill  the
papal  chair,  as  that which  both  Papists  and  Protes-

*  The  catholic  FatJiers  were  the  first  who  had  the  misguided  confidence  to
change,  and  corrupt,  and  curtail  the  Scriptures,  in  order  to  satisfy  their  sordid
thirst  tor  honour  and  dominion.  They  made  use  of  sHeh  of  the  sacred  Wri-
tings as  were  likely  to  support  them  in  their  carnal  reasonings  and  vain  phi-
losophy, and.  rejected  the  rest,  which  have  perished  under  their  usurped  do-
minion. The  Fathers  themselves  declare,  That  they  -wrote  not  what  they  found*
hut  xvfutt  they  understood— and  some  they  blotted  out,  fearing  lest  Heretics  should
have  abused  u. — ''Our  Fathers  also  declare,  (says  Barclay,)  That  whole  verses
were  taken  out  of  Mark,  because  of  the  Manicheans"  But  Luther  far  surpassed
the  zeal  and  confidence  of  his  fathers,  in  changing  and  corrupting  every  thing
sacred.  In  order  to  maintain  his  inconsistent  and  pernicious  solifidian  system
of  Imputed  Righteousness,  he  rejected  the  whole  epistle  of  James,'  and  culled  it
'•  an  epistle  of  sfraiv."  See  the  iicgin&iRg  «f  Luther's  Wil'ks*  Barclay's  Ap.p*
80,  «1.  Armi.  Mag.  Vol.  II.  />.  283.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION-.  30$

tants  called  the  word  of  God.  This  most  plausible  cha?.
rival  of  the  Roman  pontiff  did  not  long  elude  the  no-  _
tice  of  the  reformers  ;  therefore  their  appealing  to
a  general  council,  was  but  a  mere  evasion  to  serve
their  purpose,  for  a  time ;  their  grand  appeal  is,
more  emphatically,  said  to  have  been,  to  the  word  of
God.

10.  And  as  the  word  of  the  fiofie  had  been  hereto-
fore respected  as  the  infallible  word  of  God,  and  he
from  whom  this  word  came,  was  called  another  God
on  earth  ;  in  order  therefore  to  stand  upon  equal
ground  with  the  Papists,  the  Protestants  must  re-
ceive the  canon  of  scri/itufe  as  another  God  nfton  earthy
seeing  that  from  it  they  receive  the  infallible  word  of
God j  and  must  ascribe  to  their  Bible,  every  office  and
tide  which  the  Papists  ascribe  to  their  prime  bishop.

1 1.  The  scriptures  had  all  along  been  preserved  in
the  catholic  church,  according  to  the  edition  formed
in  the  Alexandrian  school,  and  never,  as  yet,  had
claimed  any  authority,  but  as  they  were  expounded
and  applied  by  those  who  were  called  church  guides  :
but  in  the  hands  of  the  reformers,  they  were  destined
to  a  place  and  a  name  above  every  name  in  heaven  or
upon  earth,  for  the  purpose  of  exalting  the  Protes-
tant priesthood  above  all  that  had  gone  before  them,
the  pope  himself  not  excepted.

12.  So  important  an  office  could  never  have  been
assigned  to  a  book,  which  had  for  hundreds  of  years
been  in  use,  and  at  the  discretion  of  men,  without  its
being  very  much  reformed  ;  hence  the  scriptures  had
to  undergo  a  new  translation,  which  Luther  commen-
ced in  the  year  1521,  and  being  afterwards  assisted  £??"?<!£
by  Aurogallus,  a  profane  author,  it  was  but  a  lutle  vi.p.»t,
while  before  all  the  Protestant  states  were  furnished

with  this  new  vicar  of  St.  Peter ,  this  infallible  judge
of  all  controversies.

13.  But  whether  a  translation  of  the  scriptures,  by
an  apostate  monk,  and  a  profane  writer,  could  claim
any  greater  authority  than  the  former  head  of  the
catholic  church,  any  person  of  sense  may  judge
from  the  following  assertions  of  bishop  Challoner.

14.  He  affirms  that,  "  the  first  Protestants  corrupt-  Ground*
*  ed  the  scripture,  in  all  their  translations,  to  make  it  %££*'


306  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.


chap. (  chime  with  their  errors," — that  "  they  are  forced  to


VI.


i  appeal  to  a  tribunal,  at  which  it  is  not  possible  that
<  any  sectary  should  ever  be  condemned. — Such  a  tri-
i  bunal  is  the  scripture,  interpreted,  not  by  church
c  guides,  but  by  every  one's  own  private  judgment ;
6  for  this  is  in  eifect  making  everyone's  private  judg-

*  ment  the  supreme  judge,  both  of  the  scriptures,  and
4  all  controversies  in  religion,  and  authorizing  him

*  to  prefer  his  own  whimsies  before  the  judgment  of
4  the  whole  church."

15.  Here  then,  stands  the  controversy  between  the
Papists  and  Protestants  ;  the  latter,  upon  the  author-
ity of  the  word  of  God,  as  they  say,  anathematize  the
whole  popish  hierarchy,  and  their  God  the  fiofie,  as
Antichrist,  and  the  mother  of  harlots,  and  every  thing
abominable  and  reprobate  ;  while  on  the  other  hand,
the  living  God  of  the  Papists,  with  his  old  Rhemish
and  Donvay  translations  of  the  scripture  in  his  hand,
rejects  the  reformers,  and  their  translation,  and  con-
demns them  and  their  whole  posterity,  as  an  endless
spawn  of  heretics.  And  who  is  to  be  the  infallible
judge  betvvreen  them  ?
Xeci.HXs-  l6-  ^ne  Protestants  sneer  at  the  infallibility  of  the
tory,voi.  pope,  when  they  find  two  of  these  earthly  Gods  con-
skyteo']  secrated  at  once,  by  two  jarring  factions,  or  when  pa-
5.  47k&  Pa*  decrees  stand  in  direct  opposition  to  each  other.
And  with  no  less  propriety  do  the  Papists  sneer  at  the
pretended  infallibility  of  the  Protestant  translation  of
the  scriptures,  when  they  see  this  infallible  judge
formed  and  re-formed  into  a  thousand  shapes,  with  as
many  supplies,  mistranslations,  notes,  references,
comments,  paraphrases,  and  other  appendages,  as
the  doctors,  with  their  natural  sagacity,  think  proper
to  put  into  it.

17.  But  more  especially  is  their  mirth  excited  to
see  the  Protestants  divided  into  a  thousand  parties,  no
two  of  them  perfectly  agreed,  ever  at  war  ;  and  yet
each  goes  into  the  combat  with  his  infallible  judge9
his  eternal  word  of  God,  in  his  hand,  or  in  his  pocket.

18.  It  will  be  proper  here  to  notice  some  of  the
first  exploits  of  this  infallible  judge,  or  what  they  are

•Scotch  pieaSed  to  call,  u  The  voice  of  our  only  God,"* — and
Art.  xx. see  how  he  arose  to  so  high  a  degree  ot  credit  among
the  kings  and  priests  of  the  reforming  party.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  307


CHAP.
VI.


19.  King-  Henry  VIII.  had  taken  to  wife,  Cath-
arine of  Arragon,  his  brother's  widow,  the  mother
of  Mary,  afterwards  queen  ;  but  growing  weary  of
so  aged  a  consort,  he  applied  to  the  pope  for  a  divorce,
which  the  reverend  father  refused  to  grant.  Henry
was  much  perplexed,  and  hearing  of  the  great  wis-
dom of  bishop  Cranmer,  he  sent  for  him  to  help  him
out  of  the  difficulty.

20.  Cranmer  had  luckily  become  acquainted  with
Luther's  word  of  God,  and  by  its  power,  in  the  hands
of  the  dextrous  bishop,  Henry  was  released  from
Catharine,  and  launched  into  a  sea  of  licentious
pleasure  ;  Cranmer  had  him  also  created  supreme
head  of  the  church  of  England,  and  himself  lord-
bishop  of  Canterbury.  Cranmer,  after  his  second
marriage,  had  the  honour  of  martyrdom  conferred
on  him  by  the  Protestants,  having  been  put  to  death
in  the  reign  of  queen  Mary,  by  the  Papists,  for  what
they  accounted  the  most  impious  acts  of  wickedness.

21.  Cranmer,  on  his  trial,  being  accused  of  perju-
ry, retorted  the  same  charge  upon  his  judge,  the  bish-
op of  Gloucester.  u  And  you,  for  your  part,  my
i  Lord,  are  perjured,  for  you  sit  judge  for  the  pope,
'  and  yet  you  did  receive  your  bishopric  from  the  king,
1  you  have  taken  an  oath  to  be  adversary  to  the  realm."
To  which  his  lord  and  his  judge  replied  :  "  You  are
i  the  cause  that  I  did  forsake  the  pope,  and  did  swear
i  that  he  ought  not  to  be  supreme  head,  and  gave  to

*  king  Henry  VIII.  that  he  ought  to  be,  and  this

*  you  made  me  do."

22.  Cranmer  retorted:  "  Yoh  report  me  ill,  and

1  say  not  the  truth,  and  I  will  prove  it  here  before  you  Mam*ro-
1  all.  The  truth  is,  that  my  predecessor,  arch-bish-  |£^'™J;
4  op  Warham  gave  the  supremacy  to  king  Henry  the

*  eighth,  and  said  that  he  ought  to  have  it  before  the
c  bishop  of  Rome,  and  that  God's  word  would  agree

*  therewith.  And  upon  the  same  was  there  sent
c  to  both  the  universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge,
c  to  know  what  the  word  of  God  would  do  touching
1  the  supremacy,  and  it  was  reasoned  upon,  and  ar-

*  gued  at  length.  So  at  the  last  both  the  universities
'  agreed,  and  set  to  their  seals,  and  sent  to  king  Hen-

F  f


OS  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  Bt  P.  V


CHAP.
VI.


c  ry  the  eighth,  to  the  court,  that  he  ought  to  be  su-
4  pre  me  head,  and  not  the  pope/'

23.  Thus  the  protestant  word  of  God  introduced
the  Reformation  into  England.  But  could  there  have
been  a  more  presumptuous  abuse  of  the  name  of  God
and  of  his  Word,  than  to  be  used  by  such  licentious
and  deceitful  workers,  as  a  pretext  for  carrying  on
their  political  intrigues  ?.  How  glaringly  do  they  ex-
pose their  deceitful  and  false  foundation,  when  they
acknowledge  that  they  had  to  send  to  their  universi-
ties, to  know  what  the  word  of  God  would  do  !

24.  And  after  they  had  "  reasoned  upon  it,  and  ar-
gued at  length,"  and  found  which  side  of  the  argu-
ment had  the  most  votes,  then  they  could  impiously
set  to  theiT  seal  what  the  word  of  God  would  do  !
This  is  an  exact  picture  of  the  whole  Protestant  gov-
ernment, from  first  to  last,  and  upon  this  plan  their
reformations  have  come  down,  with  an  uninterrupted
career,  to  the  present  day  :  their  word  of  God  still
allowing  them  to  do  just  what  they  please.

25.  Whoever  had  natural  sagacity  enough  to  pro-
pose a  subject,  and  influence  enough  to  engage  the
attention  of  the  priests,  after  their  ungodly  reasoning'
nfion  it ,  and  arguing  at  length,  could  presumptuous-
ly say,  they  had  found  what  the  word  of  God  would
do  in  that  matter  \  Hence  every  thing  sacred  has  been
distorted  into  the  last  degree  of  confusion,  by  their
reforming  power.  A  few  of  the  most  material  points,
however,  will  be  sufficient  to  show  the  absolute  de<-
ception  of  all  the  rest.


CHAPTER VII.

The  Subject  continued.


NOTHING  could  furnish  the  Protestant  doctors
with  a  more  popular  objection  against  the  pope,
than  his  universal  law  concerning  the  celibacy  of  the
clergy,  and  the  corruption  of  manners  whidh  flowed
from  that  papal  establishment.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  309

2.  Though  this  law  recognized  the  holy  example c^p-

of  Christ  Jesus  and  his  apostles,  and  was  thereby  in-

tended  to  check  the  licentiousness  of  the  priesthood,

and  to  serve  as  an  example  of  pious  restraint  to  the
extravagant  corruptions  of  the  multitude  ;  yet,  for
want  of  "the  real  spirit  of  Christ,  it  became  an  intoler-  *
able  yoke  of  bondage  ;  and  therefore,  to  get  clear  of
the  inconsistency  of  professing  to  follow  Christ,  and
not  doing  it,  the  reformers  renounced  every  institu-
tion that  had  the  least  appearance  of  that  evangelical
purity.

3.  And  after  reasoning  upon  it,  and  arguing  the
matter  at  length,  in  their  carnal  libertine  sense,  they
set  to  their  seal  that  it  was  more  consistent  to  follow
the  carnal  Corinthians  openly,  than  to  pretend  to  be
followers  of  St.  Paul,  while  living  in  the  gratifica-
tion of  their  lusts — In  short,  that  it  was  better  for
them  to  marry  than  to  burn  ;  and  this  has  been  their
universal  law  and  practice  ever  since,  in  opposition  to  3^^
the  decree  of  Gregory  and  their  mother  church*  des.

4.  In  this  debate,  the  Protestant  priesthood  charge  Art>-3*
their  ancestors,  the  popish  clergy,  with  the  vilest  hy-
pocrisy, and  maintain  that  they  are  the  very  ones  who
departed  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spir-
its and  doctrines  of  devils,  speaking  lies  in  hypocri-
sy, having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron,
forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from
meats  :  that  they  are  the  false  Christs  and  false  proph-
ets, the  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,  the  dogs  and  sor-
cerers, and whoremongers, and hypocritical liars,

and  all  the  base  characters  spoken of  in  the  New-  seot.pm
Testament :  In  fine,  that  the  Papal  hierarchy  is  the  ^^tsi
"  horrible  harlot,  the  kirk  malignant"

5.  On  the  other  hand,  the  popish  doctors,  who,
from  a  pretended  apostolic  succession,  antiquity  and
universal  authority,  claim  the  pre-eminence,  after
very  plausibly  denying  that  they  forbid  to  marry,  and
showing  that  marriage  is  held  in  the  highest  respect
by  the  church  of  Rome,  as  one  of  her  seven  sacra-
ments, "  a  conjunction  made  and  sanctified  by  God
himself,"  retort  back  upon  the  Reformers,  the  same
charge  of  afroetacy,  with  all  its  base  and  licentious
fruits.


310  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P. V.


CHAP.
VII.


6.  And  indeed,  unless  the  Protestants  can  prove
that  dogs  and  wolves  can  beget  harmless  sheep,  and
th«  true  Christ  spring  out  of  a  false  one,  and  chaste
daughters  from  a  mother  of  harlots,  they  have  no
reason  to  refuse  taking  to  themselves  every  base  and  »
abominable  character  which  they  have  given  the  po-
pish doctors,  by  whom  they  were  consecrated.

7.  Therefore  it  must  be  with  the  utmost  propriety,
even  upon  their  own  principles,  that  they  are  charg-
ed, by  the  Papists,  with  producing  an  endless  spawn
of  heresies.  Bishop  Taylor  himself  acknowledges
in  favour  of  the  church  of  Rome,  "  the  piety  and
the  austerity  of  their  religious  orders  of  men  and
women — The  single-life  of  their  priests  and  bishops.
All  which  (says  Chat/oner,)  the  good  natured  Refor-
mation has  laid  aside.'*

8.  How  far  the  first  reformers  renounce^  both
law  and  gospel,  and  every  obligation  professedly  held
sacred  by  their  mother  church,  in  relation  to  chastity,
and  how  wide  a  door  they  opened  for  licentiousness,
is  sufficiently  manifest  from  their  own  histories.

9.  When  Dr.  Carlostadt  broke  his  solemn  oath  of
perpetual  continence  which  he  had made  to  God,

Kcel.HJs-  what  kind  of  a  reforming  spirit  did  Luther  manifest  ?

ivfp/Joi*.  *n  h^s  lc^er  to  Amsdorff  he  very  plainly  shows  what

Note.[g.]  his  hypocritical  soul  was  most  intent  on  promoting,

as  appears  from  the  following  words  : "  The  nup-

*  tials of  Carlostadt  please me  wonderfully: I  have

*  known  the  girl ; The  Lord  strengthen  him  in  the  good

*  example  of  restraining  and  lessening  popish  lust.93*

10.  Here  this  excommunicated  monk,  let  loose
from  his  monastic  restraint,  expresses  his  wonder-
ful pleasure  at  the  good  example  of  his  companion.
And  what  was,  it  ?  Surely  not  the  good  example  of
Jesus  Christ,  nor  any  of  his  apostles,  for  they  knew
neither  girl  nor  woman  after  the  flesh.  But  the  re-
ligious pretext  was,  that  his  marriage  had  a  tendency
to  restrain  or  lessen  his  popish  lust ;  yet  how  grossly
did  he  err  even  in  this.

*  The  original  extract  of  this  letter,  in  Luther's  own  words,  runs  thus :  "  Ca*>-

*  lostadii  nuptiaj  mire  placent : novi  puellam  :  comfortet  euni  Dominus  in  bo-


depository  for  his  popish  lust,  by  which  means  he  could  dispose  ef  it  with  more
eoiiY£jft£istce  awl  less  remorse  of  conscience  than  formerly.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  3/  *

1 1.  Lust  is  lust,  and  under  whatever  ceremony  or c*J£f#
pretext  it  is  gratified, its  nature  is  not  altered,  re-  .
strained  nor  diminished  thereby  ;  nor  is  there  any  dif-
ference between  the Papist  and  the Protestant,  the
monk  and  the  married  bishop,  as  to  their  motive,  or

first  moving  cause  ;  neither  have  they  but  one  exam-
ple to  follow,  and  that  is  the  example  of  their  first
father  Adam.

12.  But  as  Carlostadt  put  off  his  veil  of  popish
hypocrisy,  and  made  a  regular  and  bold  provision  fo:a
the  works  of  the  flesh,  it  was  counted  a  good  exam-
ple, and  Luther  himself  soon  after  followed  it.  lie
married  a  nun  whose  name  was  Catharine  a  Bora,
whereby  both  of  them  broke  their  solemn  vows  of
continency  which  they  had  made  before  God.

13.  Well  said  the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Malachi  :

J  will  come  near  to  you  to  judgment  ;  and  I  will  be  a  Mal>aW*.
swift  witness  against  the  sorcerers,  and  against  the
adulterers*)  and  against  false  swearers.  Thus  Anti-
christ began  his  work  by  Simon  and  other  sorcerers,
continued  it  by  an  endless  train  of  adulterers,  and  it
remained  to  be  completed  by  perjured  persons  or
false  swearers.

14.  Bishop  Challoner,  after  stating Luther's  e;en-  Ground?

of  Gut'i

eral  character,  very  properly  adds  :  a  But what  was  ©ocp.^

4  the  most  scandalous  in  a  pretended  restorer  of  the

i  purity  of  religion,  was  his  marrying  a  nun,  after

i  the  most  solemn  vows,  by  which  both he  and  she

4  had  consecrated  themselves  to  God,  in  the  state  of

4  perpetual  continency. In  which  he  was  imitated  by

<  a  great  part  of  the  first  reformed  ministers."

15.  "  Even  his  most  devoted  followers  (says  Dr.  Hist,  of

<  Robertson,),  thought  this  step  indecent,  at  a  time  voLuTk
*  when  his  country  was  involved  in  so  many  calami-  340,

i  ties  ;  while  his  enemies  never  mentioned  it  with
i  any  softer  appellation  than  that  of  incestuous  or
i  profane."

^  16.  Some  might  try  to  excuse  Luther,  by  pleading
his  former  ignorance,  while  under  the  reign  of  su-
perstition ;  however,  that  can  furnish  but  a  mean  ex-
cuse, while  they  represent  him  as  a  man  of  such  un-
common parts.  Had  he  been  forced  to  take  such  a
vow,  it  might  have  materially  altered  the  case,  but

Ff2


312  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

Cvn. ^e  ^rdc^  done  ^  deliberately,  from  his  own  free  choice,

,  and  that  from  the  most  solemn  considerations.

Hist,  of  \T*  "  rFhe  death  of  a  companion  killed  by  lightning
voM^T  i  at  *]*s  s^e  *n  a  vi°^ent  thunder-storm,  made  such  an
i»a,  '  4  impression  on  his  mind,  as  co-operated  with  his  na-
4  tural  temper,  in  inducing  him  to  retire  into  a  con-
4  vent  of  Augustinian  friars,  where,  without  suffer-
4  ing  the  entreaties  of  his  parents  to  divert  him  from.
4  what  he  thought  his  duty  to  God,  he  assumed  the
4  habit  of  that  order." So  says  Br.  Robertson.

18.  And  is  a  popish  vow  or  solemn  oath  so  far  infe-
rior to  the  oath  of  a  Protestant,  that,  for  the  gratifica-
tion of  Protestant  lust,  it  can  be  broken  with  impuni-
ty ?  Where  is  that  court  of  justice  on  earth  that  would
make  such  a  distinction,  and  would  not  deem  it  per-
jury in  one  as  much  as  another,  to  violate  what  they
had  solemnly  confirmed  by  an  oath  ?  or  that  would
not,  forever  after,  reject  the  testimony  of  such  a  false
swearer  ?

19.  Yet  this  same  perjured  Luther  was  not  only
believed  as  a  translator  of  the  sacred  scriptures,  but
in  the  most  momentous  points  of  doctrine,  his  creeds
were  adopted  as  rules  of  faith  ;  and  he  was  also  prac-
tically followed  in  his  example  of  rejecting  continen-
cy  and  true  gospel  purity  as  the  doctrine  of  devils,
and  of  reforming  the  old  works  of  the  flesh  under
the  false  pretext  of  an  ordinance  of  God,  and  that
without  regarding  even  so  much  as  the  restrictions
which  the  law  of  Moses  had  laid  on  the  corrupt  and
beastly  passions  of  man.

20.  "  John  Calvin  was  originally  designed  for  the
♦m-i/voi.  church,  and  had  actually  obtained  a  benefice  ;"  of
N«tS'[aO  course  he  must  have  come  under  the  common  oath

of  continency  ;  yet  it  seems  that  he  was  not  subject  to
Xcv.  >xi.  the  law  which  saith  concerning  the  high  fir test  among
33jI4, his  brethren,  that  a  widow  shall  he  not  take,  but  he

shall  take  a  -virgin  of  his  own  fieojile  to  wife.
Ecci. Be-  21.  Nor  was  he  subject  to  the  example  of  Jesus
Tl^  Christ,  nor  to  his  own  solemn  oath  ;  for  "  he  marri-
ed the  widow  of  an  anabafitist  at  Strasburg."  And
thus,  according  to  the  law,  he  profaned  his  seed  in
the  highest  degree,  by  mixing  with  a  people  who
trere  condemned,  both  by  Papists  and  Protestants,  as


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  SIS

heretics,  and  counted  by  Luther  himself,  no  better  c^f*
than  mad  dogs.  __

22.  Theodore  Beza,  Calvin's  companion  and  succes-
sor, contributed  not  a  little  to  this  part  of  the  Refor-
mation, both  by  his  practice,  and  his  writings.  Ro-
binson says  that,  thirteen  years  after  his  conversion,
"  he  published  a  collection  of  Latin  poems,  the  most

i  lascivious  that  can  be  imagined. There  is  one  epi-  Ecci.Ro
i  gram  which,  in  licentiousness,  surpasses  any  thing  JfSjJ*
*  that  the  most  unguarded  debauchees  have  ever  ven-
i  tured  to  offer  to  the  public  eye.*

23.  From  such  reforming  priests  we  may  descend
to  the  princes,  and  see  how  far  their  popish  lusts
"were  restrained  or  lessened  by  their  reformed  gospel.
It  has  been  observed  that,  Henry  the  eighth  obtained
a  divorce  from  Catharine,  his  brother's  old  widow,
whereupon  he  married  Anne  Boleyn,  a  woman  of  re-
spectable family  and  connexions.

24.  Her he  afterwards  beheaded  under  pretence  Hume%
.  of  adultery,  though  there appears no  proof  of  her  H^y

guilt.f  Next  he  married  Jane  Seymour,  who  died  in
child  bed.  Again,  he  married  Anne  of  Cleves,  whom.
he  also  divorced,  and  married  Katharine  Heward—
She  was  beheaded.  And  his  sixth  and  last  wife  was
Katharine  Parr.

25.  Such  were  the  fruits  of  that  good  example
which  the  first  reformers  set  their  followers,  and
which  was  sanctioned  by  their  universities,  who  set
to  their  seal  that  this  same  Henry  should  be  the  su-
preme head  of  the  Church,  instead  of  the  Pofie  ;  and
such  was  the  example  of  lawless  lust  and  butchery
which  this  Protestant  supreme  head  openly  manifest-
ed, which  perhaps  was  never  equalled  by  any  who
supported  that  title  before  him.

*  Beza's  Candida  was  not  lib  wife,  for  his  wife  was  never  with  child,  and  there
are  some  verses  on  the  pregnancy  of  Candida  in  the  poems.— Robinson's  EccL
Researches,  p.  344.

t  Henry  had  been  for  some  time  enamoured  with  Jane  Seymour,  and  his  mai-
rying  her  the  next  day  after  the  execution  of  his  queen,  is  considered  as  a  pre-
sumptive evidence,  not  only  of  the  queea's  innocence,  but  of  tita  cause  whkrX
l&d  to  her  ejtewitwu.


14  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V

CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Subject  continued.


CKAP.
VIII.


IN  tracing  the  effects  of  the  Reformation  in  Eng-
land, we  find  bishop  Cranmer  making  a  conspicu-
ous appearance.  This  ambitious  primate,  instead  of
promoting  purity  and  truth,  began  his  reforming  ca-
reer by  paving  the  way  for  a  flood  of  licentiousness,
injustice  and  corruption.  When  his  crimes  are  con-
sidered, we  need  not  wonder  that  the  Papists  accused
him  with  treason  and  perjury,  in  giving  the  supre-
macy to  such  a  profane  and  wicked  prince  as  Henry
VIII.  and  for  his  hypocritical  and  treacherous  con-
duct in  other  respects.

2.  This  great  reformer,  on  his  trial,  was  charged
by  Martin,  a  popish  doctor,  that,  "  being  yet  free,  and

*  before  he  entered  into  holy  orders,  he  married  one

*  Joan  Black  or  Brown,  of  Cambridge.  That  he  mar-
1  ried  there  one  Joan,  that  he  granted. — That  after
'  the  death  of  the  aforesaid  wife,  he  entered  into
'  holy  orders,  and  after  that  was  made  archbishop  by
i  the  pope."

3.  u  That  he,  being  in  holy  orders,  married  anoth-
i  er  woman  as  his  second  wife,  named  Anne,  and  so
i  was  twice  married.— That  in  the  time  of  king  Hen-
'  ry  VIII.  he  kept  the  said  wife  secretly,  and  had

*  children  by  her.*  Hereto  he  also  granted,  affirm-
1  ing  that  it  was  better  for  him  to  have  his  own,  than
i  to  do  like  other  priests,  holding  and  keeping  other


mens  wives."


4.  Martin.  "  Did  you  swear  obedience  to  the
i  see  of  Rome  ?*'  Cranmer.  "  Indeed  I  did  once
i  swear  unto  the  same.  Martin.  "  Yea,  that  you
'  did  twice,  as  appeareth  from  records  and  writings
i  here  ready  to  be shewed. At  your  consecration

*  you  took  two  solemn  oaths  for  your  due  obedience

*  to  be  given  to  the  see  of  Rome,  to  become  a  true
i  preacher  or  pastor  of  his  flock  ; yet,  contrary  to

*  The  criminality  of  this  charge  is  founded  on  the  violation  of  his  oath  of  conr
tineney,  which  he  had  taken  as  an  ecclesiastic  :  but  this  reforminig  archbishop
manifested  on  this  as  well  as  on  other  occasions,  ibat  the  violation  of  a  ?olemn
•ath  was  but  a  small  mattei  with  hw-


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  315

6  your  oath  and  allegiance,  for  unity,  you  have  sowed  c™£f'

f  discord  ;  for  chastity, marriage  and  adultery  ;  for  m

4  obedience,  contention  ;  and  for  faith,  you  have  been

*  the  author  of  all  mischief."

5.  What  doctrine  taught  you  when  you  condemned

*  Lambert^  the  sacramentary,  in  the  king's  presence

*  at  Whitehall  ?"  Cranmer.  "  I  maintained  then  the
4  Papist  doctrine."  Martin.  "  Then  from  a  Luthe-
4  ran  you  became  a  Zuinglian — and  for  the  same  he-
4  resy,  you  will  help  to  burn  Lambert ,  the  sacramen-
4  tary,  which  you  now  call  the  Catholic  faith  and  God's
4  word."

6.  From  these  short  hints  it  is  easy  to  perceive,
who  bore  the  highest  marks  of  Antichrist,  and  most
evidently  filled  the  character  of  those  entire  apos-
tates from  the  faith  and  practice  of  Christ,  spoken
of  in  the  scriptures.  Therefore,  Martin^  with  the  high*
est  Catholic  authority,  addresses  Cranmer  as  follows.

7.  "  Christ  foretold  there  should  come  against  his
4  church,  ravening  wolves,  and  false  apostles.  But
4  how  shall  we  know  them  ?  Why,  Christ  teach eth
4  us  saying,  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.  What
4  are  their  fruits  ?  St.  Paul  declarelh,  after  the  flesh
4  they  walk  in  concupiscence,  and  uncleanness,  they
4  contemn  power."

8.  "  Again  :  in  the  latter  days  there  shall  be  perii-

*  ous  times.  Then  shall  there  be  men  loving  them-
4  selves,  covetous,  proud,  disobedient  to  parents,
<  treason-workers. Whether  these  be  not  the  fruits

*  of  your  gospel,  I  refer  to  this  audience  ;  whether
4  the  said  gospel  began  not  with  perjury,  proceeded
4  with  adultery,  and  ended  in  conspiracy."

9.  So  much  then  have  the  Protestants  gained,  by
endeavouring  to  prove  that  the  Papists  forbid  to  mar-
ry, in  order'that  they  might  be  released  from  every
obligation  to  chastity,  and  take  full  liberty  in  their  in-
cestuous and  beastly  works  :  so  that,  in  every  respect,
they  evidently  reformed  from  bad  to  worse.

10.  Likewise  their  charging  the  pope  with  forbid-
ding to  marry  in  order  to  excuse  themselves,  will
be  but weakly  supported,  if  we  consider  that  their
translation  of  1  Tim.  iv.  1,  2,  3.  is,  according  to  their  ^Je^
own  critics,  much  to  be  disputed,*  Loc'  w


316  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

™ii* 1 1.  But  admitting  their  translation  to  be  never  so
correct,  it  is  a  question  whether  the  Papists,  from  a


*See comparison  of  their  doctrines  with  those  of  the  Pro-
?°^ivii*  testants  on  tnat  subject,  have  not  the  greatest  right  to
scor.xi.  charge  the  latter  with  forbidding  to  marry  according
to  the  apostle's  use  of  the  term.*

12.  It  is  most  certain  that  the  people  of  God  al-
ways did  consider  marriage  to  be  something  very  dif-
ferent from  what  the  lost  and  corrupt  nations  of  the
earth  conceived  it  to  be  ;  then,  from  such  a  plain
distinction,  the  question  would  naturally  arise,  wheth-
er those  apostates  in  the  latter  times  would  forbid
what  was  called  marriage  by  the  people  of  God,  or
that  which  went  under  that  name  among  the  nations
of  the  earth  ;  and  no  one  need  to  doubt  that  the  apos-
tle meant  they  would  forbid  marriage  in  the  true
spiritual  sense,  and  not  in  the  sense  of  the  world  :
for  the  world  loveth  its  own,  and  apostates  love  the
same.

13.  Although  it  is  evident  enough  that  the  papal
hierarchy  did,  by  law,  oblige  their  clergy  to  abstain

from  marriage,  according  to  the  sense  in  which  the
Gentiles  consider  marriage,  which  is  a  plain  evi-
dence that  their  institution  of  celibacy  was  a  .spurious
institution  ;  yet  there  is  not  the  smallest  proof  that
they  forbade  marriage,  as  it  was  instituted  in  the  in-
nocent state  of  man,  nor  (according  to  their  creeds)
did  they  forbid  it  as  it  was  considered  by  the  follow-
ers of  Christ,  relative  to  their  spiritual  union  in  the
Lord,  and  with  one  another.  This  is  manifest  from
the  Grounds  of  the  Catholic  Doctrine,  as  follows.

14.  "  Q.  When  was  matrimony  instituted  ?  Ans.
Ground*  «  jj-  was  first  instituted  by  God  Almighty  in  Paradise,
p.  23. *  between  our  first  parents  ;  and  this  institution  was

i  confirmed  by  Christ  in  the  new  law.  Matt.  xix.  4.
<  5,  6.  where  he  concludes,  What  God  hath  joined
4  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder."

15.  "  Q.  How  do  you  prove  that  matrimony  is  a
i  sacrament  ?  Ans.  Because  it  is  a  conjunction  made
*  and  sanctified  by  God  himself,  and  not  to  be  dissolv-
6  edby  any  power  of  man,  as  being  a  sacred  sign,  or
i  mysterious  representation  of  the  indissoluble  union
4  of  Christ  and  his  church. Eph.  y. 31, 32, For


P.  V*  THE  REFORMATION".  317

4  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother,  chap.

*  and  shall  be  joined  to  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  ^

4  one  flesh. This  is  a  great  mystery  :  (ftvmptov  a  sa-
4  cra?nent")  &c.

16.  Now  in  the  Protestant  articles  of  faith  it  is  ex-
pressly asserted  to  the  contrary. "  Matrimony,  Sec.  xxxixA*.
4  are  not  to  be  counted  for  sacraments — for  that  they  tlcles*

4  have  not  any  visible  sign  or  ceremony  ordained  of
4  God." With  this the  Protestant confessions  uni-
versally agree. They  scoff  at  the  popish  sacrament
of  marriage,  and  call  it  "  a  bastard  sacrament,"  and  Nation.
affirm  that  marriage  is  no  sacrament  or  sacred  rite  at  nan°ve"
all,  but  equally  pertains  to  all  sorts  of  people  who  are  £akb*f
able  with  judgment  to  give  their  consent.

17.  The  Jews  bible  or  book  was  very  different  from.
a  book  that  was  common  among  all  sorts  of  people,
and  as  different  was  their  law  of  marriage,  from  mar*.
riage  so  called  among  the  profane  Gentiles.  The
same  distinction  will  hold  good  between  that  marriage
which  the  followers  of  Christ  called  a  mystery,  and
that  civil  contract  which  was  common  among  all  sorts.

18.  Then  if  the  Protestants  did,  in  any  sense,  im-
pede, hinder,  prohibit  or  forbid  such  marriage  as
God  instituted  in  Paradise,  or  prescribed  by  the  min-
istry of  angels  to  the  Jews,  or  that  innocent,  pure,
and  chaste  union  in  Christ,  which  implies  a  state  of
continency,  and  is  spiritually  called  a  marriage,  or
being  married  in  the  Lord,  then  it  evidently  follows,
that  they  are  the  ones  who  forbid  to  marry,  in  a  more
important  sense  than  the  Papists.

19.  As  far  as  both  the  Pa/iists  and  Protestants  were
unanimous  in  persecuting  those  who  bore  a  practical
testimony  concerning  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  the
spiritual  union  of  the  saints,  so  far  they  jointly  fill
up  the  character  of  those  apostates  of  the  latter  times
spoken  of  by  the  apostle.

20.  It  is  evident  from  the  scriptures  of  truth  that
this  spiritual  union  in  Christ,  and  in  the  church,
is  the  last  marriage  that  was  sanctioned  of  God  ;  and
under  that  name  it  was  held  as  the  most  sacred  in-
stitution, in  support  of  which  thousands  in  the  Prim-
itive Church  were  willing  to  be  tortured  to  death  ;
and  as  it  was  the  last  order  or  kind  of  marriage  which


SIS  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  ETFECTED  BY P.  V.

Cvm/ was  sectioned  by  Almighty  God?  it  was  this  that  was
,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  forbidden  by  the  apostates of

later  times.
^L  21.  The Geneva and Scotch  confession of  faith

Geneva  . .  .

conf.  p.  pointedly  maintains,  that  "  A  politic  magistrate  be-
21,  22. i  jongS  to  the  church  ; — to  whom  (say  they  J  it  ap-
pertained  to root  out  all doctrine of  devils  and
men,  (among  which  are  ranked) free-will  vows  of
single  life,  Sec. — The  punishment  whereof,  although
God  oftentimes  deferreth  in  this  life,  yet,  after  the
general  resurrection,  when  our  souls  and  bodies  rise
again  to  immortality,  they  shall  be  damned  to  un-
quenchable fire."
ist Book 22-  Among  other  things  which  they  say  are  to  be
soc^ist ut*erty  suppressed,  and  abolished,  are,  vows  of  chas-
tity, and  difference  of  meats  for  conscience  sake,  and
affirm  that  "  All  maintainers of  such  abominations,
4  should  be  punished  with  the  civil  sword."

23,  This  was  the  faith  established  at  Geneva,  and
received  and  approved  by  the  church  of  Scotland,  in
the  beginning  of  the  Reformation.  Could  there  pos-
sibly be  a  more  pointed  forbidding  of  the  sacred  mys-
tery of  being  joined  to  the  Lord  in  one  spirit  ?  A*id
further,  what  they  forbade,  they  were  able  to  execute
*  church-  by  their  politic  magistrate,  so  that  their  kirks*  and
£*•  kingdoms  should  be  wholly  purged,  as  they  express

it — "  from  all  idolaters  and  heretics,  as  Papists,  An-
&£!&'. "  abaptists,  and such like limbs  of  Antichrist,"  as
would  not  receive  their  reformed  doctrine  of  matri-
mony, which  was  common  to  all  sorts.
Common 2i-  To  this  Protestant  confession  of  faith  may  be
*J*yer added  their  public  form  of  prayer. "  Almighty  God,
s  from  whom  all  power  is  derived,  we  humbly  be-
4  seech  thee  to  bless  thy  servant  the  Zorrf-Lieutenant
4  of  this  kingdom, and grant  that  he  may  use  the
4  sword,  which  our Sovereign (or  dread  sovereign}
4  Lord,  the  A'zV^hath  committed  into  his  hand  for  the
4  protection  of  the  true religion  established  amongst
4  us."

25.  This  true  religion,  as  it  is  called,  most  posi-
tively forbids  every  obligation  to  chastity,  and  all  dis-
tinction between  clean  and  unclean  beasts,  under  the
terrors  of  the  sword,  and  all pains,  civil  and  ecclesi-


4.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION,  319

astical,  as  will  hereafter  more  fully  appear. And  ™av,

what  these  reformers  established  under  the  name  of

marriage,  in  the  place  of  all  that  had  been  called  sa-
cred, is  manifest  from  their  own  confessions.

26.  In  that  part  of  their  creed  which  respects  mar-
riage, the  name  of  God  is  not  even  mentioned,  (ex-
cept in  the  negative,)  and  it  is  only  when  they  speak
of  divorce,  that  the  stolen  words  of  scripture,  or  the
name  of  God  are  used  ;  which  is  a  plain  evidence
that  they  consider  marriage  as  a  thing  common,  and

not  as  a  sacred  institution.  This  is  manifest  in  their  *seeAm,
latest  creeds,*  which  shows  that  their  faith  has  been  £°"£p^
uniform,  on  that  subject,  from  the  beginning.  ch.xxi*,

27.  u  Marriage  (say  they)  is  to  be  between  one
man  and  one  woman/'  No  account  here  of  that  being
dead  wherein  we  were  held,  or  of  becoming  dead  to
the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ ;  that  we  might  be  mar-
ried to  another,  even  to  him  that  was  raised  from  the
dead,  that  we  might  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.

28.  Again  they  say,  "  Marriage  was  ordained  for
4  the  mutual  help  of  husband  and  wife  ;  for  the  in-
\  crease  of  mankind  with  a  legitimate  issue,  and  of
4  the  church  with  an  holy  seed  ;  and  for  preventing

*  of  uncleanness. It  is  lawful  for  all  sorts  of  people
'  to  marry,  Sec." — u  Bishops,  priests  and  deacons  are  *»»■>&■
1  not  commanded  by  God's  law  either  to  vow  the  es-
4  tate  of  single  life, or to  abstain  from marriage  ;

*  therefore  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  marry  at  their  own

*  discretion."

29.  If  by  marriage,  they  mean  that  outward  sign
or  ceremony,  which  they  say  was  never  ordained  of
God,  but  which  they  invented  to  ratify  the  contract
of  man  and  wife,  then  marriage,  in  their  account,  is
but  a  civil  rite,  with  which  the  true  followers  of
Christ  never  had  any  thing  to  do.

30.  And  this  will  appear  most  evidently  to  be  the
fact,  if  we  advert  to  the  form  of  marriage, "  ratified,

rehearsed,  allowed,  approved,  and  executed  with-
i  in  the  realm,  by  the  assent  and  consent  of  [their]
6  Sovereign Lady Elizabeth,  by  the grace of

<  God,  of  England,  France  and  Ireland, Queen,  de-

<  fender  of  the  faith,  Sec."

31.  In  this  lascivious  ceremony,  after  the  parties


tides.


320  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V*


©HAP.
VIII.


Ch.  x>iv.


have  repeated  much  senseless  jargon  after  the  priest,
the  man  shall  put  a  ring  upon  the  fourth  finger  of
the  woman's  left  hand,  and  holding  it  there,  and
taught  by  the  priest,  shall  say,  "  With  this  ring  I
i  thee  wed,  with  my  body  I  thee  worship,  and  with
f  all  my  worldly  goods  I  thee  endow  :  In  the  name  of
4  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
4  Amen"

32.  The  late  American  Presbyterian  Confession
says,  "  Such  as  profess  the  true  reformed  religion
4  should  not  marry  with  infidels,  Papists,  or  other
4  idolaters.'*  An  idolater  is  one  who  worships  an
idol,  a  false  god,  or  a  plurality  of  gods.  And  are  the
reformed  Protestants  no  idolaters  ?  Do  they  worship
one  God  ?  Yea  truly,  and  the  above  form  of  matri-
mony, without  either  veil  or  fig-leaf,  shows  who  it
is. — -|CpWoman — yrith  my  body  I  thee  moor  ship  I

33.  "  The  godly  (they  say)  should  not  be  unequal*
44  ly  yoked  with  such  as  maintain  damnable  heresies/"
Then,  according  to  their  creed,  it  behoves  the  wor-
shipper, forsooth,  to  worship  the  Lord  his  God  with
all  his  heart,  soul,  strength  and  might ;  and  to  this
kind  of  worship  all  kinds  of  people  enjoy  an  equal
right,

34.  They  talk  of  solemnizing  holy  marriage  ;  but
so  solemn  a  profanation  of  words,  and  so  glaring  a
prostitution  of  common  sense,  never  was  presented  to
die  human  ear,  through  all  the  superstition  and  idol-
atry of  Pagan  and  popish  priests  ;  and  therefore  this
finishing  work  of  Antichrist  not  only  forbade  the
pure  spiritual  marriage  of  the  saints,but  remitted  and
disannulled  every  restraint  that  had  ever  been  laid  on
the  carnal  lust  of  man,  and  thereby  corrupted  the
sacred  institution  to  its  very  source.

35.  The  very  idea  of  solemnizing  the  matrimonial
contract,  implies  that  the  protestants  considered  it  in
itself,  void  of  any  sacred  or  spiritual  sanction  ;  which

w»'ti»o  is  plain  from  their  own  words.  "  We  judge  it  expe-
«?hl£  <  c^ent  (say  l-h*ey)  that  marriage  be  solemnized  by  a
4  lawful  minister  of  the  word, — that  he  may  pray
4  for  a  blessing  upon  them,— entreat  the  Lord  to  own
r*  see  i  anj  accept  them  in  Christ  [*]  who  are  to  be  joined
it.  ' 4  in  the  honourable  estate  of  marriage,  the  covenant


P.  V.  THE  INFORMATION.  321

4  of  their  God. — That  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  to  c*iaf<
4  accompany his own  ordinance with  his  blessing, L ..  .
4  particularly with  the  comforts and  fruits  of  mar-
4  riage."

35.  Hence  they  pretend  that  their  motive  in  mar-
rying is,  uto  increase  the  church  with  an  holy  seed."
But  their  confession,  in  the  postcript  of  their  creed,
is,  that  they  "  beget  children  and  keep  families,  mere-
ly for  the  world  and  the  flesh  :"  and  the  same  confes-
sion says,  that  their  masters  of  families,  moreover,
44  educate  their  children  for  the  world  and  the  flesh—
44  betraying  the  souls  of  their  children  to  the  Devil."

37.  Lastly,  the  end  of  their  holy  marriage,  they

• it  /*  •  •  r  i  i i  u Westm.

say,  is  "  for  preventing  ot  uncleanness  :  and  may  be  c<mf.  &
4  performed  at  any  time  except  on  a  day  of  public  hu-  £™;r-
4  miliation.  And  we  advise  that  it  be  not  on  the
4  Lord's  day."  Which  is  a  further  evidence  that  they
conceive  nothing  either  sacred  or  solemn  in  it.  Then
it  only  remains  to  enquire,  wrhat  uncleanness  it  is  in-
stituted to  prevent  ?

38.  The  reformers  have  not  left  in  the  dark,  what
they  mean  by  uncleanness  in  general ;  it  is  the  same
that  Luther  called  popish  lust,  or  those  lawless  grati-
fications of  the  flesh  which  have  no  kind  of  respect
to  a  posterity.  And  does  the  Protestant  marriage
prevent  all  such  uncleanness  ?

39.  Does  that  solemn  ordinance  (as  they  call  it)
bind  them  to  such  times  and  seasons  as  nature  pre-
scribes for  conceiving  seed  ?  If  it  does  not,  have  they
sufficient  authority  to  count  that  cleanness,  which  both
Jaw  and  gospel  call  uncleanness  ?  Are  the  decrees
of  their  most  dread  sovereign,  or  of  their  sovereign
Lady,  and  all  their  church  guides  sufficient  to  forbid
and  disannul  that  sacred  light  of  heaven,  which  ex-
cludes from  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  every  lustful  and
lawless  propensity  ?  Is  there  no  uncleanness  commit-
ted between  the  Protestant  man  and  wife  ?

40.  The  f.ict  is,  the  Reformation  opened  the  very
last  and  most  effectual  door  for  the  unrestrained  and
full  gratification  of  every  unclean,  and  worse  than
brutal  lust,  both  in  man  and  woman,  under  the  name
of  a  holy  ordinance,  by  making  the  woman  a  proper

J  object  of  worship,  or  setting  her  up,  openly  and  avow**
cdly,  above  all  that  is  truly  called  God.


522  TAltTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V-

chap. 41  #  Therefore, according  to  the  Protestant  faith

"Y.LII»

and  practice,  every  sacred  rule  of  chastity,  every  de-
gree of  light,  tending  to  continency,  or  gospel  puri-
ty, has  been  anathematized  out  of  countenance,  and
driven  from  their  kirks  and  realms  with  the  most  fu-
rious zeal.

42.  They  have  enjoin ed  it  upon  all,  as  a  solemn
duty  to  marry,  in  their  way,  and  have  established
marriage  in  a  way  which  indulges  the  licentious  pros-
pect of  living  in  the  full  gratification  of  their  lusts,
with  full  liberty  to  defile  and  abuse  each  other  in  the
most  scandalous,  incestuous  and  debauching  manner,
without  any  respect  to  times  or  seasons  :  not  even  re-
garding the  dictates  of  modesty  and  prudence,  and
much  less  those  interposing  commands  of  heaven,
\yhich,  under  the  law  of  Moses,  exempted  the  wo-
man from  every  such  lawless  abuse,  while  in  a  state
of  pregtianty,  and  throughout  the  days  of  her  sepa-
ration.
»tkq.b.  43-  Then  what  have  the  Protestants  to  charge  up-
&•  on  the  Papists  ?  Was  it  not  they  themselves  that  in-

creased unto  more  ungodliness,  and  whose  words
have  eaten  out  the  very  marrow  of  the  gospel,  as
doth  a  canker ;  among  whom  is  Hymenius  or  Hymen>
i.  e.  the  defender  cf  nuptials ,  and  Philetus^  the  car-
nal lover  ?

44.  And  who  can  be  so  justly  charged  with  depart-
ing or  standing  off  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  se-
ducing spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils,  speaking  lies
in  hypocrisy,  Sec.  as  those  very  false  swearers,  those
perjured  apostates,  who  not  only  renounced  the  pro-
fession of  chastity  and  continence,  but  publicly  de*
claimed  against  that  innocent  manner  of  life  ?

45.  In  the  heat  of  their  reformed  lust,  they  went
on  pulling  down  and  destroying  those  buildings,  which
both  they,  and  their  respected  forefathers,  and  good
old  mother  church  had  deemed  most  sacred,  and  which
had  been  professedly  erected,  and,  in  their  way,  sol-
emnly dedicated  for  the  accommodation  of  such  as
chose  to  adopt  the  profession  of  continency.  And
lastly,  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  character,  they
have  forbidden  holy  marriage  in  truth,  and  out  of
manifest  contempt  to  every  thing  sacred,  have  con*


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  323

temned  continency,  and  given  the  title  of  My  mar-  c*^;
riage  to  their  lascivious  and  vain  ceremony.  .

46.  These  charges  cannot  apply  to  any  civil  gov-
ernment, in  itself  considered  ;  for  the  members  of
such  never  were,  nor  ever  can  be  forbidden  to  marry
in  their  way,  by  the  followers  of  Christ ;  nor  have
such  ever  prohibited  the  marriage  and  spiritual  union
of  the  saints.  It  is,  therefore,  that  apostate  priest-
hood who  corrupted  civil  government  with  their  hy-
pocritical and  obscene  forms  of  religion,  to  whom
the  charge  of  forbidding  marriage  properly  belongs.

47.  Nor  is  every  individual,  who  has  been  called
t>y  the  name  of  Protestant,  to  be  ranked  with  those
hypocritical  liars,  who  set  out  to  sap  the  very  founda-
tion of  truth.  Amidst  the  darkness  of  establish-
ed systems,  there  have  been  men  of  candour  and  dis-
cernment, who  were  willing  to  give  the  scriptures
their  due  weight  on  the  side  of  gospel  holiness.  To
instance  this,  a  few  sentences  from  their  writings
may  be  sufficient.

48.  "  Mortify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,  waber-
4  is  (says  V/ilberforce,)  the  Christian  precept  ;  a  soft  ^JJf  ?J,
4  luxurious  course  of  habitual  indulgence,  is  the  prac-  p.  n%

4  tice  of  the  bulk  of  modern  Christians  ;  and  that con-
4  stant  moderation)  that  wholesome  discipline  of  re-
4  straint  and  self  denial,  which  are  requisite  to  prevent
4  the  unperceived  encroachments  of  the  inferior  appe-
4  tites,  seem  altogether  disused  as  the  exploded  aus-
4  terities  of  monkish  superstition."

49.  Again,  says  John  Wesley,  "  There  are  eunuchs  JJ^ey0n
4  who  have made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the kingdom  Mat.  xix,
4  of  heaven's  sake— ,-Happy  they  !  who  have abstained  "
4  from  marriage  (though  without  condemning  or  des-
4  pising  it)  that  they  might  walk  more  closely  with
4  God  ! He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let him receive
<  ?7 — This  gracious  command  [for  such  it  is  unques-
4  tionably,  since to say,  such  a  man  may  live  single,
4  is  saying  nothing. Who  ever  doubted  this  ?]  is  not
4  designed  for  all  men  ;  but only  for  those  few  who
4  are  able  to  receive  it. O  let  these  recieve  it  joyful -

Gg2


20*


24  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

CHAPTER  IX.

The  Subject  continued.


F


Bodr.  in


*bn.  Di-


G?*p-  TOASTING  is  another  article  of  the  Reformation.
The  Protestants  charge  the  Papists  with  com-
manding to  abstain  from  meats,  although  they  them-
selves have  been  as  positive  in  their  commands  of  that
kind  as  the  Papists  ;  but  the  word  commanding  in
1  Tim.  iv.  S — is  put  into  the  text  by  the  translators.

2.  Black-well,  and  after him Doddridge ,  observes,
Lei"" ' that  "  the  original  words  contain  one  of  the boldest

4  ellipses  in  the  whole  New-Testament,  where  a
'  word  is  to  be  understood,  contrary  to  that  which  is

*  before  expressed.''  But  admitting  the  propriety  of
such  a  bold  ellipsis,  they  can  make  nothing*  out  of  it
to  condemn  the  Papists  that  will  not  apply  to  them-

gMtaryT  selves. "  To  observe  days  of  fasting  (say  they)  we
eh.  xiv. i  judge  both  scriptural and  rational,"  and  "  a  reli~

*  gious  fast  requires  total  abstinence  from  food."

3.  Then  if  a  temporary  abstinence  from  meat  or
common  food  is  meant,  the  charge  falls  upon  them
equally  with  the  Papists.  If  they  make  it  signify  a
perpetual  abstinence,  either  from  meat,  or  other  com-
mon food,  they  will  find  no  people  on  earth  to  whom
it  will  apply  ;  then  it  must  follow  that  the  abstinence
respected  something  else  :  and  what  should  it  more
likely  be  than  that  from  which  the  followers  of  Christ
univerally  abstained  ?

4.  Upon  this  principle,  that  text  of  scripture  would
read  with  propriety,  and  in harmony with others,

20-29?'  without  the  bold  ellipsis.  "  But  that  we  write  unto
i  them,  that  they  abstain  from  pollutions  of  idols,  and
1  fornication,  and  things  strangled,  and  blood. — For  it

<  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  us — That
i  Thea. *  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  idols,  Sec. For  this

c  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification,  that  ye

<  should  abstain  from  fornication."

iJtet.JL  5.  "  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  strangers
and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts. — Forbidding
to  marry,  to  abstain  from  meats,  See."  Here  the
forbidding  of  these  hypocrites  is  directly  contrasted


iv.  5.


11.


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATIO***.  325

with  what  Christ  Jesus  and  his  apostles  commanded,  c**£p*
or  enjoined.  — m

6.  The  doctrine  and  practice  of  the  saints,  was  to
marry  only  in  the  Lord,  or  in  the  spirit, — to  abstain
from  fleshly  lusts — from  fornication,  and  from  meats
offered  to  idols  :  these  were  inseparably  connected  ;
and  both  were  inseparably  forbidden  by  the  mena-
cing tone  of  the  Protestant  perjured  reformers,  and
their  politic  magistrates.

7.  No  life  of  continency  was  tolerated  ;  no  absti-
nence  from  fleshly  lusts  permitted,  nor  any  suffered

in  the  realm,  that  would  not  offer  their  meats,*  yea  ,  *  ^
all  their  worldly  goods  to  that  insatiable  idol,  which  icor.^i.
they  set  up  as  an  object  of  bodily  worship.  Here
was  the  forbidding  to  abstain  from  meats  which,  they
say,  God  created  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving
of  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth  :  but  they
neither  knew  nor  believed  the  truth  nor  used  the  crea-
ture of  God  according  to  its  original  end  when  it  was
very  good.

8.  The  meat  which  Christ  Jesus  spake  of  eating,
was  that  of  abstaining  from  his  own  will,  and  doing
the  will  of  God. "  I  came  not  to  do  mine  own  will,"

are  his  words— "  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  John**,

32  34

of— My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me.,y  vi.'ss."
And  the  same  that  was  his  meat,  became  also  the
meat  of  his  followers.  Their  meat  was  to  take  up
their  cross,  and  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  and  do  the
will  of  Christ  Jesus,  as  he  did  the  will  of  his  Father.
This  was  the  true  meat,  which  God  had  appointed  to
be  received  with  thanksgiving  by  them  that  believed
and  knew  the  truth.

9.  But  on  the  contrary,  the  meats  which  satisfied
the licentious appetites of  the  Gentiles,  were the
gratification  of  their  fleshly lusts. Hence said  the
apostle  to the carnal  Corinthians,  " Meats  for  the  lCor.vi
belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats  :  but  God  shall  destroy  1S-
both  it  and  them. [Or  more  properly,  Fleshly  lusts

for  their  pleasure,  and  their  pleasure  for fleshly  lusts  :*
but  God  shall  destroy  all  these  things.] For  the  body

*  Whoever  compares  this  sense  with  what  follows  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,
may  easily  perceive  that  it  is  the  true  sense  of  the  apostle  :  besides  it  is  incon-
sistent with  the  nature  of  God  to  destroy  tiiat  which  is  good— Destruction  is  d*>
fcounced  oaly  against  that  which  in  its  very  nature  is  evil.


>26  PARTICULAR  CHANGES-EFFECTED  BY  P.  V


°  ?x P*  '*  notfor  fornication,  but  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
for  the  body."

10.  Therefore  the  Protestants,  in  refusing  nothing
that  tended  to  gratify  their  fleshly  lusts,  rejected  the
cross  of  Christ  altogether,  and  pretended  to  sanctify
by  their  word  of  God  and  their  prayers  that  which  in
its  very  core  was  evil  and  corrupt ;  which  was  only
an  addition  to  their  hypocrisy,  and  gave  the  creature
of  God  the  utmost  occasion  to  groan  under  bondage,
and  in  the  utmost  extremity  to  travail  for  redemption
from  this  deepest  sink  of  corruption.

11.  Nor  have  the  Protestants  any  reason  to  reflect
on  the  Papists,  about  their  high  and  superstitious  ti-
tles conferred  on  the  bishop  of  Rome  ;  for  the  re-
formers left  nothing  behind  on  that  score.  Besides
the  common  titles  that  appear  in  their  creeds  and
confessions,  such  as  Lord — Sovereign  Lord — Dread
Sovereign  Lord,  they  need  but  look  into  their  bibles,
to  find,  a  title  as  presumptuous  as  ever  the  pope  sus-
tained. To  the  Most  High  and  Mighty  Prince
James,  &c. Higher  than  the  Moat  High  cannot  be.

12.  "The  queen's  majesty  hath  the  chief  power
c  in  this  realm  of  England,  and  other  her  dominions*
c  unto  whom  the  chief  government  of  all  estates  of
*  the  realm,  whether  they  be  ecclesiastical  or  civil
4  doth  appertain.  "  This  is  a  part  of  their  reformed
creed,  which  included  England,  France  and  Ireland  ;
and  had  the  bishop  of  Rome  ever  greater  authority  in
his  dominions  ?

13.  The  Protestants  glory  over  the  Papists,  in  be-
ing able  to  bring  their  dark  abominations  to  light  ;  but
surely  they  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  exhibit  those  ve-
ry same,  and  greater  abominations,  in  the  open  light,
by  their  own  practice.

14.  When  the  protestant  supremacy  was  establish-
ed, and  the  law  respecting  marriage  reformed,  there
remained  but  one  point  more  to  reform,  that  was  of
any  great  consequence  to  the  priesthood  ;  and  that
was,  as  their first  book  of  discipline expresses it,  that

*Book « the whole  rents  of  the  Kirk,  abused  in papistry,

piine}cii-  '  shall  be  referred  again  to  the  Kirk — That  tithes,  the

^  6  uppermost  cloth,  the  clerk  mail,  the  pasch-orTe rings,

4  tithe-ale  ;  all  friaries,  nunneries,  chantries,  chaplain-


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  327

*  ries,  annual  rents,  Sec.  be  reduced  to  the  help  of  the c7x.p*

*  Kirk — the deacons  disponing them  to  the  minis- m

4  try — And  moreover  that,  merchants  and  craftsmen

*  in  Burg,  should  contribute  to  the  support of  the
<  Kirk."

15.  Thus  they  turned  the  whole  current  of  reve-
nue, which,  as  they  say,  had  been  lavished  upon  a
profuse  pontiff,  and  the  various  monastic  orders,  into
a  regular  channel  of  salary  to  support  the  luxury  of
the  new  kirk-guides.

16.  As  to  the  great  change  which  the  reformed
priesthood  boast  of,  in  respect  to  supplying  the  com-
mon people  with  bibles,  this  great  exploit  loses
much  of  its  importance  when  we  consider  that  it  was
only  that  sense  or  meaning  which  they  fixed  for  the
scriptures,  and  established  by  civil  authority,  that  the
people  were  allowed  to  adopt.

17.  Into  this  Catholic  sense  of  the  scriptures,  they
were  either  drawn  by  eloquence,  driven  by  civil  au-
thority, or  frighted  by  the  hideous  din  of  eternal  de-
struction against  free-thinkers,  free-willers,  and  all
such  reprobate  heretics  as  would  dare  to  think  differ-'
ently  from  the  established  system.

18.  Their  charging  the  Papists,  with  idolatry,  such
as  the  worship  of  images,  relicks,  &x.  was  but  a  fur-
ther mark  of  their  hypocrisy,  while  they  only  reform-
ed the  practice  of  idolatry  into  another  shape. They

say,  "  The  true  God  may  not  be  worshipped  accord-  cSSSck.
ing  to  the  imaginations  or  devices  of  men — under  any  xxi.
■visible  representation ,"  yet  they  will  use  consecrated  cat.q%2
water,  wine  and  bread  in  their  worship,  and  affirm  that
Christ,  (who  is  true  God,)  is  thereby re/irese?ited,
sealed  and  applied  to  believers.

19.  And  what  have  they  but  the  imaginations  and
devices  of  men,  for  their  songs,  their  long  sermons,
and  pharisaical  prayers  ?  They  acknowledge  that
Origen  was  the  first  who  introduced  the  practice  of
sermonizing  upon  the  scriptures  ;  that  the  oldest
psalmody  they  have,  was  introduced  into  the  church,
in  the  reign  of  Constantine  ;  and  their  own  scriptures
prove, 'that  their  standing  and  praying,  to  be  seen  of
men,  is  the  undeniable  mark  of  a  hypocrite  ;  and  yet
such  are  the  principle  parts  of  their  reformed  worship*


328  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

C*ixP*  2G#  ^nc*  wnat  are  their  steeple  houses  but  Pagan
*  temples  reformed,  and  ornamented  with  pictures,
pulpits,  bells,  and  instruments  of  musick  ?  And  can
any  thing  manifest  greater  blindness  than  to  call  this
work,  built  by  their  own  hands,  the  Church,  and
Christ's  Church,ov  St.  Paul's  Church,  and  St.  Peter'*
Church  ?  Can  Christ  or  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  have
any  fellowship  or  union  with  such  churches  ?

2 1 .  Protestants  pretend  to  abhor  relics,  and  images  ;
but  what  mean  their  costly  marbles,  and  epitaphs  that
ornament  their  burying  grounds,  and  the  images  of
their  great  ones,  with  which  their  coin,  their  furni-
ture, and  their  houses  have  been  replete  ?

22.  They  abhor  popish  titles:  but  after  forming
and  re-forming,  from  the  most  mighty,  down  the  long
list  of  Lords,  Knights,  Barons,  Counts  and  Earls,
with  their  corresponding  priestly  titles,  it  remains,
even  to  this  day,  that  the  most  humble  grade  of  the
clergy,  must  be  distinguished  by  the  title  of  Rever-
end, or  Reverend  Sir,  and  the  very  lowest  class  of
their  church  members,  must  be  all  gentlemen  and  la-
dies ;  each  a  Sir,  a  Mr.  a  Madam,  or  a  Miss.

23.  And  if  the  more  enterprising  among  the  Re-
formers, occasionally  introduce  the  use  of  common
names,  or  scriptural-titles,  and  teach  the  same  to
others,  the  lesson  is  soon  forgotten,  and  their  natural
love  of  worldly  honour  insensibly  leads  them  back  to
the  vain  ceremony  of  pompous  titles  and  flattering
compliments  :  so  that  whatever  the  world  is,  the  same
in  substance  is  the  Protestant  Reformed  Church,
with  only  the  superior  advantages  of  a  false  religion,
and  the  most  refined  arts  of  deception.

t>  24.  Virtue  never  needed  the  varnish  of  supersti-
tious ceremonies,  and  atoning  rites.  It  was  always
vice  and  corruption  that  required  long  prayers,  and
sermons,  and  sacx*aments,  and  outward  shows  of  sanc-
tity, to  change  their  native  appearance,  and  ward  off
deserved  condemnation.  Therefore  the  great  work
of  reforming  these  outward  things,  was  a  strong  evi-
dence of  the  increasing  depravity  of  the  reformers.

25.  It  is  written,  The  testimony  of  two  men  is  true.
The  reformed  church  beareth  witness  of  herself,  and
her  mother  also  beareth  witness  of  her,  and  they  both.


P.  V*  THE  REFORMATION.  329

agree  in  one — That  with  all  her  outward  changes,  C^£P"

and  reformations,  she  only  promoted  a  greater  in- 'mmmm

crease  of  wickedness  :  and  now,  in  the  mouth  of  two
or  three  witnesses,  shall  this  fact  be  established.

26.  In  the  Grounds  of  the  Catholic  Doctrine,*  it  is  *p.  5*,
testified,  that  "  The  fruits  of  the  Reformation  were

4  such  as  could  not  spring  from  a  good  tree.  1.  An
4  innumerable  spawn  of  heresies.  2.  Endless  dissen-
sions. 3.  A  perpetual  itch  of  changing,  and  incon-
4  stancy  in  their  doctrine. — In  fine,  a  visible  change  of
4  manners  for  the  worse,  as  many  of  their  own  writers
4  freely  acknowledge.  And  old  Erasmus  long  ago
4  objected  to  them,  Efi.  ad  vultur.  where  he  defies
4  them  to  shew  him  one  who  had  been  reclaimed  from
4  vice  by  going  over  to  their  religion  ;  and  he  declares
4  he  never  yet  met  with  one  who  did  not  seem  chang-
4  ed  for  the  worse."

27.  With  regard  to  the  Lutherans,  Dr.  Mosheim,  a.  Eccl.His*
member  of  that  branch  of  the  Protestant  church,  .^  vd.
states,  that,  "  the  terror  of  excommunication  lost  its  283.'

4  force  ;  and  ecclesiastical  discipline  was  reduced  to
4  such  a  shadow,  that,  in  most  places,  there  are  scarce-
4  ly  any  remains,  any  traces  of  it  to  be  seen  at  this
4  day."

28.  "  This  change  may  be, attributed  partly  to  the
4  corrupt  propensities  of  mankind,  who  are  naturally
4  desirous  of  destroying  the  influence  of  every  institu-
4  tion  that  is  designed  to  curb  their  licentious  pas-
4  sions. — This  relaxation  of  ecclesiastical  discipline
4  (adds  the  writer)  removed  one  of  the  most  power-
4  ful  restraints  upon  iniquity."

29.  44  When  this  is  duly  considered,  it  will  not  ap-
4  pear  surprising  that  the  manners  of  the  Lutherans
4  are  so  remarkably  depraved,  and  that  in  a  church
4  that  is  deprived  almost  of  all  authority  and  disci-
4  pline,  multitudes  affront  the  public  by  their  auda-
4  cious  irregularities,  and  transgress  with  a  frontlets
4  impudence,  through  the  prospect  of  impunity."  So
far  concerning  the  reformed  church  of  Luther.

30.  What  respects  the  Calvinistic  church  may  be
seen  at  large  in  the  Westminster  Confession  of
Faith,  under  the  title  of,  A  solemn  confession  of  pub-
lic sins,  from  which  the  following  is  but  a  small  ex-
tract.


330  PARTICULAR  CHANGES  EFFECTED  BY  P.  V.

chai\  31.  "  We  [i.  e.  Reformed  Calvinists  or  Presbyteri-
*  i  ani]  noblemen,  barons,  gentlemen,  burgesses,  min-
6  isters  of  the  gospel,  and  commons  of  all  sorts — do
6  humbly  and  sincerely,  as  in  his  sight,  who  is  the
'  searcher  of  hearts,  acknowledge  the  many  sins  and
c  great  transgressions  of  the  land.  We  have  done
'  wickedly,  our  kings,  our  princes,  our  nobles,  our
4  judges,  our  officers,  our  teachers  and  our  people  ;
6  — And  have  broken  ail  the  articles  of  that  Solemn
f  League  and  Covenant  which  we  swore  before  God,
c  angels  and  men."

32.  "  We  have  been  so  far  from  endeavouring  the

*  extirpation  of  profaneness,  and  what  is  contrary  to  the
<  power  of  godliness,  that  profanity  hath  been  much

*  winked  at,  and  profane  persons  much  countenanced,

*  and  many  times  employed,  until  iniquity  and  ungod-

*  liness  hath  gone  over  the  face  of  the  land  as  a  flood.

33.  "  Nay,  even  those  that  had  been  looked  upon
'  as  incendiaries,  and  upon  whom  the  Lord  had  set

*  marks  of  desperate  malignancy,  falsehood  and  de-

*  ceit,  were  brought  in,  as  fit  to  manage  public  af-

*  fairs. — Nay  many  of  the  nobility,  gentry,  and  bur-
4  rows,  who  should  have  been  examples  of  godliness

*  and  sober  walking  unto  others,  have  been  ring-lead-
6  ers  of  excess  and  rioting.

34.  "  Albeit  we  be  the  Lord's  people,  yet  to  this
c  day  we  have  not  made  it  our  study  that  judicatories
\  should  consist  of,  and  places  of  power  and  trust  be

*  filled  with  men  of  a  blameless  and  christian  conver-
4  sation  :  by  which  it  hath  come  to  pass,  that  judica-

*  tories  have  been  the  seats  of  injustice  and  iniquity.

35.  "  It  were  impossible  to  reckon  up  all  the  abom-

*  inations  that  are  in  the  land  ;  but  the  blaspheming
6  of  the  name  of  God,  swearing  by  the  creatures,
4  profaning  of  the  Lord's  day,  uncleanness,  drunken-
c  ness,  excess  and  rioting,  vanity  of  apparel,  lying
4  and  deceit,  railing  and  cursing,  arbitrary  and  uncon-
4  trouled  oppression,  and  grinding  the  faces  of  the

*  poor  by  landlords,  and  others  in  place  and  power,
i  are  become  ordinary  and  common  sins  : — There  be
i  many  who  heretofore  have  dealt  deceitfully  with  the
i  Lord  in  swearing  falsely  by  his  name."

36.  Then,  out  of  thine  o%vn  mouth  will  I  judge  thee,


P.  V.  THE  REFORMATION.  331

thou  wicked  church  !  Where  is  that  mark  of  false-  cha*.
hearted  and  rotten  apostates,  in  all  the New-Testa- * a
ment,  that  is  not  comprehended  in  the  foregoing  cat-
alogue of  crimes,  publicly  confessedly these  pre-
tended reformers  ?

37.  Their  universal  crime  is  perjury,  the  mark  of
the  beast  in  the  right  hand  lifted  up  in  confirmation
of  a  false  oath  ;  and  what  remained  but  for  them  to
fill  up  the  measure  of  their  cup  with  desperate  ?na-
lignity,  falsehood  and  deceit,  uncleanness,  drunken-
ness, excess  and  rioting,  and  such  abominations  a*
it  were  impossible  to  reckon  up  ?

38.  Thus,  in  the  fatal  schism  between  the  civil  and
ecclesiastical  powers,  the  beast,  who  was  bred  in  that
corrupt  and  earthly  mass,  congested  together  by
priests  and  politicians  under  the  name  of  a  Christian
hierarchy,  comes  up  to  open  view,  and  cannot  be  hid.
He  declares  his  own  progeny,  for  he  sficaks  like  a
Dragon,  and  leaves  no  mark  of  Rome  Pagan,  which  he
does  not  deseribe  in  himself.

39.  Whence  proceeded  such  a  flood  of  ungodli-
ness ?  was  it  not  from  those  judicatories  that  were
seats  of  injustice  and  iniquity?  And  whence  pro-
ceeded such  universal  uncleanness  ?  was  it  not  from
their  prohibiting  chastity,  and  destroying  every  trace
of  continence  and  true  virtue  t  And  whence  their
excess  and  riot  ?  was  it  not  from  their  destroying  ev-
ery distinction  of  meats  which,  for  conscience  sake,  had
been  made  ?  and  have  they  not  thus  encouraged  all
ranks,  rulers  and  ruled,  priests  and  people,  to  serve
their  own  bellies,  instead  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?

40.  From  all  which,  it  is  the  most  manifest  judg-
ment of  truth,  that  the  reformers  and  the  reformed
did,  in  the  fullest  perfection,  fill  up  those  abomina-
ble characters  of  Antichrist,  described  by  Christ  and
his  apostles  ;  who  profess  to  know  God,  but  in  works
deny  him,  being  abominable,  and  disobedient,  and  unto  Titus-..
every  good  work  re/irobate.  16-

■  41.  And  it  is  equally  manifest  that  these  same  Cal-
vinists,  who  were  counted  the  most  perfect  reformer*,
who  called  themselves  God's  elect,  and  reprobated  as
vessels  of  wrath  to  eternal  damnation,  Anabaptists  and
all  others,  who  were  not  of  the  same Catholic  kirk,

Hh


332  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OP  P.  V\


CHAP
X.


are,  upon  their  own  pointed  confession, unto every

good  work  reprobate.

42.  By  professing  to  be  the  followers  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  observers  of  the  word  of  God,  they  most
evidently  speak  lies  in  hypocrisy,  when  in  reality  they

2Tim.m.  ^^  lovers  of  their  own  selves,  coveteous,  boasters,
proud,  blasphemers,  truce-breakers,  incontinent,  fierce,
despisers  of  those  that  are  good,  traitors,  heady,
high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of
God  ;  having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  pow-
er thereof  Thus  the  second  beast,  under  his  lamb-
like form,  exercised  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast  be-
fore him.


CHAPTER  X.

The  Persecuting  Spirit  of  the Protestant  Reformers


H


OWEVER  abominable  the  doctrine  of  compul-
sion, and  however  corrupt  the  source  from
whence  this  principle  flowed  ;  yet  the  Protestant  re-
formers retained  it  in  its  fullest  extent.  This  is  man-
ifest in  their  delivering  over  people  of  different
sentiments  to  be  oppressed  and  punished  by  the  civil
powers.

2.  The  persecutions  of  the  Priscillianists,  by  the
ecclesiastics  of  Spain,  in  the  fourth  century,  were  at
that  time,  regarded  with  abhorance  by  the  bishops  of
Gaul  and  Italy,  "  for  Christians  [i.  e.  Catholics]  had
4  not  yet  learned,  (says  Moshcim,)  that  giving  over  he-
4  retics  to  be  punished  by  the  magistrates,  was  either
4  an  act  of  piety  or  justice."
Bed  H?e~  3-  "  ^° :  (saXs  his  translator,)  this  abominable  doc-
toiy,yoi.  '  trine  was  reserved  for  those  times,  when  religion
4  was  to  become  an  instrument  of  despotism,  or  a  pre-
4  text  for  the  exercise  of  malevolence,  vengeance,  and
4  pride.'5

4.  And  it  is  evident  from  all  the  histories  of  these
reforming  times,  as  well  as  from  their  own  avowed
creeds,  that  the  protestant  Reformers  not  only  retain-


*  i»  416.


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  33;


CHAP.
X.


edthis  doctrine  in  principle,  but  confirmed  it  by  their

practice  ; being actuated by the same persecut-

ing  spirit  of  vengeance  which  had  influenced  the  un-
godly ecclesiastics,  who  were  raving  mad  with  ortho-
doxy under  the  Papal  power.

5.  The  Papal  hierarchy  being  in  a  great  measure
broken  in  pieces  by  means  of  the  Reformation,  and
the  reforming  parties  being  themselves  broken  in  pie-
ces by  their  own  divisions  and  perpetual  dissensions,
it  was  not  possible  for  the  latter  to  extend  the  limits
of  their  tyranny  so  far  as  the  former,  except  whe&
they  all  united.

6.  But  the  persecuting  spirit  of  the  Protestants  was
uniformly  one  and  the  same  with  that  which  had  pro-
duced the  Spanish  Court  of  Inquisition,  and  fell  short
of  its  cruelties  only  in  extent.  The  same  spirit  of  An-
tichrist which  actuated  the  Papists,  actuated  also  the
Protestants.

7.  Robinson  saith  very  justly,  "  Dominion  over  con-  Kcci.Re*
1  science  is  Antichrist  any  where.  At  Rome  Anti-  J^J!^
i  christ  is  of  age,  a  sovereign,  and  wears  a  crown  :  at

4  the  meanest  meeting  house,  if  the  same  kind  ofty-
'ranny  be,  Antichrist  is  a  beggar's  baby  at  the  breast:
*  but  as  conscience  every  where  is  a  throne  of  God,  so
'an  usurper  of  his  throne  is  Antichrist  any  where."

8.  "  Whatever  deranges  the  equality  of  Christians,  j>,  ui,
i  is  the  spirit  of  Antichrist,  all  the  rest  is  nothing  but

i  the  carcase."  Call  it  truth,  or  fiiety,  or  virtue,  or
the  gosfie!,  or  whatever  you  please,  the  whole  stands
in  direct opposition  to the  true Christ,  so  long  as

I"  that  persecuting  spirit  of  tyranny  remains  connected
with  it.
9.  It  was  but  a  little  while  after  the  Reformation
commenced,  that  this  beastly  work  of  persecution  was
set  on  foot,  in  order  to  crush  the  rising  sects  in  their
infancy,  to  bow  down  every  effort  on  the  side  of  free-
dom, and  to  extirpate  every  reputed  heretic  who  dar-
ed to  oppose  the  reformed  plans  of  corrupt  ambition,
and  more  refined  cruelties.  And  who  more  fit  to  set
the  example  than  the  first  reformer,  Martin  Lu-
ther ?  In  him  the  spirit  of  Antichrist  found  an  able
advocate.

10.  His  most  favourable  historian, Dr.  Moshiem,


.334  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V.


CHAP.
X.


speaking  of  the  bitterness  and  animosity  of  the  first  re-
formers, says,  "Luther  himself  appears  at  the  head
iccLHis.  '  oi  this  sanguine  tribe,  whom  he  far  surpassed  in  m-
ir'p.'aoi  '  vectives  and  abuse,  treating  his  adversaries  with  the
'  most  brutal  asperity,  and  sparing  neither rank  nor
ibid. i  condition." Dr.  Maclaint  speaks  of  his  "  obstinate,
asStelr.]  i*tubb°rn  and  violent  temper,  rendering  him  unfit  for

'  healing  divisions.'5
Hist,  or 1 3«  ^r*  Robertson  says,  "  His  confidence  that  his
v«m&?  '  0wn  °Pin*°ils  were  well  founded,  approached  to  ar-
311. '  ;  rogance  ;  his  courage  in  asserting  them,  to  rashness  ;
'  his  firmness  in  adhering  to  them,  to  obstinacy  ;  and
*  his  zeai  in  confuting his  adversaries,  to  rage  and
i  scurrility" He  considered  every  thing  as  subordi-
nate to  his  own  opinions  under  the  name  oi  truth,  and
46  poured  forth  against  such  as  disappointed  him  in
6  this  particular,  a  torrent  oi  invective  mingled  with
'  contempt**
fijwmnds 12.  All  of  which  agrees  with  the  following  charac-
j>o^!ph54  ter  given  him  by bishop  Challoner. "  All  his  works
4  declare  him  to  have  been  a  man  of  an  implacable  na-
6  ture, rigidly  self  willed,  impatient  of  contradiction,  and
'  rough  and  -violent  in  his  declamations  against  those,
i  of  what  quality  soever,  who  dissented  in  the least
'from  him."

13.  Such  was  the  head  of  influence  to  the  Reform-
ation :  and  as  every  effect  must  resemble  its  cause  ;
so  persecution  must  as  naturally  flow  from  such  a
source,  as  goodness  and  mercy  proceeded  from  tho
meek,  the  merciful,  and  self-denying  Jesus.

14.  From  rage  and  scurrility,  brutal  asperity,  and
an  implacable  nature,  might  reasonably  be  expected
bloodshed  and  cruelty.  Hence  this  famous  reformer
began  to  exercise  his  beastly  power  by  banishment,
and  so  proceeded.

Kcci.Re-  15.  He  fell  out  with  Carlostadt,  and  had  him
p^Jig^  banished,  not  only  from  Wittemberg,  but  followed  him
5'43-  from  place  to  place,  and  had  him  expelled  by  order  of
the  duke.  He  disliked  Calvin,  he  found  great  fault
with  Zuingle,  who  were  all  supported  by  great  pat-
rons ;  and  he  was  angry  beyond  measure  with  the
Baptists  who  had  none.

16.  Luther  himself  had  taught  the  doctrine  of  dip-


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  333

ping,  "  but  the  article  of  reforming  without  him  he ^y  p*
could  not  bear. This  exasperated  him  to  the last  ___
degree,  and  he  became  their  enemy  ;  and  notwith-  Ecci.  up-
standing all  he  had  said  in  favour  of  dipping,  he  per-  ^a£*f»
secuted  them under  the  name  of  re-di/ifiers, and
re-bafitizers,  or  Anabaptists"

17.  "  There  was  a  Thomas  Muncer,  who  had  been
a  minister  at  several  places,  having  been  persecu-  p.  *43.
ted  by  Luther,  and  driven  to  seek  refuge  where  he
could.  There  was  Nicholas  Stork,  Mark  Stubner,
Martin  Ccllarius,  and  others.  Against  all  of  them
Luther  set  himself.  When  he  heard  of  their  set-
tling any  where,  he  officiously  played  the  part  of  an
universal  bishop,  and  wrote  to  princes  and  senates  to
expel  such  dangerous  men."

18.  "  It  is  (says  Robinson,)  very  truly  said  by  cardi-
nal Hosius,  that  Luther  did  not  intend  to  make  all
mankind  as  free  as  himself;  he  had  not  foreseen
that  other  men  would  apply  the  same  reasoning  to
his  tyranny  over  conscience,  that  he  had  so  success-
fully applied  to  that  of  the  pope,  and  therefore  he  de-
throned him  that  he  might  set  up  himself.  His  col-
league Carlostadt  found  this  to  his  sorrow."

19.  "  On  Luther's  plan  there  was  no  probability  ibid,
of  freedom  flowing  to  the  people.  It  was  only  in-  *••  546*
tended  to  free  the  priests  from  obedience  to  the
pope,  and  to  enable  them  to  tyrannize  over  the  peo-
ple in  the  name  of  the  civil  magistrate.  Muncer
saw  this  fallacy,  and  remonstrated  against  it,  and  this
is  the  crime  which  Luther  punished  with  an  unpar-
donable rigour,  and  which  the  followers  of  Luther
have  never  forgiven  to  this  day."

20.  "  Muncer,  say  they,  was  a  man  well  skilled
in  the  knowledge  of  the  scripture,  before  the  devil
inspired  him  :  but  then  he  had  the  arrogance  not
only  to  preach  against  the  pope,  but  against  Master
Doctor  Martin  Luther  himself :  as  if  Martin  of
Saxony,  had  any  better  patent  for  infallibility  than
Leo  of  Rome  .'"

21.  But  the  principal  occasion  which  Luther  took
to  vent  out  his  persecuting  spirit,  was  from  the  insur-
rections of  the  peasants,  called  the  rustic  war.  The
celebrated Voltaire^  says,  "Luther,  had  been  sue-  ^fh,

Hh2


*36  THE PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V.

CAx}y' i  cessful  in  stirring  up  the  princes,  nobles  and  magis-

—  '  trates  against  the  pope  and  the  bishops. Munctr  stir-

4  red  up  the  peasants  against  them. He  and  his  com-

4  panions went  about addressing  themselves  to  the

1  inhabitants  of  the  country  villages. They  laid  open

4  that dangerous  truths which h  implanted  in  every

4  breast,  that  all  men  are  born  equal ;  saying,  that  if  the

4  pope had  treated  the  princes  like  their  subjects,  the

4  princes  had  treated  the  common  people  like  beasts."

22.  It  was  enough  then,  to  draw  upon  Muncer  and

his  followers,  the  united  vengeance  of  both  Papists  and

Protestants,  that  they  would  neither  acknowledge  the

Papal  hierarchy,  nor  the  reformed  plans  of  Luther's

more  refined  despotism.

•Ecci.Re- 23-  However  contrary  to  the  spirit  and  precepts  of

Tl537es'  tlne  £0SPe*>  tne  conduct  of  the  peasants,  in  taking  up

iici.His-  arms  against  their  cruel  and  unmerciful  oppressors,

*J*p!<Si  lP  is  granted,  nay,  affirmed  by  the  most  authentic  his-

Not bd  tor*ans>  tnat  tiie  peasants,  the  common  people,  groan-

Hist,  of ed  under  intolerable  grievances,  which  they  were  no

vo*iaH.Cpl  longer  able  to  bear  ;  that  the  excessive  and  unsup-

832. portable  tyranny  of  the  nobility  and  gentry,  was  such,

as  sometimes  drove  the  unhappy  people  to.  despair

and  distraction.

fej.Re- 24.  u  When  these  depressed  hearts  sighed  for  free-

11,537.  '  '  dom  ;  divines  of  all  orders  agreed  to  reproach  them

4  for  their  depravity,  and  to  scandalize  the  first  of  all

4  human  blessings  with  the  odious  name  of  carnal  lib-

1  erty." O  false  divinity  !  O  cruel  divinity  !  At  the

head  of  this  unjust  and  cruel  tribe  appears  Luther.

25.  Muncer  drew  up  for  the  peasants  a  memorial
or  manifesto,  which  sets  forth  their  grievances,  and

*■*  ^hich  they  presented  to  their  lords,  and  dispersed
all  over  Germany.  It  is  a  just  piece.  Voltaire  says,
44  A  Lycurgus*  would  have  signed  it.

26.  u Luther wrote four  pieces  on  the  subject.
1>.*52. '  The  first  was  an  answer  to  the  manifesto,  in  which

4  though  he  told  them  that  the  princes  were  cruel  op-
4  pressors,  who  had  no  excuse  for  their  injustice,  and
4  deserved  to  be  dethroned  by  God,  yet  it  was  sedi-
4  tious  in  the  oppressed  to  resist  them.  His  advice
4  was,  that  they  should  not  resist  evil,  but  when  they

*  An  ♦suitable  law-giver  among  Ihe  Pagans*


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  337

f  were  smitten  on  the  one  cheek,  turn  the  other  al-  chav.
4  so," and  so  on. "  This  was  the  doctrine  of  Christ, *
4  and  such  doctors  as  taught  otherwise  were  worse
4  than  Turks,  and  inspired  by  the  devil."

27.  This  same  Luther,  who  under  the  hypocritical  ecc1.r«.
mask  of  a  minister  of  Christ,  exhorted  the  oppres-  p.a^s'
sed  peasants  not  to  resist  evil,  wrote  again  to  the  prin-
ces, and  endeavoured  to  convince  them  that  it  was
their  duty  to  kill  and  exterminate  those  same  peas-
ants as  they  would  mad  dogs.

28.  The  princes  set  about  the  work,  agreeable  to
the  instructions  of  this  double-faced  reformer,  and
thousands  fell  victims  to  the  most  cruel  and  more
than  savage  massacres,  in  which  both  Papists  and
Protestants  became  united,  and  in  which  the  peasants
without  distinction  were  involved  in  one  common  fate
of  fire  and  sword,  and  suffered  with  the  most  undis-
tinguishing  barbarity.

29.  "It  was  in  Saxony,  (says  MosheimJ)  and  also  Ecci.Ui^
4  in  the  year  1525,  that  penal  laws  were  first  enacted  j^'J^*
4  against  this  fanatical  tribe.  These  laws  were  re-  Note[o.i
4  ncwed frequently in the years 1527, 1528,  and

4  15  34."  Charles  V.  also  issued  out  against  them
severe  edicts  in  the  years  1527,  and  1529.  The
magistrates  of  Zurich  also  denounced  capital  punish-
ments against  them  in  the  year  1525.

30.  Thus  the  united  vengeance  of  both  Papists  and
Protestants,  was  let^  loose  to  destroy  a  people  who
groaned  under  intolerable  oppressions,  which  they-
were  no  longer  able  to  bear  ;  and  as  if  this  were  not
sufficient,  Protestant  historians  must  also  agree  to
hand  down  their  characters  in  one  common  mass,  as.
the  most  detestable  and  seditious  fanatics,  and  under
all  the  odious  names  that  the  spirit  of  malice  and
rage  for  persecution  could  invent.

31.  But  all  the  art  of  Protestants,  in  painting  the
outrages  of  the  first  rustic  insurrections,  and  blend*
ing  the  conduct  of  those  furious  abettors  of  human
freedom  with  the  doctrines  and  sentiments  of  harm«
less'heretics,  in  order  to  palliate  their  own  crimes,
can  never  clear  their  church  of  the  deepest  stains  of
blood-guiltiness,  which  arose  from  their  unmerciful
butchery  of  the  innocent.


S39  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  07  P.  V.

CI*^P#  32.  The  particular  circumstances  relating  to  these
~*  insurrections,  are  very  foreign  from  this  work.  Who-
ever wishes  to  see  that  matter  fairly  investigated,  may
find  it  at  large,  in  the  judicious  and  well  authentica-
ted Researches  of  Robert  Robinson.  However,  that
Luther's  persecuting  rage  was  mainly  directed  against
those  whom  he  condemned  in  his  writings  under  the
name  of  Anabaptists,  and  who  unjustly  suffered  with-
out resistance,  appears  from  what  follows.

EcciHis- ^3'  "  ^  *s  to  ^e  ODservec^  (says  Mosheim,)  that  as
tory,roi.  i  the  leaders  of  this  sect  had  fallen  into  that  errone-
iv.p.430.  i  ous  ancj  chimerical  notion,  that  the  new  kingdom  of
c  Christ,  which  they  expected,  was  to  be  exempt  from
4  every  kind  of  vice,  and  from  the  smallest  degree  of
*  corruption,  they  were  not  satisfied  with  the  plan  of
4  reformation  proposed  by  Luther''
Scci.Re- 34.  This  was  enough  to  kindle  the  flames  of  re-
searches, sehtment  in  the  breast of  the implacable Luther*

p.  547.  .  l  r . .

"  who  by  taking  the  church  as  the  pope  left  it,  mclu-
4  ded,  whole  parishes  and  kingdoms,  with  all  the  in-
4  habitants  of  every  description  in  the  church."

35.  That  the  most  cruel  resentment  was  kindled
in  the  breast  of  Luther  against  these  people,  is  evi-
dent from  his  famous  Augsburg  Confession  ;  each  ar-

fcid.  ticle  of  which  begins  with  Doccnt  ;  i.  e.  they  teach  ;
and  ends  with  damnant,  and  many  of  them  with  dam-
riant  Anabapdistas  ;  i.  e.  they  damn  the  Anabaptists.

36.  But  what  business  had  he,  or  any  other  who
had  no  divine  authority,  to  teach  what  the  faith  of
another  should  be  ?  or  to  call  in  question  the  senti-
ments of  others,  and  presumptuously  damn  those  who
differed  from  him  ?  As  if  Martin  Luther  had  all
power  in  heaven  and  upon  earth  !

37.  It  was  a  horrid  crime  in  Luther's  eye,  for  any
to  expect  a  fiure  and  unspotted  church,  and  for  that
reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  his  plans  of  reforma-
tion. If  a  corrupt  and  tyrannical  church  had  been
the  object  of  pursuit  with  these  reputed  heretics,  both
they  and  their  ancestors  found  one  to  their  sorrow,
long  enough  before  Luther  rose  up  to  establish  his
by  the  sword  of  earthly  princes.

38.  The  fact  is,  that  reputed  heretics  had,  in  every
age,  witnessed  a  good  confession;  by  cheerfully  lay-


fc\  §5L


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  339

ing  down  their  lives  in  support  of  their  faith  concern-  chap.
ing  a  pure  church,  in  opposition  to  a  corrupt  catholic  __
hierarchy,  and  the  same  undaunted  spirit  continued
to  witness  against  the  Protestant  reformers,  and  gave
them  a  fair  opportunity  to  prove  that  they  exercised
all  the  power  of  lhe  .first  beast.

39.  "  In  almost  all  the  countries  of  Euro  fie,  (says  Ecci.m*-
i  Mosheim^)  an  unspeakable  number  of  these  unhafi-  i^llsft
*fiy  wretches  preferred  death,  in  its  worst  forms,  to  a

1  retraction  of  their  errors. Neither  the  view  of  the

<  flames  that  were  kindled  to  consume  them,  nor  the
1  ignominy  of  the  gibbet,  nor  the  terrors  of  the  sword,
i  could  shake  their  invincible,  but  ill-filaced  constancy,
'  or  make  them  abandon  tenets,  that  appeared  dearer
i  to  them  than  life  and  all  its  enjoyments."

40.  But  Mosheim  soon  after  adds,  "  It  is  true,  in- iua.

*  deed,  that  many  Anabafitists  suffered  death, — -mere- P'4^

*  ly  because  they  were  judged  to  be  incurable  heretics  ;
1  for  in  this  century,  the  error  of  limiting  the  admin-
4  istration  of  baptism  to  adult  persons  only,  and  the
i  practice  of  re-baptizing  such  as  had  received that

*  sacrament  in  a  state  of  infancy,  were  looked  upon  as

<  most  flagitious  and  intolerable  heresies. "

41.  And  what  greater  cruelties  did  ever  the  church
of  Rome  practice,  than  to  cast  into  the  flames  such  as
they  judged  to  be  incurable  heretics, when  no other
blemish  could  be  found  ?  But  Mosheim  is  pleased  to
call  their  faith  concerning  a  fiure  church,  an  errone- #
ous  and  chimerical  notion,*  and  their  sentiments,  er- Eph.  r.
rors,  and  their  constancy  with  which  they  faced  death  Rev^ixi.
in  its  worst  forms,  ill-filaced.  27.

42.  Just  so  the  popish  historian  Thuanus  speaks  of  Newton
the  Waldenses,  "that  they  were  rather  slain,  put  to  TZ^t.
i  flight,  spoiled  every  where  of  their  goods  and  digni-  m-

c  ties,  and  dispersed  here  and  there,  than  that  convin-
4  ced  of  their  error  they  repented."

43.  It  is  acknowledged  by  their  enemies,  that  ma-  ecci.h*.
ny  of  these  Anabafitists  were  men  of  the  most  upright  i?!p'.4S4.
intentions  and  sincere  piety,  and  that  the innocent  435>43§*
with  those  who  were  counted  guilty,  suffered  withun-
distinguishing  cruelty.

44.  But  it  is  remarkable  that  all  those undistin-
guishing  cruelties,  carried  on  under  the  cloak  of  suj>


54^  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V.

CHx.P* Pressing  sedition  or heresy,  were  practised  in  the

same  persecuting  spirit,  and  with  the  same  misrep-

Eeci  His  resentatlons  and  slanderous  accusations  that  were  us-
toiy/vot  e.d  D>*the  ancient  Pagans  against  the  Primitive  Chris-
j.p.73.&  tians.*

N©te[mJ A- tT

m  45.  Mow  inconsistent  it  must  appear  to  every  feel-
ing mind,  to  hear  the  title  of  glorious  Reformation*
applied  to  that  abominable  work  which  was  wrought
by  Martin  Luther  and  his  followers,  when  by  gibbet,
zndfre,  and  sword,  they  could  exterminate  their  fel-
*;w*'  p  ^  creatur(;s  from  the  earth,  as  they  would  mad  dogs  f
Poisoned  with  a  venom  cruel  as  the  grave,  they  ap*
\>lzud  the  zeal  and  fortitude  of  Luther,  in  addressing
the  princes  to  take  up  arms,  and  destroy  these  odious
and  detestable  fanatics  !

46.^  And  besides  those  undistinguishing  cruelties,
exercised  by  the  instigation  of  Luther,  'what  fruits
did  his  reformed  gospel  produce  in  his  own  heart  or
life  ?  After  he  had  proved  it  twenty  years,  it  did  not
even  save  him  from  his  out-breaking  sins,  but  direct*
ctok£v  ]yi0  the  CQntraiT-  "  He  grew  daily  more  peevish,
voi.iii.p.  6  more  irascible,  [more  easily  provoked  to  anger,]  and
'  more  impatient  oj  contradiction"  So  says  Robert-
son.

47.  His  whole  life  of  ambition  and  cruelty, well
comports  with  the  character  he  gives  of  himself  in

n.b3H llis  la8t  w'7/;.and  whether  any  temporal  monarch,  or
pope,  ever  discovered  the  feelings  of  his  own  ambi-
tion more  than  Luther,  maybe  seen  from what  fol-
.  lows.

48.  lam  known,  (says  he,)  in  heaven,  in  earth,  and
hell,  and  possess  consequence  sufficient  for  this  demand,
that  my  single  testimony  be  believed,  seeing  that  God  of
his  fatherly  compassion  hath  intrusted  to  me,  though  a
damnable  man  and  a  miserable  sinner,  the  gospel  of
his  Son,  and  hath  granted  that  I  should  be  so  true  and

faithful  in  it,  that  many  in  the  world  have  received  it
by  me  as  a  doctor  of  the  truth,  while  they  contemn  with
detestation,  the  bans  of  the  pope,  of  Casar,  of  kings,  of
princes  and  of  priests,  yea,  of  all  devils.  Why  theny
may  it  not  suffice,  for  this  disposal  of  a  small  estate,  if
the  testimony  of  my  hand  be  affixed,  and  it  can  be  said,


P. V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  341

Dr. Martin  Luther,  God's  Notary,  and  witness  of  chap.
his  gos/icl,  wrote  these  things.*  '

49.  And  such  a  character  as  that  of  A  damnable
man,  and  a  miserable  sinner,  will  every  such  imperi-
ous and  persecuting  tyrant  as  Martin  Luther  have  to  34!
subscribe,  when,  Cain-like,  he  is  convicted  that  his  ^keMX
own works are evil,  and his brother's righteous.

Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee,  thou  wicked
serva?it  !

50.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth
speaketh.  And  he  that  saith  that  God  hath  intrusted
to  him  the  gospel  of  his  Son,  while  his  whole  life
and  conduct,  and  his  final  testimony,  signed  with  his
own  hand,  declares  himself  A  damnable  man  and  a  *Sec
miserable  sinner,*  the  Same  is  certainly  a  liar,  and  the  **<*»*•
truth  is  not  in  him. '  4* &&>  8'


CHAPTER XL

The  Subject  continued,

THE  same  persecuting  spirit  that  influenced  Mar-
tin Luther,  influenced  also John Calvin. At  Eeel,mfe*
Geneva  he  acted  the  part  of  a  universal  bishop,  presi-  fopJas!
led  in  the  assembly  of  the  clergy,  and  in  the  Consis-  £ote3§2
ory,  and  punished  heretics  of  all  kinds  with  unremit- *'*
ed  fury,  who  had  the  confidence  to  object  against  his
cclesiastical  and  inconsistent  systems  of  tyranny.

2.  Here were  Beghards,  and  Spirituals,  and  Lib- \m.
nines,  and  Heretics,  and  odious  ones  enough  to  give i>,4ir»
Calvin  a  fair  opportunity  of  proving  that  he  possessed
he same persecuting spirit with which  he was
wrought  up,  in  his  mother's  house.

*  The  original  of  this  specimen  of  Luther's  presumptuous  vanity  and  self-ap-
dause,  as  quoted  by  Robertson,  inns  thus  :  "  Notus  sum  in  ccelo,  m  terra.&  in-
terne, & :  auctontatem  ad  hoc  suffieiente-m  habeo,  ut  mihi  soli  credatur,  cum

JSr  to  J'  homini  licet  damnabSi,  et  miserabili  pecoatori,  ex  patema  miseri-
coroia  Evangeimm  filii  sui  credijerit,  dederitque  ut  in  eo  verax  &  fidelis  t'u-
enm,  ita  ut  mulu  in  mundo  illud  per  ine  acceperint,  &  me  pro  Doctore  veii-
tatis  agaovenut,  spreto  banno  Papse,  Ca?saris,  Regwn,  Principum  &  sacerdo-
tum,  uno  omnium  damomim  odio.  Quidni,  igitur,  ad  dispositionem  banc,  in
^t?18!?'  s.u*neiat,  «i  adsit  manus  meae  testimonium,  8e  diei  possit.  haec  —  ■'—

««'  M*rt,"us  Luther,  Notarius  Dei,  &  testis  JEvanireJu  ejus." Seek  li
-  6*1. See  hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  u.  p.  314,


scrip
lib.  u.


342  . ' THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V,

chap. 3.  There  was  one  Gruel,  whatever  was  his  charac-

xi.  • .  ...
' ter,  he  was  charged  with  denying  "  the  divinity  of  the

Ecci.Hb  Christian  religion  [i.  e.  the  religion  at  Geneva"]  and
tor>, vol.  the  immortality  of  the  soul." He  also  called  Cal-
tv'p'  '  '  vin  the  new  pope ,  #nd  other  impieties  of  the  like  na-
ture, for  which  he  was  brought  before  the  civil  tribu-
nals, in  the  year  1550,  and  was  condemned  to  death.

4.  There  were  others  who  could  not  receive  his
doctrine  of  eternal  and  absolute  decrees.  "  These  ad-
4  versaries  (says  MoshcimJ)  felt,  by  a  disagreeable  ex-
c  perience,  the warmth and  violence  of  his  haughty

*  temper,  and  that  impatience  of  contradiction  that
<  arose  from  an  over-jealous  concern  for  his  honour,

*  or  rather  for  his  unrivalled  supremacy."

5.  "  He  would  not  suffer  them  to  remain  at  Gene-
i  va ;  nay,  in  the  heat  of  the  controversy,  being
c  carried  away  by  the  impetuosity  of  his passions,

*  he  accused  them  of  crimes,  from  which  they  have
4  been  fully  absolved  by  the  impartial  judgment  of  un-
6  prejudiced  posterity."

ibid.  6.  "  Among these  victims  of  Calvin's unlimited

l>'419'  '  power  and  excessive  zeal,  we  may  reckon  Castalipy
6  master  of  the  public  school  at  Geneva"9  He  was
deposed  from  office  in  the  year  1544,  and  banished.
A  like  fate  happened  to  Bolsec,  professor  of  physic,
whose  favorable  opinion  of  the  Protestant  religion
first  brought  him  to  Geneva  ;  but  finding  himself  mis-
taken, he  barf  the  assurance,  in  the  year  1551,  to  lift
up  his  voice,  in  the  full  congregation,  against  absolute
decrees  ;  for  which  he  was  cast  into  prison,  and  soon
after,  sent  into  banishment.
*Md.  7.  But  none  gave  Calvin  more  trouble  than  Michael

#'472,  Servetus,  a  Spanish  physician,  who  appeared  in  the
year  1530,  and  by  his  abilities,  both  natural  and  ac-
quired, had  obtained  the  protection  of  many  persons
of  weight  in  France,  Germany  and  Italy.  Notwith-
standing these  advantages,  Calvin  had  him  imprison-
ed, and  an  accusation  of  blasphemy  brought  against
him  by  the  council.

8.  Servetus  was  a  man  of  a  free  and  liberal  turn  of
SvdSsT  mind,  "  he  was  an  original  genius,  (says  Robinson,)  of
i».  527. 4  a  manly  spirit,  bold  in  his  enquiries  after  truth,  and

*  generous  as  the  day  in  communicating  his  opinions,
4  not  doubting  that  he  had  as  much  right  to  investi-


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  343

«  gate  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  others  had  that chap.
*  of  Tran&ubstannation"  .  1_


p. 329.


9.  In  the  year 1531  and 1532.  he  published  two  Eccl.ne,
books,  both  intended  to  disprove  the  doctrine  of  the  *^f»
Trinity  ;  and  as  they  denied  the  popular notion  of
persons  in  God,  and  affirmed  that  Jesus  was  a  man,

they  procured  him  a  great  number  of  enemies,  and
also  many  friends.  He  had  freely  communicated  his
sentiments  to  Oecolampadius  and  Bucer,

10.  Both  these  divines  had  the  character  of  mild-
ness ;  but  Oecolampadius  thought  anger  just  in  this
case,  and  Bucer  declared  from  the  pulpit,  that  "  Ser*  JM&
"  vetus  deserved  to  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  his  bowels
"  torn  out  of  him."  All  the  artillery  of  the  orthodox
was  now  directed  against  this  haughty  Spanish  blas-
phemous heretic  ;  for  so  they,  whom  the  greater  part

of  Europe  called  heretics,  had  the  inconsistency  to
call  Servetus,

11.  Calvin  having  published  his  favourite  produc-
tion entitled  Christian  Institutes  :  Servetus  read  this
book  ;  finding  in  it  a  great  number  of  mistakes  and  er-
rors, he  took  the  liberty  to  inform  the  author  of  them.
This  so  irritated  Calvin,  that  he  never  forgave  him,
and  instead  of  profiting  by  the  advice,  he  wrote  to  his
friends  Viret  and  Farel,  u  that  if  ever  this  heretic
i  should  fall  into  his  hands,  he  would  order  it  so,  that
*  it  should  cost  him  his  life." And  so  it  fell  out.

12.  Calvin  had  an  admirer  at  Geneva  whose  name ib^-
was  Trie,  this  Trie  had  a  relation  at  Lyons,  a  Papist, p*  .  '
whose  name  was  Arney,  who  incessantly  exhorted  his
cousin Trie  to  return  to  the  bosom  of  the church.
Calvin  dictated  letters  in  the  name  of  Win.  Trie,  who
directed  them  to  Arney,  and  Arney  carried  them  to  Ory

the  Inquisitor  * By  which  means,  in  the  year 1553,

*  It  was  an  iniquitous  example  which  John  Calvin  set  by  encouraging  the
Papists  to  continue  their  sport  in  shedding  innocent  blood,  "when  in  his  letter
under  the  name  of  Trie,  he  says,  *•  I  thank  God,  that  vices  are  better  corrected
u  here  than  among  all  your  officials — with  you  they  support  a  heretic,  who  de«
"  serves  to  be  burnt  wherever  he  is  found  — When  I  mention  to  you  a  heretic,  I
"  mention  one  who  shall  be  condemned  by  he  Papists  as  well  as  by  us,  at  least
"  he  deserves  to  be  so  :  for  although  we  dn  er  in  opinion  about  many  things,  WQ
"  are  still  agreed,  that  there  are  three  persons  in  one  essence  of  God. — You  cru-
"  elly  burn  us  :  but  behold  him,  who  shall  call  Jesus  Christ  an  idol,  who  shall  de-
"  stroy  all  the  foundations  of  faith,  who  gather  together  all  the  dreams  of  ancient
"{  heretics,  who  shall  even  condemn  the  baptism  of  little  children,  calling  it  a  ti>
'  abolical  invention  ;  and  he  shall  have  the  vogue  amongst  you,  and  be  stippoit-

ed  as  if  he  had  committed  no  fault. Where,  pray,  is  the  zeal  you  pretend  to  ?

And  wdiere  is  the  wisdom  of  this  fine  hierarchy  you  magnify  so  much  :"  Rob-
wson't  Eccl.  Rewarclies,  p.  336.

Ii


314  THfc  PERSECUTING  SriRlt  0£  P.  W

C  xi.P* Servetus  was seized  and  cast  into  prison  ;  but  four

days  after  made  his  escape^  and  could  not  be  found.

Keci.  Pe-  13.  The  prosecution  was  carried  on  in  his  absence,
tiTm*'  an(l  ne  was  condemned  to  be  burnt  alive,  in  a  slow
fire.  And  seeing  his  person  could  not  be  found,  the
sentence  was  executed  in  effigy.  "  The  effigy  of
4  Servetus  was  set  in  a  dung  cart,  with  five  bales  of
4  his  books,  and  all  were  burnt  together  for  the  glory
'  of  God,  and  the  safety  of  the  church. "
ibid.  14.  Four  months  after, Servetus was  discovered,

^  while  waiting  for  a  boat  to  cross  the  lake,  in  his  way

to  Zurich.  Calvin  got  intelligence,  and  prevailed
upon  the  chief  magistrate  to  arrest  and  imprison  him,
although  it  was  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  or  sab-
bath, when  by  the  laws  of  Geneva,  no  person  could  be
arrested,  except  for  a  capital  crime  :  but  Calvin  pre-
tended that  Servetus  was  a  heretic,  and  heresy  was  a
capital  crime.  To  prison  he  was  committed,  and  the
same  day  he  was  tried  in  court*

15.  As  it  was  necessary  for  some  one  to  prosecute
Servetus^  Calvin  employed  one  of  his  own  family,  a
Nicholas  cle  la  Fontaine.  Some  say  he  had  been  a
cook,  others  a  valet  or  servant:  but,  whatever  he  had
been,  he  was  now  a  preacher.  Short  as  the  notice
had  been,  La  Fontaine  was  ready  prepared,  and  a
humble  request  was  presented  to  the  judges,  in  which
Servetus  was  accused  of  uttering  blasphemies  against
God,  infecting  the  world  with  heresies,  and  condemn*
ing  the  doctrine  preached  at  Geneva.

16.  Calvin  did  not  blush  to  say,  "  I  ordered  it  so
(  that  a  party  should  be  found  to  accuse  him,  not  de-
<  nying  that  the  action  was  drawn  up  by  my  advice/
And  he  expressly  affirms,  "  La  Fontaine  demanded
i  justice  against  him  by  my  advice." — On  a  future
day  Calvin  appeared  in  court,  and  disputed  with  Ser-
vetus, on  the  words,  person  and  hy/iostasis  :  and  yet  he
knew  if  he  succeeded  in  convicting  the  prisoner  or
heresy,  the  crime  was  capital,  and  he  was  doomed  by
the  law  to  die.

17.  Servetus  presented  a  petition  to  the  magis-
trates and  council.  The  petition  was  rejected.  The
attorney-general  observed,  that  the  court  ought  not  to
grant  the  petitioner  an  advocate,  because  he  himself


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  345

was  thoroughly  skilled  in  the  art  of  telling  lies. What cn^
chance  had  Servetua  for  his  life  ?  -. „

18.  This  was  his  deplorable  situation:  "  Far  from  Eccl.Rt_
his  own  country,  fallen  into  the  hands  of  cruel  stran-  s™f™>
gers,  all under  the influence  of  Calvin,  his  avowed
enemy, who  bore  him  a  mortal  hatred  ;  stript  of  all

his  property  ;  confined  in  a  damp  prison,  and  neglect-
ed till  he  was  almost  eaten  up  with  vermin,  denied
an  advocate,  and  loaded  with  every  indignity  that  bar-
barity could  invent.5'

19.  "  The  last  act  of  this  tragedy  was  performed  at ibj^

4  Geneva,  on  the  27th  of  October,  1553. Calvin  had P-  H*
4  drawn  up  the  process  against  Servetua  ; — the  magis-
4  trates  and  council  had  denounced  sentence  against  him

*  that  he  should  be  burnt  alive  :  and  on  this  day,  with

*  many  brutal  circumstances,  the  sentence  was  execu-
4  ted  to  the  encouragement  of  catholic  cruelty,  to  th©
4  scandal  of  the  pretended  reformation,  to  the  offence
4  of  all  just  men,  and  to  the  everlasting  disgrace  of
4  those  ecclesiastical  tyrants,  who  were  the  chief  in^
4  struments  of  such  a  wild  and  barbarous  deed."

20.  "  Many  (says  Robinson,)  have  pretended  to  apol-

*  ogize  for  Calvin :  but  who  is  John  Calvin,  and  what
4  are  his  nostrums,  which  end  in  tyranny  and  murder,
4  that  the  great  voice  of  nature  should  be  drowned  ia

*  the  din  of  a  vain  babbling  about  him  ?"

21.  "  Servetus  was  not  a  subject  of  the  Republic  of
4  Geneva  ;  he  had  committed  no  offence  against  the
4  laws  of  the  state  ;  he  was  passing  peaceably  on  the
4  road  which  lay  through  the  city  ;  he  was  not  a  mem-
ber of  any  reformed  church  :  he  was  an  useful  and
4  honourable  member  of  society  ;  he  was  a  man  of  uti-
4  impeached  morality  ;  he  was  then  the  admiration  of
4  numbers  of  good  judges,  who  afterwards  pleaded  his
4  cause."

22.  Calvin's  hard  heart  never  relented  at  the  recol- \\&L
lection  of  this  bloody  action. On  the  contrary,  he  jus- p>  343>
tified  it  by  publishing,  after  the  execution,  a  book  en-
tilled,  «  A  faithful  account of  the  errors  of  Michael

4  SERVEfuSf — in  which  it  i* firoved that  Heretics  ought
4  to  be  restrained  with  the  sword'9

23.  Castellio  or  Socinus  confuted  this  book.  Beza
answered,  and  justified  the  doctrine  of  putting  here-


$46  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P. V.

Cxi.P ^C3  to  (leatn- — Several endeavoured  to  sanctify  the
__  crime  by  scripture  texts,  and  godly  words  ;  and  many
have  attempted,  after  these  examples,  to  do  the  same.
They  go  so  far,  some  of  them,  as  to  attribute  the  de-
struction of  Servetus  to  a  special  providence  of  God. —
Can  the  nicest  critic  tell  wherein  this  differs  from  the
spirit  and  style  of  the  Papal  Inquisition  ?
Ecd.Re- 24.  u  The  execution  of  th is  man  (says I?Gbi?ison,)
p.a343es'  '  occasioned  a  great  many  excellent  and  unanswera-
344. ' «  ble  treatises  against  persecution. — Beza  was  offend-
i  ed  because  the  authors  said  he  had  published  a  book
4  to  justify  the  murder  of  heretics  ; whereas  he  had
4  only  wrote  one  to  prove  that  they  ought  to  be  put  to

4  death. They  called  him  a  bloody  man  for  exhort-

4  ing  magistrates to  put  men  to  death  for  religion  ;
4  and  he  retorted,  he  had  wished,  and  he  continued  to
4  wish,  the  magistrates  would  serve  them  so."
ihid.  25.  The  apologists  for  Calvin  urge  the  example  of

i>-346.  Melancihonm  proof  of  the  justice  of  putting  Servetus
to  death.  "  Melancthon  himself,  (say  they,)  the  most
4  moderate  and  mildest  of  all  reformers,  approves
4  what  has  been  done  at  Geneva."  Then  if  such  was
the  spirit  of  the  mildest  of  all  the  reformers,  what
kind  of  men  were  those  whom  the  Protestants  ac-
knowledge to  be  men  of  violent 3  haughty ,  and  brutal
tempers  ?

Bcci.His-  26.  Mosheim  says,  The  Anabafitists,  and  those  who
W,482!  ^en^ef^ tne  divinity  of  Christ,  [i.  e.  those  who  denied
'  that  Jesus  was  God,]  and  a  trinity  of  persons  in  the
Godhead,  were  objects  of  common  aversion,  against
whom  the  zeal,  vigilance,  and  severity  of  Catholics,
Lutherans,  and  Calvinists  were  united,  and,  in  oppos-
ing whose  settlement  and  progress,  these  three  com-
munions,  forgetting  their  dissensions,  joined  their
most  vigorous  councils  and  endeavours.

27.  He  that  is  joined  to  an  harlot  is  one  body,  saith
the  scriptures.  The  Lutherans  and  Calvinists  were
joined  to  the  Pa/iists  in  shedding  innocent  blood  ;
therefore,  their  Protestant  persecuting  churches  were
indisputably  one  in  spirit,  nature  and  disposition  with
the  old  scarlet  ivhore  their  mother  church  of  Rome,  as
much  as  the  daughters  of  a  harlot  arc  one  in  spirit,
nature  and  disposition,  with  their  mother.


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  347

28.  The  Protestant  reformers  could  encourage  per- r^p*

sedition,  and  could  set  the  example,  both by their

principles  and  practice,  and  unite  with  the  Papists,  in
continuing  to  shed  innocent  blood: As  if  the  purple

and  crimson  dye  of  their  mother's  attire  had  not  been
stained  deep  enough.

29.  Voltaire,  who  deplores  the  death  of  Servetus,  Ecci.Ro
says,  "  The  finishing  stroke  to  this  picture  of  Calvin,  JJfSSjj6*.'
4  may  be  found  in  a  letter  written  with  his  own  hand,  *j™  *£*

<  which  is  still  preserved  in  the  castle  of  Bastie Ro-  <Sfo.  e**
i  land, near  Montelimar. It  is  directed  to the  Man

1  ques  de  Poet,  high  chamberlain  to  the  king  of  Na*
(  varre,  and  dated  September  30th, 1 56 1 ."

30.  "  Honour,  glory,  and  riches  shall  be  the  re-
1  ward  of  your  pains  :  but  above  all  do  not  fail  to  rid
i  the  country  of  those  zealous  scoundrels  who  stir  up
4  the people  to  revolt  against us. Such  monsters

<  should  be  exterminated,  as  I  have  exterminated
i  Michael  Sei-vetus,  the  Spaniard."  Bloody  Cain  !
Where  is  Abel  thy  brother  ?  The  voice  of  thy  broth-
er's blood  crieth  unto  me  from  the  ground,

31.  The persecuting  spirit  of  Calvin  was  not  con-  Ecd. Re-
fined to  Geneva. Robinson  says,  he  and  other  foreign  ^^J'
divines  had many  tools  in  Poland,  particularly  Pras-
nicius,  a  violent  orthodox  clergyman. With  this  man,

and  through  him  with  the  nobility,  gentry,  and  clergy,
Calvin  and  Beza  corresponded  :  and  many  divines  of
Germany  and  Switzerland,  and  even  the  synod  of  Ge-
neva sent  letters  and  tracts  into  Poland — -all  justifying
the  murder  of  Gentilis  and  Servetus,  and  the  neces-
sity of  employing  the  secular  power  to  rid  the  world
of  such  monsters  as  denied  the  Trinity  and  infant
baptism.

32.  "  The  advice  given  by  the  Consistory  of  Gene-  JbU.
va  to  prince  Radzivil,  is  a  most  ignorant  and  impi-  P«  58&
ous  attack  on  the  liberties  and  lives  of  innocent  men.
They  beg  his  highness,  as  the  first  in  piety  and  dig-
nity, to  use  his  influence  with  the  nobility  of  Poland^
to  engage  them  to  treat  the  antitrinitarians  as  they
would  Tartars  and  Muscovites'*

33.  It  was  here  also,  in  Poland,  that  the  "  Cat  ho-  EcclHis
1  lies,  Lutherans)  and  Calvinists"  were  united  in  one  tory,  roU
spirit  of  cruelty,  to  crush  those  who,  for  the  sake  of  ^3P' 4*2'

li  2


S48  THE  PERSECUTING SPIRIT  OF  P.  V.

Ql*f' Peace>  nac*  ®e&  there,  from  their  iron  arm  of  persecu-

...  tion  in  other  places. It  would  be  very disagreeable,

unnecessary,  and  indeed  endless  to  enumerate  all  the

particular  cruelties  and  unjust  measures  practised  by

the  first  reformers,  and  through  their  influence.*

3  k  If  matters  of  fact  can  establish  any  certainty,
then  it  is  certain,  that  the  two  principal  pillars  of  the
reformation,  Martin  Luther  and  John  Calvin,  and  their
confederate  reformers,  were  influenced  by  the  self-
same spirit  of  cruelty  and  injustice,  which  had  influ-
enced the  ecclesiastical  tyrants  of  every  age,  from
Diotrefihes  and  the  Alexandrian  ftriesthood  down  to
the  same  Luther  and Calvin. It  will  be  necessary

*  We  here  present  the  reader  with  two  extracts  of  letters  written  by  Andrew  i)«-
dtih,  of  Poland,  who  had  been  excommunicated  from  the  Church  of  Rome  lor
heresy.  Hi*  sentiment!  favoured  the  Unitarian  Baptists,  a  species  of  popular
heretics  who  had  lied  into  Poland  for  the  enjoyment  of  that  religious  liberty
which  was  deniad  them  in  other  place*.  Dudith  corresponded  with  many  of  the
most  noted  reibraiers  ;  and  these  extracts  clearly  <  lis  cover  the  spirit  hy  which
they  were  actuated,  and  may  serve  to  show  the  light  in  whuh  J^at  discerning
man  viewed  the  conduct  of  these  persecuting  Protestants.

**  Tell  me,  (says  he  to  Wolffs  my  learned  friend,  now  that  the  Calvirmts  hav#
'burnt  Servxus,  and  beheaded  GehtHis,  and  murdered  many  others,  having  ban-

*  iihed  Bernard  Oekin  with  his  wife  and  children  from  your  city  in  the  depth  of  a
'  sharp  winter ;  now  that  the  Lutherans  have  es  pelled  Lasco,  with  the  congrega-
tion of  foreigners  that  came  out  -of  England  with  him,  in  an  extremely  rigorous
'  season  of  the  year  :  having  d  me  a  great  many  such  exploits,  all  contrary  to  tho
'  genius  of  Christianity,  how,  I  ask,  how  shall  we  meet  the  Papists  ?  With  what
8  lace  can  Ave  tax  them  with  cruelty  ?  How  dare  we  say,  Our  weapons  are  not  ear*
'  rial?  How  can  we  any  longer  urge,  Let  both  grow  together  till  the/iarvcst  f  Let

*  us  cease  to  boast,  that  faith  cannot  be  compelled,  and  that  conscience  ought
;  to  be  free."

"  You  contend,  (says  he  to  Beza,)  that  scripture  is  a  perfect  rule  of  faith  and
1  practice.  But  you  are  all  divided  about  the  sense  of  scripture,  and  you  have  not
■'  settled  who  shall  be  judge.  You  say  one  thing,  St&ncarus  another.  You  quous
'  scripture,  he  quotes  scripture.  You  reason,  he  reasons.  You  require  me  to  be-
'  liere  you. I  respect  you  :  but  why  should  I  trust  you  rather  than  Stancarus  ?

*  Yoa  say,  he  is  a  heretic :  but  the  papists  say,  you  are  both  heretics. Shall  I  be-

*  lieve  them  ,?  They  quote  historians  and  fathers  :  so  do  you.  To  whom  do  you
•address  yourselves  ?  Where  is  the  judge  ?  You  say,  the  spirits  of  the  prophets
"are  subject  to  the  prophet*:  :  but  you  say  I  am  no  prophet,  and  I  say,  yon  are
-'.not  one. Who  is  to  be  judge  ?  I  love  liberty  a-;  well  as  you. You  have  broken

*  off  your  yoke,  allow  me  to  break  mine. Having  freed  yourselves  from  the  ty-

*  ranny  of  popish  prelates,  why  do  you  turn  ecclesiastical  tyrants  yourselves,  and
1  treat  others  with  barbarity  ami  cruelty  for  only  doing  what  you  set  them  an  ex-
0  ample  to  do  ?  you  contend,  that  your  lay-hearers,  the  magistrates,  and  not  you
'are  to  be  blamed,  for  it  is  they  who  banish  and  burn  for  heresy. 1  know  you

*  make  this  excuse  :  but  tell  me,  have  not  you  instilled  such  principles  into  their
'  ears  ? Have  they  done  any  thing  more  than  put  in  practice  the  doctrine  that

*  you  taught  them  ?  Have  you  uot  told  them  how  glorious  it  w  as  to  defend  the
•faith  ?  Ha\e  you  not  been  the  constant  panegyrists  of  such  princes  as  have  de-

*  populated  whultf  districts  for  heresy  ?  Do  you  not  daily  teach,  that  they  who

*  appeal  from  your  confessions  to  scripture  ought  to  be  punished  by  the  secular

*  power?  It  is  impossible  for  you  to  dvny  this.  Does  not  all  the  world  know  that
'  you  are  a  set  of  demagogues,  or  (to  speak  more  mildly)  a  sort  of  tribunes,  and

*  that  the  magistrate*  do  nothing  but  exhibit  in  public  what  you  teach  them  in

*  private  ?  You  try  to  justify  the  banishment  of  Ochin,  and  the  execution  of  others,

*  and  you  seem  to  wish  Poland  would  follow  your  example. God  forbid  !  When

*  you  talk  of  your  Augsburg  Confession,  and your  Helvetic  Creed}  and  your  unrff

*  uimiiy,eaid  your  fundamental  truth*,  I  keep  thinking  of  the  sixth  eonunjittk
-  ff:«m,  Thau  skatt.  mi  h*u:'-~btK>i4<*wtiru4  Itesmrctes,  p.  69%.  595.


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  349

now,  to  take  some  notice  of  the  same  persecuting  spir- C1™*-
it  in  England  and  America


35.  The  whole  life  of  Henry VIII. one  of  the Hume's
first  reformers  and  the  principal  supporter  of  the  re-  gjj^^
formation  in  England,  was  one  continued  scene  of  h.  vih.
ambition and cruelty. "  The  flattery  of  courtiers  ch,3a'
(says Hume,)  had so  inflamed his  tyrannical  arro-
gance, that  he  thought  himself  entitled  to  regulate,

by  his  own  particular  standard,  the  religious  faith  of
the  whole  nation."

36.  There  was  one  Lambert,  a  schoolmaster  in  Lcn~
don,  who  was  committed  to  the  flames,  because  he
had  dared  to  differ  from  the  king  in  his  religious
opinions,  and  openly  to  propagate  his  doctrines.*
"  He  was  burned  at  a  slow  fire  ;  his  legs  and  thighs
were  consumed  to  the  stumps  ;  and  when  there  ap-
peared no  end  of  his  torments,  some  of  the  guards
more  merciful  than  the  rest,  lifted  him  on  their  hai-
berts,  and  threw  him  into  the  flames,  where  he  was
consumed."

37.  "  Some  few  days  before  this  execution,  four
Dutch  Aaabafitists,  three  men  and  a  worn  in,  had
faggots  tied  to  their  backs  at  Paul's  cross,  and  were
burned  in  that  manner.  A  man  and  a  woman  of  the
same  sect  and  country,  were  burned  at  Smithfteld"-

38.  Under  Edward  VI.  the  son  and  successor  of >*>**•.
Henry,  heresy  was  still  a  capital  crime  by  the  com-
mon law,  and  subjected  to  the  penalty  of  burnings

"  Though  the  Protestant  divines  (says  Hume,)  had
ventured  to  renounce  opinions  deemed  certain  during
many  ages,  they  regarded,  in  their  turn,  the  new
system  as  so  certain,  that  they  would  suffer  no  contra-,
diction  with  regard  to  it ;  and  they  were  ready  to
burn  in  the  same  flames,  from  which  they  themselves
had  so  narrowly  escaped,  every  one  that  had  the  as-
surance to  differ  from  them."

39.  "A  commission  by  act  of  council  was  granted
to  the  primate,  [archbishop,]  and  some  others,  to
examine  and  search  after  all  Anabaptists,  heretics,

*  Lamhvt  denied  the  real  pr-esenre  of  Christ  in  th«  eueharist,  which  was  a
doctrine  so  strenuously  maintained  by  Henry  that  he  would  su.fer  no  contradk*
tbn  with  respect  to  it.  Dr.  Barnes  a  Lutheran  was  the  instigator  of  this  pros,
eeution,  who  had  Lambert  summoned  before  Cranmer  and  Latimer.  Lambert
appealed  to  the  king:,  who,  after  disputing  with  him  upon  hi«  fevorite  doetei%*
ordered  him  to  be  cowaraiued  to  tfee  &u*«.


530  '  *"HE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P. VY

C  xi**' or  contemners  °f  tne  book  of  common  prayer." A

' woman  called  Joan  Bochtr,  or  Joan  of  Kent)  accu-

*ByBp.  sec^  °f  heresy,  was  committed  to  the  flames.* Af-

(^•anqaer  terwards,  a  Dutchman,  called  Van  Paris,  accused  of

the  heresy  called  Arianism,  was  condemned  to  the

same  punishment."

40.  Under  Queen  Elizabeth,  whpm  the  Protes-
tants call  That  bright  occidental  star  ;  but  "  the  most
wicked  (says  a  late  writer)  that  ever  was  known  in

f  short  any  reign."f  "  It  was  decreed  that  whosoever,  in
Ec^His^.  any  way^  reconciled  any  one  to  the  church  of  Rome,
p.  273. or  Was  himself  reconciled,  was  declared  to  be  guilty

of  treason. To  say  mass  was  subjected  to  the  pen-

Sk?of a^y  °f  a  year's  imprisonment,? and  a  fine  of  two  hun-
Engian^  dred  marks. — The  being*  present  at  mass  was  punish-
Ec'ci.iiis-  able  by  a  year's  imprisonment,  and  a  line  of  one  hun-
fr^ssl".  dred  marks. — A  fine  of  twenty  pounds  for  being'  ab-
Jfote[p.]  sent  from  church  a  month. — A  severe  law  was  also
enacted against  Jesuits  and  popish  priests. — Some,
even  of  those  who  defend  the  queen's  measures,  al-
low that  in  ten  years  fifty  priests  were  executed,  and
fifty-five  banished."

41.  But  the  most  powerful  instrument  of  persecu-
tion, as  well  as  the  most  perfect  substitute  of  Papal
cruelty,  during  this  reign,  was,  the  Ecclesiastical
Court  of  High  Commission,  established  by  John  Whit'
gift,  the  queerts  primate,  in  the  year  1584.  Whit'
gift  was  archbishop  of  Canterbury.

42.  Hume  says,  u  He  appointed  forty -four  commis-
sioners, twelve  of  whom  were  ecclesiastics — To  visit
and  reform  all  errors,  heresies,  schisms,  8cc. — to
regulate  all  opinions — to  punish  all  breach  of  unifor-
mity in  the  exercise  of  public  worship — to  make  en-
quiry, not  only  by  legal  methods  of  juries  and  witnes-
ses, but  by  any  other  means  which  they  could  devise
— by  rack — by  torture — by  inquisition — by  imprison-
ment, &x."

43.  "  When  they  found  reason  to  suspect  any  per-
son, they  might  administer  to  him  an  oath  called  ex
officio,  by  which  he  was  bound  to  answer  all  ques-
tions, and  might  thereby  be  obliged  to  accuse  him-
self or  his  most  intimate  friend. — The  fines  which
they  levied  were  discretionary,  and  often  occasioned


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  351

the  total  ruin  of  the  offender,  contrary  to  the  estab-  c*£p*
lished  laws  of  the  kingdom."  .

44.  "The  imprisonments  to  which  they  condemn-
ed any  delinquent,  was  limited  by  no  rule  but  their
own  pleasure. — These  Ecclesiastical  Commissioners
were  liable  to  no  controul. — In  a  word,  this  court  was
a  real  Inquisition,  attended  with  all  the  iniquities  as
well  as  cruelties  inseparable  from  that  tribunal."

45.  The  spirit  of  this  bloody  inquisition  continued  Hurae>s
through  the  reign  of  king  James  VI.  who  is  canon-  gist.  <>r
ized,  as  the  Most  High,  in  that  translation  of  the  bi-  Appen-  *
ble  which  he  established. "  Under  this  reign,  (says  ^*toJa*-
Hume,)  no  toleration  for  the  different  sects. — Two
Arians,  under  the  title  of  heretics*,  were punished

by  fire  ;  and  no  one  reign  since  the  Reformation  had
been  free  from  like  barbarities."  And  so  they  proceed.

46.  A  specimen  of  the  barbarous  decrees  and  ty-
rannical laws,  established  in  those  times,  down  to  the
reign  of  king  Charles  II.  may  be  seen  in  the  West-
minster Confession  of  Faith,  and  National  Covenant,
M  The  sixty-ninth  article,  Pari.  6.  of  king  James  VI.

*  declares,  that  there  is  no  other  face of  kirk,  nor
6  other  face  of  religion,  than  was  presently  at  that

*  time  established  within  this  realm  : Which  therefore
i  is  ever  styled  God's  true  religion — and  a  perfect  re-

*  ligion  ;  which  by  manifold acts  of  parliament,  all
6  within  this  realm  are  bound  to  profess,  to  subscribe

*  the  articles  thereof,  the  confession  of  faith,  to  re-
'  cant  all  doctrine  and  errors  repugnant  to  any  of  the

*  said  articles."

47.  "  And  all  magistrates,  &c.  on  the  one  part,  are
i  ordained  to  search,  apprehend,  and  punish  all  con-
<  travellers.  That  all  kings  and  princes,  at  their  cor-
f  onation,  shall  make  their  solemn  oath  in  the  pres-
6  ence  of  the  eternal  God, — that  they  shall  be  care-

*  ful  to  root  out  of  their  empire  all  heretics, Sec."*
gCP  Could  the  decrees  of  that  horrible  court  of  the

*  In  the  National  Covenant,  which  was  subscribed  by  king  diaries  II.  in  the
year  1650,  and  1651,  and  which  all  within  the  realm  were  bound  by  an  ordi-
nance of  council  to  subscribe,  it  is  wr'tten. "  We  promise  and  swear  by  the

*  Great  name  of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  continue  in  the  profession  of  the  aforesaid
religion— and  resist  all  contrary  errors— all  the  days  of  our  life. And  in  like

4  manner  we  promise  and  swear,  that  we  shall  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  with
our  means  and  lives,  stand  to  the  defence  of  our  dread  sovereign,  the  king's

*  majesty,  his  person  and  authority,  in  the  defence  and  preservation,  of  tuo
aforesaid  true  religion."


352  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V,

Cxn?# PaPa*  Inquisition  be  more  manifestly  contrary  to  the

...■  spirit  and  precepts  of  the  gospel  ?

48.  Such  were  the  dire  decrees  and  bloody  resolu-
tions by  which  they  rooted  out  every  appearance  of
true  light,  and  in  their  rage  for  orthodoxy,  went  on
butchering  one  another,  until  the  testimony  of  George
Fox  furnished  a  common  object  of  persecuting  cru-
elty.


CHAPTER XII.

The  Subject  continued.


THE  same  year  in  which  the  National  Covenant  of
persecuting  venom  was  subscribed  by  Charles,
and  the  defenders  of  his  sovereignty,  George  Foxy
and  those  who  embraced  his  testimony,  received  the
^SSory name  °f  Quakers,  from  Gervas  BenneY,  a  persecu-
JM*.  ' ting  magistrate,  on  account  of  George  Fox's  bidding
him.  and  those  about  him,  tremble  at  the  word  of  the
Lord.
Ccci.m*. 2.  Mosheim  says,  "  It  is  not  at  all  surprising  that
vp.'lfi*.  4  the  secular  arm  was  at  length  raised  against  these
4  pernicious  fanatics,  for they  would  never  give  to
4  magistrates  those  titles  of  honour  and  pre-eminence
4  thut  are  designed  to  mark  the  respect  due  to  their
4  authority  ;  they  also  refused  obstinately  to  take  the
4  oath  of  allegiance  to their sovereign,  and  to  pay
4  tithes  to  the  clergy  ;  hence  they  were  looked  upon
4  as  rebellious  subjects,  and,  on  that  account,  were
4  frequently  punished  [persecuted]  with  great  sever-
4  ity."

3.  The  unreasonable  fines,  imprisonments,  banish-
ments, and  other  acts  of  cruelty  which  they  suffered,
under  the  united  rage  of  Protestant  priests  and  poli-
ticians, may  be  seen  at  large  in  Sewed9?  History  of  the
people  called  Quakers  ;  a  few  particulars  of  which  we
shall  notice.

4.  After  relating  many  scenes  of  cruelty,  which
terminated  in  the  death  of  the  sufferers,  the  historian


£.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  &5t


CHAP.

IX.


says,  "  Severe  persecution  raged  not  only  in  London,
but  all  over  the  kingdom  [in  1662]  of  which  a  rela-
tion was  printed  of  more  than  four  thousand  two  hun-  sewei's
dred  of  those  called  Quakers,  both  men  and  women,  ^uZ*
that  were  imprisoned  either  for  frequenting  meetings
or  for  refusing  to  swear.  Many  of  these  were  griev-
ously beaten,  or  their  clothes  torn,  or  taken  away  from
them  ;  and  some  were  put  into  such  stinking  dun-
geons, that  some  great  men  said,  they  would  not  have
put  their  hunting  dogs  there.''

o.  "  Some  prisons  were  crouded  full  of  both  men  and  •
women,  so  that  there  was  not  sufficient  room  for  all  to
sit  down  at  once  ;  and  in  Cheshire,  sixty-eight  persons
were  in  this  manner  locked  up  in  a  small  room.  By-
such  ill  treatment  many  grew  sick,  and  not  a  few  died
in  such  jails  ;  for  no  age  or  sex  was  regarded,  but  even
ancient  people,  of  sixty,  seventy,  and  more  years  of
age,  were  not  spared."

6.  u  This  year  [1.676]  died  in  prison  John  Sage,  ibid'
being  about  eighty  years  of  age,  after  having  been  in
prison  at  Ivelchesttr,  in  Somersetshire,  almost  ten
years,  for  not  paying  tithes.  And  it  appeared,  that
since  the  restoration  of  king  Charles,  above  two
hundred  of  the  people  called  Quakers,  died  in  prisons

in  England,  where  they  had  been  confined  because  of
their  religion."

7.  The  first  of  those  called  Quakers,  who  really
suffered  banishment,  were  Edward  Brush  and  James
Harding,  who  were  carried  to  Jamaica.  And  it  is
stated  as  a  remarkable  fact,  that  the  plague  which  soon
after  raged  with  such  violence  in  London,  first  broke
out  in  a  house  next  door  to  where  Edward  had  lived.

8.  In  the  forepart  of  the year  1665,  many  of  the *Mfc
Quakers were  sentenced  to  be  transported  ;  and  as p*
the  sentences  of  transportation  were  multiplied  in  the
course  of  the  following  summer  ;  so  (as  is  remarked)

the  number  of  those  that  died  of  the  pestilence  much
more  increased.

9.  In  consequence  of  those  cruel  sentences,  fifty  -
|  five  Quakers,  eighteen  of  whom  were  women,  were
I  put  on  board  one  ship;  but  before  they  were  able  to
I  proceed  on  their  voyage,  the  plague  so  increased  that
I  many  died  on  board  the  ship  ;  and  according  to  the


§54  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P. V*

chap, bills  of  'mortality,  in  the  beginning  of  August,  while
' the  ship  was  yet  in  port,-  upwards  of  three  thousand
died  in  one  week  in  the  city  of  London.

10.  Notwithstanding  the  number  of  deaths  still  in-
creased, and  the  pestilence  raged  to  that  degree,  in
the  latter  end  of  September  that  upwards  of  eight
thousand  people  died  in  London  in  one  week,  and  the
grass  grew  in  the  most  populous  streets  of  the  city  ;
yet  the  Quakers  meetings  were  still  disturbed,  and
sentences  of  transportation  still  continued,
sewers  1  *•  According  to  the  laws  of  the  realm,  the  penalty
History,  for  attending  any  conventicle  or  religious  meeting,
p*  '  separate  from  the  established  worship,  was  three
months  imprisonment  or  live  pounds  for  the  first  of-
fence, and  ten  pounds  or  six  months  imprisonment
for  the  second,  and  banishment  beyond  the  seas,  for
seven  years,  for  the  third  offence,  or  one  hundred
pounds  for  a  discharge,  and  the  additional  sum  of  one
hundred  pounds  more  for  every  new  offence  commit-
ted.

12.  And  in  case  that  any  one,  being  condemned  to
banishment,  should  escape  or  return  within  the  time
prescribed,  he  should  suffer  death,  and  forfeit  all  his
goods  and  chattels  forever.  Under  this  wTorse  than
savage  system  many  were  fleeced  of  their  whole  es-
tates, while  the  malicious  priests  exercised  their  ut-
most vigilance  to  detect  the  innocent,  and  inflame  the
civil  powers,  with  whom  they  shared  the  spoil.

13.  It  would  be  endless  to  enumerate  the  sums  un-
justly aud  cruelly  extorted  from  the  harmless  Qucikersy
by  those  greedy  dogs.  "  Among  others  (says  Scwel^)
one  Henry  Marshall,  having  several  benefices — yet
how  great  soever  his  revenues  were,  kept  poor  peo-
ple of  that  persuasion  in  prison  for  not  paying  tithes
to  him  :  and  once  he  said,  from  the  pulpit,  that  not

atJd one  Quaker  should  be  left  alive  in  England." And

p. 486*. the  bishop  of  Peterborough said  publicly — "  When

'  the parliament sits  again,  a  stronger  law  will  be

c  made,  not  only  to  take  away  their lands  and  goods,

i  but  also  to  sell  them  for  bond  slaves.'*

14.  Thus  the  churchmen  blew  the  fire  of  persecu-
tion, and  kindled  so  high  a  flame  in  the  breasts  of  un-
merciful statesmen,  that,  Justice  FennisTon Wha-


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT REFORMERS.  $$&

let,  who had fined  many  of  those  called  Quakers c^-

for  attending their  religious  meetings,  encouraged  1_

the  people  at  the  sessions  to  persecute  the  Quakers  scwei's
without  pity,  saying, "  Harden  your  hearts against  ""tory*
1  them,  for  the  act  of  the  thirty-fifth  of  Q.  Elizabeth,
lis  not  made  against  the  Papists  ;  since  the  church  of
i  Rome  is  a  true  church,  as  well  as  any  other  church  $

*  but  the  Quakers  are  erroneous  and  seditious  persons ."

15.  And  again,  at  the  trial  of  William  Penn,  the
recorder  of  the  court  ventured  to  say,  "  Till  now  I

<  never  understood  the  reason  of  the  policy  and  pru-

<  dence  of  the  Spaniards  in  suffering  the  Inquisition
f  among  them.  And  certainly  it  will  never  be  well
I  with  us,  till  something  like  the  Spanish  inquisition,

*  be  in  England. °  The  fact  is,  they  never  had  been
without  something  like  it,  during  the  whole  pro-
gress of  the  Reformation,  as  their  own  histories,
creeds  and  confessions  abundantly  declare.

16.  The  same  histories,  creeds  and  confessions,
with  the  impartial  records  of  other  writers,  make  it
also  most  pointedly  manifest,  that  there  is  no  essen-
tial difference  between  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  the
Protestant  reformers,  and  those  infernal  and  beastly-
cruelties  practised  in  the  darkest  ages  of  popery,  and
that  they,  as  well  as  their  Catholic  ancestors,  gloried
in  nothing  greater  than  in  building  up  their  Zion
with  blood.

17.  We  shall  now  leave  Europe,  and  trace  the  con-
duct of  those  famous  Protestants  who  called  themselves
Puritans,  who  fled  from  the  iron  arm  of  persecution,
at  home,  and  crossed  the  Atlantic,  to  find  liberty  of
conscience  in  the  destined  land  of  American  freedom.

18.  The  persecution  of  the  Quakers  in  New-Eng-
land, under  the  established  hierarchy  of  Governor
John  Endicot,  Priests  Morton,  Wilson,  and  others,  dif-
fered from  these  before  mentioned,  only  as  a  small
stream  differs  from  a  great  flood.  The  same  spirit
prevailed,  and  the  same  cruelties  were  exercised  :
such  as  imprisoning,  fining,  confiscation  of  goods,
banishing,  unmerciful  scourging,  burning  with  hot
irons,  cutting  offeayr,  and  destroying  their  innocent
lives  by  the  ignominious  gallows.  ibIil

19.  These  detestable  scenes  of  more  than  savage p.  ih»

Kk


8j6  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  0$  P.  V.

mxii' barbarity,  began  in  the  month  called  July,  1656. Ma-
"  ry  Fisher  and  Ann  Austin* having  armed  in  the road

before  Boston,  the  deputy  governor  Bellingham,  had
them  brought  on  shore,  and  committed  to  prison,  as
Quakers.  They  were  stript  naked  under  pretence  of
knowing*  whether  they  were  witches,  "  and  in  this
*  search,  (says  Sewel,)  they  were  so  barbarously  misus-
i  ed  that  modesty  forbids  to  mention  it.s>— -After  about
five  weeks  imprisonment,  they  were  sent  back  to  Old
E-ngfand,  their  beds  and  bibles  being  taken  by  the
jailor  for  his  fees.

20.  Scarce  a  month  after,  eight  others  of  those  cal-
led Quakers  came  ;  they  were  locked  up  in  the  same
manner  as  the  former  ;  and  after  about  eleven  weeks
stay,  were  sent  back.  John  Endicot  bid  them  "  Take
1  heed  that  ye  break  not  our  ecclesiastical  laws,  for
i  then  ye  arc  sure  to  stretch  by  the  halter."

21.  Then  a  law  was  made  to  prohibit  all  masters  of
ships  from  bringing  any  Quakers  into  that  jurisdic-
tion. Nicholas  Ufisaly  a  member  of  the  church,  and  a
man  of  unblamable  character,  for  speaking  against
such  proceedings,  was  fined  twenty -three  pounds,  and
imprisoned  also  for  not  coming  to  church  ;  next  they
banished  him  out  of  their  jurisdiction  ;  and  though  a
weakly  old  man,  yet  he  was  forced  to  depart  in  the
winter.  Nicholas  afterwards  met  with  an  Indian
prince,  who,  having  understood  how  he  had  been  us-
ed, offered  to  make  him  a  warm  house  ;  and  further
said,  "  What  a  God  have  the  English,  who  deal  so  with
4  one  another  about  their  God  .'"

lewd'* 22.  The following:  year,  1657,  Anne Burden  and,

Mist !>  •

i#*,i».  Mary  Dyer  were  imprisoned  at  Boston  ;  and  Mary
Clark,  for  warning  th'ese  persecutors  to  desist  from
their  iniquity,  was  unmercifully  rewarded  with  twen-
ty stripes  of  a  three  corded  whip  on  her  naked  back,
and  detained  in  prison  about  three  months  in  the  win-
*  Se© ter  season.  [*] The  cords  of  these  whips  were  com-

*?v,u" monly  as  thick  as  a  man's  little  finger,  having each
some  knots  at  the  end,

2  3.  ChrUtofiher  Holder  and  John  Cofieland  were
whipt  at  Boston  the  same  year,  each  thirty  stripes  with
a  knotted  whip  of  three  cords,  the  hangman  measur-
ing his  ground  and  fetching  the  strokes  with  all  the
force  he  could,  which  so  cruelly  cut  their  flesh  that  a


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMEH9.  357

woman  seeing it,  fell  down' for dead. Then  they  cgIAIp-

were  locked  up  in  prison  and  kept  three  days  without

food,  or  so  much  as  a  drink  of  water,  and  detained  in
prison  nine  weeks  in  the  cold  winter  season,  without
fire,  bed,  or  straw.

24.  Lawrence  and  Cassandra  Southick,  and  their  son
Josiah,  being  carried  to  Boston,  were  ail  of  them,  not-
withstanding the  old  age  of  the  two,  sent  to  the  house
of  correction,  and  whipt  with  cords  as  those  before,  in
the  coldest  season  of  the  year,  and  had  taken  from
them  to  the  value  of  four  pounds  ten  shillings,  for  not
coming  to  church.

25.  In  the  year  1658,  a  law  was  made,  which,  be-
sides imposing  heavy  penalties  and  imprisonments,  ex-
tended to  working  in  the  house  of  correction,  severe
whipping,  cutting  off  ears,  and  boring  through  their
tongues  with  a  red  hot  iron,  whether  male  or  female,
and  such  like  inhuman  barbarities.

26.  The  same,  year  William.  Br  end  and  William  seal's
Lcddra,  came  to  Newbury  ;  thence  they  were  carried  p^P'
to  Boston,  to  the  house  of  correction,  to  work  there  ;

but  they,  unwilling  to  submit  thereto,  were  kept  five
days  without  any  food,  and  then  beaten  twenty  strokes
with  a  three-corded  whip.

27.  'Next  they  were  put  into  irons,  neck  and  heels  so
close  together,  that  there  was  no  more  room  left  be-
tween, than  for  the  lock  that  fastened  them,  and  kept
in  that  situation  sixteen  hours,  and  then  brought  to
the  mill  to  work,  but  Brend refusing,  was  beaten  by  the
inhuman  jailor,  with  a  pitched  rope,  more  than  a  hun-  mf  {$,
dred  strokes,  till  his  flesh  was  bruised  into  a  jelly,  hi«
body  turned  cold,  and  for  some  time  he  had  neither
seeing,  feeling  nor  hearing.

28.  The  high  priest,  John  Norton,  was  heard  to
say,  "  William  Brend  endeavoured  to  beat  our  gcsfiel
ordinances  black  and  blue,  if  then  he  be  beaten  black
and  blue,  it  is  but  justufion  him  ;  and  I  will  afifiear  in
the  behalf  of  him  that  did  so."  Bloody  priest !  Who
will  appear  in  thy  behalf,  at  the  great  tribunal  of  Al-
mighty God  ?

29.  In  the  same  year,  John  Cofleland,  Christofiher  ibid.  p.
Holder,  and  John  Rous  were  taken  up,  and  in  a  private  19S» 194,
manner  had  their  right  ears  cut  off  by  authority. And,


THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V,


CHAP
XII.


*0,  il.


as  if  these  inhuman  barbarities  were  not  sufficient,  John
A- or  ton,  and  other  priests -petitioned  for  a  law  to  ban-
ish the  Quakers  on  pain  of  death.  The  petition  was
granted  October  20th,  1658,  by  the  court  of  Boston.
A  short  extract  of  the  law  is  as  follows.

30.  u  Whereas  there  is  a  pernicious  sect,  (com-
<  monly  called  Quakers) — do  take  upon  them  to  change

*  and  alter  the  received  laudable  customs  of  our  na-
f  tion, — -and  also  to  destroy  the  order  of  the  churches,

Acts\i. <  ky  denying  all  established  forms  of  worship  [*] —
in?**1*  *  F°r  PVe mention  thereof,  this  court  doth  order  and

*  enact,  that  every  person  or  persons — being  convict-
'  ed  to  be  of  the  sect  of  the  Quakers,  shall  be  sen-
4  tenced  to  be  banished  upon  pain  of  death."

Sewers  31.  Daniel  and* Provided  Squ thick,  son  and  daugh-
**wl*  *er  t0  Lawrence  and  Cassandra,  not  frequenting  the
assemblies  of  such  a  persecuting  generation,  were  fin-
ed ten  pounds,  though  it  was  well  known  they  had
no  estate,  their  parents  being  already  brought  to  pov-
erty by  their  rapacious  persecutors.  To  get  this  mo-
ney, the  general  court  at  Boston  issued  out  an  order,
by  which  the  treasurers  of  the  several  counties  were
empowered  to  sell  the  said  persons  to  any  of  the  Eng-
lish nation  at  Virginia  or  Barbadoes,  to  answer  the
said  fines.

32.  William  Mast  on,  at  Hamfiton,  was  fined  ten
pounds  for  two  books  found  in  his  house,  five  pounds
for  not  frequenting  their  church,  and  three  pounds
besides  as  due  to  the  priest ;  for  which  fine  he  had
taken  from  him,  what  amounted  to  more  than  twen-
ty pounds.  Not  long  after,  above  a  thousand  pounds,
were  taken  from  some,  only  because  they  had  sepa-
rated themselves  from  the  persecuting  church.
ihid.  33.  Thomas  Prince,  governor  of  Plymouth,  was

fr  219,  heard  to  say,  That  in  his  conscience  the  Quakers  were
such  a  people  as  deserved  to  be  destroyed,  they,  their
wives  and  children,  their  houses  and  lands,  without  pi*
ty  or  mercy. — Humphrey  Norton  at  New^Haven,  for
being  a  Quaker,  was  severely  whipt,  and  burnt  in  the
hand  with  the  letter  H.  to  signify  Heretic.
M)id.  34.  1 ne  unjust  and  bloody  sentence  of  death  was

p.  326. executed  upon William Robinson and  Marmaduke
Stephenson,  the  27th  of  October, 1659. When  they


P. V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  359

were come  near  the  gallows, the  priest  [_Witeon~\ c£i*'

tauntingly  said  to  Robinson,  "  Shall  such  Jacks  as  you

c  come  in  before  authority  with  their  hats  on?"  To
which  Robinson  replied,  "  Mind  you,  mind  you,  it  is
for  the  not  putting  off  the  hat  we  are  put  to  death  i"

35.  The  persons  that  were  hanged, were  barba-
.  rously  used — even  their  shirts  were  ripped  off  with  a

knife,  an_d  their  naked  bodies  cast  into  a  hole  that  was
dug,  without  any  covering. And  Priest  Wilson  makes

i  a  ballad  on  them. On  the  3  1st  of  the  third  month

1660,  Mary  Dyer  was  sentenced  to  death  by  Endi-  seweiv

cot,  and  the  next  day  executed. William  Leddra  JJ18^1

returned  to  Boston,  was  cast  into  an  open  prison,  and
locked  in  chains  day  and  night,  in  a  very  cold  winter,
and  was  sentenced  to, death,  and  executed  on  the  14th
of  the  first  month  1661.

36.  Many,  both  men  and  women,  were  stript  na-
ked from  the  waist  and  upward,  tied  to  the  cart-tail
and  scourged  in  the  most  brutal  and  barbarous  man-
ner, while  the  priests,  who  were  the  principal  insti-
gators to  such  more  than  savage  meanness,  were  pleas-
ed in  nothing  better  than  in  the  exercise  of  such  an-
tichristian  and  diabolical  cruelties.

37.  Peter  Pearson  and  Judith  Brown,  being  stript  ibid,?,
to  the  waist,  were  fastened  to  a  cart-tail,  and  whipt  272j3W*
through  the  town  of  Boston — Also  Josiah Southick

was  stript  and  led  through  the  streets  of  Boston  at  the
cart-tail,  and  vehemently  scourged  by  the  hangman.
The  same  day  he  was  whipt  at  Roxbury,  and  the
next  morning  at  Dedham.  The  whip  used  for  these
cruel  executions,  was  not  of  whip  cord,  but  of  dried
guts  ;  and  each  string  with  three  knots  at  the  end.

38.  At  Dover,  Anne  Coleman,  Mary  Tomkins,  and
Ailice  Ambrose,  were  sentenced  to  be  fastened  to  the
cart-tail,  and  whipt  on  their  naked  backs, through  Dee.  22*.
eleven  towns,  a  distance  of  near  eighty  miles. Then  U63%

in  a  very  cold  day,  the  deputy  Walden,  at  Dover,
caused  these  women  to  be  stript  naked,  from  the
middle  upward,  and  tied  to  a  cart,  ancl  then  whipt
them,  while  the  priest  looked  on  and  laughed  at  it.
Two  of  their  friends  testified  against  Waldenys  cruel-  *sceJer.
ty,  for  which  they  were  put  in  the  stocks.*  Aci  «§

39.  The  women  were  carried  to  Hamfiton^  and  there  34.

Kk3


360  THE  PERSECUTING  SPIRIT  OF  P.  V.

CxnP' W^*P* — from  thence  to  Salsbury  and  again  whipt. — -

William  Barefoot  at  length  obtained  the  warrant  from

the  constable  and  let  them  go  :  the  priest  advising-  to
the  contrary.  Not  long  after,  these  women  returned
to  Dover,  and  were  again  seized,  while  in  meeting,
and  barbarously  dragged  about  at  the  instigation  of
[a  man  falsely  called]  Hat e -evil  J\ut well,  a  ruling  el-
der.*

40.  Afterwards,  Anne  Coleman,  and  four  of  her
friends  were  whipt  through  Salem,  Boston,  and  Dcd-
ham,  by  order  of  Hawthorn  the  magistrate.  Anne
Coleman  was  a  little  weakly  woman  ;  Bellingham  en-
couraging the  executioner  while  she  was  fastening  to
the  cart  at  Dedham,  he  laid  on  so  severely,  that  with
the  knot  of  the  whip  he  split  the  nipple  of  her  breast,
which  so  tortured  her,  that  it  almost  took  away  her
life.

4 1 .  These  are  a  few  instances  out  of  many,  of  those
diabolical,  beastly,  and  more  than  savage  cruelties,
which  were  exercised  by  those  who  pretended  that
for  conscience  sake  they  had  chosen  the  wilderness  of
America  !  And  such  were  the  fruits  of  the  Protest-
ant religion  in  its  greatest  purity. — Let  them  cease
to  disgrace  the  name  of  Jesus  ;  they  never  knew  him,
but  were  the  great-grand  children  of  those  who  per-
secuted the  prophets — they  were  the  posterity  of:
Cain — Walking  in  the  way  of  Balaam — Raging
waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out  their  own  shame.

y\Ut.  of  42.  To  the  above  matters  of  fact  may  be  added  the
p*458np*  following  just  remark  inserted  in  the  History  of  Re-
tfb*e[c]  demption.  After  speaking  of  the  persecutions  and
oppressions  in  the  times  of  the  Stuarts,  and  the  ty-
ranny of  archbishop  Laub  and  his  furious  associates^
the  writer  observes,  that  "  persecution  has  not  been
i  confined  to  such  men  :  every  sect  (s?cys  he)  and
*  some  of  the  best  men  in  each  have'  engaged  in
4  the  diabolical  business. With  what bitterness

*  The  barbarity  of  their  persecutors,  on  this  occasion,  exceeds  all  description.
Being  seized  in  meeting,  while  on  their  knees  in  prayer,  they  were  dragged  by
tbtir  arms  nearly  a  mile,  through  a  deep  snow,  across  fields  and  over  stumps,  by
miich  they  were  much  bruised.  The  next  day  they  were  barbarously  dragged
•lown  a -steep  hill  to  the  water  side  and  threatened  with  drowning,  and  one  of
them  was  actually  plunged  iuto  the  water,  when  a  sudden  shower  obliged  them
to  retreat-— At  length,  after  much  abuse,  these  poor  victims  of  orthodox  barbar-
ity, wei-e  turned  out  of  doors  at  midnight,  and  with  their  cloathes  wet  and  ireze*Y  \
view  oblijjed  to  suffer  the  ineleuiyney  of  a  severe  winter's  ci^kt.


P.  V.  THE  PROTESTANT  REFORMERS.  361

*  did  the  Lutherans,  Zuinglia7isy  and Calvinists,  and e5fjP>

4  other  parties  of  the  reformers,  abuse,  imprison,  and  L,

4  banish  each  other,  is  two  well  attested  by  ecclesias-

4  tical  historians  of  the  sixteenth  century ."

43.  "  Not  to  mention  the  blood  of  sectaries  unjust-
4  ly  shed  at  home  and  abroad  ;  Not  only  did  the  Epis-

*  copalians  in  England  persecute  the  dissenters  ;  but
4  in  Scotland,  and  during*  the  commonwealth  in  Eng-
4  land,  these  persecuted  the  Episcopalians.  And
4  what  is  perhaps  more  extraordinary,  even  in  New-.
4  England,  where  the  first  colonists  fled  from  the  iron
4  hand  of  oppression  at  home,  they  persecuted  the
4  Quakers  and  others  who  differed  from  their  estab-
4  lishment.  How  then  (adds  the  writer)  shall  we  ac-
4  count  for  these  enormities,  but  upon  the  principle,
4  — that  it  proceeds  from  the  general  depravity  of  hu-


man nature.


•>>


44.  And  a  general  defiravity  it  is,  when  the  best
men,  in  all  their  established  sects  and  parties,  are,  by
the  confession  of  their  own  writers,  diabolical  perse-
cutors. And  if  persecution  is  a  diabolical,  or  devil-
ish work,  well  said  Christ  of  such,  Ye  are  of  your  fa-  seejtf*
ther  the  Devil,  and  the  lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do  :  ^^
he  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,  and  abode  not

in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in  him.

45.  Yet,  by  all  these  most  horrid  cruelties  and
abominable  works,  they  established,  what  is  called
the  Christian  World,  upon  the  principles  of  false
teachers,  corrupted  priests,  bloody  emperors,  imperi-
ous popes,  and  diabolical  persecutors,  including  the
ecclesiastical  tyrants  of  every  age,  from  Constan-
tine,  down  to  John  Norton,  and  the  rest  of  the  pro-
testant  priest-hood  under  Governor  Endicot.

46.  But  their  diabolical  works  unmask  their  Chris-
tianity, and  by  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  a  Pet**
the  foundations  of  their  World  are  discovered,  which
hath  been  long  kept  in  store,  reserved  unto  fire,  against
the  day  of  judgment,  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men.


7.


THE TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  VI.

THE  EXTENT  AND  DURATION OF WHAT
IS  CALLED  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD.

CHAPTER  I.

Worldly  Christians  contrasted  with  virtuous  Believers

in  Christ.

THE  disciples  of  Christ  or  learners  of  the  gos-  chap,
pel,  were  first  called  Christians  at  Antioch.
Under  this  name  all  were,  in  process  of  time  inclu-
ded, who  professed  to  believe  that  Jesus  was  the
promised  Messiah.  But  when  Antichrist  arose,  and
assumed  the  name  and  authority  of  Christ,  he  was
properly  a  false  Christy  and  his  disciples  of  course
must  be  false  Christians ;  therefore  the  Christian
world  must  mean  that  world  of  Christians  who  are
the  followers  of  a  false  Christy  and  who  wondered
after  the  beast ;  while  such  as  retained  a  measure  of
the  true  Christian  faith  and  practice,  must  be  called
by  some  other  name.

2.  From  what  has  been  already  stated  concerning
the  rise  and  progress  of  Antichrist's  dominion,  it
appears  that  after  the  days  of  the  apostles,  there  re-
mained but  little  room  for  the  pure  and  undented  re-
ligion of  Jesus,  on  earth.

3.  How  far  the  fire  of  truth  was  extinguished,  by
those  floods  of  error,  which  early  began  to  be  disgor-
ged by  false  a/iostles  and  deceitful  workers,  and  how
extensively  the  influence  of  Antichristian  corruption
prevailed,  is  particularly  worthy  of  reflection,  in  or-
der to  discover  the  real  distinction  between  the  multi-


364  W031LDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH P.  VI.

chap. tucje  wko  assume(i  the  name of  Christ,  and  called
___  him Lord,  Lord,  and  the virtuous  few,  who  were
careful  to  do  the  things  that  he  said.

4.  Ail  that  the  false  spirit  could  engage  in  his  ser-
vice, from  his  first  rise,  he  did  engage,  and  all  that
he  engaged  in  his  service  he  did  corrupt,  in  the  high-
est degree  ;  so  that  in  the  progress  of  his  dominion,
as  far  as  his  influence  extended,  both  men  and  things
were  most  effectually  changed  for  the  worse.

5.  Emperors,  kings,  and  every  class  of  civil  ru-
lers, became  more  tyrannical ;  laws  and  maxims  of
civil  policy  more  cruel  and  oppressive  ;  soldiers  more
barbarous  ;  every  kind  of  craftsmen  more  addicted  to
deception  and  fraud  ;  and  every, art  and  science  more
perverted  to  the  purposes  of  pride,  luxury,  and  un-
righteous gain.

6.  All  orders  of  priesthood  were  more  corrupted,
and  learned  greater  arts  of  imposition  and  deceit ;  the
sacred  scriptures  were  corrupted  from  beginning  to
end,  both  in  the  sense  and  application,  especially  the
doctrines  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  In  a-  word,  ev-
ery thing  that  Antichrist  could  get  hold  of,  or  in  any
wise  attach  to  his  corrupt  kingdom,  whether  it  rela-
ted to  soul  or  body,  to  faith  or  practice,  to  time  or
eternity,  he  so  corrupted  that  the  whole  creation  was,
in  a  moral  sense,  removed  to  a  much  greater  distance
from  God.

7.  Every  age  improved  upon  the  corruptions  of
the  past,  and  prepared  a  greater  degree  of  corrup-
tion for  the  following  ;  and  thus  it  continued  and  in-
creased until  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  cor-
rupted ;  and  as  far  as  Antichrist's  claim  extended,
nothing  escaped  his  poisonous  and  corrupting  influ-
ence, save  those  few  enlightened  souls  who  were  wil-
ling to  face  death  in  all  its  most  frightful  forms,  ra-
ther than  come  under  his  dominion.

8.  Amidst  all  the  presumptuous  claims  and  high
pretensions  of  the  false  spirit,  by  which  the  world
was  deceived,  God  did  reserve  the  spirit  of  faith  and
of  true  virtue  in  his  own  power,  and  whenever  it  was
poured  out  upon  any  people,  the  life  and  substance
©f  that  spirit  was  out  of  the  deceiver's  reach.

9.  True,  he  could  torture  the  bodies,  corrupt  and


JfrVL  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  I*  CHRIST.  365

pervert  the  words,  and  maliciously  misrepresent  the  CK£r-
action's  of  those  who  possessed  that  spirit ;  but  the  ..
spirit  itself,  by  which  they  spake  and  were  actuated,
remained  uncorrupted  and  undefiled  through  the
whole  of  his  pernicious  reign,  and  is  to  this  day,
where  ever  it  is  found,  a  swift  witness  against  all  his
deceitful  claims  to  orthodoxy,  and  all  his  beastly  works.

10.  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  a  false  Christ  often
had  power  to  corrupt  by  flatteries,  and  draw  into  his
communion,  many  who  had,  for  a  time,  been  actua-
ted by  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  bore  a  swift  testimony
against  error  and  vice  :  whole  societies  of  such  were
frequently  overcome  by  the  beast,  and  swallowed  up
in  the  general  mass  of  corruption.

1 1 .  But  the  spirit  of  truth  never  could  be  overcome,
nor  led  captive  with  them  ;  but  would  again  raise  up
others  of  the  same  description,  separate  from  the
catholic  kingdom  ;  and  thus  a  measure  of  the  true
work  of  God,  and  the  fruits  of  the  spirit  of  truth,
from  time  to  time  appeared,  and  stood  as  a  monu-
ment to  condemn  the  universal  corruptions  of  a  false
religion,  which  overspread  the  earth  under  the  name
of  Christianity.

12.  Therefore,  for  the  truth*s  sake,  we  are  bound
to  distinguish  between  that  spirit  which  ruled  the
motley  mixture  of  Pagans,  Jews,  and  pretended  Chris-
tians, and  that  very  different  spirit  which,  in  a  sepa-
rate and  distinct  people,  was  all  along  distinguished  by
the  fruits  of  mortification  and  abstinence,  piety,  vir-
tue, innocence,  and  simplicity  of  manners.

13.  Ccrdon,  Martian,  Mani,  Novation,  Hierax,
Priscillian,  and  those  who  followed  their  example,
would  doubtless  furnish  a  very  different  history  from
that  of  the  contending  philosophers,  emperors,  and
popes,  were  their  sentiments,  their  lives,  and  their
actions  justly  recorded.  Even  the  small  traces  of
virtue,  that  have  been  transmitted  down  through  the
writings  of  their  adversaries,  are  sufficient  to  show
the  striking  contrast  that  existed  between  them  and
the  great  Christian  hierarchy.

14.  Under  the  various  names  of  Marcionites,  Ma-
nicheanS)  Bogoniilans^  Cathaii,  Beghards,  Picards,
Waldense^ Mbigenscs>  Anabafitista, &c. there ap-


366  WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH P.  VI.

chap, peared,  at  different  periods,  a  people  who  bore  a
.T  striking resemblance  to  each other,  both  in their

faith  and  manners.

15.  They  considered  Jesus  Christ  not  as  the  foun-
der of  a  temporal  hierarchy,  but  as  a  pattern  of  piety
and  virtue  :  hence  they  placed  religion  not  so  much
in  doctrines  and  outward  forms  of  worship,  as  in  pu-
rity of  heart  and  a  virtuous  practice  ;  and  hence  they
bore  a  uniform  testimony  against  vice,  and  the  estab-
lished orthodoxy  of  the  standing  priesthood.

1 6.  Many  of  them  chose  a  life  of  continence,  others
did  not  :  they  allowed  each  other  liberty  of  conscience,
that  each  might  live  according  to  their  own  faith,  and
they  persecuted  none  who  differed  from  them.  They
took  no  oaths,  bore  no  arms,  and  patiently  endured
persecution  for  the  testimony  which  they  held.

17.  And  what  was  all  this,  but  a  standing  memo-
rial of  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the  true  gospel,
and  a  witness  against  the  corrupt  religion  established
by  human  authority  ?  Not  that  either  the  doctrine  or
manners  of  those  virtuous  people  were  formed  into
any  system,  or  conveyed,  by  any  external  authority,
from  one  to  another  ;  but  being  influenced  by  the
same  invisible  Spirit,  however  disconnected  they
might  have  been,  as  to  external  things,  their  faith
and  practice  were  essentially  the  same  in  nature,
though  not  always  in  degree.

1 8.  Wherever  such  a  faith  and  practice  were  mani-
fested, they  never  failed  to  reprove  and  condemn  thatt
which  was  of  a" contrary  nature  ;  and  such  was  then  the
true  work  of  God  for  that  purpose  ;  therefore,  as  vice
and  wickedness  increased  among  the  great  orthodox :!
Christians,  virtue  was  elsewhere  practised,  under
some  other  name,  sufficient  in  degree  to  expose  the
kingdom  of  the  beast  in  its  proper  colours.

19.  Thus,  while  the  door  of  the  catholic  church
stood  open  to  all  characters,  and  the  universal  deprav-
ity of  priests  ajid  people,  destroyed  every  real  dis-
tinction between  virtue  and  vice  in  that  apartment,
the  people  taught  by  Xovatian,  stood  as  a  living  re-
proof of  their  libertine  government. Some  exclaim!

Eect.Be-  ec] «  it  is  a  barbarous  discipline  to  refuse  to  re-admit

searches,  ' ■»'  "."' «i » «  • *  11

li.  127. {  people  into  Christian  communion  because  they  have


P.  VI.  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  IN  CHRIST.  367


CHAP.
I.


lapsed  into  idolatry  and  vice."  Others  finding  the
inconvenience  of  such  a  lax  discipline,  required  a  re-
pentance of  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  years.

20.  But  the  Novatians  said,  "  If  you  be  a  virtuous
c  bejiever,  and  will  accede  to  our  confederacy  against

sin,  you  may  be  admitted  among  us  by  baptism,  or  if
any  Catholic  has  baptized  you  before,  by  re -baptism.
But  mark  this,  if  you  violate  the  contract  by  lapsing
into  idolatry  and  vice,  we  shall  separate  you  from
our  community,  and,  do  what  you  will,  we  shall  nev-
er re-admit  you. God  forbid  we  should  either  injure

1  your  person,  your  property,  or  your  character,  or
even  judge  of  the  truth  of  your  repentance,  and  your
future  state  :  But  you  can  never  be  re-admitted  to

f  our  community  without  our  giving  up  the  best  and
only  coercive  guardian  we  have  of  the  purity  of  our
morals.'*

21.  This  Novatian  discipline,  Eusebius  says,  "  rent
the  unity  of  the  church."  Truly  it  showed  that  the
church  of  Christ  and  a  wicked  idolatrous  world  could
never  be  united.  But  when  Antichrist  had  completed
the  union  between  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers,
and  a  w>.ole  empire  was  christianized  at  once,  by  a
mere  change  of  human  government,  the  state  of  the
world,  thus  united  to  the  church,  might  have  appear-
ed unspeakably  glorious,  had  not  God  reserved  a  peo-
ple, whose  virtuous  practice  should  expose  the  uni-
versal deception  of  the  self-stiled  Catholics.

22.  "  Certain  it  is, (says  Robinson,)  the  virtuous  Kcci.Se-
Manicheans  thought  they  were  only  Pagan  schisma-  JJfSjf8'
tics,  acting  vice  in  the  name  of  the  most  virtuous  of
beings,  Jesus  Christ,  whose  character  must  sink  in
proportion  as  theirs  rose."

23.  Thus  Faustus,  the  Manichean,  said  to  Saint
Augustin  :  "  How  dare  you  call  me  a  Pagan  schis-
'  matic  ?  The  Pagans  honour  God,  they  think,  by
c  building  temples,  by  erecting  altars  and  images,  and

<  by  offering  sacrifice  and  incense.  I  have  quite  other
4  notions.  I  consider  myself,  if  I  be  worthy,  a  ration-
4  al  temple  of  God. I  honour  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,

<  as  his  express  image.  A  well  instructed  mind  is
c  his  altar,  and  pure  and  simple  adoration  the  accept-
1  able  sacrifice  to  God."

LI


368  WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITK P.  VL

chap. 24.  "  For  your  parts,. you  have  substituted  the  cer-

m  4  emonies  of  your  love  feasts  in  the  place  of  sacrifices,

4  martyrs  instead  of  idols,  and  you  honour  them  as  the
4  Pagans  do  their  deities,  by  votive  offerings.  Ycu
"Ghosts.  <  appease  the  manes*  of  the  dead  by  wine  and  festi
4  vals.  You  celebrate  the  feasts  of  paganism  by  oh
i  serving  days  :  and  in  regard  to  their  morals,  you  pre
4  serve  them  entire,  and  have  altered  nothing.  It  is
4  you  then,  and  not  we,  who  are  Pagan  schismatics,
4  and  nothing  distinguishes  you  from  the  rest  of  the
4  heathens,  but  your  holding  separate  assemblies."

25.  "  You  ask  me  whether  I  believe  the  gospel  ?
4  Is  that  a  question  to  put  to  a  man  who  observes  all
4  the  precepts  of  it  ?  I  might  with  propriety  put  the
4  question  to  you,  because  your  life  gives  no  proof  oi
4  it."
,Kid.Re-  26.  44  As  for  me,  I  have  quitted  father,  mother,
2^7^  4  and  children.  I  have  renounced  all  that  the  gospel
4  commands  me  to  renounce  ;  and  you  ask  me  wheth-
4  er  I  believe  the  gospel.  I  perceive  you  do  not  urn.
4  derstand  the  gospel,  which  is  nothing  but  the  doc-
4  trine  and  precepts  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  see  in  me
4  the  beatitudes  mentioned  by  Jesus  Chris*.  I  an
4  poor  in  spirit,  meek,  peaceable,  pure  in  heart.  Yoi
4  see  me  suffer  sorrow,  hunger,  thirst,  persecution
4  and  the  hatred  of  the  work!  for  righteousness  sake;
i  yet  you  doubt  whether  I  believe  the  gospel. "

27.  "  I  do  not  admit  the  genealogy  of  Christ ;  anc
4  you  do  admit  it :  You  do  not  practise  the  precepts  o
.  4  Christ ;  and  I  do  practise  them.  Thus  neither  o
4  us' admit  the  whole  gospel ;  but  it  must  be  allowed
4  you  have  chosen  the  easy,  and  I  the  difficult  part
4  and  that  Jesus  hath  not  annexed  the  promise  of  sal
4  vation  to  your  part;  but  he  hath  to  mine.  He  hatf
4  said,  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  com
4  mand  you  ;  but  he  hath  not  said,  Ye  are  my  friend
4  if  ye  believe  I  was  born  of  a  virgin."

23.  The  analogy  between  virtuous  believers  of  ev
ery  age,  may  be  seen  in  the  general  accounts,  in  his
tory,  of  heretics,  enthusiasts  and  fanatics;  and  tha
such  had  no  relation  to  the  Christian  world,  is  mani
fest  from  the  history  of  persecutions,  from  Nero
emperor  of  Rome,  down  to  John  Endicot,  gover
nor  of  Boston.


P.  VI.  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  IN  CHRIST.  369


29.  To  be  sewed  up  in  the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  and
worried  to  death  by  dogs,  or  dressed  in  shirts  made
stiff  with  wax  and  set  on  fire)  was  the  fate  of  heretics
under  the  reign  of  Nero.  And  for  what  cause  was
every  additional  mode  of  torture  employed  by  his  suc-
cessors, to  extirpate  them  from  the  earth  ;  imprison-
ing, scourging,  racking,  searing,  burning,  drowning,
or  tearing  them  piecemeal  with  red-hot  pincers  ?  The
whole  ground  of  their  hatred  may  be  seen  from  a  few
instances  of  their  cruelty.


CHAP.

u.


CHAPTER  II.

The  Subject  continued.


WHEN  the  persecution  in  the  second  century  be-
gan to  rage  at  Lyons,  Efiifiodius,  a  young  man,
was  brought  before  the  governor,  and  examined  in
the  presence  of  a  croud  of  Pagans.  T he-governor
at  length  took  him,  aside,  and  with  dissembled  kind-
ness, pretended  to  pity  his  condition,  and  intreatcd
him  not  to  ruin  himself  by  obstinacy.

2.  "Our  deities  (continued  he)  are  worshipped  by
the  greater  part  of  the  people  in  the  universe,  and
their  rulers  : — we,  to  honour  them,  launch  into
pleasures;  you,  by  your  faith,  are  debarred  from
all  that  indulges  the  senses. Our  religion  enjoins

'  feasting,  yours  fasting  ;  ours  the  joys  of  licentious
f  blandishments,  yours  the  barren  virtue  of  chastity.
r  Can  you  expect  protection  from  one  who  could  not
f  secure  himself  from  the  persecution  of  a  contempt-
*  ible  people  ?  Then  quit  a  profession  of  such  austeri-
4  ty,  and  enjoy  those  gratifications  which  the  world
4  affords,  and  which  your  youthful  years  demand/'

3.  To  which  Efiifiodius  replied  :  "  Your  pretend -
c  ed  tenderness  is  actual  cruelty  ;  and  the  agreeable
4  life  you  describe,  is  replete  with  everlasting  death.

t  4  The  frame  of  man being  composed  of  two  parts,

|]4  body  and  soul  ; the  first  as  mean  and  perishable,

4  should  be  rendered  subservient  to  the  interests  of


370 ^ WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH P.  VI.

€I1I£P- ( the  last. Your  idolatrous  feasts  may  gratify  the  mor-

i  tal,  but  they  injure  the" immortal  part:  that  cannot

Wright's  '  therefore  be  enjoying  life,  which  destroys  the  most

voiT™'  '  valuable  moiety  of  your  frame  :  your  pleasures  lead

21/ «  to  eternal  death,  and  our  pains  to  perpetual  happi-

i  ness." For  this  speech,  Epipodius was severely

beaten,  and  then  put  to  the  rack,  upon  which  being

stretched,  his  flesh  was  torn  with  iron  hooks,  then

taken  from  the  rack  and  beheaded,  April  20th,  in  the

year  179.

*i>id.  4.  About  the  year  250,  "  Denisa,  a  young  woman

•'* ' of  only  sixteen  years  of  age,  was  (by  order  of  Qfiti**

must,  proconsul  of  Asia)  given  up  to  two  libertines,  to

become  the  object  of  their  lust:  and  having  suffered

under  their  brutality  half  the  night,  and  being  mirac*

ulously  delivered,  was  afterwards  beheaded,  by  order

of  the  same  tyrant."

5.  "  Agtha,  a  Citilian  lady,  for  refusing  to  gratify
the  lustful  passions  of  Quintian,  the  governor  of  Sici*
ly,  was  scourged,  burnt  with  hot  irons,  and  torn  with  j
sharp  hooks,  laid  naked  upon  live  coals,  and  carried

ibid,  thence  to  prison,  where  she  expired.  Theodora,  a
beautiful  young  lady  of  Antioch,  on  refusing  to  sacri-
fice to  the  Roman  idols,  was  condemned  to  the  stews,
that  her  virtue  might  be  sacrificed  to  the  brutality  of  i
Just :  and  for  attempting  to  escape,  was  beheaded  and
burnt."

6.  Maximilian,  a  likely  youth,  about  the  same  time,
refusing  to  bear  arms,  and  saying  "  I  am  already  a
<  soldier  of  Christ  and  cannot  serve  any  other  power"
« — was  beheaded.  And  for  no  other  cause  thaia  for  a
spirit  of  peace  and  purity,  were  the  millions  of  vir-
tuous believers  persecuted  to  death,  in  succeeding
ages,  by  those  who  deceitfully  called  themselves
Christians.

7.  That  lying  spirit  that  could  convert  a  vain  phi'
lo&ojihy  into  a  gospel,  a  licentious  priesthood  into  Chris-
tian apostles,  and  a  worse  than  Pagan  hierarchy  into
the  church  of  Christ,  could  also  corrupt  the  doctrines
of  the  innocent  by  deceitful  and  mysterious  language,
and  put  a  false  colouring  upon  the  practice  of  the
virtuous,  to  blind  the  eyes  of  the  ignorant,  and  retain
the  world  in  the  fatal  snares  of  vice.


P.  VI.  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  IN  CHRIST.  371

3.  Thus,  the  last  degree  of  Antichrist's  influence,  Ch*p-

was  in  taking  away  the  key  of  knowledge,  forming  a

thick  veil  of  prejudice  to  cover  and  hide  the  only
living  witnesses  of  truth,  whose  faith  and  practice,
many  candid  men  have  fully  demonstrated,  even  from
the  records  of  their  persecutors,  to  have  been,  of  all
others,  the  nearest  transcript  of  the  precepts  and  ex-
ample of  Christ,  in  their  rky.

9.  Dr.  Horneck9  and  after  him  John  Wesley,  say?,
"Not  a  few  of  them renounced  the satisfaction  of

*  matrimony,  lived  single,  forsook  all,  buried  them-
4  selves  in  poor  cottages,  studied  the  scriptures,  con-
4  templated  heaven,  and  thus  lived  to  God  alone."

*  Some  travelled  into,  far  countries,  preached  the  gos-  wdtt'i
4  pel,  and  when  they  had  laid  a  good  foundation  there,  ^tn.  Li-
4  went  further,  and  spent  their  time  in  pains  and  lab-  vol.  xiix.
4  ours  and  doing  good. Thousands  of  their  virgins,  p* 136,

4  freely  dedicated  themselves  to  God,  and  would  be
4  married  to  none  but  him — and  though  many  times
4  they  were  tempted  by  rich  fortunes,  yet  nothing
f  could  alter  their  resolutions."

10.  The  same  spirit  of  virtue  is  breathed  in  the
words  of  a  Waldensian  preacher,  as  recorded  by  Ret-  E  ,  «
?ter,  and quoted  by Robinson. "  They (the  Papal  searches,
4  clergy)  are  rich  and  avaricious,  of  whom  the  Lord ^ii**4'
4  says, Wo  unto  you  rich,  for  you  have  received  your

4  consolation:  but  we,  having  food  and  raiment^  are
4  therewith  content.93

11.  "They  are voluptuous,  and  devour  widows

*  houses  :  we  only  eat  to  be  refreshed  and  supported.
4  They  fight  and  encourage  war  ;  and  command  the
4  poor  to  be  killed  and  burnt,  in  defiance  of  that  say-
4  ing,  He  that  taketh the  sword  shall  perish by the

*  sword.  For  our  parts,  they  persecute  us  for  right-
4  eousness  sake.5'

12.  "  They  do  nothing  ;  they  eat  the  bread  of  idle-
4  ness  :  We  work  with  our  hands.  They  monopolize
4  the  giving  of  instruction,  and  wo  be  to  them  that
4  take  away  the  key  of  knowledge  :  but  among  us,  wo-
4  men  teach  as  well  as  men,  and  one  disciple,  as  soon
4  as  he  is  informed  himself,  teaches  another. And

*  because  we  are sincere believers  in Christ,  and

*  teach  and  enforce  a  holy  life  and  conversation;  the&e

L12


372  WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH P.  VI.

CY1AP* i  scribes  and  pharisees  persecute  us  to  death,  as  their

'  predecessors  did  Jesus  Christ."

13.  It  matters  not  what  changing  hypocrites,  from
age  to  age,  have  called  those  harmless  people,  or
what  slanderous  comments  they  have  formed  upon
their  doctrines  and  manners.  Virtue  itself  could  nev-
er be  changed  into  vice,  and  wherever  it  appeared,
it  stood  as  a  testimony  against  them,  the  noblest  work
of  God  on  earth .
Eeci  Re-  14.  Robinson,  speaking  of  those  virtuous  dissen-
^313?*  ters,  in  the  twelfth  century  and  onward,  says,  "  They
condemn  the  tyranny  and  corruptions  of  a  false  reli-
gion by  a  practical  Testimony.  They  could  not  be
charged  with  perjury,  for  they  had  never  taken  oaths,
and  one  of  their  maxims  was,  Swear  not  at  all.  Se-
dition could  not  be  pretended,  for  they  never  bore
arms.  They  could  not  be  awed  by  one  another,  for
they  had  no  masters ;  they  could  not  be  bribed,  for
they  had  no  necessitous  gentry.  Filled  with  that  au-
spicious freedom  which  innocence  inspires,  they  had
not  even  one  patron  at  court,  and  their  whole  expect-
ation was  placed  on  the  superintending  providence  .of
God."

15.  Such  was  the  general  character  of  the  people,
driven  from  city  to  city,  from  mountain  to  mountain,
and  from  valley  to  valley,  for  many  hundred  years,
under  as  many  uames  of  heresy  as  their  adversaries
*bit!*  chose  to  invent.  "  If  they  were  called  Manicheansy
i  (says  Robinson,*)  it  was  because  they  denied  the  cath-
i  olic  doctrine  of  the  Trinity — and  of  course  believ-
i  eel  that  Jesus  was  a  man."
ibid.  15.  Says  Rodulfihy  "  Nun  credunt  filium  aequalem

Kote[fi.]  pa^ri5  qUja  clixit,  Pater  major  me  est.  i.  e.*  They  do
not  believe  the  Son  to  be  equal  ivith  the  Father,  because
he  mid)  The  Father  is  greater  than  I."  If  they  were
called  CathUri  or  Gazari,  it  was  because  of  their  mor-
als— the  purity  of  their  lives.  They  said  "  A  Chris-
tian church  ought  to  consist  of  only  good  people  :
The  church  ought  not  to  persecute  any,  even  the
wicked."
^.r'cif;0"  1 7.  Sometimes  they  were  called  Paterines  :  "  This
i».^jo.  '  described  their  condition  in  life.  They  were  decent
in  their  deportment,  modest  in  their  dress  and  dis-


P.  VI.  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  IN  CHRIST.  37-3

course. In  their conversation  there was  no  levity,  chap,
no  scurrillity,  no  detraction,  no  falsehood,  no  swear-  .
ing. They  were  chaste  and  temperate  ;  not  given  to
anger  or  other  violent  passions. "

18.  If  we  compare  this  character  with  that  of  the
reformed  Calvinists,  given  in  the  words  of  their  own
confession,  we  need  not  wonder  that  the  reformers
laboured  hard  to  prove  their  descent  from  the  perse-
cuted Waldenses.  Just  so  the  obscene  and  wicked
catholic  priests  first  founded  their  authority  on  a  claim
to  their  descent  from  Jesus  and  his  holy  apostles,  and
endeavoured  to  cloak  their  wickedness  under  his  im-
jiuted  righteousness^  and  condemn  their  fellow  Pagans
upon  the  false  presumption  of  their  sublime  descent.

19.  In  the  same  manner  have  the  Protestant  per-
secutors endeavoured  to  cover  their  abominations  un-
der the  righteous  character  of  those  whom  their  fa*
thers  persecuted.  While  they  exceed  the  Papists  in
all  manner  of  wickedness,  they  claim  the  catholic
authority  over  them,  upon  pretence  that  the  true  key
of  St.  Peter  was  handed  down  to  them  through  those
innocent  people,  whom  they  themselves,  on  other
occasions,  will  brand  as  the  worst  of  heretics.  To
such  miserable  artifices  has  Antichrist  been  driven  to
support  his  orthodoxy  !

20.  Says  Dr.  Madame — «  When  the  Papists  ask  EccI.hl*
us  where  our  religion  was  before  Luther  ?  We  gen-  Jsfp.im
erally  answer,  in  the  Bible  ;  [i.  e.  in  the  Book  ;  a  poor  Note[g.j
kind  of  religion  !]  and  we  answer  well,  (says  he,)  but

to  gratify  their  taste  for  tradition  and  human  authori-
ty,  we  may  add  to  this  answer,  and  in  the  Values  of
Piedmont.9'  i.  e.  among  those  persecuted  heretics,
the  Waldenses.

21.  Such  an  answer  may  serve  to  vindicate  a  reli-
gion that  began  and  continued  in  false  swearing,  and
is  wholly  dependant  for  merit  on  the  righteousness
of  another.  But  unhappily  for  the  Reformers,  there
were  Piedmontese  cotemporary  with  them.

22.  Who  were  those  heretics  that  were  extirpated
like  mad  dogs^  by  Luther's  advice,  but  the  heirs  of
that  spirit  of  liberty,  of  innocence  and  peace,  which
had  been  so  happily  cherished  and  preserved,  for  ma-
ny ages,  in  the  vallies  of  Piedmont  and  the  Piraneese  ?


S74  WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH P.  VI.

ckap. Among  those  persecuted  Jnabafitists  of  the  sixteenth
* century,  we  find  the  same  characters  which  the old
Waldenses  and  Manic  hcans  supported.*
Ecci.ne- 23,  Authentic  records  in  France  assure  us,  (says
searches,  Robinson,)  that  a  people  of  a  certain  description  were
^' " driven  from  thence  in  the  twelfth  century. Bohe-
mian records  of  equal  authority  inform  us,  that  some
of  the same  description  arrived  in  Bohemia  at  the
same  time,t  and  settled  near  a  hundred  miles  from
Prague,  at  Satz  and  Laun  on  the  river  Egcr,  just  on
the  borders  of  the  kingdom.

24.  Almost  two  hundred  years  after,  another  un-
doubted record  of  the  same  country,  mentions  a  people
of  the  same  description,  some  as  burnt  at  Prague,  and
others  as  inhabiting  the  borders  of  the  kingdom.
Above  two  hundred  years  after  this,  in  the  reign  of
Ferdinand,  emperor  of  Gcrma??y,  the  same  kind  of
people  existed  ;  and  from  the  account  of  Carafa  the

a>ici. Jesuit,  more  than  twenty  thousand  lived  all  together
**524, in Moravia,  and  were,  by  an  edict  of  the  emperor,

proscribed  and  banished  as  heretics,  under  the  name

of  Anabafitists.

25.  "  The  religious  character  of  these  people  (says
4  Robinson,)  is  so  very  different  from  all  others,  that
*  the  likeness  is  not  easily  mistaken.  They  had  no
4  priests,  but  taught  one  another.  They  had  no  pri-
4  vate  property,  for  they  held  all  things  jointly.  They
4  executed  no  offices,  and  neither  exacted  nor  took
4  oaths.  They  bore  no  arms,  and  rather  chose  to
4  suffer  than  resist  wrong.  They  held  every  thing
4  called  religion  in  the  church  of  Rome,  in  abhor*
4  rence. — They  aspired  at  neither  wealth  nor  power,
4  and  their  plan  was  industry."

26.  They  lived  in  forty-live  divisions  called  frater-
nities, exactly  as  their  ancestors  had  done  before
their  banishment  from  France,  Each  of  those  little
corporations  consisted  of  many  families,  who  held  all
things  common.  Under  the  most  aggravated  cir-
cumstances of  cruelty,  they  were  obliged  to  abandon

*  The  reader  may  find  an  ample  and  authentic  account  of  those  reputed
Heretics,  the  ancient  Waldeftset,  in  the  Researches  of  Robert  Robinson,  under  his
tistory  of  The  Church  vf  Navarre  and  Biscay,  of  Italy,  and  The  Vallits  of  Pkd-
mont.

t  This  was  the  time  of  the  most  general  persecution  against  the  Wahicns^s
•r  Picards  of  the  sequestered  vallie«.


P.  VI.  VIRTUOUS  BELIEVERS  IN  CHRIST.  $75

their  houses  and  lands  just  at  the  time  their  fields  °hap.
were  ripe  for  the  harvesting,  and  the  most  deplorable  _ _
scenes  of  persecution  followed,  for  seven  successive
years.

27.  Where  then  appears  the  difference  between
those  Anabaptists  so  cruelly  persecuted  by  the  Pa-
pists in  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  and  those  who  were,
with  equal  cruelty,  massacred  and  burnt  by  Papists
and  Protestants  in  Germany  ?  The  fact  is,  they
sprung  from  one  original  stock,  were  precisely  of  the
same  character,  and  were,  in  every  respect,  as  much
one  people  as  were  their  joint  persecutors.

28.  It  is  acknowledged,  even  by  the  reformers,
that  they  were  men  of  upright  intentions. Mosheim

says,  "  their  common  opinions  seem  to  be  all  derived  Eed.fi5h
from  this  leading  and  fundamental  principle,  that  the  fop.4$£
kingdom  which  Christ  established  upon  earth,  is  a  vis-
ible church, or  community, into  which  the  holy and
the  just  are  alone  to  be  admitted,  and  which is  conse-
quently exempt  from  all  those  institutions  and  rules  of
discipline,  that  have  been  invented  by  human  wisdom,  *SeeIJl*
for the  correction  and  reformation  of  the wicked"  ft. l.'anS
This  the  writer  calls  a  "  fanatical  principle."*  f3e.ph,i^

29.  We  learn  from  the  same  writer,  that  some  of
their  descendants  (the  Mennonites)  woxxldneither  admit
civil  rulers  into  their  communion,  nor  allow  any  of
their  members  to  perform  the  functions  of  magistracy.
That  they  denied  the  lawfulness  of  repelling  force  by

force,  and  considered  war,  in  all  its  shapes,  as  unchris-
tian and  unjust :  and  refused  to  confirm  their  testimony
by  an  oath,  upon  this  foundation,  that  the  perfect
members  of  a  holy  church  can  neither  dissemble  nor
deceive, 8cc,

30.  These  were  the  incurable  heretics  destroyed  by
the  Protestants,  and  their  being  called  incurable  he-
retics, did  not  make  any  difference  between  them  and
the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  vallies  :  for  the  same
who  were  called  Manicheans,  Paterines,  Sec.  "  were
moreover  denominated  heretics,  (says  Robin  son  ;)  for
their  whole  religion  implied  the  belief  of  some  polit-
ical principles  which  were  accounted  heresy  by
popes,  prelates,  viscounts,  and  tyrants  of  every  name,
and  which  they  avowed  when  thev  were  interroga-
ted."


*76 WORLDLY  CHRISTIANS  CONTRASTED  WITH,  ScC.  P.  VI.

chap. 3i#  The influence of Antichrist,  by the united

^  power  of  Protestants  and  Papists  went,  however,  so-

effectually  to  exterminate  the  Anabaptists  of  the  six-
teenth century,  that  there  remains  no  trace  of  their
faith  and  power  under  that  name. Mosheim  remarks,


Ezek. "  tnat  smce  they  have opened  their  eyes,  they  ac-
>xii.2«,  knowledge  that  the  visible  church  is  promiscuously
composed  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  &c."*

32.  Many  of  those  persecuted  people  who  escaped
the  fire  and  sword,  and  retained  any  measure  of  the
true  heretical  faith  and  practice,  retired  into  Poland,
and  lived  there  in  peace  for  several  years.  But  as
soon  as  they  began  to  discover  their  real  principles,
the reformed  churches  renewed  their  persecuting

Eeei.His-  zeal,  and  "  they  were  again  threatened  (says Mo-
^^p! 483!  '  sheim,)  with  a  formidable  prospect  arising  from  the

i  united  efforts  of  Catholics,  Lutherans  and  Calvinistsy

*  to  crush  their  infant  sect." >

33.  However,  having  completed  a  translation  of
the  bible,  and  published  a  summary  of  their  religious
doctrines  in  the  year  1572,  they  obtained  a  name  of
distinction  among  the  divided  parties,  and  are  since
known  in  history  under  the  name  of  Socinians  :  yet  it
was  long  before  the  rage  of  persecution  was  averted
from  those  liberal  advocates  of  the  rights  of  con-
science :  and  not  till  the  attention  of  the  Christian
world  was  arrested  by  the  more  extraordinary  testi-
mony of  George  Fox^  and  his  friends.

34.  About  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,
the  testimony  of  these  people  (called  Quakers)  broke
forth  with  increasing  light  and  power,  beyond  what
had  ever  appeared  among  any  people  since  the  days
of  the  Primitive  Church.  This  was  manifested,  not
only  by  their  powerful  testimony  against  the  iniquities
of  the  times,  the  superstitions  and  vain  ceremonies
of  the  established  religions,  and  the  vicious  lives  of
the  worldly  Christians;  but  by  the  inflexible  course
of  virtue  which  they  maintained,  in  the  midst  of  a
crooked,  perverse  and  persecuting  generation.

35.  The  Quakers,  so  called,  besides  the  charges
of  heresy  common  in  past  ages,  such  as  holding  the
doctrine  of  a  pure  church  upon  earth,  refusing  to
swear,  to  persecute,  shed  blood,  pay  tithes;  &c.  were


P.  VI.  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF,  &C,  *Y7

particularly  branded  with  enthusiasm  on  account  of  c^p*
their  doctrine  of  an  inward  Christ.  mmm _

36.  To  such  as  had  any  acquaintance  with  the
writings  of  the  apostles,  the  doctrine,  simply  consider-
ed, could  not  appear  new  ;  but  the  fact  was,  the  day  of
Christ's  second  appearing  was  near  at  hand,  and  these
people,  by  the  true  spirit  of  prophecy,  had  received
an  inward  sense  of  it,  and  as  Christ  is  actually  form-
ed in  the  hearts  of  his  people,  they  neither  knew  nor
could  testify  of  any  other  than  Christ  within.

37.  And  for  this  very  purpose  they  were  raised  up,
by  the  special  power  of  God,  and  qualified  by  the  in-
spiration of  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  only  to  bear  a  full
and  pointed  testimony  against  ail  the  corrupt  and  An-
jfcichristian  establishments  of  both  Papists  and  Protes-
tants, but  also  to  announce  their  certain  downfall,
and  the  setting  up  of  that  everlasting  kingdom  of
Christ  which  should  be  established  in  the  latter  day.

38.  And  when  we  consider  the  sufferings  of  these
people,  both  in  Europe  and  America,  for  the  honesty
and  integrity  of  their  lives,  the  innocence  and  sim-
plicity of  their  manners,  the  marked  distinction  be-
tween them  and  the  great  Christian  world  must  be
(evident  without  any  other  comment.


..CHAPTER III.

Jldmarks  on  the  present  State  of  the  Christian  World*

AMONG  the  various  religions  adopted  by  the  lost
nations  of  the  earth,  Christianity  doubtless  has
the  most  plausible  pretence  to  divine  authority,  inas-
much as  it  claims  for  its  original  author,  Jesus  Christ ',
who  was  manifestly  the  Son  of  God.  But  if  Chris-
tianity,  with  all  its  superior  pretensions,  has  not  de-
livered its  subjects  from  the  deplorable  effects  of  the
fall,  it  is  easy  to  judge  in  what  state  the  whole  world
must  be.

2.  The  present  popish  profession  of  Catholic  faith  Grounds
says,  I ackno%vledgc the  holy,  catholic,  apostolic,  Ro-%*£f;


3T3  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VlJ

chap. man  church  for  the  mother  and  mistress  of  all  churches.

_  The  present  Protestant  Confession  of  Faith  says, The

Amei\ visible church,  which  is  also  catholic or  universal—-
Conf.F. consists  of  all  those  throughout  the  world,  that  profess
the  true  religion,  together  with  their  children.

3.  These  two  great  oracles  of  Christianity  have  a
right  to  mark  the  extent  of  the  Christian  world,
which  according  to  the  above,  must  include  the
church  of  Rome,  with  all  her  daughters,  and  all  those
throughout  the  world  who  profess  the  true  religion,
(as  they  call  it,)  with  their  children.

4.  The  foundation  and  progress  of  Papists,  Pro-
testants, and  dissenters  of  past  ages,  have  been  alrea-
dy sufficiently  manifested,  from  their  own  writings,
to  have  been  a  very  sink  of  corruption,  calamity,  and
cruelty  to  mankind  :  it  now  remains  to  examine,  af-
ter so  long  a  time,  and  so  much  reforming,  what  the
present  world  of  Christians  possess,  that  distin-
guishes them  from  the  past,  or  from  the  rest  of  the
human  race.

5.  Plow  much  soever  these  Catholic  professors  dif-
fer among  themselves,  there  are  certain  fundamen-
tal principles  in  which  they  hold  such  a  visible  agree-
ment as  to  distinguish  themselves,  and  each  other,
from  heathens,  infidels,  heretics,  and  incurable  fanat-
ics ;  and  these  general  Christian  principles  are  such
as  respect  their  faith,  their  rules  of  church  govern-
ment, and  their  morals.

6.  It  would  be  unnecessary  to  make  any  further  re-
marks on  the  established  faith,  government,  and
morals  of  the  mother  church,  and  her  immediate
daughters,  as  they  have  so  abundantly  exposed  each
other,  and  are  so  universally  known  :  the  only  part  of
the  Christian  world  which  can  promise  any  thing  bet-
ter to  mankind,  are  those  denominations  which  have
dissented  from  both,  and  have  reformed  the  same
Christianity  more  to  the  taste  ct  the  present  times.

7.  Modern  Christians,  forced  by  the  progress  of
civil  and  religious  liberty,  will  acknowledge  that  their
forefathers  were  very  wrong  in  many  things  ;  but
what  is  their  Christianity  better,  while  the  same  faith,
the  same  principles  of  government,  and  the  same
manners,  exist  in  all  their  churches  ?


P.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD.  379

8.  In  professing the present  true  Christian  reli- c^p*

gion,  so  called,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  profess  a __

belief  of  Three  persons  in  the  Godhead — of  two  na-
tures in  Christ — Imfiuted  righteousness — the  Resur-
rection of  all  human  bodies,  the  same  in  substance —

the  establishment  of  a  visible  kingdom  by  the  imperial
power  of  Christ  at  the  last  day — and  such  fundamen-
tal doctrines  as  were  held  sacred  by  Saint  Jugus-
#in,  Leo  the  Great,  Doctor  Martin  Luther,
Bishop.  Calvin,  and  the  true  Catholic  church  in  eve-
ry age.

9.  These  same  doctrines  that  smothered  every
principle  of  reason,  and  inflamed  the  passions  of  man-
kind to  fill  the  earth  with  bloodshed  and  cruelty,  are
considered  as  the  only  sound  Christian  principles  of
the  present  day,  as  may  be  seen  in  all  their  modern
creeds  :  and  no  more  altered  are  their  present  means
of  christianizing,  or  their  principles  of  church  gov-
ernment.*

10.  All  that  were  born  after  the  flesh  in  the  mother
church,  were  christened  by  an  outward  ceremony  ; —
by  the  outward  rite  of  baptism  and  the  sign  of  the
cross  on  the  forehead,  they were  received  as  mem-
bers of  the  Protestant  church  ; and  at  present  the
most  reformed  institution  for  christening  is,  the  min-  I)irect^
ister  is  to  baptize  the  child  with  water,  by  pouring  or  rv.  chap.
sprinkling  it  on  the  face  of  the  child. In  this  way  the  vn"
church  is  increased,  for  every  baptized  person,  who

has  not  been  formally  excommunicated,  is  a  lawfu*
member.  In  this,  present  Christianity  differs  nothing
from  the  past.

11.  As  to  government,  a  majority  always  ruled  in
the  Christian  world,  the  stronger  tyrannized  over  the
weaker,  and  upon  the  same  principle,  the  Christian
parties  of  the  present  dw,  only  want  the  necessary
means  in  order  to  christianize  and  convert  the  nations
over  again  upon  the  old  fashion.

12.  Every  sect  and  denomination  claim  the  ancient
ecclesiastical  power  :  Presbyterian  bishops  have  been

*  Although,  in  consequence  of  the  progress  of  civilization,  and  the  preva-
lence ot  civil  liberty,  there  is  an  abatement  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny  and  rigor-
ous compulsion  ;  yet  human  power  and  human  authority  are  the  means  used,
instead  ot  the  authority  and  power  oi  God  ;  and  the  subjects  are  required  to
subscribe  human  creeds,  and  observe  human  ceremonies,  a*  the  eruditions  ©f
salvation.

Mm


3SD  I THE  PRESENT  Si  ATE  OF  / P.  VI.

chap, fl^y  consecrated  by  the  authority  of  the  national  kirk

of  Scotland,  whose  ministers  were  duly  ordained  ac-

"  cording  to  the  church  laws  of  Geneva,  and  her  great
bishop?  Calvin,  received  his  holy  orders  from  the
pope.

13.  In  the  same  manner  the  Episcopalian,  or  bish-
op-ruled Methodists  are  duly  ordained  by  the  laying
on  of  the  hands  of  one  who  was  duly  consecrated  by
the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  John  Wesley,  whose
holy  orders  were  duly  transmitted  from  .  Bishop
Cranmer,  who  was  consecrated  by  the  pope  :  And
so  of  the  rest.  And  what  is  their  laying  on  of  hands
without  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  a  mock  to  God  and  man  ?

14.  Hence  those  consecrated  rulers  not  only  exer-
cise their  supposed  ecclesiastical  powers  in  their  gen-
eral assemblies,  synods,  presbyteries,  consistories,  con-
ferences, associations and congregational  assemblies,
"but  by  insinuating  themselves,  or  their  admirers  into

the  affairs  of  civil  government  on  every  occasion  that
oilers,  they  manifestly  show  their  disposition  to  seize
the  old  despotic  reins,  and  rule  the  church  and  world
in  one,  had  they  only  the  opportunity.

15.  But  until  these  divided  and  subdivided  dissent-
ers caashow  other  distinguishing  marks  of  their  true
religion,  than  those  doctrines  and  powers  of  govern-
ment which  they  received  from  their  mother  Protes-
tant or  popish  churches,  the  infidels  and  free-think-
ers of  the  present  day  will  veiy  justly  hold  them  in^
suspicion.  (

16.  Forced  by  the  changes  in  civil  government  to
conform,  they  may  give  their  voice  in  favour  of  liber-
ty, and  show  such  respect  to  the  spirit  of  the  times
as  to  expunge  from  the  creeds  and  common  prayer
books  of  their  fathers,  those  despotic  sentiments,  so
hateful  to  every  just  man  ;  but  in  all  this  they  only
act  the  harlot,  who  willingly  changes  her  dress  in  or-
der to  win  the  aiVecticn  of  her  lovers.

17.  It  is  well  known  that  thd  Augsburg  confession,-.
the  Form  of  Concord,  the  true  religion  at  Geneva,  of
the  church  of  Scotland,  or  of  Queen  Elizabeth,
could  never  be  admitted  into  any  republic  without  a
very'  material  change  in  its  outward  dress  ;  but  re-
form and  change  it  as  they  will,  it  is  still  the  same


P.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WOULD.  381.


f CHAP.


III.


true Christian  religion,  the  only  face  of  kirk,  out  ot

which there  is no  possibility of  salvation,*  (as she  _

says,)  and  therefore  her  pitiful  crocodile prayer  is,  *a

O  that  the  civil  rulers of  the  earth  would  fall  in  love  §££^

with  me!  that  a  nation might  be  born  in  a  day,  and  Jai.  lx*i.

8,

kingdoms  at  once,  perver*

18.  But  after  all,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  most  polished  **•
of  those  reformers  and  coriformets  never  granted  nor
promoted  the  religious  liberty  of  the  present  day  ;
this  change  v/as  effected,  by  the  order  of  Divine
Providence,  in  the  hearts  of  the  civil  rulers  of  the
earth.

19.  When  George  Washington,  that  justly  re-
spected patriot,  stood  forth  at  the  head  of  a  great  na-
tion in  the  cause  of  liberty,  and  Christians  on  both
sides  of  the  Atlantic,  implored  each  their  God  to  go
forth  with  their  respective  armies,  it  was  not  in  an-
swer to  the  prayers  of  these  divided  hypocrites  that
the  contest  was  decided  ;  but  when  the  European  God
was  obliged  to  give  up  his  despotic  reins,  then,  in-
deed, the  European  creeds  must  be  new  modelled  by
American  ecclesiastics,  to  suit  the  government  of  the
most  powerful  deity.

20.  Neither  was  it  in  a  general  council  of  Chris-
tian bi.dwfis,  but  of  noble  advocates  for  civil  and  reli-
gious liberty,  that  the  wise  and  generous  Washing-
ton, established  the  rights  of  conscience  by  a  just
and  equitable  Constitution.  And  truly,  if  the  rights
of  conscience  are  still  respected  under  the  present  ad-
ministration, we  are  not  indebted  to  ecclesiastical  ty-
raus  for  the  privilege  ;  for  such  never  will  respect
nor  promote  an  establishment  which  has  a  tendency
to  diminish  the  current  of  their  unrighteous  gain,  by
allowing  every  one  to  think  and  act  for  themselves  in
matters  of  religion.

21.  As  to  doctrine  and  discipline,  the  world  of
mankind  never  was,  nor  ever  will  be  benefitted  by
such  a  consecrated  priesthood,  nor  such  a  Christian
religion.  The  only  remaining  point  to  be  considered,
is  the  morals  of  those  who  profess  this  true  religion,
so  called,  and  their  children.

22.  The  common  objection,  even  of  infidels,  so
called,  against  Christianity,  is  the  immoral  influence  it


382  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.

CiiiP" ^ias  u^lon  *&e  I*ves  °f  its  professors. To  which  a  late
m  writer  replies,— "  If  any  who  take  to  themselves  the


christn. Christian  name  live  immorally,  it  cannot  be  the  fault  of
p.a33o* Christianity" By  this  kind  of  reasoning*  false  Chris-
tianity has,  for  many  ages,  been  kept  alive  amidst  all
the abominations  that  have  overspread  the  Christian
world.

23.  They  say,  their  true  religion  was  in  the  Bible
before  Luther  ;  and  if  true  religion  it  is,  it  must  be
there  yet;  for  they  have  never  brought  it  out  in  their
Jives,  to  answer  the  above  objection  of  the  unbeliev-
er. The  last  covering  for  their  benign  gospel,  and
their  saving  faith,  is  to  divide  the  charge  of  gross
immorality  among  divided  sects  and  party  names,  so
as  to  preserve  the  common  Christian  profession  un-
spotted.

24.  They  can  reproach  one  another  with  the  title  of
popish  tyrant,  Protestant  persecutor,  Presbyterian /z-
a'r,  drunken  Seceder,  Baptist  knave,  or  Methodist
whoremonger  ;  but  these  are  terms  of  no  reproach  to
the  true  Christian  religion  so  long  as  it  can  be  kept
in  the  Bible  ;  therefore,  when  the  Bible  and  its  true
religion  are  rejected  by  sensible  unbelievers  at  home,
they  must  be  sent  abroad  to  convert  and  christianize
the  heathen  :  but  even  the  Indians  themselves  can
see  the  deception  ;  so  that  the  christian  missionary
finds  as  sensible  infidels  there,  as  at  home  ;  as  ap-
pears from  the  following  remarks  of  a  late  writer  on
the  Journal  of  D.  Brainerd.

n*t.  of 25.  "Their  grand  question, What  has  become  of

3»*465np'  i  thdr  forefathers,  is  not  easily  answered. They  were

i\o.te  [I.]  '  good  men,  (say  they,)  and  we will  follow  them;  we

4  doubt  not  but  they  were  happy  without  this  new  reli-

6  gion,  why  then  should  %ve  embrace  it  ?  But  their  most

•*  important  objection  (says  the  writer")  is  drawn  from

*  the  vicious  lives  of  nominal  Christians, Christian

c  religion  !  Devil  religion  !  (say  they)  Christian  much

6  drunk  ;  Christian  much  do wrong,  much  beat,  much

«  abuse  others"—"  Truly  it  is  a  sad  sight  (says  one,)

1  to  behold  a  drunken  Christian,  and  a  sober  Indian —

c  an  Indian  just  in  his  dealings,  and  a  Christian  not

(  so  ;  a  laborious  Indian  and  an  idle  Christian,  &c.


P.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLB.  383

c  O  what  a  sad  thing  it  is  for  Christians  to  come  short  c**£v-
i  of  heathens  even  in  moralities  !"  .

26.  Then  in  vain  do  such  Christians  try  to  justify
their  principles,  while  they  themselves  condemn
their  own  practice.  Thus,  corrupt  manners  as  evi-
dently flow  from  their  true  religion,  as  practice  na-
turally flows  from  principle.  Nor  need  they  refer  to
the  Bible  for  their  Christianity,  for  neither  the  name
nor  the  thing  is  there  ;  but  it  is  found  in  their  Confes-
sions of  Faith,  which  make  every  provision  and  allow-
ance for  their  worse  than  heathenish  practices.

27.  By  original  corruption  they  say,  "  we  are  ut-  Amer.
terly  indisposed,  disabled,  and  made  opposite  to  all  chap^'i,
good,  and  wholly  inclined  to  all  evil," — and,  "  This
corruption  of  nature, :  during  this  life,  doth  remain

in  those  that  are  regenerated." And  further,  "  No  Larg.
man  is  able,  either  of  himself,  or  by  any  grace  re-  149.'
ceived  in  this  life,  perfectly  to  keep  the  command-
ments of  God  ;  but  doth  daily  break  them  in  thought,
Word,  and  deed."

28.  This  is  called  genuine  Christianity  ;  and  is  a  suit-
able pretext  for  ail  the  aggravated  sins  of  those  Chris-
tians who are of  riper  age, greater  experience,  or q.  ui,
grace,  eminent  for  profession,  gifts,  place,  office,  guides

to  others,  tefc.  and  which  are  committed'  as  they  ex-
press it,  against  means,  mercies,  judgments,  light  of
nature,  conviction  of  conscience,  public  or  private  ad-
monition,  censures  of  the  church,  civil  punishments  ;
and  against  their  own  prayers,  purposes,  promises,
vows,  covenants,  and  engagements  to  God  or  men  ;
done  deliberately,  wilfully,  presumptuously,  impudent-
ly, boastingly,  maliciously ,  fr  e  qnently ,  obstinately,  with
delight,  continuance,  or  relapsing  after  repentance,
&c.  &c.  &c. N

29.  Now  go,  saith  the  man  of  God,  write  it  before  isalxsx.
them  in  a  table,  and  note  it  in  a  book,  thai  it  may  be  for  8,y*
the  time to  come  for ever  and  ever  ;  that  this  is  a  re-
bellious people, lying  children,  children that  will  not

hear  the  law  of  the  Lord.

30.  As  to  particular  forms  of  doctrine,  Christians
of  the  present  day  have  learned  the  art  of  dissenting
from  one  another,  and  new  modelling  their  doctrines
so  cunningly,  that  probably  many  would  not  openly

M  m  2


384  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.

Cm.P* avow  tne  above  article  of  faith. Many  of  the  follow-

ers  of  John  Wesley , George  Whitejield,  and  others,

talk  of  Christian  perfection — a  possibility  of  living
without  sin  ;  and  doubtless  many  of  them,  under  the
influence  of  sentiments  borrowed  from  the  scriptures
of  truth,  have  felt  a  great  deliverance,  as  they  sup-
posed, from  the  power  of  sin,  so  as,  for  a  season,  to
abstain  from  every  appearance  of  evil  in  their  knowl-
edge.

31.  Yet  however  the  stream  of  conviction,  or  of
comfort  and  consolation,  might  flow  from  breast  to
breast,  and  whatever  temporary  fruits  it  might  pro-
duce, the  pool  of  natural  corruption  still  remained,
which  is  evident  from  their  own  prayers  to  be  deliv-
ered from  the  last  and  least  remains  of  sin.

32.  No  stream  can  rise  higher  than  its  fountain-
head  ;  and  whether  John  Wesley  himself  attained
that  perfection  which  he  preached,  has  been  a  ques-
tion  even  among  his  followers.  Eut  if  we  are  to
judge  from  his  own  writings,  it  will  appear,  that  his
views  of  himself  were  very  different  from  what  ma-
ny have  entertained  concerning  him.

S3.  On  his  passage  from  America  to  England,  Jan.
1738,  he  writes  in  his  Journal  as  follows. "  I  went

*  to  America  to  convert  the  Indians  :  But  O  !  who
i  shall  convert  me  ?  Who,  what  is  he  that  will  deliv-
1  er  me  from  this  evil  heart  of  unbelief?  I  have  a  fair
6  summer-religion.  I  can  talk  well  ;  nay,  and  believe
<  myself  while  no  danger  is  near ;  but  let  death  look
6  me  in  the  face  and  my  soul  is  troubled.  Nor  can  I
4  say,  to  die  is  gain."

34.  The  day  he  landed  at  Deal,  in  England,  he
writes  :  "  It  is  now  two  years,  and  almost  four  months

*  since  I  left  my  native  country,  in  order  to  teach  the
6  Georgian  Indians  the  nature  of  Christianity  ;  but
4  what  have  I  learned  myself  in  the  mean  time  ?
6  Why,  (what  I  the  least  of  all  suspected)  that  I  who

*  went  to  America  to  convert  others,  was  never  my-

*  self  converted  to  God. I  am  not  mad,  though  I  thus  •

*  speak  ;  but,  /  sfieak  the  words  of  truth  and  sober-

*  Ties*  ;  if  haply  some  of  those  who  still  dream,  may
6  awake  and  see,  that  as  lam,  so  are  they,  Sec."

35.  "  This  then  have  I  learned  in  the  ends  of  tho


P.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WOULD.  $85

i  earth  ;  that  I  am  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God  ; c^f°
6  that  my  whole  heart  is  altogether  eorrufit  and  atom- '
<  inable,  and  consequently  my  whole  life,  (seeing*  it
i  cannot  be  that  an  evil  tree  should  bring  forth  good
fruit.'5)

36.  Then  if  this  most  eminent  branch  of  the  church
of  England^  and  his  fruit,  were  both  corrupt  and
abominable,  (and  he  never  was  cut  off  from  his  union
to  that  church,  but  lived  and  died  in  her  commun-
ion,) can  any  of  those  branches  which  have  derived
their  sap  and  nourishment  from  him,  be  any  better  ?

37.  Thou  that  taikest  of  Christian  perfection,  boast  Rom.^.
not)  for  thou  dearest  not  the  root,  but  the  root  thee.  18»
And  this  friendlv  caution  from  the  root  of  one  of  the
most  flourishing  branches  of  the  church  universal,  is,
according  to  its  original  design,  inserted  here,  if  hap-
ly some  of  those  who  still  dream  their  self-flattering
dreams,  may  awake  and  see  that,  as  the root,  so  are

the  branches-*— altogether  corrupt  and  abominable.

38.  A  late  author  in  defence  of  Christianity,  sup-
poses that,  u  degenerate  as  too  many  professing  Chris-  fthrfeik*

tians  are,  Christianity  has  nothing  to  fear  from  a  32<£033V
4  contrast  with  unbelievers,  in  point  of  morality."  Be
it  so,  it  certainly  has  nothing  whereof  to  boast,  even
if  it  were  ail  true  what  this  writer  asserts  it  has  done.
"  It  has— -It  has— (And  what  is  the  sum  ?)  introdu-
1  ced  more  equality  between  the  two  sexes,  and  ren-
i  dered  the  conjugal  union  more  rational  and  happy. —
1  Having,  therefore,  (adds  he)  weathered  all  the
'  storms,  and  sustained  without  injury,  all  the  assaults
*  of  1800  years,  what  has  she  now  to  fear?"

59.  She,  even  she,  who  for  more  than  a  thousand
years,  was  an  open  public  harlot  to  the  kings  of  the
earth,  even  in  the  judgment  of  all  her  Protestant
daughters!  She  who  now  saith  in  her  heart,  I sit  a  Rev.xriii
Queen,  and  am  no  widovj,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow  !  7'fxd&
what  has  she  to  fear?  but  that  the  same  national  pow-
ers, that  supported  her,  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall
make  her  desolate,  and  naked,  and  shall  eat  her  flesh,
and  burn  her  with  fire  :  for  strong  is  the  Lord  God
who  judgeth  her.

40.  In  point  of  doctrine,  of  government  and  mor-
als,, this  true Catholic  Christianity  is  all  of  a  kind.


S86  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.

c?jjP" Examine  it  from  beginning  to  end,  from  bottom  to
' top,  and  from  side  to  sicle,  in  all  its  branches,  it  con-
tains the  same  mystery  of  iniquity,  keeps  its  subjects
in  bondage  to  corruption,  and  under  the  dominion  of
their  own  lusts.

41.  As  Christian  has  descended  from  Christian  by
"ordinary  generation,  and  the  consecrated  fathers  have
christened  their  children  with  their  own  hands,  as  the
certain  heirs  of  a  future  church  ;  and  one  bishop
(though  corrupt  and  abominable)  has  ministered  to
another,  with  his  defiled  hands,  his  supposed  author-
ity, it  is  evident  that  the  whole  are  still  under  the
darkness  and  deception  of  Antichrist,  and  in  as  de-
plorable a  state  of  corruption  at  this  day  as  ever.*

42.  It  may  seem  a  hard  saying,  that  protestantism,
which  has  been  established  nearly  two  hundred  years,
is  the  beast  of  the  _apocaiypse  that  came  up  out  of  the*
earth  ;  but  can  it  be  more  surprising  or  more  grating,
than  it  was  to  affirm,  that  popery,  which  for  more
than  a  thousand  years  was  deemed  the  only  true  reli-
gion, was  the  beast  that  came  up  out  of  the  sea  ?

43.  This  the  protestants  have  not  only  asserted,
but  abundantly  proved  ;  and  no  less  evidently  do  the
marks  of  the  second  beast,  and  the  number  of  his
name,  apply  to  Lutherism  and  Calvinism,  which  more
or  less  extend  their  influence  to  every  dissenting  *
party. t

*  w  Who  are  more  wofully  lost  as  to  all  true  Godliness,  who  are  more  deeply
'  sunk  into  sensuality  and  brutishnoss,  than  the  generality  of  Christians  ? Nay, :
'  among  wli&t  sort  of  men  are  all  manner  of  al>ominable  wickednesses  and  vil-
'  lainies  to  be  found  to  rise,  so  much  as  among  them  ? upon  which  account  the
'  name  of  Chilian  stinks  in  the  nostril*  of  the  very  Jews,  Turks  and  Pagans.

*  Beastly  intemperances  and  uncleauness  of  all  sorts  ;  the  most  sordid  covetous*

*  ness  ;  w  retched  injustice  ;  oppressions  and  cruelties  ;  the  most  devilish  malice,

*  envy  and  pride  ;  the  deadliest  animosities,  the  most  outrageous  feuds,  dissen-
'  sions  and  rebellions  ;  tHe  plainest  and  grossest  idolatry ;  highest  blasphemies,
'  and  most  horrid  impieties  of  all  kinds,  are  in  no  part  of  the  world  more  ob-
'  servable  than  they  are  in  Christendom  ;  nor  most  of  them  any  where  so  ob-

*  serrable.— Nor  can  there  be  an  easier  task  undertaken  than  to  shew,  that  not

*  a  few  mere  Heathens  have  behaved  themselves  incomparably  better  towards.

*  God,  their  neighbours,  and  themselves,  than  the  generality  of  those  who  are
'  called  Christians." Fotvler's  Design  of  Christianity,  p.  143,  144.

t  The  beast  which  came  up  out  of  the  earth  had  t ivo  Jwms  like  a  lamb. The
preteetant  power  was  divided  into  rtvo  powers,  which  had  each  a  separate  in-
fluence. The  power  and  influence  of  the  beast  was  in  \)h  horns A  horn,  in
the  style  of  the  prophets,  signifies  any  power  civil  or  religions. Two  horns  like
l  #7  lamb,  therefore,  signify  two  religions  powers  into  which  the  beast  was  divided.

But  to  whom  or  to  what  do  these  horns  apply  ?  Not  indiscriminately  to  any  man,
or  set  of  men  ;  but  to  the  reigning  influence  of  those  powers  which  were  pro-
phetically represented  hy  two  horns*  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  ponver  of  God
unto  salvation,  to  every  one  that  bclieveth ;  yet  this  gospel  cannot  be  indiscrim-
inately applied  to Jesus  Christ,  but  to  that  eertam  power  and  influence  of


IP.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD.  387

44.  The  second  beast  was  to  cause  an  image  of  the l^'

first  to  be  made  ;  to  give  life  to  the  image,  and  cause

that  as  many  as  would  not  worship  the  image  of  the  Rev.  xiii.
beast,  should  be  killed. This  did  Luther  and  Cai>  13~iS*
vim,  and  their  followers,  by  the  energy  of  the  sword  ;

of  which  their  Form  'of  Concord,  their  creeds  and
history  of  the  extirpation  of  heretics,  are  an  evidence
to  this  day.

45.  The  second  beast  was  to  do  great  wonders,  and
to  deceive  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by  reason  of
the  wonders  which  he  had  power  to  do. And  what
was the Reformation,  from the  time that  JLuther
burnt  the  laws  of  his  sovereign,  but  a  scene  of  won-
ders ?  a  late  Protestant.writer  says,  in  relation  to  their
defending  their  cause  by  the  sword,  "  They  deter-  Hist,  of
mined  not  to  renounce  those  religious  truths,  to  the  XQ\}^
knowledge  of  which  they  had  attained  by  means  so  p-3si.
wonderful,"  i.  e.  full  of  wonders.*

46.  He  was  also,  to  cause  all,  both  small  and  great,
rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive  a  mark  in
their  right  hand,  or  in.  their  foreheads  :  and  that  no
man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or
the  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his  name.

47.  By  sprinkling  a  little  water  or  making  a  sign  common
of  a  cross  on  the  forehead,  whole  Protestant  states  SfS,
and  kingdoms  were  christianized  ;  and  by  taking  a  8iolw*
solemn  oath  with  their  right  hand  lifted  up  (the  oath

which  he  was  the  beginning,  and  which  is  transmitted  to  all  who  believe  ;  and
in  proportion  as  the  gospel  influences  the  mind  of  a  believer,  so  it  captivates
his  will,  and  leads  hiru  into  action,  and  the  first  moving  cause  become*  a  real
Mid  certain  power  in  his  soul,  which  saves  him  from  sin,  and  leads  him  on  in
the  way  of  righteousness.  Hence  the  title  of  a  horn  is  justly  applied  to  the
power  and  influence  of  the  gospel  ;  not  a  persecuting  horn,  but  a  horn  of  sal-
vation. e  Again,  the  Utile  Ixorn  of  Antichrist  which  waxed  great,  cannot  be  in-
liscriminately  applied  to  Leo  the  Great,  but  to  that  certain  power  and  influence
which  extended  down  through  the  line  of  popes,  and  which  in  pope  Leo  the
first,  hail  it*  beginning.  So  the  two  horns  like  a  Ian  A  cannot  be  indiscriminately
applied  to  Luther  and  Calvin,  but  to  those  certain  powers  and  that  religious  in-
fluence which  began  in  them,  and  of  which  they  were  the  acknowledged  fouu-
ilers  and  promoters.  As  far  then  ns^Lutherism  and  Calvininn  separately  lull u-
tmced  the  mind  and  led  the  subject  into  action,  go  far  they  separately  became
eal  and  certain  powers.  And  as  far  as  the  subjects  of  these  powers  professed
to  maintain  the  gospel  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  so  far  the  beast  made  hi*
i  appearance  with  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  being  blended  with  civil  government
•  the  beast  spake  as  a  dragon.  Thus,  Lutherimt  and  Calvinism  constitute,  and
verily  are  what  is  signified  by  St.  John's  vision  of  the  beast  which  had  two  horn*
I  Mike  a  lanib,  and  spake  as  a  dragon.

*  Wondars  indeed  must  have  greatly  abounded,  when  blood  and  fire,  dispen-
sed in  the  name  of  the  Faiht-r,  Son,  and  Holu  Ghost,  were  the  wonderful  mean*
by  which  religious  truth?  were  to  be  maintained,  defended  and  propagated  I
Well  might  it  be  sail  of  the  bmst,  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven
wn  the  earth,  in  the  sight  of  men.  Surely  such  miraculous  wonders  were  never
-  the  power  of  Pharaoh's  magicians  I


388  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VlJ

CIiiiP" or  sacramen0  tney  were.sealed  to  full  membership  in
__  the  Rational  covenant ;  and  without  these  distinguish-
ing marks  in  the  forehead  or  in  the  right  hand,  it  ia
evident  from  all  their  Creeds  and  Confessions,  thai
no  one  was  entitled  to  any  religious  privilege^
j^Attsof 4S-  ^he  Jtnabafitists  for  renouncing  the  mark  on
Ass.sess.  the  forehead  werei decreed  to  be  rooted  out  of  the
4  Protestant  dominions. Moreover  the  civil  and  eccle-
siastical powers  ordain  and  command,  their  said  com
fession of  faith,  &c.  " to be subscribed  by  all hisj
majesty's  subjects,  of  what  rank  and  quality  soevefl
under  all  civil  pains." They  caused  all  to  receive  th&
oath, " all masters of universities, colleges and
schools,  all  scholars  "at  the  passing  of  their  degrees—
and  finally  all  members  of  the  kirk  and  kingdom.'"
Thus  comprehending  under  their  mark,  both  smaw
and  great,  rich  and  floor ',  free  and  bond.

49.  The  Protestant  mark  [xecpayfAx]  or  charactch
of  a  Christian  was  always  an  outward  ceremony,  oath,i
or  profession  ;  so  they  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,

iRev.'xiu.  to  receive  that  Christian  character  or  mark.  All  mas-,
'  '  ters,  and  scholars,  and  ministers,  such  as  made  mer-
chandize of  their  gospel,  as  well  as  merchants  in  burg^j
and  ail  who  paid  rent  to  the  kirk,  must  have  the  truei
Christian  character,  the  sealing  ordinance,  the  onlji
mark  of  God's  true  religion  administered  and  received!

50.  And  however  formed  or  reformed,  these  out
ward  marks,  so  long  as  the  dispositions  and  actions
of  man  are  beastly,  his  assuming  a  Christian  charac*
ter,  and  claiming  a  relation  to  Christ,  only  distin-
guishes him,  as  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing  is  distin-
guished from  other  beasts.

51.  Protestants  never  would  admit  that  man  in  the
present  life,  could  rise  to  any  thing  higher  than  his
own  fallen  nature,  or  be  so  united  to  Christ  as  to  be-
come one  with  him,  he  must  continue  to  be  fallen
man,  mere  man,  a  daily  transgressor  of  the  com-
mands of  God,  and  to  this  they  must  all  covenant  and
swear,  and  the  seal  of  *this  character  is  their  distin-
guishing point  of  communion.

ftev.  iiu. 52.  Here  is  wisdom. Let  him  that  hath  understand-

iS«  ing  count  the  number  of  the  beast :  and  this  is  easily

done,  for  it  is  the  number  [Gr.  #y0£#?r«] of  man  j


P.  VI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD.  * 389

lot  (as  many  suppose)  some  particular  man,  as  an  in-  e7j^p'

lividual ;  but  Man  in  his  common  gender,  including .mm

nale  and  female.  Then  as  the  number  of  the  beast
s  the  number  of  man}  so  the  character  of  the  beast  is
he  character  of  man,  even  beastly  man  in  his  natural
mman  depravity,  which  he  established,  supported
tnd  applauded,  under  a  profession  of  the  name  of
Christ ;  and  his  name,  under  this  profession  in  his
common  gender,  is  simply  in  the  original  Greek  #£s\
e.  Chxist  ;  and  his  number  six  kundredand sixty-six  *

53.  Thus  fallen  man  in  his  most  reformed  state  is  Gen.vi
bund  wanting. When  God  saw  the  wickedness  of  5'6'T*
nan  that  it  was  great—it  repented  him  that  he  had
nade  man — and  he  said  I  will  destroy  man. His  eyes

n  a  former  beastly  appearance  are  said  to  have  been  ^an*  **■
ike  the  eyes  of  man. And  last  of  all,  the  number  of  see2Pei
'he  beast  is  the  member  oimart^  and  his  name  is  almost  ll#12314,
ike  the  name  of  Christ,  but  it  is  not  Christ,  and  how-
ever near the resemblance,  justice  forbids  that  he
mould  be  heir  to  the  premise  of  everlasting  life.

54.  Likewise  this  beast  begins  with  a  great  num-
ber, and  ends  with  a  small  ;  so  the  Protestants  began
with  christening  whole  nations,  causing  all  both  small

nd  great  to  receive  a  mark,  and  a  name,  to  the  let-
:ers  of  which  they  added  nought.  Their  kirk  it  is
:rue  had,  in  a  nominal  profession,  some  appearance,  but
hey  never  could  keep  the  commandments  of  Christ :
ike  the  Ephraimites  and  their  Sibbcleth,  for  Shibbo-  J
\eth,  they  never  could  frame  to  pronounce  it  right.

55.  While  they  and  their  kings  and  nobles,  and
Hministers  of  the  gospel,  professed  to  bear  the  cross
t  of  Christ,  (at  least  the  mark  of  it  in  the  forehead,)

they  unhappily  betrayed  their  attachment  and  likeness
!  to  the  rebellious children  of  Israel,  who had  their

*  The  ancient  Greeks  as  well  as  Romans,  used  the  characters  of  their  alpha*
bet  instead  of  figures  to  represent  numbers. Thus  :

'  The  1st.  character  X is  in  number  600, in  the  letters  of  our  alphabet  Ch.
The  2d. character  | is  in  number 60,  in  the  letters  of  our  alphabet  >:i.
•J  The  3d. character  5- is  in  number 6, in  the  letters  of  our  alphabet  st.

I  Then  by  putting  these  characters  together  they  make  CHXIST;
;  I A  very  specious,  but  false resemblance  of  the  true  CHRIST.

I  And  by  adding  the  numbers  together  they  make  666.  Thus  we  see  that
ACJixiit  is  the  name  of  the  beast,  ami  666  the  number  of  bis  name.  Let  him
\that  hath  under<standing  to  compute  his  pernicious  doctrines,  horrid  blasphe-
»ues,  and  abominable  cruelties,  make  tke  ajipiicHtion.


5.U.


390  THE  PRESENT  STATE  0F?  &C.  P.  VI.

chap, distinguishing  mai  k  only  in  the  flesh  of  the  foreskin  ;  j
_^_  but  the  Protestant  mark  on  the  skin  of  the  forehead,]
"  was  neither  so  deep,  nor  so  dangerous  to  the  beast.

56.  The  Protestants  and  their  descendants,  like  the]
uncircumcised  Israelites,  glory  much  in  their  out-J
Ward  marks,  but  more  in  their  number ;  but  though|
the  number  of  these  children  of  Israel  be  as  the  sandi
of  the  sea,  it  is  only  the  number  of  the  beast,  the
number  of  fallen  man,  such  as  Christ  called,  serfientm
a  generation  of  vipers.

57.  As  the  Jews  confined  the  favour  of  God  to  their]
mark  and  their  number,  so  did  the  Protestants,  anca
so  do  all  the  Christian  world  ;  therefore  the  character
#nd  doom  of  both  are  well  described  by  the  prophets  :

i-ai.  lxv.  — But  ye  are  they  that  forsake  the  Lord,  that  forget
my  holy  mountain,  that  prepare  a  table  for  that  troop,
and  that  furnish  the  drink  offering  unto  that  number.
Therefore  will  I  number  you  to  the  sword,  and  ye  shall
all  bow  down  io  the  slaughter  : — for  the  Lord  God  shall-
slay  tfiec  and  call  his  servants  by  another  name.

58.  To  sum  up the  whole  matter,  the  Christian
world,  in  its  present  state,  is  so  universally  corrupt,
that  every  orthodox  Christian  must  needs  be  markec
with  a  significant  mark  or  sign  of  human  depravity,  ,
and  bound  by  every  obligation  that  ever  was  given  t(
restrain  vice.

59.  The  sexes  cannot  live  together  in  any  order
without  a  ceremonial  covenant  ratified  and  solemni-
zed by  a  consecrated  priest,  or  civil  magistrate  ;  thei
cannot  be  governed  without  the  compulsive  energy
of  arms  and  human  laws  ;  they  cannot  be  credited
.without  the  sanction  of  a  solemn  oath,  nor  agree
among  themselves  without  the  interference  of  the
civil  magistrate  to  keep  them  in  order  ;  none  of  which
pertains  to  the  true  kingdom  of  Christ  ;  and  there-
fore, after  the  appearance  of  the  Lamb  on  mount  Zion,
the  Angel  so  justly  proclaims  with  a  loud  voice  :

R?y.  xiv.  60.  If  any  man  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,
9>  10-  and  receive  his  mark  in  his  forehead,  or  in  his  hand,  the
same  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,
which  is  poured  out  without  mixture,  into  the  cup  of
his  indignation  ;  and  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire
and  brimstone,  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and
in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb.


|P.  VI. REMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF, ScC.  391

CHAPTER  IV.

^(Remarks  on  the  present  State  of  the  Witnesses  of  7  ruth.

*T^HE  natural  state  of  man  being  a  state  of  proba-  C1^p*
1  tion,  it  became  necessary  that  he  should  be  _
rought  into  judgment,  and  render  an  account  of  all
the  deeds  done  in  the  body  :  and  as  wickedness  can-
not go  unpunished,  so  it  cannot  be  condemned  with*
ut  witnesses  :  for  this  cause,  therefore,  hath  God  se-
ected  from  amongst  mankind,  men  of  like  passions
with  the  rest  ;  and  endowed  them  with  the  light  and
ifts  of  his  spirit,  to  stand  as  witnesses  against  the
eneral  corruptions  and  abounding  wickedness  of  the
world  :  and  no  age  has  been  without  such,  from  the
eginning  to  the  present  day.

2.  Even  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophe-
sied against  the wicked, saying,  Behold,  the  Lord
:ometh  in*  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judg-  *gr  £  Ve
ment  u/ion  all,  and  to convince  all that  are  ungodly  Judei4,

mong  them,  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  ivhich  they  have
ngodly  committed,  and  of  all  their  hard,  s/ieechis,
hich  ungodly  sinners  have  sfioken  against  him.

3.  Noah  was  a  true  witness  against  the  Antedeluvi-
an  world,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Moses,  and  Sam-
pel,  all  bore  a  swift  testimony  against  sin.  The
prophets,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel,
pvith  the  lesser  prophets,  and  thousands  who  receiv-
led  the  same  spirit,  were  witnesses  for  God,  against
the  growing  corruptions  of  human  nature.

4.  Next  follows  John  the  Baptist,  by  whom  was
Introduced  Jesus,  the  true  and  faithful  witness,  who,
having  finished  his  testimony,  gave  the  same  author-
ity to  his  disciples,  apostles,  and  true  followers,  thou-
sands of  whom  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
knew  what  was  in  man,  and  testified  against  his  de-
pravity, for  which  they  suffered  all  kinds  of  hard-
ships and  torture,  even  to  the  laying  down  of  their
lives.

5.  We  have  seen  also, from  the  most  approved
[records,  that  through  the  darkest  ages  of  antichris- *
|tian  apostacy,  God  had  a  people  who  bore  witness  to

•Nn


392  REMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VL

CJ1-^P- the  truth  ;  a  people  who  taught  the  principles  of  vir-

[__  tue,  and practised  what  they  taught  ;  who  took  no

oath s,  bore  no  arms,  and  held  the  reins  of  spiritual
government  in  the  strictness  of  their  morals;  which,
according  to  their  degree  of  light,  rendered  their
communion  inaccessible  to  the  unrighteous  and  wick-
ed, and  who  testified,  that  the  church  of  Christ,  could
be  comfiosed  only  of  the  holy  and  the  just*

6.  We  have  stated  from  the  authority  of  some  of
the  most  noted  ecclesiastical  writers,  the  general
faith  and  manners  of  the  Marcionitcs,  Hierachites9
Manicheans,  JScvatians,  Priscillianists,  Basilians,  Bo-
gomilans,  Catharists,  Pattrines,  Albigenses,  Anabaft-
tists,  Picards,  IValdenses,  and  lastly  of  the  people
called  Quakers.  Thousands  and  millions  of  whom,
even  from  the  beginning  of  the  falling  away,  to  the-
time  of  the  persecution  in  New-England,  fell  by  the
sword,  and  by  fire,  and  by  captivity,  and  by  spoil  ma-*
ny  days,

7.  The  testimony  of  truth,  which  stood  against  vice
-  through  the  reign  of  Antichrist,  had  for  its  authority

both  the  first  and  second  appearing  of  Christ,  that
which  was  past,  and  that  which  was  to  come  ;  and
besides,  it  had  for  its  object  the  corruption  of  human
nature,  both  in  male  and  female,  so  women  as  well
as  men,  were  authorized  to  bear  testimony  to  the
truth,  against  vice  and  corruption  ;  and  as  two  wit-
nesses were  always  counted  necessary  to  establish  a
fact,  therefore  they  are  said  to  be  two  witnesses,  two
Rev.xi.4.  olive  trees ,  and  two  candlesticks,  standing  before  the
God  of  the  earth*

8.  According  to  the  time  of  Antichrist's  reign,
which  was  to  be  a  time,  times,  and  an  half,  which  is
understood  to  mean  three  prophetic  days  and  an  half
or  forty  and  two  months,  that  is,  (according  to  the
solution  of  prophetic  numbers,)  one  thousand  twe
hundred  and  sixty  years  ;  so  were  the  sufferings  anc
death  of  the  witnesses.

9.  Yet  those  bodies  or  communities  of  virtuous
believers,  although  dead  to  the  world,  cut  off  fron
any  free  exercise  in  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  de
voted  to  destruction,  and  banished  by  oppression  t(
the  sequestered  valUes,  to  the  mountains,  and  to  the


■P.  VI.  THE*  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  393

dens  and  caves of  the  earth, were  not  suffered  by  c^p*

tlieir  rapacious  persecutors  to  be  buried  out  of  sight,

although  the  fire  of  their  testimony  continued,  from
age  to  age,  to  torment  them  that  dwelt  upon  the  earth.

10.  These  had  the  only  keys  of  divine  influence,
and  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  the  real  gifts  of  the
Holy  Ghost  should  be  withheld  from  the  church  of
Antichrist, in  the  days  of their  prophecy, and  to

mite  the  earth  with  plagues  and  troubles  as  often  as
they  would,  by  letting  loose  the  tormenting  truth
among  them.

11.  The  slaying  of  the  witnesses  was  peculiar  to
the  reign  of  Antichrist.  In  former  ages,  before  An-
tichrist had  the  dominion,  witnesses  were  in  some
measure  tolerated,  respected  and  believed  among  the
nations;  but  in  the  corrupt,  debauched,  and  tyran-
nical kingdom  of  the  beast,  they  were  not  suffered
to  live,  and  were  perpetually  misrepresented,  black-
ened and  anathematized  as  the  most  odious  of  all  be-
ings, and  persecuted  unto  death  :  Therefore  the  slay-

ng  of  the  witnesses  was  to  end  with  the  tyranny  of
Antichrist.

12.  For  three days  and  a  half  their  dead bodies
were  to  lie  in  the  street  of  the  great  city,  which  spir-  Rev.  *i,
itually  is  called Sodom  and Egypt,  wiiere  also  our  8*

ord  was  crucified  ;  that  is,  in  a  Catholic  hierarchy,
where  politicians  are  ruled  by  priests,  and  where  the
c/i/iression  of  Egypt,  and  the  Sin  of  Sodom  abounds.

13.  And  as  this  great  Babylon  was  constructed  by
the  obsequious  Marc i anus,  the  imperious  Leo  the
Great,  and'  the  barbarous  kings,  upon  the  plan  of
Jewish  priests  and  Pagan  rulers  ;  so  in  the  street  of
the  same  did  those  dead  bodies  lie,  clothed  in  sack-
cloth, under  a  state  of  spiritual  mourning,  and  held
in  the  utmost  contempt  and  derision,  while  the  whole
Christian  world  were  rejoicing  over  them.

14.  And  thus  it  continued  until  about  the  beginning
of  the  seventeenth  century,  when  the  bloody  priest-
hood lost  their  balance  of  power,  and  politicians,  in
the  order  of  Providence,  began  to  assume  the  right
of  civil  government,  according  to  the  long  neglected
dictates  of  reason  ;  at  which  period  the  power  of  the
beast  began  gradually  to  decline.


394  KEMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF P.  VI.

e^p- 15.  And  from  this  period  it  might  be said,  the
.  witnesses  arose  and  stood  upon  their  feet,  in  point  of

credit  and  divine  authority :  and  while  fearfulness
took  hold  of  the  antichristian  powers,  the  spirit  of
the  witnesses  in  the  French  Prophets,  arose  in  a
cloud  to  heaven,  in  answer  to  the  great  voice  of  eter-
i  nal  truth,  which  began  to  be  uttered.;  and  they  were
*f  heard  and  received  with  reverence  and  awe.9'  And
clouds  of  witnesses  have  ever  since  been  rising  up
to  testify  plainly  against  the  spirit  and  tyranny  of  An-
tichrist, and  the  darkness  that  fills  his  kingdom,  as
well  as  against  the  general  abominations  that  over-
spread the  earth.

16.  So  that,  to  this  day,  light  and  conviction  has
been  increasing  in  the  earth,  and* there  are  many  souls-
on  earth,  boh  tolerated  and  credited  among  the  peo-
ple, as  God's  witnesses  had  usually  been,  before  the,
beastly  power  of  Antichrist  arose. These  have,  in  a
greater  or less  degree,  the  light  and spirit  of  the
true  witnesses,  and  are  able  to  discover  and  bear  tes-<:
timony  against the fraud  and  inconsistency  of  those'
false  systems  invented  by  men  of  corrupt  minds,  who,
for  so  many  ages,  have  corrupted  the  earth,  and  per-
verted the  rights  of  man.

17.  As  long  as  such  witnesses  are  honest  and  faith*
ful  to  testify  what  is  given  them  of  God,  they  are
justified  and  accepted,  and  no  longer;  this  is  accord-
ing to  God's  manner  of  dealing  in  every  age.  The*-
spirit  of  Christ  was  never  committed  to  man  to  be  at
his  disposal:  God  always  required  that  man  should
be  subject,  in  all  things,  to  the  dictates  of  the  Spirit.

18.  Hence  it  has  often  happened  with  many,  who-
have  had  a  good  degree  of  light,  and  possessed  the
spirit  and  power  of  a  living  testimony,  that  whenever
they  had  gained  sufficient  credit  and  authority  among
the  people,  the  self-exalting  spirit  of  man  has  risen
up  against  God,  and  perverted  the  most  precious  gifts
of  God  to  the  purposes  of  building  up  their  own  honr
our :  and  this  has  been  the  fundamental  cause  of  so
many  divided  sectaries  now  in  the  earth.

19.  The  witnesses  of  God  in  every  age,  while  they
stood  in  the  pure  light,  testified  impartially  against
the  depravity  of  all  .  nations, and  more  especially


P.  VI.  THE  WITNESSES  QF  TRUTH.  395

against  their  own  ;  but  whenever  they  became  attach- CIifv.P*
ed  to  their  own  people, so  as  to  favour  and  wink  at  .

their  corruptions,  and  build  them  up  with  an  imagi-
nation that  they  were  better  than  others,  then  the
whole  became  corrupted  together,  and  the  true  gift
was  taken  from  them  and  committed  to  others.  And
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  former  have  generally
persecuted  the  latter,  as  far  as  circumstances  would
admit.

20.  The  true  witnesses,  during  the  reign  of  Anti-
christ, received  not  their  testimony  by  a  line  of  suc-
cession from  the  apostles,  but  by  revelation  ;  they
had  the  spirit  and  power  of  prophets  to  bear  testimo-
ny, not  of  apostles  to  build  ;  ail  such  as  went  to
forming  systems,  to  Build  up  separate  parties,  or  to
unite  with  any  establishments,  in  order  to  shun  per-
secution or  gain  worldly  honour,  were  deceived  by
the  influence  of  Antichrist,  and  lost  their  testimony.

21.  But  such  as  were  neither  warped  by  fear,  fa-
vour, interest  nor  affection,  and  continued  to  the  end,
retained  their  testimony,  and  were  owned  and  ac-
cepted of  God  as  true  witnesses,  and  their  reward
was  with  the  souls  of  those  under  the  altar,  who
were  beheaded  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  tes-
timony which  they  held.

22.  The  testimony  of  the  witnesses  continued  to  v
be  received  by  revelation., after  the  apostles  days,  and
through  the  succeeding  ages,  down  to  the  Quakers^
after  which,  none  of  the preceding,  sectaries who

had  lost  their  testimony,  could  be  accepted.*

23.  George  Fox  came  forth  with  a  testimony
against  all  those  thieves  and  robbers,  who  had  under-
taken to  defend  their  cause  by  written  creeds,  and  out-
ward forms  of  doctrine  and  worship,  and  who,  for
the  purpose  of  making  a  covering  for  themselves,

*  The  authority  of  a  present  living*  witness,  must,  of  necessity,  supercede
the  authority  of  nil  preceding  witnesses,  even  admitting  the  preceding  to  have
been  faithful  in  their  day.  This  is  so  plain  a  truth  that  it  is  surprising  that  man-
kind should  blunder  at  it,  and  blindly  reject  a  present  testimony,  while  they
profess  to  believe  in  the  past.  No  one  will  dispute  that  the  present  authority  of
a  foreign  ambassador,  clothed  with  the  powers  of  his  government,  supercedes
the  authority  of  all  former  ambassadors  whose  powers  hav#  ceased,  or  who,
thiouga  uni'aithfulness,  have  forfeited  their  authority  :  and  it  would  readily  be
acknowledged  that  one  who,  without  authority,  should  assume  the  name,  and
demand  audhn.ee  as  a  foreign  ambassador,  would  meet  with  contempt  from  any
nation.  So  wise  and  discerning  is  man  in  things  that  respect  the  affairs  of  thh
nie  j  and  yet  so  grossly  blLid  hi  things  spiritual  and  eternal  I

Nil  2


•96  REMARKS  OK  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.


CHAP.
IV.


had  stolen  the  good  words  of  the  apostles,  or  their
forefathers,  whose  testimony  had  stood  equally  against
all  flesh,  and  who  had  suffered  for  righteousness
sake.

24.  All  agree  that  George  Fox  did  not  receive
toiy,'voL  ^s  sentiments  from  Origen,  nor  the  schools.  "  His
v.p.458.  ignorant  and  inelegant simplicity,  says  one,  places

him  beyond  the  reach  of  suspicion  in  this  matter."
God  generally  chose  such  ignorant  and  inelegant
teachers  to  deliver  his  messages,  of  which  the  fol-
lowing is  an  example.

25.  "  These  (the  professors  of  Christianity,  says
Fox'sJou.  i  Fox^j  paint  themselves  with  the  prophets',  and  with
toIi.  p. t  Christ>s  anci  wjtjj  tne  apostles'  words  most  fair. —

i  Whited  walls,  painted  sepulchres,  murderers  of  the

*  just  you  are.  Your  eyes  are  double,  your  minds  are
4  double,  your  hearts  are  double.  Ye  flatterers,  re-
4  pent  and  turn  from  your  carnal  ends,  who  are  full

*  of  mischief;  pretending  God  and  godliness,  taking
1  him  for  your  cloak ;  but  he  will  uncover  you,  and

*  he  hath  uncovered  you  to  his  children."

26.  "  He  will  make  you  bare,  discover  your  secrets,
1  take  oif  your  crown,  take  away  your  mantle  and
'  your  veil,  and  strip  you  of  your  cloathing  ;  that  your
1  nakedness  may  appear,  and  how  you  sit  deceiving
1  the  nations. Your  abomination  and  your  falsehood

*  is  now  made  manifest  to  those  who  are  of  God ;— I
c  who  in  his  power  triumph  over  you,  rejoice  over

*  you,  the  beast,  the  dragon,  the  false  prophet,  the;
c  seducer,  the  hypocrite,  the  mother  of  all harlots.

im. <  This  is  the  generation  which  God  is  not  well  pleas-

*' •  ed  with  ;  for  their  eyes  are  full  of  adultery,  who

i  cannot  cease  from  evil. These  be  they  that  live  in

'  pleasures  upon  earth  ;  who  glory  not  in  the  Lord

<  but  in  the  flesh."

27.  George  Fox  bore  a  plain  and  living  testimony
of  truth,  according  to  the  will  of  God  at  that  time.
But,  unhappily  for  the  Friends^  the  testimony  of
truth  was  exchanged  for  the  illustrations  and  com-
ments of  great  men,  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  great
and  popular  ones  of  the  earth  :  hence  the  wise  and
learned  of  this  world  have  had  occasion  to  make  the
following  distinction.  *»


THE  WITNESSES  ©F  TRUTH.  397

28.  «  The  tenets  which  this blunt  and  illiterate c^p-
man  [Fox]  expressed  in  a  rude,  confused  and  am-


biguous manner,  were  dressed  up  and  presented  Bums*
under  a  different  form,  by  the  masterly  hands  oi  tvmp^1;
Barclay,  Keith,  Fisher,  and  Pen-n,  who  diges-
ted them  with  such  sagacity  and  art,  that  they  assu-
med the  aspect  of  a  regular  system."  And  hence
It  is,  that  the  writings  of  Barclay  and  Pcnn,  are  more
recommended  than  those  of  Fox  or  Burroughs

29.  And  what  was  all  this  digesting  and  regula-
ting, but  laying  another  foundation  for  those  very
whited  walls  and  painted  sepulchres,  against  which
heir  testimony  first  came  forth  ?  Jesus  of  Nazareth
might  have  been  called  a  blunt  and  illiterate  man,
when  among  his  own  nation  the  Jews,  he  denounced
judgment  against  both  them  and  their  most  solemn
place  of  worship.  His  apostles  were  blunt  illiterate
fishermen  ;  and  such  were  generally  the  principal  in-
struments by  which  God  promoted  the  best  of  cau-
ses ;  and  the  true  witnesses  never  attempted  to  sof-
ten the  matter,  or  to  suit  their  testimony  to  the  taste
of  the  great  ones  of  the  earth.

SO.  The  truth  is,  the  Friends  were  led  astray  from
the  power  of  a  iiving  testimony  by  popularity  ;  in
this  case  they  were  deceived  ;  and  while  they  cloth-
ed themselves  with  the  words  of  their  ancients,  they
came  under  the  condemnation  of  those  who  had  cloth-
ed themselves  with  the  words  of  Christ  and  his  apos-
Itles,  against  whom  their  ancients  testified.
31.  Popularity  and  persecution  could  never  abide
with  each  other.  When  the  Friends  became  nume-
rous and  popular,  and  the  life  and  power  of  their  tes-
timony was  on  the  decline,  then  they  were  prepared
to  sue  for  an  establishment  as  a  true  Christian  sect,
worthy  of  protection  under  the  power  of  the  secular
arm ;  and  here  ended  both  their  power,  and  their
extraordinary  sufferings.

32.  Many  of  the  petitions,  which  they  presented  Setrel,s
to  King  James  II.  and  also  to  King  William  III.  J*"*1**
and  Queen Ann,  now  stand  on  record. William,  593',  599.
Prince  of Orange,  first  established  liberty of  con-
science by  law  in  England,  about  the  year  1689. To
his  honour, the  friends  partook  of  that  righteous


3VS  REMARKS; ON TI1E  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.

chap, grant,  but  to  their  shame,  as  the  witnesses  of  God,
' it  was  granted  to  them,  in  particular,  upon  their  hum-
ble request,  and  t,heir  religion established  by  act  of
parliament,
sewers 35.  In the  year  1702,  William died,  and  Prin4
^Xffi7' cess  Ann,  was  proclaimed  queen. To  her  also,  the;
friends  sent  many  addresses. Thus  their  petitions
for  the  redress  of  their  grievances,  were  mixed  with
addresses  of  applause to  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,
until  they  were  placed  upon  equal  ground  of  respect-'
ability  with  other  Pro'estants  ;  and  thus  the  offence  ofi
the  cross  ceased,  the  glory  of  their ancients  passed
away,  and.  left  another people  in  the  outward  form,. J
but  destitute  of  the  power  ;  so  that  chosen  witnesses)
wrere  raised  up,  among  themselves,  to  testify  of  their-
fall  and  apostacy  from  their  original  spirit.

34.  The  spirit  and  power  of  eternal  truth  confirm-^
ed  the  testimony  of  George  Fox,  and  many  of  those:
who  were  cotemporary  with  him,  that  they  were$
sent  of  God  as  true  witnesses.  But  there  is  decided^
proof  that  a  people  of  the  same  name  followed  after*),
who,  as  a  people,  were  not  the  true  witnesses :  fort
as  God  never  did  raise  up  one  true  witness  to  testify
against  another  ;  therefore  the  testimony  of  John%
Griffith,  whom  they  acknowledge  to  have  been  sent*
of  God,  stands  as  an  undeniable  proof  that  their  powd-
er, as  a  people,  was  gone,  in  about  sixty  years  fromA
the  time  of  their  addresses  to  the  queen.

35.  From  the  many  lamentations  of  this  faithful1'
labourer,  over  a  back-sliding  people,  it  will  be  suflW

Griffith's  cient  to  notice  the  following. "  Many  under  our  re-
u^so?' '  ligious  profession,  (says  he,) resting  in  the  profes-

4  sion  only,  is  the  principal  reason  that  we  find  divers^

5  under  our  name  more  insensible,  harder  to  be  reach-fl
*  ed  unto,  and  awakened  by  a  living  powerful  minis*
c.  try,  than  any  other  religious  persuasion.  This  may!
c  seem  strange  to  some,  but  I  know  it  is  lamentably!
«  true."

M.  36.  On his  visiting  the  Friends in America,  he

p* iC'5' makes  this  reflection. "  When  I  have  considered  the

'  low,  indifferent,  languid  state  of  those  under  our,

<  name, in  many  places,  both  in  this  and  other  na-

'  tions,  chiefly  occasioned  by  an  inordinate  love  of  the


VI.  THE  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  39$


CHAP.
IV.


■world,  and  the  things  thereof,  my  soul  has  been
deeply  humbled  in  awful  prostration."

37.  In  speaking  of  the  meetings  managed  by  un-  Griffith's
sanctified  spirits,  he  saiih,  "  The  seed  of  God,  which  3^^}f

should  have  dominion  in  all  our  meetings,  is  de-
pressed  This  spirit  getting  in  amongst  us,  in

every  part  of  the  body  or  society,  cannot  fail  of  lay-
ing waste  ;  therefore  let  all  consider  what  spirit
rules  them.  It  is  a  mournful  truth,  (adds  he,)  that
among  the  many  thousands  of  Israel,  there  are  but
few,  in  comparison,  who  really  stand  quite  upright ; —
who  cannot  be  at  all  warped  by  fear,  interest,  favour,
or  affection."

38.  How  far  this  character  fails  below  the  testimo-
ny and  expectations  of  the  first  true  witnesses  called
Quakers,  is  evident  from  all  their  writings,  especial  -
y  from  those  of  Edward  Burrongh,  The  truth  is,
hose  blunt  and  illiterate  men,  as  they  are  called,  who
irst  broke  out  with  such  rude  and  ambiguous  expres-
ions,  were  never  commissioned  to  found  a  church,
lor  to  build  up  any  people  upon  the  authority  of  their
ixtraordinary  testimony  :  for  no  church  or  people'
:ould  be  established  till  the  reign  of  Antichrist  was  at
n  end.

39.  But while  they  testified  against  all  the  false' .
hurches, and  false  systems,  that  existed  on  earth,

ey  were  commissioned  from  heaven  to  announce
heir  certain  downfall,  and  the  setting  up  of  that
hurch  or  kingdom  which  should  stand' forever  ;  but
he  work  was  not  given  them  to  do  ;  their  commis-
ion  extended  no  further  than  to  declare  that  God  was
x>ut  to  effect  it,  and  would,  by  means  of  his  ownchu-
ing,  most  certainly  accomplish  it  in  his  own  time.

40.  This  will  appear  most  strikingly  evident  from
he  writings  of  Edward  Burroughs  who  was  cotem-
orary  with  Geoi-ge  Fox,  and  who,,  in  the  year  1662,

the  28th  year  of  his  age,  died  a  prisoner  at  .Afrw-
ate,  London,  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  tes-
mony  which  he  held.  The  following  short  extracts,
rom  his  own  writings,  may  show  the  nature  of  that
istimony  for  which  he  patiently  suffered  unto  death. rf^s

41.  "  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  in  all  nations  works,
throughout  the  world  ;  hearken  and  give  ear,  the  5c  I47'.


400


REMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  Of  P.  Vll


CHAP.
IV.


Bur-
pough's
Works,p.
293, 194.


itod.
g>7.


word  of  the  Lord  God1  that  made  heaven  and  earth
is  toward  you ;  he  is  coming  to  set  up  his  kingdom
and  his  dominion,  which  never  shall  have  an  end  ;
and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  be  changed^
and  shall  become  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God.
The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  near  to  come,  and  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  be  changed,  and  none
shall  have  any  part  therein,  but  they  that  are  re-
deemed out  of  kindreds,  tongues,  and  people  :  this
we  believe  ;  he  that  can  receive  it  let  him/'

42.  "  This  is  the  time  in  which  all  the  men  of  this
generation  are  fallen,  and  the  scripture  is  fulfilled  h
the  night  wherein  no  man  can  work  is upon  thee
world  ;  and  further,  this  is  the  time  of  Antichrist's?
dominion. And  also  we  know,  the  time  is  now  ap#<
proaching,  that  the  dominion  of  the  beast  is  near  arft
end,  and  the  holy  city  shall  the  saints  possess,  anew
the  Gentiles  shall  be  driven  out  of  it,  according  as.*
John  said. I  say,  the  time  is  well  nigh  expired,!
and  finished,  and  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  and  the
Lamb  is  risen  to  make  war  against  the  beast  and  his'
image,  who  hath  reigned  over  the  kingdoms  of  the
world. — But  now  the  mighty  day  of  the  Lord,  anc
the  judgment  of  the  whore  is  approaching,  where*
in  she  shall  be  rewarded  according  to  her  works.'

43.  "  This  I  have  received  from  God,  I  say  thfe
holy  city  shall  be  measured,  and  she  shall  be  adorn-
ed, and  as  a  bride  for  her  husband  shall  she  be  pre
pared  ;  and  God's  tabernacle  shall  be  with  men
The  kingdom  of  the  beast  must  clown,  and  the
princely  power  of  darkness  must  be  overthrown,  and
laws,  and  times,  and  things,  and  powers  of  men
shall,  be  overthrown,  and  overturned,  till  he  come
to  reign  in  the  earth,  whose  right  it  is  to  reign  ovei
nations  and  people."

44.  "  This  is  written  as  moved  of  the  Lord,  to  gc
abroad  through  the  nations,  that  all  may  understand
concerning  the  times,  and  the  changing  of  times,
and  how  the  beast  hath  reigned  in  dominion — anc
the  kingdom  of  Christ  hath  not  been  known  upor
the  earth  for  many  generations  ;  but  the  beast  hatt
been  established  in  his  throne  of  rebellion  againsi
Christ  Jesus."


VL  THE  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  401

45.  "  All  this  traditional  worship,  and  false  imita-  ™*P-
tions  which  have  been  set  up  since  the  apostles  days,  _
shall  be  overthrown  and  confounded;  the  Lord  is Bur-
risen  and  will  dash  down,  and  overthrow  all  this  ^v"fjj'g9
idolatry  now  practised  amongst  Christians  :  and  a  p. 437/
great  shaking  and  confounding  shall  suddenly  come
among  Christians  ;  for  the  Lord  will  break  down

that  which  hath  been  builded,  because  it  is  pollu-
ted ;  and  he  will  pluck  up  that  which  hath  been
planted,  because  it  is  defiled  ;  and  a  mighty  work  f

will  the  Lord  work  in  the  earth. — And  for  this  state,
all  that  fear  God,  and  love  him,  are  to  wait,  for
this  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  world."

46.  "  Concerning  the  things  whereof  we  have  tes- iba>
tified  these  divers  years,  I  am  no  way  doubtful  but l>-7^»
our  God  will  fulfil  them,  neither  can  my  confidence

be  shaken,  by  what  is  or  can  come  to  pass  ;  for  An-
tichrist must  fall,  false  ministry  and  worship,  false
ways  and  doctrines  God  will  confound,  false  /lower
and  Jalse  church  the  Lord  will  lay  low  ; — and  Truth
and  Righteousness  must  reign. — These  things  have
we  prophesied  from  day  to  day  ;  and  my  faith  is
constant  and  immoveable,  that  God  will  effect  these
things  in  his  season. "

47.  The  epistles  and  warnings  of  this  faithful  wit-
less of  Christ,  are  left  as  a  standing  monument  of
;he  testimony  of  truth  at  that  day  ;  as  a  controversy
>f  God  with  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earthy  directed

7ito  all  sorts  of  fie 0 file  ;  as  a  trumpet  of  the  Lord,
Old  a  true  noise  of  a  fearful  earthquake  at  handy  which
diall  shake  the  whole  fabric k  of  the  earth,  and  the  pil-
ars of  its  standing  shall  fall,  and  never  more  be  set  up
igain. — Declared  and  written  by  a  son  of  thunder,  as
warning  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  By  or-
ier  and  authority  given  unto  me  by  the  Spirit  of  the
iving  God.  So  testified  Edward  Burrough,  in  the
rear  1655.

48.  Beginning  at  the  head  of  the  nation,  he  deliv-
ers his  message  to  Oliver  Cromwell,  and  all  his  coun-

il — To  all  judges  and  lawyers — To  all  astrologers,
soothsayers,  and  wise men — To  all  generals,  colo-
nels, commanders,  officers,  and  soldiers,  in  England,
^Scotland,  and  Ireland— To  all  the  priests,  and  proph-


402  REMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI,

chap.  ets?  anc[  teachers  of  the  people — To,  all  the  Papists,
.  their  whoie  body  and  head  at  Rome — -To  all  Protes*

tants  of  the  eldest  sort — To  all  Presbyterians  and  In-
dependents— To  ail  Anabaptists — To  all  free  wiliers
— To  all  Rs  nters — To  all  seekers  and  waiters. — And
lastly,  to  those  who  were  in  thejight  of  eternal  life.
And  two  years  after,  he  delivered  ten  solemn  warn*
ings  to  Friends*

49.  Those  testimonies,  which  were  then  deliver-
ed from  time  to  time,  breathe  the  most  evident  spir-
it of  prophecy,  in  regard  to  the  end  of  a  corrupt
Christian  World,  and  the  setting  up  of  the  pure  and(
everlasting  kingdom  of  Christ.

50.  Now  certain  it  is,  that  the  many  complaints  oi;
worldly  mindedness,  of  dcadness  and  insensibility,  m
resting  on  a  mere  firqfes '&io?i ,  and  of  receiving  a  false*
spirit,  which  stand  against  the  general  body  of  the*
Friends,  by  their  own  writers,  are  sufficient  eviden«J
ces  that  they  are  not  that  pure,  spiritual  and  heaven i
ly  church,  of  which  those  witnesses  prophesied:
whose  name  they  now  bear.


CHAPTER  V.

The  Subject  continued.


i


THE  church  of  Christ  in  the  latter  day,  was  n&
to  be  composed  of  the  worldly  minded — th<
dead  and  insensible — or  of  such  as  would  be  led  awa;
by  a  false  spirit.  Yet  not  one  word  of  truth  ccub
fall  to  the  ground  that  had  been  delivered  by  the  wit
nesses  of  God  :  for  the  whole  must  be  accomplished
2.  The  dissolution  of  the  Christian  World,  wit]
all  its  false  establishments,  was  an  event  as  certaij
as  any  that  had  ever  been  marked  out  by  the  spirit  o
prophecy  ;  and  the  jarring  materials  of  which  it  wa
composed,  lost  the  centre  of  their  attraction  and  band
of  uniformity?  within  forty  years  after  the  testimon;

*  These  addresses  may  be  seen  at  large  in  BurrougU's  WorUs,  p.  9S  to  1X4.


VI.  THE  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  40.:

George  Fox>  Edward  Burrongh  and  the  rest,  was cwfltt
elivered  ;  when  civil  rulers  caused  the  persecuting '
word  to  be  put  up  into  its  sheath,  and  began  to  pro-
aim  liberty  for  every  one  to  enjoy  his  own  faith  un-
aolested.

3.  The  whole  chain  of  prophecies,  that  relate  to
e  heavens  and  the  earth  that  then  were,  have  been

vidently  fulfilling  ever  since  liberty  of  conscience
vas  granted  ;  sects  and  parties  have  not  only  been
issolving  asunder,  and  removing  more  distant  from
le  mother  church,  and  from  each  other,  but  the
nost  fundamental  points  of  doctrine,  discipline,  and
overnment,  and  even  whole  creeds,  confessions,
ommon  prayer  books.  Sec.  are,  in  many  parts  of
Christendom,  passing  away  with  a  great  noise,  and
le  elements  in  which  they  were  composed,  are  melt-
ig  with  fervent  heat.  So  that  every  attempt  to  re-
:>rm,  repair,  and  unite  together  the  different  parts
*  the  great  Christian  World,  can  only  widen  the
reach,  and  hasten  the  final  dissolution  of  the  whole.

4.  But  again,  when  the  Friends,  in  the  declining
tate  of  their  power,  applied  to  an  arm  of  flesh  for
rotection,  and  had  their  religion  established  by  law,
iey  united  with  the  remaining  power  of  the  beast,
irough  the  influence  of  which  they  became  a  dead
feless  body,  as  a  people.  And  in  setting  out  to  build
nother  old  heaven  church  upon  the  principles  of  their
primer  light  and  testimony,  before  the  time  had  ar-
ived  for  their  testimony  to  be  accomplished,  they
nly  exposed  themselves,  equally  with  others,  to  suf-
iv  the  loss  of  all  their  superfluous  labour,  in  the
eneral  wreck  of  false  buildings.

5.  It  is  true  they  were  very  cautious  as  to  adopting
rose  forms  and  ceremonies  of  worship  which  per-
illed to  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist ;  so  that  in  this
iey  are  a  very  distinguished  people.  Nevertheless,
he  root  and  foundation  of  all  false  religion,  and  the
ery  source  of  this  general  deadness  and  insensibility,
bey  did  not  touch.  They  spared  Agag  and  the  best
f  the  flock.

6.  The  lawless  works  and  fruits  of  the  flesh
iey  lopped  off  in  a  great  degree  ;  but  the  flesh  itself
hey  carefully  preserved  and  transplanted  over  into

Oo


MX.


404  REMARKS  OX  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  . P.  VL

chap, th&ir  new  soil. So  that)  when  that  power  failed,  by

* which  God is  able,  of  stones,  to  raise  up  children

unto  Abraham,  their  numbers  might  stiil  increase  bj

the  works  of  natural  generation,  and  their  children

be  taught  by  tradition,  to  say  over  the  words  of  their

forefathers, while  totally  ignorant  of  their  power.

Fox's  7.  "  Their  way  of  marriage  (says William  Perm,

prthce! '  is  peculiar  to  them,  and  is  a  distinguishing  practice

vol. i.p. 'from all ether societies professing Christianity

'  They  say  that  marriage  is  an  ordinance  of  God,  an(

i  that  God  only  can  rightly  join  man  and  woman  h

4  marriage." But  instead  of  showing  how  Gcd  join:

them,  they  give  a  lengthy  detail of  their  own  prcx

cecdings,  which are as formal  and ceremonial an

those  of  any  other  professing  Christians  :  and  the;

do  not  state  any  thing  peculiar  in  their  manner  or  mo

rive  of  copulation  to  distinguish  their  natural  poster

ity  as  the  peculiar  people  of  God) more  than  others

.  8. We  appeal to  the  light  of  Christ  within  them

whether  their  secret  motive  or  manner  in  the  groim

work  of  this  matter",  is  any  thing  peculiar  and  distil

guishing  from -the  practice  of  other  professing  Chris

tians. And  until  t\\e»Fritnd$  can  give  evidence  thf.

they  aire  a  peculiar  and  distinct  people  in  this  resperji

they  must  be  numbered  with  that  generation,  will

winch their ancients testified,  God was not wet

pleased.

9.  They  cannot  be  numbered  with  the  true  follow'
ers  of  the  Lamb,  because  they  do  not  follow  him  i
the  regeneration  ;  and  if  they  ever  enter  that  king
dom,  ..of  which  their  ancients  so  abundantly  prophi
sied;  it  must  be  in  the  same  strait  and  narrow  way!
complete  self-denial  with  others  of  the  same  corrufl
natu.e,  otherwise  they  never  will  see  that  kingdor
while  the  earth  endureth.

10  God  never  intended  that  the  real  gifts  of  th
Holy  Ghost  should  be  conveyed  from  one  to  anothc
by  the  works  of  natural  generation  ;  but  he  intende
(and  it  was  so)  that  every  succeeding  age  should  b
dependant  on  him  for  their  present  gifts  and  callinj
11.  Admitting  that  the  first  witnesses  among  th
Friends  had  no  special  command  from  God,  either  i
regard  to  natural  or  spiritual  marriage,  (as  was  th


VI,  THE  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  405

ase,)  this  can  be  no  reason  why  the  metier  should  CITV*P-

)e  overlooked  in  them,  by  those  whp  now  stand  in

he  spirit  and  power  of  that  work  of  which  their  an-
cients prophesied.

12.  It  may  her*  be  particularly  observed,  that  God
aised  up  witnesses  In  different  ages,  and  in  divers
nanncrs,  to  effect  certain  purposes  ;  and  what  vi
sometimes  the  testimony  or  practice  of  oftie  witness,
was  not  always  of  another  ;*neither  was  the  testimo-
ny or  practice  of  one  witness  to  be  always  the  standi-
ng rule  of  faith  or  practice  to  a  nation  or  people.

IS.  The  prophet  Ilosea  was  expressly  command-
ed to  go  and  take  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  and  beget
children  of  whoredoms  ;  and  because  he  was  justifi-
ed in  this,  was,  therefore,  his  example  to  be  folio  w-
d  by  the  whole  nation  of  the  Jews  ?  In  no  wise.  It
was  not  an  example,  but  a  sign  or  reproof  to  the  un-
ion for  their  whoredoms,  when  their  prophet  per-
formed openly,  what,  they  practised  in  secret.

14.  The  Friends,  according  to  their  own  account, fox>
were  charged  in  open  court,  that,  "  they  went  to-  JomT^
*ether  like  brute  ^beasts,"  because  they would  not  p.  s.

iave  their  marriages  solemnized  by  a  priest,  or  civil
fricer.  So  might  the  Jewish  lawyers  have  charged
he  prophet  and  his  spouse  with  coming  together  like
vhorcmongers  ;  and  admitting  the  charge  in  either
ase  to  be  ever  so  well  founded,  neither  of  them
ould  be  charged  with  criminality  in  fulfilling  what
ight  have  been  commanded  them  i  1  particular.

15.  But  to  take  that  which  might  have  been  given
\s  a  reproof,  or  at  best  merely  tolerated,  and  turn  it
nto  an  example,  or  precedent,  because  lawyers  or
udges  could  prove  it  to  be  both  lawful  and  Christian,
must  surely  be  a  grand  deception,  and  very  foreign
Torn  any  thing  dictated  by  the  Spirit  of  truth.  And
.herefore  the  Friends  lie  under  this  deception,  if  they

suppose  that  this  outward  ceremony  or  civil  rite  of
marriage,  was  given  to  the  first  witnesses,  whose
lame  they  bear,  as  a  standing  ordinance  of  God.

16.  The  truth  is,  that  George  Fox,  Fdward  Bur-
-ough,  and  many  of  the  same  spirit  cotemporary  with

Khem,  were  the true  witnesses  of  the  Most High
3od,  possessed  of  his  spirit  and  power  ;  and  on  ac-


406  REMARKS  OxV  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  P.  VI.

C1\AP-  count  of  the  power  in  which  they  stood,  and  the  near
. — _  approach  of  that  kingdom  of  which  they  testified,
they  were  the  greatest  witnesses  that  had  been  since
the  apostles.  Notwithstanding,  there  were  those,
after  the  apostles  days,  who  had  greater  light  and
testimony  in  regard  to  the  hidden  works,  of  the  flesh*
and  who  suffered  more  numerous  tortures,  and  igno-
minious deaths  for  the  practical  testimony  which'
they  held.

If.  But  the  first  witnesses  called  Quakers,  wer«<
not  required  to  bear  a  full  testimony  concerning  the-
root  of  human  depravity,  but  the  testimony  that  was
given  them  of  God,  most  of  them  delivered  faithful-
ly, as  true  witnesses,  and  finished  their  testimony
through  many  sufferings.

1 3.  And  it  is  also  a  truth  that"  their  natural  descend*
xmt3,  as  a  people,  have  turned  aside  in  their  hearts
and  practice  after  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  of
the  world,  have  made  shipwreck  of  true  faith,  and
are  living  upon  the  words  and  good  speeches  of  theiri
ancients,  while  destitute  of  their  life  and  power  ;  and;
from  true  and  spiritual  worshippers, they  have  be-

Gv^h's  COme.  °.pen  and  secret  idolaters.* And  therefore,  the;
jranni, remaining  few, who  still  breathe  the spirit  of  up-
*.ei. rightness  under  thislFallen  condition,  are  but  suffer-
ing witnesses  clothed  in  sackcloth.

19.  On  this  point  we shall only  observe  furtheiy
that  soon  after  the  Honourable  William  Perm  became*
governor  of  Pennsylvania, by a grant  from  King
Charles  II.  the  spirit  and  testimony  of  truth  was
given,  in  power, to  another  people,  called  French
Prophets,  who  formed  no  systems,  nor  left  any  able1
advocates  behind  them  to  defend  their  cause. Wm
shall  here  add  a  short  account  of  these  people,  taken
from  the  records of  those  who  could  only  judge  of
them  according  to  outward  appearance.
view  ©F 20.  "  The  French  Profihets  first  appeared  in  Daujihiny
%£$£*  i  and  Vivarais. In  the  year  1688,  five  or  six  hundred
Fand*ts  '  Pr°testants  of  both  sexes  gave  themselves  out  to  be
chaun- i  prophets,  and  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost. They
Wm-ks, c  s°on  became so  numerous, that  there  were  many
VXf,*, i  tnousanc*s  of  them  inspired. They  had  strange  fits,
&V  '  '  I  which  came  upon  them  with  tremblings  and  faint-


P.  VI.  THfi  WITNESSES  OF  TRXJTK.  407


ings,  as  in  a  swoon,  which  made  them  stretch  out
their  arms  and  legs,  and  stagger  several  times  be-
fore they  dropped  down."

21.  "They  struck  themselves  with  their  hands ;
they  fell  on  their  backs,  shut  their  eyes,  and  heaved
with  their  breasts.  They  remained  a  while  in  tran-
ces, and  coming  out  of  them  with  twitchings,  ut-
tered all  which  came  into  their  mouths.  They  said
they  saw  the  heavens  open,  angels,  paradise,  and
feell."

22.  "  Those  who  were  just  on  the  point  of  receiv-
ing the  spirit  of  prophecy,  dropped  down,  not  only
in  the  assemblies,  crying  out  mercy,  but  in  the
fields,  and  in  their  own  houses.  The  least  of  their
assemblies  made  up  four  or  five  hundred,  and  some
of  them  amounted  to  even  three  or  four  thousand
persons.  When  the  prophets  had  for  a  while  been
under  agitations  of  body,  they  began  to  prophesy."

23.  "  The  burden  of  their  prophecies,  Amend  your
lives  ;  repent  ye  ;  the  end  of  all  things  draws  nigh.
The  hills  rebounded  with  their  loud  cries  for  mercy,
and  with  imprecations  against  the  priests,  the
church,  the  pope,  and  against  the  Antichristian  do-
minion, with  predictions  of  the  approaching  fall  of
popery.  All  they  said  at  these  times,  was  heard
and  received  with  reverence  and  awe."

24.  "  In  the  year  1706,  three  or  four  of  these  pro-
phets came  over  into  England,  and  brought  their
prophetic  spirit  along  with  them  ;  which  discovered
itself  in  the  same  ways  and  manners,  by  ecstasies,
and  agitations,  and  inspirations  under  them,  as  it
had  done  in  France.  And  they  propagated  the  like
spirit  to  others  ;  so  that  before  the  year  was  out,
there  were  two  or  three  hundred  of  these  prophets
in  and  about  London,  of  both  sexes,  of  all  ages,
men,  women  and  children;  and  they  had  delivered
under  prophetic  inspiration,  four  or  five  hundred
prophetic  warnings."

25.  "  The  great  thing  they  pretended  by  the  Spirit,
was  to  give  warning  of  the  near  approach  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  the  happy  times  of  the  church,  the
millennium  state.  Their  message  was,  that  the
grand  jubilee  \ the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  ;

Oo2


CHAF.

V.


408


REMARKS  ON  THE PRESENT  STATE  OF  - P.  VL


CHAP.
V.


*  Com-
pare Rev
xii.  11.
with  \ix.
15.


-V  See  Jo-
nah Hi.  4.


the  accomplishment  of  those  numerous scriptures,^
concerning'  the  nev>  hfarotnx  and  the  new  earth  ;  the
kingdom  of  the  Messiah  ;  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  1
the  frst  resurrection,  ov  the  new  Jerusalem  descend-
ing from  above,  were  now  even  at  the  door  :"

26.  That  this  great  operation  was  to  be  wrought'
on  the  part  of  man,  by  spiritual  arms  only,  pro-:
cceding  from  the  mouths*  of  those,  who  should  by
inspiration,  or  the  mighty  gift  of  the  Spirit,  he  sent
forth  in great  numbers to  labour  in  the' vineyard  :

That  this  mission  of  his  servants  should  be  witnes-i
sed  to,  by  signs  and  wonders  from  heaven,  by  a
deluge  of  judgments  on  the  wicked  universally
throughout  the  world,  as  famine,  pestilence,  earth-,
quakes, Sec."

27.  "  That  the  exterminating  angels  shall  root  out*
the  tares,  and  there  shall  remain  upon  earth  only'i
good  corn ;  and  the  works  of  men  ^eing  thrown]
down,  there  shall  be  but  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one]
heart,  and  one  voice  among  mankind.  They  de-j
Glared  that  all  the  great  things  they  spoke  of,  would!
be  manifest  over  the  whole  earth  within  the  term  of]!
three  years."!

28.  "  These  prophets  also  pretended  to  the  gift  od
languages  ;  of  discerning  the  secrets  of  the  heart  a
the  gift  of  ministration  of  the  same  spirit  to  others*'
by  the  laying  on  of  hands  ;  and  the  gift  of  healing.;
To  prove  they  were  really  inspired  by  the  Holyj)
Ghost,  they  alledged  the  complete  joy  and  satisfaci
tion  they  experienced  ;  the  spirit  of  prayer  which'
was  poured  for  ill  upon  them  ;  and  the  answer  o|>
their  prayers  to  God."

29.  The  particular  testimony  of  the  Two  Witnes*
ses  closed  with  the  JRrtnch  Prophets,  inasmuch  as
the  things  whereof  they  testified,  followed  in  order
according  to  their  prophecy.  A  measure,  however,
of  the  same  spirit  has  never  since  been  wanting,  but
has  wrought  either  internally  or  by  more  external  ap-
pearances in  divers  places.  Nor  has  it  been  confined
to  any  particular  sect  of  people,  but  has  been  a  spirit
of  prophecy  in  many  of  different  names,  who  have
earnestly  locked  for  the  appearing  of  Christ  in  tbe
Litter  day.  *


P.  VI.  THE  WITNESSES  OF  TRUTH.  409

30.  This  is  manifest,  not  only  from  the  many  revi-  CF^P-

vals  of  religion,  both in Europe  and  America,  since

the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  but  more  par-
ticularly, from the late  extraordinary  out-pouring  of

the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  states  of  Kentucky  i  Ohio^  Ten-
nessee^ and  many  other  places.

31.  But  it  is  to  be  particularly  remarked,  that,  un-
til the  things  prophesied  of  were  accomplished,  and
the  real  work  of  Redemption  wrought,  the  purposes
of  God  could  be  revealed  only  through  men  of  like
passions  with  the  rest,  who  were  in  themselves  as
much  lost  as  others  ;  and  liable,  through  their  own
corruptions,  to  run  into  wild  extremes  and  ground-
less imaginations  of  their  own  framing.

32.  For  the  want  of*  true  judgment,  and  a  real  spir-
itual discernment,  bet  ween  the  testimony  of  truth
and  the  exalted  sensations  of  depraved  human  nature,
seemingly  blended  with  it,  men  of  natural  abilities,
and  even  of  upright  intentions,  have  been  led  to  de-
fend that  which  in  the  main,  was  indefensible.  And
in  the  final  failure  of  a  false  prophecy  in  some  cases,
the  blind  and  incredulous  have  been  left  to  oppose  the
truth  in  others.  Occasions  of  this  nature  may  be  seen
in  a  book  entitled,  "  The  World's  Doom}  or  the  Cab-
inet of  Fate  unlocked"

33.  But  certain  it  is,  that  no  human  errors,  mix-
tures, and  false  applications,  can  ever  alter  the  pur-
pose of  God,  or  prevent  the  main  substance  of  pro-
phecy from  taking  place  :  nor  can  any  wild  extremes
into  which  the  prophet  may  run,  destroy  the  force  of
the  prophecy,  in  che  judgment  of  the  wise  ;  because
the  fulfilment  depends  not  on  him  that  delivers  it ;
nor  is  the  truth  of  it  founded  on  his  wisdom  or  pru-
dence : witness  Balaam  and  the  prophet  Jonah.

34.  The  Mennonites  and  Moravians  of  the  present
day,  claim  their  descent  from  the  ancient  heretics ;
however,  by  mixing  with  the  spirit  of  antichristian
reformers,  and  embracing  their  human  creeds,  they
have  degenerated  into  a  lifeless  form  ;  yet,  in  many
particulars,,  they  retain  some  shadow  of  the  ancient
virtue,  in  regard  to  civil  officers,  arms,  oaths,  &c.
But  the  purest  descendants,  and  present  remains  of
the  ancient  witnessess, are  the, people  called  Dun-


410  REMARKS  ON  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF,  ScC. P.  VI,

«hap- Jeers  ;  some  among  this  people, in  a  great  degree,
' retain  the  uprightness,  and  simplicity  of  their  prede-
cessors.

35.  Under  the  name  of  Quakers,  Methodists,  New
light  Presbyterians,  and  others,  even  under  the  most
permanent  forms  that  have  been  established  during
the  dominion  of  Antichrist,  it  is  undoubtedly  certain,
that  there  are  many  souls  sincerely  looking  for  re-
demption from  sin ;  and  who,  according  to  their
light,  are  labouring  to  do  the  best  they  can.

36.  And  such  have  always  been  particularly  noti^
ced  of  God,  as much as  the penitent  Jews  were  in
their captivity  ; and  such,  with  those  of  the  same;
spirit  of  honesty  and  love  of  truth,  God  will  hide  ii\
his  pavillion,  in  the  day  of  visitation,  and  in  the  se-
cret of  his  tabernacle shall they  be covered  in  the
day  of  trouble  ; while the kings  and  great  ones  off
the  earth  shall  cry  to  the  rocks  and  mountains  to  falli!
upon  them  ;  and  while  the  kingdoms  and  nations  of!
the  earth  are  breaking  each  other  in  pieces,  even  as?
the  vessel  of  a  potter  is  broken.

37.  God  will  not  cast  off  those  who  truly  fear  him.
He  will  not  reward  the righteous  according  to  the
works  of  the  wicked  ; neither  will  he reward  thep
wicked  according  to  the  doings  of  the  just. But  eachj
shall  have  the  portion  of  their  own  choice,  as  it  iaj

Ret.xxi.  written  :  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still  1
J1>  1*'~'  and  he  that  isjilthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still ;  and  he  that
is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous  still;  and  he  that  %$•
holy,  let  him  be  holy  still.  And  behold,  I  come  quick*
ly  ;  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  every  man  ac*$
cording  as  his  work  shall  be,


1  ■■ ■  ■ ■■' '  ■'  ""  ' '  " ■  ■ ■  BSam

THE TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.


PART  VII.

THE  SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST;

THE  FINISHING WORK  OF  THE

NEW  CREATION


CHAPTER  I.

General  Reinarks  on the  Spirit  of  Prophecy.

ACCORDING  to  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  chap.
many  have  been  long-  looking-  for  the  com-  *
nencement  of  what  is  called  the  Millennium,  or
after  day  of  glory,  when  the  kingdom  of  Christ  shall
>e  set  up  and  established  on  earth  ;  in  which  all  ty-
annical  and  oppressive  governments  shall  be  over-
;hrown  and  destroyed,  and  mankind  enjoy  just  and
>qual  rights  in  all  matters,  civil  and  religious  ;  when
11  wars  shall  cease,  and  universal  peace  be  enjoyed
>y  the  nations  of  the  earth.

2.  That  such  a  day  has  long  been  foretold,  and
mist  necessarily  take  place,  is  clear  from  the  whole
:enor  of  scripture  prophecy  ;  but  the  time,  and  cir-
cumstances of  that  day,  have  been  matter  of  reason-
ng  and  debate  for  many  ages  ;  while  it  was,  in  real-
ty, out  of  sight  of  the  most  penetrating  part  of  man-
kind, and  was  intended  to  remain  so,  until  the  work

the  day  should  declare  it.

3.  God,  who  made  the  world  and  all  things  there-  ac*xt&
in,  had  determined  the  times  before  appointed,  and  34-«
fixed  the  bounds  of  man's habitation,  changed  the
heavens  and  the  earth  as  he  pleased,  cast  down,  or
exalted  the  nations  according  to  his  own  wisdom,  and  Ban.ir,
permitted  the  basest  of  men  to  rule  over  them,  until


412  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  Y1L


CHAP.
I.


the  times  determined  were  accomplished,  which  he
had  reserved  in  his  own  power.

4.  It  was,  therefore,  impossible  in  the  nature  of
things,  for  the  most  upright  men  living,  in  their  na-
tural state,  to  comprehend,  in  its  real  and  true  nature,
that  which  belonged  to  a  future  state  of  things.  This
belonged  to  God  alone,  and  therefore  could  only  be
revealed  to  man,  by  such  sensible  signs,  figures  and
similitudes,  as  were  adapted  to  his  natural  capacity,  -
to  excite  his  rational  belief  in  what  was  yet  to  appear,  j

5.  To  say  nothing  here,  particularly,  on  the  differ-
ent parts  which  compose  the  scriptures  ;  it  is  certain-
that,  if  any  history  of  past  events  is  to  be  credited,
the  historical  part  of  the  sacred  writings  claims  the
first  and  highest  authority.

6.  And  it  is  equally  certain,  that  many  future
events  were  revealed  to  those  who  were  chosen  of  God
for  that  purpose,  under  many  a^d  various  similitudes,
figures,  and  shadows,  while  the  substances  them-
selves were  concealed  from  the  penetration  even  of
those  unto  whom  the  shadows  were  given.

7.  But  as  many  future  events  have  been  revealed
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  under  mysterious  figures  or  na-
tural appearances,  the  natural  man  must  naturally
form  some  ideas  in  his  mind  concerning  them.  The
question  then  is,  whether  his  ideas  are  true  or  false  ?

8.  This  matter  may  be  at  once  decided  ;  for  if  his.*,
ideas  are  fixed  upon  natural  objects,  because  the  si-
militudes are  familiar  to  his  natural  senses,  his  ideas
must  be  false  ;  and  it  is  evident,  that  until  the  sub-
stances themselves  are  actually  manifested,  he  can
have  nothing  to  contemplate  them  by,  but  natural  si-
militudes.

9.  And  although  the  spirit  of  revelation  is  true,
yet  the  natural  man's  ideas  concerning  the  real  sub-
stances of  the  things,  can  be  no  other  than  false  ;  and
whether  the  similitudes  are  to  be  literally,  or  spiiitiH
ally  fulfilled,  it  is  not  for  him  to  know  or  determine,
seeing  that  God  has  reserved  to  himself  alone,  the
times  and  seasons,  and  of  course,  the  manner  of  their
accomplishment.

10.  The  whole  Jewish  state,  was,  as  it  were,  con-
verted into  natural  similitudes  and  shadows  of  good


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  41i

things  to  come,  which  were  confirmed  to  the  heirs  chap.
of  promise  from  time  to  time,  by  the  most  evincing  *
evidences  ;  yet,  how  long  has  that  nation  persevered
in  the  fatal  delusion,  that  they  are  the  only  people  of
God,  and  true  seed  of  promise  ;  while  bondage,  cap-
tivity, death,  and  the  curse  of  being  scattered  among
the  nations,  are  their  most  distinguishing  evidences  I

1 1 .  And  how  many  hundreds  of  years  has  the  name
.Christian^  bound  whole  nations  under  the  same  strange

delusion,  and  furnished  them  with  a  pretext  for  fil-
ling the  earth  with  the  most  horrid  crimes  !

12.  Thousands,  no  better  by  nature  or  practice
than  others,  by  virtue  of  this  distinguishing  name,
have  assumed  the  character  of  God's  children,  laid
claim  to  the  earth  as'their  lawful  inheritance,  taken
up  arms  against  every  other  name  and  character,  as
usurpers,  and  by  such  acta  of  cruelty  and  outrage,  as
are  shocking  to  nature  itself,  have  given  their  fellow
creatures  the  greatest  occasion  to  blaspheme  the  God
of  heaven  for  sending  into  the  world  such  a  person
as  Jesus  Christ.

13.  These  fatal  mistakes  among  mankind  evident-
ly arose  from  their  taking  the  shadow  for  the  sub-
stance ;  claiming  a  right  to  revelation,  the  spirit  of
which  they  possessed  not ;  proposing  the  mariner  of
God's  work,  and  limiting  or  extending  the  times  and
seasons",  which  divine  wisdom  had  reserved  in  his  own
power  ;  and  fixing  their  own  natural  and  carnal  ideas

;to  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  virtue  of  sto-
len words  ;  to  the  true  sense  of  which,  consequently,
they  could  never  agree.

14.  Hence  came  confusion,  contentions,  and  de-
bates without  number ;  an  incpnte stable  evidence
that  the  Holy  Ghost  never  gave  them  this  authority
to  construe  her  language  :  therefore  it  ctm  be  no  rea-
sonable objection  against  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  that
the  substances  of  what  it  revealed,  was  incompre-
hensible, and  could  not  be  known  or  understood  in
their  true  nature,  until  they  were  brought  forth  and
exhibited  in  their  season  ;  seeing  it  was  impossible
in  the  nature  of  things  that  it  should  be  otherwise.

15.  The  error  or  deception*  therefore,  is  not in
the  mysterious  language  of  inspiration,  nor  in  those


414  GENERAL  REMARKS  Otf  P.  VII.

chap.  who  were  simply  moved  to  foretel,  under  sublime
'  figures,  what  God  would  bring  to  pass  in  future
days  ;  but  in  the  minds  of  natural  and  carnal  men,
who  take  upon  themselves  to  limit  or  extend  those
times  and  seasons',  which,  in  the  mind  of  wisdom,
were  determined  to  be  out  of  their  reach  until  the
times  appointed.

16.  Nor  could  those  sublime  figures  in  prophetic
language,  ever  be  really  and  truly  understood,  or  ex-
plained, until  the  very  times  of  their  fulfilment ;  and
even  then,  by  those  only,  who  come  into  the  very
.spirit  of  the  work,  at  the  day  in  which  it  is  wrought.

IT,  Whatever  may  be  said  in  opposition  to  divine
revelation,  or  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  certain  it  is,
that  fallen  man  never  could  have  had  any  sense  of
his  future  existence,  or  the  prospects  of  immortality,
but  through  this  medium,  whether  he  received  it  by
tradition  or  otherwise.

18.  And  it  is  equally  certain,  that  nothing  else  has
ever  kept  the  world  in  awe,  or  given  any  lasting  en-
ergy to  the  impulse  of  human  laws  :  and  nothing  but
that  religion,  which  contemplates  the  objects  and
scenes  of  the  present  life,  as  the  prolonged  shadows
of  a  never  ending  eternity,  could  ever  have  prolong
ed  those  shadows  to  so  great  an  extent.

19.  It  must,  therefore,  be  ascribed  to  the  wisdom
of  God,  in  revealing  a  future  state,  successive  to  the
present,  that  man  has  been  excited  to  that  degree  of
natural  virtue,  through  which  his  natural  state,  has
continued  to  such  a  length  of  time,  as  to  overtake
that  new  creation,  which  the  divine  counsel  had  de-
termined. For  if  the  lawless  passions  of  Cain  and
the  Canaanites,  had  universally  prevailed,  no  flesh
could  have been saved ; this  world  would  long  ago,

isw.  l ».  have  been  like Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities
round  about.

20.  Much  was  said  by  the  Witnesses  of  Truth,  par
ticularly  in  later  ages,  concerning  that  day  in  which
the  Mystery  of  God  was  to  be  finished  in  relation  to
man  ;  but  after  all  those  prophecies,  and  all  the  rea
sonings  of  natural  men,  concerning  their  accomplish
nient,  the  words  of  Christ comprehend  the  whole  :

>fa.t.r,iY  pyut Qj*  that day and hour fcnowei/-l nQ man^ n0} H0

the  angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Father  only.


i


jP.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  415

§

21.  Previous  to  the commencement  of  that  day,  <?***•
there  were  three  things  respecting  it,  which  man-  .
kind  could  not  possibly  know. First,  the  time  ; Se-
cond, the  place  ;  and  Third,  the  manner  in  which  it
was  to  commence.

s22.  First.  The  time  could  not  possibly  be  ascer-
tained, although  it  was  fixed  in  definite  numbers,  by
various  prophets.  As  nothing  inferior  to  man  can  icor.fe
know  the  things  of  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  that  1U
is  in  him  ;  so  no  man  can  know  the  things  of  God,
but  the  spirit  of  God,  by  which  the  prophecies  were
given.

:»  23.  Man,  as  a  rational  creature,  has  fixed  the  times
and  seasons,  according^  to  the  changes  of  this  globe,
in  relation  to  the  sun  and  moon,  and  has  thereby  es-
tablished the  day,  the  month,  and  the  year  ;  but  in-
terior beings  are  not  confined  to  those  calculations  of
man  ;  much  less  beings  of  a  superior  rank.

24.  Again,  man  has  been  accustomed  to  calculate
times  by  a  variety  of  objects  in  nature,  and  to  distin-
guish those  calculations  by  various  names,  as  gener-
ations, ages,  years,  months,  weeks,  days,  hours,
and  seasons  ;  but  what  can  he  certainly  know  beyond
the  limits  of  his  own  age  ?  Nothing  at  all.  Yet  the
Spirit  spake  of  ages  of  ages  ;  he  may  call  this  eter-
nity, or  what  he  pleases,  it  alters  it  not;  he  is  cer-
tainly lost  in  the  thought,  because  it  exceeds  his  nar-
row limits.

25.  Again,  in  the  language  of  the  Spirit,  A  thou-  spet.  m.
mand  years  are  with  the  Lord  as  one  day. — I  have  a/i-  ^f^:
wioi?ited  thee  each  day  for  a  year, 4nd  these  nations  *xv.  u-

"ihall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon  seventy  years,

26.  Therefore,  the  natural  man  may  calculate  the
jtimes  to  suit  his  ojftg*pleasure  ;  he  may  comprise  the
greatest  numbers  in  a  few  hours  of  the  natural  day,
and  prove  the  time  of  the  promise  to  have  been  past
thousands  of  years  ago.  Or  if  he  chuses  to  continue
in  his  sins  during  lite,  he  may  put  far  away  the  evil
day,  even  to  a  future  period  of  twenty-five  millions
3f  common  years  ;  by  either  of  which  he  will  also
prove  himself  to  be  totally  ignorant  of  the  matter,
ind  altogether  in  nature's  darkness.

27.  Again,  an  angel  set  the  time  for  cleansing  the  u*  *Ui*

pP


416  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

chap, sanctuary,  at  two  thousand  three  hundred  days. But
" can  the  natural  man  certainly  tell  whether  the  Spirit
meant  the  days  of  man,  or  of  the  Lord  ;  or  a  medi-
um between,  that  is,  two  thousand  three  hundred  of
his  natural  years  ?

28.  Which  ever  way  he  may  take,  it  can  profit  him
little.  He  may  out-live  the  first  period  of  six  or  sev-
en years,  and  all  the  good  it  may  bring.  The  second
is  entirely  out  of  his  reach  ;  nor  can  he  tell  where  it
began,  or  where  it  will  end  :  and  the  third  is  infinite-
ly beyond  his  comprehension,  being  not  less  than  two
million,  or  twenty-three  hundred  thousand  years.

29.  The  natural  man,  or  the  inspired  man,  (if  he
chuses  to  denominate  himself  so  because  he  has  the
scriptures  before  his  eyes,)  may  acknowledge,  thai
he  knows  nothing  about  the  time,  because  the  Spirit
of  prophecy,  by  express  declarations,  obliges  him  sc
to  do  ;  yet  he  imagines  that  he  can  tell  the  event
whenever  it  shall  appear  ;  but  in  this  he  is  equall]
mistaken.

30.  To  whom  were  the  prophecies  first  given  I
To  whom  were  given  the  types  and  shadows  of*  the
law  and  the  prophets  ?  Was  it  not  to  the  Jews  ?  Mucr
every  way  they  had  the  advantage,  saith  the  apostle.

31.  What then? The prophet Daniel had tok
»aa.  b. them  that  it  should  be  seven  weeks,  and  threescore

and  two  weeks  vmto  Messiah  the  prince. But  hov
would the scripture-inspired Jew calculate this
Would  he  call  it  four  hundred  and  eighty-three  nat
viral  days  ?  or  four  hundred  and  eighty-three  years
or  four  hundred  and  eighty-three  thousand years
Without  the  very  same  Spirit  which  dictated  thos*
numbers,  and  that  in  the  time  of  their  accomplish
ment,  either  way  darkness  must  be  his  portion.

32.  Upon  the  first  calculation,  he  finds  nothing
satisfy  his  mind  ;  his  natural  senses  comprehend
he  beholds. The  second  calculation,  he  thinks,
bring  the  Messiah  ;  and  the  plan  he  has  laid  out
his understanding, he thinks, will determine th<
event  whenever  it  comes  to  pass.

33.  But  instead of  the Messiah , and the g
imuxiv.1  event  he  looks  for,  there  comes  one  Jesus  of  JVa

rcthy  whcm  they  know,  and  who  is  more  like  a  b<


Jlom.  iit.

2»


|P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  417

gar  than  a  prince  ;  who  called  them  a  generation  or  <;hap.
brood  of  vipers,  denounced woes upon  them,  fore-  __.
told  the  destruction  of  their  city  and  temple,  the  ab-
olition of  their  whole  religious  system,  and  their  fi-
nal extinction  as  a  nation.

34.  Thus  the  events  of  his  most  reasonable  calcu-
lations take  place,  and  he  knows  them  not ;  and  be-
yond this,  the  calculation  of  the  sixty -nine  or  seven-
ty weeks  must  out-run  the  most  distant  conception
of  either  Jew  or  Gentile.

35.  The  truth  is,  natural  men  could  never  calcu-
ate  God's  times  and  seasons,  they  either  came  too
soon  or  too  late  ;  and  thus,  in  all  their  calculations 9
they  have  always  placed  God  at  a  great  distance  from
the  calculator,  either  In  the  past  or  future  tense  ;  at
so  great  a  distance  at  least,  that  there  remained-no
probability  of  his  seeing  the  day  of  God's  power  ;  and
the  world  have  been  best  satisfied  to  have  it  so.

36.  They  shrink  from  the  thought  of  their  days
jeing  numbered,  and  their  enjoyments  in  nature,  be-
ing included  within  the  small  compass  of  a  genera-
tion ;  and  yet,  upon  their  own  calculation,  them-
selves being  judges,  men  in  a  state  of  nature  cannot
know  the  day  of  God's  power  ;  it  is  out  of  their  sight,
as  far  as  eternity  is  out  of  sight  of  time.

37.  They  cannot  see  that  to  which  the  prophecy
alludes,  and  therefore  cannot  interpret  it.  The  vi-
sion of  all  is  to  them  like  a  book  that  is  sealed,  which

men  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,  Read  this,  isaixiix.
I  pray  thee  ;  and  he  saitli,  /  cannot,  for  it  is  sealed.  ll'
And  the  unlearned  cannot  read  it  because  they  are
not  learned.

38.  It  is  therefore  justly  observed  by  Newton,  "  It  ^u.^*

*  is  no  wonder  that  the  fathers,  nor  indeed  that  any  i?4.
<  one  should  mistake  in  particularly  applying  proph-

*  ecies,  which  had  not  then  received  their  completion.
1  The  fathers  might  understand  the  prophecies  so  far

as  they  were  fulfilled, — but  when  they  ventured
i  farther,  they  plunged  out  of  their  depth,  and  were
'  lost  in  the  abyss  of  error.  Such  prophecies  can  be
i  explained  only  by  the  events."

39.  All  this  is  strictly  true,  to  which  it  may  be  ad-
ded, that  when  the  prophecies  received  their  com-


418  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

cl\i*' pletion,  none  could  make  the just application  but
. such  as  were  in  the  spirit  and  truth  of  their  fulfil-
ment.

40.  The  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will
i,  21,  ar»d  of  man ^  neither  can  it  be  accomplished  by  his  will,
j)*p.  wiv  nor  agreeable  to  it ;  and  consequently  the  time  of  its
accomplishment  cannot  be  dated,  nor  interpreted  to
serve  his  private  views  ;  but  must  be  ascertained
first  of  all  by  the  event,  and  then  understood  by  those
who  are  in  it.


iCor.xjg.


CHAPTER II.

27ic  Subject  continued.


SECONDLY.  The  place,  in  which  the  work  of
Christ's  kingdom  was  to  be  exhibited,  is  also
entirely  out  of  sight  of  men  in  a  state  of  nature,  and
in  its  real  and  full  sense  cannot  possibly  be  commu-
nicated to  the  natural  understanding,  even  by  the
spirit  of  prophecy.

2.  The  prophets  spake  of  the  Lord's  descending!
from  heaven,  but  natural  men  cannot  call  Jesus  Lord,
because  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ; — for  no
man,  in  truth,  can  say  that  Jesus  is  Lord)  but  by  the
Holy  Ghost.

3.  Again,  they spake  of  Jerusalem,  as  being  the.
place where  the kingdom  of God was  to  appear
and  of  a  descendant  from  David  sitting  there upon
his  throne  :  but  these prophecies,  according  to  the
sense  of  a natural Jew,  could  not apply  to  Christ
Jesus,  nor  to  his  day.

4.  He  was  not  descended  of  David,  nor  born  in
the  palace  of  any  of  their  princes  ;  but  begotten  out
of  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  and  brought  forth
in  a  stable  ;  Jerusalem  was  also  in  bondage  with  her
children  ;  the  sceptre  was  departed  from  Judah  ;  and
the  throne  of  David  laid  waste.

5.  The  city  and  temple  of  God  had  been  partic-
ularly described  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel;  and  all  the


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  4\9

bounds  and  limits  of  the  Holy  Land  round  about ;  c^ap.
and  the  natural  man  supposed  all  those  things  would  '
be  literally  established  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  on
the  natural  mount  Zion.  But  the  appearing  of  Christ,
and  the  work  of  God,  went  directly  against  all  such
views  ;  therefore  natural  men,  were,  in  that  instance,
wholly  mistaken  as  to  the  place,  and  why  not  again  ?

6.  Since  that  mistake  has  been  discovered,  and
the  natural  Canaan  put  out  of  the  reach  of  Abraham's
natural  posterity,  some  have  become  a  little  more
spiritual  in  their  understanding,  concerning  the  place
of  God's  throne  and  kingdom,  and  have  stated  it  to
be  the  Church.

7.  But  the  churches  have  become  so  numerous
since  this  principle  was  discovered,  that  in  this  par-
ticular, natural  men  are  more  divided  and  bewildered
than  ever ;  and  the  enquiry,  Where  Lord  ?  is  more
than  ever  out  of  their  reich  to  determine.

8.  If  Christ  should  appear  in  one  church,  all  the
rest  would  of  course  reject  him,  because  he  came
not  where  they  looked  for  him.  This  difficulty  was
very  evident  in  his  first  appearing  : — They  object,
Can  there  any  gjod  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  40

9.  The  prejudices  of  nations,  kingdoms,  church-
es,  and  individuals,  arc  such  against  each  other,  that
unless  God  should  act  contrary  to  them  all,  he  could
not  open  his  kingdom  or  manifest  his  work  of  re-
demption where  none  of  them  expect  it.  For  were
it  opened  and  revealed,  according  to  the  sagacity  of
any  natural  man,  church  or  nation,  all  the  rest  would
be  offended,  because  they  had  not  been  favoured  with
the  first  discovery.  Such  is  the  very  nature  of  proud
man.

10.  Therefore  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  place  of
the  soles  of  his  feet,  are  to  the  natural  man,  neither
at  Jerusalem,  nor  in  this  mountain  ;  neither  in  the  c/c-
sert,  nor  secret  chamber ;  neither  here,  nor  there. It  2!.  U'
is absolutely  hid  from the wise and  prudent, who  J^g,
sought  it  by  their  human  wisdom,  and  revealed  unto.  ^]z
spiritual  babes.

11.  The  powers  of  nature,  in  relation  to  God's
spiritual  work,  are  as  far  short  of  ascertaining
i  JVherc:  as  How  long. Man,  bv  searching,  may  find

Pp2


John  L


Mat.  "vxiv

7..


420  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

ckap.  out  where  he  himself  is,  in  relation  to  time  and
things  ;  whether  he  is  in  sickness  or  disgrace  ;  in
poverty  or  debt  ;  whether  he  is  in  a  healthy  country,
in  a  kingdom,  commonwealth  or  republic ;  whether
he  is  in  subjection  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  or  in
secret  or  open  violation  of  them  ;  whether  he  is  in
war  or  in  peace  ;  in  his  own  house  or  in  prison.

12.  He  may  also  ascertain  the  position  of  other
objects  in  relation  to  each  other.  He  may  know
where  this  earth  is,  and  measure  its  distance  from
the  sun,  and  find  out  all  the  motions  and  distances
of  the  moon  and  planets.  The  natural  heavens  and
earth  are  within  the  compass  of  his  knowledge  ;  here
he  may  have  his  god,  his  favourite  object  of  love,
his  virtues  and  vices,  his  good  and  evil.

1 3.  But  beyond  this  what  cloth  he  know  ?  Can  he
tell  where  his  soul  is,  in  relation  to  the  true  God,
and  eternal  life  ?  Has  he  any  certain  knowledge  ei-
ther of  the  one  or  the  other  ?  What  place  or  thing
doth  he  comprehend  beyond  the  use  of  his  natural
senses  ?  Deprive  him  of  seeing,  hearing,  feeling*
and  where  is  he  ?  In  a  pavilion  oi  profound  darkness  I

14.  By  the  use  of  sensible  objects?  he  may  form  a
thousand  places  and  things  in  his  imagination,  which
never  had,  nor  can  have  any  reality  in  them.  He
may  imagine  a  material  heaven  beyond  the  fixed
stars,  and  contemplate  its  coming  to  this  earth  at  some
certain  period  far  distant.

15.  He  may  imagine  a  resurrection  of  material  bf>
dies,  and  fancy  a  union  to  be  formed  between  that  re-
mote heaven  and  this  earth.  And  when  his  imagination
has  been  stretched  to  the  utmost,  he  may  correct  his
own  errors,  and  reject  revelation,  because  he  sup-
posed it  led  him  into  such  unreasonable  opinions.

16.  Yet  after  all  his  fantastic  ideas,  and  consequent
disappointments,  he  will  find  that  the  error  was  not
in  revelation,  because  he  never  had  it ;  but  arose  out
of  his  own  weakness,  in  trying  to  bring  the  sublime
things  of  God  within  the  limits  of  his  own  dark  and
sensual  capacity.

17.  If  then,  a  material  heaven  cannot  pass  down  to
this  earth,  through  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  the
tun,  moon  and  planets,  nor  a  material  body  ascend


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF PROPHECY.  421

thither ;  is  this  any  reason  why  the  promise  of  God chap.
should  be  void,  and  of  no  effect  ?  __

18.  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar  ;  let
man  deceive  and  be  deceived,  while  he  imagines
that  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  are  such  as  he  can  see
With  his  natural  eyes,  and  handle  with  his  natural
hands.

19.  While  he  is  willing  to  put  far  away  the  day  of
God,  and  abuse  the  scripture  words  and  numbers,
by  his  carnal  reason,  let  him  try  to  ascertain  by  his
human  wisdom,  whether  Christ  will  come  first  to
old  Jerusalem,  or  to  some  of  the  churches  ;  whether
in  an  army  of  natural  troops,  or  of  rational  argu-
ments ;  and  whether  his  kingdom  will  most  resem*
ble  that  of  king  Solomon,  the  Pope,  Bonaparte,  or
that  of  the  Word.

20.  He  may  fix  it  either  way,  but  very  little  de-
pends on  the  conclusion  of  his  carnal  mind  ;  the  pur-
pose of  God  remains  unchangeable  in  all  the  opera-
tions of  his  work,  and  he  will  do  his-  pleasure.

21.  When  Christ  spake  to  his  disciples  of  his  se-
cond coming,  they  asked  him  Where  Lord  ?  Jesus
did  not  answer,  In  Jerusalem,  or  among  such  a  body
of  nominal  Christians,  or  lo  here,  or  lo  there  ;  but,
Wheresoever  the  body  is.  For  as  the  body  is  one,  JJlk1ccY*
and  hath  many  members,  and  all  the  members  of  that  one  xi  \%
body,  being  many,  are  one  body  ;  so  also  is  Christ.

22.  Neither  did  Jesus  expressly  tell  them  what,  or
where  that  body  should  be.  Whence  then  cometh
wisdom  ?  and  where  is  the  place  of  understanding  I
seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  living.

23.  Thirdly.  The  manner  of  the  work  of  God
in  the  latter  days,  was  also  to  remain  concealed  from
the  comprehension  of  mankind,  until  the  event
should  declare  it, being  promised  under  prophetic

Egures  and  similitudes,  as  opposite  to  each  other  as
re  and  water,  light  and  darkness.

24.  The  natural  figures  which  were  used  to  de-
scribe the  day  of  the  Lord,  after  holding  forth  the  fu-
ture prospects,  were  more  calculated  to  blind  than
to  enlighten. This  the  prophet  knew,  when  he  said,

\Woe  unto  you  that  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord!  the  Annut.
May  of  the  Lord  is  darkness  and  not  light.  n"


422  GENERAL REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

CIilP* ^5*  ^nc*  agam>  when  Zion  shall  arise  and  shine,

and  the  Lord  shall  be  her  everlasting  light,  and  her

isai.  lx. God  her  glory  ;  then  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,
*♦*« and  gross  darkness  the  people.

26.  Natural  men  could  look  for  natural  appearances
of  greatness  and  glory,  while  both  the  similitudes  of
future  events,  and  the  events  themselves,  confound-
ed their  human  wisdom.  Thus,  Christ  was  denomi-
nated a  king  ;  but  his  appearance  in  reality  was  as
mean  as  that  of  a  beggar,  without  form  or  comeli-
ness that  any  one  should  desire  him.

27.  Here  the  natural  man  fell  short  in  looking  for
a  king,  like  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  when  the
work  of  this  King  of  kings,  was  to  humble  himself
and  become  obedient  unto  death  ;  and  by  his  self-de-
nying example,  lay  a  foundation  for  supplanting  ail
the  kings  and  kingdoms  of  the  earth.

28.  This  the  natural  man  could  not  comprehend,
however  plainly  substantiated  ;  still  he  looked  for  a
king  higher  than  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  sitting
upon  some  visible  throne,  such  as  his  carnal  eyes
could  behold,  while,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  there  was
Nothing  for  his  carnal  reasonings  but  eternal  disap-
pointment.

29.  The  ruling  elements  of  the  day  of  God  he
could  not  understand  from  natural  figures.  The  Ho-
ly Ghost  was  compared  to  fire  ;  and  the  same  was  of-
ten compared  to  water.  2s  not  my  word  a  fire,  saith
the  Lord.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  wanted  to  call  down
real  fire  from  heaven ;  but  they  mistook  the  figure
for  the  substance,  and  knew  not  what  manner  of  spir*
it  they  were  of.

30.  And  the  same  mistake  remains  with  all  natur-
al men,  while  they  look  for  a  natural  Jesus  to  des-
cend from  the  natural  heavens,  in  flames  of  natural
fire,  taking  vengeance  on  their  natural  enemies  :  but
their  natural  eyes  shall  never  see  it.

johttiiU  31.  The  wind  blonveth  where  it  li&tcth—A  dry  wind
jeriv.ii  — a  fun  wind  shall  come — he  shall  come  up  o«  clouds-—
isk\  xii.  and  the  wind  shall  carry  them  all  away — I  will  pour
mJl^'1  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the
mt.x*iv  dry  ground  :  I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and

my  blessing'  upon  thine  offspring — He  is  like  a  refiner9*

fire — He  shall  come  in  tht  cfouds.


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  423

32.  In  these,  and  many  other  places,  the  same  Clf£*'
thing  is  denominated  by  opposite  elements,  and  the  _ _1_
same  elements  made  use  of  to  denominate  opposite
things,  how  then  could  the  natural  man  comprehend
it  ?  If  the  Spirit  that  was  to  be  poured  out,  was  both
fire  and  water,  both  hot  and  cold,  it  could  not  possi-
bly be  one  ;  and  how  could  he  know  it?  He  might
be  looking  for  water,  and  behold  fire  cometh  ;  or  he
might  be  looking  for  fire,  and  there  cometh  water;
so  that  he  could  not  possibly  tell  which  to  expect.

33.  But  he  thinks  he  verily  believes  the  scriptures,
■which  cannot  be  broken,  and  these  testify,  that  "  when  iTh#s.Y,
they  shall say,  fieace  and  safety r,  then  sudden  destruc-  5#
lion  cometh." So  contrary  are  the  imaginations  of
men  to  the  things  of  God  in  futurity.


CHAPTER III.

The  Subject  continued.

THE  signs  given  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  are
also  out  of  sight  of  the  natural  man  ;  such  as
the visible  changes  in  the  things  of  nature. The  Joeifiji.
tun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness^  and  the  moon  into  29.  *XMT
blood. —  The  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven^  and  the  flow-
ers of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken.

2.  These  things  were,  in  a  certain  sense,  fulfilled
on  the  day  of  pentecost ;  but  was  the  natural  sun  re-
ally turned  into  darkness  ?  was  the  moon  converted
into  blood  ?  or  did  the  natural  stars  fall  from  the  na-
tural heavens  ?  No  such  events  ever  did  take  place,
and  who  can  say  they  ever  will  ?*

3.  Then  the  natural  man  may  say,  this  spirit  of
prophecy  is  a  lying  spirit.  This  by  no  means  fol-
lows ;  for  the  same  spirit  in  the  apostles,  testifies  con-
cerning the  prophets,  that  not  unto  themselves,  but

*  The  sun  may  be  said  to  be  darkened,  when  its  lijht  U  excluded  from  the
earth  by  a  cloud  or  an  eclipse,  or  by  any  supernatural  means,  as  the  darkness
over  the  land  of  Egypt  in  the  time  of  Moees.  and  the  darkness  at  the  crucifixion
ot  Jesus;  yet  no  person  can  reasonably  suppose  that  the  sun  itself  was  ever
tarned  mto  darkness ;  and  whether  it  erer  will  be,  is  entirely  unknown  to  wan,


424  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

C^vl' unto  us they  did  minister  the things, that were
mmmmJmmm  then  reported,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from
heaven.

4.  Men  of  different  occupations,  call  very  different
things  by  the  same  name  :  as,  A  wheel  among  clock-
makers,  a  wheel  among  coach-makers,  a  wheel  among
mill-wrights  ;  all  of  which  are  denominated  wheels,
though  very  different  in  their  use,  appearance,  and
manner  of  operation.

5.  The  human  body,  a  political  body^  a  body  of
troops ;  the  society,  the  church,  the  nation,  have
each  their  particular  head.  The  light  of  the  sun,  the
light  of  reason,  the  light  of  revelation,  are  very  dif-
ferent objects,  yet  each  is  called  light.  Adam  fell
from  a  state  of  innocence*  Judas  fell  from  the  apos-
tleship,  Eutychus  fell  from  the  third  loft ;  each  13
denominated  a  fall.

6.  Eutychus  was  raised  up,  so  was  Lazarus,  and
so  was  Christ ;  but  their  rising1  was  very  different
Eutychus  was  raised  up  by  the  power  of  others,  from
where  he  fell ;  Lazarus  w&s'raised  up  by  Jesus,  from
where  the  buriers  had  laid  him,  and  was  subject  to
be  laid  in  the  same  place  again  :  but  Christ  arose
from  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  where  he  had  des
cended,  and  that  by  his  own  power ;  wherefore  his

" , rising  was  very  different  from  all  others.

7.  If  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  did  beforehand,  min-
ister to  those  who  were  heirs  of  salvation,  in  words,
which  at  the  time  the  ministration  was  given,  repre-
sented other  objects,  those  heirs  of  salvation,  when
they  received  the  true  substance  of  the  thing  signi-
fied, could  then  bear  witness  that  the  ministering
Spirit  was  a  Spirit  of  truth.  And  natural  men,  whe
had  not  received  the  same  Spirit,  but  had  deceiveci
themselves,  by  falsely  using  the  words  of  prophecjlj
in  a  natural  sense,  could  have  neither  underslandinjln
nor  right  to  interfere  in  the  matter.

8.  An  ignorant  man  may  use  and  pervert  the  word!
of  philosophers  ;  he  may call the  light  of  the  sun
the  light  of  reason  ; — he  may  use  the  words  ofmeli
chanics,  and  call  the  crown  wheel  of  a  clock,  th<J
hind  wheel  of  a  coach,  or  the  rag  wheel  of  a  saw
mill ',  or  he  may  use  the  words  of  divines  and  poli


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  425

ticians,  and  call  a  body  of  divinity,  a  corporate  body,  c^p-
Or  a  body  of  troops.  _—

9.  But  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  not  the  light  of
reason ;  so  neither  is  the  light  of  reason  the  light  of
revelation.  And  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  used  in
the  figurative  language  of  the  prophets,  are  no  more
the  natural  heavens  and  earth,  than  a  body  of  reli-
gious doctrines  is  a  body  of  national  troops.

10.  And  it  the  prophet  Joel  and  others,  had  used
the  words  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  blood,  fire,  and  va-
pours of  smoke,  to  describe  certain  characters,  things,
and  operations,  that  were  to  appear  and  take  place
in  a  future  day  ;  it  belonged  to  Peter,  who  had  receiv-
ed the  Holy  Ghost,  to say whether  it  was  natural

(stars  that  were  to  fall*  from  the  natural  heavens,  or
whether  the  falling  respected  another  species  of
lights  ;  and  whether  the  darkness,  trembling  and
quaking,  spoken  of,  respected  another  kind  of  heav-
ens and  earth.

11.  But  natural  men  have  always  erred,  not  know-
ing the  scriptures  nor  the  power  of  God  ; and  de-

»  ceived  themselves,  by  fixing  their  own  natural  idea*
k  of  natural  things  to  the  letter  of  the  scriptures,  while
M  they  are  wholly  ignorant  of  the  Spirit  who  dictated
is  them  ;  and  hence  the endless debates  concerning

their  true  meaning.
i 12.  Even  the  disciples  of  Jesus  themselves,  until
8)  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  could  not be  made
c*  sensible  of  spiritual  things  : Hoiv  in  it,  said  Christ,
H  that  ye  do  not  understand  ? — O  fools, and slow  of  Luke
i  heart  to  believe  !  They  marvelled  at  his  sayings,  and
were  afraid  to  ask  him. Yet  proud  natural  men,  ten-
fold darker  than  they,  presume  that  they  can  under-
stand all  about  it ;  although  they  have  fixed  the  living
saviour  at  a  greater  distance from  them,  than  the
most  distant  regions  of  the  fixed  stars. So foolish
is  the  wisdom  of  this  world !

13.  How little  did  the  disciples  of  Christ Jesus
comprehend  from  his  words,  the  design  of  his  death,
the  nature  of  his  resurrection,  and  future  glory  !  He
told  them  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  delivered Luke
up  to  the  Gentiles,  that  he  should  be  mocked,  and  -34.
'despiteful!/ entreated, and spit upon — that they


426  GENERAL  REMARKS  ON  P.  VII.

CmP*  s^ou^  scourge  him,  and  put  him  to  death,  and  that
* he  should  rise  again.

14.  But  they  did  not  understand  him,  although
his  words  were  as  plain  as  words  could  be.  And
what  was  the  reason  ?  Did  they  not  know  who  the
Gentiles  were  ?  Had  they  never  known  of  any  who.  {i
were  put  to  ckaih  ?  Had  they  not  been  informed  of
numbers  who  had  been  raised  from  the  dead  before  ?
Had  they  not  with  their  own  eyes  seen  Lazarus  raised
from  the  dead  I  Did  they  not  know  what  it  was  to  be
spitefully  entreateci,  to  be  mocked,  and  scourged  1  Did
they  not  know  what  it  wa3  for  one  man  to  spit  upon
another ?

15.  They  were undoubtedly  men of  common h
sense,  and  knew  as  well  as  other  natural  men  what
these  things  naturally  signified. But  as  to  the  true
spiritual  meaning,  they  were  at  a  loss. The  thing;
was hid  from  them  ;  they  questioned  among  them-

Markix.  selves  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean.

-°«  Nay more,  they understood none  of  these  things—

neither  knew  they  the  things  that  were  spoken,

16.  Then  if  the  disciples  themselves,  from  the
living  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  could  not  understand^
this  rising  from  the  dead,  nor  any  of  these  thingt|  ^r
when  they  were  so  near,  how  should  natural  men  un-
derstand them  from  the  letter,  at  so  great  a  distance  ?
Nay,  it  cannot  be,  any  more  than  they  can  span  the
heavens,  or  find  out  the  bounds  of  a  never  ending
eternity,

1 7.  But  after  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  to  the  apos-
tles, then  indeed,  what  they  knew,  they  knew  in  re«
ality  and  truth,  although  they  knew  but  in  part;  for;
they  still  prophesied  of  things  to  come,  having  not
received  the  fulness. Hence  said the  apostle  Paul

iCor.xiii,  W€  know in  party  and we  prophesy in  part. But
'9*10, when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come, then  that  which  is
in  part  shall  be  done  away,

18.  The  apostles  still  spake  of  the  coming  of
10,  i2. m  Christ,  as  future  ;  and  of  their  looking  for,  and  has-
tening unto  the  coming  of  that  day,  in  which  the
heavens  being  on  file,  should  be  dissolved,  and  the
elements  melt  with  fervent  heat,  and  when  the  earth
and  the  works  thereof  should  be  burnt  up.


h


P.  VII.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PROPHECY.  4,27

19.  In  the  same  prophetic  manner  they  testified  chap.
hat  the  Lord  Jesus  should  descend  from  heaven  with


l  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  t  Thess
he  trump  of  God — that  the  dead  in  Christ  should  iv.  16,1;
ise  first ;  and  that  those  who  were  aiive  and  remain-
d,  should  be  caught  up  together  to  meet  the  Lord  in
he  air.

20.  Here  the  same  figures  are  still  continued  to  de-
cribe  his  coming,  that  had  been  used  by  the  Jewish
rophets,  although  they  had  testified  that  he  had
ome,  and  they  had  seen  him  after  he  had  finished  the
Fork  that  was  given  him  to  do.

21.  But  in  all  that  they  had  testified,  how  they  had
een,  and  learned,  and  Jieard,  and  known,  what  was
iere  that  could  open  the  matter,  in  its  true  light,  to
he  natural  man  ?  Christ  told  them  that  he  came  to
ring  fire  on  earth  ;  but  who  ever  saw  any  material
re  in  the  case  ?

22.  What  changes  in  the  material  world  were  vis-
ile to  the  natural  eyes  ?  What  blood  or  fire  or  pil-
irs  of  smoke  had  they  to  show  ?  They  saw  in  part^
ut  what  had  they  to  show  to  others  ?  what  part  of  a
ew  heaven  or  anew  earth  ?  what  other  sun  was  in
art  risen  ?  or  what  new  stars  created  ?  or  what  nat-
ral  body  was  in  part  risen,  so  that  the  natural  eyes  of
lan  could  behold  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  them  that
ept  ?

2.3.  They  neither  had,  nor  pretended  to  have  any
ring  of  the  kind  to  show.  The  same  earth,  air,  fire,
rid  water,  continued  just  as  they  had  been  from  the  be-
inning  ;  no  burning,  nor  drowning,  nor  sweeping
way  by  windy  hurricanes,  or  any  thing  of  the  kind.

24.  But  after  bringing  certain  strange  things  to  the
ars of  mankind,  concerning  one Jesus,  who was

ad,  and  whom  they  affirmed  to  be  alive,  their  wri-
ngs were  enlarged  upon  the  same  prophetic  subject,
id  in  the  same  prophetic  language  they  predicted
le  great  day  of  the  Lord  yet  to  come.

25.  Then  from  what  has  been  said,  it  may  appear
vident,  that  neither  the  time,  place,  nor  manner  of  *
'hrist's  ccming  can  possibly  be  known  or  understood

any,  until  it  is  declared  by  the  event  itself,  and
mt  even  then,  it  cannot  be  really  and  trulv  known

Qcj


428  GENERAL  REMARKS,  &C.  P.  VM

CmP* ™^  declared,  DUt  by  and  through  those  who  have  re-
__  ccived  the  same  Spirit,  which  first  foretold  the  event*

and  are  in  the  very  light  and  work  of  the  day.
JobxxTiii  26.  For  there  is  a  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth,  and
which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen:  The  lion's
whelps  have  not  trodden  it,  nor  the  fierce  lion  passed
it.  And  that  path  which  no  fowl  knoweth,  cannot  be
in  the  natural  heavens  ;  therefore,  the  way  of  Christ's
coming  cannot  be  through  the  natural  heavens  ;  nei-
ther can  it  be  from  the  desert,  the  paths  of  wliicr.
have  not  eluded  the  feet  of  the  lion.
ae,2i,&  27.  Whence  then  cometh  true  wisdom?  and  whefi
24,30/  &  the  place  of  understanding  ?  seeing  it  is  hid  fron
the  eyes  of  all  living,  and  kept  close  from  the  fowl
of  the  air.  The  same  path  is  equally  hid  from  th*
carnally  wise  and  cruel.  No  philosopher  hath  diss
covered  it ;  nor  bloody  tyrant  trodden  it.  It  remain*
unknown  to  those  eager  pursuers  of  natural  wisdon
and  human  power,  of  whom  the  fowls  of  the  car,  an<i
the  lions  of  the  desert,  are  but  a  figure.

28.  In  vain  then  is  the  path  of  wisdom,  or  the  wa;:1
of  Christ  sought  for,  until  he himself  declares  it
and  to  this  purpose  his  own  words  stand  recordec

John  viii.  /  know  whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go.  But  ye  cati
not  tell  ivhence  I  co?ne9  or  whither  I  go — I  proceed

Matt.  xi. ed  and  came  forth  from God. No  man  knoweth  th

Son  but  the  Father  ;  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Fc
ther,  save  the  Son,  and  he,  te  whomsoever  the  Son  wi\
reveal  him.

29.  Is  then  Christ  revealed  in  the  atmosphere,  1
the  birds  of  the  air  ?  Is  he  revealed  in  the  secrc
chambers  ?  or  is  he  revealed  in  the  desert,  to  th
beasts  of  the  forest  ?  Nay,  in  no  wise.

30.  He  therefore,  that  would  learn  and  kno'
whence  Christ  cometh,  and  where  he  is  revealed,  lc
him  seek  for  him  where  he  is  to  be  found,  and  who*
he  has  promised  to  set  up  his  tabernacle,  and  to  ei
tablish  his  throne  and  abide  forever.


c!


|P.  VII.  THE  TRUE  CHARACTER,  &C.  429

CHAPTER  IV.

The  true  Character  of  the  Church  of  Christ.

TPHE  Church  of  Christ  is  composed  of  such  as  ch^p.
JL  are  called  and  chosen  of  God  out  of  the  spirit
tad  practice  of  the  world.  And  in  obedience  to  that
;all,  they  are  separated  from  all  the  rest  of  mankind,
md  united  in  one  body,  constituted  a  holy  and  pe-
tiliar  people,  actuated  by  one  holy  spirit,  and  are
e  voted  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  virtue.

The  Church  of  Christ  is  called  the  kingdom  of
leaven,  because  it  is  under  the  government  of  heav-
n,  and  is  a  state,  habitation,  or  society,  necessary
o  prepare  mankind  for  the  happiness  of  heaven  it-
elf;  and  such  is  that  line  of  order  and  disposition
f  things  in  the  spiritual  world,  extending  from  the
ource  of  true  happiness,  to  this  world,  that  no  soul
:an  enter  heaven,  bur.  through  that  kingdom,  or
hurch  of  Christ.

3.  Hence  the Church  is called  the light  of  the  Matt.  v.
yor/J,  inasmuch  as  the  men  of  the  world  can  receive  13»14,
10  true  saving  light,  but  in  and  through  the  Church,
t  is  also  the  salt  of  the  earth,  as  none  upon  earth
an  be  saved  but  by  the  Church  :  It  is  therefore  plain-
y,  the  saviour  of  the  body.

4.  The  Church  is  properly  the  house  or  habitation
f  God  on  earth,  which  signifies  that  God  is  not  to
e  found  any  where  else  on  earth.*  As  it  is  written  :
Ipri  of  man,  the  place  of  my  throne,  and  the  ftlace  of  ^f»k^
he  soles  of  my  feet,  where  I  will  dwtll  in  the  midst  iTirn»ii|i
f  the  children  of  Israel  forever. — Great  is  the  mys-
ery  of  godliness  : God  manifested  in  the  flesh.

5.  The  essential  properties  of  the  Church  of  Christ
ire  Unity  and  Purity.  The  Church  is  one  in  faith
md  practice  ;  one  in  doctrine,  discipline,  and gov-

rnment  ;  and  one  in  the  mutual  and  equal  enjoy -
nent  of  all  things  both  spiritual  and  temporal.  And
vherc  this  oneness  doth  not  exist,  there  is  neither

*  God  may  be  seen  in  the  order  and  works  of  his  creation  and  providence  ;
ret  be  can  be  found  for  the  salvation  and  redemption  of  mankind,  only  vvhfcrtj
is  has  reveaittd  himself  for  that  purpose,  and  that  is  in  his  Churek.


430  THE  TRUE  CHARACTER  OF  P.  VII.

1  *  rvf  * ^ru^  nor  evidence  of  the  true  Church  of  Christ ;  for
.__.  Christ  is  not,  nor  can  he  be  divided.

6.  The  Church  has  but  one  faith,  and  that  is  the
faith  of  Christ ,  the  faith  of  the  Son of  God,  which

overcometh  the  nature  and  spirit  of  the  world,  en-
lightens the  understanding,  influences  the  will,  and
purifies  the  heart : — It  is  one  in  doctrine,  which  ia
according  to  godliness,  sound,  pure,  wholesome*
and  free  from  error  ;  inasmuch  as  it  makes  no  provi
sion  for  the  flesh  or  any  evil,  or  any  sin  great  oi
small,  and  leads  only  to  the  practice  of  true  godii
.  ness,  unspotted  piety,  and  sound  virtue. —  There  shqU
57.  ' in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  dejlleth,

7.  The  Church  has  but  one  government,  becausi
all  the  members  arc  governed  and  influenced  by  out
Spirit,  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  who  is  the  heac
of  the  body,  and  the  centre  of  influence  to  the  mem

'isai.Hi.8.  hers. —  They  shall  lift  up  their  voices  together — thai

shall  see  eye  to  eye  : — It  is  one  in  practice,  which  '

tiuw^ix righteousness  and  peace. Thy  people  also  shall

si. ... all  righteous — He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteonk


3  Jotuiw.  jt  -s  tnerefore  by  doing  right,  that  the Church  u


righteous  :  And  of  the  Church  all  must  learn  right
eousness,  who  will  be  righteous.  Let  your  Ugh
so  shine  before  ?nen.

8.  The  Church  is  of  one  joint  interest,  as  the  cbii
clren  of  one  family,  enjoying  equal  rights  and  pri\j
leges  in  tilings  spiritual  and  temporal,  because  thjl
are  influenced  and  led  by  one  Spirit,  and  love  is  thji

Actsii. only  bond  of  their  union. 411  that  believed  were  tct

'  gether,  and  had  all  things  common-— and  were  of  OTfy
heart,  and  of  one  souL

9.  And  there  lore,  in  the  sense  of  an  aspiring  am
s<£,m' selfish  nature,  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  higl

nor  low,  rich  nor  poor,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  fe
male  ;  for  they  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  th<
Church  claims  no  relation  to  that  which  is  the  mos
highly  esteemed,  as  the  common  interest  and  princi
pal,  and  common  enjoyment  to  the  children  of  thi
world  ;  namely,  to  the  works  of  the  flesh.

10.  In  this  respect  the  Church  is  perfectly  unite
—they  have  one  common  cross,  which  is  the  cros
of  Christ  Jesusi— -they  crucify  one  root  of  evil,  wind


IF. VII.  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHllIST,.  4>U

(s  the  flesh  with  all  its  affections  and  lusts  ;  and  hence CI™P*
hey  possess one common salvation from  all sin.
BVhere  there  is  not  a  common  salvation  from  all  sin,
there  is  neither  Christ  nor  his  Church  ;  for  his  name  ^tt.*.
was  called  Jesus,  i. e.  a Saviour,  because  he  saves  21,
lis  people  from  their  sins.

1  1.  As  all  have  sinned,  and  none  can  be  saved
Vom  their  sins  out  of  the  Church  ;  so  all  that  come
o  the  Church  must  needs  come  in  their  sins  ;  and
)y  bringing  their  deeds  to  the  tight)  that  is,  by  con-
fessing and  forsaking  all  their  sins,  they  may  find
heir  relation  to  the  Church,  according  to  the  degree
f  their  faith  and  obedience  to  the  light  which  they
cceive.

12.  But  they  cannot  ftold  that  relation,  nor  become
is  pillars  in  the  temple  of  God,  to  go  no  more  out,  in
tny  other  way  than  by  receiving  a  ministration  of  that

ift  and  power  of  God,  which  abides  in  the  Church,

nd  in  obedience  thereto  resisting  and  overcoming
ivil  and  growing  up  in  all  things  into  Christ  who
the head. Therefore  all  are  not  the Church,

ho  at  first  find  their  relation  to  the  Church,  until
heir souls  become purified  in  obeying  the  truth.

or  the  tern  file  of  God  is  holy.

13.  But  persons  may,  for  a  time,  receive  faith  and
ght,  and  the  gifts  of  God  through  the  Church,  and
y  being  unfaithful  and  disobedient  may  fall  away  ;
ut  the  Church  itself  can  never  fall,  nor  be  shaken  ;
ecause  the  foundation  thereof  is  everlasting,  being
iid  by  the  revelation  of  God,  in  the  unchangeable
ature  and  order  of  his  own  eternal  power  and  di-
me majesty  ;  and  the  building  itself  has  been  rais-
d  according  to  the  unchangeable  purpose  of  God,
yhich  he  purposed  in  himself  before  all  worlds,  to
ccomplish  in  the  fulness  of  times.  *

14.  And  although  there  was  a  true  Church  in  the
ays  of  the  apostles,  which  was  supplanted  and  trod-
en  under  foot ;  yet  it  was  because  the  order  in  the
oundation  of  the  building,  was  not  completed,  ac-
ording  to  the  purpose  of  God  in  the  fulness  of  times,

^or  could  it  be,  until  Christ  made  his  second  appear-

15.  And  if  there  were  in  the  succeeding  agejs  af~


432  THE  TRUE  CHARACTER  OF,  &X.  P.  VIL

Cil\Jf' ter  ^e  aP0S^es>  fa*se  ana*  divided  churches,  it  was

__  because  they  sprang  from  false  hearted  and  divided
men.  And  if  there  is  one  Church  now  on  earth,
faithful,  holy,  and  righteous,  it  is  most  certainly  the!
offspring  of  a  faithful,  holy  and  righteous  God,  who!

Eph.ui. created  the  Church  and  all  things  therein,  both  vi

Coii.i6.  hie  and  invisible  by  Jesus  Christ.

1 6.  And  as  certain  as  the  only  true  God  did  prom-
ise tc  establish  a  holy  Church,  in  the  latter  day,  ir
which  he  would  dwell,  so  certain  that  Church  is
brought  forth,  and  contains  all  that  was  promised
as  pertaining  to  the  Church,  temple,  tabernacle;
house  or  habitation  of  God  in  the  latter  day.

17.  A  house  or  habitation  is  built  to  contain  th<
property  and  furniture,  as  well  as  the  person  of  th<
builder  :  so  the  Church  of  God  contains  all  the  un
searchable  riches,  and  treasures  of  wisdom  anc
knowledge,  pertaining  to  the  redemption  of  man:
which  God  hath  treasured  up  in  Christ,  who  is  th<

£oi.i.i7,  head  of  the  Church,  and  who  is  before  all  thing!
therein,  and  by  whom  all  things  therein  coiasist.

IS.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  promised,  and  in  th»
Church  she  dwells,  with  all  her  gifts,  powers,-  ant
diversities  of  operations.  The  gifts  of  faith,  wis
dom,  knowledge,  discerning  of  spirits,  gifts  of  heal
ing,  miracles,  prophecy,  tongues,  and  so  on.  Al
which gifts of  the Holy Ghost are given to ia

• .  . Church,  for  the  manifestation  of  the  spirit — forth!

31,12,13.  perfecting  oi  the  saints — ior  the  work  ot  the  minis
try — and  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,  till  the;
all  come  into  the  unity  of  the  faith — unto  the  meas
ure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.

19.  Thus  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  God  hath  sanctifie
dbap.v. and  cleansed  his  Church,  That  he  might  prese?u  it  t

himself  a  glorious  Churchy  not  having  spot,  or  ivrinkh
or  any  such  thing  ;  but  that  it  should  be  holy,  an
without  blemish.

20.  The  law  and  the  covenant  were  promised,  an
fcai.ii.3.  are  in  the  Church. —  The  law  shall  go  forth  out  of  Z\

on.  Christ  is  the  head  of  his  body  the  Church,  whic
cfeap.xfii  is  the  light  of  the  world.  I  will  give  him  for  a  covt
*'  nant  of  the  people,  for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles. Th

word  of  God  was  promised  and  is  in  the  Church


P.  VII. THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF, &C  433

that  word  which  is  quick  and  powerful,  a  discerner  of  g^aij-
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart — and  liveih  and  ._
abideth  forever.  Hebiv.xa

21.  .JRepentance  and  remission  of  sins  were  prom-  M^
ised,  and  are  in  the  Church. Him  hath  God  exalted  31.
— a  Prince  and  Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Is-
rael, and  forgiveness  of  sins. —  The  Son  of  man  hath

power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins. — This  power  is  given
to  the  Church  ; — Whose  soever  sins  ye remit,  they  Jo]mjau
are  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose  soever  sins  ye  re-  21.
tain,  they  are  retained.

22.  Salvation  and  redemption  are  in  the  Church,  jsai.xivi,
and  no  where  else.  /  will  place  salvation  in  Zionfor  w.lis*
Israel  my  glory. The  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,

and  unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob.

23.  In  a  word,  the  whole  mystery  of  God,  and  of
the  Father,  and  of  Christ,  and  all  that  pertains  to
eternal  life  and  godliness,  are  in  and  through  the
Church  revealed  and  manifested,  and  according  to
the  order  of  God  in  the  fulness  of  times,  are  to  bo
acknowledged  for  the  purposes  of  Redemption.


CHAPTER  V.

The  Foundation  Pillars  of  the  Church  of  Christ.

THE  Church  of  Christ  has  its  foundation  in  the
revelation  of  God,  and  that  foundation  is  Christ.
But  who,  or  what  is  Christ?  The  name  Christ  Jesus  Ma^L
signifies  Anointed  Saviour. —  Thou  shalt  call  his  name
Jesus  ;  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.
And  as  the  man  Jesus  was,  for  that  very  purpose,
endowed  with  the  spiritual  unction  or  anointing  pow-
er of  the  Holy  Ghost,  therefore  he  was  called  Chris?:
i.  e.  the  anointed.

2.  Hence  the  Church  is  called  the  body  of  Christ,
which  signifies  the  body  of  the  anointed,  or  the  body
of  those  who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost :  and
therefore  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  Church  of  the
anointed. Jesus  was  not  the  body  of  the  anointed*


434  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF  P.  VII<

CH^P- but  the  head  ;  and  as  the  body  hath many  members,

___  so  also  is  Christ,  or the  ^anointed. These  members

are  those  human  bodies in  which  the  anointing  hath

Uohmi *ts  aD0c^e- And  hence  it  is written  : The  anointing

27.  which  ye  have  'received  of  him  abide th  in  you — which  1

..  "  is  Christ  in  you, the  hofie  of  glory,

3.  Therefore,  Christ  or  the  anointing  is  not  a  man
or  a  woman,  but  an  unction  or  anointing*  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  of  which  the  anointing  oil  with  which  the  Jew-
ish kings  and  prophets  were  formerly  anointed,  was
a  figure.  Neither  is  the  anointed  one  member,  but
many:  not  a  particular  person  only,  but  a  body  of
people.  And  as  every  thing  must  have  a  foundation:
or  first  cause,  so  the  body  of  the  anointed  originated
from  one,  and  this  one  must  be  considered  as  the  foun-
dation pillar  or  first  father  of  all  who  constitute  that
body.

4.  The  world  is  not  one  person,  but  many  ;  yet  all
the  world  sprang  from  one  man,  who  is  therefore
considered  as  the  foundation  pillar  or  first  father  of
the  human  race.  But  as  the  first  man  was  not  alone
in  the  foundation  of  the  old  creation  ;  so  neither  did
Christ  Jesus,  in  his  single  person,  complete  the  order
in  the  foundation  of  the  new  creation.

5.  Had  there  never  been  any  written  account  of
the  foundation  of  human  society,  or  the  constituent
order  of  the  world,  the  world  itself  would  be  a  stand-*
ing  monument  of  the  essential  parts  of  which  it  is
composed,  namely,  of  man  and  woman  ;  the  father
and  mother  of  all  living.  And  as  every  individual  in
the  world  sprang  from  a  father  and  mother,  the  conjj
elusion  is  self-evident,  that  the  whole  sprang  from
one  joint  parentage,  or  first  father  and  mother,  as
the  foundation  pillars  of  human  society.

6.  And  upon  the  same  principle  might the  foun*
dation  pillars  of the anointed  be discovered,  weri;-
there  no  written  or  verbal  account  of  the  beginning
of  such  an  order,  for  no  effect  can  exist without
cause,  and  by  the  effect,  the cause  which  produced
it  is  made  manifest  :  and  this  truth  is  still  more  evi-
dent since the  pointed  predictions of the ancient
prophets  are  recorded,  and  fulfilled  in  the  Church  of
Christ  in  the  present  day.


P.  VII.  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST.  4%

7.  Thenars/,  as  the  Church  is  constituted  of  man-  CF^P-
kind,  who  are  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  se-  ._
parated  from  the  world,  it  follows  that  man,  anointed
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  the  first  foundation  pillar

of  the  Church.  And  second,  as  the  Church  is  not
composed  of  the  man  without  the  woman,  but  both
are  united  in  the  Lord  by  an  inseparable  bond  of  spir-
itual union,  it  follows  of  course  that  such  a  union  and
relation  sprang  from  a  first  man  and  woman  who  were
thus  united.

8.  And  this  man  and- woman,  united  in  the  bond
of  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  anointed  with  the
same  spirit,  must  be  the  foundation  pillars  of  all  who
are  thus  united  by  the  same  anointing.  And  wheth-
er they  are  immediately  and  personally  known  or  not,
yet,  by  the  spirit  of  harmony  and  union  flowing
through  the  anointed,  there  is  a  relative  knowledge
of  their  nature  and  union  ;  as  much  as  the  world  rel-
atively know  by  experience,  the  nature  and  union  of
their  first  foundation  pillars  whose  image  they  bear.

9.  And  as  the  order  in  the  foundation  of  the  old
creation  could  not  be  complete  by  the  first  man  with-
out the  first  woman  ;  so  the  order  in  the  foundation
of  the  new  creation  could  not  be  complete  in  the  man
alone  :  for  the  man  is  not  without  the  woman  in  the
Lord,  nor  the  woman  without  the  man,

10.  In  the  natural  creation,  the  man  was  first  form-
ed, and  afterwards  the  woman,  who  was  the  mother
of  all  living  :  and  the  man  was  not  of  the  woman,
but  the  woman  of  the  man,  and  by  the  woman,  was
the  order  in  the  creation  of  man  completed  ;  and  the
first  covenant  was  between  them  both,  for  the  in-
creasing glory  of  the  natural  creation.

1 1.  Christ  Jesus  was  the  second  man,  the  beginning
of  a  new  creation  of  God :  but,  as  has  been  observed,
no  order  in  the  creation  could  be  completed  by  one
alone  ;  therefore,  according  to  the  invariable  order
and  relation  of  things,  the  ultimate  display  of  the
new  creation  required  a  second  woman,  that  the  new
covenant  might  stand  between  them  both,  for  the  in-
crease and  glory  of  the  new  creation.

12.  The  first  man  was  created  male  and  female
jointly,  but  neither  male  nor  female  separately,  un-


Wm  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF  P.  Vlff

€I\rtP"  ^  tne  woman  wa3  taken  out  of  the  man  ;  so  in  the
___  first  appearing  of  Christ,  that  spirit  of  anointing  which
constituted  Christ,  was  male  and  female  jointly,  but
not  separately  in  visible  order  :  Nor  could  any  spir-
itual union  and  relation  exist  in  order,  between  thei
sexes,  until  the  woman  was  raised  up,  in  her  appoin-
ted season,  to  complete  the  order  in  the  foundation
of  the  new  creation,  for  the  redemption  of  both  mans
and  woman.

13.  This  was  the  reason  why  the  woman  was  not
permitted to teach in  the times of  the  primitive  »p

sf35Xiv  Church  :  as  saith  the  apostle,  Let  your  women  keem

1  'tim.ii.  silence  in  the Churches  :  for  it  is  not  permitted  unto

*  '* them  to  sjieak  :  And  again,  /  suffer  not  a  woman  to

teach~—and  if  they  ivill  learn  any  thing,  let  them  ask

their  husbands  at  home.

14.  The  woman  was  the  first  in  the  transgression^
and  therefore  must  be  the  last  out  of  it,  and  by  her
the  way  of  deliverance  must  be  completed.  Never*
theless,  by  her  faith,  and  in  her  subjection  to  thtfc
man,  she  was  justified  and  accepted  in  the  primitive;
Church  ;  and  only  in  the  line  of  prophecy,  as  rela-i
ting  to  the  second  appearing  of  Christ,  wras  she  aft
terwards  allowed  to  teach,  until  the  time  of  her  re-
demption came.

15.  Before  the  first  woman  was  taken  out  of  tho|<
man,  he  had  a  work  given  him  to  do.  He  gave
names  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  but  among  all
those  animals,  there  was  not  found  for  him  a  help)
according to  that  order  which  was  before  him  : sof

m  ^  after  the  second  man  was  created,  and  his  body  anoint-:
Matt.  vii.  ed,  every  beast  received  from  him,  his  name,*  s&
xx'iU^V  tnat  tne  kingdom  of  the  beast  became  full  of  names  \
Rev.  xiji.  DUt  there was  none  anions  them  all,  a  real help  to

and  fcvn.  J*  .  °  '  .  >T  1:1 il

andxsii.  the first-born  in the nc-w Creation. Nor  could  tn

real  spiritual  work  of  his  kingdom  be  set  in  order,
until  the  names  and  characters  of  those  beasts  were
filled  up,  which  v/as  at  the  end  of  the  beast's  domin-
ion, about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.

1 6.  When  the  persecuting  power  of  the  beast  ceas-
ed, the  body  of  the  true  witnesses,  who  had  the  spir-
it of  the  two  anointed  ones,  or  first  foundation  pillar
in  the  new  creation,  fell  in.to  a  deep  sleep  j  and  out


jl  VIL  THE  CHURCH  OP  CHRIST.  437

f  that  body  was  the  woman  taken,  by  the  Spirit  of  cha*.
fe  from  God,  and  by  the  operation  of  his  creating  _ _
ower,  she  was  purified,  and  raised  up,  as  a  founda-
ion  pillar,  and  the  tirst  born  in  her  order,  to  stand
s  a  help  with  the  first  born  of  many  brethren,  in  the
idminist ration  of  the  covenant  of  redemption.

17.  From  what  hath  been  observed  on  the  cove*
lant  made  with  Abraham — the  law  of  Moses — the
tate  of  man  at  the  first  appearing  of  Christ — what
was  wrought  in  the  days  of  Christ  Jesus  and  his
ipostles — and  all  that  followed,  through  the  reign  of
Antichrist,  it  is  evident  that  the  covenant  of  eternal
ife  was  yet  lacking  in  a  very  essential  point.

18.  For  as  every  form,  or  appearance  of  a  cove-
lant,  that  ever  God  made  with  man,  stood  between
wo,  and  required  two  to  fulfil  it ;  so  it  is  evident,
lot  only  from  the  nature  of  things,  but  also  from  ev-
ery promise  and  prophecy,  which  related  to  the  cov-
enant of  eternal  life,  that  it  equally  required  two,  in
>rder  to  its  final  execution.

19.  Then  as  the  first  covenant  was  established  be-
tween the  first  man  and  woman,  in  the  creation  of
nan,  and  the  order  and  relation  of  man  was  comple-
ed  by  the  woman  ;  so,  by  the  woman,  is  the  order
,nd  relation  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  completed,  and
i  perfect  union  and  equality  established,  for  the  pur-
>ose  of  full  redemption,  and  the  increase  of  that  mu-
ual  glory  and  happiness,  which  God,  according  to
he  covenant  of  eternal  life,  promised  to  accomplish
n  the  latter  day.

20.  This  covenant  relation  is  between  them  both  :
hv  as  the  first  covenant  between  the  male  and  female
was  broken, and  the whole creation was thereby

arred  ;  so  no  restoration  could  take  place  without  a
w  covenant  relation  between  male  and  female  :  and
therefore  it  was  necessary  both  in  the  purpose  of  God,
land  in  the  order  of  things,  that  Christ  should  make
|his  first  appearing  in  the  man,  and  his  second  in  the
woman.

2 1 .  It  was  reasonable  that  Christ  Jesus,  who  was
(the  beginning  and  first  pillar  in  the  new  creation,
[should  not  be  begotten  in  the  ordinary  course  of  na-
jture  : had  it  been  otherwise, he  could not  have


te.


43$  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF  P.  Vlfl

chap,  wrought  any  deliverance  from  sin  in  the  earth,  be-
*  cause  he  was  alone,  and  there  was  none  before  him
ir  hUi  °f  the  human  race,  who  had  ever  done  it.  I  have
3.  trodden  the  wine  fir  ess  alone  ;  and  of  the  fiec file  there  \  o

was  none  with  me. Yet,  if  he  had  not  been  begotten.

through  that  medium  by  which he Look  upon  him?

the  nature  of  sin,  he  could  not  have  destroyed  death,

which  came  by  sin,  nor  established  the  foundation  of

man's  redemption.

22.  By  his  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  and  coun
sel  of  God  his  Father,  and  the perfect  law  of  right--

■<r*o\.i.  is.  eousness  and  truth  which  he  established,  and  by  of—
Heb.1^.5*  fering  up  his  own  life  a  sacrifice,  through  sufferings^
itiU.ii.9,  he  became  the  first  born  of  every  creature  in  the  new,
creation,  the  first  begotten  from  the  dead  ;  and  God*
hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  giver*  hii  n  ti  e  abovejt
every  name,  not  only  in  this  world,  cue  in  thai  which
is  to  come,  so  that  in  all  things  he  hath  the  pre-
eminence.

23.  And  therefore,  when  the  foundation  of  man'sfs
redemption  was  laid  by  the  work  of  Christ's  first  ap#j
pearing,  the  way  began  also  to  be  prepared  for  his
second  appearing,  to  make  a  final  end  of  sin,  and  toe
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness.  For  although^
the  foundation  was  laid,  yet  there  Could  be  no  com-
plete redemption  from  sin,  until  the  revelation  ot
Christ,  for  its  final  destruction,  should  be  made  wherjfl
sin  first  took  its  seat.

24.  As  sin  first  took  its  seat  in  the  woman,  and  thence
entered  the  human  race,  and  as  Christ  Jesus,  in  tak-
ing upon  him  the  nature  of  fallen  man,  made  his  first
appearing  in  the  line  of  the  male  only  ;  therefore  the)
mystery  of  iniquity  or  wan  of  sin  was  not  fully  re-
vealed, nor  the  mystery  of  God  finished,  in  Christ's!'
first  appealing.

25.  And  therefore '  it  was  also  necessary,  that
Christ  should  make  his  second  appearing  in  the  line
of  the  female,  and  that  in  one  who  was  conceived  in
sin,  and  lost  in  the  fulness  of  man's  fall ;  because  in
the  woman  the  root  of  sin  was  first  planted,  and  i
firal  destruction  must  begin  where  its  foundation  w
first  laid,  and  from  whence  it  first  entered  the  hu-
man race.


|P. VII.  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST.  439

25.  Therefore,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  according  chap.

0  the  unchangeable  purpose  of  God,  that  same  Spir- V'
t  and  word  of  power,  which  created  man  at  the  be-

inning — which  spake  by  all  the  prophets — which
Iwelt  in  the  man  Jesus — which  was  given  to  the
ipostles  and  true  witnesses  as  the  holy  Spirit  and
Word  of  promise,  which  groaned  in  them  waiting
or  the  day  of  redemption — and  which  was  spoken  of
n  the  language  of  prophecy  as  a  woman  travailing
rvith  child,  and  pained  to  be  delivered,  was  revealed
n  a  Woman.

27.  And  that  woman,  in  whom  was  manifested  that
Spirit  and  Word  of  power,  who  was  anointed  and
:hosenof  God,  to  reveal  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  to
tand  as  the  first  in  her  order,  to  accomplish  the  pur-
pose of  God,  in  the  restoration  of  that  which  was  lost
y  the  transgression  of  the  first  woman,  and  to  finish
he  work  of  man's  final  redemption,  was  j4nn  Lee.

28.  As  a  chosen  vessel,  appointed  by  divine  Wis-
lom,  she,  by  her  faithful  obedience  to  that  same  a-
lointing,  became  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
he  second  heir  with  Jesus,  her  Lord  and  head,  in  the
ovenant  and  promise  of  eternal  life.  And  by  her
ufferings  and  travail  for  a  lost  world,  and  her  union
nd  subjection  to  Christ  Jesus,  her  Lord  and  head,  she

Iecame  the  first  born  of  many  sisters,  and  the  true
\forHER  of  all  living  in  the  new  creation.

29.  Thus  the  perfection  of  the  revelation  of  God

1  this  latter  day,  excels,  particularly,  in  that  which
espects  the  most  glorious  part  in  the  creation  of  man,

mely,  the  woman.  And  herein  is  the  most  conde-
cending  goodness  and  mercy  of  God  displayed,  not
nly  in  redeeming  that  most  amiable  part  of  the  crea-
*m  from  the  curse,  and  all  the  sorrows  of  the  fall,
ut  also  in  condescending  to  the  lowest  estate  of  the
of  mankind.

to.  So  that  by  the  first  and  second  appearing  of
ist,  the  foundation  of  God  is  laid  and  completed,
the  full  restoration  of  both  the  man  and  the  wo-
i  in  Christ,  according to  the order  of  the  new
pvenant,  which  God  hath  established  in  them  for  his
Wn glory,  and the  mutual  good  and  happiness  of
uch  other.

R  r


440  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF  P. VIL

chap.  3 1 .  And  in  this  covenant,  both  male  and  female,  as
brethren  and  sisters  in  the  family  of  Christ,  jointly
united  by  the  bond  of  love,  find  each  their  corres-
pondent relation  to  the  first  cause  of  their  existence,
through  the  joint  parentage  of  their  redemption.

32.  Then  the  man  who  was  called  Jesus,  and  the
woman  who  was  called  Ann,  are  verily  the  two  first
foundation  pillars  of  the  Church  of  Christ — the  two
anointed  u  ?tf? — the  two  first  heirs  of  promise,  between
whom  the  covenant  of  eternal  life  is  established — the
first  Father  and  Mother  of  all  the  children  of  regene-
ration— the  two  first  visible  parents  in  the  work  of  re-
demption—and the  invisible  joint  parentage  in  the
new  creation,  for  the  increase  of  that  seed  through
which  all  the  families  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed.


J*eb.  s.


CHAPTER  Vt
The  Subject  continued.


EVERY  thing  that  exists  has  a  correspondent  r§,
latiori  to  the  cause  of  its  existence.  Thus,  theri
is  a  correspondence  between  the  creature  and  this
Creator  ;  the  redeemed  and  the  Redeemer  ;  the  sane
tified  and  the  Sanctifier  ;  and  if  there  were  no  creaj
tire,  there  could  exist  no  such  attribute  as  Creator

2.  He  that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctifies
n. are  all  one  :  that  is,  in  the  order  of  correspondence

In  the  same  sense,  the  ruler  and  ruled,  the  fathe
and  son,  the  mother  and  daughter,  are  respect) ver
one  in  a  correspondent  relation,  or  in  a  correspond
ence  of  attributes.

3.  Without  which  union  or  correspondent  relation
neither  can  have  real  existence.  So  that  the  ver
existence  of  Father  depends  upon  Son,  as  much  a
the  existence  of  Son  depends  upon  Father.  An<
from  this  correspondence  in  the  nature  and  existenc
of  things,  arises  every  attribute  of  God  and  Chris
which  are  known  to  man.

4.  And  for  the  want  of  an  understanding  of  th


DO

an

h

SN
I


VII.  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST.  44J

true  nature and  cause of that  union  and  relation, CI*£P*
which  constitutes  the  different  attributes  in  spiritual *
objects,  wrong  headed  men  have  run  into  the  incon-
sistency of  ascribing  distinct  subsistences  or  person-
alities to  the Divine Majesty,  and  even  to  imagine
that  there  were  a  plurality  of  Gods.

5.  Thus  they  suppose  that  the  Father  is  one  intel-
igent  distinct  subsistence  ;  that  the  Son  is  as  dis-
inct  a  person,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  third,
s  distinct  from  both  the  former  :  whereas,  those  at-
ributes  are  ascribed  to  God  merely  from  the  relation

fend  correspondence  that  exists  between  visible  ob-
ects,  which  natural  men  do  not  understand.

6.  Hence  the  very  existence  of  those  distinct  at-
tributes depends  upon  created  objects  :  take  away
every  created  object,  and  all  those  attributes  cease  ;
as  the  attributes  of  greater  light  and  lesser  light  would

nd,  if  the  sun  and  moon  were  annihilated  :  for  it
must  be  from  a  correspondence with  the  lesser,  that

he  greater,  receives  its  attribute  of  greatness  ;  and
so  of  the  rest.

7.  Therefore,  if  no  Son  or  Daughter  exist,  there
an  be no  Father  or  Mother,  if  no  female,  then  no

male  ;  destroy  the  existence  of  the  woman,  and  the
ttribute  of  the  man  ceases  and  falls  into  oblivion,
and  all  the  order,  glory,  and  perfection  in  the  visible
reation  of  man,  falls  with  it.

$.  Upon  these  plain  and  self-evident  principles,  it
bllows  that  those  attributes  which  men  have  ascribed
o  the  Deity,  are  not  in  his  Divine  Essence,  they  are
lot  eternal,  but  had  a  beginning,  and  necessarily
irose  from  comparisons,  drawn  by  the  human  mind,
between  corresponding  objects  in  time  ;  and  by  rea-
son of  human  depravity,  and  the  want  of  true light

d  revelation,  those  objects have  been perverted,

d  with  them  every  true  attribute  of  deity.

9.  As  God  is  eternal,  immortal  and  infinite  ;  so
the  Divine  Essence  or  Being  is  incomprehensible,
and  cannot  be  known  but  by  the  things  that  are  made,
and  their  correspondent  relations.  And  as  none  of
those  corresponding  attributes  could  exist  but  from  a
first  cause  ;  so  it  is  proper  to  receive  the  knowledge
and  contemplate  the  glory  of  the  invisible  first  cause
through  those  corresponding  objects  that  visibly  exist,


442  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLARS  OF  P. VI


..


chap.  10.  In  the  same  sense  that  God  received  the  attri-
*  bute  of  Creator  from  the"  existence  of  creation  ;  so  the
Creator,  in  the  sense  of  mankind,  received  the  attri-,
bute  of  Father^  from  the  existence  of  the  first  manr
who  was  called  the  Son  of  God.  Nor  could  such  an
attribute  as  Saviour  ever  have  existed  in  the  mind  of
man,  had  not  man  become  a  lost  creature.

11.  TJien  as  nothing  can  exist  without  its  corres-
pondent relation,  and  the  attributes  of  God  are  so  evi-
dent from  the  invariable  union  of  things  in  the  natu^
ral  creation,  and  as  the  new  and  spiritual  creation
was  intended  to  display  the  glory  of  God  in  a  superior,^
manner  ;  therefore  it  will  be  proper  here,  to  con-
sider the  union  and  correspondence  of  the  different
parts  of  the  new  creation,  by  which  the  divine  per-
fections are  most  eminently  displayed.

12.  It  hath  been  observed,  that  the  perfection  ana
glory  of  the natural creation  was  not  completed  un-
til the  woman  was  taken  out  of  the  man,  and  placed  i
her  proper  order. Whatever essential  glory  ma
might  have  possessed,  ye't  it  could  not  have  been  d
clarative,  so  long  as  he  existed  alone  ;  that  is,  itcouldjj
not  have  been  declared,  revealed  or  manifested,  with|
out  a suitable  correspondent object,  to increase  or
augment  his  glory. And therefore the Lord  God  ri
said,  It  is  not  good  that the  man  should  be  alone  ;  1
will  make  him an  hel/i  according  to  that  order  whicfy
is  before  him.

13.  Upon  the  same  principle  it  was  not  good  for
Christ  Jesus  to  be  alone  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom, ,
and  the  perfection  of  that  victory  which  he  gained
over  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  fall.  Nor  could
the  true  glory  of  what  he  gained  ever  have  been  de;
clared,  or  made  manifest  without  a  correspondent!
object  united  to  him  in  a  joint  relation.

14.  Therefore,  as  the  first  man  was  not  without
the  woman,  nor  the  woman  without  the  man  in  the
natural  creation  ;  so  neither  is  the  man  without  the
woman,  nor  the  woman  without  the  man  in  the  Lord.
Man  cannot  exist  without  woman,  any  more  than
father  can  exist  without  son.  Christ  Jesus  in  his  first
appearing  did  not  exist  without  a  woman.  He  was
made  of  a  woman,  and  from  the  natural  and  visible


u


ill


I  VIL THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST*  44^

orrcspondetice  between  man  and  woman,  he  receiv-  Cy£p*
d  the  attribute  of  man.  ,

15.  And  as  no  higher  order  of  woman  existed  than
atural,  he  could  be  known  only  as  a  natural  man  ;
ut  as  a  spiritual  man  and  one  standing  alone  in  the
eginning  of  a  new  and  spiritual  creation,  he  could
ot  be  revealed  or  known,  in  reality,  without  a  spirit-
al  woman,  any  more  than  the  first  natural  man  could

reality  have  been  declared  as  such,  when  God
reated  male  and  female,  two  in  one,  and  called  their
ame  Adam,  in  the  day  when  he  created  them.

16.  As  the  natural  woman  could  npt  exist  but  from
er  correspondent  union  and  relation  to  the  first  man ;

neither  could  a  spiritual  woman  exist  but  in  a  cor-
spondent  union  and  relation  to  a  spiritual  man  ;  and

ach  must  receive  the  distinguishing  attribute  of  man

r  woman  from  its  relation  to  the  other.

17.  Then  as  the  natural  woman  was  separated  from
le  man,  and  placed  in  her  distinct  order  before  the

ory  and  perfection  of  the  man  or  the  woman  could
\  displayed  ;  so  it  was  necessary  in  the  work  of  re-
emption,  that  woman  should  be  taken  out  of  man,
id  placed  in  her  corresponding  order,  before  the  per-
ction  and  glory  of  the  new  creation  could  appear.

18.  The  man  Christ  Jesus,  through  the  medium
f  a  woman,  took  upon  him,  not  the  nature  of  angels,
tit  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  nature  of  human  de-
eavity,  with  which  he  entered  the  world,  and  in  all
lings  was  made  like  unto  his  brethren  ;  yet  he  was,

every  sense,  taken  out  of,  separated  from,  and
aced  above  every  correspondent  attachment  to  all
lat  was  carnal  in  woman,  which  came  by  the  fall.

19.  And  by  the  energy  of  that  eternal  Word,  which
received  from  his Father,  he  overcame  the  spirit

id power  of  human  depravity,  and  was  sanctified
id  set  apart  in  the  work  of  redemption,  as  the  first
in  the  new  creation. And  by  that  Word  which
:th  and  abideth  forever,  he  was  constituted  the  se-
nd Adam,  an  high  priest  forever  over  the  household
God,  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  without  be-
aming of  days,  or  end  of  life.

20.  And  all  who  came  into  him,  that  is,  not  into
ie  natural  body  of  Christ  Jesus;  but  into  his  divine

Rr2


444  THE  FOUNDATION  PILLA1U  OF  P.  Vllf

CJ*fi*'  nature,  were  in  him,  and  by  him,  through  the  energy
_^_  of  that  same  eternal  Word,  taken  out  of  their  cor-
respondent relation  to  the  depravity  of  the  fall,  and
constituted  the  spiritual  body  of  the  second  Jclam^
comprehending  male  and  female,  as  the  body  of
Christ.  And  this  was  the  work  of  Christ  in  his  first
*£h*  ■•  appearing,  to  make  in  himself,  of  twain,  (i.  e.  of  man
and  woman)  one  new  man  ;  so  making'  fieace.

21.  Then  the  Church,  which  was  the  body  tft
Christ  in  his  first  appearing,  did  constitute  one  new
man,  consisting  of  man  and  woman  ;  but  that  boAf\
alone  could  not  increase  and  multiply,  after  the  or-
der of  the  new  covenant,  (any  more  than  the  body  ot
the  first  male  and  female,  while  in  the  state  in  which!
God  first  created  them  when  he  called  their  name
Adam,)  until  the  spiritual  woman  was  taken  out  of  the<
spiritual  man,  and  placed  in  her  own  proper  order
and  correspondent  relation  to  her  spiritual  head.

22.  This  was  the  grand  reason  why  the  apostle^
speaking  of  Christ's  second  appearing,  and  of  the
Church's  increase  in  that  day,  says,  That  day  shall  not

n.  come,  except  there  come  a  falling  away  fivst,  and  thai

man  of  sin  be  revealed,  even  the  mystery  of  iniquity
Hence  it  follows  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  the
work  of  redemption  was  not  yet  complete.

23.  Therefore  the  work  of  God,  in  the  firsi
Mother  of  the  new  creation,  was  to  reveal  the  mys
tery  of  iniquity  where  it  first  entered,  and  to  sepa
Tate  the  woman  from  her  correspondent  relation  ii
the  flesh,  after  the  order  of  the  old  covenant,  and  tc
place  her  in  her  proper  order  as  a  spiritual  woman
according  to  the  new  covenant,  in  a  corresponden
relation  to  the  first  spiritual  man.

24.  As  it  was  by  the  revelation  of  Christ,  and  th<
energy  of  that  same  eternal  Word  which  liveth  an<
abideth  forever,  that  the  woman  was  taken  out  of
and  separated  from  her  correspondent  relation  to  thi
fallen  state  of  man,  and  made  a  spiritual  woman  ;  to
in  her,  and  by  her,  the  glory  and  perfection  of  th<
Apiri.ual  man  Christ  Jesus  was  revealed.

25.  It  was  only  by  the  spiritual  man  Christ  Jesus
and  her  corresponding  relation  to  him,  that  she  coul<
receive  the  attribute  of  spiritual  woman. And  it  i


VII.  TRR  CH9RCH  OF  CI-UUVT.  445

nly  from  the  certain  existence  of  sons  and  daughters, c "**•

>r  spiritual  children,  that  those  who  begat  and  brought

hem  forth,  can  receive  the  attributes  of  father  and
nother,  or  spiritual  parents. So  that  if  the  son  has

corresponding  relation  in  the  new  creation,  so  like-
vise  has  the  daughter.

26.  It  is  not  to  be  understood  in  the  spiritual  work
f  God,  that  one  natural  body,  either  of  man  or  wo-
nan,  is  either  taken  out  of,  or  joined  to  another  :  but
is  man  and  woman  are  terms  used  to  express  the
oint  body  and  relation  in  the  natural  creation  of  man  ;
»o  they  iire  used  in  regard  to  the  spiritual  work  of

od.  '

27\  To  this  spiritual  relation  the  apostle  refers,  and
>rings  the  natural  as  a- figure  of  the  spiritual,  when
le  says,  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  F.ph.  v*
md  mother ,  and  shall  be  joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they  Zl>***
fwo  shall  be  one  flesh.  And  therefore,  as  the  very  es-
ence  of  male  implies  also  the  female,  the  same  ap-
plies to  the  woman,  to  leave  mother  and  father,  and
>e  joined  to  her  corresponding  relation  in  the  same
piritual  work.

28.  This j  saith  the  apostle,  is  a  great  mystery  :  but
r  sfieak  in  Christ  and  in  the Church. To  the  same

thing  he  refers,  when  he  says,  He  that  is  joined  to  l  Cor>  ^
the  Lord  is  one  S/iint.  And  from  such  a  union  and  17*
correspondence,  arises  the  substance  of  all  those
piritual  attributes  in  the  new  creation,  or  work  of
edemption,  such  as  the  bridegroom — the  bride  the
Lamb's  'wife — brethren  and  sisters,  and  the  sons  and
daughters  of  God.

29.  Hence  the  apostle,  speaking  of  the  final  sepa-
tion  between  Christ  and  Belial,  tight  and  darkness,

the  believer  and  the  infidel,  saith, Where/ore,  come  tc«r.v».

ut  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  saith the  17>  1,#
Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing  ;  and  I  will  re-
ceive you,  and  will  be  a  Jathcr  unto  you,  and  ye  shall
my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty.

30.  Then  if  the  Church,  which  is  called  out,  and
separated  from  the  unciean,  is  composed  of  sons  and
daughters,  they  must  needs  have  both  a  father  and
mother,  and  these  must  be  the  first  foundation  pillars,
and  joint  parentage  of  the  Church.


446  TYPES  AND  PROFHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  Vll't

ghap. 3 1 ,  Therefore,  as  there  was  a  natural  Adam  and:

2?t/<?,  who  were the first foundation pillars of  the

world,  and  the  first  joint  parentage  of  the  human
race  ;  so  there  is  also  a  spiritual  Adam  and  Eve,  who
are  the  first  foundation  pillars  of  the  Church,  and  thi
first  joint  parentage  of  all  the  children  of  redemp-
tion. And  as  the  world,  truly  and  properly,  pro-
ceeds from  Father  and  Mother,  in  the  line  of  genera-  "
Hon  ;  so  the  Church,  truly  and  properly,  proceeds  from  \
Father  and  Mother  in  the  line  of  regeneration.


pi


CHAPTER  VII.


Types  and  Prophecies  fulfilled  in  the  Two  Foundation

Pillars.


'  in


THE  work  of  Redemption,  being  spiritual,  coulcf:
not  be  ushered  in  with  such  ocular  evidence  to
the  natural  man,  as  accompanies  the  changes  in  the:
things  of  nature  ;  neither  was  man  formed  to  be  in^jL,
fluenced  solely  by  such  kind  of  evidence.

2.  But  as  man  is  a  natural  creature,  endowed  with  %
a  spirit  and  rational  faculties,  therefore  the  spiritual  j
work  of  God  must  be  exhibited  in  a  spiritual  light ;
and  although  the  natural  eyes  may  often  be  the  me^
dium  through  which  the  truth  of  natural  things  ia|s  s
conveyed  to  the  mind,  yet  it  must  be  the  mind,  and,  lr
not  the  natural  eyes,  that  receives  the  conviction  ofii  4
its  truth  and  reality.

3.  And  as  the  new  creation  was  to  have  respect  t«
the  soul  or  spirit  of  man,  it  is  only  by  the  spirit  thai
the  work  itself  can  be  discovered  in  its  true  nature  ;
and  therefore  the  evidence  by  which  it  is  discovered)
is  addressed  to  the  mind,  and  not  to  the  bodily  senses.

4.  A  Saviour  was  born  for  souls  that  were  lost  in
their  sins,  and only  such  as  were  absolutely  saved,
could  know  or  rightly  name  him  :  and  unto  such  fl
were  waiting  for  redemption  in  the  latter  day,  Christ
was  to  appear  the  second  time  without  sin,  and  none


iti

k


to


| VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  447

ut  such  could  possibly  know  him,  or  give  him  his  fv^p-
'ue  and  just  titles.  .

5.  And  nothing  could  possibly  recommend  him  to
le  mind  of  man,  with  greater  evidence,  than  his
rst  giving  them  types,  figures,  prophecies,  and  vi-
Lons,  of  his  future  appearance,  and  then  coming  in
uch  a  manner  as  expressly  to  fulfil  them,  and  to  ren-
er  any  other  fulfilment  of  them  absolutely  impossi-
le  :  this  we  certify  has  been  the  case.

6.  And  when  those  types  and  prophecies  are  stated,
ith  their  true  accomplishment,  the  matter  may  be

once  decided, that  such  as  do  not  acknowledge

rhrist  in  his  second  appearing,  must  either  deny  the

uth  of  the scriptures,  or  they  are  not  looking  for

ademption,  but  are  in  'pursuit  of  some  other  object

at  has  blinded  their  understanding.

7.  We  Lave  already  shown  the  similitude  between
le  first  and  second  Adam,  in  a  number  of  particu-
rs,  which  prove  that  the  second  Adam  could  not
e  the  antitype  of  the  first,  short  of  being  both  male
id  female  in  a  spiritual  sense.

8.  And  as  the  apostle expressly  affirms  that  the

rst  Adam  is the  Jigure of  him  who was  to  come^  it  RonL  v
mnot  be  denied,  that  he  who  was  to  come,  should  be  14-
lale  and  female,  unless  it  be  denied  that  he  who  was
le  figure,  was  male  and  female  in  the  day  that  he
as  created.

9.  The  same  remark  will  apply  to  every  other  per-
>n,  who  was  chosen  as  a  type  of  Christ.  So  that  the
oman  must  appear  in  Christ,  in  her  proper  order
id  lot  ;  unless  the  utmost  violence  is  used  in  distort-
g  the  natural  similitude,  and  forcing  her  out  of  her
■ope.r  place  there,  and  consequently  from  her  just
id  equal  correspondent  union  and  relation  in  the
ork  of  redemption.

10.  Volumes  might  be  written  on  this  subject,  were
necessary  to  trace  out  the  correspondence  between
le  shadow  and  the  substance  in  every  particular.
iowever,  this  present  work  will  not  admit  of  enlarg-
»g  ;  and  such  as  are  in  any  measure  acquainted  with
ie  scriptures,  and  really  desire  the  truth,  will  be  able
>  make  the  application,  from  the  slightest  compar-
on.


448  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VI


CHAP
VII.


1 1.  As  figures  or  similitudes  come  the  nearest  tii
the  natural  understanding,  we  shall  first  notice  a  fev^
particular  things,  by  which  Christ  was  represented
and  next,  a  few  leading  prophecies,  which  may  servi,
as  a  key  to  all  the  rest.

12.  Abraham  and  Sarah  (whose  names  signif
great  father,  and  firinccss  of  a  multitude)  were  pari  t
ticular  figures  of  Christ  in  his  first  and  second  appear \i
ing,  inasmuch  as  Christ  the  promised  seed  was  calla
in  Isaac,  their  joint  issue,  who  was  begotten  by  promaflj
ise,  in  which  Sarah  was  jointly  and  inseparably  inml)
eluded  with  Abraham.  ink

13.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Isaac  and  Rebekahiei
Jacob  and  Rachel.  Hence  the  apostle  speaks  of  thdNi
female  as  well  as  the  male,  when  he  mentions  the  pantn
triarchs  as  types  of  Christ.  And  had  not  Sarah,  Reno
bekah,  and  Rachel,  conceived  by  one  promise,  ttyl|  I
posterity  of  the  patriarchs,  in  point  of  goodness^
would  not  have  been  distinguished  from  the  rest  o  i
mankind.  And  the  promise  of  God,  typically  att)))i
spiritually  descended,  by  Jacob  and  Rachel,  into  JcCl
seph  and  Benjamin,  from  whom  Christ  in  his.firsirc

Gen*xxx  anc*  seconc^  appearing,  in  a  typical  sense,  spiritual!; i
23,24. descended.*  Ilioi

xhx.22to j ^ gQ  t^at  t^e  on|y  distinguishing  goodness  tha

1>eu-  ,«  ever  was,  or  can  be  manifest  on  this  earth,  has  comr  ^
t»i7. through  woman's  conceiving* according  to  promise j
And  therefore,  whoever  denies  this,  must  deny  tft
distinction  between  the  seed  of  Hagar  and  Sarah,  c
Leah  and  Rachel,  and  either  suppose  that  the  patri
arch,  including  the  free  woman,  was  a  type  of  Chrbjj
without  any  regard to  his  seed,  or  that  he  was  n
type  at  all.

15.  Moses  also  was  an  eminent  type  of  Christ,  bot
of  his  first  and  second  appearing  :  A  prophet,  said  h(

A«teiu. moill  the  Lord  your Gcd  raise up unto you,  like  uni
23.  me,  him  shall  ye  hear. Many  striking  things  whereii

he  resembled  Christ,  have  been  stated  by  many  wr:
ters  :  but  there  was  one  important  particular  i
Moses,  relating  to  Christ,  which  they  have  all  passe
over.

16.  Moses  was  circumcised,  of  the  stock  of  Abra
ham;  and  also  a  law-giver,  and  both  by  the  law  an<


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  44*

istom  of  the  Hebrews,  they  were  not  to  intermarry  Cy£p*

ith  other  nations  ;  but Moses  had  taken  an  Ethio-

an  woman,  a  princess,  the  daughter  of  the  prince
I  Midian,  for  his  companion,  which  was  a  cause  of
[•eat  offence  to  the  most  respectable  of  his  own  kin-
ged, because  Zipporah  was  an  Ethiopean,  of  another
ition,  entirely  of  a  different  lineage,  and  of  another
)lour.

17.  Yet  Zipporah  was  accepted  of  God,  as  stand-  SeeNum.
g  in  her  order  and  correspondent  relation  to  Moses,  bertxii.
hile  Miriam  was  struck  with  the  divine  displeasure,

id  became  a  leper  as  white  as  snow,  for  despising
er,  and  speaking  against  Moses  on  her  account,
his  happened  to  them  as  an  ensamjilc,  and  is  writ-
n  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the
orld  are  come.

18.  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth.  Christ  Je-
is,  in  his  first  appearing, was  reckoned  from  Ju-

h,  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  concerning
riesthood.  Thus  the  priesthood  was  changed,  and
hrist  came  out  of  their  sight ;  and  thus  he  went
way  ;  and  so  in  like  manner  must  he  come  again.

19.  The  truth  is,  Christ  cometh  not  by  observa-
on,  first  nor  last  ;  neither  lo  here,  nor  lo  there,
om  this  tribe,  nor  that  tribe  ;  but  by  being  revealed
id  made manifest  in  his  true  character,  according

the  types,  promises,  prophecies,  and  visions  of
is  appearing,  which  God  hath  given  from  age  to
je,  and  from  time  to  time.

20.  Not  only  typical  persons,  both  male  and  female,
ere  many,  but  numerous  typical  things,  in  the  or-
^r  of  two,  were  exhibited throughout  the  law  and

le  prophets. The  law  was  a  shadow  of  good  things  Heb.jui*

come  ;  and  in  the  most  striking  particulars,  point-
i  out  two  dispensations  of  the  appearing  of  Christ.

21.  The  first  appearing  of  Christ,  and  the  great
stacy  which  followed,  was  signified  by  the  two
t  tables  of  the  covenant,  upon which  the  law  of

od  was  written. The  tables  were  written  with  the  ex<kims
er  of  God~-and  the  tables  were the  work  of  God,  *xxi  \**
the  writing  was  the  writing  of  Gody  graven  ufion  16, 19.
tables. These  prefigured  the  revelation  and  the
of  God,  given  to  Christ  Jesus,  who  was  neither


450  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN


P.  vil


%*XiV.  1.


Heb.  i.\.


CvnP' Deg°tten  nor  born  aftcr-  the  flesh,  nor  by  the  will  ol
t  man,  but  by  the  power  of  God.

22.  These  two  tables  were  broken  in  pieces,  as  thej
approached  nigh  unto  the  camp  of  Israel,  by  reason
of  idolatry.  So  the  truth  was  trodden  under  foot,  anc
the  power  of  the  holy  people  scattered,  by  the  setting
up  of  a  false  worship  after  the  apostles  days,  although
the  kingdom  of  heaven  had  come  nigh  unto  them

23.  Then  after  the  first tables  were  broken,  the
E*odu8 Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Hew  thee  two  tables  like  unti

thejirst  ;  and  I  will  write  u/ion  the  tables  the wordi
that  were  in  thejirst  tables,  which  thou  brakesi.

2  4.  Which  signified,  that  the  revelation  of  Go6
in  Ghrist's  second  appearing,  should  be  given  to  one
-who  was  born  after  the  flesh,  in  the  common  courses
of  nature.  And  as  God  wrote  in  the  second  tabldl
the  same  words  that  were  in  the  first,  it  signified
that  the  work  of  Christ's  second  appearing,  shouljl
be  built  upon  the  foundation  of  his  first  appearin
and  that  the  work  of  both  should  be  united  in  on
and  under  the  inspiration  of  one  Spirit,

25.  The  tabernacle  also  was  a  striking  figure  o<
the  appearing  of  Christ.  It  was  separated  by  a  vai
into  two  apartments,  the  holy  and  most  holy,  whicl
is  also  called  the  sanctuary.  The  tabernacle  wa:
moveable,  and  typified  Christ  in  the  tabernacle  Qt
human  nature  ;  the  two  dispensations  of  his  wo
in  his  first  and  second  appearing,  were  signified
those  two  apartments.

26.  "  The  priests  went  always  into  the  first  tab
%£~ nacle,  accomplishing  the service  of God:  But  i

the  second  went  the  high  priest  alone  once  a  ye
not  without  blood,  which  he  offered  for  himself,  a*
for  the  errors  of  the  people  :  The  Holy  Ghost  t,
tiffntfyingi  that  the  way  into  t/:n  holiest  of  all  was  m
yet  made  manifest,  while  the  first  tabernacle  was  ye
standing.'"

27.  And  this  further  signified,  that  Christ  coul<
not  make  his  second  appearing,  to  establish  his  Churcl:
without  spot  or  wrinkle,  while  the  first  Gospel  Churcl
was  yet  standing  :  tmd  as  the  first  temple  was  buil
after  the  pattern  of  the  tabernacle,  so  the  Churcl
was  properly  the  antitype  to  the  temple.


p'


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  45  i


28.  The  apostle,  speaking also  of  those things CI™P*

within  the  vail,  saith,  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak

Particularly. The  true  reason  why  the  apostle  could  Heb.ix.5.
lot  speak  particularly  of  that  part,  was,  that  it had

lot  yet  received  its  accomplishment.

29.  Christ  Jesus,  in  his  first  appearing,  was  the
rue  antitype  to  the  first  part  of  the  tabernacle,  and

vhen  his  work  was  finished,  the  vail  of  the second  MatxxvK
emple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  ;  •£' j^is*.
vhich  signified  the  entrance  of  Christ  Jesus  into  the  Heb.x.20
oliest  of  all,  through the  vail,  to prepare  the  way
or  his  second  appearing,  in which  he  would  reveal
he  order  of  the  second  tabernacle,  when  the  vail,
hat  is  to  say,  the  flesh,,  should  be  taken  away.

30.  Therefore,  as  Christ  Jesus  hath  revealed  him-
elf  in  the  second  part  of  his  manhood,  and  comple-
ed  the  order  of  God  pertaining  to  the  work  of  re-
emplion,  we  may  take  some  further  notice  of  those
hings  in  the  tabernacle,  by  which  the  true-  order  of
jrod  was  particularly  typified.

31.  The  tabernacle,  including  the  holy  and  most  ho-
y  place,  was  in  length  thirty  cubiis,  in  breadth  ten
ubits,  and  in  height  ten  cubits,  and  the  vail  or  par-
ition,  made  twenty  cubits  for  the  holy  place,  and  ten

r  the  most  holy.  So  that  the  first  temple  was  ob-
ong,  not  perfect  in  its  order.  But  the  most  holy  was
Dur-square  ;  the  length  and  breadth,  and  height  of  it
yerc  equal.  Yet  the  latter  was  only  separated  from
le  former  by  a  vail,  and  the  former  was  preparatory
>  the  latter.

32.  Within  the  vail,  was  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
he  length  of  which  was  two  cubits  and  a  half,  the
readth  one  cubit  and  a  half,  and  the  height  one  cu-

t  and  a  half. And  upon  the  sides  were  two  staves
bear  the  ark,  and  these  staves  were  not  to  be  taken
way  from  it.

33.  And  in  the  ark  were  put  the  two  tables  of  the
ovenant.  And  over  the  ark  was  the  mercy-seat  of
>ure  gold.  And  upon  the  ends  of  the  mercy-seat,
vere  two  cherubims  of  beaten  gold,  and  their  wings
were  stretched  on  high,  so  that  they  covered  the  mer-
cy-seat with  their  wings.

34.  Thus  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  "  In  the  ark

Ss


452  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VIll

CvnP" ^10U  8^a^  Put  ^ie  testin^ony  tnat  I  shall  give  thee
. ' and  there  I  will  meet  with  thee,  and  I  will  commune


Exo.xxv  *w"^z  ^iee  from  above  the  mercy -seat, from  betweem
21,22. the  two  cherubims  which  are  upon  the  ark  of  the  tes-1
timony."

35.  These  things  were  patterns  of  things  in  tha
heavens,  but  they  were  not  the  heavenly  things  them*;
selves  :  They  were  given  of  God,  to  show  forth  his
unchangeable  purpose,  in  the  order  and  work  of  man's

Heb.vUi.  redemption  :  For  See,  said  he  to  Moses,  thou  make
all  things  according  to  the  pattern  shewed  thee  in  the
mount.

36.  The  testimony  of  the  covenant,  being  en  graven  I
by  the  finger  of  God  in  the  two  tables  of  stone,  typi*
fied  the  new  covenant  written  in  the  hearts  of  the  twoi
first  heirs  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  The  merctA
seat  upon  the  ark,  over  the  testimony,  and  betwee
the  cherubims,  typified  the  place  of  God's  residenc
and  throne,  in  the  mickt  between  the  two,  the  ma
and  woman  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.

S7.  The  testimony  of  the  covenant,  being  written
in  the  two  tables,  and  concealed  under  the  mercy-seat,
typified  the  invisible  law  and  revelation  of  God  upon1'6
which  the  Church  is  built;  and  the  visible  adminis-
tration of  that  law  and  testimony  by  two,  was  typified
by  the  two  cherubims*

38.  These  two  cherubims  were  of  wrought  goldj
of  beaten  work,  which  was  figurative  of  the  morti-!
lication  and  sufferings,  which  the  two  anointed  onesy
in  Christ's  first  and  second  appearing,  were  to  pass
through,  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  the  work  where*
unto  they  were  anointed.

39.  As  gold  is  tried  and  purified  by  fire,  and  wrought
under  a  hammer  ;  so  the  Spirit  and  Word  of  God
is  both  a  fire  and  a  hammer,  by  which  all  things  mus'
be  tried  and  wrought,  that  will  ever  stand  in  God's
spiritual  building.

40.  Solomon's  temple,  which  was  the  brightest  fig
ure  of  the  spiritual  house  of  God  that  ever  was  pre
sented  to  human  eye,  consisted  of  two  parts,  the  hol\
and  the  most  holy  ;  representing  the  Church  of  Chris
in  his  first  and  second  appearing,  in  a  more  striking
manner  thank  had  been  represented  by  the  tabernacle


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  453

41.  The  whole  length  of  the  temple  was  sixty  cu-  chap,
3its,  in  breadth  twenty  cubits,  and  in  height thirty
cubits  ;  and  the most  holy  within  the  temple,  was
igain  four-square,  being  twenty  cubits  each  way  ;  its
ength  and  breadth  and  height  were  equal.

42.  The  cherubims  in  the  most  holy  place  of  the  tem-
ple, were  each  ten  cubits  in  height,  of  one  meas-
ure and  of  one  size  :  and  the  wing  of  the  one  cherub
ouched  the  wall  of  the  house  on  one  side,  and  the
ndng  of  the  other  touched  the  wall  on  the  other  side  ;
xud  their  wings  touched  each  other  in  the  midst  of
he  house  ;  and  the  mercy-seat  was  placed  between
he  two  cherubims.

43.  These  things  represented  the  extent  of  Christ's  Psa)  Ixxf.
lominion  on  both  sides,  in  man  and  woman,  as  from  «.  Ixxxy.
ea  to  sea,  and  showed  the  correspondent  relation  ill  10,11%
he  two  anointed  ones,  between  whom  is  placed  the
estimony  and  the  covenant  of  everlasting  life,  where
nercy  and  truth  are  met  together,  righteousness  and

heace  kiss  each  other.

44.  Besides  these  figures  in  the  most  holy  place,
'wo  pillars  were  also  reared  up  in  the  porch  of  the
emple;  the  first  was  called  Jachin,  i.  e.  he  that  1  Kings
strengthens  and  makes  stedfast ;  and  the  second  was  vii,2*%
called  Boaz,  i.  e.  in  strength.  So  that  when  the
emple  was  finished,  it  could  not  be  entered  but  be-
ween  two. Thus,  Christ  in  his  first  appearing,  was

i  pillar  strong  and  stedfast ;  and  his  second  appearing
vas  in  the  strength  of  the  first.

45.  Thus,  typical  persons  and  typical  things,  in
he  most  striking  particulars,  evidently  show  the  pur-
Dose  of  God,  in  regard  to  the  order  of  his  spiritual
lyork  in  Christ,  to  be  in  the  order  of  two  dispensa-
tions, and  by  two  anointed  ones;  which,  beyond  all
J-easonable  dispute,  have  had  the  beginning  of  their
(uxomplihhment,  and  confirmed  by  many  infallible
proofs  ;  first  through  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  the  Church
»vhich  he  established  at  his  first  appearing  ;  and  se-
cond in  Mother  Ann,  and  in  the  Church  which,
■hrough  her,  was  established  in  this  day  of  Christ's
lecond  appearing.

46.  And  to  these  types,  no  antitype can  be  found
p  the  Antichristian  world :  for  thev  have  rendered


„•


M


454 TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  V'.

€\il' every  comparison  defective,  by  excluding'  the  woman

from  her  proper  lot  and  order  in  Christ,  and  from  her

joint  and  correspondent  relation,  and  true  heirship  in
the  work  of  redemption.  <

47.  This  appears  evident  from  their  doctrine  of  threci
distinct  personalities  in  the  Deity,  all  in  the  masculines
gender :  First  the  Father,  second  the  Son,  and  third  the
Holy  Ghost ;  He  proceeding  from  Father  and  Son,  from
everlasting,  without  the  attribute  of  either  Mother  orio
Daughter. To  complete  their  heterogeneous  system^  dj
they  unite  two  distinct  and  contrary  natures  in  thej
Son  of  God  ; — and  finally  look  for  the  mystery  of  Godq
to  be  finished  in  the  odd  number  of  three  males. i

48.  Where  is  there  any  similitude,  which  applies
to  this  human  invented  scheme,  among  any  of  theti
works  of  God,  cither  in  heaven  or  on  earth  ?  Where!  i
is  there  any  type  or  shadow,  vision  or  prophecy,  oil  ft
things  animate  or  inanimate,  that  ever  God  gave:tjn
from  the  creation  of  the  first  man,  through  all  the  lawl&
and  the  prophets,  down  to  the  present  day,  thatbcarsn-
any  relation  to  such  an  unnatural,  unscriptural  andnra
inconsistent  proposition  of  attributes,  without  theiii
corresponding  relations  ?  And  where  then  is  the  cor
respondent  cause  of  the  woman's  existence  ?

49.  But  we  can  testify  of  a  truth,  that  Christ  hat?1
verily  fulfilled  the  scripture  types,  in  such  a  manner
that  they  can  never  be  fulfilled  by  any  thing  els©
while  the  world  stands  :  And  the  more  reasonable))
and  unprejudiced  the  mind  of  man  becomes,  the  more
exactly,  in  every  particular,  will  those  figures  appear
to  have  their  accomplishment  in  the  spiritual  Father
and  Mother  of  the  true  children  of  promise

50.  We  might  further  observe,  that  the  same  things*
were  shadowed  forth  under  the law  by  typical  cere
monies;  among  which  the two  goats  for  the  expia-
tion of  sin,  is  very  pointed. Two  goats  were  chosen

Lev.  xvi.  and  presented  before the  Lord,  to  make  atonement!
for  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel.

5 1 .  The  first  was  taken  by  lot  and  slain,  and  the
blood  of  it  taken  within  the  vail  to  make  an  atone
ment,  which  typified  Christ  Jesus,  who  died  for  thi
sins  of  the  world,  and  entered  into  the  holiest  of  all


l\


o:


I


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  455

iat  is,  into  heaven  itself,  through  the  vail,  which Q^^'
ras  his  flesh.  -

52.  Afterwards  the  High  Priest  returned,  typify-
ig  Christ  Jesus  in  his  second  appearing,  and  all  the
liquities  and  transgressions  of  the  children  of  Is-
lel,  were  confessed  over  the  head  of  the  scape-goaty
nd  taken  away  into  a  land  not  inhabited.

5  3.  The  Holy  Ghost  thus  signifying,  that  sin  could
ever  be  finally  taken  away,  by  all  the  blood  that
mid  be  shed,  until  Christ  should  come  in  the  flesh
woman,  to  destroy  and  take  away  sin  from  where

first  entered  ;  and therefore,  the full  and  perfect

der  of  confessing  sin,  once  for  all,  was  never  es*

Wished  until  Christ's  second  appearing.

54.  In  Christ's  first  appearing,  Jesus  died  for  the
ns  of  the  world  ;  but  there  was  none  who  remained

a  joint  and  corresponding  relation  and  equality  with

m,  to  receive  the  confession,  and  to  beur  them
vay.  And  therefore  the  first  gift  and  revelation  of
od  through  Mother,  for  the  final  expiation  of  sin,
as  a  full  and  final  confession  of  sins,  and  a  full  sal-

tion  from  all  sin  as  the  consequence.

5  5.  So  that  in  the  first  and second  appearing  of

irist,  both  in  the  man  and  in  the  woman,  the  figure
the  two  goats  were  perfectly  fulfilled,  and  which
jver  was,  nor  can  be  fulfilled  in  any  thing  else.

56.  To  these  typical  things  may  be  added  the  Two  Num.*.
\ver  Trumpets,  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  2""JU

make,  and  which  were  to  be  used  among  the  chil-
*en  of  Israel  on  occasion  of  assembling  themselves
gether  in  separate  assemblies — in  their  journeyings,
id  in  their  wars  with  their  enemies — on  gathering
gether  the  whole  congregation  to  the  tabernacle —
d  on  all  such  important  occasions  they  were  to  be
memorial  before  God,  and  an  ordinance  forever
^oughout  th  ir  generations.

57.  These  Two  Trumpets  were  also  typical  of  the
dispensations  of  the  gospel,  or  Christ's  first  and

cond  appearing. The  gospel  or  testimony  of  Jesus

compared  to  a  trump  t. In  the  first  appearing  of

hrist,  the  first  gospel  trumpet  was  sounded  ;  and  in

s  second  appearing,  the  second  trumpet  is  sounded,

Jhich  is  cailed  the  Last  Trumpet — by  which  the  alarm

Ss2


456  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  TULFILLSTll  IN P.  VII

rvu?" IS  soundcdin  God's  holy,  mountain,  and  by  which  th
.  gospel  of  salvation  is  sounded,  and  the  gathering  ti

getktt  unto  Christ  is  effected.

58.  Thus,  were  it  necessary,  it  might  be  show
wherein  the  whoie  typical  and  ceremonial  law  has  it  ftr
full  and  final  accomplishment  in  the  second  appearira  i
Isai.  vni.  of  Christ.  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  ot  th
prophets  ;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  wortH
it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them.  jgol


CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Subject  continued.


THE  prophecies  concerning  the  two  foundatic
pillars  in  the  work  of  Redemption,  are,  to  thl
mind  that  is  in  any  degree  spiritual,  still  more  plain
copious  and  convincing,  than  the  types  and  shadow!  J
given  in  the  Law.  Were  we  to  bring  all  that  tr.  '6i
prophets  have  uttered  on  this  particular  subject,  ar
to  state  every  thing  in  its  proper  light  of  correspoi
dence,  a  large  volume  would  contain  but  a  very  sms
portion.  A  few  particulars,  however,  are  necessai
to  be  noticed  at  this  time.

2.  David,  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  in  the  fort]
fifth  Psalm,  speaks  expressly  of  the  male  and  the  f
male,  in  Christ's  first  and  second  appearing,  in  tr
following  words  :  "  My  heart  is  inditing  a  good  ma
ter  :  I  speak  of  the  things  which  I  have  made  touci
ing  the  King  :  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a  ready  writ©
Thou  art  iairer  than  the  children  of  men  :  grace
poured  into  thy  lips  :  therefore  God  hath  blessed  the
forever."

3.  "  Gird  thy  sword  upon  thy  thigh,  O  most  Migl
ty,  with  thy  glory  and  thy  majesty.  And  in  thy  m
jesty  ride  prosperously,  because  oj  truth,  and  mee
ness,  and  righteousness ;  and  thy  right  hand  sh<
teach  thee  terrible  things.  Thine  arrows  are  shai
in  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies  ;  whereby  tl

afefcit.  people  fall  under  thee. Thy  throne,  0  God}  U  foy


k
lit

Hit
(


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  45?

'ver  and  ever  :  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom  is  a  right cJf[f*/
\ccptre."  .

i.  This  has  long  been  applied  to  Christ  Jesus  the
?o/z  of  God  ;  but  this  is  not  all,  as  distinct  a  charac-
er  relating  to  the  Daughter^  as  the  first  in  the  line
>f  the  female,  is  evidently  described  as  follows  :

5.  "  Kings  daughters were  among  thy  honourable
vomen  : upon  thy  right  hand  did  at  and  the  Queen  in  p$al.xfy
^old  of  Ophir: Hearken, 0  daughter,  and  consider,  9>  &f*
ind  incline  thine  ear  ;  Jorge t  alao  thine  own  people  j

\nd  thy  father's  house  ;  so  shall  the  King  greatly  de-
ire  thy  beauty  :  for  he  is  thy  Lord;  and  wo  ^  hip
hou  him.  And  the  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be  there
vith  a  gift ;  even  the  rich  among  the  people  shall
jntreat  thy  favour."

6.  "  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within  ;  her
Nothing  is  of  wrought  gold.  She  shall  be  brought
tnto  the  King  in  raiment  of  needle  work  :  the  virgins
\er  comftanions  that  follow  her  shall  be  brought  unto-
hee  :  with  gladness  and  rejoicing  shall  they  be  brought  :
hey  shall  enter  into  the  King's  palace.  Instead  of  thy
athers  shall  be  thy  children,  whom  thou  may  est  make
trinces  in  all  the  earth.  I  will  make  thy  name  to  be
emembered  in  ali  generations  :  therefore  shall  the
\eople  praise  thee  forever  and  ever''  ,

7.  As  it  is  sufficiently  evident  that  the  prophecy
oncevning  the  Son,  alluded  to  a  particular  person,
nd  not  to  any  collective  body  called  the  Church  ;  so
t  is  as  evident,  that  the  Daughter  must  have  as  par-
icular  an  allusion,  and  so  must  her  children,  and  the
irgins  her  companions  that  follow  her

8  And  as  the  one  was  to  be  a  child  born,  a  Son  i^fei*
iven,  whose  name  should  be  called,  The  everlasting
father  ;  so  the  other  was  to  be  as  expressly  fulfilled
a  one  who  should  be  called  The  everlasting  Mother  :
or  she  that  hath  children  and  companions  that  follow
er,  must  be  both  a  mother  and  a  leader.

9.  Therefore  the  truth  is,  that  the  prophecy  hap
rad  its  complete  fulfilment,  in  such  a  manner  as  en-
irely  to  exclude  every  other  comment  or  application  j
eing  first  of  all  fulfilled  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  Father^
nd  secondly  in  Ann  Lee,  the  Mother  of  our  redemp-
on,  and  the  followers  of  her  example,  who  were
egotten  and  brought  forth  by  the  word  of  life  as  her


458  TYPES  ANB  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VII.

Cviil° spi^ual  children,  and  constitute  the  Church  of  Christ
<  in  this  day  of  his  second  appearing.

10.  The  promise  of  God  through  the  prophet  Jer-
emiah, in  regard  to  salvation  by  Christ,  was  also  ex-
pressly made  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  order  of  the  male'
and  the  female  :  first  distinctly  to  one  male  ;  and  se-«
condly,  to  the  male  and  female  in  their  correspondent X
relation.

1 1.  Of  the  first  he  saith,  "  Behold  the  days  come,
saith  the  Lord,  that  /  will  raise  unto  David  a  right*
eous  Branch,  and  a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and
shall  execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth.  In
his  days  Judah  shall  be saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell

>m safely  :  and  this  is  the  name  whereby  He  shall  be  called*

5jg.  1HE  LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

12.  And  of  the  second  he  saith,  "  Behold,  the  days*
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  /  will  perform that  goocli

xxxm!'i4,  thing  which  I  have  firomised  unto  the  house  of  Israel,
15,16.  and  to  the  house  of  Judah.  In  those  days,  and  at  thatt
time,  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of  righteousness  to  grow
ufi  u?ito  David  ;  and  he  shall  execute  judgment  and
righteousness  in  the  land.  In  those  days  shall  Judah
be  saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  dwell  safely  :  and  thiss
is  the  name  wherewith  She  shall  be  called.  The  Lord
our  Righteousness."

13.  Doubtless  it  appeared  very  new  and  strange
to  the  Jews,  to  apply  the  first  of  these  prophecies  ta
the  son  of  a  carpenter  ; and  no less  strange  it  may
appear  to  the  great  and  wise  of  the  present  day,  to>
apply  the second  to  the  daughter  of a  blacksmith.
But  as  certain  as  the  carpenter's  son  was  the  He,  who^
set  the  example  of  righteousness  for  all  men  ;  so  cer
tain  the  blacksmith's  daughter  was  the  She,  who  hathi
set  the  example  of  righteousness  for  all  women  ;  andi
in  her  proper  order  is, The  Lord  our  Righteousness^
or  God  manifested  in  the  flesh,  according  to  the  prom*
ise  of  the  latter  day.*

•  Whaterer  application  may  be  made  to  these  passage*  of  Jeremiah,  by  natu-
ral men,  whose  learned  sagacity  is  confined  to  the  letter  of  scripture,  and  who
•onsequently  confine  the  pronouns  he  and  she  to  the  names  Israel  and  Jerusth
lent  us  the  antecedents,  certain  it  is,  that  no  :ust  application  can  be  made  con-
trary to  that  which ^ is  here  given  :  for.  as  the  people  os  Israel  and  the  city  of
Jerusalem  were  typical  of  God's  Church  and  people,  who  are  the  offspring  of
the  mate  and  female  in  the  work  o;  regeneration;  so,  in  their  salvation,  they
ean  ascribe  the  glory  to  the  parents  of  their  redemption,  knowing  that,  thrcvek
them,  the  way  of  righteousness  is  made  manifest ;  and  therefore  it  is  with  tht
greatest  propriety  that  hoth  He  and  She,  are  called  The  Lord  <w*r  Itfghiceusnclb


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  459


eiiAp.

VIII.


14.  And  therefore,  as  the  righteousness  of  the  lat-
>r  day  was  to  be  infinite  ;  comprehending  both  he
id  she,  male  and  female,  it  could  not  enter  but  by
>mething  new  and  strange  :  as  it  is  written  of  the
ew  creation  by  the  same  prophet,  "  The  Lord  hath
reated  a  new  thing  in  the  earth,  A  woman  shall  com-  ^Z'^^'

88  a  man.9\

15.  After  the  kingdom  of  Israel  had  risen  to  its
eight  of  temporal  glory,  and  the  spiritual  temple,
p  Church  of  Christ's  first  and  second  appearing,  had
sen  typified  by  the  temple  at  large,  the  people  fell
ito  idolatry,  which  brought  on  the  Babylonian  cap-
vity.

16.  By  this  was  typified  the  spiritual  captivity,  or
lling  away  from  that  power  and  order  in  which  the
rimiiive  Church  stood,  as  had  in  part  been  signified

the  breaking  of  the  £rsl  tY?6  tables  of  the  covenant
ade  with  typical  Israel ;  and  this  spiritual  captivity,
d  treading  under  foot  the  holy  city,  was  to  continue

til  the  time  for  the  building  of  the  second  gospel
hurch,  which  was  typified  by  the  building  of  the
cond  temple  at  Jerusalem.

17.  Then  at  the  return  from  the  captivity,  the  se-
jbnd  temple  was  built ;  not  in  every  respect  in  full

nitation  of  the  first  temple  ;  for  the  substance  of
|  mt  was  shortly  to  be  fulfilled  by  the  coming  of  Christ,
| )  set  up  a  spiritual  temple  ;  but  in  outward  imita-
on  of  the  inward  temple,  or  most  holy  place,  which
ointed  to  the  Church  of  Christ  in  his  second  ap-
earing.

18.. And  therefore,  the  second  temple  was  built
lore  complete  in  its  outward  form,  and  more  exten-
ve  in  its  size,  being  in  length  sixty  cubits,  in  breadth
ixty  cubits,  and  in  height  sixty  cubits,  in  form  four
£uare.*  This  still  pointed  to  God's  spiritual  buiid-
ig>  the  holy  city  of  the  latter  day,  as  the  most  holy
lace  in  the  tabernacle,  and  first  temple  had  done  be-

*  It  is  proper  here  to  remark,  that  all  those  extraordinary  patterns,  which  in
ie  inner  court  o?  the  first  temple,  and  most  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle,  had
minted  out  the  order  ami  glory  of  God's  spiritual  building,  were  not  in  this  se-
nd temple.  The  ark  with  the  two  tables  of  the  covenant  were  lost  by  the
Iptivity  ;  the  two  cherubims  and  cloud  of  glory,  which  overshadowed  themer-
r-teat ;  the  Urim  and  Thuruim  (i.  e.  light  and  perfection)  were  also  lost,  and
ke  fire  .rom  heaven  upon  the  altar,  was  i;o  more.  So  in  the  captivity  of  the
lints,  in  spiritual  Babylon,  which  continued  during  the  reign  oi'  Antichrist, the
ue  order  oi'  the  Church,  and  all  that  pertained  t*  it,  were  lost  «r  troduea  ua,
ii'  fort.


460  TYPES  AND PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VI]

CvnL* f°re  **• *ts  length,  and  breadth,  and  height  wer<
equal  ;  signifying  universal  justice  and  righteousness

19.  That  the  building  of  the  second  temple  alludetl,
to  the  building  of  God's  spiritual  house  in  the  latte,  |
day,  may  be understood  from  the  prophet  Haggai

Hag.  11. «  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, Yet  once,  it  is  a  littl
whiles  and  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  am  ^
the  sea,  and  the  dry  land. And  I  will  shake  all  nations
and  the  desire of  all  nations  shall  come,  and  I  wit ,  f(j
Jill  this  house  with  my  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.'

20.  Then  as  this  second  temple,  prefigured  th
spiritual  house  of  God  in  the  latter  day,  and  thost
extraordinary  patterns,  which  pertained  to  the  fin
temple,  were  no w  lost  by  the  captivity,  therefore  theA
were  again  supplied  by  vision  and  prophecy,  and  othes  D
things  of  the  same  nature  added,  at  the  building  ot
this  second  temole.

21.  For  this  purpose  was  the  remarkable  vision  0(  in
the  prophet  Zechariah,  which  is  particularly  worth
of  notice. Thus  in  reply  to  the  angel  he  said,  "  '
have  looked,  and  behold  a  candlestick  all  of  gold,  witltfc
a  bowl  upon  the  top,  of  it,  and  his  seven  lamps  thereot  %

s^^Vq*  anc^  seven  pipes  l0  the  seven  lamps — and  two  olive  tret
'  by  it,  one  upon  the  right  side  of  the  bowl>  and  thh  tr
other  upon  the  left  side  thereof."

22.  And  the  angel  said,  "  This  is  the  word  of  th:  |:
*zerub- Lord  unto  Zerubbabel,*  saying,  Not  by  might  nor  b
^tran-e*  fiower,  [not  by  the  carnal  weapons  of  an  army]  bu  t
|erbai ty  mV  spirit-)  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.— The  hands  c
ordisp«r-  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this house  m
cw2r2-f h*s  hands  shall  also  finish  it :  and  thou  shalt  know  tha

the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you."

23.  The  candlestick  of  gold,  signified  the  trut
and  revelation  of  God  upon  which  his  Church  or  spir
itual  house  is  built,  and  supplied  the  place  of  the  ar]
of  the  covenant,  which  contained  the  law  of  Goc
under  the  mercy-seat.  And  the  bowl  upon  the  to;
of  the  candlestick,  between  the  two  olive  trees,  pre
figured  the  same  as  did  the  mercy-seat  between  th
two  cherubim*.

24.  And  the  seven  lamps  are  the  seven  spirits  c
i-pr  '  God,  which  are  before  his  throne,  and  answer  to  th
*?ll1'4'  seven  golden  candlesticks  of  perpetual  light  before  th


I


KfK«.XXV.


\  VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION PILLARS.  461

Lrk,  by  which  the  ministers  performed  the  service cha£.

f  God  in  relation  to the people. And  the seven  •

ipcs  to  the  seven  lamps,  signified  the  various  gifts,
irough  which  the  ministrations  of  the  spirit  should
e  conveyed  to  the  world.

25.  The  two  olive  trees  answer  to  the  two  cherubim,^
id  are  the  two  anointed  ones,  who  stand  by  the  Lord
f  the  whole  earth  ;  and  by  the  spirit  of  the  two  anoint-
i  ones,  the  two  witnesses  prophesied.  These  are
le  two  foundation  pillars  of  the  Church.

26.  And  besides  these  two  olive  trees,  are  "  two  2  .  .
live  branches,  which,  through  two  golden  pipes,  empty  is.

le  golden  oil  out  of  themselves."  Which  signified
le  two  first  chosen  vessels,  whose  correspondent
nion  and  relation  is  with  the  two  anointed  ones,  and
rhom  God  raised  up  as  instruments  to  gather  into
ne,  his  people,  and  establish  the  order  of  the  Church,
l  this  day  of  Christ's  second  appearing.

27.  Now  that  the  purpose  and  promise  of  God,  in
elation  to  the  two  anointed  ones,  or  foundation  pil-
irs  of  his  spiritual  building,  were  to  be  fulfilled  in
le  order  of  male  and  female,  may  be  clearly  under-
tood  from  the  following  prophecies  unto  Joshua,  the
rpe  of  Jesus  the  'Saviour.

28.  "  And  the  angel of  the  Lord  protested  unto
oshua,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  If  zech.iii.
iou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  if  thou  wilt  keep  my  °'7*
targe,  then  thou  shalt  also  judge  my  house,  and  shalt

so  keep  my  courts,  and  I  will  give  thee  places  to
alk  in  among  these  that  stand  by."

29.  The  charge  here  given  to  Joshua,  typically  re-
Lted  to  Christ  Jesus,  and  which  he  punctually  fulfil-
>d  during  his  ministry,  in  his  first  appearing,  accor-
Lng  to  his  own  words  :  I  have  kept  my  Father's  com-
landments. — I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him.  f^"/"*'
have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do.  **«.4»  "
y  which  he  laid  and  established  the  foundation  of

urn's  redemption  ;  and  God  appointed  him  to  be  the
ead,  and  first  heir  of  all  things  to  his  Church,  and  the
ldge  and  ruler  in  his  spiritual  house.

30.  But  the  promise  of  God  in  Christ  >  Jesus,  re-
jected also  another,  in  a  joint  relation  with  the  first.
Hear  now,  O  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou  and  thy  £*£*


462  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VI]

^vinP" feN°ws  tnat  srt  before  thee  :  for  they  are  men  won
* dered  at  :  for  behold,  I  will  bring'  forth  my  servant  th
Micahiv.  Branch. In  that  day  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  sha;  '
4-  ye  call  every  man  his  neighbour  under  the  vine,  an

under  the  fig  tree."

31.  This  prophecy  concerning  the  Branch,  a]
ludes  particularly  to  Christ's  coming  in  the  latter  day
to  set  up  his  kingdom,  and  complete  the  order  in  th
foundation  of  his  spiritual  building,  when  the  proml11
ise  of  God  should  be  fulfilled  in  both  the  anointet )K
ones.  I m

32.  Again,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  ZecrJ^
zeeh.vi.  ariah,  saying,  "  Take  silver  and  gold,  and  mak,lr
1J>  12' crowns,  and%set  them  upon  the  head  of  Joshua. — Amr

speak  unto  him,  saying,  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  < M
hosts, — Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch  \  ™
and  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  and  he  sha:  4
build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  So  that  Zerubb>)^
bel  and  the  Branch  are  one  and  the  same.  Bi

33.  "  Even  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord  w
and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and  ruji  ^
upon  his  throne  ;  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  hHW

zech.vi.  throne  :  and the council  of  fieace  shall  be  beTwee  \*

"THEM  BOTH."

34.  Here  then  are  two  particular  and  principal  pei  *
sons  spoken  of.  The  first  is  Joshua,  that  is,  Jesus  ll
and  to  him,  and  in  him,  was  the  promise  of  the  s«s|  ^
cond,  who  was  called  the  Branch,  who  was  to  gro\\  e«
lift  out  of  his  f dace  and  build  the  temple  of  the  Lore  to

35.  Therefore,  in  this  Branch  there  are  two,  i  y
the  branch  and  the  root  are  two.  I  am  the  root  an  ]r
the  offspring  of  David,  said  the  Son  of  God.  In  hir  «
is  the  root ,  and  in  him  is  the  branch  ;  one  in  naturt
union  and  essence,  and  in  one  joint  correspondent  ri
lation  ;  but  two  in  their  lot  and  order.  The  frstym
hath  been  observed,  is  called,  He,  The  Lord  ou1
Righteousness  ;  and  the  sccondy  She,  The  Lor
our  Righteousness.

36.  These  are  the  two  olive  trees,  from  which  th*
Church  of  God  is  nourished  and  supplied  with  tlij
oil  of  joy,  and  from  which  the  meek  arc  beauiiiie
with salvation. These are The 1  wo anoints
Ones,  who  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth


»


VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  465

id  the  counsel  of  fieace  is  Between  them both. chaf«
.nd  by  and  through  these,  the  male  and  the  female


tid  each  their  correspondent  relation  to  the great
st  cause,  from  whom  all  order  and  perfection  flows,
id  their  joint  union  and  relation  to  each  other  in  the
ork  of  eternal  redemption.  m

37.  And  through  these Two Anointed  Ones,  be-
veen  whom  the  counsel  of  God  is  placed,  God  hath
omised  saying,  Jncl  they  that  are  far  off  shall  come  Zech-Vi,
id  build  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord. — And  their  seed  isai.ixi.
all  be  known  among  the  Gentiles,  and  their  offspring  9*
nong  the  people  :  all  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge

em,  that  they  are  the  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed.

38.  To  the  same  spiritual  union  and  relation,  ai-
des the  prophecy  of  Micah  :  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem
phratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands

Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  He come  forth  unto

,  that  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel ;  whose  goings  forth  1,3,  *,*

ive  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  This  part
the  prophecy  particularly  alludes  to  Christ's  first

►pearing.

39.  "  Therefore  will  he  give  them  up,  [i.  e.  they

ail  fall  away]  until  the  time  that  She  which  travail-  ?eena».

ix 2*> xi

'1  hath  brought  forth  :  then  the  remnant  of  his  breth-  31'.  ii.  Y,
n  shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  This  iuj1**
rt  of  the  prophecy  particularly  alludes  to  Christ's
cond  appearing.  "  And  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in
e  strength  of  the  Lord  his  God  ;  and  They  [that
He  and  She,  the  Two  anointed  Ones]  shall  abide  ;
t  now  shall  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.9*

40.  The  same  prophet  Micah,  also  speaks  of  the
ost  important  parts  of  the  prophecy  as  being  fulfil-
1  in  the  line  of  the  female,  which  had  not  their  ac-
mplishment  in  Christ's  first  appearing  ;  but  are
adually  and  progressively  accomplishing  in  this  day

his  second  appearing.

41.  "  And  thou, O  tower  of  the  flock,  the  strong

>ld  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  suV.^
en  the  first  dominion  ;  the  kingdom  shall  come  to
r  daughter  of  Jerusalem. — Be  in  pain,  arid  labour
\  bring  forth,  O  daughter  of  Zion,  like  a  woman  in
Uvail :  for  now  shait  thou  go  forth  out  of  the  city,
vdthou  shalt  dwell  in  the  field,  and  thou  shalt  go

T  t


;.


hi


464 TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VI

chap, even  to  Babylon  ;  [literally  fulfilled  in  the  Babylonia
m  captivity,  and spiritually in the  dominion  of  Ant
christ ;]  there  the  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  from  tl:
hand  oi  thine  enemies."
see  also 42.  "  Now  also  many  nations  are  gathered  again
to231,20  thee,  that  sjty,  Let  her  be  defiled,  and  let  our  eye  loc  l!1
ed^SiT  uPon  Zion, But  they  know  not  the  thoughts  of  tl  IC
Zech.Mi.  L ord,  neither understand  they his counsel: for II
g^Matt.  shall  gather  them  as  the  sheaves  into  the  floor. Aril
ao^'nd'  alK^  tnresn' ® daughter  of  Zion  ;  for  I will mal;fJ
Rer.i.r.  thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will  make  thy  hoofs  brass  ;  ar
thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  many  people  :  and  I  wi
consecrate  their  gain  unto  the  Lord,  and  their  sui
stance  unto  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."
/ ..iii 43.  Also  the  prophet  Zephaniah  "  For  then  will
'\io. turn  to  the  fieople  a  fiure  language,  that  they  may  \
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve him  wij
one  consent. From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopin
my  suppliants,  even  the  daughter  of  my  dispersed  J
shall  bring  mine  offering."

44.  It  is  further  evident,  not  only  from  the  wrP
tings  of  the  apostles,  but  from  the  parables  and  tc  ;
timony  of  Christ  Jesus  himself,  that  his  second  aj ,!
pearing  was  to  be  in  the  order  of  the  female. T.

Mat.xxii.  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  certain  King,  ivhl
2-  made  a  marriage  for  his  Son.

45.  Here  the  God  of  heaven  is  likened  to  an  eart '  [
ly  king,  and  his  Son,  to  the  son  of  a  mortal. B  k
wherein  does  this  likeness  consist  ? The  similitiu  lc
is  so  natural  and  pointed,  that  it  cannot  be  mistake
nor  misapplied  without  the  greatest  perversion.

46.  It  was  Christ's  usual  manner  to  speak  in  par
bles,  and  to  condescend  to  the  state  of  mankind,  ai
convey  the  nature  of  spiritual  things  by  natural  i
niilitucles  ;  and  therefore,  to  speak  after  the  mann
of  men,  had  the  Son  of  God  remained  in  his  fii
capacity,  without  completing  the  order  of  his  ma
hood,  there  could  have  been  no  similitude  in  the  cas©
which  he  was  speaking.

47.  Christ  Jesus  entered  the  world  in  the  mornii
of  a  great  day,  which  was  a  day  of  preparation  i
his  marriage,  and  the  setting  up  of  his  everlastij
kingdom  :  and  thai* day  was  to  pass  away  before  tl


t


1


.  VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  465

lenm  scene  could  commence  : his  oxen  and  fat-  ct[AP-

\  in.
igs  were  to  be  killed,  and  all  things  made  ready. _

48.  Souls  were  not  invited  to  come  immediately
to  that  kingdom  ;  but  they  were  taught  to  pray  for
to  come  ;  and  were  invited  to  be  ready,  against  the
me  when  he  should  appear  in  his  glory.  And  they
ere  warned  to  watch  and  pray,  and  not  to  be  over-

>me  with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  Lukexxi.
is  life,  lest  that  day  should  come  upon  them  una-  34:^
ares,  like  a  thief For  as  a  Snare,  said  Jesus,  shall
come  on  all  them  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  uhAe
rilu

49.  To  the  same  import  is  also  the  parable  of  the

ise  and  foolish  virgins}  who,  while  the  bridegroom  Matx,.r
rried,  all  slumbered  and  slept. There  was  to  be  iuh.  '
going  forth  to  a  spiritual  marriage,  after  which  the
>or  was  to  be  shut.

50.  The  ww<r  and  foolish  virgins  are  not  imagina-
beings  ; they  are  real  persons,  wise  and foolish

ofessors  of  the  Christian  name,  who  equally  cx-
ct  Christ  to  make  his  second  appearing.

51.  The  wise  virgins  are  such  as  know  that.  Christ
a  Spirit,  who  never  was,  nor  ever  could  be  seen

ith  the  carnal  eye  ;  and  therefore  tiiey  have  oil  in
eir  vessels  with  their  lamps  :  their  understandings
ing  enlightened,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  discern
e  bridegroom  at  his  coming.  The  foolish  virgins
e  those,  who,  being  asleep  in  their  dead  profes-
>ns,  trust  to  their  own  human  wisdom,  in  a  false
pe  of  seeing  the  bridegroom  according  to  their
vn  carnal  expectations.

52..  The  bridegroom  hath  been  long  ascertained,  to
t,  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  who  is  the  bride  ?  She  is
ither  the  wise  nor  the  foolish  virgins,  but  a  pecu-
r  object  distinct  from  both  ;  an  object  which  lay
d,  until  the  fulness  of  time,  when  the  revelation  of
3d  made  her  manifest,  at  the  bridegroom's  coming.
3.  It  may  be  said,  that  the  Church  is  the  bride  ;
e  Church  is  the  daughter  of  Zion  ;  the  Church  is
e  daughter  of  Jerusalem  ;  the  Church  is  the  wo-
an  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  so  on.  It  is  granted
at  the  prophets  and  apostles  frequently  spake  of  the
lurch  in  the  feminine  gender.


i.


466  -TtPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  VII

C^P- 54.  "  Ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the
body  of  Christ,  (saith  the  apostle,) that ye  should  be


Kom.vii.  married  to  another,  even  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the
4- .  dead. —  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  I  may

2  Cor.  il.  ,■'.-.  ^, .  ^T  7

2.  present  you  as  a chaste  virgin  to  Christ. — Now  ye

iCor..\u.  are  tjie  £oc{y  0j  QjiriBtti  ancj  members  in  particular.

55.  Then  let  it  be  considered,  that  God  never  ac-
complished any  work  on  the  earth,  but  what  had  a
beginning.  And  that  Church,  which  was  collective-
ly called  the  body  r-f  Christ,  and  as  a  virgin  esfioused
to  one  husband,  had,  notwithstanding,  its  beginning
fey  a  single  person.

56.  And  therefore,  as  it  will  be  granted  that  the
bridegroom  was  a  single  person,  who  contemplated  a
.carriage  or  spiritual  relation,  which  should  be  co-
temporary  with  the  setting  up  of  his  kingdom  in  the
latter  day  ;  so  it  follows,  beyond  any  reasonable  dis
})Ute,  that  the  manifestation  of  his  glory  at  his  se
cond  appealing,  was  to  be  in  this  spiritual  relation
with  his  bride  ;  from  whom,  in  a  particular  manner,
die  Church  is  spoken  of  as  feminine.

57.  And  that  this  bride  was  to  be  a  peculiar- ob-
ject, a  single  person,  and  as  distinct  from  the  body,
the  Churc.i  collectively,  as  Jesus  himself  was  dis-
tinct from  his  body,  the  Church,  in  his  first  appear-
ing, and  no  more  so.  To  this  the  law  and  the  pro
phets  all  point,  from  beginning  to  end,  and  which  is
also  consonant  to  the  plainest  dictates  of  reason.


1


&


CHAPTER  IX.

The  Subject  continued ',

THE  same  spiritual  relation  of  Christ  in  the  lat-
ter day,  which  had  been  pointed  out  by  the  lai
and  the  prophets,  was  still  more  clearly  confirmed
by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  his  servam
John,  and  shows  what  should  be  ushered  into  the
world,  in  the  time  of  its  accomplishment.  "  The
Lord God  Omnipotent  reigneth. Let us be glad


P.  VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  467

[and  rejoice,  and  give  honour  to  him  :for  the  marriage  of  chap.
fhe  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready  "  '

2.  The  Spirit  saith  not,  The Church  hath  made  Rev  ^
lerself  ready,  as  of  a  body  collectively  ;  nor  yet,  his  #,  7.
wives  have  made  themselves  ready. But  as  the  Lamb
s  One  and  is  the  bridegroom  ; so it  is said of  One
which  is  the  bride — his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready.
A>nd  after  this,  it  is  spoken  of  the  Church,  or  holy
:ity  collectively. "  And  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  chai>.*&»
lew  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heav-  *•
jn,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband."

3.  Christ  Jesus,  in  his  first  appearing,  spake  much
>f  his  coming  in  his  own glory,  and  in  the  glory  of
lis  Father,  and  all the holy  angels. But  what  was
hat  glory, in  which lie  was  to  come  ?  The  apostle,

n  the Spirit  of  Christ,  expressly  says, The  woman  iCer.  xi.
8  the glory of  the  man. And  the prophet  Isaiah,  7*
ilso,  speaking  of  the  Branch  of  the  latter  day,  says,
In  that  dan  shall  the  Branch  of  the  Lord  be  beautt  *margini

iND  GLORY*  Bible>

4.  Then  as  the  man  is  the  head  of  the  woman,
*nd  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man,  and  as  Christ
lid  verily  make  his  first  appearing  in  the  man,  which
was  the  first  part  of  his  manhood,  it  remained,  (ac-
cording to  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  law,  and  the
)rophecies,  visions,  and  promises  of  God,  given  from
time  to  time,)  that  Christ  was  to  make  his  second  ap-
learingin  the  woman,  the  second  part  of  his  manhood  ;
ind  this  is  the  glory  in  which  he  was  to  appear,  with
;he  glory  of  his  Father,  and  all  the  holy  angels.

5.  And  without  this,  the  types  are  not  answered,
J£  prophecies  are  not  fulfilled,  and  the  order,  glory

d  perfection  of  the  new  creation,  even  in  its  exter-
appearance,  must  fall  short  of  the  old5  at least
ne  half,  which  cannot  be. And  therefore)  in  any
hing  else,  Christ  could  not  be  known,  in  his  second
I  'appearing,  as  the  promised  Saviour  of  the  world.

6.  In  him  dwelt  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  Majesty  :

as  said  the  apostle,  God  hath  in  these  last  days  spo-  Col<ii#9j
ten- unto  us  by  his  Son, — whobeinerthe  b**ightnt?s  or  Heb.i.2l
■^tuning  forth of  his  glory , and [Gr. %*f**^f tmZ
tTrorxvsat *ffT«,] the  type or  character cf  his lot)
Handing  or  correspondent  relation.

T  t  2


46S  T^PES  AND PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN P.  Vlll

C?xP*  ?.  Thus,  by  ascending  from  the  less  to  the  greater,
__  it  may  appear  evident,  that  as  the  woman  was  taken
out  of  the  man,  and  is  the  glory  of  the  man,  and  as,
the  fulness  of  the  Divine  Majesty  dwelt  in  Jesus,  who
filled  the  character  of  his  Father's  standing  or  cor-]
respondent  relation,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost  possessec1]
the  brightness  of  his  Father's  glory  ;  so  Wisdcm  was)
the  glory  and  perfection  in  the  order  and  correspon-
dent relation  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  and  who  was
as  one  brought  up  with  him  from  everlasting.

8.  And  as  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  waul
in  Christ  Jesus  in  his  first  appearing,  as  woman  wa
in  man  when  God  first  created  him  male  and  female
in  his  own  image,  and  after  his  own  likeness  ;  so,  ii
order  to  Christ's  coming  in  his  own  glory  and  the  glo
ry  of  his  Father,  it  was  necessary  that  the  brightnes:
oihis  glory  should  have  its  abode  in  the  first-born  wo  ■
man,  in  the  new  creation,  as  the  brightness  of  th
Father's  glory  had  in  the  first-born  man.  But  thi
could  not  be  until  the  fulness  of  times.

9.  The  rib,  as  it  is  called,  or  binder,  was  first  ta
ken  out  of  man,  of  which  the  Lord  God  formed  wo
man,  and  brought  her  to  the  man,  and  set  her  in  he
corresponding  relation  to  him,  according  to  the  or
der  of  the  first  covenant

10.  So  that  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  whic
was  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  and  wrhich  was  to  coe
stitute  his  future  glory,  was  given  to  his  follower
after  his  departure,  at  the  day  of  pentecost,  as  th
Spirit  of  Promise,  wiiich  was  to  abide  with  them  fo
ever  ;  and  by  which  the  Church  as  his  body,  had  po\i
er  on  earth  to  remit  and  retain  sins  ;  and  whateve
they  bound  on  earth  was  to  be  bound  in  heaven.

11.  It  is  evident  from  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  th
.feimriv.  he  was  in the  Father,  and  the  F'ather  in  him — th

the  Father  spake  by  and  through  him,  and  did  th
works  which  he  wrought ;  so  that  through  him  w?
the  manifestation  of  the  Father.

12.  And  Jesus  promised  saying,  I  will  pray  the  Ft
iher,  and  he  will  send  you  another  Comforter-— ev
the  Spirit  of  truth  :  which  implied  that  one  Comfo
ter  had  already  come  ;  and  that  this  other  Comforte
the  Spirit  of  truth,  even  the  Holy  Ghost,  should  fii


10—26.


fe


P.  VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION PILLARS,


469


ish  the  work  of  Christ,  and  take  up  her  abode  and  be c^f-
manifested  in  and  through  the  woman,  as  the  Father  ,

had  been  manifested  in  and  through  the  man.

13.  Therefore,  as  Christ  Jesus  in  the  first  part  of
his  manhood,  was  the  type,  character,  or  represent-
ative, and  filled  the  lot  or  correspondent  relation  of
the  Father,  in  regard  to  man's  redemption  ;  so  that
the  order  of  heaven  might  be  displayed  in  the  second
part  of  his  manhood,  the  woman  must  be  the  repre-
sentative, and  fill  the  lot  or  correspondent  relation  of
Wisdom,  which  is  the  last  revelation  of  the  Holy
Ghost. — And  without  this  manifestation,  the  true  or-
der and  perfection  of  the  Deity  could  never  be  known.

14.  And  therefore  the followers  of  Christ,  as  his
true  body,  received the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was  to
them  a  S/iirit  of  Promise,  which led them  into all  Rom.viii
truth,  by  which  they  were  sealed  unto  the  day  of  re-  f3^*1^
demption,  and  in  which  they  groaned  in  travail,  wait-

ing  for  the  adoption,  to wit, the redemption of  the
whole  body,  female  as  well  as  male.

15.  And  as  this  redemption  could  be  effected  only
in  the  display  of  Wisdom by  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the

I  fulness  of  times,  yet  future  ;  therefore  she  appeared
in  a  vision  to  St.  joha,  under  the  similitude  of  a  wo-  Rev.fti.
man  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,
and  ufion  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars.

16.  Which  signified  that  She  possessed  the  glory
and  righteousness  which  was  in  the  Son  of  God —
that  her  abode  was  above  the  corruptions  of  an  earth-
ly nature  ;  and  that  she  possessed  the  light  and  pow-
er given  unto  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb.

17.  And  although  she  brought  forth  the  man-chi\d>
the  first-born  of  every  creature,  who  was  to  rule  th&
nations  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  he  was  caught  up  to
God,  and  sat  down  with  him  in  his  throne,  out  of  the
reach  of  the  dragon,  above  all  principality  and  pow-
er ;  yet  certain  it  is,  that  nothing  more  was,  nor  could
be  brought  to  the  same  degree  of  perfection,  with
the  first-born  Son,  in  that  dispensation.

18.  After  the  ascension  of  the  Son,  the  Holy
Ghost  was  in  the  Church  ;  and  after  the  decline  of
the  Church,  in  the  night  of  apostacy,  and  wilderness
state  of  the  truth,  the  Holy  Spirit  moved  upon  th$


470  TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  12*

C^p-  confused  chaos,  called  christian,  as  upon  the  face  of
"  the  waters,  or  great  deep  of  human  nature  ;  but  in-
stead of  multiplying  andincreasing  the  true  spiritual
seed,  the  woman  is  represented  as  fleeing  into  the
wilderness,  which  was  in  the  persecuted  witnesses,
who  fed  her  there  for  the  space  of  twelve  hundred
and  sixty  days,  or  years,  the  time  of  the  beast's  do*
minion.

19.  At  the  close  of  which  time,  there  was  war  in
heaven:  Michael  [i.  e.  Perfect,  who  is  like  God.]
and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragoia  and  his  an-
gels -T  that  is,  the  perfect  and  united  spirit  of  the  Two
Witnesses,  having  received  power,  began  to  contend
for  that  perfect  and  full  redemption  which  God  had
promised  in  the  latter  day.  And  they  overcame  th^
nature  of  the  serpent,  so  that  he  was  cast  out  of  the
temple  ;  that  is,  out  of  every  part  of  human  nature!
which  is  the  habitation  of  God,  the  place  of  his
throne,  or  heaven  upon  earth.

20.  And  therefore,  in  the  issue  of  this  war,  when
the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  and  the  Holy  Ghost
had  taken  up  her  abode  in  the  woman,  purified  and
redeemed  her,  and  united  her  to  the  first  spiritual
man  in  the  work  of  final  redemption,  and  the  dragon

Hev.xii.  Was  cast  out,  then  it  was  said, JVow  is  come  salvation

30.  .

and  strength,  and  the  kingdom,  or  the  dwelling  place'
of  our  God,  and  the  flower  of  his  Christ :  which  nev-
er could  properly  and  truly  be  said  before.
lCer.vii. 21.  For  as  the  man  hath  not  power  over  his  own
4-  body,  but  the  woman  ;  and  the woman is  properly*

the  power  of  the  man, as  the  man  is  the  power  of
the  woman  ;  so  Christ  in  man  alone,  could  have  no
power  over  his  body,  the €hurch,  for  full  redemp
tion,  but  by  the  woman.

22.  And  therefore  the  woman,  in  the  work  of  re-1
demption,  is  strictly  the  power  of  Christ  Jesus  in  the
fulness  and  perfection  of  his  order ;  by  whom  the  ac-
cuser of  the  brethren  was  cast  down,  and  both  male
and  female  overcame  him,  and  all  his  false  and  foul
accusations,  by  jointly  living  the  life  of  the  lamb,  and
by  the  Word  of  their  testimony.

23.  Then  as  the  same  Spirit  and  Word  of  life,  that
brought forth  the first  man in  the  new creation,


?.  VII.  THE  TWO  FOUNDATION  PILLARS.  471

>rought  forth  also  the  first  woman  in  the  same  di-  c"£p*
fine  nature  ;  so  the  enmity  of  the  dragon  was  equally  '
itirred  up  against  the  woman,  as  it  had  been  against
he  man.  And  to  the  woman  were  given  two  wings
>f  a  great  eagle,  that  she  might  fly  into  the  wilder-
less,  into  her  place  : — Which  applies  particularly  to
he  woman  we  have  described  as  the  Mother  of  the
lew  creation,  and  in  her  it  was  fulfilled  in  the  most
>ointed  manner.

24.  When  she  was  brought  forth  into  the  new
:reation,  for  salvation  and  strength,  the  same  perse*
Wting  spirit  by  which  Jesus  was  put  to  death,  raged
igainst  her.  In  him  was  spiritually  fulfilled  that
cripture,  He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judg-  j^^
nent :  and  by  the  protection  of  God,  she  was  deliv-  *•
jred  from  the  hands  of  her  enemies  ;  so  that  in  her,
Christ  fulfilled  that  scripture*  both  literally  and  spirk-
lally.

25.  From  the  prison  of  the  wicked,  and  from  the »
udgment  of  Antichrist  she  was  taken  ;  and  on  the
vings  of  Liberty  and  Independence,  she  flew  into  the
wilderness  of  America,  where  God  intended  to  make

short  work  in  righteousness  ;  and  there,  in  her  afi-
xointed  place,  (in  a  remote  part  of  Niskeuna,)  she
vas  nourished  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time^  or
hree  years  and  a  half,*  until  the  opening  of  the  tes««
imony  in  America,  in  the  year  1780  ;  when  she  was
:alled  forth  out  of  her  secret  retirement  from  the
vorld,  and  openly  arrayed  in  her  true  spiritual  appa-
rel, fne  linen  clean  and  white.  ;  which  is  the  right-
eousness or  [Ptxe&t  a  par  4]  the  righteous  acts  of  the
laints.

26.  And  then  was  heard,  in truth  and  reality,  a  Rev  ^
*reat  voice  of  much  people  in  heaven,  saying,  Allelu-  i— s
a;  salvation,  and  glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  un-

o  the  Lord  our  God- r-For  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb

s  come.

27.  Marriage  is for the purpose of  multiplying

seed,  therefore  it  was  said, She  shall  be  brought  unto  j^/xi*.
'he  king,  whose  arrows  are sharp  in the heart  of  5&fc14*.
lis  enemies — And  after  being  brought,  with  the  vir-

*  It  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  the  time  here  specked,  and  allude*!  to  j*i
teoxii.  14.  is  entirely  different,  and  distinct  ivom  the  Juried  dliuded  to  «i  &c
ixth  verse  of  the  same  chapter.


,!


IV


472 TYPES  AND  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN,  ScC. P.  Villi

CIixP' &*ns  ^er  comPani°ns5  m  robes  of  needle  work,  the
' angry  dragon  soon  commenced  a war  of  malicious
words  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  [for  she  is  nowi
Rev.  xS.  a  Mother  and  hath  children,]  who  keep  the  command-
ments of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ*

28.  They  that  are  joined  to  the  Lord  are  One  Spir
it  ;  for  Two,  saith  he,  shall  be  one.  And  the  Tvoo  whoi
become  One  Spirit  in  the  Lord,  are  man  and  woman ,j
redeemed  and  purified  from  the  power  and  influence!
of  the  fall,  and  these  Two  agree  in  One,  and  that  ini
which  they  agree,  is  the  One  Word  of  their  testimony

29.  Hence  there  are  three  that  bear  witness  on  ecrth,
namely,  the  first  Father  and  Mother  of  redemption,!
and  the  one  word  of  their  testimony,  which  liveth
and  abideth  forever  ;  and  these  three  are  one,  and
bear  a  perfect  correspondence  to  the  three  that  bear
record  in  heaven,  namely,  the  Father,  and  Wisdom^
and  the  Holy  Spirit  of  influence,  which  is  the  Word
of  life  proceeding  from  the  two,  and  by  which  al
things  were  created  that  are  created.

30.  Nothing  in  nature  can  be  begotten  without  j
begetter,  and  nothing  can  be  conceived  without  aeon
ceiver,  and  nothing  can  be  either  begotten  or  conceiV'
ed,  without  a  corresponding  influence  between  two  :

Uohnv.  and  hence  there  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  earth,
the  spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood :  and  these  three
agree  in  one.  And  by  these  three,  all  things  are  be
gotten,  conceived  and  brought  forth  into  existence
in  regard  to  time.

31.  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness
©f  God  is  greater.  If  there  be  a  correspondent  rela-
tion of  one  thing  with  another,  in  regard  to  the  things
of  time,  much  more  so  in  regard  to  the  things  ol
eternity  :  and  if  the  primitive  order  and  perfection  oi
the  natural  and  visible  creation  of  man  was  glorious,
the  order  and  relation  of  the  spiritual  and  invisible  i
much  more  perfect  and  glorious.

32.  Then  as  the  three  that  bear  record  on  earth
bear  a  correspondence  to  the  three  that  dear  record  i
heaven  ;  so  each  derive  their  attributes  from  that
tual  correspondence. The first  spiritual Father  o
man's  redemption,  is  the  image  and  likeness  of  Him
that  was  from  everlasting.— The  first  spiritual  Mother


* VII.  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING,  &C.  473

s  the  image  and  likeness  of  Her  that  was  with  Him  ohat.
rom  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  ,
tfarth  was.

33.  And  the  one  joint  testimony  of  Father  and  Mo*
her ,  by  which  their  spiritual  children  are  begotten,
onceived  and  brought  forth  in  the  new  creation,  and
y  which  all  things  are  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesu6,
s  the  revealed  glory  and  correspondent  brightness  of
hat  Word which  proceeded  and  came  forth  from

od,  which was in the  beginning  with God,  and
vhich  was  God,  and  by  which  all  things  were  made
lat  were  made,  and  without  which  was  not  any  thing  John  i.  3,
nade  that  was  made.

34.  Therefore,  according  to  the  unchangeable  pur-
)ose  of  God,  which  he  purposed  in  himself  before  the
oundation  of  the  world,  he  hath  brought  forth  the
bundation  pillars  of  his  declarative  giory,  who  have
inished  and  completed  the  foundation  of  God's  spir-
tual  building,  by  the  most  infallible  evidences,  and
vho  are  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  unfathomable
eep  of  the  divine  nature.

35.  And  therefore,  until  the  whole  order  of  heav-
;n  be  supplanted  and  overthrown,  the  foundation  of
he  church  can  never  be  moved,  nor  the  pillars  there-
>f  shaken  ;  but  according  to  that  promise,  Yet  once
nore,  the  work  and  building  of  God  will  go  on  to  the
inal  removing  of  those  things  that  are  shaken,  as  of
hings  that  are  made,  that  those  things  which  cannot  **eb.xi.
)e  shaken  may  remain.


CHAPTER  X.


Evidences  accompanying  the second  Ajifiearing of

Christ,

THE  work  of  God,  in  relation  to  the  redemption
of  man,  being  beyond  human  comprehension,
-  been  always  mistaken  by  the  most  wise  and  pen-
etrating, in  their  natural  state  ;  and  therefore,  it  is
t\ot  surprising,  that  such  should  wholly  mistake  the


I


:;


.1


■:.


474  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING  P.  VII

chap,  nature  of  that  evidence,  by  which  it  is  confirmed  tc
l  those  who  are  actuary  in  it.

2.  In  this,  however,  as  well  as  in  every  thing  else
vain  man  has  assumed  the  authority  of  prescribing  tc
God  ;  and  without  regarding  the  presumptuous  mis
takes  of  former  generations,  every  one  is  ready  tc
layout,  in  nib  own  imagination,  what  evidence  is  ne
cessary  to  accompany  a  living  testimony,  in  order  t<
give  it  divine  credit  and  authority.  But  the  trutl
never  was  acceptable  to  sinful  man,  nor  can  any  evi
dence,  even  of  his  own  causing,  bind  him  to  believe
and  obey  it.

3.  The  greatest  external  wonders  that  ever  Go<
wrought  in  confirmation  of  his  word,  were  folio  wee!
by  the  greatest  and  most  aggravated  unbelief,  anc
hardness  of  heart ;  as  is  evident  from  the  history  o
Noah's  posterity  after  the  flood,  and  the  Israelites  ir'
the  wilderness.

4.  The  greatest  objection  against  the  testimony  o
Christ,  in  his  first  appearance  was,  want  of  evidence]

?o)m  ti  What  sign  shewest  thou  that  we  may  believe  ?  They  pre
m  tended  that  they  would  believe  upon  the  evidence  o
such  mighty  works  as  their  fathers  had  seen  in  th<
wilderness  ;  but  their  hatred  of  the  truth,  and  then
fondness  to  find  objections  against  it,  proved  that  the;
had  the  same  spiiit  of  their  fathers,  who  for  fort;
years,  provoked  God  in  the  wilderness,  with  thei
objections  and  cavils.

5.  Hence  the  Spirit  of  truth,  that  was  then  griev
cd,  and  provoked,  by  a  generation  of  proud  Phari
sees,  and  deceitful  hypocrites,  predicted  by  the  moutl
of  Saint  Paul,  that  when  Christ  should  make  his  se
cond  appearance,  to  reveal  the  man  of  sin,  whom  h
would  consume  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  d<
stroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coining,  his  appe

r  ing  Would  be,  to  them  that  fierish,  after,  or  [Gr.  Ktcrk

it  9,io. according  to  the  working  cf  Satan,  with  all  flow *<  r,  a
signs,  and  lying  wonders,  arid  with  all  deceiveablene
of  unrighteousness  ;  because  they  received  not  the  I
of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved.

6.  And  for  this  cause  God  should  send  them  stroll
delusion,  to  believe  a  lie,  tli.  t  they  all  might  be  damn
cd,  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  ii


VII. THE SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHKIST.  475

nrighteousness. Nothing  but  a  principle  of  love  to  CI^P-
uth, and  obedience flowing from that principle, *
ver  saved  any  soul ;  nor  were  any  of  those  visible
tirades and wonders, which are left  on record,
rought  for  the  purpose  of  saving  the  soul.

7.  Yet,  in  condescension  to  mankind,  in  their  im-
:isoned  state  of  darkness  and  sensuality,  God  has,

every  dispensation  of  his  grace,  addressed  their
eternal  senses  with  evidences  of  his  divine  power,
t  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the  faith  of  the  weak
fliever,  in  that  which  was  saving,  and  to  stop  the
ouths  of  gainsayers.

8.  And  however  grossly  the  present  testimony,  and
ork  of  Christ,  has  been  misrepresented,  and  stig-
atized,  as  an  unfounded,  and  'incredible  invention
,the  worst  of  human  characters,  it  has  by  no  means
en  lacking  in  such  kind  of  evidence,  as  sufficiently
monstrated  its  intimate  and close  relation  to  the

ork  that  was  manifested  in  the  primitive  church,
ren  to  the  external  senses  of  natural  men.

9.  The  Spirit  is  unchangeably  one  and  the  same  at
1  times  ;  but  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  may  be
trious,  by  means  of  supernatural  and  extraordinary
fts. Many  extraordinary  gifts  were  in  the  primi-

Ife  church;  such  as  gifts  of  healing — working  of
iracles — prophecy — discerning  of  spirits — clivers
nds  of  tongues — the  interpretation  of  tongues,  &c.
Jt  all  these  were  not  for  salvation,  but  for  the  out-
ard  manifestation  of  that  inward  spirit,  by  which
Ivation  is  wrought.

Jb.  Such  evidences  have  existed  in  the  Church  of
irist  from  the  first  opening  of  the  gospel  to  the
esent  day  ;  as  such  outward  gifts  have  been  abun-
ntly  ministred  through  our  Mother,  and  the  first  wit-
;sses,  and  from  them  to  others,  and  frequently  used
various  occasions.

II.  It  is  true,  wicked  men  have  often  had  extra-
dinary  gifts,  which  have  given  occasion  to  their  s£
ide  and  vanity,  from  which  offences  have  arisen
;ainst  the  true  exercise  of  a  Divine  Power;  and
erefore  such  things  are  not  to  ba-the  most  earnestly
2ted  ;  nor  is  the  real  internal  saving  work  of  the
it  thereby  certainly  evidenced.  The  Spirit  is
Uu


MattA  ii.


4?6  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING  P.  VII.

C3^?- known  by  its  fruit,  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  which
* are  invariably  the  same  in  all,  are  very  different  from
those  extraordinary  gifts  which  are  severally  divided,
and  may  exist  even  where  the  real  fruits  of  the  Spir-
it are  not  to  be  found.

12.  However,  as  these  gifts  originally  flow  from
the  Spirit,  and  belong  to  the  Church,  they  are  of  im-
portance in  their  proper  place,  and  have  been  abun-
dantly used  in  the  first  opening  of  the  gospel  in  Amer-
ica. '  Therefore,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  notice,
here,  a  few  instances  of  that  miraculous  power,  by
which  the  most  stubborn  unbelievers  were  confound-
ed, and  the  faith  of  others  strengthened,  who  con-
tinue to  be  living  witnesses  of  the  truth,  to  the  pre-
sent day.

13.  It  has  been  remarked  that  Pharoah's  wise  men
and  sorcerers  could  mimic  the  miracles  of  Moses,  in
such  things  as  were  productive  of  evil  ;  but  those
evils  they  could  not  remove,  which  showed  that  the
evil  spirit  had  neither  power  nor  disposition  to  do
good.  Hence  such  miracles  as  were  of  benefit  to
mankind,  have  been  most  generally  considered  as  a
distinguishing  confirmation  of  the  Spirit  of  goodness
and  truth  ;  and  upon  this  principle,  the  gift  of  heal-
ing has  been  the  most  universally  ascribed  to  the  spir-
it of  Christ.

14.  Therefore,  although  a  multitude  of  facts  of  a
like  extraordinary  appearance,  might  have  been  col-,
lected  from  the  living  witnesses  of  the  present  work
of  God  ;  yet,  to  the  candid  and  honest  friend  of  truth,
the  following  particulars  may  be  sufficient  to  show
that  the  same  Spirit,  which  wrought  by  Christ  Jesus
and  his  apostles,  was  made  manifest  for  the  confir
mation  of  the  truth  in  this  latter  day.*

15.  Noah Wkeaten,  of New-Lebanon^ in the
state of  New- York,  aged sixty-four  years,  testifies,

*  The  manner  in  which  we  have  stated  these  miraculous  gifts,  is  not  such  as
would  have  been  the  most  agreeable  to  our  own  feelings,  were  our  testimony  tc
be  confined  to  our  friends  and  those  who  are  personally  acquainted  with  oiu
people.  Among-  ourselves,  a  pigSn  and  simple  statement  of  the  truth  is  suffi
cient,  without  the  formal  ceremony  of  an  affidavit,  to  enforee  it.  But  th<
world  of  maiddnd  have  become  so  faithless  towards  each  other,  that  they  can
not  believe,  nor  be  believed,  without  something-  Mice  leg-al  -attestation ;  there
fore,  in  conformity  to  general  practice,  we  have  stated  these  evidences,  after  th«
manner  of  depositions,  signed  and  witnessed ;  and  we  are  willing  that  any  wh<
are  desirous  of  father  information,  should  make  personal  enquiry.


P.  VII.  THE  SECOND APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  477

That  shortly  after  he  had  received  faith  in  the  testi-  G**£p-

mony  of  Christ's  second  appearing,  in  the  year  1780,

near  the  beginning  of  July,  (according  to  the  best  of
his  remembrance,)  being  employed  in  clearing  land,
about  forty  or  fifty  rods  from  his  own  house,  and  be-
ing thirsty,  he  left  his  work  to  go  to  a  spring  on  the
opposite  side  of  a  fence,  nearby,  to  get  some  drink. —
That  having  mounted  the  fence,  which  was*  very  high,
in  jumping  off,  by  a  mis-step,  dislocated  his  ancle  out-
wardly, and  split  or  broke  the  outer  bone  of  his  leg,
just  above  the  ancle  joint.

16.  That  after  groaning  and  wallowing  in  this  sit-
uation a  while,  he  crawled  to  the  spring,  and  back  to
the  place  where  he  had  been  at  work.  That  although
he  was  unable  to  go  on  with  his  work,  he  was  yet
unwilling  to  return  to  his  house,  or  to  make  his  case
known,  on  account  of  the  enmity  of  his  unbelieving
neighbours,  to  whom  he  had  often  testified  his  faith,
as  he  had  nothing  to  expect  from  them  but  derision.

17.  That  his  ancle  began  to  swell,  and  the  pain  in-
creased, yet  there  he  continued,  tumbling  and  lolling
about,  for  the  space  of  two  or  three  hours,  in  great
distress  of  mind  as  well  as  pain  of  body.  That  at
length  he  crawled  home  on  his  hands  and  knees,  and
although  under  extreme  mortification  of  spirit  for
this  misfortune,  yet  he  was  full  of  faith  and  confi-
dence in  the  gift  of  miracles,  which  he  had  befora
strongly  testified  to  his  unbelieving  neighbours.

18.  That  he  felt  the  trial  of  his  faith  now  come,
and  was,  therefore,  resolved  not  to  mar  his  testimony
by  flinching  from  it,  in  the  hour  of  trial ;  but  feeling
full  confidence  in  the  gift  of  God,  he  refused  to  have
a  doctor  called,  or  any  attempt  made  to  set  the  bone,
or  even  any  outward  application,  for  the  mitigation
of  his  pain. — That,  consequently,  his  ancle  and  leg
swelled  greatly,  turned  black,  and  was  excessively
painful.

19.  That,  while  in  this  situation,  numbers  of  his
unbelieving  neighbours  came  to  see  him,  and  also
several  of  the  believers;  but  still  confident  in  the
faith  of  a  miraculous  cure,  and  desiring  to  confirm
his  testimony  to  his  neighbours,  he  would  not  submit


478  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING  P.  \


„


X


chap,  to  the  ordinary  means  of  relief.*  That  thus  he  con
tinued,  from  about  two*  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  til
the  evening  of  the  following  day  ;  during  which  time
his  mind  was  in  agonizing  labour  to  God  for  a  mirac
ulous  cure  ;  which,  with  his  extreme  pain,  forcec
the  sweat  in  plentiful  effusions,  from  every  pore  o
Jus  body.

20.  At  length,  as  his  family,  consisting  of  ten  ir
number,  were  assembled  at  their  evening  worship
in  the  room  where  lie  was  then  sitting  upon  a  chest
the  power  of  God  came  suddenly  upon  him,  and  h<|
was  instantly  hurled  from  his  seat,  and  set  upon  hi:
feet,  and  whirled  swiftly  round,  like  atop,  for  the
space  of  two  hours,  without  the  least  pain  or  incon
venience.  That  he  then  retired  to  rest,  well  ant
comfortable — and  the  next  morning,  arose  in  health
took  his  team  and  went  to  plowing.

21.  The  said  Noah  Wheat  en  further  testifies,  as;
remarkable  fact,  that  his  unbelieving  neighbours)
who  were  knowing  to  this  dislocation  of  his  ancle
hearing  of  his  miraculous  cure,  came  to  his  hous<
nnd  desired  to  see  his  ancle. — That,  accordingly,  h
uncovered  it  before  them  ;  at  this  instant,  a  shar
pain,  like  the  piercing  of  a  dagger,  passed  throng]
his  ancle — and  that  this  was  repeated  as  often  as  hj
showed  it,  for  several  days  afterwards.  That  othe|
wise  he  has  suffered  no  inconvenience  from  it,  front
that  time  to  this  ;  but  that  ancle  has  remained  a;
sound  as  the  other.

22.  That  happening  afterwards  to  mention  thi
circumstance  to  Mother,  she  said,  It  was  their  unM
lief  which  Jiierccd  his  ancle,  and  that  he  had  no  bud
ness  to  show  it  to  them.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  JVbah  JVheafcn
the  21st  of  April,  1808.  In  presence  of  Ri chare
S/iier,  Stephen  Munson,  Daniel  Goodrich,  and  Sethm
Wells.  (Signed) NOAH  WHEATEN.

*  To  some  who  are  strangers  to  Noah  Wheaten,  his  perseverance  in  refu
the  ordinary  means  of  rt  lief,  may  seem  incredible  ;  while  others  may  be  re
to  impute  it  to  enthusiastic  madness  :  it  may  therefore  be  proper  to  remark  "
that,  as  a  man  in  nature,  he  was  well  known  to  be  a  person  of  singular  cou
and  invincible  fortitude. He  was  formerly  a  sea-faring  man,  and  employed
captain  of  a  vessel,  mostly  in  the  whale  fishery;  and  having  passed  througi
many  trying"  scenes,  he  Often  had  his  courage  and  fortitude  put  to  the  sevefes
test. And  as  his  enterprising  zeal  was  not  easily  frustrated,  in  worldly  adveu
tures  ;  so  in  his  faith,  he  could  not  be  readily  brought  to  yield  his  teetiiuosy  I
the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Cluist.


P. VII.  THE  SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  479

23.  Sarah Kibbee, of  New-Lebanon, testifies,  tn£T*

That  when  a  child, she  was  very  weakly — That  her  _

weakness  finally  settled  in  her  left  foot.  That,  beside
other  medical  attendance,  she  was  under  the  care  of
Doctor  Millard,  during  one  whole  summer,  and  found

no  relief— That  her  foot  and  leg  withered,  and  seem-
sd  to  perish  ; — That  the  cords  of  her  ham  were  so
contracted,  that  she  was  unable  to  straighten  her  leg,
or  set  her  foot  to  the  floor.  That  for  the  space  of  a
pear  and  a  half,  she  used  crutches  altogether.  That
sometime  about  the  middle  of  March,  1781,  being
;hen  in  the  16th  year  of  her  age,  she  went  with  JVbah
Wheaten  from  Hancock,  where  she  then  lived,  to
ATiskeuna,  (now  Water -Vliet)  where  Mother  and  the
llders  resided.

24.  That  here  she  was  left,  though  much  against
ler  will.  That  being  a  cripple,  and'young  and  bash-
ul,  she  was  treated  with  great  kindness  and  gentle-
less.  That  she  had  no  faith  in  the  testimony  of  the
>eople,  nor  any  convictions  of  sin,  although  her  pa-
ents  had  believed  before.  That  labours  were  made
vith  her,  and  after  a  few  days  she  received  faith,  and
confessed  her  sins.  That  the  next  day,  being  the
irst  day  of  the  week,  as  she  was  sitting  in  a  chair,
Slder  William  Lee  came  into  the  room,  took  hold  of
Ler  foot,  and  stroked  it  with  his  hands,  saying,  Ac*
ording  to  thy  faith,  so  be  it  unto  thee. — That,  soon
fter,  Mother  came  into  the  room,  and  bade  her,  Put
way  her  wooden  staves,  and  lean  upon  Christ,

25.  That  she  immediately  received  strength,  laid
way  her  crutches,  and  has  never  used  any  since,  but
ras  restored  to  perfect  soundness,  so  that  her  foot
nd  leg,  which  before  was,  at  least,  one  quarter
ess  than  the  other,  was,  in  every  respect,  restored
qual  with  the  other.— That  she  went  forth  in  the
worship  of  God,  afterwards  to  work,  and  has  never
ilt  the  least  symptom  of  her  old  infirmity  from  that
ay  to  this.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said Sarah  Kibbee^
Kpril  21, 1808. In  the  presence  of  Hannah  Chaun-.
h>  Amos  Slower,  D,  Goodrich,  and  S. Y. Wells.
(Signed J SARAH  KIBBEE.
Uu2


480  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING  P.  VII

chap.  26.  Hannah  Cogswell,  of  New- Lebanon,  testi-
___ mmm  fies,  that  the  above  mentioned  Sarah  Kibbee's  mir-acto
lous  cure  was  wrought  in  her  presence.  Noah  Whca
ten,  also  states,  as  a  remarkable  'instance  of  obstinaM
unbelief,  and  determined  opposition,  in  the  world  o
mankind,  against  the  truth,  That  having  often  la
boured  with  two  men,  his  neighbours,  (by  name
Gideon  and  Simeon  Martin,)  to  convict  them  of  th
truth  of  the  testimony  which  he  had  received. — Am
that  they,  knowing  that  the  people  professed  faith  i
the  gift  of  miracles,  had  said  that,  If  the  Shaker
would  cure  Sarah  Kibbce,  they  would  believe  in  them
27.  That,  accordingly,  after  her  miraculous  cur<i
these  men  having  seen  her,  he  reminded  them  1
their  promise,  as  they  must  now  be  convinced  th*
Sarah  Kibbee  was  restored. — That  they  replied,  the  i
if  they  should  see  the  Shakers  cut  a  man  in  two,  an
put  him  together  again,  and  heal  him,  they  woull
not  believe.


28.  Phebe  Spenceii,  of  New-Lebanon,  aged  se\
cnty-three  years,  testifies,  That  in  the  year  1781,  i
the  month  of  November,  (according  to  the  best  <
her  remembrance,)  having  been  in  the  faith  aboi
two  months,  and  living  then  in  Stefihentown,  sh
went,  in  company  with  her  husband  Jabc&h  Sfiencto
(since  deceased)  to  see  a  young  woman,  about  fiitee
miles  distant,  and  that  on  their  return  home,  (bein
the  first  day  of  the  week)  in  crossing  a  bridge,  wit]
in  about  twenty  rods  of  their  own  house,  a  part  of  th
bridge  gave  way,  her  horse  fell  through,  and  she,  fa
ling  backwards,  came  with  her  right  side  upon  orl
of  the  string-pieces  of  the  bridge,  was  taken  up  sena
less,  and  carried  into  the  house  by  Jabesh  and  other
who  assembled  at  the  place.

29.  That,  soon  after,  she  came  to  herself,  and  pe
ceived  that  her  ribs  were  broken  in  such  a  manni
that she was unable to  speak,  or  breathe  withoinh
screeching. — That  she  could  sensibly  feel  and  hear  tl  II
broken  ends  of  her  ribs  grate  against  each  other, f
every  breath  she  drew. That  her  neighbours,
had  assembled  on  the  occasion,  urged  her  to  sendf(Bli
a.  doctor  to  let  blood,  or  to  do  something  for  her  \  b\m


P.  VII. THE  SECOND  APPEARING  OF CHRIST.  431


CHAP,
X.


although  she  was  in  extreme  pain  and  distress,  she

could  not  feel  freedom  of  mind  to  do  it.

30  That  Jab e ah  was  also  urged  to  get  a  doctor  ;
Jthich,  on  account  of  her  feelings,  he  also  declined.
That  this  unwillingness  in  her,  was  considered  by  her
neighbours  as  obstinate  wilfulness,  and  they  said  that,
>ecause  she  was  a  Shaker,  she  had  set  herself  against
receiving  help  from  doctors,  and  earnestly  pressed
ler  to  send  for  0:10  ;  but  she  still  refused,  and  thus
continued,  without  any  mitigation  of  distress,  till  the
Tuesday  following,,  when  Jabesh  came  into  the  room,
and  reminding  her  of  the  apostle  James's  advice,  Is  Jam.  v
any  sick  among  you,  let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the
church,  izfe.  he  proposed  to  send  for  Hezekiah  Ham-
mond, and  others  of  the  believers. — That  she  imme-
diately consented,  accordingly?  Hezekiah  Hammond
and  Joel  Pratt  were  sent  for,  and  came  about  sunset.

31.  That  they  entered  the  room,  where  she  sat  bol-
stered up  in  her  bed  ; — that  Hezekiah  came  and  took
hold  of  her  hand,  and  bade  her  labour  for  the  power
of  God,  and  take  faith.  That  she  was  immediately
seized  with  a  shaking,  like  one  in  a  strong  fit  of  the
ague,  which  so  far  released  her,  that  she  was  able  to
speak  and  breathe  without  difficulty  ;  but  that  her
pain  still  continued,  and  she  was  yet  unable  to  move
or  help  herself:  that  she,  however,  rested  some  that
night.  That  the  next  morning,  after  breakfast,  Hez-
ekiah came  again  into  the  room  and  assembled  all  the
family,  that  were  then  at  home,  consisting  of  her
ihusband,  two  sons,  and  seven  daughters,  and  desired
them  all  to  kneel  down  with  him.

32.  That  they  accordingly  kneeled,  which  was  very
contrary  to  the  feelings  of  her  children.,  as  they  were
all  in  opposition  to  the  faith.  That  after  continuing
on  their  knees  a  few  minutes,  they  arose,  and  Heze-
kiah came  to  the  bed  side,  took  her  by  the  hand,  and
desired  her  to  get  up.  That,  with  some  difficulty,
she  got  up  and  sat  in  a  chair.  That  they  again  kneels
ed  in  a  circle  round  her,  after  which  Hezekiah  bade
her  stand  up;  which  she  accordingly  did.  That  he
then  put  one  hand  upon  her  head,  and  the  other  upon
her  side,  at  which  she  felt  such  a  glow  of  the  power
of  God,  as  she  was  unable  to  describe,  which  first


482  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING


QFxF* struck  her  head,  and  then  ran  down  her  right  side

instantly she felt her ribs sensibly press  outvvan  I

against  his  hand,  and  her  side  was  immediately  healed

33.  That  he  then  led  her  several  times  across  th
floor  ;  but  having  taken  no  nourishment  since  her  fall'
she  was  weak.  That  he  bade  her  sit  down  and  tak<
food,  which  she  did.  That  afterwards  he  bade  he
walk  herself,  and  she  walked,  and  felt  well  and  com
fortable.  That  after  some  salutary  advice  he  left  her
That,  at  evening,  a  number  of  the  believers  came  ti
the  house,  and  she  assembled  with  them,  and  wen
forth  in  the  worship  of  God,  with  greater  power  thai  f
she  had  ever  done  before.

34.  That  she  has  continued  from  that  day  to  this
without  the  least  symptom  of  pain  or  inconvenience
arising  from  her  fall ;  and  that  this  miraculous  gift  o
God  struck  conviction  all  around,  and  was  a  means  oi
bringing  her  whole  family,  and  many  others  into  the
faith.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Phebe  Sfiencer^
April  22,  1808.  In  presence  of  Sarah  Slosson,  Amoi
Stowery  £>,  Goodrich,  and  Seth  Y.  Wells.

(Signed) PHEBE  SPENCER


it


)


,


*

U


N.  B. Mary  and  Salome  Spencer,  daughters  of  the
said  Phebe  Sfiencer,  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  above  ll(
account;  and  that  it  was  the  means  of  bringing  themj
into  the  faith,  and  also  many  others.

35.  Richard  Treat,  of  New-Lebanon,  testifies!
That  in  the  year  1781,  sometime  in  July,  (according
to  the  best  of  his  remembrance,)  his  son Truman}
then  about  fifteen  months  old,  having  been,  for  abou
ten days, violently sick, appeared  to be  perfectly1
senseless  and  near  dying. That  being  distressed i
his  mind  for  the  child,  he  went  over  the  mountain  t
Hancock,  to  see  Elder John  Hocknell,  and requeste
of  him  that  he  would  come  and  lay  his  hand  upon  t
child  ;  for  he  had  faith  that  he  could  heal  the  child.

36.  That  Elder  Hocknell,  having  laboured in  hi
mind  a  few  minutes,  was  seized  with  the  power
God in  outward  operations,  came up  to  him,  an
struck  him  on  the  hand  several  times,  then  bade  hi


VII. THE  SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  483

ro  home,  nothing  doubting,  and  lay  his  hand  ufion  the  CI^P*
hild,  and  he  should  see  the  glory  of  God.  That  this
hrew  him  into  great  tribulation,  fearing  lest  his  faith
hould  fail  him,  and  he  should  not  be  able  to  heal  the
hild.  That  he  returned  home,  praying  every  step
f  the  way,  that  God  would  strengthen  his  faith.

37.  That  he  came  into  the  house,  and  walking  the
oor  in  great  tribulation,  was  suddenly  seized  with
le  power  of  God,  in  the  same  manner  that  Elder
locknell  had  been  ;  and  going  to  the  child,  who  then
ly  in  his  mother's  lap,  he  first  laid  his  hand  upon  the
hild,  then  took  him  from  his  mother,  placed  him
pon  his  arm,  and  holding  him  with  his  other  hand,
arried  him  several  times  around  the  room.  That
le  child  immediately  came  to  his  senses,  laughed,
lid  appeared  bright  and  lively.  That  he  then  re-
irned  him  to  his  mother,  lively  and  well  ;  and  that

5  continued  so,  without  any  return  of  his  disorder.
Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Richard  Treat,
pril  22,  1808. In  the  presence  of  John  Farrington>
~)anid  Goodrich,  and  tieth  Y. WetU.

(Signed) RICHARD  TREAT.

N.  B.  Sarah  Treat,  the  mother  of  the  child,
ives  the  same  account  of  this  miraculous  cure,  which
ras  wrought  in  her  presence,  and  in  the  presence  of
everal  of  the  tamily.

38.  John  Farrington,  of  Ne<&  Lebanon,  testifies,
hat  at  the  age  of  four  or  five  years,  being  at  school,
lout  two  miles  from  home,  he  had  his  left  ancle  put
ut  of  joint,  and  was  carried  home  in  great  pain  and
istress.  That  two  or  three  days  afterwards,  he  was
arried  to  Dr.  Thompson's,  in  Somers,  state  of  Con-
ecticut.  That  the  doctor  being  absent,  his  wife
who  also  professed  some  skill  in  bone-setting,)  mi-
stook to  set  the  ancle  ;  but  it  being  greatly  swelled,
as  not  effectually  done,  which  occasioned  a  continu-

weakness  afterwards,  and  was,  at  times,  very  painful.

39.  That  at  the  age  of  twenty,  (being  the  year
780, N>  he  heard  and  embraced  the  testimony  of  the
ospel  ; — but  was  still  subject  to  lameness,  and  often

that  degree,  that  his  whole  leg  would  swell  up  to


484-  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING  P.  VI|V

CIx.P' h*s  knee,  and  be  very  painful. That  having,  for  soirj  u
„_.  years,  expected  it  to  terminate  in  a  fever-sore,  he  a]<  i
plied  to Calvin  Harlow,  who  was  then  a  physiciaj  „
among  the  Believers,  and that  outward  applicatioi
were  made,  from  time  to  time,  but  to  no  effect.

40.  That  in  the  month  of  December,  1789,  h
lameness  having-  greatly  increased,  he  was  in  muc
tribulation  about  it — That  both  himself  and  the  do
tor  had  great  apprehensions  that  he  would  remain
cripple  during  life — That  his  leg  was  greatly  swelle
attended  with  a  high  fever,  so  that  he  was  confined^
his  room  for  several  days.

41.  That  as  he  was  silting  one  evening,  with  h
leg  across  his  knee,  his  hand  clasping  his  ancle,  whic  ^
was  then  in  extreme  pain,  {William  Sajford  beii
present,)  Eleazar  Hand  came  suddenly  into  the  root
and  without  speaking,  placed  a  chair  near  him.  Pe
ceiving  that  Eleazar  had  a  gift  of  God  for  him,
immediately  removed  his  leg  from  his  knee  into  £.
chair,  and  Eleazar,  at  the  same  time,  taking  anoth
chair,  sat  down  by  him,  placed  his  leg  upon  h
(i.  e.  John's)  leg,  and  sat  in  that  position  three  or  fo
minutes,  then  rose  up  and  left  the  room  ;  but  sq
returned,  sat  down  and  placed  his  leg  in  the  sau
manner  the  second  time.

42.  That  this  was done seven times,  withoutj  »]
word  spoken  by either  of them. — That the  pa
ceased,  the  swelling  abated,  and  his  leg was  ham
diately  restored  whole  and  sound  as  the  other,  ^
has  continued  so  from  that  day  to  this.

43.  William  Safford,  of  J\re?v-Lebancn,  beil
present,  testifies  to  the  truth  of  this  miraculous  cuj
The  said  John  Farrington  and  William  Safford  M
testify,  That  they  were  afterwards  informed  that  I
der  Henry  Cluff,  Job  Eisho/i,  and  Eleazar  Hand,  wei
at  the  time  mentioned,  sitting  in  silence  in  a  ro0|
in  the  upper  part  of  the  meeting  house,  near  by  :«i
that  Job  Lishofi  suddenly  rose  out  of  his  seat,  a'j
bade  Eleazar  Rand,  Go  and  lay  his  leg  on  John's  It,
without  saying  what  John,  or  where.

44.  That  Eleazar  instantly obeyed,  and was  k
by  the  power  of  God,  to  the  house,  and  into  an
per  room,  where  the  said  John  Farrington  was
fitting,  as  before  mentioned ;  and  that,  returning


19

w


ted

::.
ff

Id

[ijr

k


«


VII. THS  SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  43<

meeting  house,  he  was  met  by  Job  Bishoji  at  the chap.

ad  of  the  stairs,  who  bade  hirn,  go  again  till  seven  __

ies — which  he  accordingly,  did.*
Taken  from  the  mouths  of  the  said  John  Furring-
,and  William  Sajford,  April  22,  1808. In  presence
Daniel  Goodrich  and  Seth  Y. Wells.

rv™.rt  ) 5  JOHN  FARRINGTON,
(Signed J jWILLIAM S AFFORD.

45.  Jennet  Davis,  of  Hancock,  testifies,  That  in
5  month  of  May,  1783,  (being  then  in  the  twenty-

t  year  of  her  age,)  she  had  a  tooth  extracted  from
•  lower  jaw,  on  the  right  side  ;  and  it  being  the
thermos t  tooth,  the  jaw  was  much  injured  by  the
eration,?ind  was  very  sore,  which  afterwards  termi-
ted  in  an  issue  which  occasioned  a  very  offensive
eath.

46.  That  some  time  in  August  following,  she  took
Id  in  her  jaw,  which  occasioned  it  to  swell  very
ach,  and  was  attended  v/ith  a  high  fever  and  great
in. — That  outward  applications  were  made  for  her
lief,  but  without  effect  : — That  the  swelling  still
creased,  till  her  face,  and  neck,  on  that  side,  was
elled  nearly  even  with  her  shoulder,  her  head  turn-
over her  opposite shoulder,  and  her  jaws  set,  in

ch  a  manner,  that  for  the  space  of  six  days,  she
uld  take  no  nourishment,  except  what  she  sucked
tough  her  teeth.

47.  That  one  afternoon,  about  the  beginning  of
ptember,  Elder  John  Hocknell  came  to  the  house
lere  she  then  lived,  [in  Richmond  near  Hancock,
trkshire  county,  Massachusetts,']  and  tarried  till
ening,  when  the  people  assembled  to  the  number  of
Pty,  and  went  forth,  in  the  worship  of  God  with
eat  power  : — That  she  attempted  to  unite,  but  was
arcely  able  to  move,  when  Elder  Hocknell  came  up
her,  put  his  band  upon  her  face,  and  bade  her  la-
ur  for  the  healing  fiower  of  God  ;  that  her  face  im*
ediately  felt  warm,  and  the  pain  left  her,  so  that  she
snt  forth  and  laboured  in  the  worship  of  God  with
eat  power.

Since^  the  first  Edition  of  this  work  was  published,  the  testimony  of  Job
top,  of  Canterbury,  in  New-Ham^hirey  ha*  been  given  in  confirmation  of
se  particular  circumstances.


2lil
ft

]!ti

m


485  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING-  P.  VII.

chap.  48.  That  after  meeting,  she  retired  to  rest,  and
x'  slept  comfortably,  which  she  had  not  done  for  many
nights  before.  That  the  next  morning  she  awoke^
well  and  comfortable — the  swelling  was  entirely
gone,  and  she  arose  in  perfect  health  ;  and  that  she
has  had  no  return  of  the  disorder  from  that  time  to
this.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Jennet  Davis\\
April  23d,  1808.  In  the  presence  of  Mary 'South*.
wick)  Daniel  Cogswell,  Daniel  Goodrich,  and  Seth  Y,
Wells,  R.  Clarke  J.  Demmin^,  Jt  Southwick.

(Signed) JENNET  DAVIS.

v  49.  Mary  Southwick,  of  Hancock,  testifies,  That1  "
about  the  beginning  of  August,  1783,  (being  then  im
the  twenty-first  year  of  her  age,)  she  was  healed  of  a
cancer  in  her  mouth,  which  had  been  growing  two*
years,  and  which,  for  about  three  weeks,  had  beer
eating,  attended  with  great  pain  and  a  continual  run*
ning,  and  which  occasioned  great  weakness  and  loss
of  appetite.

50.  That  she  went,  one  afternoon,  to  see  Calvii
Harlow,  to  get  some  assistance  : — That  Mother  being
at  the  house,  Calvin  asked  her  to  look  at  it. — Thai/
she  accordingly  came  to  her,  and  put  her  finger  intc
her  mouth  upon  the  cancer  ;  at  which  instant  the
pain  left  her,  and  she  was  restored  to  health,  and  was
never  afflicted  with  it  afterwards.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Mary  Southwick)
the  23d  day  of  April,  1808.  In  presence  of  Jennet
Davis,  Rebecca  Clark,  Daniel  Cogswell,  Daniel  Good'
rich)  and  Seth  Y. Wells,

(Signed) MARY  SOUTHWICK. ;

51.  Jerusha  Bigelow,  of  Hancock,  in  the  month
of  October,  178  5,  was  taken  suddenly  sick  with  the
canker-rash,  which  increased  to  such  a  degree  that
her  life  was  despaired  of. — She  was  senseless  for  some
time — had  a  very  high  fever — her  tongue  swelled
and  cracked  open.  One  Friday  evening,  the  family
expecting  that  she  would  die  before  morning,  had
made  preparations  to  lay  her  out.

52.  Qn  Saturday  morning,  her  father  went  for  An\


\


i


VII. THE  SECOND  APPEARING  OF  CHRIST.  437

oodrich,  who  lived  about  a  mile  distant,  having  faith CIW*-

believe  that  Anna  con  Id  cure  his  daughter. Anna

ame,  and  after  kneeling  by  the  bed  side,  and  pray-
ig  to  God  for  a  gift  of  healing,  which  receiving,  she
rid  her  hand  upon  Jerusha,  (who  appeared  to  be  near
ying,)  and  her  fever  left  her,  and  she  felt  herself  im-
lediately  well,  rose  from  her  bed,  and  walked  into
nother room,  and  in a  short  time recovered  her

rength.

{JERUSHA  BIGELOW
ELCE  BIGELOW,  8c
ANNA  GOODRICH.
In  presence of Daniel Goodrich,  Seth  Y.  Wells,
ad  a  number  of  other  witnesses. April  2  3,  1808.

53.  Enoch  Pease,  (now  living  at  Enfield,  m  Con-
client,)  when  about  two  years  old,  was  taken  very

ok,  and  senseless,  and  like  to  die.  Josefih  Mark-
im  went  to  see  the  child — felt  a  gift  to  kneel  down,
ith  several  of  the  family,  by  the  side  of  the  cradle
here  the  child  lay  ;  and  laying  his  hands  upon  the
liid,  he  was  immediately  restored  to  health,  and
>on  after  went  to  play  with  the  rest  of  the  children.

So  testifies 5JEMIMA  PEASE,  &
aotesunes £  JOSEPH  MARKHAM.

In  presence  of  D.  Goodrich,  S.  Y.  Wells  and  others.
Hancock,  April  23d. 1808.

54.  Susannah  Cook,  of  Hancock,  testifies,  That
the  spring  of  the  year  1783,  (according  to  the  best

'  her  remembrance,)  she  was  healed  of  an  issue  or
ver-sore,  under  which  she  had  suffered  very  much
r  the  space  of  seven  years,  and  could  find  no  relief
om  doctors,  though  much  labour  and  pains  were
ken  for  her  recovery.

55.  That  having  faith  to  be  healed  by  a  gift  of  God,
lie  went  six  miles,  to  Luther  Cogswell's,  where  a

unoer  of  the  brethren  and  sisters  were  assembled.
-That  her  feelings  led  her  to  apply  for  a  healing  gift
Anna  jVorthrofi,  who  was  then  labouring  under
.'eat  power  of  God.  That  she  received  a  healing
ift.from  Anna's  hand,  which  instantly  restored  her.

56.  That  previous  to  her  receiving  this  gift,  sic

W  w


4BS  EVIDENCES  ACCOMPANYING,  &C.  P.  VII

chap. was  ri0t  a^]e  t0  vva]^  01le  mile  without  great  difficulty.

..  and  greatly  increasing  her  disorder  ;  but  that  she  was

never  troubled  with  her  old  complaint  afterwards
That  soon  after,  she  travelled  about  forty  miles  or
foot,  [to  Water- Vlict^  and  could  travel  any  distance
on  loot  without  any  inconvenience.

Taken  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Susannah  Cook
the  23d  day  of  April  1808.  In  presence  of  Danie
Goodrich,  Seth  Y. Wells,  and  others.

(Signed) SUSANNAH  COOK.

57.  Mary  Turner,  of  New-Lebanon,  testifies
That  her  son  Jonathan,  (since  deceased,)  being*  abou
nine  or  ten  years  of  age,  was  chopping  wood,  at  som
distance  from  home,  and  by  a  stroke  of  the  ax,  re
ceived  a  very  bad  wound  on  the  top  of  his  foot :  [hi
father,  Gideon  Turner,  testifies  that  he  could  lay  hi
finger,  at  length,  in  the  wound.]  That  he  wa
brought  home,  and  she  seeing  it  bleed  excessively
was  greatly  troubled,  not  knowing  what  to  do  for  it.

5S.  That  she  went  into  another  room,  kneele
down  and  cried  to  God,  and  soon  felt  the  power  c
God  run  down  her  arm,  and  into  her  right  hand — in
stantly  her  hand  seemed  to  be  filled  with  the  powe
of  God,  accompanied  with  such  a  delicious  balsami
smell,  as  she  was  unable  to  describe. — That  feelinj
confident  that  it  was  a  gift  of  healing  for  her  sor?
she  returned  directly  into  the  room  and  put  her  han
on  the  wound,  and  it  instantly  ceased  bleeding.  Sh
then  walked  the  floor— came  again  and  laid  on  he
hand  a  second  time  ;  this  she  repeated  seven  timei
gently  stroking  the  wound,  during  which  time,
closed  up  and  was  healed,  leaving  only  a  small  seawi

59.  That  she  then  bound  it  up.  This  being  Sa»
urday  afternoon,  the  next  morning  she  unbound  [
and  found  no  other  appearance  of  the  wound  than
small  white  seam,  resembling  a  white  thread  ; — al
ter  which  he  attended  meeting,  went  forth  in  th
worship  of  God,  was  fully  restored,  and  found  no  ic
convenience  from  the  wound  afterwards.

60.  Gideon  further  testifies,  that  while  Mary  (th
child's  mother)  was  stroking  the  wound,  he  saw  tfe
flesh  gradually  gather  and  close  up,  leaving  only


VII.  REMARKS  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  OF,  &C.  489


XI.


unall  red  streak,  about  the  size  of  a  knitting  needle  ; CI^P-
ind  that  he  was  restored  as  above  described.

Taken  from  the  mouths  of  the  said  Alary  and  Gid-
on>  April  25th,  1808.  In  the  presence  of  Daniel
lOQdricJiy  Scth  Y. Wells  and  others.

Ctotncd) $  MARY  TURNER,
(  vgneaj <  GIDEON  TURNER.


CHAPTER  XL

Remarks  on  the  Evidence  of  Christ's  second  Appearing.

INHERE  were  many  instances  of  miraculous  cures
A  of  diseases,  of  almost  every  kind,  which  never
veve  published  abroad,  being  known  at  the  time,  on
r  among  the  people  themselves.  The  instances  in-
erted  in  the  foregoing  Chapter,  are  but  a  few  out  of
nany,  which  were  of  such  a  nature  as  could  not  be
id ;  most  of  them  were  circumstantially  known  to
le  world,  and  of  which  there  are  many  living  wit-
esses  to  this  day.

2.  Yet  such  was  the  bitter  opposition  of  the  gene-
ality  to  the  way  of  God,  that  many  either  impiously
enied,  and  contradicted  abroad,  what  they  knew  to
e  facts,  or  maliciously  slandered  what  they  could
either  contradict  nor  deny.

3.  This,  however,  was  but  little  regarded  by  the
elievers,  as  such  extraordinary  and  occasional  gifts
lade  no  essential  part  of  the  foundation  of  their  faith  ;
nd  knowing,  also,  that  such  kind  of  evidence  would
ecrease  and  be  withdrawn  from  the  world,  in  pro-
onion  as  the  true  spiritual  substance  of  the  gospel
acreased.

4.  It  was  not  that  miraculous  power  which  ope-
ites  upon  the  body,  but  that  which  purifies  and  saves
ie  soul  from  the  nature  of  sin,  that  the  truly  wise

Jnd  discerning  believer  esteemed  the  most ;  yet  for
[very operation of  the power of  God,  they  were
lankful,  and  nothing which  they  received  was  in
rain.


490  REMARKS  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  P.  VII,

Cxir' 5*  ^nc^  doubtless  the  end  was  answered  for  which]  I

1_  those  miraculous  gifts  were  given,  inasmuch  as  they  i"

confirmed  the  faith  of  the  weak,  removed  the  preju-
dices of  many  who  were  doubtful,  and  took  away  ev-
ty  just  ground  of  objection  from  the  enemies  of  thef11
cross  of  Christ.

6.  Yet  some  might  pretend  to  object,  that  the  mir-fe
acles  wrought  by  Mother,  and  by  the  first  Elders.  IP
and  others,  through  her  ministration,  were  neither  so  ^
numerous  nor  so  great  as  those  that  were  wrought) »
ijy  Jesus  and  his..apostlcs.  But  who  is  to  be  the jud
of  the  nature,  number,  or  greatness  of  those  mira-
cle s  ?

7 .  ili  natural  men  are  to  judge  according  to  thei
ttward senses, the objection will also apply tc

Christ's  first  appearing  ;  and  upon  the  same  rule  o
'ping,  k  will  equally  apply  to  every  manifestatioi
of  the  power  of  God  since  the  Hood  of  Noah  !

8.  For  in every dispensation,  since that  period
those  visible  miraculous  operations,  which  have  at
tended  the  testimony  of  God,  have continually  de
creased  in  the  esteem  of  natural  men,  and  become
less  and  less  wonderful  and  affecting  to  their  outwarc
senses  ;  insomuch that many of  their wise men  IP
while  they  admit  the  facts,  deny  any  supernatural  oi<  V
divine  agency  in  the  case  ;  but  account  for  the  mos  k
extraordinary  appearances,  as  springing  from  certain  J
causes  in  nature,  before  unknown.

9.  To  whatever  cause  natural  men  are  pleased  t<  n
ascribe  the  miraculous  operations  of  the  power  %
God,  it  is  certain,  they  have  always  thought  they  ha<  t>
good  reason  to  object  to  the  present,  from  its  infer!
ority  to  the  past. It  is  granted,  according  to  thei;

johiix.  sense,  that  John  the  Baptist,  who  was  superior  to  aJ
the  prophets,  did  no  miracle.  That  in  some  places
Jesus  himself  did  not  many  mighty  works,  because  oj
their  unbelief;  and  that  in  his  own  country,  and  amouf
Mark  vi  his  own  kin,  he  could  do  no  mighty  work,  save  tha
4>  5t  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk,  and  heata
them.

10.  That  his  baptism  at  Jordan,  was  not  so  wonder
ful  as  Joshua's  dividing  Jordan,  and  leading  througl
the  thousands  of  Israel  dry,  shod  ;  nor  the  darkness


i


ipi

i
i


V


41

>tat.  !r*ii.
53.


I  VII.  Christ's  second  appearing-.  491


t  his  crucifixion  so  astonishing  as  Joshua's  stopping
l.e  sun  and  moon  in  their  progress.

1 1.  That  his  walking  upon  the  sea  was  not  so  as-
mishing,  and  universally  convicting  to  the  outward
snses,  as  the  dividing  of  the  sea  by  Moses,  in  the
ew  of  six  hundred  thousand  Israelites,  and  all  the
gyptian  host ;  neither  was  his  feeding  five  thou-
ind,  with  a  few  loaves  and  fishes,  to  be  compared
ith  the  feeding  the  whole  nation  of  Israel,  forty
jars,  with  bread  from  heaven.

12.  In  a  word,  the  adversaries  of  Jesus  could  see
rthing,  in  all  his  life  and  ministry,  so  evidential  of
ie  power  of  God  as  what  was  recorded  of  their  fore-
thers.  And  how  were  their  forefathers  affected
ith what  they beheld:? Had  they  not the same

ound  of  objection  ?  and  did  they  not  soon  forget
^ery  wonder  that  they  had  seen,  and  provoke  God
ith  their  unbelief?

13  It  must  be  granted  to  these  unbelievers  too,
iat  the  testimony  of  Moses  was  not  attended  with
I  convincing  evidence  as  the  preaching  of  Lot :
bat  drowning  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt
ith  water,  was  not  so  great  a  miracle  as  the  destruc-
>n  of  the  Sodomites  and  their  cities,  with  a  total
'er throw  by  fire  from  heaven  ;  and  that  all  those
;her  miracles,  which  were  soon  withdrawn,  and  had
greater  visible  monument  left  than  a  pillar  of
les,  were  far  inferior,  in  point  of  standing  evi-
mce,  to  Lot's  wife,  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.

14.  But  how  were  Lot's  posterity  affected  by  all
ese  wonders  I  Did  the  incestuous  Moabites  and
/mmonites  cease  to  do  wickedly?  By  no  means,
oubtless  they  had  as  good  reason  for  rejecting  their
ther's  testimony,  for  want  of  evidence,  as  any  other
it  of  unbelievers ;  and,  upon  equal  principles,  it
mst  be  granted  them,  that  a  small  eruption  of  fire,
&her  from  the  earth,  or  clouds,  was  more  easily
:counted  for,  and  less  astonishing,  than  a  flood  of
raters  over  the  whole  earth,  fifteen  cubits  above  the
ighest  mountain  ;  and  that  the  destruction  of  a  few
odomites  was  not  to  be  compaved  with  the  total
yerthrow  of  the  whole  antedeluvian  world.

15.  So  that  the  only  miracle  that  can  silence  the

W  w  2


CHAP.
XI.


492  REMARKS  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  P.  VII

CxlP' cavils °r  stoP the  objections  of  the unbeliever,  ii
that  which  envelops  him,  and  all  his  kind,  in  destruc

lion. It was,  and  still  is  the  language  of  the  wick^
JMat  xxiii  ed> — If  we had  been  in  the days  of  our  fathers,  w

would  not  have  keen  partakers  with  them.

16.  But  could  unbelievers  of  the  present  day  havi  I
been  in  all  the  dispensations  that  are  past,  they  woul<
have  taken  part  with  the  antedeluvian  world  agains
Noah  ;  with  the  Sodomites  against  Lot ;  with  thi
rebellious  Israelites  against  Moses  ;  with  the  Scribe
and  Pharisees,  against  Jesus  and  his  followers  ;  an<
with  the  persecuting  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  agains
the heretics,  from the same  selfish  motives,  wit

Aets>ii. which  they  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  re

J.uke\ii.  jeet  the counsel of  God  against  themselves,  reveale<

30- in  the  present  testimony  of  Christ,  against  the  world

the  flesh  and  all  evil.*

17.  The  believer  and  the  unbeliever  stand  direct
in  contrast,  let  the  dispensation  of  God,  or  the  out
ward  evidence  attending  it  be  small  or  great ;  and  i
is  a  noted  truth,  that  the  more  spiritual  and  powerfu
the  day  and  work  of  God  is,  for  the  destruction  of' sin
and  the  brighter  and  more  glorious  the  evidence  t<
the  believer,  the  darker  and  more  doubtful  it  appear
to  the  wicked,  because  it  is  the  more  pointedl
against  them.

18.  The  unbeliever  maybe  driven  bv  fear,  but  tM
believer  is  drawn  by  love ;  and  hence  such  a  strikint
distinction  between  the  operations  of  God  under  thi
gospel,  and  those  under  the dark  dispensations  tha

jokn  iii. preceded  it. A  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  b
*-v.y>- given  him  from  heaven,  was  a  true  saying  of  John

and,  /  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing,  was  as  tru

a  saying  of  Jesus.

19.  Then  as  Jesus  did  not  come  into  the  world  o
himself,  and  it  was  not  given  him  to  destroy  menty

*  The  spirit  of  unbelief  is  the  same  in  all  ages  :  it  never  was  willine-  to  a<

n  IhJlrtl ned  and  increased,  in  proportion  to*  the  increase  of  light  and  trut
in  the  earth  ;  so  that  its  subjects  are  harder  to  be  wrought  upon  than  they  wer
•U£f3§£  JeSUS  ^n^o  the  unbelievers  of  that  day  that  if  the  might
works  done  among  them,  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  Tyre  and  Sidon,  the
would  have  repented;  by  which  he  plainly  iudicate:d\vhat  part  they  woul
*nZ* S  had^J  h ved  «"<»**  former  dispensations.  The  same  te stimuli
may  apply  to  unbelievers  of  the  present  day:  for  surely  that  spirit  of  unbeliei
*h*ch  can  oppose  the  light  and  revelation  of  God  in  the  present  day,  "
*e?er  have  yielded  to  tbe  testimony  of  past  ages.  F  7>


P.  VII.  chuistVsecond  appearing,  493

ives,  but  to  save  ;  therefore  his  miracles,  however  Cl^°
mall  in  the  eyes  of  the  great,  yet,  to  the  believer,  ___
hey  unspeakably  surpassed  any  thing  that  had  ever
)een  wrought  before.

20.  His  gift  of  power  was  not  over  all  winds,  and
eas,  and  fires,  but  over  all  flesh  ;  and  therefore,  as
ar  as  the  body  of  man  is  more  noble  in  its  creation,
ban  the  natural  elements  of  the  globe,  in  their  in-
animate state  ;  so  much  more  excellent  were  even
he  gifts  of  healing  given  to  Christ  Jesus,  than  any
pft  that  ever  pertained  to  the  dispensations  that
were  before.

2  I .  And  as  much  as  the  soul  or  spirit  is  more  ex-
cellent than  the  body  of-  man  ;  so  much  greater  is  the
;ift  and  power  of  God,  in  this  day  of  Christ's  second
ppearance,  which  is  a  power  over all  spirits,  and
ningeth  salvation  to  all  that  believe  and  obey.

22.  Christ  Jesus  had  a  sufficient  gift  of  power,
ver  all  winds,  and  seas,  and  natural  elements,  to

irove  to  his  disciples,  that  he  descended  from  that
^od  who  had  wrought  wonders  by  Moses  and  Elias  ;
nd  for  a  similar  purpose,  the  same  power  over  dis-
eases, which  Jesus  and  his  apostles  manifested,  was
£*iven  to  Mother,  with  other  apostolic  gifts  ;  and  they
ufficiently  proved,  to  all  who  lay  open  to  conviction,
hat  her  commission  was  from  no  other  than  the
od  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

23.  But  as  Jesus  neither  wrought  the  same,  nor  so
>Teat  miracles,  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  as  were
wrought  by  Moses  ;  so  neither  were  all  the  same,
lor  so  great  outward  miracles,  wrought  by  Mother,

s  had  been  wrought  by  Jesus  and  his  apostles.  No-
ting has  been  exhibited  in  this  latter  day,  in  the
>pinion  of  the  multitude,  equal  to  raising  the  dead
)ody  of  Lazarus  from  the  sepulchre  :  hence  the  un-
believer may  say,  like  the  lying  rich  glutton  in  the  LukexT3
>arable,  If  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead)  they  w»
11  re/ient.

24.  But  if  they  love  not  the  truth,  and  are  deter-
mined not  to  obey  it,  they  have  their  answer  in  the
(words  of  Abraham,  or  rather  of  Christ :  Neither  will

hey be  persuaded,  though one  rose  from the dead.

"ut  the  more  the  truth  is  confirmed,  the  more  they


494  REMARKS  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  OF,  &X, P.  VII.

chap. wiH  hate  and  oppose  it ;  as  did  the  unbelieving  Jews,
and  as  many  have  evidently  done  in  the  present  day.*'

25.  Whatever  gifts  have  been,  and  still  are,  in  the
church,  it  is  certain,  that  the  main  gift  of  God  to-
wards mankind,  at  this  day,  is  that  which  respects'
the  redemption  of  the  soul  from  sin,  and  is  therefore
great,  in  proportion  as  the  worth  and  value  of  the
soul  is  great,  in  comparison  to  every  other  created
object. And  as  the work  ©f  redemption  is  a  sub-?

warkviii  stance,  and  no  sign,  therefore  the  substance  and  nc\

12t  sign  shall  be  given  unto  this  adulterous  generation^  a$|

evidence  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  the  work.

26.  That  which  established  the  testimony  of  Christ
in  his  first  appearing,  is  neither  necessary  nor  propel
to  be  repeated  in  confirmation  of  the  work  of  his  se-
cond appearing  :  but  the  testimony  itself  is  a  sufficient
confirmation  of  the  work  ;  as  much  as  the  tree  is  i
confirmation  of  the  fruit  which  it  bears,  and  not  the
particular  operations,  by  which  the  tree  was  plantec
and  established.

27.  For  as  the  tree  is  known  by  its  first  fruit ;  sc
the  fruit  of  the  second  year,  is  known  by  its  corres-
pondence to  the  established  tree,  and  its  fruit  of  the
first  year.  Therefore,  whoever  denies  the  fruits  o
righteousness,  in  this  day  of  Christ's  second  appear-
ing, must  deny  the  doctrine  and  testimony  of  Chrisl
in  his  first  appearing,  and  every  sign,  wonder,  an<i
gift  of  God,  by  which  that  doctrine  or  testimony  was
established.

28.  But  he  that  doeth  the  works  of  Christ  in  thii
day,  hath  not  only  the  immediate  evidence  of  the]
word  of  Christ,  but  also  the  confirming  truth  of  all  thjf
signs,  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  even]
were  given,  in  confirmation  of  that  word,  in  all  age"

29.  Therefore, upon  the  plainest principles
truth,  and  according  to  the  very  nature  of  things,
cannot  be  that  the  words  of  Christ  are  to  be  commen
ed  in  his  second  appearing,  by  signs  and  wonde
for  this  has  been  sufficiently  done  ;  but  his  works
commended  to  the acceptance  of  mankind,  by
simple  authority  of  his  doctrine or testimony,

Mat.™,  ready  established: a  good  tree cannot bri;

*8'  FORTH  EVIL  FRUIT.


VII. THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN, &C.  495

30.  Hence  it  is,  that  the signs  and wonders  of  c"^r*

farist,  among  his  followers,  in  this  day,  are  not  to

le  world  ;  but  his  words  are  to  the  world,  and  each

*  his  followers  can  say,  Though  ye  believe  not  me,  Johnx>
iicve  the  works  : — ar  else  believe  me,  for  <r&E  vert  m. sit.
orks9  sake  :  A  work  which has  been  productive

'  righteousness,  justice  and  goodness,  with  every
uit  of  eternal  life,  by  which  it  has been  evidenced

*  shown  out,  with  a  continual  increase,  from  the
est  visible  appearance  of  jsiie  church,  till  the  pros-
it day.


CHAPTER  XII.

The  Church  established  in  Gos/?el  Order,

\  S  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world,  not  to  con-
TjL  demn  the  world,  but  to  redeem  and  save  the
or  Id  from  the  nature  and  eiiects  of  the  fall,  by  which
eir  whole  life  and  practice,  stood  in  direct  enmity
gainst  God  ;  consequently,  and  of  unavoidable  ne-
jssity,  his  whole  life  and  testimony,  stood  in  oppo-
tion  to  the  life  and  practice  of  the  world.

2.  And  hence  the  words  of  Christ,  The  world  ha-  jo^to*,
th  me,  because  I  testify  of  it,  that  the  works  there-  7. and

'  are  evil.  And  as  the  second  appearing  of  Christ
as  to  complete  that  which  was  begun  in  his  first  ap-
earing,  it  could  not,  in  the  nature  of  it,  be  different
om  the  first.

3.  It  was  hard  to  the  disordered  senses  of  a  lost
id  corrupt  world,  to  bear  the  light  of  the  divine  na-
ure  manifested  in  Jesus,  who,  in  a  certain  sense,
tood  remote  from  mankind,  having  descended  out
f  the  ordinary  course  of  natural  generation  ;  and
mo,  contrary  to  their  exalted  expectations  of  the
lessiah,  made  his  appearance  in  the  form  of  a  ser-
ant.  And  so  trying  was  the  manifestation,  that  di-
me wisdom  saw it  would  not  be  received,  without

preparatory  work  of  the  Spirit,  to  make  ready  a
eople  prepared  for  the  Lord.


496  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VI]

*xnf# 4#  ^Ut  now  much  more  painful  must  it  be  to  th
__  disordered  senses  of  a  lost  world,  and  how mud
more  contrary  to  the  exalted  expectations  of  mar
kind,  when  the  same  fulness  of  the  divine  nature,  i
manifested  through  a  woman,  of  like  passions  wit
others,  and  that  in  the  form  of  a  handmaid,  for  th
discovery  of  man's  total  depravity,  and  for  bringin
him  into  judgment  for  every  secret  action  of  his  lift!
5.  A  manifestation  of  God,  so  near,  so  deep  an
piercing to  the  pride of  fallen man,  that  nothin
could  seem  to  be  left  remaining,  of  what  God  hai
promised  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophets,  to  accom*
plish  in  the  latter  day,  for  the  destruction  of  iniquitj
and  for  the  salvation  of  his  people.
..  6.  And  herein  may  be  understood  the  following  esf

ax*.  9.  press  declarations:  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  h
humbled,  and  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  bow&
down — For  the  day  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  uj
on  every  one  that  is  fir oud  and  lofty,  and  upon  everj
one  that  is  lifted  ufi,  and  he  shall  be  brought  low.*
The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  to  stain  the  firi&\
of  all  glory,  and  to  bring  into  contempt  all  the  hop
able  oj  the  earth.

7.  And  upon  the  same  principle  that  a  work  of  pre
paration  was  necessary,  in  order  to  the  manifestatioJ
of  Christ  in  his  first  appearing,  it  was  required  in  i
more  extraordinary  manner  in  his  second,  to  convio
mankind  of  their  sins, — to  break  and  humble  them-4
to  enlighten  and  encourage  them  to  look  for  salvia
tion — and  to  bring  them  under  a  sacred  obligatior
from  their  own  prayers  and  solemn  vows,  to  accep
of  salvation  in  the  order  of  God,  through  whatevei
means  he  would  please  to  send  it.

8.  Therefore  it  was,  that  soon  after  our  blesse
Mother,  and  her  companions,  came  over  into  Amei
ica,  with  the  treasures  of  tjie  everlasting  gospel,  th
spirit  of  Elijah  was  sent  forth,  and  began,  in  ag
markable  manner,  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  LomP

r9.  The  work  of  preparation  in  America  first  be  gal
at New-Lebanon, in the county of  Columbia, an
state  of New-York^  and at Hancock,  in Berkshir
county,  state of  Massachusetts,  in the year 1775
with  the  usual  appearances  of  what  is  called  a


,  VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER*  49?

arkable  revival of  religion,  or  out-pouring  of  the c5nP#
vine  Spirit.  fc-B

10.  Preachers  and  people  were  generally  awaken-

I  under  the  mighty  power  of  God,  and  multitudes
>cked  to  their  assemblies,  from  the  adjacent  parts
ound,  and  were  struck  with  conviction  of  their
ns.  Many  received  the  gift  of  visions  and  prophe-
es,  by  which  they  saw  and  testified  that  the  day  of

II  redemption  was  at  hand.

11.  Their  testimony  was  against  all  sin,  and  was
tended  with  great  power  ;  and  the  various  exercises
id  gifts  of  the  spirit  among  the  people,  manifested
e  most  convincing  evidences  of  a  real  work  of  God.
)me,  under  deep  conviction  of  their  sins,  were  cry-
g  for  mercy  ;  others,  filled  with  unspeakable  joy,
ere  carried  out  in  visions  and  revelations  of  the
ory  of  the  latter  day — of  the  coming  of  Christ—
e  setting  up  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  nature  of  his
)vernment,  which  was  to  put  an  end  to  wars  and
jhtings,  and  restore  peace  to  the  earth — make  an
td  of  sin — bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and
tther  the  saints  into  one  harmonious  communion.

12.  The  subjects  of  this  work  testified,  that  all
eir  former  experience  in  religion  had  left  them
ort  of  real  salvation,  that  is,  it  had  never  saved
em  from  their  sins,  and  that  nothing  short  of  salva-
>n  could  constitute  a  true  follower  of  Christ ;  and
rther,  that  the  day  of  judgment,  the  day  of  full  re-
in ption,  and  the  coming  of  Christ  were  nigh,  even
the  door.

13.  The  work  among  this  people  was  powerful
d  swift ;  yet,  as  to  outward  appearance,  it  was  of
ort  duration.  In  about  eight  months  time,  their
sions  and  prophecies  ceased,  and  the  extraordinary
werof  their  testimony  seemed  to  be  at  an  end,  and
4ie  of  those  things  whereof  they  had  testified,  as
t  appeared.  While  in  this  situation,  they  were  in
•eat  distress,  and  applied  to  their  leaders  lor  help,
ho,  being  in  the  same  condition,  candidly  confessed
jat  they  were  unable  to  lead  them  any  further.

J 14.  Notwithstanding,  the  people  retained  their  in-

ferity;  and  in  full  confidence  of  seeing  their  earn-

t  desires  accomplished,  they  continued  their  assem-


498  THE  CHUKCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VII

chap,  blies  ;  and  from  time  to  time,  by  such  as  were  mov


XII.


ed  thereto,  received  mild  and  encouraging  exhorta
tions  to  hope  and  wait,  with  earnest  expectation,  fat
the  day  of  their  redemption,  which  was  near  at  hand
Their  cries  and  prayers  were  incessant  to  God  fo
deliverance,  beseeching  that  he  would  raise  up  im
struments  to  lead  them  out  of  all  sin  :  in  this  situa
tion  they  continued  about  four  months.

15.  This  was  the  state  of  the  people  in  the  sprini
of  the  year  1780,  when,  having  heard  a  report  b;
Talmage  Bishop,  a  subject  of  the  revival,  and  oth
ers,  concerning  a  very  strange  people  who  lived  in  at
obscure  place,  in  the  wilderness,  North- West  of  thi
city  of  Albany,  they  appointed  Calvin  Harlow  to  gt
and  make  diligent  search,  who  and  what  these  peo
pie  were,  and  report  accordingly.

16.  Calvin  Harlow went,  and returned,  but  nei
therthe  people  nor  himself  being  fully  satisfied,  In
went again, in company with Joseph Meachaiwl
Amos  Hammond  and  Aaron  Kibbee.  The  two  formed
were  preachers,  of  the Baptist  order,  to  which  bf
longed  the  greater  part  of  the  people  in  the  reviv

17.  These  four  persons  returned,  being  now  fulll
convinced,  and  established  in  their  own  minds,  thu
what  they  had  seen  and  heard  was  the  work  and  trutJ
of  God.  Whereupon  the  people  at  large  were  alaij
encouraged  to  go  and  examine  for  themselves,  a  J
these  had  done,  and  each  one  to  conduct  in  relation
to  those  strange  people  and  their  testimony,  as  the;
thought  proper.

18.  Accordingly, during the  latter  part of  th
spring,  and  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer  a;
fall,  great  crouds,  both  of  men  and  women,  from  d
ferent  parts,  resorted  to  the  place,  (then  called  Ni\
tuna,)  to  see  and  hear,  and  judge for  themselv
And  it  was  found,  beyond  all  doubt  or  contradict*
to  every  candid  inquirer  after  truth,  that  God  h
verily raised himself  up witnesses, and endow
them  with  all those gifts  of  the Holy Ghost t
were  given  to  the  apostles  and  primitive  church,
the  day  of  Christ's  first  appearing.

19.  The  light  and  power,  and  gifts of  the  H
Ghost,  were  so  great,  especially  in  the  Mother  r


3C


.  VII.  G6SPEL  ORDER.  499

ruled  with  the  word  of  prophecy,  in  so  marvellous Cx£p'

manner,  that  every  heart  was  searched,  and  every  mmm ,

in  of  them  that  heard,  was  tried.  The  loss  of
an  was  opened  from  its  foundation  ;  and  the  way  of
lvation  by  Christ,  as  a  straight  and  narrow  way,  a
ay  of  self-denial  and  the  cross,  was  opened  by  a
stimony  accompanied  with  the  most  convincing  ev-
ence.

20.  Many  believed  with  all  their  hearts,  and  ac-
rding  to  the  requirement  of  God,  manifested  to
em  through  the  Mother,  confessed  their  sins  one

one,  and  showed  their  former  deeds,  and  made
stitution  of  all  things  wherein  they  had  wronged
y  one  in  times  past,  and  set  out,  once  for  all,  to  be-
me  a  harmless,  just  and  upright  people.

21.  Many  who  believed  from  the  heart,  and  were
edient  to  the light  and  revelation  of  God,  made

town  unto  them  through  the  witnesses,  received
e  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  such  as  tongues,  and
vela/don,  and  visions,  and  prophecies,  and  many
traordinary  gifts  of  healing.  And  all  that  were
>nest  hearted,  without  exception,  received  the  in-
rnal  power  of  salvation  from  all  sin.

22.  These  were  the  gifts  and  evidences  accom-
nying  the  testimony,  at  the  first  opening  of  the
spei  in  America.  And  from  this  small  beginning
Mskeuna,  (now  Water-Vliet,)  the  work  of  God  in-
eased  and  spread  to  different  parts  in  the  state  of
Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New -Hampshire,  and  the
istrict  of  Maine.  And  the  multitude  of  all  who
lieved  and  were  faithful,  were  filled  with  great  joy
d  gladness  ;  increased  in  faith,  in  power,  and  in
sclom  ;  and  being  led  by  one  Spirit,  they  became  of
e  heart,  and  of  one  soul.

23.  The  opening  of  the  testimony  continued  about
ur  years  successively  ;  after  which  it  was  closed,

Scl  withdrawn  from  the  world,  and  a  work  of  pre-
ration  continued,  among  the  believers,  under  the
inistry  of  Elder  James  Whittaker,  and  others,  for
out  ihree  years  longer,  by  which  they  were  prepar-
to  come  together,  as  a  joint  body,  in  gospel  or-
;r.

|24.  As  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  compared  to  a  *!ftt'xr*'

Xx


50©  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VI

«hap.  nct  that  was  cast  into  the  sea,  which  gathered  of  ev
cry  kind  ;  so  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  was  ope
"  and  free  to  all,  without  exception.  It  took  souls  i
it  found  them,  aii  in  their  sins,  of  various  dispos1
tions  and  intentions,  some  honest  hearted,  faithfi
and  true  to  their  own  salvation,  others  insincere,  ro
ten  hearted  and  deceitful.

25.  And  as,  when  the  net  is  full  and  brought  i
shore,  there  is  a  separation  made  between  the  go(
and  bad,  and  the  bad  are  cast  away,  and  the  go<J
cleansed  and  gathered  into  vessels  and  saved  ;  so
the  internal  and  increasing  work  of  the  gospel,  the
was  a  constant  separation  between  good  and  evil,  s
and  holiness;  and  while  the  evil was  purged  aw*
the  good  remained. Like  the  shaking  of  a  fan,  win
the  chaff  is  shaken out  and  carried  away with  tit
wind,  and  there  remains  only  good  wheat. In  tl  <
Mat.xiii.  the  words  of  Christ  were  fulfilled,  that  he  would g\
4U  ther  out of  his kingdom all  things that offend,  a\x

them  which  do  iniquity.

26.  Every  thing  that  hath  life  and  growth,  fro*
a  law  in  itself,  hath  its  beginning  from  a  seed  plaii
ed  in  its  proper  season  ;  so  the  word  and  testimony
Christ  is  the  seed  of  God,  by  which  the  Church  \
begotten,  conceived  and  brought  forth  ;  and  as  ma;
as  receive  the  word  and  testimony  of  Christ,  and  a
thus  begotten  and  conceived,  in  any  opening  of  V
testimony,  are  the  seed  of  one  distinct  body,  to
born  in  due  season,  in  their  proper  order,  as  mem
bers  of  Christ.

27.  The  Church  is  compared  to  the  human
ivhich  hath  a  head  and  many  members  united  th
with  ;  or  to  a  tree,  which  hath  many  branches  unit
to  the  root :  as  every  part  of  the  tree  is  first  for
under  ground,  and  the  body  hath  all  its  parts  in
womb  of  her  that  is  with  child  ;  so  the  Church  is
formed  out  of  sight,  by  the  invisible  operations  o:
word  and  testimony  proceeding  from  an  invisible
rentage,  the  joint  and  corresponding  influence  o
two  first-born  in  the  new  creation. And  as  the
a  travailing  and  bringing  forth,  in  the  natural
so  there  is  also  in  the  spiritual.

28.  No  individual  member  of  the  human  body


.  VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER.  501

s  born  separate  and  distinct  from  the  rest ;  therefore  €^f*
is  notify  uniting  members  that  are  separately  born,
sundry  times,  that  the  human  body  is  formed,
or  is  the  Church  formed  of  such  as  are  born  again
this  manner.  But  as  the  whole  body  is  brought
rth  at  one  birth,  and  in  order,  with  all  its  corres-
mding  parts,  perfect  after  its  kind  ;  so  also  is  the
rth  of  the  Church.  And  this  is  effected  in  and  by
ie  joint  power  and  influence  of  the  two  first-born,
hich  is  the  word  of  their  testimony.

29.  By  this  tne  Church  is  jointly  and  invisibly  be-
aten and  conceived,  and  visibly  brought  forth,  one
)dy,  perfect  in  its  order,  and  in  all  its  correspon-
ng  pans,  as  the  offspring  of  God,  coming  forth
am  the  invisible  order  of  heaven — rooted,  settled,
■  grounded  in  the  divine  nature — sound  and  un-
laken  in  her  faith — pure  and  exampiary  in  her  mor-
s — unpolluted  and  unstained  by  the  flesh — and  sep-
Ited  and  unspotted  from  the  world  and  from  all
a.  And  in  the  same  manner  must  every  individual
;  born  again,  who  is  ever  born  in  and  by  the  Church

the  Mother.

30.  Hence  the  work  of  regeneration  and  salvation,
spects  souls  in  a  united  capacity  ;  for  no  individual
n  be  regenerated  nor  saved  in  any  other  capacity
an  in  a  Church-relation,  any  more  than  a  hand  or
ot  can  be  born  separate  or  distinct  from  the  human
dy,  and  united  to  some  other  body  after  it  is  sepa-
teiy  born.

SI,  1/  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  God  is  in  the  light,  x  Johl^
r  have  Jellowshi/i  one  with  another,  and  the  blood  or  *.  ?•
e  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.
nd  without  this  light  i  fellowship  there  can  be
|  salvation.  Therefore,  the  first  work  of  the  Spir-
of  preparation,  in  this  day  of  Christ's  second  ap-
aring,  was  to  convince  those  who  committed  sin,

they  were  not  born  of  God  :  for  whosoever  is  born  1  JoLav.

God  sinneth  not.  '* .

32.  And  as many as were  thus  convinced,  and

e  willing  and  desirous  to  confess  and  forsake
eir  sins,  and  to  find  salvation  from  them,  came  in-
I  the  testimony,  confessed  their  sins,  and  set  out  to
|avel  in  the  work  of  regeneration  and  redemption.


Cral.  1
22,23


502  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VI]

*xi\P' ^°  ^at  a^  >V^° wer^  faithful j  gradually,  and  pre
_  gressively,  travelled  out  of  an  evil  nature,  by  morti

fication  and  the  cross  of  Christ  ;  and  became  seps
rate  from  the  world,  and  in  their  spiritual  relation,  a
much  out  of  sight,  as  the  seed  of  a  plant  unde
ground,  or  the  infant  in  the  womb.

33.  And  after  having  gained  a  sufficient  degree  (
deliverance  from  the  nature  of  lust,  covetousnes:
selfishness,  and  the  various  branches  of  an  evil  m
ture  ;  and  having  that  growth  and  maturity  in  th
principles  and  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  which  are  love
peace,  meekness,  gentleness,  long-suffering,  faitl
fulness,  goodness,  temperance,  benevolence  and  sue
jike  ;  they  were  then  enabled,  practically,  to  coin
forth  in  outward  visible  order,  proceeding  from  tli
order  of  that  which  is  invisible.

34.  Accordingly,  about  the  ninth  month,  Septefli
ber,  in  the  year  1787,  the  Believers  began  to  gatm
together  with  one  consent ;  first  at  New-Lebanoi
and  shortly  after  in  other  places,  for  the  purpose
supporting  one  joint  union  and  interest  in  all  thing;
spiritual  and  temporal,  for  the  mutual  benefit  at
comfort  of  each  other,  and  for  other  pious  and  cha;
itable  uses,  according  to  the  light  of  God  they  m
received,  and  their  understanding  of  a  Church  in  tl
true  order  of  the  gospel.

35.  And  it  was  revealed,  and  manifested  to  the  B  i
lievers  at large,  that first,  Joseph  Meacham,  ail
afterwards  Lucy  Wright,  were  raised  up,  prepw
ed  and  appointed,  by  the  gift  and  power  of  God,  ea(<
in  their  own  order,  to  take  the  first  lead  and  spirits
concern  in  the  order  and  government  of  the  Church
and  they  were  mutually  acknowledged  by  all,  as  o
beloved  parents,  standing in  the visible  order,  ai
relation,  of  the  first  Father  and  Mother  of  our  t
demption,  who  are  the invisible  first  pillars  up<
which  the  spiritual  house  of  God  is  built.

36.  These  were  first  pillars  in  the  spiritual  buil
ing  and  visible  order  of  the  Church  ;  Father  a:
Mother,  in  spiritual  relation,  and  first  in  relation
all  others.  And  by  these,  with  others  as  helps^
the  ministry,  the  Church  was  established,  and  set

that  order  and  correspondent  relation,  uudcr  whi

-


:


VII.  GOSPEL ORDER.  5fr3


very  member,  both  male  and female,  as  brethren Cxnf'
nd  sisters  of  one  family,  and  members  of  one  joint  _

>ody,  enjoyed  their  free  and  equal  rights  and  privi-
eges,  pertaining  to  the  spiritual  travel,  increase
nd  up-building  of  the  whole.

37.  Ministers  were  likewise  raised  up  and  appoint*
d  by  the  gift  of  God,  and  sent  forth  from  the  Church,
y  the  ministry,  to  labour  among  distant  believers,  in
vord  and  doctrine,  to  purge  out  iniquity,  to  reprove
he  disobedient,  to  strengthen  and  encourage  the
veak,  and  confirm  the  faithful.

38.  Deacons  and  Deaconesses  also  came  forth  in
heir  proper  gift,  order  and  office,  in  the  temporal
ffairs  of  the  Church  ;-and  each,  according  to  their
ift  and  talents  for  usefulness,  were  felt  and  mutual-

icknowledged  by  all,  according  to  the  order  and
ift  of  God  by  which  they  were  appointed.

39.  Therefore,  as  each  member  of  the  body  is  de-
endent  on  another,  and  as  the  light  of  the  body  is
le  eye  ;  so  the  whole  body,  that  came  forth  into  vi-
bie  church-order,  were  subject  to  the  visible  head,
he  joint  parentage,  who  stood  in  Christ  the  invisible
ead,  as  the  medium  through  which  the  whole  visi-
le body  is  full  of  light.

40.  And  as  both  the  eyes  in  one  head,  centre  m
ne,  and  see  every  thing  alike,  and  as  the  true
catchers,  when  the  Lord should  bring  again  Zion,

irere  to  see eye to  eye ;  so,  according to that one  *••-«••'
ght  which  flows  from  Christ  the  head,  through  both
he  man  and  woman,  all  things  were  disposed,  re  gu-
tted, and  set  in  order,  in  a  perfect  law  of  righteous-
ess,  justice  and  truth.

41.  As  the  work  of  redemption  is  a  great  work,
ven  from  its  beginning  until  its  final  accomplish-
nent ;  so  all  iniquity  was  not  purged  away  at  once,
iior  was  the  complete  order  of  the  Church  obtained
n  an  instant.

42.  In  the  preparatory  work  and  building  of  the
Church,  the  Believers  passed  through  many  scenes
)f  mortification,  trial,  tribulation,  and  temptation,  in
vhich  all  the  faithful  were  united  from  the  eldest  to
he  youngest,  as  the  heart  of  one  man.  Sharp  re-
proofs against  the  flesh,  and  all  sin;  and  every  band

:  Xx2


504  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IJT  P.  VII.

CxnT' anc^  ^e  °^  a  carna^  nature,  were  continually  rolling

_ _  like  peals  of  thunder  :  and  the  word  and  testimony

of  eternal  life,  like  perpetual  flames  of  fire,  sat  up-
on each  of  them,  until  a  complete  victory,  over  the
nature  and  practice  of  evil,  was  mutually  obtained.

43.  And  as  sin  and  confusion  was  removed,  and
every  thing  contrary  and  offensive  to  the  pure  nature
of  the  gospel  was  purged  out  ;  so  purity,  order,  and
righteousness  were  established.  Every  thing  that
could  be  shaken,  was  shaken  ;  and  that  which  coulli
neither  be  shaken  nor  moved,  still  remained,  rootec
and  grounded  in  the  foundation  of  eternal  truth.

44.  In  all  this  work  was  the  promise  of  God  ful-i
isaL  ir. fined,  relating  to  the work  of  Christ  in  the  latter

day — "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  isi
left  in  Zion,  and  rcmaineth  in  Jerusalem,  shall  bt
called  Holy,  every  one  written  among  the  living  ili
Jerusalem  :  when  the  Lord  shall  have  washed  away
the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  and shall  hav<
purged  the  blood  of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst  there (
of,  by  the  spirit of  judgment ,  and  by the  spirit o,i
burning.99
... 45.  "  Rut  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming
s,  *\ '  and  who  shall  stand  when  he  appeareth  ?  for  he  I
like  a refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap  :  And hv
shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  ^  purifier  of  silver:  and  hli
shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  purge them  a;
gold  and  silver,  that  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  ai
offering  in  righteousness.

46.  Such  in  reality,  was  the  nature,  and  spirits
the  work,  which  was  wrought  in  the  Believers,
by  which  they  were  severally,  mutually,  and  jointl;
prepared  to  stand  as  a  united  body,  fitly  joined
gether  in  all  its  corresponding  parts,  so  as  to  form
pure  and  spiritual  relation  in  the  building  of  th<
Church.  And  thus  from  faith  to  faith,  and  from  om
attainment  to  another,  there  was  a  gradual  and  con
tinual  increase  of  unity,  purity,  and  order,  until  th<
present  order  of  the  Church  was  fully  established^


VII.  GOSPEL  OHDEII.  50->


r


CHAPTER  XIII.

The  Subject  continued.
HE  present  gospel  order  of  the  Church  was  es-  Cx£i.'


tablished  in  the  year  1792,  although  the  gath-
ring  and  preparatory  work  began  some  years  soon-
r.  Most  of  the  members  of  the  Church  at  New-
\cbanon,  were  gathered  in  the  year  1788.  At  which
me  they  entered  verbally  into  Covenant  with  each
ther,  to  stand  as  one  joint  community  in  Church  rc-
ation.

2.  In  this  Covenant'they  freely  gave  themselves
nd  services,  with  all  their  temporal  interest,  for  the
nutual  support  and  benefit  of  each  other,  and  for
ther  charitable  uses,  according  to  the  light  and  rev-
ilation  of  God  which  they  had  received,  and  which
vas  there  and  then,  and  from  time  to  time  afterwards,
evealed  and  made  known,  in  regard  to  the  order  and
uilding  of  the  Church.

3.  After  seven  years  experience,  the  said  Covenant
vas  committed  to  writing,  in  form,  for  the  security
>f  their  just  and  natural  rights,  on  account  of  those

ho  were  envious  without ;  and  for  the  more  perfect
nformation  of  all  whom  it  might  thereafter  concern.
—And  five  years  after  this,  the  Covenant  was  again
enewed.

4.  It  may  therefore  be  proper  here,  for  the  better
nderstanding  of  our  faith  and  practice,  in  regard  to
he  joint  union  and  equal rights  of  the  Church,  to

•tate  the  conditions  and  most  essential  particulars  of
this  Covenant,  as  they  are  taken  from  the  written
I  form  of  the  Covenant  itself:  they  are  as  follows.

5.  "  In  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  seven
hundred  and  eighty  eight,  the  year  in  which  most
of  the  members  of  the  Church  were  gathered,  tho

1  following  order  and  Covenant,  was  then,  and  from
1  time  to  time  after,  made  known  and  understood,  re-
1  ceived,  and  entered  into,  by  us  members of  the

I  Church,  agreeable  to  our  understanding  of  the  or-

II  der  and  covenant  of  the  Church  in  gospel  order."

6.  "  It  then  was,  and  still  is  our  faith,  being  con-


506  THE  CHUXCtt  ESTABLISHED  Itf  P.  VI]

^in*' i  ^rme(^  DV  our  experience, that there  can  be  n
.  i  Church  in  complete  order,  according  to  the  lawc

6  Christ,  without  a  joint  interest  and  union,  in  whicl
4  all  the  members  have  an  equal  right  and  privilege
4  according  to  their  culling  and  needs,  in  things  spii
4  itual  and  temporal." —

7.  "  And  in  this,  we  have  a  greater  privilege  am
4  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  each  other,  as  well  a
4  to  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  and  of  receiving  according
4  to  our  needs,  jointly  and  equally,  one  with  another
4  agreeable  to  the  following  articles  of  Covenant. "

8.  "  First.  All,  or  as  many  of  us,  as  were  of  ag':
4  to  act  for  ourselves,  who  offered  ourselves  as  mem
4  bers  of  the  Church,  were  to  do  it  freely,  and  volun.
4  tarily,  as  a  religious  duty,  and  according  to  our  ow
4  faith  and  desire."

9.  "  Second.  Youth  and  children,  being  uncle
4  age,  were  not  to  be  received  as  members,  or  as  bt
4ing  under  the  immediate  care  and  government  (
4  the  Church,  except  by  the  request,  or  free  consen
4  of  both  their  parents,  if  living  ;  but  if  they  wcr
4  left  by  one  of  their  parents  to  the  care  of  the  other
4  then  by  the  request,  or  free  consent,  of  that  parent
4  but  if  the  child  had  no  parents,  then  by  the  reques
4  or  free  consent,  of  such  person,  or  persons  as  ha;
4  just  and  lawful  right  in  the  care  of  the  child,  to
4  gether  with  the  child's  own  desire."

10.  u  Third.  All  who  were  received  as  member*
4  being  of  age,  who  had  any  substance  or  property
4  and  were  free  from  debt,  or  any  just  demand  frof
1  those  that  were  without,  such  as  creditors,  or  heirs;
i  were  allowed  to  bring  in  their  substance,  as  thei
1  natural  and  lawful  right ;  and  to  give  it  as  a  partjj;
4  the  joint  interest  of  the  Church,  according  to  tl|
*  own  faith  and  desire  ;  to  be  under  the  order  and
'  ernment  of  the  Deacons  or  overseers  of  the  temi
4  ral  interest  of  the  Church,  for  the  use  and  supjflj
1  of  the  Church,  or  for  any  other  use  that  the
1  pel  might  require,  according  to  the  understand!
4  and  discretion  of  those  members  with  whom  it
4  intrusted,  and  who  were  appointed  to  that  office
4  care."

II.44  Fourth. All  the  members  who  were  receii


IIP.  VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER.  50?

I  eel  into  the  Church,  were  to  possess  one  joint  inter-  r^iL*
est,  as  a  religious  right  ;  that  is,  all  were  to  have  just  ___
and  equal  rights  and  privileges,  according  to  their
needs,  in  the  use  of  all  things  in  the  Church, —
without  any  difference  being  made,  on  account  of
what  any  of  us  brought  in,  so  long  as  we  remained
in  obedience  to  the  order  and  government  of  the
Church,  and  were  holden  in  relation  as  members. —
All  the  members  were,  likewise,  equally  holden,  ac-
cording to  their  abilities,  to  maintain  and  support
one  joint  interest,  in  union  and  conformity  to  the
order  and  government  of  the  Church."

12.  "  Fifth*  As  it  was  not  the  duty,  nor  purpose
of  the  Church,  in  uniting  into  Church  order,  to
gather,  and  lay  up  an  interest  of  this  world's  goods  ;
but  what  we  became  possessed  of  by  honest  indus-
try, more  than  for  our  own  support,  was  to  be  de-
voted to  charitable  uses,  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,
and  such  other  uses,  as  the  gospel  might  require. —
Therefore,  it  was,  and  still  is  our  faith,  never  to
bring  debt  flor  blame  against  the  Church,  or  each
other,  for  any  interest,  or  services  which  we  have
bestowed  to  the  joint  interest  of  the  Church  ;  but
freely  to  give  our  time  and  talents,  as  Brethren  and
Sisters,  for  the  mutual  good  one  of  another,  and
other  charitable  uses,  according  to  the  order  of  the
Church."

13.  u  The  foregoing  is  the  true  sense  of  the  Cov-
enant of  the  Church,  in  relation  to  the  order,  and
manner  of  the  possession,  and  uses  of  a  joint  in-
terest, understood,  and  supported  by  us  the  mem-
bers,"

14.  "  And  we  do  fully,  and  freely,  in  the  mostso-
;  lemn  manner,  acknowledge  and  testify,  in  the  pre-
1  sencc  of  each  other,  (and  are  free  and  willing  to  do
\  it  before  all  men  if  required,)  that  it  is  that  which

we  have  kept  and  supported,  according  to  our  un-
'  demanding,  from  the  time  of  our  first  gathering  ;
'  and  still  mean  to  support,  as  that  which we  believe

to  be  both  our  privilege  and  duty." —

15.  "  And  we  hive  had  the  experience  of  seven
years  labour  and  travel,  and  have  received  a  greater

i  confirmation  and  establishment  ia  our  faith  ;  and


508  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VII

Cxhl '  we  be^eve  t^iat  the  order  and  covenant  which  we

m  4  have  solemnly  entered  into,  is  a  greater  privilege.

4  and  enables  us  to  be  more  useful  to  ourselves  and
4  others,  than  any  other  state  within  our  knowledge  ;
4  and  is  that  which  was  required,  and  is  accepted  oi
4  God  ;  and  that  which  we  fee!  in  duty  bound,  ac<
4  cording  to  our  faith  and  understanding,  in  the  moat<
4  conscientious  manner  to  support  and  keep."

16.  The  foregoing  are  the  most  essential  particu-
lars of  the  Covenant  in  form,  which  was  verbally  en-
tered  into  by  the  members  of  the  Church,  in  the*
year  1788  ;  and  committed  to  writing,  and  signedi
by  the  members  at  large,  in  the  year  1795  ;  and  re-
newed, on  account  of  further  provision  in  the  order
of  deacons,  in  the  year  1801,  and  is  closed  in  the
following  words.

17.  "  And  we  do,  by  these  presents,  solemnly
1  covenant  with  etch  other,  for  ourselves,  and  as«
4  signs,  never  hereafter,  to  bring  debt  or  demand*
4  agiinst  the  said  Deacons,  nor  their  successors,  noi
4  against  any  member  of  the  Church,  or  community*
4  jointly  or  severally  on  account  of  any  of  our  .ser-
4  vices,  or  property,  thus  devoted  and  consecrated  to<
4  the  aforesaid  sacred  and  charitable  uses."

18.  u  And  we  also  covenant  with  each  other,  M.
4  subject  ourselves  in  union,  as  Brethren  and  Sistersji
4  who  are  called  to  follow  Christ  in  Regeneration,  in
4  obedience  to  the  order,  rules  and  government  of  the
4  Church  : — And  this  covenant  shall  be  a  sufficient
4  witness  for  us  before  all  men,  and  in  all  cases  relat*
4  ing  to  the  possession,  order,  and  use,  of  the  joint
4  interest  of  the  Church.  In  testimony  whereof.
4  we  have,  both  Brethren  and  Sisters,  hereunto  sub*
4  scribed  our  names,  in  the  presence  of  each  other,
4  This  twenty-fourth  day  of  June,  in  the  year  of  oui
4  Lord,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  one."

19.  It  may  here  be  understood,  that  this  covenant
which  was  entered  into  in  the  year  1788,  immediate-
ly respects  the  Church  at  New-Lebanon,  as  the  fii
in  gospel  order,  in  this  day  of  Christ's  second  ap
pearing.  And  after  the  example  and  order  of  th<
first,  the  Church  was  shortly  after  established  in  se^


•


VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER.  509


ral  of  the  principal  places  where  the  word  and  tes-
mony  of  the  gospel  had  been  planted,  and  such  of
le  Believers  as  were  scattered  in  different  parts,
athered  at  those  places.

20.  Particularly at Water-Vliet, near Albany,  m
restate  oi  New-York .;  at  Hancock,  Tyringham,  Har-

ard,  and  Shirley,  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts  ;  at
Infield,  in  the  state  of  Connecticut  ;  at  Canterbury
nd  New-Enjield,  in  tfre  state  of  New- Hampshire  i
nd  at  Alfred,  and  Sabbath-day -fiond,  near  Portland,
n  the  District  of  Maine.

21.  Hence  the  whole  body  of  Believers  was  plac-
d  indistinct  societies  or  communities,  and  those
gain  into  large  families,  situated  according  to  cir-
cumstances, for  convenience  in  life  ;  each  family,  in
heir  own  order,  having  their  own  government  in  their
emporal  economy  *,  and  in  spiritual  matters,  having
heir  immediate  head  of  influence  in  their  own  order
nd  community  ;  ana  each  particular  community  hav-
ng  their  corresponding  relation  to  the  Church  at  JLeb-
,non,  which  is  the  centre  of  union  to  all  who  believe.

22.  All  the  Believers,  who  came  together  in  the
iill  order  and  covenant  of  a  Church  relation,  posses-
sed all  things  jointly  ;  neither  said  any  of  them  that
night  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own  ;
>ut  every  thing  was  possessed  in  a  perfect  law  of
ustice  and  equity,  by  all  the  members.

23.  However,  there  were  some,  who  gathered  to-
gether into  large  families,  and  stood  in  a  family  re-
ation,  whose  circumstances  did  not  immediately  ad-
mit of  a  joint  union  and  interest  in  ail  things  ;  and
who  devoted  their  services,  and  the  use  and  improve-
ment only,  of  their  temporal  substance,  for  the  joint
support  and  up-buiiding  of  each  other  ;  while  their
real  and  personal  estates  remained  in  substance,  as
they  were  at  the  time  of  their  coming  together.

24.  Such  were  not  considered  as  standing  in  per-
fect gospel  order,  but  held  a  certain  relation  to  the
Church  according  to  the  order  in  which  they  stood.
It  may,  therefore,  be  proper  to  make  a  few  remarks
on  the  nature  of  the  Church  Covenant,  in  which  alone
the  perfect  order  and  equality  of  the  gospel  can  be
enjoyed.


CHAP.

XIII.


510  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VII.

Cxnf# $&•&&**- As  one  of  the  most  essential  principles
_  of  the  Church,  was  to  maintain  a  perfect  law  of  jus-

tice and  equity,  both  in  relation  to  themselves anc!
others  ;  therefore  parents,  who  had  estates,  and  chil-
dren under  age,  could  not  bring  their  substance  intc
the  joint  interest  of  the  Church,  after  it  was  estab-
lished.

26.  And  provided  the  parents  or  children  were
gathered,  with  their  substance,  into  any  family,  in  the
like  capacity,  the  inheritance  of  the  children  was  se«
cured  until  they  became  of  age.  And  it  was  an  es-
tablished principle  in  the  Church,  that  children  whej
were  faithful  and  obedient  to  their  parents  until  the)
became  of  age,  were  then  entitled  to  their  natural
and  just  portion.

27.  Second.  As  the  Church  was  established  upoft
the  principles  of  gospel  liberty  and  freedom,  and  as.
no  one  could  be  bound  contrary  to  their  own  faitlj.
and  desire,  having  a  perfect  understanding  of  the  na<
ture  of  their  undertaking  ;  therefore,  children  in  mi?
nority,  could  not  be  fully  considered  as  members  qk
the  Church,  until  they  became  of  mature  age  tc.
judge  and  act  for  themselves.

28.  Nevertheless,  children  who  had  faith,  and  whe
were  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  light  from  God
(of  whom  there  were  many  that  received  faith  wift
their  parents,)  enjoyed  equal  rights  and  privileges;*
all  things  in  the  Church,  according  to  their  needs
and  the  measure  of  their  faith  and  understanding.

29.  Third.  As  the  gathering  together  of  the  Be*
lievers,  into  the  order  and  liberty  of  the  gospel,  im^i
mediately  respected  their  separation  from  the  pel*
plexed  cares  and  entanglements  of  the  world  ;  there-
fore such  as  were  under  obligations  to  creditors  oi
heirs,  were  not  considered  in  full  membership  in  the
Church,  until  they  were  perfectly  free  from  all  jusl
demands  of  those  who  were  without.  Yet,  all
such  as  were  faithful  and  diligent  in  paying  their  just
debts,  and  faithful  in  all  matters  according  to  their
light  and  understanding,  were  as  much  owned  and
accepted  in  their  relation  to  the  Church  as  any  others.

30.  Fourth. As  the  gathering  of  the  Church,  w#i
not  from  any  worldly  motives,  to  lay  up  in  store  of


\  VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER.  51!

lis  world's  goods,  but  solely  as  a  religious  duty  and rj^*
riviiege,  for  mutual  benefit  ;  therefore,  all  had  an  J

ual  right  as  members,  jointly,  in the  use of  all
lings  in  the  Church,  and  according  to  their  several

eds,  whether  they  brought  in  any  temporal  sub-
ance  or  not. And  in  those who  brought  in  sub-  Exo.xvi*
ance,  more  or  less, was  that  scripture  fulfilled,  He  ™£ov
at  gathered  much  had  nothing  ov er,  and  he  that  gat h-  w&-  »*•
ed  Utile  had  no  lack.

31.  Fifth.  As  all  the  members  of  the  Church  are
ually  holden,  according  to  their  abilities,  to  main-
in  and  support  one  joint  interest,  in  union  and  con-

rruty  to  the  order  and  government  of  the  Church  ;
erefore,  all  labour  with  their  hands,  to  maintain
e  mutual  comfort  and  benefit  of  one  another  by  hon-
t  industry  and  acts  of  kindness, — not  by  compul-
on,  but  of  choice,  from  a  principle  of  faith,  jus-
:e,  and  equity.

32.  Ministers,  Elders  and  Deacons,  all  without
cception,  labour  with  their  hands  ;  excepting  at  such
nes  as  are  taken  up  by  each  in  their  particular  gifts
d  callings,  which  all  tend  to  the  mutual  increase
d  benefit  of  the  whole.  And  no  member  or  mem-
rs,  from  the  eldest  to  the  youngest,  are  constrain-
I  or  compelled,  by  any  law,  rule  or  custom  in  the
hurch,  to  go  beyond  their  abilities,  or  in  any  mat-
:  to  act  contrary  to  their  own  faith  and  voluntary
oice.

33.  Sixth.  As  the  gospel  is  perfectly  free,  and
e  free  exercise  of  conscience  can  in  no  wise  be  re-
•ded  ;  so  the  conduct  of  no  one  can  be  compelled,
any  matter,  contrary  to  their  own  faith  ;  therefore,

who  believe  in  the  gospel  of  Christ's  present  ap-
aring,  ever  remain  in  perfect  liberty,  without  any
each  of  order,  to  use  and  improve  their  own  tem-
>ral  interest  as  a  separate  possession,  or  to  unite  -
Lth  others  of  the  same  faith,  in  one  joint  union  and
i:erest ;  either  of  which  must  be  according  to  their
vn  faith  and  discretion.

34.  All  are  owned,  accepted,  and  justified  of  God
d  the  Church,  according  to  their  perfect  obedience
the  light  and  understanding  which  they  receive,
evertheless,  the  centre  of  union  and  protection  to

Yy


512  TjiE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN  P.  VII,

ch\p. all  who  believe,  is  in  the  Church,  established  in  the

■v  ITT

perfect  order  of  the  gospel,  in  a  perfect  law  of  liber-
ty and  equality,  for  the  equal  benefit  of  every  mem-
ber, in  all  things,  spiritual  and  temporal.
.35.  Seventh.  The  order  and  regulation  of  the
Church,  in  all  spiritual  matters,  is  intrusted,  by  the
gift  of  God,  to  the  Ministry  and  Elders,  or  elder
Brethren  of  each  community  and  family.  To  them
also  is  committed  the  charge  of  sending  out  minis-
ters to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  world  of  mankind.*
56.  None  of  the  Ministry  hold  any  title  to  lands  oj(
property,  as  individuals,  more  than  any  other  mem*i
bers  ;  nor  have  they  any  pensions  or  salaries  :  but
whatever  they  need  for  their  support  at  home,  or  ex-
penditure abroad,  they  receive  at  such  times  as  they
need  it.

37.  The  concern  and  regulation  of  the  temporal
matters  of  the  Church,  is  intrusted  to  the  Deacons
appointed  to  that  office  by  the  joint  union  of  the  body
To  them,  their  assigns  and  successors  in  the  gospel
appointed  to  the  like  office,  is  intrusted  the  whole  o;
the  joint  interest  of  the  Church,  to  support  and  main:
tain  the  same  in  behalf  of  the  Church,  and  their
heirs  in  the  gospel  forever.

38.  And  their  office  and  care  it  is,  to  have  the  print
cipal  concern  in  dealing  with  those  who  are  withoqtj
and  to  provide  all  things  necessary  for  the  comfort
able  support  of  the  Church,  jointly  and  equally,  a|u
cording  to  the  number  and  need  of  each  family  in  the
Church.

39.  Besides  the  first  order  of  Deacons,  there  ai|
also  Deacons  in  each  family,  whose  care  is  to  sei;

* that  every  member  in  the  family,  from  the  eldest
the  youngest,  enjoy  their  just  and  equal  rights,
cording  to  their  several  needs,  of  all  temporal  thin,
possessed  in  the  family.

40.  In  the  order  and government  or  regulation
the  Church,  no  compulsion  or  violence  is  cither  us
approved,  or  found  necessary. So  that,  accordin
our  faith,  in the  full  and  perfect  establishment

*  The  general  manner  of  sending  out  ministers  to  preach  the  gospel,  u
two  and  two,  sometimes  more,  according  to  circumstances,  but  not  less  t
iwo ;  and  sisters  are  not  sent  to  travel  less  than  two  together,  and  that
wtUout  the  company  of  their  own  brethren.


.


VII.  GOSPEL  ORDER.  5 13


'hrist's  Government  among  his  people,  no  kind  of  cjcr^*

orporal  punishment  is,  or  can  be  inflicted  on  any

erson,  by  or  among  those  who  stand  in  the  first  or-
er  of  gospel  liberty.*

41.  Neither  Ministers,  Elders,  nor  Deacons,  nor
ny  others,  either  in  spiritual  or  temporal  trust  in

e  Church,  are  appointed  to  their  several  callings
y  their  own  individual  choice,  nor  by  a' majority  of
otes  among-  the  people  ;  but  by  a  spontaneous  spirit
f  union,  which  flows  through  the  whole  body,  by
hich  every  created  talent,  and  every  special  gift  of
rod,  given  to  individual  members,  is  mutually  pre-
erved  in  the  Church.

42.  Unto  every  member  of  the  body  is  given  a
leasure  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  profit  withal,  in
rhich,  by  a  faithful  improvement  of  their  created
dents,  every  member  becomes  prepared,  and  grows
p  into  a  fitness  to  fill  that  place  and  order,  in  the
ilritual  house  of  God,  for  which  they  were
reated  ;  and  their  real  qualifications  appear  visi-
le and  manifest  to  the  whole  body,  who  jointly  unite
V  promoting  every  improved  talent  and  gift  of  God,
iven  to  individuals,  and  which,  thereby,  becomes  a
eal  gift  of  God  to  the  whole.

43.  As  there  can  be  no  arbitrary  appointment  of
members  in  the  human  body,  to  which  the  body  of

hrist  is  compared,  and  no  one  member  can  be  app-
ointed to  fill  the  place  or  office  of  another,  but  each
lember  fills  its  proper  place  and  office,  by  a  sponta-
eous  influence  and  a  mutual  concurrence  of  every
ther  member  ;  so  is  the  appointment  of  members
i  the  Church  of  Christ.

44.  But  as  the  human  body  has  a  leading  part,
rtiich  is  the  head,  by^which  all  the  other  members
f  the  body  are  directed,  and  as  the  head  directs  and
overns  by  the  free  and  mutual  consent  of  all  the
lembers  ;  so  it  is  with  the  Church  or  body  of  Ghrist.

45.  The  revelation  and  gift  of  God  is  given  to  the
Ministry,  as  the  head  of  the  body,  in  relation  to  lots

*  In  families  which  have  not  attained  to  the  first  order  of  gospel  liberty,
id  where  there  are  parents  of  guardians  "who  have  children  under  their  care;
ieh  parents  and  guardians  are  requiied  tftfcring  up  their  children  in  the  way
holiness,  to  teach  them  every  virtue  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  tap
>rrect  them  in  such  a  manner  as  they  may  judge  most  p»udent  ier  tfetir  vith
*re,


514  THE  CHURCH  ESTABLISHED  IN "  P.  VII

Cxii?/  °^  °^ce  anc*  trust,  and-other  matters  of  importance  ;

.-  .  and  through  these,  communicated  to  the  other  mem-
bers. Yet  nothing  is  considered  as  established  in  the
Church  until  it  receives  the  free  and  mutual  consent;
and  united  approbation  of  the  whole  body  ;  and  thus
by  the  body,  in  union  with  the  head,  every  thing  im
poriant  is  established.

46.  And  each  member  of  the  body  throughout,  i;
»L?i.m  a^so  dependent  on  another. —  The  eye  cannot  say  unu  ,t,

the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of  thee  ;  nor  again,  the  heat
to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you.  Nay,  much  ?non>
those  members  of  the  body,  which  seem  to  be  more  fed
tie,  are  necessary.

47.  Such  as  are  intrusted  with  the  greatest  caret
are  the  greatest  servants  ;  and  such  as  feel  care,  con>i
cern,  and  labour  for  the  welfare  of  the  v/hole,  an
verily  the  servants  of  all,  and  are  the  more  highly
beloved  and  esteemed  for  their  works'  sake,  and  counij
ted  worthy  of  double  honour.  E

48.  Those  little,  simple,  and  very  comprehensive
\iZZ4. words  of  Christ  Jesus,  Whosoever  will  come  after  me
Lukexi?  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  ufi  his  cross  and  folloi
~  ' ' me^  were  received  and  established  among  the  peopl

of  God,  as  a  foundation  and  lovely  principle,  froi^
the  time  they  first  heard  and  received  the  gospel  cj
Christ's  second  appearing,  unto  the  present  day.

49.  Hence  no  one  member  of  the  body  sought  C
obtain  the  pre-eminence,  or  to  usurp  authority  Qve
another  ;  but  each  to  build  up,  and  support  the  wet
fare  and  comfort  of  the  other,  and  consequently  a>,
were  busy,  peaceable,  and  happy  ;  and  every  blessing
spiritual  and  temporal,  ensued,  as  naturally  as  rays  c
light  flow  from  the  sun,  or  the  fruits  of  harvest  fr
the  heat  and  moisture  of  the  summer.

50.  From  the  year  1780,  until  the  present  ti
1808,  including  a  period  of  twenty -eight  years,  th
never  has  been  an  instance  of  any  brother  going
law  with  brother,  in  any  case.  Nor  has  there  bej|
any  such  thing  as  a  general  council,  or  even  a  Chur
meeting,  to  settle  any  difference  among  the  m
bers  ;  because  there  never  were  any  differences,
debates,  or  divisions  in  the  Church,  that  ever  reqv
cd  any  such  thing.


W.  VII.  GOSPEL  ORDEf.  5ii

51.  The  very  Spirit  of  the  gospel,  which  was  re-  ™m'
Bcived  from  God,  through  our  Mother,  and  through  *
Ipe  first  witnesses  by  her  appointment,  was  that  from

le  beginning,  by  which  all  the  true  and  honest-
earted  who  received  it,  became  of  one  faith,  of  one
eart,  and  of  one  soul  ;  and  which  in  its  certain  con-
equences,  was  productive  of  peace  and  good  will,
umiiity  and  temperance)  condescension  and  obedi-
nce,  order  and  harmony,  with  every  fruit  of  right-
msness  and  eternal  life,

52.  Such  in  reality,  is  the  nature  and  consequence
:  that  testimony  which  we  received  and  obeyed
om  the  heart,  and  have,  according  to  our  under-
anding,  carefully  and  conscientiously  maintained
nd  supported  from  the  beginning,  and  in  the  prac-
ce  of  which  we  now  live,  at  this  present  day.

53.  And  such  is  the  nature  of  the  present  work  of
od,  in  all  its  corresponding  parts,  both  visible  and
ivisible,  and  such  the  certain  effects,  which  are
lanifest  in  all  its  fruits,  that  it  cannot  be  imitated,  so

to  stand,  by  any  human  wisdom  or  power  on  earth,
jparate  from  the  Spirit  and  power  of  the  living  and
ue  God.

54.  Since  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  of  Christ's
:cond  appearing,  was  first  opened  in  America,  from
e  year  1789,  to  the  present  period,  there  never  has
jen  any  such  thing  as  a  Church  Creed,  or  Confes-
on  of  .Faith,  or  form  of  Church  government,  nor
ly  thing  of  the  kind  committed  to  writing,  by  which

e  affairs  of  the  Church  were  to  be  jointly  transact-

5  or  by which any  individual  member  could be

und.

55.  All  the  affairs,  in  the  order,  government,  or
gulation  of  the  Church,  are  transacted  according  to

sent  circumstances,  or  an  immediate  and  present
of  God  ;  and  everything  is  strictly  observed  from
incipie  of  faith,  implanted  in  the  heart  of  every
vidual,  jointly  and  severally.

6.  Their  Confession  of  Faith,  if  it  may  be  so  cal-
l,  is  to  shew  their  faith  by their  works,  in  doing  jamw^
>tice  and loving mercy  :  being fully  persuaded,  18,
it  where  there  are  no  doers  of  the  very works of
•htcoumessj  there  is  neither  a  true  faith  nor  a  true

*  7  ?


516  THE  CHURCH ESTABLISHED  IN,  &C. P.  VII

*xiil* Church^  nor  any  fruits  or  evidence  by  which  the  trin

Church  may  be known  or distinguished  from  th

false,  by  those  who  are  without.

57.  It  may  be  observed,  that  the  Covenant  whicl
was  entered  into  by  the  Church,  was  kept  and  main:
tained  as  an  internal  law,  during  seven  years  ;  and  i
was  afterwards  committed  to  writing  in  form,  on  ac
count  of  those  who  were  without,  and  to  convey  a
understanding  of  the  faith  of  the  Church  in  relatio:
to  a  joint  interest  ;  and  to  confirm  it  beyond  dispute
as  the  mutual  faith  and  practice  of  the  Church,  to  a
whom  it  might  concern,  it  was  signed  by  the  mem
bers  at  large.

58.  But  thisybrm  of  the  Covenant,  is  not  the  Co\
enant  itself.  The  internal  spirit  and  substance  of  th
Covenant  is  more  than  ever  was,  or  ever  will  be  wrii
ten  with  paper  and  ink,  being  the,  fulness  of  the  la\
of  Christ,  written  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the  hear
and  on  the  mind  of  every  true  member  of  his  Church
and  is  by  them  kept  and  maintained  as  an  intern?
law  of  liberty,  justice  and  equity.  And  althoug
the  spirit  and  substance  of  the  Covenant  is  not  coi
trary  to  the  form,  yet  it  is  exclusive  of,  and  entire
distinct  from  any  written  form  whatever.

59.  Thus  the  promise  of  God  by  his  prophet
isaLxifi.  concerning  Christ,  is.  fulfilled  :  I  will  give  thee  for
Jer.xxxi.  covenant  of  the  fieo/ile,  for  a  light  of  the  .Gentiles*—.
SJd?3#—  -Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  mak
3,io. a  new  covenant with  the  house  of  Isreal-*-I  will -fit

my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write  them  in  the\
hearts  ;  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  w
fieo/ile.

60.  Christ,  in  his  first  and  second  appearing,  hat
made  manifest  the  whole  spirit  and  substance  of  th
law,  in  The  Two  tables  of  the  New  Covenant  ;  an
the  Two  Anointed  Ones,  or  Two  first-born  in  the  ne
creation,  have  finished  their  work,  between  whoi
the  covenant  of  eternal  life  is  established  ;  hence  th
spirit  and  substance  of  this  new  Covenant,  in  its  fu
ness,  is  written  in  the  hearts,  and  on  the  minds  of  a
their  spiritual  children.

61.  And  therefore,  in  the  gathering,  building,  if
crease  and  establishment  of  God's  spiritual  house


P.  VII. PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING,  Sec. 517

all  the  members of  the  Church,  both male  and  fe- cSf£'

male,  as  his  Sons  and  Daughters, Brethren  and  S/&-  '

ters.of  one  family,  according  to  their  lots  and  seve-
ral abilities,  possess  and  enjoy  one  mutual  interest,
and  one  joint  inheritance,  both  in  regard  to  the
things  of  time  and  eternity.

62.  However  humiliating  to  the  pride  of  fallen
man,  the  present  work  of  God  may  be,  in  disannul-
ling their  human  systems,  and  forms  of  worship  ;
yet  the  work  has  commenced,  and  will  be  accom-
plished. Already  have  we  ourselves  suffered  the
wreck  of  all  our  own  works  and  inventions  ;  yet  we
have  had,  and  still  have,  the  greatest  cause  of  thank-
fulness to  Almighty  God,  for  that  work  which  is  ac-
companied with  the  real  and  abiding  treasures  of  sal-
vation and  eternal  life  ;  and  have  therefore  received
joyfully  the  spoiling  of  our  goods,  and  have  received,
even  in  this  life,  an  hundred  fold,  according  to  the
promise  of  Christ.

63.  And  certain  it  is,  that  by  those  means  which
seemed  foolish  to  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  hath
God,  according  to  his  own  unchangeable  purpose,
completed the foundation  of  his  spiritual building,

[and  established  that  law  of  order,  harmony,  peace,
and  righteousness  in  the  earth,  that  will  stand  for-
ever ;  and  which,  in  its  increasing  operations,  will,
in  the  end,  be  an  everlasting  blessing  to  all  nations.


CHAPTER  XIV.

Prophecies  and  Promises  fulfilling  in  the  present  in-
creasing Work  of  Christ.

KNOWN  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from  the
foundation  of  the  world  ;  and  as  far  as  possible,
invisible  spiritual  things  have  been  revealed  by  the
things  that  are  made  ;  therefore  said  the  Lord  by  the
prophet  Hosea,  I  have  multiplied  virions,  and  used  y0S€a  Xlj
similitudes,  by  the  ministry  of  the  prophets.  , j  10*


518  PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING  IN P.  VII

°xivP' 2#  Christ  Jesus,  the  first  who  received  the sub-

stance  of  the  promises,  seemed often at  a  loss for

means  to  convey  an  understanding  of  spiritual  thing!

to  souls  that  were  lost  in  their  sins  :  and  therefore  he

had  recourse  to  similitudes,  and compared  spiritual

things with  natural,  as  the  most  striking means  o

Mavkiv.  conveyance. "  Whereunto  shall  we  liken  the  king

32. dom  oi  God  ?  or  with what  comparison  shall we

LukeNiii  compare  it  ?  Unto  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  like

*8, and  whereunto  shall  I  resemble  it  ?"

3.  When  Christ  compared  the  kingdom  of  God  tc
a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  to  leaven  hid  in  three  mea
sures  of  meal,  or  to  a  net  cast  into  the  sea,  he  could
not  mean  that  there  was  any  resemblance  in  the  case
to  the  view  of  the  natural  eye.  And  therefore,  il
must  be  a  false  imagination  that  will  look  for  the
spiritual  object  to  appear  in  the  natural  form,  oi
shape  of  those  things  to  which  it  may  have  been
compared.

4.  It  would  be  very  unnatural  and  unreasonable  tc
look  for  a  kingdom  to  appear  in  the  shape  or  form  ol
a  net,  or  of  a  piece  of  leaven  ;  yet  in  the  spiritual
mind  there  is  a  true  sense,  in  which  these  things  h
nature  have  a  resemblance  to  the  spiritual  work  o:
God.  And  this  is  particularly  made  manifest,  in  the
present  day,  in  and  by  the  Church  of  Christ,  which
is  built  according  to  the  fore-knowledge  of  God,  an
swerable  to  all  the  similitudes  that  were  ever  drawn
by  the  spirit  of  Christ,  in  prophets  or  apostles.

5.  The  Church  of  the  latter  day  was  represented
by  the  prophets,  under  the  similitude  of  a  kingdomj
a  city,  particularly  Jerusalem,  Mount-Zion,  the  tern
pie,  and  such  like  objects  of  visible  glory  ;  and  the
gathering  and  uniting  of  God's  people  into  Church*1
order,  is  compared  to  the  gathering  of  the  Israelites)
from  the  countries  in  which  they  were  dispersed^
and  establishing  them  in  the  possession  of  their  own
land.

6.  But  to  frustrate  the  carnal  mind,  Christ  and  t
apostles  represent  the  same  spiritual  work,  by  things
directly  contrary  ;  so  that  the  proud  and  aspiring  hav
as  good  reason  to  look  for  the  promise  to  be  fulfille
in  planting  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  as  in  setting  up


g  VII. THE  PRESENT  INCREASING  WORK  OF  CHRIST. 5  19

great  visible  kingdom  ;  for  thereunto  is  the  king- CxivP*
bm  of  heaven  likened. Therefore,  it  is  necessary  wmmmmmmmm

>  consider  the  true  signification  of  the  promises  of
rod  to  his  Church  and  people,  and  wherein  they
ave  been  fulfilled.

7.  Whatever  the  promise  of  God  literally  referred
),  whether  to  a  kingdom,  a  new  city,  or  a  new  heav-
ii  and  earth,  it  doubtless  alluded  to  men  and  wo-
len,  living  on  the  earth,  in  and  among  whom  the
ork  of  God  was  to  be  wrought,  and  to  whom  the
romises  were  finally  to  be  fulfilled,  for  the  estab-
shment  of  everlasting  righteousness  and  peace  ;
le  re  fore,  such  must  constitute  the  true  Church  of
hrist,  the  only  antitype  of  every  figure,  and  the
ibstance  of  every  blessing  promised.

8.  We  shall  take  notice  of  a  few  general  promises,
'hich  comprehend  all  the  particular  ones,  relating

>  the  Church  of  the  latter  day,  together  with  their
Iain  and  pointed  accomplishment  :  and  first  we  shall
ansider  what  was  promised  through  the  prophet
>anie*.

9.  By  the  fate  of  the  image  which  was  shown  to
Febuchadnezzar,  and  of  the  four  beasts  which  ap-  Ban.  a

28 31  —

eared  to  Daniel,  both  representing  four  great  em-  35'&v&
ires,  God  did  particularly  promise  and  show  the  fi-
al  dissolution  of  those  monarchal  governments,  by
hich  mankind  were  bound  in  ignorance and  wick*
dness.

10.  In  the  fourth  and  last  of  these  empires,  Anti-
irist  was  to  have  his  reign,  in  which  the  civil  and
:clesiastical  powers  would  be  divided,  like  the  feet
id  toes  of  the  image,  and  into  which  the  existing
owers  of  government  would  gather,  for  the  support
f  the  whole  system.

1 1 .  A  stone  was  also  cut  out  of  the  mountain  wi th-
at hands,  and  smote  the  image  on  his  feet,  which
ere  part  iron  and  part  clay,  and  broke  them  to  pic-
es, and  continued  to  break  and  bruise  every  part  of
ic  image,  until  the  whole  was  broken  in  pieces  to-
ether  ;  and  the  wind  carried  them  away,  and  no
lace  was  found  for  them  ;  and  the  stone  that  smote
>e  image,  became  a  great  mountain,  and  filled  the
kholc  earth.


Dan.n
45.


520  PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING  IN P.  VI]

CJaTP'  12.  It  was  thereby  expressly  shown,  and  promis
*  ed,  that  the  powers  of  monarchy  should  be  weaken
ed,  in  the  latter  end  of  Antichrist's  dominion,  by
mixture  of  republican  principles  ;  that  is,  the  seed o
men,  where  all,  however  divided,  have  equal  powe
and  authority,  and  where  those  Antichristian  and  re
publican  principles  should  be  blended  together,  lik!
hard  iron  and  soft  clay ;  there  God  would  smit
them  both  together,  by  the  Everlasting  Gosfiely  giv
en  by  invisible  inspiration  from  heaven.

13.  All  this  God  is  particularly  fulfilling  in  this  Jat
ter  day  ;  for,  as  stone  is  harder  than  any  metal,  an
grinds  and  wears  away  iron  and  brass,  silver  an
gold  ;  so  the  truth  of  God  is  harder  than  all  the  mos
polished  systems  and  principles  of  men,  and  mu
in  the  end,  grind  and  wear  them  away  till  no  plac
be  found  for  them.

14.  And  as  republicans  are  mixed  with  Ant:chri<
tians  in  every  department;  so  this  mixed  goverr
menfis  partly  strong  and  partly  broken,  and  the  di
ferent" parties  help  to  weaken  and  break  each  othe:
And  as  neither  are  founded  on  the  revelation  an
spiritual  work  of  God  ;  so  neither  can  stand,  but  i
the  end  both  must  fall  together  ;  and  only  by  a  pre
per  relation  to  the  spiritual  work  of  God,  can  th
principles  of  real  and  true  freedom  be  finally  estatj
lished.

15.  For  neither  empire,  nor  republic,  founded!
the  corruptions  and  depravity  of  the  fall,  can  stan
in  the  shaking  of  this  last  and  great  day  of  God  A
mighty:  and  therefore  the  perfectly' just  and  peace
able  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  is  opened  as  a  re  fug
for  all  that  would  escape  the  promiscuous  wreck  an
ruin  of  the  Antichristian  world.

16.  This  was  also  included  in  the  same  prophec
Diui.ii. through  Daniel. "  And  in  the  days  of  these  king!

[that  is,  in  the  time  of  the  fourth  empire,  befon
the  kingdom  of  Antichrist  is  at  an  end,]  shall  th
God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom,  which  shall  nevtf
be  destroyed  :  and  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  lefH
other  people,  but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  cor
sumc  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  foreve*.
%ift I?.' 17.  And  further,  says  the  same  prophet,  "  I  behel


>.  VII.  .THE  PRESENT  INCREASING  WOllK  OF  CHRIST. 521

11  the  thrones  were  cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of  ^vT'

ays  did  sit, — I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  behold,

ne  like  unto  the  son  of  man  came  with  the  clouds  of
eaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they
rought  him  near  before  him.  And  there  was  given
im  dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that  all
eople,  nations  and  languages,  should  serve  him  :  his
ominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  which  shall  not
ass  away,  and  his  kingdom  that  which  shall  not  be
estroyed."

18.  "  And  Judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  na*.™,
lost  High  ;  and  the  time  came  that  the  saints  pos-  33>  27-

jssed  the  kingdom. And  the kingdom  and  do-

union,  and  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the

hole  heaven,  shaU  be  given  to  the  people  of  the,
lints  of  the  Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  ever-
.sting  kingdom,  and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and
jey  him."

19.  Hence  the  breaking  and  demolishing  of  that
hie h  was  corrupt,  and  the  setting  up  of  that  which
lould  stand  forever,  was  not  only  promised  as  an:
fent  most  certainly  to  take  place  ;  but  also  the  time,
hen  it  should  take  place,  was  revealed  and  promis-
i  by  the  same  prophet.

20.  u  Then  I  heard  one  saint  speaking,  and  ano-  pan.viiii
ter  saint  said  unto  that certain  saint  which  spake,  13>14-
!ow  long  shall  be  the  vision  concerning  the  daily  sac-

fice,  and  the  transgression  of  desolation,  to  give
)tli  the  sanctuary  and  the  host  to  be  trodden  under
ot  ?  And  he  said  unto  me,  Unto  two  thousand  and
iree  hundred  days  ;  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be
eansed."

21.  This  vision  of  Daniel  is  dated  553  years  before

e  Christian sera, which  taken  from 2300,  leaves  i^KJek
T47,  as  the  year  for  the  promise  to  be  fulfilled)  count-
g  a  day  for  a  year  in  the first  given  number,  as  is
sual  with  the  prophets.

22.  Man  is  the  •  empie  or  habitation  of  God,  in  both  .
jarts  of  his  manhood  maie  and  female,  and  the  fe •  .
lale  is  the  medium  through  which  all  enter  into  man-  t
bod  ;  but  as  the  female  or  seconci part  of  the  man  i

Has  defiled  by  sin,  so  that  none  could  enter  into  man-
JDod  without  partaking  of  a  sinful  nature  ;  therefore,


522 PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING  IN. P.  VII

CxivP" *n  cleans*n£  an(*  purifying  tie  female,  the  sanctuary

...  was  cleansed,  and  vie  v:ay  into  lie  holiest  of  ail  fulrjl

made  .  tanifest,  -where  God  promised  to  dwell  forever!

23.  Hence  the  promises  so  universally  allude  10  thi
purging  .Wc.y*of  sin  and  tmcleanness,  rooting  out  an<
destroying  that  which  is  evii  in  human  nature,  anc
implanting,  prompting,  and  building  up  that  which  ii
virtuous,  holy,  and  good.  As  the  whole  law  is  fulfil]
led  in  one  word,  namely,  in  obedience  ;  so  all  the  piomj
ises  of  God  are  contained  in  one  void,  namely,  i;
righteousness.

24.  And  hence  such  plain  promises  as  the  folio  wl
isai.i.25,  -ng  .  u  j  wyj turn  m^  hand  upon  thee,  and  pure!]

purge  away  thy  dross — afterwards  thou  shalt  be  cal

led  The  city  of  righteousness, The  faithful  city. A*
chap.  vi.  a  teil-tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  tbemJ
*3,  when  they  cast  their  leaves  ;  so  the  Holy  seed  shall  b<

Joel  iii. tne  substance  thereof. — Then  shali  Jerusalem  be  Ho|
i7-  ly,  and  there  shall  no  strangers  pass  through  her  an;

Zeeh.viii  more. — And  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  a  city  of  truth

and  the Mountain of  the Lord  of  hosts, The Hoh}

mountain.9*

25.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days*
that  the  mountain  [or  foundation]  of  the  Lord's  hous<

IM1.H.  2,  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  [thai
Ski.'  ir.  is>  above  the  strength  of  every  other  building,]  an^
A>3>^  it  shall  be  exaited  above  the  hills  ;  and  people  shall
flow  unto  it.  And  many  people  shall  go  and  say
Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  th<'
Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob  ;  and  hV
will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  hi
paths  :  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  an<
the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."

26.  "  And  he  shall  judge  among  the  nations,  an(
*Lvtcif?s  shall  work  conviction  in  many  fieo/iles  ;*  and  thej'
tion. r  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plow-shares,  and  thei:  f

spears  into  pruning-hooks  :  nation  shall not  lift  ill'
sword  against nation,  neither shall  they  learn  wai
any more/ — But  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  hi:
\ine,  and  under  his  fig-tree :  and  none  shall make
them  afraid. "

27.  And — |cy  "  This  is  the  law  of  the  house>\
firs*;*. Upon  the  top  of  the  mountain,  the  whole  limit  thereof


VII. THE  PRESENT  INCREASING  WORK  OF  CHRIST, 523

ound  about  shall  be  most  holy. And  the  name  of  the  c*^-

ity  from that  day  shall  be,  The  Lord  is  there.

The  giory  of  Lebanon  shall  come  unto  thee-— to  beau-  Ezeidei
fy  the  place  of  my  sanctuary-- -and  all  they  that  des-  xivi"-  Z5>
ised  thee  shall  bow  themselves  down at  the  soles  of
y feet  ;  and  they shall call  thee,  The  city  of  the  IsaJ.k.T3
\prd, The  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Isreal."  14,1*8,21.

28.  "  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  land,
asting  nor  destruction  within  thy  borders  ;  but  thou
lalt  call  thy  walls  Salvation,  and  thy  gates  Praise.
"hy  people  also  shall  be  all  righteous  :  they  shall  in-
erit  the  land  forever,  the  branch  of  my  planting,
le  work of  my  hands,  that  I  may  be glorified.—

hat  they  might  be called Trees  of  Righteousness,  isaUxi
he  planting  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might  be  sHori-  5-

29.  All  these  and  such  like  promises,  are  express-
to  the  Church  and  people  of  God,  in  this  latter

iy.  If  true  believers  are  called  A  City,  it  is  because
ey  are  joined  and  compacted  together,  by  the  spir-
of  union  and  order :  if  they  are  called  Jerusalem,
is  because  the  name  is  expressive  of  peace  :  if
ey  are  called  Mount*Zion,  which  signifies  high  and

tan,  it  is  because  they  are  raised  above  the  low  and

ise  corruptions  of  human  nature  ;  and  if  they  are
lied  Trees  of  Righteousness,  it  is  because  they  arc

uitful  in  every  good  work.

30.  In  a  word,  all  the  prophecies  were  descriptive
that  state  of  purity  and  holiness,  justice  and  right-

usness,  in  which  God  would  meet  and  dwell  with
s  people  forever  ;  according  to  what  was  revealed
st  of  all  to  saint  John. "  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  frev.xsb
d  a  new  earth— wherein  (according  to  saint  Peter)  zkt'm,
velleth  righteousness. And  I John  saw  the  holy  13*
ty,  new  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of
>a.ven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband,
tid  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  fie-
ld the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men'9

31.  «  For  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God  ;  as  2Cor  *j
'od  hath  said,  I will  dwell  in  them,  and walk  int-
ern ;  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my

]  ople. — And  I  saw  no  temple  therein  :  for  the  Lord
tj>d  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it—  |^j*

Z  z


ail


5*4  PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING  IN P.  VI!

chap. And  there shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thin;
XIV- that  defiieth,  neither  whatsoever worketh abomim

tion,  or  maketh  a  lie  ;  but  they  which  are  written  l

the-book  of  the  life  of  the  Lamb."
Hev.xxii. 32.  M  And  he  shewed  me  a  pure river  of  the  ws
a'  ter  of  life,  clear  as chrvstal,  proceeding  out  of  thf

throne  of  God,  and  of  the  Lamb  :"  That  is,  purit

of  life,  or  true  righteousness,  proceeding  from  th
p  v  xi  saints,  who  are  the  throne  and  city  of  God. — For,  T)
soT'  "' fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  Tree  of  life. — And  out  |:
gj**™  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.

33.  "  And  on either  side  of  the  river,  (he  shewe
Kev.xxu.  ^ ^  T^^  ^  ^  which bare  twelve  fruits,  a*

yielded  her  fruit  every  month."  Thus  the  river  w>
represented  as  flowing  between  two  trees,  whl
were  of  one  nature,  and  typified  the  same  Two  ;
the  Two  Olive  Trees,  in  the  vision  of  Zechariah.  ^

34.  But  here  the  matter  is  more  full  and  plaim
and  that  which  was  represented  by  the  golden  oil,
here  a  river  of  the  water  of  life,  having  two  sided
relating  to  man  and  woman,  and  their  respective  t*
of  life  on  each  side  :  and  that  covenant  by  which  bo)
man  and  woman  live  the  life  of  the  Lamb,  is  here  r
presented  as  established  between  them  both  ;  so  thl
eternal  life  is  no  where  to  be  found  but  in  that  co«j
enantand  correspondent  union  which  flows  betwe<
the  two  ;  which  is  like  a  river  for  multitude,  ma*
up  of  many  drops  ;  for  power,  which  cannot  be  sto

ped  in  its  course  ;  and  for  perpetual  motion,  whi
ilows  day  and  night.

35.  And  there  shall  be  no  more  curse. By  the df

R*v.xm  obedierice  0f  Woman,  the  curse  entered  ;  and  soi
her  obedience  it  is  finally  taken  away  ;  and  she  b
comes  a  tree  of  life,  on  her  corresponding  side  of  tj
river  of  life,  answerable  to  the  life  of  Jesus.  Ti
same  was  also  signified  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel,
his  vision  of  the  holy  waters,  with  an  increase  of  x

£>£?!  ry  many  Trees  on  the  one  side  and  on  the other  jj
which  is  according  to  the  promise  of  God,  A  lit

Isai.lx. one  shall  become  a  thousand,  and  a  small  one a  stA

22*  nation  : I  the  Lord,  will  hasten  it  in  his  time.

36 Therefore  it is written;."  Sing,  O  barrc

ij$uu  thcu  didst  not  bear  ;  break  forth  into  singing,  a


f.  VII. THE  PRESENT  INCREASING  WORK  OF  CHRIST. 525


ry  aloud,  thou  didst  not  travail  with  child  :  for  more
*e  the  children  of  the  desolate,  than  the  children  of
e  married  wife,  saith  the  Lord.— For  thy  Maker  is
me  Husband  ;  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name  ;  and
ly  redeemer  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  ;  The  God
I  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called. — And  all  thy
lildren  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord  ;  and  great  shall
the  peace  of  thy  children.  In  righteousness  shalt
iou be established  ;  thou  shalt  be  far  from  oppres-


CHAP.
XIV.


ion."


37.  But,  "  Wo  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  Mat.x^v
them that  give  suck  in  those  days  ! — They  shall  g- *

Dme with weeping,  and with  supplications  will  I  8,d.
>ad  them  : — They  shall  say,  Blessed  are  the  barren,  Luke
>id  the  wombs  that  never  bare,  and  the  fiafis  which  nev-  xxl,i- 2?-
gave  suck. — Therefore  they  shall  come  and  sing  Jer.xxxi.
1  the  height  of  Zion,  and  shall  flow  together  to  the  12'  l
oodness  of  the  Lord,  for  wheat,  and  for  wine,  and
>r  oil, and for  the young  of  the  flock and  of  the
erd  ;  and  their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden  ;
id  they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more  at  all."

38.  "  Then  fhall  the  virgin  rejoice  in  the  dance,  both
King  men  and  old  together  :  for  I  will  turn  their
kourning  into  joy,  and  will  comfort  them,  and  make

lem  to  rejoice  from  their  sorrow. — There  shall  be  ^S£*
0  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  neither  shall  they  x™  £
enerate  a  shortlived  race.*  20/

39.  But  I  say.  Did  not  Israel  know  ?  Did  they  not
nderstand  when  such  prophecies  had  gone  forth  in-
all  the  earth,  and the  words  of  the  prophet  unto

le  ends  of  the  world  ?  Nay,  verily  the  sound  they*:
eard,  but  the  sense  they  wholly  mistook  :  for  they
ere  united  to  the  first  Adam,  and  multiplied  after
he  covenant  of  the  flesh.

40.  Therefore "  Moses  saith,  I  will  provoke  you  Rom  v>
0  jealousy  by  them  that  are  no  pe  0 file,  and  by  a  fool-  18,19V

h  nation  I  will  anger  you."  And  such  is  the  Church
f  Christ  in  the  present  day,  who  claim  no  relation
0  the  works  of  the  flesh  ;  they  are  therefore  count-
d  as  no  people,  among  the  peoples  and  kindreds  of
he  earth.  J  foolish  nation  ;  that  is,  a  nation  not
bunded  on,  or  supported  by  human  science  or  leani-
ng :  for  God  hath  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this


4.


526  PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING  IN P.  VI]

CxivT' world>  since  it  has  pleased  him,  by  the  foolishnes:

. of  preaching Christ  crucified,  to  save  them  that  be

acor.i. Heve.

'2i}23.  4i#  Where  there  is  no  sin,  there  is  no  curse  ;  an*

where  there  is  no  curse,  there  is  no  need  of  any  al
tar,  atoning  sacrifice,  or  temple  service  ;  and  there
fore  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  appearer
as  the  only  temple  of  the  new  Jerusalem;  whicl
leaves  no  place for  making atonement for  the un

Bev.xxii.  cleanness  of  man  or  woman.  "  Bui  the  throne  of  Go<

and of  the  Lamb  shall be  in it  ;  and his servant

shall  serve  him  :  and  they  shall  see  his  face,  and  hi

name  in  their  foreheads."

•42.  The  servants  of  God  are  sealed  unto  the  daj

J^id*'  °^  redemption. "  And  I  heard  the  number  of  then

Aiv.  i.  that  were  sealed, — an  hundred  and  forty  and  fou
thousand  ;"  the  same  as  those  with  the  Lamb  upo:
mount  Zion,  and  the  fruits  brought  forth  by  the  Ire

isaUsiu.  of  life,  who  brought forth  every  month  in  the  year
according  as  it  was  said,  "  The  year  of  my  redeemt
ed  is  come."

43.  As  the  female  is  the  mother,  orbringer  Forth
of  all  living  into  life  ;  so  all  such  prophecies  pointed
for  their  accomplishment,  to  the  appearing  of  Chris
in  the  female.  In  the  light  of  Christ's  first  appear;
ing,  his  followers  could  suffer  and  be  in  pain  ;  but  I:
couid  be  only  in  his  second  appearing  that  any  couh
live  and  reign  with  him  on  earth.

44.  Hence said  the  prophet,  "  Like  as  a  womai
Ti^iV.  with  child,  that  draweth  near  the  time  of  her  deliv*

•  cry,  is  in  pain,  and  crieth  out  in  her  pangs  ;  so  havi
we  been  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord.  We  have  been  wit!
child,  we  have  been  in  pain,  we  have  as  it  wen
brought  forth  wind  ;  we  have  not  wrought  any  deliv
erance  in  the  earth,  neither  have  the  inhabitants  o
the  world  fallen. "

45.  And  so  it  continued,  through  all  generations
until  the  present  appearing  of  Christ ;  in  which  i
follows,  that  as the  inhabitants of  the  old crcatior

,  fall  ;  so  those  of  the  new  arise.  Therefore  it  wai
Rer.xx.  sa^5  "  Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  together  with  m)
4V  iii  dead  D0Cty  sna^  tne>r  ar^se- — And  they  lived,  anc
8. *'  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years  :"  which  is  th<


Js.i.xxvi


111


-:


n


HP.  VII. THE  PRESENT  INCREASING  WORK.  OF  CHRIST. 527

•rear  of  the  redeemed,  or  the  great  day  of  God  Al- c**f*'
•nighty.  "  _

46.  Christ  in  this  day,  is  the  author  of  eternal  sal-
tation to  all  them  that  obey  him  ;  they  are  quicken-
ed together  with  Christ,  five  as  he  lived,  and  reign

Dver  ail  that  he  reigned  over. "  But  the  rest  of  the  Rev,XXk
lead  lived  not  together  until  the  thousand  years  were  5-
unshed."

47.  Thus,  while  the  people  of  God  are  brought
brth  and  united  in  the  life  of  Christ,  the  disobedient
md  gain-saying  are  more  than  ever  divided,  and  will
lever  find  any  thing  into  which  they  can  gather  and
inite  until  the  day  of  redemption  and  separation  is
>ver.

48.  Therefore  the  psalmist,  speaking  of  the  second
tppearing  of  Christ,  says,  «  Ke  shall call to the  iT *
leavens  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he may  judge

lis  people.  Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me  :
hose  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacri-
ice.  And  the  heavens  shall  declare  his  righteous-
less."  The  saints  are  first  gathered  to  Christ  In  a
;ovenant ;  and  by  thus  becoming  the  habitation  of
Jod,  the  new  heavens  wherein  dwelleth  righteous-
ress,  they  declare  his  righteousness.

49.  And  as  the  true  and  faithful  are  gathered  unto
Jhrist,  in  the  covenant  of  righteousness  and  peace,
y  the  testimony  of  unchangeable  truth,  which  was
esignated  by  the  voice  of  the  arch-angel  and  the  last
rump  of  God  ;  so,  during  the  voice  of  this  trumpet,
rid  the  gathering  of  the  saints,  the  devil  and  satan  is
ound,  that  he  cannot  deceive  the  nations  with  any
stablished  system  of  false  religion,  as  he  has  done
nder  the  reign  of  Antichrist.  He  can  furnish  no-
ting to  imitate  the  truth,  as  a  pretended  revelation

Irom  God,  sufficient  to  influence  the  nations,  or  unite

fliem  to  one  common  head.

M  50-  But  when  the  year  of  the  redeemed  is  finish-  g^Kzek
d,  and  the  elect,  or  those  who  believe  and  obey  the  ***▼*»*
ruth, are  gathered  of  all  nations  ; then shall  the  "
ricked  also  be  gathered,  according  to  those  figures
nd  prophecies  which  respect  their  final  doom  :  this
owever,  is  not  the  work  of  the  present  day.
51.  But  while  the  new  heavens  are  building  up,

Z  z  2


xxm.


31a  t.  xxiv


*4,


528 PROPHECIES  AND  PROMISES  FULFILLING,  $CC P.  VII.

CxnT tne  °^  arc  dissolving,  According  to  all  that  the pro-

phets  have  spoken,  particularly  the  prophet  Haggaij

Hag. «.  "  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea.
J'7:22*"  and  the  dry  land.  And  I  will  shake  all  nations  Anc
4.  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  and  I  will

destroy  the  strength  ot  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen  |
and  I  will  overthrow  the  chariots,  and  those  that  ride
in  them  ;  and  the  horses  [the  people]  and  their  rider*
[the  priests]  shall  come  down,  every  one  by  the  swore
of  his  brother."

52.  This  prophecy,  with  others  of  the  like  nature:
has  evidently  been  fulfilling  ever  since  the  presenl
order  of  the  Church  was  established,  in  the  yeai
1792,  by  the  encreasing  commotions  and  revolution!
among  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  which  afford  the,
strongest  evidence  that  peace  will  never  be  restore*
to  the  earth,  until  every  purpose  of  God,  towards  thi
fallen  race  of  man,  be  fully  executed.

53.  The  dissolution  of  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist
•was  also  signified  by  all  the  threatnings  against  oh
Jerusalem  for  her  abominations,  and  svas  particular!
signed  out  by  the  destruction  of  that  corrupt  city,  b;
the  army  of  Titus  Fesfiasian,  so  that  not  one  stone  0(
their  temple  was  left  upon  another,  according  to  tin
words  of  Christ.

54.  And  as  the  seat  of  that  corrupt  religion  whicl
stood  in  opposition  to  Christ  in  his  first  appearing
wasted  away,  by  slow  degrees,  through  their  own  di
visions,  and  the  superior  power  of  a  foreign  people
so  in  the  second  appearing  of  Christ,  that  which  let
or  hinders  the  progress  of  his  work,  will  be  take]
out  of  the  way  by  a  similar  overthrow.

55.  Therefore,  let  them  which be  in  Judea,  fle*
iRev.xxii.  unto  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house — And  B lessee

are  they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may  hav
right  to  the  tree  of  life^  and  may  enter  in  through  tk
gates  into  the  city.


i.


I


P.  VII. A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES.  529

CHAPTER  XV.

A  short  Calculation  of  the  fir  inc  if  ml  Prophecies,  relating
to  the  lath  r  Day.

AS  the  time  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies C^F*
lie  latter  day,  or  Christ's  second  ap-

Rearing,  was  not  to  be  known,  nor  the  manner  of  it
Understood,  until  the  event  itself  should  declare  it  ;
and  as  those  prophecies  were  given  by  the  Spirit  of

Inspiration,  and  can  be  properly  understood  only  by
the  same  ;  therefore,  where  the  revelation  of  God
is  given,  and  the  events  have  taken  place^  there  the

rophecies  may  be  rightly  calculated  and  truly  under-
stood, by  those  who  are  in  the  event  itself,  so  far  as
the  things  are  revealed  and  made  known,  and  no  fur-
ther.

2.  And  as  the  time  fixed  in  many  of  the  principal
prophecies,  is  certainly  run  out,  and  the  principal
events,  as  to  their  commencement,  have  taken  place  ;
therefore  the  events  are  certainly  known,  by  those
who  are  in  the  Spirit  of  their  fulfilment,  at  this  pres*
ent  day.

3.  The  prophecies  of  Daniel  include  the  time,  and
rincipal  events,  of  all  the  other  prophecies,  which

n  their  order,  were  to  be  fulfilled  at  three  different
ieriods  as  follows  :  For  a  time,  times,  and  an  half, —  Dan.xfc7
he  shall  have  accomplished  to  scatter  the  power  of  th vSi*!!
holy  fieofile :  That  is,  three  years  and  a  half,  which  *?5™*&
ontain forty  and  two  months,  or  1260  days,  a  day  Mat.xxiv
for  a  year,  the  same  period  that  the  woman  continu-  RevtJSs.
ed  in  the  wilderness. This  was  to  be  the  particular  3,&xitt.
riod  of  Antichrist's  dominion,  in  which the  wit-
sses  prophesied  in  sackcloth.

4.  The  second  period  is,  Unto  two  thousand  and  Y**1'^
three  hundred  days  ;  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  clean-  xii.  11,12.
sed. — And  from  the  time that  the  daily  sacrifice  shall

be  taken  away,  (which  is  at  the  commencement  of  the
1260  days)  and  the  abomination  of  desolation  set  ufi}
there  shall  be  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days*.
These  two,  in  their  expiration,  refer  to  one  and  the
same  period. Then  follows  the  third,  Blessed  is  he


I


or:


530  A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES. P.  VII.

CxvP* ^lCLt  wuitethi  and  comdh  to  the thousand  three hun*
' dred  and  Jive  and  thirty  days,

5.  As  all  the  different  periods  have  expired,  and
the  principal  events,  to  which  all  the  three  prophe-
cies allude,  have  taken  place,  as  they  arose  in  the  or-
der of  times  ;  it  is  therefore  proper  to  state  those
numbers  in  order,  as  they  arose,  with  their  several
accomplishments  ;  by  which  both  the  commencement  ec
and  expiration  of  the  most  noted  periods  may  be  ea-
sily understood.*

6.  The  2300  years  include  the  reign  of  Antichrist,!
as  at  the  end  of  that  period  the  sanctuary  was  to  be<
cleansed  ;  and  therefore,  by  taking  from  that  number,l
the  553  years  before  Christ,  at  which  time  the  proph

tseemar  ecy  was  given, t  wc  have  the  period  alluded  to  in  the  fli
*"  Christian  sera, 1747,  at  which  time  the  present  work  kj
of  God  began  in  England.

7.  From  the  setting  up  of  the  abomination  of  des*
olation,  there  was  to  be 1290  years,  which  period  H
must  also  expire  at  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary ;
and  therefore  by  taking 1290,  from  1747,  we  have  *i
the time in  which  the  reign of  Antichrist  began,
namely,  in  the  year  457,  under  Leo  I.  (commonly)
called  Leo  the  Great,)  bishop  of  Rome,  at  the  death  of  I
the  emperor  Marcianus ; as  has been  circumstan
lially  stated.

8.  The  reign  of  Antichrist  was  to  continue  1260k
years,  which  being  added  to  457,  brings  that  period
down  to  the  year  1717;  but  as  there  was  a  gradual
preparation  in  civil  government,  before  the  time  of
the  prophecy,  alluding  to  the  beginning  of  Anti-
christ's reign,  commenced  ;  so  there  was  also  a  grad*
ual  preparation  in  the  same,  by  which  his  kingdom
was  weakened.

9.  Liberty  of  conscience,  a  deadly  wound  to  Antik


Xi


*  In  2300  days,  or  years,  the  sanctuary  was  to  be  cleansed.  j

553  years  before  Christ  this  prophecy  was  given.
1747  the  ministry  of  James  Wardley  commenced.
1290  years  of  desolation.
457  the  abomination  of  desolation  set  up  under  Leo  I.
1335  years  of  waiting  or  the  fulness  of  the  promises.
1792  the  Chureh  established  in  gospel  order.

2ZSL

™"  45  years  of  gradual  increase  from  1747  till  1792*


I


I


(P.  VII. A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES.  531

Ichrist,  was  in  part  established  by  William  III.  prince  °2v.P*
pf  Orange,  in  the  year  1 689  ;  so  that  by  the  year  1717,  ___

lis  kingdom  was  sufficiently  weakened  to  establish

hat  period,  answerable  to  the  prophecy.

10.  But  as  the  fulness  of  time  was  not  yet  come  to
inish  the  scattering  of  the  holy  people,  and  to  set  up
he  kingdom  of  Christ ;  therefore,  in  another  proph-
ecy, 30  years  more  are  added  to  the  1260,  which
>rings  the  1290  years,  to  the  year  1747.

11.  By  this  time,  in  the  order  of  providence,  the
>rinciples  of  freedom  and  the  rights  of  conscience,
vere  so  far  established  as  to  weaken  the  powers  of
>ersecution  in  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  and  make
oom  for  the  present  work  and  testimony  of  God  ;  in
yhich  was  expressly  fulfilled  that  prophecy,  The  earth  Rfcv.x*
\elfied  the  woman.

12.  Then  as  the  true  order  of  the  primitive  Church
vas  wholly  lost,  and  the  great  apostacy  established  as
aiiy  as  the  year  457;  therefore  the  1335  years  of
vaiting,  and  coming  unto  the  days  of  blessedness,
ommenced  at  that  period,  and  expired  in  the  year
792,  by  which  time  the  Church  was  established  in
s  present  order,  as  the  antitype  of  the  second  tem-

le,  to  which  the  Desire  of  ali  nations  was  to  come. Hag.».7»

3.  So  that  the  expiration  of  the  1335  years,  or
ear  1792,  was  the  period  for  the  fulfilment  of  that
rophecy,  and  the  commencement  of  all  the  blessed-
ess,  spoken  of  by  all  the  prophets  ;  and  beyond  this,
o  given  period  of  prophecy  extends,  as  thencefor-
ard  unto  the  end,  in  conformity  to  the  beginning,
LI  things  will  be  fulfilled,  pertaining  to  the  salvation
T  mankind,  and  ali  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the
iter  day.

14.  The  work  of  Christ  in  his  first  appearing,  is  Actsi.22,
Considered  as  beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John,  If^W
Bntii  by  his  ministry,  the  way  was  prepared  in  the
eople,  and  one  was  found  standing  among  them,
rhom  neither  John,  nor  the  people  had  before  known,
o  the  second  appearing  of  Christ  is  considered  as
eginning  from  the  preparatory  work  in  the  people,
nder  the  ministration  of  James  Wardley,  from  the
ear  1747,  and  onward,  until  the  Mother  was  anoint-
d  among  them,  and  sent  forth  of  God,  to  bear  a
•ublic  testimony  against  the  flesh.


532  A  CALCUXATION  OF  PROPHECIES. P.  VII.

c**p-  15.  And  therefore,  by  taking  1747  from  1792,>
[_  there  are  45  years  of  gradual  increase,  from  the  com-
mencement of  the  present  work  of  God  in  England,
until  the  building  and  establishment  of  the  Church  in
America  ;  within  this  period  all  the  transactions  oc-
curred, relating  to  Mother,  and  the  work  under  hen
ministry,  as  they  are  circumstantially  stated  in  the
Introduction.

16.  For  although  the  2300  years,  for  the  time  of  '
cleansing  the  sanctuary,  expired  in  the  year  1747  ;
yet  as  the  work  was  of  a  gradual  nature,  it  could  not
be  completed  at  once.  Therefore  the  real  blessed-
ness, which  was  to  flow  from  it,  was  not  dated  at  the
period  when  it  began,  but  45  years  later,  when  the
work  of  cleansing  and  purifying  was  to  be  in  such  a;
manner  completed,  that  the  way  into  the  Holiest  oi
all  should  be  made  manifest.

17.  And  therefore  it  was  said,  Blessed  is  he  thai
waiteth  and  cometh  to  the  thousand  three  hundred  ana

Jive  and  thirty  days  :  which  evidently  expired  at  the
year  1792,  when  the  Church  was  fully  established
in  the  present  order  of  the  gospel.

18.  Much  time  has  been  spent  in  calculating  th<  <«
foregoing  prophecies,  under  the  dark  night  of  apos*  f>
tacy,  particularly  in  the  latter  ages,  by  the  learnec  of
and  wise  men  of  this  world  :  but  as  men  cannot  se*  t

Ban.xii. to  read  in  the  dark,  and  none  of  the  wicked  were  tit
understand  ;  therefore  the  events  could  not  be  seen *)
nor  the  manner  of  their  fulfilment  searched  out,  un
til  it  was  revealed  by  the  light  of  Christ,  at  his  se
cond  appearing,  and  even  then  only  by  those  who  re
ceived  him,  and  who  were  ready  and  watching  at  th<  n
time  appointed.

19.  The  most  favoured  prophet  could  not  read  hii
»an.xii. own  prophetic  numbers. Go  thy  way,  Daniel :  (sail i
®"-13- the  angel  ;)  for  the  words  are  closed  nfi  and  sealed  ^H

the  time  oj  the  end — thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  th
lot  at  the  end  of  the  days.  Neither  was  it  for  the  CU
rious  inquiries  of  the  disciples  to  be  answered,  in  re
Acts i.7.  gardto  the  times  and  seasons,  which  the  Father  ha<
put  in  his  own  power.

20.  The  present  work  of  God  must  always  be  seei
in  and  by  its  present  light ;  not  through  the  telescope
of  human  wisdom,  nor  by  the  treasures  of  huma


[jr.  VII. k CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES.  533

knowledge,  which  the  wise  and  prudent  of  this  world c**ap.

have  treasured  up  to  themselves  ;  nor  according  to  '

the  conceptions  of  the  proud  and  lofty.

21.  They may  discern  the  face  of  the sky  :  but
they will  never  know  the  signs of  the  times,  until
they  come down  to  Christ  where  he  is  manifested,
according  to  his  own  counsel :  lake  my  yoke  upon  you,  Matt.  *a.
and  learn  of  me  ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  :  29'
and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your  souls.

22.  The  learned  scribes  .and  Pharisees  sat  in  the
sear,  of  Moses,  in  whom  they  trusted  ;  but  these  hyp-
ocrites clearly  manifested  that  they  regarded  neither
Moses,  nor  the  Messiah  of  whom  he  wrote  :  for
they  disbelieved  the  former,  and  totally  rejected  the
latter.  Had  ye  believed  Moses,  said  Jesus,  ye  would  JohQT>
have  believed  me  :  for  he  wrote  of  me.

23.  They  professed great  veneration  for  the  an-
cient prophets,  by  garnishing  the  sepulchres  of  those
whom their fathers  had killed,  and saying,  If  we  MotnSi
had  been  in  the  days  of  Our  fathers,  we  would  not  have  Acts  a.
been  partakers  with  them  in  the  blood  of  the  prophets  ;  JJ,V&51
while  they  themselves,  denied  the  holy  One,  and  the

Just,  of  whom  they  were  the  betrayers  and  murder-
ers ;  and  by  so  doing,  they  made  a  jest  of  the  oracles
of  the  prophets,  trampled  upon  their  prophecies,  and
ienied  both  the  time  and  manner  of  their  fulfilment.

24.  It  was the  manner  of  Jesus  to  teach  in  the
synagogues  of  the  Jews,  on  the  sabbath days. On
>ne  of  those  occasions,  in  his  own  country,  where  he
iiad  been  brought  up,  he  read  the  words  of  the  pro-
)het  Isaiah  : The  spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  be-
cause he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  I^ke**
hoor  ;  he  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken hearted,  to  l*"*f'
breach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and  recovering  of
sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruis-
ed ;  to  preach  the&cce/itable  year  of  the  Lord.

25.  In  that  day,  and  at  that  time,  was  this  scripture
fulfilled  in  their  ears.  So  testified  Jesus.  But  who,
)f  all  those  of  the  synagogue,  believed  that  this  scrip-
ture was  fulfilled  in  him  ?  Or  who  of  them  believed
;hat  this  was  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  that
Sod  had  anointed  and  sent  him  to  proclaim  it  \  Not  one.  .

26.  They  scorned  to  stoop  so  low  as  to  acknowl-
edge  such  a-  mean  character,  whom  they  so  well


ii


i


534  A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES.  P.  VIL

°xvP'  knew  as  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  brought  up  among
__ __  them,  and  with  whose  kindred  and  parentage  they
wei  e  so  well  acquainted,  instead  of  that  extraordi-
nary personage  whom  they  expected  to  come  in  great
JJ*^18,  power  and  splendor  as  the  Messiah.  Whence,  say
they,  hath  this  man  this  wisdom,  and  these  mighty
works  ?  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  so?i  ?  And  they
were  offended  at  him.

27.  But  Jesus  said,  "Ye  will  surely  say  unto  me
this  proverb,  Physician  heal  thyself:  whatsoever  wt
have  heard  dene  in  Capernaum,  do  also  here  in  tin
own  country"  But  he  testified  to  them  of  a  truths
that  many  widows  were  in  Israel,  in  the  days  of  Elh
as,  when  there  was  great  famine  throughout  the  land  \
but  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save  unto  £
widow  of  Siddri  :  and  that  many  lepers  were  in  Is*
rael,  in  the  time  of  Elisha  ;  and  none  of  them  was
cleansed,  saving  Xaaman,  the  Syrian.  And  the  true
reason  why  their  widows  were  not  visited,  nor  then
lepers  cleansed,  was,  that  they  were  a  stiff-neckec
and  gainsaying  generation,  who  killed  the  prophets-'
and  stoned  those  who  were  sent  unto  them.

28.  But  what  effect  had  the  truth  on  the  descend1
ants  of  those  unbelievers  ?  Truly,  the same effec'
that  it  had  on  their  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  fore

Acwvn.  fatllers_they  always  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost  :  as  their
fathers  did,  so  did  they  :  For  all  they  of  the  synagogue
when  they  heard  the  truth,  were  filled  with  wrath
and  rose  up,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city,  and  lee
him  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  that  thej  might  cast  run-
down head-long.

29.  This  was  the  manner  in  which  the  Saviour  o:
mankind  was  treated  in  his  first  appearing  ;  and  then1
never  was  a  time  since  man  fell  from  his  first  I'ccj
tude  to  the  present  day,  that  the  work  of  God  wai
not  objected  against,  and  the  testimony  of  his  witness
ses  rejected  by  all  hypocrites  and  unbelievers.

30.  But  the  objecters  and  gainsayers  of  the  present
clay,  would  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  not  un*
believers,  and  that,  if  they  had  been  in  the  time,  and
enjoyed  privilege  of  those  wicked  Jews  who  denied
Christ,  they  would  not  have  been  partakers  with
them  in  their  evil  deeds  ;  while  there  never  were  an)
gainsayers  to  the  work  of  God,  in  any  dispensatior


1


I.  VII- A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES.  535

f  his grace,  but  what  were  of  that  perverse  and c***-
ainsaying  generation,  who  do  always  resist  the  Holy  __
Ihost,  by  their  objections  and  cavils.

31.  The  unbelieving  Jews  were  always  ready  to
large  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  great  pride  and  pre-
imption,  in  applying  to  himself,  and  to  the  time
len  present,  the  title  and  dignity  of  the  Messiah,
id  the  fulfilment  of  that  superior  power  and  author-
y  of  his  mission,  spoken  of  by  the  prophets.  They
jjected  against  him  on  every  side — They  objected,

We  know this  man,  whence  he  is  :  but  when  Christ  Johnvti.
meth,  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is — Search  and '
>ok  :  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet." He  chap.  r.
ad  not  only  broken  the  sabbath,  but  said  also,  that  18*
rod  was  his  Father,  making  himself  equal  with  God. —
to  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abraham  ?  said  they  ;  viii.  53.
\hom makes  t  thou  thyself? — For  a  good  work we  1.33.
;one  thee  not ;  but  for  blasphemy,  and  because  that
wu,  being  a.  man,  makest  thyself  God.

32.  Thus  those  gainsayers  denied  not  only  the  per-
m  whom  God  had  anointed,  but  also  denied  his  mis-
on,  together  with  the  time,  and  place,  and  manner
f  his  appearing.  And  while  they  spent  their  time
i  objecting  and  cavilling  against  the  propriety  of
h list's  testimony,  aiming  to  prove  that  this  was  not
le  appearance  of  the  Saviour,  whom  the  prophets
ad  pointed  out,  they  wasted  the  day  of  their  visita-
.011,  and  only  proved  that  they  were  yet  servants  to
\n  ;  and  that  it  was  their  choice  and  intention  to  con-
nue  such,  under  the  hypocritical  mask  of  professing
>  believe  in  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and  the  prophets.

33.  In  the  same  situation,  and  actuated  by  the
*me  gainsaying  spirit,  are  those who,  at  this day,

rould  labour  to  prove,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  not  SeeKasr.
et  come,  and  that  Christ  has  not  made  his  second  Speuiif.
[Jppearing,  but  all things  continue  as  they were  ;  be-  3>4«
Hause  they  have  not  allotted  for  themselves,  that  the
ijurpose  of  Gcd  should  be  accomplished  in  this  their
]  ay,  but  in  some  future  day  ;  nor  have  they  prepared
heir  hearts  to  believe  that  the  manner  of  God's  work
vould  be  contrary  to  all  the  plans  devised  by  their  hu-
nan  wisdom.

34.  And  therefore,  while  they  labour  to  prove  that

A  a  a


536  A  CALCULATION  OF  PROPHECIES. P.  VII.

Cxv.P*  *ne  ^me  *s  not  >'et  come  for  Christ  to  set  up  hit
-  ,  kingdom  on  earth,  they  only  eventually  prove,  that
they  are  still  under  the  dominion  of  Antichrist,  tha<
they  are  the  willing  subjects  of  his  kingdom,  anc
are  the  scoffers  of  the  latter  days,  of  whom  the  scrip
tures  have  testified,

35.  And  while  they  profess  to  believe  in  Christ
and  in  the  time  and  manner  of  his  first  appearing
but  deny  this  day,  and  reject  both  the  time  and  man
ner  of  his  second  appearing,  they  evidently  speal
lies  in  hypocrisy.  For  had  they  believed  in  Christ'
first  appearing,  they  would  believe  in  his  second!
for  he  testified  of  it.  And  had  they  believed  in  th
prophets,  they  would  believe  in  the  fulfilment  o
their  prophecies :  for  they  have  all  prophesied  an
written  of  this  day.

36.  The  words  of  the  prophecies  were  closed  uA
and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end.  At  the  time  of  thi
end  the  seals  wTere  to  be  taken  off,  and  the  time  an
the  events  were  to  be  known  by  those  who  shoul
then  be  in  them.  But  it  never  was  the  purpose  <
God,  to  reveal  these  things  to  the  wise  and  pruder
of  this  world  ;  but  to  such  only  as  are  candid  am
honest  hearted  before  God,  and  are  willing  to  stoot
down  to  the  times  and  terms  of  his  own  appointment
for,  The  secrets  of  the  Lord  are  with  them  that  fea\
him :  and  he  will  shew  them  his  covenant.

Mat.xi. 37.  Hence  said  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  /  lhan\

r*5t  thee, 0  Father,  Lord of  heaven  and  earth,  becam

thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  firudert\

and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes. Even  so,  Father

for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight.

38.  And  however  humiliating  and  debasing  to
pride  of  fallen  man,  the  purposes  of  God  may  prove
yet  they  are  unchangeable and will  stand  ;  and  i
their  appointed  times  and  seasons,  will  accomplish  a
that  whereunto  they  are  purposed,  and  none  can  di
annul  or  hinder  it.
T^kiei 39-  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know  that
i^Ht ^ie  Lord  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have  e&
».an«iiTu  alted  the  low  tree,  have  dried  ufi  the  green  tree,  an
3* 4* have  made  the  dry  tree  to  flourish  :  I  the  Lord  hat
spoken  and  have  done  it.


?sa.  xx\
4*- _


4

^e  I


THE  TESTIMONY  OF

CHRIST'S  SECOND  APPEARING.
PART  VIII.

RTICULAR  DOCTRINES  ACCORDING  TO
THE  PRESENT  APPEARING  OF
CHRIST.

CHAPTER.  I.

The  Revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  *

"  EHOVAH,  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ,  was  known  unto  the  patriarchs  as  the ^  *
od  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and the  '

od  of  Jacob  ;  and  therefore  as  Jacob  abode  in  the
ar  of  his  father,  he  could  swear  by  none  greater  oen.xxx
an  by  the  Fear  of  his  Father  Isaac. But  as  per-  sa-
ining to  spiritual  children,  except  in  a  comparative
snse,  or  by  promise,  God  was  never  known  by  the
ue  attribute  of  Father  until  the  Son  revealed  him.

2.  Unto  Moses  the  Lord  declared  saying,  "  Thus
lalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  f/0^'
nt  me  unto  you — The  God  of  Abraham,  the  God
',  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob — This  is  my  name
rever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto  all  genera-
ls. " Therefore  until  the  genealogies  of  genera-

ns  ceased,  in  the  work  of  regeneration  by  Christ,

The  first  appearing  of  Christ,  in  the  simplest  terms  of  language,  is  the
Nation  of  the  Father*  ami  the  second  appealing  of  Christ  is  the  Revelation
the  Mother  ;  but  for  the  subject  under  consideration  we  have  preferred  the
Lb,  "  Tlie  Revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  as  the  most  forcible  and  striking  of
other  scripture  terms,  that  can  be  applied  to  convey  an  understanding  of
fundamental  doctrines  of  Christ  in  the  present  day.  In  the  scriptures  the
ne  things  are  very  frequently  expressed  in  very  different  words,  and  under
Ferent  names  and  titles.  And  it  is  not  very  essential  what  terms  are  used  to
ivey  the  truth  to  a  lost  world,  provided  it  can  thereby  find  an  entrance  int«
?  heart,  and  by  its  superior  light,  dispel  those  «louds  of  confused  ideas,  and
se  notions  of  God,  by  which  Antichrist  has  long  bewildered  mankind.


538  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. P.  VIII


none  of  the  true  attributes  of  Jehovah  were  eve
known.

3.  Hence  God  said  unto  Moses,  "  I  appeared  unfc
Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by  the  nam
of  God  Almighty  ;  but  by  my  name  Jehovah  wa
I  not  known  unto  them."  Whatever  names  or  attri
butes  were  applied  to  God  before  Christ  appearec
they  were  only  significant  of  the  substance,  whic
never  was  really  and  truly  known  until  the  Fathe
was  revealed  by  the  Son.

£■**» 4.  Hence  said  Christ,  "  No  man  knoweth  who  th.

M*  Son  is,  but  the  Father;  and who  the  Father  is,  bi

the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him.-<

Jukni.18  No  man  iiat-n  seen  qoc]  at  anv  time  j  the  only  begot
ten  Son,  which  is  in  the.  bosom  of  the  Father,  hi
hath  declared  him."

5.  Therefore  the  true  attribute  of  Father,  in  th
Deity,  was  never  known  until  it  was  revealed  by  th
Son  :  and  as  the  mystery  of  iniquity  was  only  in  par
revealed  by  the  Son  ;  so  only  in  part  could  the  mys,
tery  of  God  be  by  him  revealed  in  that  day.

6.  But  it  has  been  promised  that  in  the  days  of  th
Bcv.x.7.  voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  should  begin  1
^Thes.ii  soqh^  the  mystery  of  God  should  be  finished;  b<

cause  then  should  that  wicked  be  revealed,  and  take  S
fully  out  of  the  way,  and  consumed  by  the  Spirit!
the  Lord's  mouth,  and  destroyed  by  the  brightness  i
his  coming.

7.  Every  thing  must  have  a  beginning  before  it  ca
be  finished.  Hence  the  mystery  of  God  began  to  t
revealed  in  the  days  of  Christ's  first  appearing,  ar
is  finished  in  his  second.  When  the  Father  was  m
vealed  in  and  by  the  Son,  in  whom  dwelt  the  fulnei

iTira-iii.  of  the Deity,  it  was  a  great  mystery. — Great  is t)
i*i  a  2.  mV8tery  °f  Godliness, God  manifested  in  the  flesh-

The mystery of  God, and of  the Father, and  4

Christ,

8.  God  was  named  by  the  name  of  JEHOV^
and  owned  as  the  Creator  of  all  things,  for  ages  h
fore  the  name  of  Father  was  named  ;  but  the  tri
attributes  of  JEHOVAH,  which  imply  the  full  pe  1
fections  of  the  Deity,  the  first  and  the  last,  bega
first  of  all  to  be  made  known  by  promise. Thus  tt


1


|p.  VIIL THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST.  539

o  CHAP

jbrophet  Isaiah, Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  bon ,
s  giVCn— his  name  shall  be  called— The  Mighty  God,


The  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  imUix.  6

9.  This  particularly  alluded  to  Christ  Jesus  ;  and
lthough  the  Word  states  it  in  the  present  tense,  yet
here  were  in  truth  and  reality,  no  such  attributes  per-
aining  to  God,  whereby  he  was  actually  revealed*
mtil  the  Son  was  actually  born  ;  but  his  name  for-
ver,  and  his  memorial  through  all  generations,  was
Jod  Almighty,  until  the  work  of  regeneration
ommenced,  and  the  Father  was  actually  revealed  in
ndby  the  Son.

10.  Christ  Jesus  had  the  Father  dwelling  in  him,
nd  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  as  he  was  sent
nto the world  ;  so  he sent  his  disciples  into  the
vorld  ;  saying,  "  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  na-  Matt,
ions,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  ^ol
>f  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  teaching  them

o  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded
'ou."  And  as  the  Holy  Ghost  was  sent  into  Jesus,
>y  which  he  revealed  the  Father ;  so  the  same  was
iso  given  to  his  followers.

11.  As  Christ  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God,  the  first  Rev.i.5.
50m  of  every  creature  in  the  new  creation,  and  the  20Cor'xv*
irst  begotten  of  the  dead,  and  was  therefore  the  first  Jam«i.
ruits  of  them  that  slept ;  so  those  who  were,  through

iim,  begotten  by  the  word  of  truth  in  that  day,  were
i  kind  of  first  fruits,  of  his  creatures,  or  creation,
hich  was  exhibited  only  in  the  line  of  the  male.

12.  But  when  the  vision  of  St.  John came  to  be  Rev-xiv.
ulfilled,  the  perfect  first  fruits  unto  God  and the  K-ekiei

amb  appeared,  complete  both  in  the  order  of  the  Reviixli
lale  and  female  ;  which  was  included  in  the vision  *•
I  the  holy waters,  with  very  many  trees  on  both
ides  of  the  river,  whose  leaf  (it  was  said)  should
t  fade,  neither  should  the  fruit  thereof  be  consumed.

1 3.  The  invisible  things  of  God  from  the  creation
f  the  world,  are  clearly seen,  being  understood  by  Rom  ^

'he  things  that  are  made,  or  created  ;  even  his  eter-  20.
ial  power  and  Divinity. Therefore,  although  many
;hings,  from  the  beginning  of  the  visible  creation,
«rere  declared  beforehand,  and  suddenly  fulfilled  in  a

A  aa2


540  THE  11EVELATIOJJ  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. P.  VIII.

chap. figure  .  yet  nothing  was  known  of  the  Creator,  in
^ reality,  until  their  actual  existence.

14.  And  although  many  things  were  seen,  and  spo-«
ken,  and  prophesied  of,  concerning  the  Divine  per-
fections of  JEHOVAH ■;  yet  in  reality  and,  truth,
those  perfections  could  not  be  known,  until  their  ac-
tual accomplishment  and  revelation  by  Christ,  in  the
fulness  of  times,  in  his  first  and  second  appearing.
For  if  the  fulness  of  the  perfections  of  JEHOVAH  en
had  been  revealed  in  the  days  of  Christ's  first  appear-
ing, there  would  not  have  been  another  day  spoken
of;  and  until  the  fulness  of  time,  it  was  in  the  mind
of  infinite  wisdom  to  keep  them  concealed.

15.  Hence God speaks by  the prophet Isaiah,
isajxivia  «  Hear  ye  this,  O  house  of  Jacob — which  swear  by

the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  make  mention  of  the  Godc
of  Israel,  but  not  in  truth,  nor  in  righteousness. Foi
they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  city,  and  stay  them-  k
selves  upon  the  God  of  Israel."

16.  "I  have  declared  the  former  things  from  the*
beginning — I  shewed  them  ;  I  did  them  suddenly,-
and  they  came  to  pass.  Because  I  knew  that  thou  art
obstinate,  and  thy  neck  is  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow
brass  ; — before  it  came  to  pass  I  shewed  thee  ;  lest
thou  shouldest  say,  Mine  idol  hath  done  them."

17.  "I  have  shewed  thee  new  things  from  this  time,:
even  hidden  things,  And  thou  didst  not  know  them,!
They  are  created  now,  and  not  from  the  beginning—
lest  thou  shouldest  say,  Behold  I  knew  them: — fori
knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  treacherously,  and
wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  womb"

18.  And  because  the  heart  of  fallen  man  is  deceit
ful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  and  be<
cause  he  is  a  very  treacherous  dealer,  and  a  trans* !
gressor  from  the  womb  ;  therefore  it  is,  that  th#
hidden  things  of  God  were  not  given  unto  man  to  know,
any  faster  than  in  the  fulness  of  times,  appointed  in
the  order  of  God's  unchangeable  purpose.

19.  Hence  it  was  of  greater  benefit  to  mankind,
that  the  time,  place,  and  manner  of  Christ's  second
appearing  should  be  totally  concealed  from  them,  than
the  revelation  of  it  would  have  been.  While  such
stiff-necked  corrupters  are  endeavouring  to  limit  the


(P.  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOL* GHOST.  54l

Holy  One,  and  corrupt  every  thing- which comes cM*-
irithin  the  comprehension  of  their  blind  senses,  God  ~

Suddenly,  and  unawares,  accomplishes  his  own  pur-
ees out  of  their  sight,  in  such  a  manner  as  their
mman  wisdom  can  neither  comprehend,  nor  their
>ower  supplant.

20.  As  it  is  only  by  the  things  that  are  created  now,
,nd  made  manifest  in  their  present  and  actual  exist-
mce,  that  the  invisible  things  of  God  can  be  truly
:nown  ;  and  as  it  was  only  in  and  by  the  Son,  in  his
ctual  existence,  that  the  Father  was  revealed  in
Christ's  first  appearing  ;  therefore  by  the  things
vhich  are  now  created anew  in Christ  Jesus,  and

hich  actually  exist  in  the  present  day,  the  full  per-
fections of  JEHOVAH  are  actually  revealed,  made
nanifest,  and  certainly  known.

21.  Before  the  substance  was  made  known  by  the
ctual  existence  of  the  Son,  in  Christ's  first  appeali-
ng, the  Anointing  Power  (which  constituted  Christ)
welt  in  the  eternal  Word,  which  was  communica-  *
ed  to  the  patriarchs  and  prophets  by  the  ministry  of
ngels  ;  so  in  the  same  manner  was  the  Holy  Ghost
iven  unto  the  apostles  and  true  witnesses,  as  a  Sfiir*

of  Promise )  until  the  substance  should  be  revealed
nd  made  known  by  the  actual  existence  of  the
)aughter,  in  Christ's  second  appearing.

22.  And  as  in  the  fulness  of  time  the  Spirit  of  God
escended  and  abode  in  the  Son,  in  whom  dwelt  the
ulness  of  the  Deity,  pertaining  to  man's  redemp-
ion  ;  so  also  in  the  fulness  of  time,  the  Holy  Ghost,
escended  and  took  up  her  abode  in  the  Daughter,
l  and  by  whom,  united  in  a  correspondent  relation
i  the  Son,  the  perfection  of  order  in  the  Deity  was
nade  known,  and  the  mystery  of  God  finished,  per-

jaining  to  the  foundation  of  man's  redemption.
|  23.  It  hath  been  observed,  that  the  universal  law  of
jiature,  established  in  the  first  creation  of  man,  has
bstablished  the  order  and  relation  for  the  increase  of
pis  posterity  after  the  flesh,  by  a  mutual  correspond-
ence between  two  ;  in  which  it  invariably  descends
From  generation  to  generation,  proceeding  from  the
first  Father  and  Mother,  the  joint  parentage  of  all  the
human  race.


54f  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. P.  VIII.

chap. 24,,  And  no  less  is  the  law  of  the  new  creation  es-
' tabiished,  between  two,- for  the  increase  of  a  spiritual


posterity-)  by  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  purpose  of
JEHOVAH,  according  to  his  divine  and  immutable
perfections,  which  existed  in  his  divine  essence  be-  j
fore  all  worlds,  which  were  kept  secret  through  all
ages  and  generations  ;  but  now  are  made  known  un-
to the  saints  of  the  present  day,  for  the  full  and  final
accomplishment  of  all  that  ever  God  promised  in
Christ,  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  prophets,  since  the
world  began.

25.  The  Father  is  first  in  the  order  of  the  new^
creation,  and  the  Mother  is  the  second,  the  glory,1
wisdom  and  perfection  of  the  Father.  And  in  and
by  the  Son  and  Daughter,  or  Christ  in  his  first  and
second  appearing,  the  Father  and  Mother  are  both!
revealed  and  made  known,  through  the  mutual  influ-
ence of  the  eternal  Word  proceeding  from  both}
who  are  one  in  essence,  nature  and  union?  but  twe
in  their  office  and  manner  of  operation.

26.  Yet  neither  the  attribute  of  Father  nor  Sort?
Mother  nor  Daughter,  existed  from  all  eternity  ;  but
derived  their  existence  from  the  Creator,  by  those
things  which  actually  exist  in  the  order  of  the  old
and  new  creation,  which  is  created  by  the  eternal;
Word,  proceeding  from  an  everlasting  source  ;  asi
the  river  of  the  waters  of  life  proceeded  from  the.
sanctuary  and  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  and  flow-
ed between  the  tree  of  life  on  either  side  of  the  river

27.  "  From  all  eternity"  is  a  term  invented  by
blind  guides,  and  conveys  no  true  idea  at  all  in  rela-
tion to  the  things  of  God,  having  neither  beginning
nor  end.  But  everlasting,  is  that  which  expresses
the  immutability  of  the  Divine  perfections,  being
that  which  never  dissolves,  nor  comes  to  an  end
And  hence,  beings  created  at  any  certain  period,  may
be  everlasting,  because  proceeding,  and  coming  forth
from  an  everlasting  substance.

28.  It  hath  been  observed,  that  the  attribute  of  Fa-
ther depends  upon  the  existence  of  Son,  as  much  as
the  attribute  of  Son  depends  upon  the  existence  of  Fa-
ther. Therefore  said  the  prophet,  They  are  created
now,  and  not  from  the  beginning— -lest  thQU  shouldest
say,  J  knew  (hem,


P.  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLT  GHOST.  543

ilA
L


29.  In  the  records  of  Truth,  before  the  EVER-


LASTING  FATHER,  we see  JEHOVAH ;  and

>efore  JEHOVAH,  we  see  I  AM  ;  and  before  I  AM,

we  see  GOD  ;  and  before  GOD,  we  see  the  Begin-

ting. — In  the  beginning \  God  created the  heavens

md  the  earth  :  for  without  a  beginning  God  could

lot  be  known  to  exist,  and  therefore  could  not  exist

:n  relation  to  things  that  have  a  beginning. Canst  jobxi.r,

thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  canst  thou  find  out

the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?

30.  At  the  beginning  of  the  new  creation,  the  Son
:>f  God  declared  that  he  was  in  the  Father,  and  the
Father  in him;  and  to  the  Jews  he  said,  JVb  man  jd»»£
iath  ascendrd  uji to  heaven,  but he that  came  down  &. m^  13I

from heaven^ even  the Son of  man, which  it>  in  hea-v-

*n. This  he  said  while  on  the  earth, where  the  Fa-
ther was,  and  only  could,  or  needed  to  be  revealed.

31.  Moses  had  written  the  history  of  the  natural
creation  from  the  beginning,  and  not  the  history  of
the  new  creation  ;  but  the  Evangelists  wrote  the  his-
;ory  of  the  new  creation,  and  not  that  of  the  old,  hav-
ing been  eye  witnesses  of  the  work  of  Christ  Jesus  Lmkeii.
rom  the  beginning,  and  having  received  the  Word,  If"^
>y  which  the  foundation  of  that  world  was  laid,  and  si.

>y  which  they  were  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,
who  was  the  beginning  of  that  creation.

32.  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  [of  Revela-
tion] and  the  Word  was  God  :  The  same [Word]  Johni#
was  in  the  beginning  with  God. Every  thing  was* *<^.
)y  him,  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  that  was.  £rey*'
[n  him  was  life  ;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men. —  J^dor
And  the  Word  was  flesh  [revealed  by  Christ  Jesus]  brought
&nd  dwelt  among  [or  in]  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  iorth°
the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full

of  grace  and  truth.

33.  That  Word  by  which  Jesus  spake,  by  which
the  ages  were  set  in  order,  and  which  Jesus  testified
should  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day,  proceeded
from  the  everlasting  substance  of  the  Father,  and  the
Holy  Ghost ;  and  hence  the  Father,  the  Word,  and
the  Holy  Ghost  are  one,  in  essence,  in  nature,  and  in
union,  everlasting.

34.  But  doth  this  imply"  Tkree  J*erson%  of  one


544  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLT  GHOST. P.  VIII,


M


rei


ii

501

lei

N

fti

oi


CH*P- Substance,  Power,  and  Eternity  ?"  or  that  "  The  Son

' is  eternally  begotten  of  the  Father  ?"  Or  doth  it  imply

John  v. that  the  Son  is  "  very  and  eternal  God,  equal with

£?;  u the  Father  ?"  No  such  thing. /  carc  of  mine  own  sel)l B

s*/ do  nothing,  said  Jesus  : The Word  which  ye  hear  h

not  mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  me  :~For  my

Father  is  greater  than  I.

35.  And  doth  not  nature  and  reason,  as  well  as  the
whole  order  of  creation,  witness,  that  he  who  begets c
must  be  before  him  that  is  begotten  ?  and  that  the
Father  is  therefore  greater  than  the  Son  ?  and  thaii
the  Son  must  have  a  beginning  ?  How  can  the  Son  °
be eternally begotten?  If  he  is  eternally begotten.
then  the  Father  must  be  eternally  begetting  him,  and

Consequently, of eternal necessity, he  mUSt be  eter*

natty  in  the  womb,  and  was  never  brought  forth,  ne-
ver came  to  the  birth,  nor  ever  can  while eternity,
endures.

36.  But  if  the  Father  had  a  Son,  he  was  certainly)
begotten  ;  and  if  begotten,  then  certainly  brought
forth  ;  and  as  certainly  he  had  a  beginning  ;  and  that
beginning  was  not  all  eternity,  but  the  operation  oi
God  at  a  certain  period  of  time  ;  yet  his  descent  was
from everlasting,  being begotten, conceived, andt1

John\ai.  brought  forth  from  an  everlasting  source.

37.  Jesus  said  to  the  Jews,  M  Your  Father  Abra«J
ham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day  :  and  he  saw  it,  and  wa»
glad/' But  how  did  Abraham  see  his  day  I  Was  it
to  him  present,  past,  or  future  ?  The  truth  is,  it  was
not  to  him  real,  but  only  by  faith  in  the  promise,  the*,
fulfilment  of  which  was  yet  future  :  for  he  looked  f ox*  s

Heb.^i. a  city  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God  :  And  what
^24,25  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  yet  hope  and  look  for  ?

38.  Again  said  Jesus,  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am;
This  was  strictly  true  ;  but  in  what  sense  ?  Not  in
relation  to  the  period  of  his  existence  ;  but  in  rela-
tion to  the  dignity  of  his  order,  office,  and  work  ;  iri
this  he  was  preferred  before  all,  and  above all  that

John  i. ever  Were  before  him. Hence  said  John  the  Baptistf
the  greatest  of  all  the  prophets,  He  it  is,  who  comi
after  me,  is  preferred  before  me — for  he  was  before  m

39.  Again,  it  is  said  that  Jesus  prayed  for  the  glo^
ry  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world
\ras. Whatever  ideas  the  natural  man  may  form


P.  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLT  GHOST.  545

rom  the  literal  words  of  scripture,  the  plain  truth  is  CHAF-
lis  :  Christ  Jesus,  in  whom  dwelt  the  fulness  of  the  __
rodhead  bodily,  knew what was intended,  in the
lind  and  purpose  of  the  Father,  for  him  ;  therefore,
dien  he  had  finished  the  work  which  the  Father  had
iven  him  to  do,  he  prayed,  saying,  And  now,  O  Fa-  JoknxTi4
r*£J*>  glorify  thou  me,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  *•
hee,  [that  is,  which  was  in  thy  mind  and  purpose
oncerning  me]  before  the  world  was.

40.  Again,  when  the  apostle  said,  "  God  hath  sa-  sTim.i,
ed  us,  and  called  us with  an  holy  calling,  according *

)  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us
l  Christ  Jesus,  before  the  world  began"  He  could
ot  mean  the  old  world-,  for  neither  they,  nor  Christ
esus  existed  in  the  order  of  time  before  the  old
rorld,  but  long  after.

41.  Therefore  it  is  written,  u  Thou  art  my  Son,  p^^y,
his  day  have  I  begotten  thee  :"  which  could  not  be  Heb.tf,

Ipe  day  in  which  David  wrote  :  for  again  he  saith,  /
nil  (in  the  future  tense)  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he
hall  be  to  me  a  son.  And  when  he  bringeth  the  first
egotten  into  the  world,  he  saith,  And  let  all  the  an-
-els  of  God  worshi/i  him.  Which  was  expressly  ful-
lled  when  the  tidings  of  his  birth  were  brought
a  the  shepherds,  four  thousand  years  after  the  visi-
le creation  began,  and  never  before.

42.  The  apostles  and  true  followers  of  Christ  Je-  See  John
lis,  were  indeed  called  and  chosen  to  be  in  him,  as  xir.2o.

was  in  the  Father,  and  to  be  witnesses  of  him,  Acts'i.1?',
efore  the  foundation  of  that  world,  new  creation,  or  J*eb.ii.4
iew  age  was  fully  established,  which,  according  to  Actsig.
iromise,  was  at  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  then  it  was  24,
ctually  brought forth,  according  to  the  purpose  of
lod,  which  he  purposed  in  himself  before  all  worlds.

But  we  must  distinguish  between the purpose  of

God,  and  its  actual  accomplishment.

43.  A  man  might  purpose  to  build  a  city,  and  ex-
hibit the  plan  according  to  his  purpose  ;  but  would
he  plan  be  the  city  itself?  And  provided  the  city  was
>uilt,  from  what  period  would  the  building  of  the  city
>e  dated  ?  from  the  time  of  its  actual  building  ?  or
)f  forming  the  plan  ?  Not  from  the  plan,  but  from
the  actual  building  of  the  city.

44.  And  should  he,  at  the  same  time,  include  ia


546  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. P.  VIII


chap,  the  plan  the  building  Qf  a  meaner  city,  preparatory
'  to  that  which  he  intended  for  glory  and  duration,  and
in  which  he  intended  to  live  and  abide  ;  would  nol
every  person  of  common  sense  grant,  that  the  lasi
could  only  be  first  in  point  of  dignity  and  glory,  anc
not  in  the  order  of  time  ?

45.  The  purpose  of  God  is  eternal,  and  equally  in-
cludes the  existence  of  all  his  works,  to  be  created^
and  to  exist  in  their  own  order  of  times  ;  therefore
no  one  thing  can  be  considered  as  prior  to  another
in  that  eternal  purpose,  otherwise  than  as  it  respects
the  times  of  their  actual  existence,  and  the  dignity
of  their  order.

46.  As  one  thing  must  exist  before  another,  in  ret
gard  to  time  ;  so  in  this  respect,  the  first  man  Adam
was  first,  as  to  actual  existence  ;  and  the  first  bom
Son  of  God,  was  preferred  before  him  in  the  purpose
of  God,  respecting  man's  redemption  ;  but  was  noc
first  as  to  actual  existence,  any  more  than  the  wholi
human  race  existed  on  the  earth  before  God  saicML
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image."

47.  When  David  spake  by  the  Spirit,  saying,  Tho-c
art  my  Son^  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee  ;  many  age:
had  to  pass  away  before  this  prophecy  could  be  fulfil
led, But  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  for  thdL
Son  to  be  begotten,  conceived,  and  brought  forth  inil  0(
the  world,  then  the manner  of  his  conception aij
birth,  his  name  and  office,  were  particularly  declared  ^
by  the  angel  Gabriel,  unto  Mary,  a  virgin  espouses  0
to  Joseph.

LukeL 48.  "  Behold,  thou  shalt  conceive in  thy  womtm

'  and  bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call his  name  JEI  S|

SUS. He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Soi

of  the  Highest. — The Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upo

thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow


LO


thee."


49.  Here  then,  were  the first  operations  of  tha

en


P


Word,  by  which the  first  begotten  Son  of  God
tered  the world. And  as  he  was  the  second  Adai%
therefore  he  was  not  before  the  Jirst  Adam. And  a
he  was  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God,  whicl (
is  the  New  creation  \  therefore  he  was  not  in  exist .,,
ence  before  the  beginning  of  the  Old  creation.


45,46,47,


\  VIIL THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST.  54f

CHAPTER  II.

The  Subject  continued.

1  nf^HERE  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spir-  ciia*,

X*  itual  body  :"  and  as  there  is  a  natural  birth  to  u*
he  natural  body,  so  there  is  a  spiritual  birth  to  the
piritual  body,  which  is  produced  by  the  work  of  re-
;eneration,  and  is  called  the  new  birth^  or  being  born
gain.  Hence  it  is  written,  The  first  man  Adam  was  i*°r«*y
lade  a  living  soul,  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quick-
ning  spirit.  Howbeit,  that  was  not  first  which  is
hiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural  ;  and  afterward
hat  which  is  spiritual.

2.  The  living  soul  of  the  first  man  was  a  spiritual
ody,  and  occupied  the  natural  body  of  the  7^*  Adamy
nd  constituted  the  first  natural  man.  The  quickening
hirit  of  the  second  man  was  the  Lord  from  heaven,
id  occupied  the  spiritual  body  of  the  second  Adam,
nd  constituted  the  first  spiritual  man,  the  true  Christ
le  Son  of  God.

3.  That  natural  body  or  tabernacle,  in  which  the
•ord  Jesus  dwelt,  was  visible  to  the  human  eye,  like
le  natural  bodies  of  other  men  ;  but  his  spiritual
Ddy,  in  which  was  Christ  the  Lord,  was  invisible,
rid  was  seen  and  known  only  by  revelation  to  those
ho  received  his  Word  ;  and  no  man  could  call  him
,ord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost.

4.  How  greatly,  then,  are  they  mistaken,  who  sup-
ose  that  the  virgin  Mary  was  the  true  and  real  Moth-
*  of  the  Son  of  God.  With  as  much  propriety  it
light  be  said,  that  the  dust  of  the  ground  was  the
ue  and  real  Mother  of  the  first  living  soul.

5.  It  is  true,  a  body  was  formed  of  the  dust  of  the
round,  into  which  the  Lord  God  breathed  the  breath

>  t  life  ;  but  the ground  could  be  no  more  than  the
Hfother  of  that  body  in  which  the living  soul was
|  brmed  :  for  the  natural  dust  of  the  ground  had  no-
king  to  do  in  conceiving  the  living  soul.

6.  And  although  there  was  a  natural  body  taken
lit  of  the  virgin  Mary,  in  which  the  true  spiritual
pdy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  formed,  it  could  consti-

Bbb


548  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST. P.  VIII.

chap, tute  no  higher  relation  between  Mary  and  the  second
' Adam,  the  quickening  spirit,  than  was  between  the
dust  of  the  ground  and  the  first  living  soul.

7.  Such  as  have  considered  Mary  as  the  real  Moth-
er of  Christ,  by  falling  into  that  mistake,  have  equally
mistaken  every  thing  else  concerning  Christ.  They
have  admitted  that  Mary  was  a  fallen  creature,  pos-
sessed of  the  same  corrupt  nature  with  other  women;
And  thus  they  have  supposed  that  Christ  was  the  off-
spring of  a  holy  God  and  a  sinful  woman,  possessec
of  the  nature  of  both,  God  and  man,  in  two  distincu
natures,  having  both  the  nature  of  his  Father  an|
Mother,  "  united  in  one  jierson,  and  that  without  anj
change,  mixture  or  confusion."

8.  From  this  notion  has  arisen  the  inconsistent  afl
absurd  doctrine,  that  good  and  evil  are  united  in  thtJ
children  of  God  ;  that  "  the  corruption  of  nature,
during  this  life,  doth  remain  in  those  that  are  regen
crated."  And  consequently  the  first  followers  q\
Christ  were  at  least  half-blooded  sinners,  and  degeiw
erated,  from  age  to  age,  on  the  Mother's  side,  unti
they  could  scarcely  tell  whether  they  had  any  thinji
of  God  in  them  or  not — Daily  transgressors,  neve:t
able  to  keep  the  commandments  of  God  during  tin
term  of  life  ; when  the  pointed  truth  is,  that,  H  hosO'

Uolmiii.  ever  sinneth  hath  neither  seen  Christ,  nor  known  him
***  9.  It  is  evident,  that  in  Christ  Jesus was  no sin;

that  he  did  no  evil,  neither  was  guile  found  in h$ij
mouth  ;  therefore  it  follows,  that  he  derived  no  paj
of  his  substance  from  a  sinful  woman,  any  more  thB
the  substance  of  the  human  soul  is  derived  from  toL
dust  of  the  ground. That  which  he  took  upon  hfl
through  the  medium  of  a  woman,  he  never  own™
as  any  part  of  his  divine  substance,  but  crucified
unto  the  death.

10.  And  as  he  was  manifested  to  be  the  full  aj|
perfect  Son  of  God,  by  the  Spirit  and  fruits  of  holi
ness  ;  therefore  the  above  opinion  is  founded  upoil  l
misunderstanding  of  his  true  lineage,  which  was  no!
partly  divine  and  partly  human,  but  fully  and  perfect
ly  divine  in  both  parts  of  his  parentage.  But  as  th(
Son  came  to  reveal  the  Father  only,  therefore  the
mistake  could  never  be  rectified  till  the  Mother  was
reveajed  by  the  Daughter.


i


|P.  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GH0ST.  549

1 1 .  Whatever  may  have  been  said  by  the  disciples  chap.
f  Christ,  or  others,  concerning  his  genealogy,  his '

own  testimony  deserves  the  highest  credit  ;  for  he
lever  pretended  to  contradict  any  thing  he  said,  or  to
ntimate  that  he  was  in  the  least  mistaken  ;  and  he
expressly  says  to  such  as  judged  after  the  flesh,  Ye
know  not  whence  I  am.

12.  The  Evangelists  and  others  wrote  according  to
the  best  of  their  knowledge  ;  and  hence  there  is  such
\  diversity  in  their  writings  at  different  periods.  For
seeing  that  Christ  was  to  come  of  the  seed  and  lineage
of  David,  and  knowing  for  certain  that  he  had  come  ;
therefore  they  gave  his  genealogy  in  thatfine,  through
Joseph  and  Mary,  as  his  supposed  parents  ;  when  at
the  same  time,  they  all  agree  that  Joseph  was  not  his
real  Father.

13.  In  accommodation  to  the  blind  prejudices  of
the  Jewish  nation,  the  apostles  showed  that  Christ
came  of  Joseph  and  Mary,  according  to  the  jlesh  :
but  at  the  same  time,  they  prove  that  he  did  not  come

after  the  flesh  at  all. Though  we  have  known  Christ  2Cor.v,
ifter  the  fleshy  (saith  Paul,)  yet  now  henceforth  know
we  him  no  more.

14.  The  common  people  made  no  distinction  ;  they
say,  Is  not  this  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph,  whose  father
and  mother  we  know  ?  But  Jesus  who  knew  all  things
from  the  beginning,  says, Ye  judge  after  the  flesh —  John  yL
Ye  are  from  beneath  ;  lam  from  above. — I  proceeded  y%^
and came  forth  from  God. The  Evangelists,  who  23>4a-
wrote  to  the  common  people,  speak  of  Joseph  and
Mary  as  his  su/i/iosed  parents — u  Being  (as  was  sup-
posed) the  son  of  Joseph.5*

15.  "  Now  his  parents went  to  Jerusalem  every  Luke  it
year  to  the  passover." But  when  they  found  him  in  48>49-
the temple,  with  the doctors,  hearing  and asking
them  questions,  "  His  mother  said  unto  him,  Son —

thy  father  and  I  have  sought  thee  sorrowing.5' But
Jesus  gave  them  to  understand  that  Joseph  was  no
more  than  his  supposed  father. "  Wist  ye  not,  (said  *Dod{Tr>
he)  that  I  must  be  at  my  Father's  ?"*  ****•

16.  He  also  gave  Mary  to  understand,  that  she
was  no  more  than  his  supposed  Mother.  When  she
stood  without  desiring  to  speak  with  him,  he  said


I


550  THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLT GHOST. P.  VIII.

C1ilP* "  Who  is  my  Mother  ?  "And  who  are  my  brethren]

. And  he  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  his  disciplesj

and  said,  Behold  my  mother,  and  my  brethren  !  For

Sw-Vo!""  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  ii  \
heaven,  the  same  is my brother,  and sister, and  .
mother."
.  17.  Again,  at  the  marriage  in  Cana,  he  called  he

not  Mother,  but  said, Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  wit,
thee  ? From  all  which  it  may  be  plain and  eviden
to  those  who  would  judge  righteous  judgment,  tha
Mary  was  no  more  the  real  Mother  of  the  Son  of  Go
than  Joseph  was  his  Father.

johuxiv.  18.  As  it* was  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  all  things  ,
were  brought  to  the  remembrance  of  the  apostles  A
that  Jesus  had  taught  them  ;  so  by  the  Hofy  Ghost.  [;
they  gave  a  true  account  of  his  Mother,  as  well  as  of
his  Father,  according  to  what  was  spoken  by  the  an-  <,j
gel,  both  to  Joseph  and  Mary.

LukeL 19.  First,  it  was  said  to  Mary,  "  The Holy  Ghoyjni

35*  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest^

shall  overshadow  thee. " — Again,  the  angel  said  unto  4;

Mattieo  Joseph,  "  That  which  is  conceived  in  her,  is  of  the
Holy  Ghost.99

20.  Here  then  are  two,  distinctly  spoken  of  by  thad,
angel,  exclusive  of  Mary  ;  not  two  persons,  but  tw||f
incomprehensibles,  which  in  their  very  essence  i
ply  the  whole  order  of  the  Divine  Majesty,  namel
The  Highest,  and  The  Holy  Ghost.

21.  The  Word  which  the  angel  delivered  unto  Ma*
ry,  was  the  mutual  power  and  influence  of  the  in-
comprehensible  and  everlasting  two,  which  Mary  re-
ceived by  faith,  saying,  Be  it  unto  me  according
thy  word.  This  was  the  Word  of  God  from  everlas
ing,  by  which  all  things  were  created  that  ever  were
created.

22.  As  every  thing  begets  and  conceives  its  like,
in  the  true  order  of  things,  and  as  that  which  was  |
conceived  in  Mary  was  not  of  Mary,  but  was  of  the  ,
Holy  Ghost ;  so  it  is  truly  and  properly  stated,  ac-  j
cording  to  the  original  text,  "  Therefore  also  that
Holy,  having  come  forth  out  of  thee,  shall  be  called  j
The  Son  of  God"

23.  And  as  the  conception  of  the  Son  of  God  was


P.  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST*  o5

lerely  in  Mary,  as  the  medium  of  his  existence  on  CHI"i5*

arth,  and  not  of  her  substance  ;  hence  he  was  con-  .

eived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  came  upon  her,  and
ras  begotten  by  the  power  of  the  Highest,  which
ver-shadowed  her  ;  and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost
as  the  real  and  true  Mother  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Ihrist.

24.  Then  as  the  Son  of  God  was  neither  begotten,
mceived,  nor  brought  forth,  before  the  first  Adam,
it  long  after,  according  to  the  time  appointed,  and

he  was  called  the  everlasting  Father,  pertaining
man's  redemption,  and  proceeded  and  came  forth
om  an  everlasting  parentage  ;  therefore  it  was  not
ie  Son,  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  unto  whom  the  Lord
rod  said,  at  the  beginning  of  the  old  creation,  Let
s  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness.

25.  Father  and  Son  do  not imply  the  perfection  of
lat  order  in  which  God  created  man  at  the  begin-

ng,  and  which  is  manifest  in  the  visible  creation  ;
d  much  less  can  those  attributes  of  Father  and  Son
ply  the  perfection  of  that  order  which  was  essen-
lly  in  the  Deity,  and  was  relatively  signified  by  the
der  in  which  God  created  man  at  the  beginning,
hen  it  was  said,  God  created  man  in  his  own  image —
ale  and  female  created  he  them.

26.  And  without  this  relative  distinction  in  the  or-
r  and  perfection  of  the  Deity,  as  the  true  first
use  of  man's  existence,  the  things  that  were  crea-
d,  could  only  in  part,  claim  a  relation  to  the  Crea-
r,  while  a  very  important  part  must  exist  without
lation  to  any  correspondent  cause.  Hence  would
rtly  be  justified,  that  inconsistent  expression  of  a
lodern  poet,  "  He  said  to  Nothing,  Let  it  be,  and

)thing  brought  forth  all." And  according  to  oth-
;,  *  The  work  of  Creation  is,  God's  making  all
igs  of  Nothing."

27.  And  therefore,  upon  this  supposition,  God  is  only
:nowledged  in  one  part  of  his  true  attributes  ;  con*
[uently  the  things  that  were  created,  must  have
•ung  partly  from  God,  and  partly  from  Nothing ;
dch  is  at  least  partly  Atheism,  or  partly  denying

very  being  of  God. For  it  will  be  granted,  that
>d  is  distinguished  by  the  title  of  Father,  in  rela«
- ~- Bbb2


THE  REVELATION  OF  THE HOLY GHOST. P.  Vlft.


c  jf*" tion  to  man,  and  that  man,  in  the  perfection  of  his
. ., order,  includes  more  ttian  Father.

28.  The  first  man  Adam  was  the  first  natural  Fa4
ther  of  all  the  human  race  ;  but  he  was  not  alone,
iiis  manhood  was  made  complete  by  the  woman,  who*
was  flesh  uf  his  flesh,  and  they  two  were  called  Adam\
and  the  woman  was  called  The  mother  of  all  living.  I

29.  And  if  the  attribute  of  Mother  pertains  to  man,
in  the  perfection  of  his  order,  from  whence  could
this  attribute  flow  I  or  with  what  did  it  correspond  I
If  the  attribute  of  Father  and  Mother,  in  the  creation
©f  man,  can  flow  from  Father  alone,  the  effect  is  siro
perior  to  its  cause,  and  Mother  must  flow  from  where;
Mother  is  not,  and  the  female  part  of  creation  can
know  no  corresponding  cause  of  her  existence.

30.  But  as  Father  and  Mother,  or  male  andje?nalej
do  exist  in  the  creation  of  man,  and  are  essential  to
the  glory  and  perfection  of  that  order,  and  are  de
clared  to  have  been  created  in  the  image  and  after
the  likeness  of  God  ;  therefore,  if  no  such  relative-  p
distinction  is  admitted  in  the  first  cause  of  their  exis-?
tence,  then  it  plainly  follows,  that  the  perfection  and
glory  of  the  creature,  is  as  much  superior  to  that  oi:
the  Creator,  as  all  that  is  made  out  of  Nothing,  is  su-i
perior  to  Nothing.'  This  inconsistent,  and  absurd'  l)
supposition  would  place,  even  fallen  man,  above  all  thai
is  called  God.

3 1 .  But  the  truth  is,  that  as  God  created  man  male
and  female,  in'his  own  image  and  likeness,  and  called
their  name  Adam — two  in  their  order  and  manner  ol
operation,  but  perfectly  one  in  their  nature  and  un-
ion, constituting  one  entire  Man,  perfect  and  com- ij
plete  in  the  order  of  his  manhood  ;  so  Man  in  his
first  creation,  in  both  parts  of  his  manhood,  relative-
ly showed  forth  the  order,  glory,  and  perfection
which  essentially  constituted  the  first  cause,  and  was
a  pattern  of  that  order  and  perfection  which  was  to  be
revealed  by  Christ  in  the  new  creation.

32.  But  man,  In  his  natural  state,  could  never  know  is
tfie  perfections  of  the  invisible  Ji rst  cause,  until  they  \
were  revealed  in  the  new  creation,  by  Christ  in  his  t
first  and  second  appearing ;  in  which  the  Father  is  j
revealed  by  the  Son,  and  the  Mother  by  the  Daugh-.
ter ;  and  the  true  order  and  perfections  of  Jehovah


l\  VIII. THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST.  553

ire  made  known  by  those  things  that  are  created,  re- CJ1[£P-

sealed,  and  made  manifest,  in  which God  becomes

ill  in  all.

33.  Therefore, by  the  first  appearing  of  Christ,  in
nd  by  the  Son,  was  the  revelation  of  God,  pertain-
ng  to  the  true  order  of  the  Father,  who  was  ever*
asting  before  all  worlds  ;  and  by  the  second  appeali-
ng of  Christ,  in  the  Daughter,  is  the  revelation  of  the
ioly  Ghost,  pertaining  to  the  true  order  of  the  Aft*
her,  who  was  with  him  that  was  Everlasting.  %

34.  As  the  name  Almighty,  expresses  the  sub-
stance, but  not  the  order  of  the  Father  ;  so  the  name
Holy  Ghost,  expresses  the  substance,  but  not  the  or-
ler  of  the  Mother. And  as  the  true  order  and  office

f  the  Father  was  not  known,  until  revealed  by  the
ion  ;  so  the  true  order  and  office  of  the  Mother  was
ot  known,  until  revealed  by  the  Daughter.

35.  And  therefore,  by  whatever  name  the  Holy
Ghost  was called, under  the dispensations which

receded  her  revelation,  she  is  unchangeably  one
with  the  Father,  in  union  and  essence,  and  is  distin-
guished by  her  co-operations,  everlasting  with  the
Father,  before  ever  the  world  was,  or  the  ages  set
n  order :  which  is  according  to  her  own  testimony  of
unchangeable  truth,  under  the  title  of  Wisdom.

36.  "  She  is  a  tree of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold  g™81
upon  her  ;  and  happy  is  every  one  that  retaineth  her.

The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the  earth  ;  by  un-
derstanding hath  he  established  the  heavens. "

37.  u  She  standeth  in  the  top  of  high  places,  by  diap.tw
the  way  in  the  places  of the  paths. She  crieth  at

the  gates,  at  the  entry  of  the  city,  at  the  coming  in
at  the  doors  :  Unto  you,  O  men,  I  call,  and  my  voice
is  to  the  sons  of  men."

38.  "  I  wisdom  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find  out
knowledge  of  witty  inventions.  The  fear  of  the
Lord  is  to  hate  evil  ;  pride  and  arrogancy,  and  the.
evil  way,  and  the  fro  ward  mouth  do  I  hate.  Council
is  mine,  and  sound  wisdom  :  I  am  understanding.  I
have  strength.  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  de-
cree justice.  By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  even
sill  the  judges  of  the  earth."

39.  «  I  lead  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  in  the


554  THE  NATURE  AND  MANNER  OF P.  VIII.

Cm.P' m*dst  of  tne  paths  of  judgment:  that  I  may  cause  a

. ]_  those  that  love  me  to  inherit  substance  :  and  I  will

fill  their  treasures. The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  I
beginning  of  his  way, before  his  works  of  old. I
was  set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  J
ever  the  earth  was."

40.  "  When  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  brought
forth  ;  when  there  were  no  fountains  abounding  with
water.  Before  the  mountains  were  settled,  before
the  hills  was  I  brought  forth  ;  while  as  yet  he  had  not
made  the  earth,  nor  the  fields,  nor  the  highest  part
of  the  dust  of  the  world."

41.  "  When  he  prepared  the  heavens,  I  was  there  :
when  he  set  a  compass  upon  the  face  of  the  depths  ;
when  he  established  the  clouds  above  ;  when  he
strengthened  the  fountains  of  the  deep  ;  when  he
gave  to  the  sea  his  decree,  that  the  waters  should  not
pass  his  commandment ;  when  he  appointed  the
foundations  of  the  earth  f*

42.  "  Then  I  was  by  him,  as  one  brought  up  with
him  ;  and  I  was  daily  his  delight,  rejoicing  always
before  him  :  Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  his
earth  ;  and  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men.
Now  therefore  hearken  unto  me,  0  ye  children  :  for
blessed  are  they  that  keep  my  ways.  Hear  instruc-
tion, and  be  wise,  and  refuse  it  not."


CHAPTER  III.

The  Nature  and  Manner  of  the  Coming  of  Christ.

COMING  has  a  twofold  signification  :  First)  when
any  thing  is  brought  forth  in  the  order  of  the
visible  creation,  it  is  said  to  come.  In  this  sense,
every  thing  that  has  life,  is  said  to  come  into  the
world.  Second^  when  a  thing  removes  from  one  place
to  another,  it  is  said  to  come  to  that  place  to  which  it
removes.

2.  In  this  sense,  created  visible  objects  move to
and  fro,  in  relation  to  each  other;  'and  can  exist  oirfy


P.  VIII.  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST.  555

in  one  place  at  one  and  the  same  time  ;  whereas  in  GI**F'
the  former  sense,  an  object  may  come,  and  exist  in  a  *
thousand  places,  at  one  and  the  same  time  ;  as  is
plain  from  the  coming  of  the  day,  the  summer,  or
the  harvest.  And  as  Christ  is  not  a  local  being,  cir-
cumscribed by  any  particular  bounds  or  limits  ;  but
is  properly,  God  manifested  in  the  fleshy  so  long  as  the
work  of  redemption  continues  ;  therefore  it  is  in  this
sense,  that  he  is  said  to  come.

3.  Hence  the  figures  that  are  used  to  describe  his  Mai  ir.  2
coming  : "  Behold  the  day  cometh,  that  shall  burn  f^"j^
as  an  oven. — Ye  know  that  summer  is  nigh. — Say  not  ^'-3^  ..
ye,  There  are  yet  four  months,  and  then  cometh  harv-  2.

est  ? — The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world — An  end,  J^or,x"
the  end  is  come  upon  the  four  corners of  the  land —
On  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come."

4.  Then  as  the  coming  of  Christ  is  compared  to
the  day,  the  summer,  and  the  harvest,  and  every  one
knows  that  such  things  in  nature,  are  not  material  bod-
ies, that  go  from  place  to  place  ;  therefore  it  is  evident
that  they  must  be  grossly  mistaken,  who  look  for
Christ  to  come  into  the  world  from  some  other  part
of  space,  in  some  visible  form  or  bodily  appearance.

5.  But  as  the  day  is  brought  forth  in  its  order,  and
succeeds  the  night,  in  the  revolution  of  things  ;  and
as  summer  and  harvest  succeed  the  fall  and  fruitless
winter,  in  the  order  of  the  seasons  ;  so  is  the  coming
of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  entering  in  of  that  divine
influence  which  shall  make  an  end  of  sin,  and  estab-
lish everlasting  righteousness.  Such  is  the  nature  of
Christ's  coming,  from  which  the  manner  of  it  may
be  clearly  understood.

6.  The  manner  in  which  Christ  first  came  into  the
world,  hath  been  briefly  stated  in  the  preceding
chapter  ;  from  which  it  is  evident  that  he  did  not
come  from  some  other  part  of  space,  in  a  pompous
appearance,  as  many  expected  ;  but  was  brought
forth  by  the  Word^  according  to  the  times  and  sea-
sons appointed  of  the  father,  and  through  the  instru-
mentality of  second  causes.

7.  To  illustrate  this  subjeet  more  clearly,  it  may  be
proper  to  observe,  a  little  further,  the  analogy  between
the  first  and  second  Adam. Each  was  created  in  his,


556  THR  NATURE  AND  MANNER  OF  P.  Vllf.

C  mP' order  by  the  Word)  and  the  difference  lay  in  the  na-

ture  and  quality  of  the  second  causes,  through  which

they  were  brought  forth.  The  natural  heavens  and
the  earth  existed  before  the  first  man,  and  out  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth  he  was  created,  a  body  and
soul  united,  which  constituted  the  heavens  and  the
earth  in  the  highest,  and  most  refined  sense  then  ex-
isting.

8.  And  although  Man,  by  his  fall,  became  earthly,
sensual,  and  devilish,  and  was  said  to  be  flesh,  be-
cause the  flesh,  which  was  his  earthly  part,  reigned
over  his  living  soul,  which  was  the  only  created  heav-
en, in  and  by  which  he  could  hold  any  degree  ol
communion  with  God  ;  yet  the  heavens  and  the  earth.'
that  is,  Man,  the  most  noble  and  refined  part  of  th©
creation,  continued  as  they  were,  through  all  gene*
rations,  until  the  new  creation  began.

9.  And  as  Man  in  his  first  natural  creation,  was  su«
perior  to  the  first  heavens  and  earth  ;  so  it  could  not
be  out  of  the  first,  but  out  of  that  which  was  more
perfect  and  noble,  that  the  new  creation  could,  in  the
true  order  of  things,  come  forth.

10.  And  therefore,  all  that  is  said  by  the  prophetsJ
concerning  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  the  great,
confusion  in  both,  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  is  not  ttl
be  understood  of  the  first  heavens  and  earth,  whicr
existed  before  man  was  created  ;  but  as  relating  tc
the  soul  and  body  of  man,  which  is  heaven  and  earth;
in  the  highest  sense,  pertaining  to  the  natural  crea-
tion.

11.  And  as  the  second  Mam  Christ  Jesus,  was  tc
be  creaced  in  and  through  man,  as  the  medium  of  his  j
coming  forth  into  the  world,  and  was  to  be  reckoned
from  man,  in  the  order  of  the  natural  creation,  and
as  he  was  to  ascend  in  glory  and  dignity  above  the
natural  man  ;  so  in  human  nature,  or  in  the  souls  and
bodies  of  mankind,  all  those  things  were  to  be  accom-
plished at  the  coming  of  Christ,  which  were  spoken
of  concerning  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Such  as«
"  I  will  shake  the.  heavens  and  the  earth — The  heav-
ens being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat/'


12.  Then  as  the  coming  of  both  the  first  and  se-


i,


f .  VIII.  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST.  557

cond  man  was  by  the  Word,  it  will  be  proper  to  no-  c^p*

tice  more  particularly  what  that  Word  is. A  Word  \^

translated  from  one  language  to  another,  is  liable  to
be  corrupted  ;  but  God  is  of  one  mind  and  who  can
turn  him  ?  and  the  Word  of  God  is  simply  his  pur-
pose or  will,  revealed  and  made  known  in  the  co-op-
erations of  certain  causes^  the  effect  of  which  is
properly  his  work.

13.  Then  however  the  Word  of  God  may  be  ex-
pressed in  different  languages,  the  sense  is  unchange-
ably the  same  in  all.  And  however  different  it  may
be  expressed  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  or  Latin-,  or  any
other  language,  in  plain  English,  from  first  to  last,  it;
is,  Let, — -not  to  hinder,  but,  Let  it  be,  in  the  mind
or  purpose  of  God,  and  it  was,  or  it  came  to  pass  ac-
cordingly. This  will  appear  evident  to  be  the  Word,
from  the  beginning  of  Genesis,  to  the  end  of  Reve-
lations. A  few  examples  may  suffice.

14.  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  cjen.i.
light. — Let there be  a  firmament — and it  was  so.

Let  the  waters  be  gathered  together,  and  Let  the  dry
land  appear — and  it  was  so. — Let  the  earth  bring  forth
grass — and  it  was  so. — Let  the  waters  bring  forth —
Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creatures — and  it
was  so. — Let  us  make  man — So  God  created  man.

15.  Here  we  see  the  Word,  according  to  its  opera-
tion on  things  natural.  Thus  the  worlds  were  framed
by  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  man  constituted  the
world  in  its  highest  sense.  Hence  Peter,  speaking  of
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  that  were  in  the  time  of
Noah,  saith,  "  The  world  that  then  was,  being  over-  2Pet.  ■$
fiowed  with  water,  perished:  But  the  heavens  and  6»7'12,
the  earth  which  are  now,  by  the  same  Word,  are  kept

in  store,  reserved  ir  c  fire  against  the  day  of  judg-
ment, and  perditiv  ungodly  men, — When  the
heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved. "

16.  Observe,  it  was  not  the  first  heavens  and  earth,

Sr  first  natural  world, hat  perished  by  water  ;  for
Ills  was  all  very  good,  and  had  never  committed  any
oifence  against  the  Cren r  ;  while  the  earth  remain-
I  eth,  seed  time  and  harvest,  cold  and  heat,  summer  and
winter,  day  and  night,  shall  not  cease.

17.  But  it  was  the  world  of  the  ungodly  who  per  -


558  THE  NATURE  AND  MANNER  OF  P.  VIIL

CniP* *sned,  tne  heavens  and  the  earth  that  then  were  ;  and

]__  by  the  same  Wordy  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were

kept  in  store,  or  stored  up  with  a  constant  supply,  re-
served unto  the  day  of  judgment.  So  said  Christ :
For  judgment  am  I  come  into  the  world.

18.  And  how  did  he  come  into  the  world  for  judg-
ment ?  It  was  by  the  energy  of  the  same  Word,  ope-
rating in  and  upon  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  or  work
that  then  was  unfinished,  pertaining  to  the  new  cre-
ation ;  that  is,  in  the  human  soul  and  body.  When
the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  his
Son,  properly,  brought  to  pass  by  means  of  a  woman.
Mary  said  unto  the  angel,  Behold,  the  handmaid  of*
the  Lord,  Be  it,  or  Let  it  be  unto  me  according  toj
thy  Word  :  and  it  was  so.

19.  And  the  Word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied:
which  is  the  word  of  Faith.  And  as  many  as  receiv-
ed the  Word,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  thej
Sons  of  God ;  who  became  such,  not  of  blood,  nor|
of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but
of  God.  And  hence  the  Word  became  flesh,  or  ra
ther  the  Word  was  manifested  in  the  flesh  ;  and

. Word  was,  Let  it  be,  and  God  divided  the  flesh  from
the  Spirit,  and  the  flesh  he  called^^A,  and  the  spir
it  he  called  Spirit  :  and  it  was  so.


r  ra-

Ithe


5


5  Cor.Ui.  2°-  Now  the  Lord  is  that  Spirit : — Because  ye  are
oil  iv  e  sons'  ^oc*  katn  sent  forth  ^e  Spirit  of  his  Son  into
ijohniji,  your  hearts. — Hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  usf
by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us.  Hence  it  is
truly  and  properly  expressed  ;  The  Spirit  dwelt  in  us,
and  we  beheld  his  glory,  (not  the  glory  of  the  flesh,
but  of  the  Spirit,)  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  oi
the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth.

21.  And  as  the  sons  of  God  did  not  come  forth  of
the  flesh,  but  of  God  ;  therefore  the  Word  was,  to1
take  up  a  cross  against  the  flesh,  by  which  the  flesh

Matt.xvi.  was  divided  from  the  Spirit. Hence  said  Jesus,  Let
24.xix.ii  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow

me. — He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  Let  him  receive  it :

and  it  was  so.

22.  This  was  the Word  of  liberty,  under  which
every  thing  might  act  out  its  own  disposition,  without  f  i
being  obstructed  by  any  arbitrary  or  opposite  power.  I


P.  VIII.  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST.


559


And  thus,  while  the  Word  opened  the  prison  doors CHAF-
for  souls  that  were  bound  by  the  flesh,  it  afforded m'
equal  liberty  to  those  who  loved  those  fetters  of  death,  "
to  continue  in  darkness  under  the  bondage  of  sin.

23.  And  so  it  continues,  equal  liberty  on  both  sides,
even  until  the  last  vision  of  the  second  appearing  of
Christ. And  here  the  Word  is  the  same  that  it  was
in  the  beginning  :  «  He  that  is  unjust,  (or  chuses  to
be  unjust)  Let  him  be  unjust  still ;  he  which  is  fil-
thy, Let  him  be  filthy ;  he  that  is  righteous,  Let  him
be  righteous  ;  and  he  that  is  holy,  Let  him  be  holy.
And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come. And  Let  nev.^'n
him  that  heareth,  say,  Come. And  Let  him  that  is  n» 17-
athirst,  come. And  whosoever  will.  Let  him  take
the  water  of  life  freely."

:  24.  From  all  which  it  is  evident  that  the  coming
•  of  Christ,  was,  and  is,  in  man,  and  no  other  heaven
e  and  earth  is  disturbed  with  his  coming.  And  all  that
»ris  to  be  wrought  or  accomplished  by  his  coming,  is
it  simply  to  be  effected  through  such  a  divine  agency
[•of  the  Word  as  affords  the  soul  liberty  and  power  to
eact  according  to  the  light  and  revelation  of  God,
n  therein  manifested,
|i 25.  And  hence  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  by  Luk;>

observation. Neither  shall  they  say  Lo  here  I  or  lo  xvil2L
e  there  !  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within  you,  or
o  unong  you. For  as  the  shining  light,  [Gr.  cccf**^]  .
j,  :>r  brightness  [alluding  to  the  dawning  of  the  day  and
is  :he  rising  of  the  sun  j  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and  shi-  Matxxw
,,  leth  even  unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  27'
^  fhe  Son  of  man  be.

26.  Thus  the  prophet  Malachi :  Unto  you  that  fear  m»i.«v.2
ny  name,  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise,  with
lealing  in  his  wings. And  St.  Paul :  At  the  coming

i  )f  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints  ;  he  shall
:ome  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints.  And  Jude :  Be-
lold  the  Lord  cometh  in  ten  thousand  of  his  saints.

27.  Hence the saints are compared to clouds.  Lukexxn
Then  shall  they see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  a  ^
Jloud  :  They  shall  see  the  son  of  man  coming  m  the  So.*'*™
ilouds  ©f  heaven— We  shall  be  caught  up  together  1™%°'
a  the  clouds  ;  which  is  the  same  as  our  gathering  ?.The«,
ogether  unto  /«m— Behold  he  cometh  with  clouds—  ReV.i*

Ccc


560


THE  NATURE  AND  MANNER  OF  P.  VIII.


,


chap. Seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a
_  cloud  of  witnesses — For  ^e are  the  temple  of  thd

7*eb  Mi l***1*?!  God.

i. '  28.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  Christ's  coming  was

?a?*fl  to  be  in,  and  with  his  people;  both  the  nature  anc
manner  of  which,  was  predicted  by  the  prophet  Joel,
agreeable  to  the  predictions  of  the  other  prophets,  oi
Christ  Jesus  himself,  and  the  apostles.
,  29.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  for  it  is  nigls

wmp!ir- at  hand. A  day  of  darkness  and  gloominess,  a  dai
PsataS of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness,  as  the  morning  spreac
isah/7* ^Pon  tne  nlountams  J  a  great  people  and  a  strong-
er!'49, a  fire  devoureth  before  them,  and  behind  them  a  flam*
aSat^i?  burneth — Before  their  face  the  people  shall  be  mucr
pained  ;  all  faces  shall  gather  blackness — They  shal
enter  in  at  the  windows  like  a  thief. The  earth  shal
quake  before  them  ;  the  heavens  shall  tremble  ;  th
sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  dark,  and  the  stars  shal  ft
withdraw  their  shining — for  he  is  strong  that  cxecu
veth  his  Word  :  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  very  terri
ble,  and  who  can  abide  it."

30.  Thus,  while  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  a  day  o
darkness  and  terror  to  the  wicked,  Christ  is  glorifie
in  his  saints  ;  and  to  them  his  coming  is  the  risinj
of  the Sun of  righteousness. Hence the apostl
speaks  of  his  coming,  in  the  following  words  :  "  Thes  te
'iThess. shall  that  wicked  be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord  sha
ii.8,9,10.  consume  with  the  Spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  dc  {
stroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  coming  :  whose  com
ing  is  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with  all  powci  ,f
and  signs,  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all  deceive
ableness  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that  perish."

31.  Observe,  it  is  not  the  coming  of  the  man  of  s\
that  is  here  spoken  of ;  for  he  had  been  in  the  worl
ever  since  the  fall  ;  but  it  is  the  coming  of  Christ,
reveal  and  destroy  him.  It  is  in  thtm  that  perisi
that  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  second  time,  shoulj  j
be  after  the  working  of  Satan.

32.  And  to  such  as  perished  and  rejected  the  co
sel  of God against themselves,  it was after  th
working  of  Satan,  that  Christ  made  his  first  appeal  .

Mat.xxvi  ing. Thus  said  they,  Behold^  now  ye  have  heard  k
%  52lm  blasphemy. — Now  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  Devil- ,


»

fir/


1


P.  VIII.  THE  COMING  OF  CHRIST.  561

This  fellow  doth  not  cast  out  devils,  but  by  Beelzebub, C"I*P'
the  firince  of  Devils,  _ ,


S3.  How  justly  then was  Christ  represented as  Mat.sii.
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  in  a  day  of  clouds  24-
and  thick  darkness,  seeing  that  clouds  and  darkness
are  figures  of  trouble  and  blindness  of  mind  !  And
therefore said  the  prophet  Amos,  "  Wo  unto  you  Amos  v.
that  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord  !  to  what  end  is  it  for  18-
you  ?  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  darkness,  and  not  light."
This  was  plainly  represented  by  the  cloud  which  sep-
arated between  the  Egyptians  and  the  Israelites,  which
was  a  cloud  and  darkness  to  them,  but  it  gave  light  J*0'?***
by  night  to  these.

34.  Then  the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  clouds  of
heaven,  implies  no  visible  appearance  either  of  pow-
er or  glory  to  the  world,  but  the  contrary  ;  seeing
If  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  this  world  to
confound  the  wise  ;  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  icor.i.
confound  the  things  that  are  mighty  ;  and  base  things

of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath
God  chosen,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to
nought  things  that  are  ;  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in
his  presence."

35.  And  therefore,  to  those  who  are  in  the  flesh,
that  in  which  Christ  appears  is  both  dark  and  con-
temptible ;  and  herein  is  the  hiding  of  his  power  ;  Ha}yt^t
and  hence  it  is,  that  he  should  come  as  a  Snare  upon  l*u**»i
all  them  that  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.
Then  nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  the  manner

of  Christ's  coming,  is  not  according  to  the  expecta-
tions of  man  :  For  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the
sight  of  any  bird.  •  f

36.  Therefore,  when  Christ  speaks  of  his  coming

in  the  clouds,  he  also  says,  Then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  Mat,xxjv
the  earth  mourn.  And  again  it  is  said,  Behold,  he  ?o-kev.
cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  zech.xii.
2ll  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him  :  10»11,&c-
ven  so,  Amen.

37.  But  why  should  they  mourn  and  wail  because
Df  him  ?  It  is  evidently  because  of  the  way,  the  truth
md  the  life,  which  is  so  contrary  to  their  life,  and
which  not  only  shakes  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
jut  discovers  the  foundations  of  the  world,  and  that


662  THE  NATURE  AND  MANNER  OF  P.  VIII.

C  mf' uPon  which  it  stands,  and  all  that  is  therein,  namely,
„  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride


1  John  U.  °f  life-

i»6sa  win 38#  "  Then  the  channels  of  the  waters  were  seen,

i5.iVxvii.  and  the  foundations  of  the  world  were  discovered  at

16*  thy  rebuke,  O  Lord,  at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  thy

Dostrils. The  waters  saw  thee,  O  God,  the  waters

saw  thee  ;  they  were  afriad  : The  depths  also  were

troubled."

39.  Christ  promised  again  and  again,  that  he  would
come  as  a  thief  in  the  night ;  and  therefore  he  again
and  again,  solemnly  warned  his  disciples  to  watchj
and  not  to  be  overcome  with  surfeiting,  and  drunk-
enness, or  cares  of  this  life,  Ie*t  that  day  should
come  upon  them  unawares.

40.  And  more  striking  figures  could  not  be  used
than  those  of  a  snare  upon  all  them  that  dwell  upon
the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  and  that  of  a  thief  in  the
night,  to  signify  the  manner  of  his  coming.  Which
agree  perfectly  with  what  the  angels  told  his  disci-

Actsi.  9,  pies  on  the  mount :  "  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand
lVt  U" >e  gazing  up  into  heaven  ? This  same  Jesus,  which
is  taken  up  from  you  into heaven,  shail  so  ceme  in
like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven."

41.  And  the  manner  in  which  they  saw  him  go,
was,  that  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight ;
which  shewed  them  that  as  in  the  cloud  he  was  in-
visible, so  by  coming  in  the  clouds  he  would  come
out  of  sight.

Mat.xxv.  42.  It  is  strictly  true  that  every  eye  shall  see  him  ;
and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations  ;  and  he
shall  separate  them,  one  from  another,  as  a  shep-
herd divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats.  But  it  is  in
the  course  and  progress  of  his  work  that  every  eye
shall  see  him,  either  to  their  everlasting  joy  or  sor-
row. For  as  the  brightness  of  the  rising  sun  com*
menceth  in  the  east,  and  shineth  even  unto  the  west;
so  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be — gradual
and  progressive,  until  the  whole  earth  is  enlightened  r.
with  his  glory.  u

43.  But  it  was  foreseen,  and  foretold,  by  the  Spir-
it of  prophecy,  that  man,  wholly  under  the  influence j
of  visible  objects,  living  in  earthly  pleasures, and


3*


P.  VIII.  THE  COMING OF  CHRIST.  56


^


under  false  teachers,  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  ^jjjf"
should  deny  Christ  at  his  second  coming  ;  because  _
they  would  not  see  those  visible  changes  in  the  nat-
ural creation,  which  in  their  blind  senses,  they  had
formed,  and  which  they  vainjy  imagined  ought  to
take  place,  to  answer  their  plans  of  the  manner  of
his  coming.

44.  It  is  true,  say  they,  wars,  and  rumours  of
wars,  and  commotions  are  great  in  the  earth,  but:
this  has  always  been  more  or  less  the  case,  and
there  is  nothing  new.  The  Gentiles  are  not  yet  con-
verted, say  they,  nor  the  Jews  gathered  to  old  Jeru-
salem ;  nor  do  we  see  the  dead  bodies  rising  up  out
of  their  graves,  and  bone  coming  to  its  bone  ;  nor
do  we  see  the  heavens  on  fire,  or  the  earth  burning
up;  nor  the  sun  darkened,  nor  the  moon  turned  into
blood,  or  any  of  the  stars  falling  from  heaven,  but  all
things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning.

45.  Thus  that  scripture  is  fulfilled, u  Knowing  2  PetJiL
this  first,  that  there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  scof-  3>4-
fers, walking after  their  own lusts, and saying,
Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  for  since  the
fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were
from  the  beginning  of  the  creation."

46.  All  of  which  is  but  the  greater  confirmation  of
the  words  of  Christ  :  "  For  as  in  the  days  that  were
before  the  flood,  [that  is,  while  the  ark  was  prepar-
ing, which  was  120  years,]  they  were  eating  and
drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  Mat.xxW
day  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark  ;  and  knew  not  until  38'39*
the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all  away  ;  so  shall  also

the  coming  of  the  Son  cf  Man  be"

47.  Therefore,  as  the  manner  of  Christ's  coming
"Was  certainly  and  undoubtedly  to  be  as  a  snare  upon
all  flesh,  and  as  a  thief  in  the  night  ;  say  not  in  thine
heart,  I  shall  see  his  coming,  except  thou  watch  and
pray,  and  have  thy  lamp  trimmed  and  burning.

48.  The  nature  of  his  coming  is  likened  unto  the
coming  of  harvest,  and  no  person  of  common  sense
will  say,  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  clouds  to  bring
down  harvest  from  above  ?  or  who  shall  descend  into
the  earth,  to  bring  up  harvest  from  beneath  ?  (for  the
seed  is  nigh  thee?  already  in  the  earth;  and  according

Ccc3


64  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  P.  VIII.


CHAP.
IV.


Fhereforc,  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart, Who  shall  \
into  heaven  ?  (that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down


to  the  appointed  seasons,"  must  grow  up  to  maturity,
before  the  harvest  can  in  reality  appear.)

49. T
ascen<

Twom-x. from  above  ;) Or  who  shall  descend  into  the  deep,  ?

6.7,8..  (That  is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead.)
But  what  saith  it  ?  The  Word  (or  seed  of  Christ)  it
nigh  thee,  in  thy  month,  and  in  thy  heart  ;  that  is,  the
Word  of  faith  which  we  preach"


CHAPTER  IV.


The  Order  of  God  in  the  Confession  and  Forgiveness

of  Sins,


TH


1HAT  all  mankind  have  sinned,  and  that  none
can  be  justified,  accepted,  and  saved,  without
forgiveness,  none  will  pretend  to  deny,  who  believe
the  scriptures  of  truth  ;  and  it  is  a  truth  equally  un-
deniable, that  without  a  confession  of  sins,  there  can
be  no  forgiveness.
?r0T#  2.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper  ;$

xvvni.  13  })Ut  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have$
«39,io.'  mercy.— -If  we  say  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  himf
a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in  us. — Or,  if  we  say  that
ive  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth
is  not  in  us."  This  is  the  same  as  to  cover  sins.
"  But  if  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unright-


eousness."


3.  Agreeable  to  this  are  the  words  of  the  prophet
6?w  66*  Ezra,  "  Let  not  the sinner  say  he  hath  not  sinned  :

"  for  God  shall  burn  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head,  which
saith  before  the  Lord  God  and  his  glory,  I  have  not
sinned* — Surely  the  Lord  God  knoweth  your  inven-
tions, and  what  ye  think  in  your  hearts,  even  them  I
that  sin,  and  would  hide  their  sin. — .What  will  ye  do  ?
or  how  will  ye  hide  your  sins  before  God  and  his
angels  ?"

4.  Then  as  it  is  impossible  for  any  sinner  to  hide


P.  VIII.  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  567

his  sins  from  God  or  his  angels,  and  there  is  no  pos-  chai».

sibiiity  of  forgiveness  without  a  confession,  and  it  is  j

with  the  mouth,  that  confession  is  made  unto  saiva-  Rotu  v
tion  ;  therefore,  the  coming  of  Christ  with  his  holy  i°-
angels,  or  in  his  saints,  is  to  give  mankind,  who  are
weary  of  sin,  the  privilege  of  confessing  their  sins
to  God,  by  Christ  the  mediator,  in  his  saints,  where
he  is  actually  revealed  and  made  manifest,  as  the  only-
true  light  of  the  world  ;  and  which  is  the  only  door
of  hope  that  ever  was,  or  ever  will  be  opened  for  real
salvation.

5.  God  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  Ecci.xn.
every  secret  thing. — And,  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  J4- ..
world. — God  heareih  not  sinners  : — //  I  regard  ini-  si,&ix.*
quity  in  my  heart,  says  David,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  ^sk.  |Xvi#
me.*— As  I.  hear,  I  judge,  says  Christ. And  the  Son  *8-

of  man  ltath power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins."  30.

6.  The  order  of  the  confession  of  sins  was  first  Mat?,x,i,
marked  out  under  the  law,  by  the  command  of  God

to  Moses.  And  although  the  outward  and  ceremo-
nial part  of  the  law  ceased  at  the  appearing  of  Christ,
such  as  offerings  and  sacrifices  for  sin  ;  yet  confessing
and  forsaking  sin  did  not  cease  :  For  all  the  prophets
and  the  law  fir op.  he si ed  until  John.  And  they  of  Jeru-  13.  A.s'%
salem,  and  all  Judea,  and  the  region  round  about  Jor-  Mavkl-1*
dan,  were  baptised  of  John  in  the  river  Jordan,  con*
fcssing  their  sins  :  which  was  the  beginning  of  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.

7.  Sojne  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  be*
fore  to  Judgment. Which  is  in  no  other  way  than  by  24.

an  open  and  free  confession,  or  bringing  their  deeds
into  the  judgment,  where  the  judgment  is  given  un-
to the  saints.  But  some  men's  sins  follow  after.  For
a  confession  made  in  the  dark,  where  the  sin  is  com-
mitted, or  in  the  desert,  or  some  secret  chamber,
without  any  evidence  or  witness,  is  no  confession  at
all  ;  nor  is  any  thing  laid  open  in  the  sight  of  God,
or  brought  to  the  light  thereby,  for  all  things  are  na»
ked  and  open  before  him,  and  nothing  can  be  covered
from  him,  nor  any  thing  brought  to  the  light  of  his
All-seeing  eye.

S.  The  order  of  God  in  the  confession  of  sins,  was
marked  out,  in  a  shadow,  under  the  law,  and  Christ


56G  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  P.  VIII.

Cilv* '  came  not  t0  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets,  but  to
'/-*"--•  fulfil ;  and  as  he  came  into  the  world  for  judgment,
so  the  substance  was  in  a  measure  fulfilled,  in  the
work  of  his  first  appearing  ;  but  according  to  the  tes-
timony of  Christ  in  that  day,  the  law  and  the  prophets
were  to  be  more  especially  fulfilled  in  his  second  ap-
pearing, which,  on  that  account,  was  spoken  of  as
the  judgment  of  the  great  day.

9.  That  the  order  of  God  was  established  under
the  law,  for  the  confession  ©f  every  particular  sin,  is
evident  from  the  whole  law  :  a  few  passages  of  which

*»":m*T'  may  suffice  for  example.  "  And  the  Lord  spake  un-
to Moses  saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,
When  a  man  or  a  woman  shall  commit  any  sin  that
men  commit,  to  do  a  trespass  against  the  Lord,  and
that  person  be  guilty  ;  then  they  shall  confess  their
sin  which  they  have  done  :  and  he  shall  recompense
his  trespass  with  the  principal  thereof,  and  add  unto
it  the  fifth  part  thereof,  and  give  it  unto  him  against
whom  he  hath  trespassed."

10.  For  the  time  then  present,  there  were  always
x^t^i?.  certain  persons  appointed,  according  to  the  order  of
Lev.iii.  God,  to  hear  and  judge,  and  to  direct  the  transgres-
sor how  to  make  restitution  ;  which  served  as  a  sha-
dow of  future  things  under  the  gospel.  And  the  con-
fession of  every  particular  sin  was  accompanied  with
an  offering  and  a  sacrifice,  to  be  offered  at  the  door  of
the  tabernacle.

chap.xvii 11.  And  if  any  one  offered  an  offering,  or  a  sac-

i~9,  rifice,  in  any  other  place  than  at  the  tabernacle,  where
God  had  expressly  placed  his  name,  it  was  counted
sacrificing  unto  devils,  and  that  soul  was  to  be  cut  off
from  among  his  people.  Which  had  a  particular  al-
lusion to  the  work  of  Christ  in  his  first  and  second
appearing,  showing  that  it  would  not  be  lo  here  !  and
lo  there  i that  God  would  be  found  to  acceptance

Lukcxva  but  as  Christ  expresses  it, Wheresoever  the  body  is  $  I
that  is,  where  he  should  pitch  his  true  tabernacle  in
his  people,  where  he  should  expressly  place  his  name>
for  salvation.

12.  The  high  priest  went  into  the  holiest  of  all,

?*Ms!'  once  a  year>  and  tnat  not  without  blood,  to  make  aj
atonement  for  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  »


:


P.  VIII.  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  SSt

which  typified  Christ  in  his  first  appearing,  when  by  c?£p*
his  own  blood,  having  made  an  atonement  for  the  sins  r

of  the  world,  he  entered  into  heaven  itself ;  from
whence  he  was  to  appear  the  second  time,  to  com-
plete the  work  of  redemption.

13.  But  it  may  here  be  particularly  observed,  that
the  sins  of  the  people  were  not  taken  away  until  after
the  high  priest  returned  out  of  the  holiest  of  all,  hav-
ing made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  congre-
gation, by  the  blood  of  the  first  goat  which  was  slain.
So  Christ,  in  his  first  appearing,  by  offering  up  his
own  life,  made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ;
yet  sin  was  not  wholly  taken  away  ;  but  the  promise
remained  :  Unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  afifiear
the  second  time,  without  sin  unto  salvation.  Which
was  to  make  a  final  end  of  sin.

14.  Again,  it  was  commanded,  saying,  "  Aaron  Lev.  svl
(after  returning  from  within  the  vail)  shall  lay  both  30»21>34*
his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess

over  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,
and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sins,  putting
them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,  and  shall  send  them
away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness."
This  was  to  be  an  everlasting  statute  unto  the  children
of  Israel,  for  all  their  sins,  once  a  year.

15.  This  order  of  a  full  confession  of  sins  over  the
head  of  the  scape  goat,  had  a  particular  allusion  to
the  second  appearing  of  Christ,  to  make  an  end  of
sin,  by  a  full  atonement  and  forgiveness,  in  the  or-
der of  a  full  and  final  confession,  and  a  final  forsaking.

16.  A particular  example of  confessing  sins to
God,  is  given  in  the  case  of  Achan. "  And  Joshua  J^e^
said  unto  Achan,  give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  unto  the
Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  make  confession  unto  him  ;

and  tell  me  what  thou  hast  done,  hide  it  not  from  me.9'
And  Achan answered Joshua,  saying,  "  Indeed  I
have  sinned  against  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  thus
and  thus  have  I  done."

17.  In  this  case  Joshua  stood,  figuratively,  in  the
order  of  a mediator,  to hear  the confession  ; for
Achan  could  make  no  confession  to  the  Lord  God  of
Israel,  or  to  his  acceptance,  but  where  he  was  then
manifested,  which  was  iri  his  servant  Joshua,


563  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  P.  VIII.


CHAP
IV.


18.  Therefore,  when  -he  had  related  to  Joshua,
thing  by  thing,  what  he  had  done,  Joshua  said,  "  Why
hast  thou  troubled  us  ?  the  Lord  shall  trouble  thee
this  day.  .  And  all  Israel  stoned  him  with  stones  :  (for
in  the  case  of  wilful  and  knowing  disobedience  the
law  shewed  no  mercy  .J  And  they  raised  over  him  a
great  heap  of  stones — wherefore  the  name  of  that
place  was  called  The  valley  of  Achor  [i.  e.  the  val-
ley of  trouble]  unto  this  day."

19.  Hence  the  Lord  speaking,  by  the  prophet  Ho-
sea,  of  the  work  of  Christ  in  the  latter  day,  refers  to
this  circumstance,  as  particularly  to  be  fulfilled,  in
its  full  design  and  signification,  upon  the  very  cause

Hoseaii.  and  principle  of  sin,  when  he  says,  "  Behold  I  will
A4,i5,  c.  ajjure  ner>  an(j  brmg  ner  mt0  the  wilderness,  and

speak  comfortably  unto  her. And  I will  give  her
her  vineyards  from  thence,  and  the  -valley  of  Achor
for  a  door  of  hofie"

20.  Without  all  contradiction  the  less  is  blessed  of
the  better  :  and  therefore  such  as  receive  the  power
of  salvation  and  real  acceptance  with  God,  must  re-
ceive it  through  that  medium  appointed  in  the  order
of  God,  before  them  ;  and  by  finding  their  union  and
relation  to  the  order  of  God's  appointment,  they  find
their  relation  to  God,  which  was  ever  his  manner  of
"working,.,  in  every  dispensation  of  his  grace.

..  21.  Hence  those  who  came  to  John,  and  were  bap-
*>t3Q.  *  tized  of  him,  confessing  their  sins,  jus  life d  God;
while  the  Pharisees  and  lawyers  rejected  the  counsel
of  God  against  themselves,  being  not  baptized  of  him.
For  as  John  was  sent  of  God  ;  so  whatever  was  done
unto  John,  was  accepted  as  done  unto  God,  according
to  the  extent  of  his  mission.

22.  The  power  and  authority  of  Christ,  both  in  the
person  of  Jesus,  and  in  the  order  of  the  Primitive
Church,  has  been  already  sufficiently  stated  to  show
that  there  was  no  other  medium,  through  which  man-
kind could  find  access  to  God,  than  that  in  which  he
was  manifested,  which  was  in  his  faithful  and  true
witnesses.
Matt.v 23'  Hence  said  Jesus  to  his  chosen  followers,  "  Ye
13,14.  x.  are  the salt  of  the  earth — Ye  are  the  light  of  the
tt\xyaL  world.— He  that  recciveth  you,  receiveth  me  ;  and


P.  VIII.  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  569

he  thut  receiveth  me,  receive th  him  that  sent  me.— c^yP*

Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  mmm

heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall
be  loosed  in  heaven. — Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  jobnxx,
they  are  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose  soever  sins  83«
ye  retain,  they  are  retained."

24.  "  The  glory  which  thou  gavestme  I  have  giv-  Ch.  xvik
en  unto  them. — As  my  father  hath  sent  me  into  the  JJ'jf'jjj1
world,  even  so  send  I  you. The  Father  judge  th  no  47,48,
man  ;  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son.

—If  any  man  hear  my  words  and  believe  not,  I  judge
him  not: — He  that  rejecteth  me,  and  receiveth  not
my  words,  hath  one  that  judge  th  him  :  the  Word
that  I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the
last  day."

25.  It  was  the  Word,  dwelling  in  the  saints,  which
was  to  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day  ;  accordingly
Jesus  said,  "  I  have  gi.ven  unto  them  thy  Word. — It  *4*p,XT1J
is  not  ye  that  speak,, but  the  Holy  Ghost." Hence  Jg*

it  is  written,  " He  that abideth  in  the  doctrine  of  2  John i.
Christ,  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son — Know  ye  }e?^dU
not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spir-  yl  19».
it  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?"

26.  And  therefore,  Christ,  dwelling  and  abiding
in  the  saints,  did,  in  and  by  them,  hear  and  judge  of
all  things  pertaining  to  salvation.  And  as  there  was
no  other  name  given  under  heaven  among  men,  where-
by any  could  be  saved,  but  by  Christ,  and  Christ  dwelt
in  his  saints  and  they  in  him  ;  so  there  was  no  other
medium  under  heaven,  where  God  could  be  found  to
salvation,  or  where  true  remission  of  sins  could  be
obtained.

27.  As  God  is  All-seeing,  and  knows  the  most  se-
cret thoughts,  words  and  actions  of  all  men  ;  so  in
this  respect,  nothing  can  be  covered  from  him,  nor
uncovered  before  him  ;  therefore  when  many  that  be-  Acts  xfc«
lieved  came  and  confessed  and  shewed  their  deeds,  they  Mat.xxiv
did  not^o  into  the  desert,  or  some secret  place  to  26*
confess  their  sins,  as  many  do  now-a-days  ; but  they

came  to  the  apostles,  who  were  the  light  of  the
"world,  and  brought  their  deeds  to  the  light,  and  shew-
ed them.

2a.  Imfthig  was  substantially  fulfilled,  according  to


$7Q  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  P.  VIII.

c*j[$p- the  measure  of  that  dispensation,  what  was  so  abun-
dantly spoken  of,  in  the  law  and  the  prophets,  about


John  iii. confessing  sins  to  God. Hence  said  Christ,  "  Every

20,  21. one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh

to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved. But

he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light,  that  his  deeds

may  be  made  manifest,  that  they  are  wrought  in  God.

29.  The  greatest  power  that  Christ  had,  was  that
which  pertained  to  salvation,  and  the  remission  of  sins.
And  as  the  Son  of  man  had  power  on  earth  to  forgive
sins  ;  so  he  gave  the  same  power  unto  his  followers,

scor.iv.  whom  he  had  chosen  to  give  the  knowledge  of  salva-
tion to  the  world,  which  treasure  was  committed  to
earthen  vessels.  Whose  soever  sins  they  remitted,
they  were  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose  soever  sins
they  retained,  they  were  retained.

30.  This  was  the  true  order  and  power  in  which
the  Primitive  Church  stood.  And  although  the  pow  -
cr  of  the  holy  people  was  scattered,  and  the  true  or-
der in  the  confession  and  forgiveness  of  sins  was  per-
verted and  lost,  during  the  reign  of  Antichrist  ;  yet,
according  to  the  most  pointed  testimony  of  both
prophets  and  apostles,  the  same  power,  and  greater,
was  to  be  restored  and  given  unto  the  saints  in  the  lat-
ter day.

31.  Agreeable  to  the  vision  of  Daniel,  Judgment y
s4*M7.  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  most  High. — And  ac-
Oba.  21.  cording  to  Obadiah,  Saviours  shall  come  upon  mount

Zion,  to  judge  the  mount  of  Esau,  and  the kingdom
shall  be  the  Lord's.

32.  The  judgment  of  Esau,  which  is  Edom  or  old
Adam,  is  thus  described  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  :  .
"  I  have  made  Esau  bare,  I  have  uncovered  his  se-  I

Jor'22liN'  cret  P*aces>  anc*  he  shall  not  be  able  to  hide  himself.  ,
And  at  that  day  shall  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Edom
be  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  pangs. " That  is,  I
pained  to  be  delivered  of  those  abominations which  I
they  know  must  come  to  the  light.

33 The  same  thing  was  testified  by  ail  the  pro-^j  j,
phets  who  spake  of  the  work  of  the  latter  day,  from
Enoch  the  seventh  from  Adam,  to  John  the  last  of  the

Jade  14,  inspired  apostles;  as  it  is written,  Behold  the  Lord fl
cometh  in  ten  thousand  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judg"


P.  VIII.  THE  CONFESSION  OF  SINS.  571

tnent  ufion  all. 4nd  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon chap.

them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them.

34.  So universally  believed  and  known  was this  Rev>  X3|#
matter,  among  all  who  ever  stood  in  any  light  or  or-  4-

der  of  God, St.  Paul  expresses  it as  a matter  of
astonishment  that  any  should  be  so  ignorant  as  not  to
know  it  :  Bo  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  1  Cor.H
the  world  ?  2*

35.  Then  as  the  revelation  of  God  is  given  in  this
day  of  Christ's  second  appearing,  by  which  the  se-
crets of  the  heart  are  searched  out,  and  the  real  pow-
er of  salvation  administered  ;  so  this  Word  of  salvation
is  sent  unto  all  that  are  weary  of  sin,  and  desire  to  be
stripped  of  all  that  is  contrary  to  the  pure  nature  of
Christ,  and  released  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.

36.  Every  one  that  doeth  truth,  cometh  to  the
light,  confessing  and  shewing  their  deeds,  that  their
deeds  may  be  made  manifest  that  they  are  wrought
in  God. And  as  sin  is  ever  a  transgression  of  the

aw,  and  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  law  can  in  any
wise  fail,  till  the  whole  be  fulfilled  ;  so  in  order  to
obtain  a  final  forgiveness,  an  honest  and  full  confes-
ion  of  every  sin,  in  the  order  of  God,  will  forever
De  indispensibly  necessary,  while  one  sin  remains
concealed  in  the  earth.

37.  No  person  living  will  freely  and  honestly  con-
:ess  all  their  most  secret  sins  before  another,  as  in
Jie  sight  of  God  and  his  witness,  but  from  the  most
incere  and  upright  principle.  And  there  i*  no  per-
on  of  feeling  and  candour,  but  will  acknowledge,
hat  the  principle  which  would  lead  any  one,  honest-
y,  to  bring  their  dark  deeds  to  the  light,  and  to  wit-
less against  them,  is  not  the  same  principle  which
ed  the  per?on  to  commit  sin  and  keep  it  concealed.

38.  For  ah  it  is  the  nature  and  disposition  of  fallen
an  to  r  mtmit  sin  in  the  dark,  and  keep  it  concealed  ;

o  it  is  .he  nature  of  the  spirit  of  God,  and  the  dis-
osition  of  those  who  are  led  thereby,  to  bring  every
ecret  abomination,  and  hidden  work  of  darkness  to
igh  :  and  the  former  is  as  contrary  to  the  latter  as
nidnight  darkness  is  opposite  to  the  brightness  of  the
eridian  sun.

39.  And  therefore,  all  such  as  receive  the  grace  of

Ddd


572  THE  SVFTERIXOS  OF CHRIST,  IN P.  VIII.

chap. God,  which biingeth salvation,  in  the present  day,

^J first,  honestly,  bring*  their  former  deeds  of  darknes

to  the light,  by  confessing  all  their  sins,  with  a  full
determination  to  forsake  them  forever. By  so  doin;
they  find  justification  and  acceptance  with  God,  an
.  receive  that  power  by whioh  they  become dead  in4
deed unto  sin,  and  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus*
Christ,  and  are  enabled  to  follow  his  example,  and
walk  even  as  he  walked.


CHAPTER  V.

The  Suffering* °f  Okriai^  in  the Work  of  Regene-
ration.


FROM  what  has  been  stated  concerning  the  com
ing  of  Christ,  it  is  evident  that  every  step  of  his
coming,  from  first  to  last,  was  contrary  to  the  wisdom
of  this  world  :  and  although  he  was  in  the  world, yet
the  world  knew  him  not  :  and  as  little  did  they  know
whence  he  came,  or  whither  he  went  when  he  de-
parted out  of  the  world.

2.  Instead  of  descending  through  the  air,  from
some  unknown  region,  in  a  splendid  appearance,  and
ascending  in  like  manner,  he  first  came  forth  from;
such  a  cloud  as  all  other  infants  come  from  :  and  at
his  departure,  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight.1
The  truth  is,  he  was  born  into  the  world,  and  he  was
born  out  of  it  :  and  his  being  born  into  the  world  was
one  birth,  and  his  being  born  out  of  it  was  another.*'

3.  And  although millions  had  been  born  into  the
world  before  him,  yet  he  was  the  first  who  was  actu-
ally born  out  of  the world. And  as  the  world  wertt-Ift
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  he  was  therefore  properly h
called  the  fir st -begot  ten  from  the  dead,  and  the  first-
born of  many  brethren. For  being found  in  fashion  n
as  a  man,  with  all  the  infirmities  of  mankind,  and  in gj
all  things  made  like  unto'his  brethren,  in  things  nat-
ural, and  being  tempted  in  all  points  as  they  were,  it
was  necessary  that  he  should  be  conceived  by  the  Ho-


.,


P.  VIII.  THE  WO  RK  OF  REGENER ATlOlf.  573


CHAP


ly  Ghost,  in  relation  to  a  second  birth,  or  being  born C1*£


again


4.  And  by  him the Holy  Ghost  first  practically
taught  the  doctrine  of  the  second  birth. "  Marvel  j0hniii.
not  that  I  say  unto  you, Ye  must  be  born  again. — Ve-  J^^
rily  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  who  have  followed  me  [or  28.
rather, who  shall  have  followed  ?»c]  in  (he Regenera-
tion, when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of

his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judg-
ing the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."

5.  Here  then  was  the  true  design  of  Christ's  com-
ing into  the  world,  not  to  continue  in  the  nature  and
spirit  which,  in  behalf  of  man's  redemption,  he  took
upon  him,  through  the  medium  of  a  fallen  woman  ;
but  to  be  regenerated,  or  born  out  of  it,  into  a  state
of  immortality  and  eternal  life,  that  others  might
follow  him  in  the  same  example.

6.  It  is  expressly  said,  that  Christ  Jesus  was  the
first-born,  and  that  he  was  to  be  followed  in  the  Re-
generation ;  and  as  he  came  into  the  world  by  water
and  blood,  as  other  infants  do,  by  which  means  he
took  upon  him  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the  nature  and
enmity  of  fallen  man,  and  in  this  sense  millions  were
born  into  the  world  before  him  ;  therefore  it  is  to  be
certainly  understood  that  he  was  regenerated  and
born  again :  for  in  truth,  he  could  not  teach  others
to  follow  him  in  a  way  which  he  did  not  walk  him-
self: and  he  expressly  testifies,  Except  a  man  be  jo&ijji.*
born  of  water, and  the  Spirit,  he cannot  enter  into

the  kingdom  of  God.

7.  Accordingly  Christ  Jesus  himself  opened  the
way  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  by  a  real  spiritual
birth  ;  and  all  who  ever  possess  that  kingdom,  must
.enter  in  by  the  same  way,  after  his  example  ;  there-
fore it  is  in  vain  for  any  to  stand  gazing  up  into  the
♦natural  heavens,  in  hopes  of  seeing  the  sons  of  God
ascend  or  descend,  seeing  the  children  of  God  come

♦  forth  into  his  family,  by  being  born  again,  as  much
as  the  children  of  this  world  are  born  into  the  society
of  men.

8.  And  as  the  spiritual  birth  is  as  real  as  the  nat-
ural, and  the  manner  of  the  one  is  as  expressly  de-
scribed as  the  other  can  be,  and  is  certainly  and  pos-


5/4  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  CHRIST,  IN P.  VIII. |

chap, itively  known  ; so  from  the  time  that  the  new  man

-.  is  begotten,  he  as  sensibly  grows  up  into  the  nature

and  likeness  of  him  that  begat,  as  the natural  man,

from  his  conception, grows  up  into  the  nature  and

likeness  of  his  father.

9.  As  the  natural  man  is  conceived  in  a  body,  and
while  in  the  generation  consists  of  two  parts,  and  those
two  parts  are  fully  and  finally  separated,  in  his  actual
birth,  so  that  the  tie  by  which  they  were  united,  is
cut  off  forever,  and  the  inner  part  comes  forth  in
perfect  shape,  with  ail  the  features  of  the  father  ;  so
in  the  Regeneration  there  are  two,  called  the  flesh
and  Spirit,  both  in  the  same  body,  and  the  one  is  en-
closed in,  and  bound  by  the  ether,  from  which  it
must  come  forth,  and  be  separated,  and  wholly  cut
off,  before  it  can  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.

10.  Therefore,  as  the  natural  infant  in  its  genera-
tion, lies  concealed  within  a  second  veil  ;  so  the  real
child  of  God,  who  is  in  the  spiritual  work  of  Regen-
eration, is  as  remote  from  the  natural  eye.

11.  And  as  the  natural  infant,  within  the  second
veil,  in  the  womb  of  its  mother,  is  insensible,  and
totally  ignorant  of  what  passes  among  the  living,  un-
til it  has  been  brought  forth,  and  borne  upon  the  sides*
and  dandled  upon  the  knees,  and  comes  to  sufficient
maturity  ;  so  is  the  natural  man,  covered  up  in  the
womb  of  nature's  darkness,  wallowing  in  the  blood
of  his  nativity,  and  is  insensible  and  totally  ignorant
of  the  spiritual  birth,  until  he  is  brought  forth,  sep-
arated and  wholly  cut  off  from  the  tie  of  the  flesh,  by
which  his  soul  is  held  in  bondage.

12.  Hence  the  Lord  by  the  prophet,  speaking  figu-
ratively of  Jerusalem  in  her  natural  state,  and  of  the

Exek.xvi  second  birth  or  new  creation,  saith,  "  Thy  nativity*
in  the  day  thou  wast  born,  thy  navel  was  not  cut,  nei-
ther wast  thou  washed  in  water  to  supple  thee  :  thou
wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor  swaddled  at  all. — And  when  ,i
I  passed  by  thee,  and  saw  thee  polluted  in  thine  own  .
blood,  I  said  unto  thee  in  thy  blood,  Live  ;  Yea,  I
said  unto  thee  in  thy  blood,  Live."

13.  Such,  in  a  true  spiritual  sense,  is  the  highest
perfection  of  man  in  his  natural  state,  like  an  infant
unloosed,  wallowing  in  the  blood  of  its  nativity,  and


4,6.


n


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION'.  575

without  a  deliverance,  and  final  separation  from  that c^p*
in  which  he  is  held,  must  perish  without  remedy.

14.  As  nothing  is  born  without  a  separation,  and
no  separation  can  take  place  without  suffering  ;  so
that  which  bears  must  suffer  in  proportion  to  the  na-
ture and  quality  of  that  which  it  bears,  and  that  which
is  born  is  liable  to  suffer  in  proportion  to  the  natural
or  inherent  relation  in  which  it  stands  to  that  which
bore  it,  until  it  is  weaned  from  that  relation.

15.  And  as  that  which  beareth  is  first  in  the  order
of  things,  and  not  that  which  is  born  ;  and  as  that  is
first  which  is  natural,  and  not  that  which  is  spiritual^;
therefore,  that  which  is  natural  and  earthly  suffers*
death  in  the  work  of  regeneration,  while  that  which
is  spiritual,  and  heavenly,  is  quickened  and  made  alive
in  the  soul ;  and  the  soul  can  only  suffer  in  propor-
tion to  the  connexion,  the  near  or  distant  relation  in
which  it  stands  to  that  which  is  natural,  until  the  nat-
ural is  overcome  by  the  spiritual.

16.  The  inner  or  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  was
borne  by  the  outer  man,  or  in  other  words^that  which
was  spiritual  was  within  that  which  was  natural,  and
was  brought  forth  out  of  that  which  was  natural  and
old.  And  hence,  as  sin  captivated  the  soul,  and  occu-
pied that  which  was  natural  and  old,  and  the  suffer-
ings of  Christ  Jesus  for  the  redemption  of  souls,  be-
gan in  Christ's  first  appearing  ;  therefore  the  suffer-
ings must  continue,  in  his  second  appearing,  until  the
work  of  regeneration  is  completed,  and  that  which  is
natural  and  old,  is  finally  overcome  by  the  new.

17.  Upon  this  distinction  between  the  natural  and
spiritual  body,  hangs  the  whole  of  the  apostles*  doc-
trines ;  take  away  that  distinction,  and  the  whole
New-Testament  must  appear,  to  every  man  of  com-
mon sense,  as  the  most  absurd  and  incredible  ro-
mance.

18.  But  admit  that  the  apostles  meant  as  they  wrote,
that  there  was  a  natural  body  and  a  spiritual  body  then
existing,  and  that  the  natural  was  first  in  the  order
of  things,  and  afterwards  the  spiritual,  the  whole
may  be  understood  in  the  most  perfect  consistency.

19.  This  distinction  between^  the  natural  and  spir*
itual  body,  is  variously  expressed;  by  the  outer  men,

Ddd2


5TC)  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF CHRIST,  IN  P.  Villi.

Cf^p* and  the  inner  man  ; the  old  man,  and  the  new  man  ;

-  the  first  Adam  and  the  second  Adam  ; which  in  sub-

stance make  one  and  the  same  distinction.  And  as
each  body  must  have  a  mind,  or  seedy  or  centre  of  in-
fluence ;  so  the  apostles  as  plainly  distinguish  be-
tween the  carnal  mind,  or  mind  of  the  flesh,  which
is  enmity  against  God,  and  the  spiritual  mind,  or
mind  which  was  in  Christ.

20.  Then  the  whole  history  of  the  work  of  God,
in  the  first  appearing  of  Christ,  takes  it  for  granted,
that  it  began  in  that  which  was  natural,  and  that  out
of  that  which  was  natural,  the  true  spiritual  and
everlasting  offspring  of  God,  gradually  came  forth.

21.  And  as  the  first  decreased,  the  second  increas-
ed ;  as  the  second  was  set  at  liberty,  the  first  became
a  captive  ;  as  the  first  suffered,  the  second  triumph-
ed ;  as  the  first  died,  the  second  revived  ;  and  finally,
when  the  first  was  completely  dead,  being  crucified,
the  second  was  completely  alive  and  glorified,  and  in
the  full  and  perfect  stature  of  a  new  creature,  self-
existent  and  wholly  independent  of  the  old  forever.

22.  From  this  principle  of  a  distinction  and  sepa-
ration, between  that  which  is  natural,  and  that  which
is  spiritual,  the  fundamental  doctrines  relating  to  the
sufferings  of  Christ,  arise  ;  which  are  stated  in  such
plain  and  positive  terms,  through  all  the  New-Testa-
ment, that  none  can  mistake  the  sense,  who  have
eny  light,  unless  the  most  pointed  testimony  of  those
-who  were  eye  witnesses  of  the  work  of  God,  from '
the  beginning,  is  wilfully  perverted.

23.  The  birth  of  Jesus  is  stated,  as  being  in  the
natural  appearance  of  common  humanity ;  that  he
grew  in  stature,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man:
that  he  was  subject  to  his  supposed  parents  until  he
-was  of  age  :  that  he  then  received  the  Holy  Ghost,
began  to  suffer  and  die,  as  to  the  common  course  and
principles  of  nature  :  That  he  became  obedient  to
his  heavenly  Father,  even  unto  death  :  that  he  learn-
ed obedience  by  the  things  he  suffered  :  that  he  was
made  perfect  through  sufferings  :  that  he  suffered  z>*
the  flesh,  but  was  quickened,  or  made  alive  in  the
Sfiirit :  that  he  died  unto  sin  ;  but  was  made  alive  un~-
to  God,


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF REGENERATION.  5W

24.  That  having  finished  his  work  on  earth,  in  that CJ*AF*

human  form  which  was  put  to  death  by  the  Jews,  lie

departed,  and  afterwards  appeared  again,  in  different
forms,  to  his  disciples,  and  shewed  himself  alive,  by
many  infallible  proofs,  in  his  spiritual  state  of  exist-
ence, until  he  vanished  wholly  out  of  their  sight,  as

to  natural  appearance  :  That  in  this  spiritual  state,
they  dwelt  in  him,  and  he  in  them  :  that  they  suffer-
ed and  died  as  he  did,  after  his  example,  and  sat  to-
gether with  him  in  heavenly  places.

25.  Therefore  it  is  a  grand  deception,  that  many
have  lain  under,  who  have  imagined  that  the  holy,
harmless,  and  undefiled  Son  of  God,  suffered  and
died  in  the  room  and  stead  of  sinners,  to  rescue  them
from  that  death  and  punishment,  which  they  deserv-
ed ;  and  that  his  sufferings  and  death  fully  satisfied
Divine  Justice,  so  that  no  further  sufferings  were  ne-
cessary for  the  salvation  of  mankind.

26.  What  mind,  upon  the  slightest  reflection,  could
admit  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  suffered  and  died  in  the
room  and  stead  of  the  patriarchs  and  prophets  ?  when
it  is  testified,  that  they  had  trial  of  cruel  mockings
and scourgings,  of  bonds and imprisonment :  that

they  were  stoned,  were  sawn  asunder,  were  tempted,  Hei*.  x-i,
were  slain  with  the  sword  :  that  they  wandered  about
in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins,  in  deserts,  and  in  moun-
tains, and  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  being  des-
titute, afflicted  and  tormented.

27.  As  well  might  Jesus  have  argued,  that  the  fa-
thers had  died  in  his  room  and  stead,  that  he  might
live  as  a  universal  monarch  upon  earth,  as  that  any
of  his  followers  should  draw  such  an  inconsistent  and
groundless  inference  from  his  sufferings.  For  it  is
clearly  manifest  from  his  discourses  to  his  disciples,
that  a  great  part  of  his  doctrines,  as  well  as  the  whole
of  his  example,  was  expressly  to  encourage  them  to
undergo  the  same  sufferings  which  he  suffered,  and
to  die  the  death  that  he  died.

28.  But  all  that  human  nature  suffered,  from  the
fall  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  was  not  even  the  begin-
ning' of  sorrows  compared  with  what  was  yet  to  fol-
low, in  the  work  of  Regeneration.


$T$  the  SUFFERINGS  OF  CHRIST,  IN P.  VIILl

chap. 29.  And  as  tire  sufferings,  exhibited  in  the  bring-]

-  ing  forth  of  the  first  born,  were  designed  as  a  perfect

example,  and  were  but  the  real  beginning  ;  so  it  was

the  highest  aim  of  his  true  followers to  copy  after

that  example,  in  enduring  the  same  sufferings  which

he also  suffered  :  being  fully  persuaded,  as  the  apos-

2Tim.ii.  tie  expresses  it,  that,  If  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  we

Rom.'vHi  shall  also live with  trim  : If  we  suffer  with  him, we

l7'  shall  also  reign  with  him. And again,  If  so  be  that

we  suffer  with  [or  in  conformity  to]  him,  that  we  may

be  glorified  together.

30.  This  is  the  whole  tenor  of  the  doctrines  of  the
apostles,  concerning  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  that
as  he  suffered,  so  did  they  :  and  as  the  body  is  not
complete  without  the  head,  so  neither  is  the  head
complete  without  the  body  ;  and  each  member  of
the  body  suffers  in  a  just  proportion,  as  the  members,
bear  a  proportion  to  the  head  :  so  that  in  all  things*
the  first-born  had  the  pre-eminence.

31.  Therefore,  Christ  Jesus  having  suffered  his
proportion  as  the  head,  every  member  of  the  body,
according  to  their  several  lots  and  offices,  fill  up  their
proportion  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  that  the  whole
may  be  perfected and  glorified  together. Hence

Coi.i.24.  yfixh  tjie  ap0Stie  to  the  Colossians,  "  Who  now  re-
joice in  my  sufferings  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which
is  left  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  flesh,  j
for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church."

ium.  vi. 32.  And  to  the  Romans  he  saith,  "  Know  ye  not,

3>4>§'  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ,
were  bafitized  into  his  death  ?  Therefore  we  are  bu*
ried  with  (or  in  conformity  to)  him  by  baptism  into
death. — Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified
with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,
that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin."

33.  In  all  this  there  is  not  the  least  intimation  o
the  sufferings  and  crucifixion  of  Christ  on  a  wooden
cross  ;  nor  of  his  dying  at  the  instigation  of  Jewis
priests,  by  the  hands  of  Roman  soldiers  ;  nor  of  hi

m  followers  suffering  in  conformity  to  him,  in  that  man*

ner. But  the  sufferings  and  crucifixion  of  Christ
both  in  relation  to  the  head  and  members  of  his  body*,
were,  strictly  speaking,  the  crucifixion,  sufferings


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION*.  579

and  death  of  the  fleshy  the  old  man  of  sin,  who  was  CI^P»
crucified  and  put  to  death  by  a  daily  cross.  .

34.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  GaLfiL
the  law,  (saith  Paul,)  being  made  a  curse  for  us. Who  \  pet#a#
his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  *4.
(saith  Peter,)  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed. "

35.  But  how  was  he  made  a  curse  for  them  ?  how
did  he  bear  their  sins  ?  and  how  were  they  healed  by
his  stripes  ?  was  it  without  suffering  as  he  did  ?  In
no  wise.  The  history  of  their  whole  life  and  testi-
mony witnesses  to  the  contrary.  But  it  was  by  his
example,  that  they  might  also  follow  his  steps  in  the
same  sufferings.

36.  u  Fov even  hereunto  were yc  called, (saith  ipet.&
Peter  ;)  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  2L
you  an  example,  that  ye should  follow his  steps. —
Forasmuch  then  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  J^S?***
flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same  mind  :

for  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from
sin  ;  that  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  his  time
in  the  flesh,  to  the  iusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of
God."

37.  Thus  the  sufferings  of  Christ  do  not  merely
respect  the  head,  or  first-born  of  his  body,  as  having
ceased  from  sin,  by  suffering  in  the  flesh  ;  but  every
member  of  his  body,  who  hath  suffered  in  the  fleshy
after  his  example,  hath  ceased  from  sin  :  For  if  the
root  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches  ;  and  being  crucified,
in  conformity  to  the  example  of  Christ,  they  are  dead
unto  sin,  and  cannot  live  any  longer  therein.

38.  But  what  kind  of  a  body  would  it  be  to  have
sin  wholly  abolished  out  of  the  head,  and  the  enmity
reigning  in  all  the  members  ? A  pure head, and
members  wholly  corrupt. "  A  head  obedient  unto  Boston,
death,  and  heels  kicking  against  heaven." Can  such

be  the  body  of  Christ  ?  Nay  verily , u  If  one  mem-  icor.xa.
ber  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer  with  [or  in  confor-  j^f*"
mity  to]  it." And  all  the  members  are  partakers  q/*PW.»..
Christ's  sufferings,  and  have  a  fellowship  of  his suf*
fcrings,  being  made  conformable to  hU  death.


580  THE SUFFERINGS  OP  CHRIST,  IN P.  VIII

CHAPTER VI.

The  Subject  continued*

C  vi.P' nr^HE  head  of  every  man  is  Christ,  and  the  head

JL of  Christ  is  God. So  when  Christ  cometh  into

Heb.x.7,  the  world,  his  language  is,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy
10,  14.  wiu5  q  God." — By  which  will  we  are  sanctified,  (saith
the  apostle,)  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Je-
sus Christ  once  for  all :  that  is,  a  final  offering.  And
thus  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  forever  them
that  are  sanctified.  But  the  offering  up  of  the  body
once  for  all,  is  more  than  the  offering  up  of  the  head,
it  includes  the  whole  body,  from  the  head  to  the  least
member.

2.  And  as  Christ  Jesus  was  sanctified  by  being  obe-
dient to  the  Will  of  his  Father  and  head,  in  offering
up  himself;  so  each  member  of  his  body  is  sanctifi-
ed by  the  same  Willy  in  being  obedient  to  their  head,
and  in  offering  up  themselves  once  for  all :  and  thus
the  whole  body  is  sanctified  and  perfected  forever," by-
one  offering,  which  is  one  and  the  same  in  relation  to
the  head  and  the  members.

3.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made  perfect
through  sufferings,  and  became  the  author  of  eternal
salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  him  ;  and  as  he  was
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,  and
died  for,  (or  in)  all,  and  every  part  of  that  nature
which  deserved  death  ;  therefore  he  not  only  became
dead  to  that  nature  which  he  took  upon  him,  but  that
nature  became  eternally  dead  as  to  him.

4.  Hence the  apostle  justly  concludes, that we
who  live,  should  henceforth  not  live  unto  ourselves
but  unto  him  who  set  this  example  of  dying,  and  w

2 Cor.  v. thereby  raised from the  dead. "  Wherefore  (sait

he)  henceforth  know  we no  man  after  the  flesh  :  and

expressly  adds,  If  any man  be  in  Christy  he  is  a  ne

creature  : old things  are  jiassed  away  ;  behold, at

things  are  become  new  :  and  alt  things  are  of  God.

2Tim  i 5#  Then  it  was  not  Christ  Jesus the Lord fro

io. . '  heaven  that  died,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  death  ;  b

x^ii!1' on  the  contrary,  he  abolished  death,  and  brought  lift


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION.  581

and  immortality  to  light — Having  abolished  in  hisjlesh  c^Ap-
the  enmity — And  by  the  cross,  having  slam  the  enmity.  _
Neither  did  he  finally  suffer  :  yet  on  account  of  that
sinful  nature  which  he  took  upon  him,  and  which  he
had  in  him  to  slay  and  abolish,  he  frequently  suffered
pain  and  sorrow  of  sou!,  both  in  relation  to  himself
and  others.

6.  Hence  we  read  of  his  being  tempted  of  the  de-
vil ;  spending  whole  nights  in  prayer  to  God  who  was
able  to  deliver  him — weeping  over  Jerusalem  ;  and
of  his  sufferings  in  che  garden,  when  in  an  agony,  he
cried,  My  said  is  exceeding  sorrowful  unto  death.
Such  was  the  nature  of  his  sufferings  in  the  flesh,
until  that  enmity  which  he  took  upon  him  was  slain,
and  that  death  abolished,  as  to  him  :  and  hence  the
body  of  sin  and  death  was  the  final  sufferer,  and  not
the  Lord  Christ  Jesus.

7.  Therefore  it  was  not  he  who  abolished  death,
and  slew  the  enmity,  that  finally  suffered  or  died  ;  but
that  enmity  which,  in  his  own  flesh,  he  abolished  and
slew,  by  a  daily  cross  ;  and  whereby  he  set  the  exam-
ple for  others  to  slay  the  enmity  in  their  own  flesh,  as
he  had  done  in  his.

8.  Hence  it  is  written,  "  Christ  hath  once  suffered  i  Tvt.  ui
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  (or  rather the  just18*
upon  the  unjust,) that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,  be-
ing put  to  death  in  the  jlesh,  but  made alive  in the
S/iirit. — For  in that he  died,  he died  unto  sin  once  :

but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto God. Likewise  Rom.\i.
reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin  ;  ('>10-u'
but  alive  unto  God. — Knowing  this,  that  our  old  7nan
is  crucified  with  [or  in  conformity  to]  him,  that  the
body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  that  henceforth we
should  not  serve  sin.

9.  From  all  which  it  is  most  evident,  that  it  was
not  the  Son  of  God  that  suffered  the  wrath  of  his  Fa-
ther at  all  ;  nor  was  there  any  design  in  the  case  to  re-
lease the  sinner  from  the  punishment which  was  his

just  desert.  But  on  the  contrary,  u  As  the  children  Heb. «,
are  partakers  of  fles h  a nd  blood,  he  also  himself  like-
wise took  fiart  of  the  same  :  that  through  death
[through  the  means  of  that  "nature  of  sin,  which  is
death  and  enmity  which  he  took]  he  might  destroy
him  that  ha&tha  fiowcr  of  death,  that  is  the  Devil."  ^


#82  Tins  sufferings  of  chiust,  in P.  VIII.

chap.  io.  But  there  was  no  changing  the  nature  of  things
*  in  the  case,  or  converting  holiness  into  sin,  or  life  in-
to death  :  for  that  which  he  took  he  inhabited  and
possessed,  and  that  which  he  possessed  he  destroyed,
and  in  destroying  it,  he  destroyed  that  part  of  death
which  he  took,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of  it  :
But  he  did  not  destroy  himself,  nor  was  it  either  God,
or  the  Son  of  God,  that  was  destroyed  on  the  occasion.

1 1.  But  this  is  evident,  that  it  was  flesh  and  blood,
■sin  and  death,  and  the  devil,  neither  of  which  can  en-
ter into  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  according  to  the
aposties,  strictly  speaking,  suffered  and  died.  Not
that  all  sin  and  death  was  by  him  destroyed,  which  has
reigned  in  the  world  ever  since  ;  but  so  far  as  the
first-born  in  the  new  creation,  bears  a  proportion  to
the  whole  of  that  creation,  or  as  the  head  bears  a
proportion  to  the  whole  body.

12.  He  died  unto  sin  once,  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he
liveth  unto  God,  And  unto  whatsoever  he  died,  unto
the  same  he  also  suffered  ;  and  therefore  it  was  unto
that  which  had  the  nature  and  root  of  sin  that  he  suf-
fered. Not  that  innocence  and  justice  suffered  in  the
room  and  stead  of  sins  :  therefore  the  same  that  finally
suffered,  also  died ;  and  that  which  died  never  did,  nor
ever  will  arise  again  to  life.

13.  And  therefore  the  plain  and  pointed  contrast
'is  continued,  and  the  death  is  said  to  be  once,  or  final,
and  the  coming  forth  into  life  parallel  on  the  other
side,  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  and  coming  forth
in  the  Spiriu  Which  is  perfectly  the  same  as  cruci-
fying the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,  and  walk-
ing after  the  Spirit ;  or  putting  to  death  that  which
is  fleshly,  sensual,  and  devilhh,  and  bringing  forth
into  eternal  life  that  which  is  spiritual,  pure,  and  oft
God;  and  not  bringing  to  life  again  the  same  that  j
was  put  to  death  :  For  if  I  build  again  the  things  I
that  I  destroyed,  I  make  myself  a  transgressor.

14.  And  thou  that  sayest,  God  died  for  sinners,
and  rose  again,  what  advantage  could  it  be  for  a  holy
Being  to  be  made  flesh  and  sin,  and  as  such  to  suffer
and  die,  and  as  such  to  rise  again,  that  the  sinner  in
the  flesh  and  in  sin,  might  lie  wallowing  in  the  blood
of  his  nativity  in  reconciliation  with  God  ?


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION.  583

15.  As  the  human  and  divine  nature,  or  rather  the CI^F*
nature  of  sin  and  holiness  met  together  in  Christ  Je- *
sus,  doubtless  it  was  necessary  that  one  or  the  other
should  suffer  and  die  ;  either  that  which  was  natural
pertaining  to  flesh  and  blood,  or  that  which  was  spir-
itual and  of  God.

16.  But  as  that  which  was  natural  was  the  earthly-
part,  and  that  which  was  spiritual  was  the  Lord  from
heaven,  it  could  not  be  the  quickening  Spirit  or  Spir-
it of  Anointing,  which  constituted  Jesus  the  Lord
from  heaven,  that  either  suffered  or  died  ;  but  that
which  was  natural  and  earthly,  which  the  Lord  Jesus
overcame  and  abolished.

17.  And  speaking  exclusively  of  the  nature  of  sin,
that  the  natural  part,  which  was  subject  to  weariness
and  pain,  did  die,  is  indisputable  ;  and  if  the  Lord
from  heaven  died,  then  neither  obtained  the  victory  ;
nor  could  either  be  said  to  be  immortal,  for,  in  the
strictest  sense  of  death,  that  which  is  immortal  can-
not die  ;  neither  can  it  suffer,  only  in  consequence
of  its  being  united  to  that  which,  in  reality,  deserves
both  to  suffer  and  die.

18.  And  as  the  quickening  Spirit,  the  Lord  from
heaven,  was  begotten  and  brought  forth  of  the  Ever-  nm.?,
lasting  God,  he  was  justly  called,  The  king  immortal ,  H?l*
eternal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  who  only  hath
immortality. Therefore  it  was  not  possible  that  he
could  die  ;  nor  could  his  soul  or  spiritual  body,  through

any  degree  of  suffering,  (by  reason  of  that  enmity
which  he  had  taken  upon  him,)  be  held  under  the
power  of  death  any  longer  than  until  that  which  was
appointed  unto  death  was,  by  him,  overcome  and  de-
stroyed.

19.  Thus,  in  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus,  the  flesh  and
Spirit,  or  the  nature  of  sin  and  holiness  strove,  like
blood  and  fire  upon  the  altar,  until  the  blood  was  con-
sumed by  the  fire  ;  so  the  flesh  or  nature  of  sin  was
overcame  and  consumed  by  the  Spirit.

20.  But  it  would  seem  that  the  sufferings  and  death
f  God,  in  the  room  and  stead  of  sinful  flesh,  was  a

doctrine  reserved  for  those  latter  times  of  departing,
r  standing  off  from  the  faith,  and  bringing  in  dam-

E  e  e


5Bi  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  CHIIIST,  IN P.  VIII.

CI*£P- nable  heresies,  even  denying*  the  only  Lord  God,  an
* our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

21.  If  "  God  the  Mighty  Maker  died  for  man  the]

Watts, creature's  sin  ;"  or  if  "  God  himself  comes  down  toi
be  the  offering — "  and  is  a  sacrifice  or  sin  offering,
well  might  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  rejoice  at  J
his  death  :  for  it  must  be  the  living  that  have  the  do-
minion  ;  and  the  living  must  be  superior  to  the  dead. U
.  22.  According  to  the  true  proverb,  "  A  living  dogg

*. 'is  better  than  a  dead  lion." And  upon  the  same  prin- ■
ciple,  a  living  man  is  better  than  a  dying,  or  dead  i
God. For  that  which  is  dead  can  never  raise  itself*  j
to  life  ;  and  if  the  dead  are  raised,  it  must  be  by  the]  j
power of  the living. Therefore,  if  sinners were'
real  enemies  to  God,  and  he  actually  died  in  their
stead,  that  they  might  live  in  sin,  and  in  their  blood,
during  life,  and  be  saved  from  punishment  hereafter,  j
it  certainly  depended  on  the  living  whether  the  dead
should  ever  rise.

23.  Wo  to  him  that  is  alone,  for  if  he  fall,  whcrfcl
shall  help  him  up  ?  Hence  the  necessity  of  another
link  in  this  chain  of  darkness,  "  Behold  a  God  de4i
scends  and  dies." That  is,  one  of  the  Gods  dies,  to )
satisfy  the  justice  and  appease  the  wrath  of  the  other,*
in  behalf  of  sinners  ;  and  the  other,  as  soon  as  he E
was  satisfied,  raised  up  the  dead  one  :  and  the  deadi
one,  after  he  was  raised  up,  stood  day  and  night,  per-
petually showing  his  wounds,  and  pleading  before  his ;
Father,  that  he  suffered  and  died  in  the  room  and
stead  of  sinners,  as  a  satisfaction  to  his  justice.

24.  But  what  God  or  what  justice  could  take  satis-
faction in  beholding  the  marks  of  cruelty  in  the  in*
nocent,  while  the  guilty  went  unpunished  ?  Such
black  and  infernal  darkness,  is  too  disgusting  to  the
reason  of  man,  and  too  distressing  to  any  enlighten-
ed soul,  to  merit  a  serious  investigation  ;  but  must
be  sent  back,  with  the  beast  and  false  prophet,  to  the
bottomless  pit  from  whence  it  arose.

25.  The  truth  is,  that  as  two  contrary  natures,  the
flesh  and  Sfdrit,  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and  the  seed

of  God,  met  in  one  visible  human  form,  both  were
included  under  one  common  name,  until  they  were
gradually  separated,  and  the  weaker  suffered  and  died,


Rom.  viti


P.  VIII.  THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION.  585

26.  From this  mysterious contrariety  of  two  na-  CJ***>
tures,  in  one  external  form,  the  apostles  are  frequent-  .

ly  under  the necessity  of  using  apparent contradic-
tions : Thus  St.  Paul,  "  It  is  Christ that  died,  yea,
rather that  is risen. — /  am crucified  with Christ  :  17.'
nevertheless  Hive;  yet  not  /,  but  Christ liveth  in  me"  Gall,,2°

27.  So  Christ  Jesus  is  said  to  have  two  natures  in
him,  not  united,  but  at  pointed  variance  ;  and  when
it  is  said  that  Christ  suffered  and  died,  and  rose  a-
gain,  and  ascended  up  into  glory,  these  things  are
plainly  and  expressly  ascribed  to  those  distinct  na-
tures, respectively,  according  to  the  character  and
just  desert  of  each.

28.  So  that  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ,
both  in  relation  to  the  head  and  members  of  his  body,
in  tlie  strictest  sense,  applies  to  that  old  nature  of  the
first  Adam,  which  is  a  state  of  death,  out  of  which
the  new  man  arose,  and  from  which  he  became  ful-
ly and  finally  separated,  and  ascended  into  the  divine
nature  and  likeness  of  his  Father,  as  the  first-born
and  first-fruit  in  the  work  of  redemption.

29.  And  as  the  redemption  of  Christ  had  respect
to  the  full  headship,  and  membership  of  the  redeem-
ed, or  all  who  should  be  regenerated  and  born  again  ;
and  as  his  second  appearing  was  to  be  in  the  second
part  of  man's  fallen  nature  ;  therefore,  the  suffer-
ings of  that  nature  could  never  be  filled  up,  in  their
full  and  perfect  measure,  as  to  the  order  of  both  male
and  female,  until  the  second  appearing  of  Christ  ac-
tually took  place.

SO.  And  therefore,  the  blessed  Mother  of  our  re-
demption, in  all  respects,  suffered  her  due  propor-
tion, and  died,  upon  the  same  fundamental  principles
that  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  were  necessa-
ry, in  his  first  appearing.

3 1 ;  And  in  that  she  died,  she  died  unto  sin,  once
for  all,  as  he  did,  and  revived,  and  rose  again,  and
ascended  into  the  same  divine  nature  and  everlasting
union  in  the  Spirit ;  and  being  regenerated  and  born
out  of  the  corrupt  nature  of  the  first  woman,  she
was  the  first-born  and  first-fruit  >unto  God  in  the  order
of  the  female,  having  in  all  points  been  tempted  like
as  they  are  j  but  ^rcugh  the  power  of  God  never


£86  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF CHRIST,  IN P.  VIII.,


CHAP.
VI.


yielded  to  the  tempter,  that  she  might  be  able  to  suc-I
cour  those  that  are  tempted.

32.  And  as  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  not  filled
Hom.viu.  Up  in  his  first  appearing,  hence  said  the  apostle,  "  I
til  '  '  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time,  are
not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall
be  revealed  in  us.  For  the  earnest  expectation  of
the  creature  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  the
Sons  of  God.  For  we  know  that  the  whole  creation
groaneth,  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now.
[That  is,  until  this  glory  should  be  revealed,  and  the,
Sons  of  God  manifested.]  And  even  we  ourselves
groah  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to
wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body."

S3.  So  far  then,  were  the  apostles  from  teaching
that  any  one  individual  suffered  in  the  room  and  stead
of  another.  They  state  the  plain  undeniable  fact,
confirmed  by  the  history  of  all  ages,  that  truth  and
virtue  were  never,  in  any  degree,  preserved  in  the
earth,  but  through  a  constant  succession  of  suffering
saints  and  martyrs.

34.  From  the  blood  of  Abel  to  the  blood  of  Zech-
ariah,  which  was  shed  between  the  porch  and  th
altar  ;  and  again,  from  the  blood  of  John  the  Baptist*-
to  the  blood  of  William  Robinson  and  others,  which  cri
e th  to  heaven,  even  from  this  American  paradise  of
freedom,  virtue  was  ever  attended  with  a  proportion-
able degree  of  sufferings.

35.  Could  justice  be  satisfied,  and  yet  millions
from  age  to  age,  suffer  and  die,  by*  increasing  ago-'
nies  and  modes  of  torture  before  unknown  ?  And  if
the  groans  and  dying  Jiangs — the  pains  and  blood  of

?aYinf  "  an  *Rcarnate  Godhead/'  as  Davies  expresses  it,
could  not  be  withstood  :  Or  if  the  burning  throne  had
been sufficiently  cooled off,  by  the  blood of  Jesus,

Erskine'«  an(j  fce  had  "  drank  hell  dry,"  as  Erskine  expresse

bonnets. . _' _  .  »■*■•■■.•  ,  m

it,  What  then  ?  had  justice  no  power  to  stop  the
prosecution  ?  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  from  whence
could  those  seven  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God
collected,  which  John  saw  in  vision,  long  after  th
death  of  Jesus,  preparing  to  destroy  the  kingdom
and  seat  of  the  beast  ?

36.  The  truth  is,  justice  never  was,  nor  ever  will


P.  VIII. THE  WORK  OF  REGENERATION.  587

be  satisfied  with  any  thing  short  of  the  total  dcstruc-  Cy£p#

tion  of  sin  :  and  there  lore,  while  the  nature  of  sin ^

remained,  it  had  to  suffer  in  those  who,  after  the  ex-
ample of  Christ,  took  up  their  cross  against  it.  And
while  the  enmity  raged  in  the  children  of  disobedi-
ence, those  who  took  up  their  cross  against  sin,  had
always  to  endure  outward  afflictions,  and  persecutions,
which  turned  to  them  for  a  testimony,  in  every  age.

37.  And  as  the  work  of  Redemption  was  to  become
full  and  effectual  in  Christ's  second  appearing,  and
the  man  of  sin  to  be  wholly  consumed  and  destroyed  ;
so  in  the  accomplishment  of  that  work,  the  suffer-
ings of  Christ  must  necessarily  be  filled  up,  in  their
full  and  perfect  measure,  through  which  the  fruits  of
righteousness  will  appear  in  their  full  perfection,  with
eternal  glory.

33.  And  as  all  the  faithful  witnesses  suffered  to  sup-
port the  cause  of  truth  in  the  earth,  and  in  confirma-
tion of  their  testimony  concerning  that  day  ;  so  jus-
tice, both  in  heaven  and  among  men,  is  satisfied
when  sin  and  death  are  abolished  through  sufferings,
and  righteousness,  truth,  and  eternal  life  grow  up  in
their  place.

39.  This  was manifestly  the apostle's meaning
when  he  said,  "  The  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  |^or*i;
us — And  whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  conr  2  TU-a.ii,
soiation  and  salvation,  ivJiich  is  effectual  in  the  endur-  I0*
ing  the  same  sufferings^  which  we  also  suffer." And
again,  "  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sake,  that

they  may  also  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ
Jesus,  with  eternal  glory." Which  is  according  to
the  words  of  Jesus,  " Ye shall  indeed  drink  of  my  Mattxx.
cu/iy  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that  I  am  baft-  a3,
tized  with."

40.  Then  as  that  Spirit  of  truth  and  holiness,  which
gave  occasion  to  the  sufferings  of  the  saints,  in  the
flesh,  continued  to  flow  from  witness  to  witness,  and
from  age  to  age  ;  so  all  the  afflictions  which  they  en-
dured, remained  as  a  witness  with  God,  against  those
lusts  and  abominations  of  a  fallen  nature,  by  which
the  earth  was  corrupted,  and  against  which  they  took
up  their  cross.

41.  And  therefore?  instead  of  using  the  blood  of

Eee2


588  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF  CHRIST,  &C. P.  VIII,

CIvi?' ^esus?  or  anv  °f  n*s  followers,  to  pacify  an  offended
~ Deity,  and  reconcile  him  to  the  beast,  the  false  pro-
Rev,  xv. phet  or  the  Devil  ;  the  whole  of  that  blood  is  repre-
andxvi. sent;ed  as  stored  up  in  seven  vials,  [referring  to  the
ages,] and  all  of  it  to  be  poured  out,  to  execute  his
righteous  vengeance  on  the  workers  of  iniquity  ;  that
such  as  had  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets,
should  have  blood  to  drink,  because  they  are  worthy.

42.  Hence  the  proud  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  are
compared  to  stubble,  and  it  was  expressly  said,  The

xLgu!  x5i  day  tiiat  cometh  [referring  to  Christ's  second  appear-
ing] shall  burn  them  ufi,  that  it  shall  leave  them  nei-
ther root  nor  branch,  A  day  in  which  God  promised
to  open  a  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  and  bring
his  people  through  the  fire,  and  refine  them  as  silver
is  refined,  and  try  them  as  gold  is  tried.

43.  To  this  period  the  words  of  God  allude  by  the
zech.xii.  prophet  Zechariah  :  "  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of
iotoi4. j)avy)  an(j  Upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the

Spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  ;  and  they  shall
look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall
mourn  for  him."

44.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  great  mourning
in  Jerusalem  : — And  the  land  shall  mourn,  every
family  apart ;  the  family  of  the  house  of  David  apart,
and  their  wives  apart ;  the  family  of  the  house  of  Na-
than apart,  and  their  wives  apart ; — All  the  families
that remain,  every family apart;  and their wives

7\jat.xMv  apart." Here  is  the  true  cause  why  Christ  said,  Then
5°*  R€7*  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn.

45.  Therefore,  as  Christ  Jesus,  and  his  apostles
and  true  witnesses,  patiently  suffered  to  preserve  the
cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  in  the  earth,  and  by
sealing  the  truth  with  their  blood,  conveyed  and  con*
firmed  the  same  to  others,  unto  whom  the  truth  was
made  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings  ;
so  all  the  benefit  of  their  sufferings  meet  and  centre
in  this  day  of  full  redemption,  which  is  the  end  of
their  faith,  for  which  they  suffered,  and  in  which  ev-
ery one  will  receive  a  reward  according  to  his  works.

46.  Therefore,  all  who  receive  the  mercy  and
grace  of  God,  in  this  day  of  his  final  visitation,  are
\erily  benefited  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ*  both  in


P.  VIII.  THE  RESURRECTION.  589

his  first  and  second  appearing,  and  by  the  sufferings  C^R

of  all  the  saints  and  martyrs  who  have  ever  suffered  'mmmm

for  their  testimony,  having  with  them  obtained  the
end  of  their  faith  and  promises,  and  a  full  and  final
resurrection  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  is  ever-
lasting righteousness,  peace  and  eternal  life.


CHAPTER  VII.

The  Resurrection.

THE  truth  of  God,  in  all  things  pertaining  to  the
salvation  of  Mankind,  is  fully  established  in  this
day  of  Christ's  second  appearing  ;  in  which  all  things
will  have  their  full  and  final  accomplishment,  accord-
ing to  all  that  the  prophets  and  apostles  have  spoken
since  the  world  began.

2.  It  will  be  proper,  therefore,  to  take  particular
notice  of  what  the  apostles  taught  concerning  the
Resurrection  :  which,  according  to  what  hath  been
stated  respecting  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  was  also
founded  upon  the  distinction  between  the  natural
body  and  a  spiritual  body,  the  natural  world  and  a
world  of  spirits.

3.  The  natural  bodies  of  all  men  are  mortal,  and
subject  to  a  dissolution,  like  the  bodies  of  all  other
animals  ;  and  when  dissolved  back  to  their  native
elements,  they  rise  no  more  in  the  same  form.  The
natural  body  is  called  the  earthly  house  of  this  taber-  JCor.i,
nacle,  which  is  the  first  part  of  the  natural  man,  of

the  earth  earthy. Dust  it  is,  and  unto  dust  it  returns.

4.  But  as  every  thing  was  created  in  its  order,  to
serve  some  higher  purpose  than  its  own  self-interest ;
and  as  man  was  peculiarly  designed  for  the  service
of  God,  and  was  endowed  with  a  reasonable  soul  or
spirit  for  that  purpose,  capable  of  immortality  ;  there-
fore it  is  the  soul  of  man  alone,  that  is  the  proper
subject  of  the  Resurrection,  and  is  capable  of  being
raised  to  a  higher  use,  and  more  noble  enjoyments
than  pertain  to  the  present  state.


590  THE  RESURRECTION.  P.  VIII.

Cvuf" £•  Every  thing  in  nature  that  has  life  and  growth,

has  a  seed  in  itself,  which  serves  a  two-fold  purpose ;

first,  to  promote  its  own  species,  and  second,  to  bring
forth  fruit  to  some  higher  order  of  beings.

6.  Thus  God  said unto man  in  his  first  creation,
Cjen.i.29  it  Behold  I  have  given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed,

and  every  tree,  in  the  which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree
yielding  seed  ;  to  you  it  shall  be  for  meat.  And  to
every  beast  of  the  earth,  to  every  fowl  of  the  air,
and  to  every  thing  that  cieepeth  upon  the  earth,
wherein  there  is  life,  I  have  given  every  green  herb
for  meat."

7.  Then  as  nothing  liveth  to  itself,  or  merely  for
its  own  sake  ;  so  it  was  intended  that  man  should
live  and  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God  ;  and  this  fruit  was
that  which  pertained  to  his  living  soul,  as  it  is  that
by  which  God  is  truly  worshipped  and  served  ;  and
therefore  the  apostles  so  frequently  speak  of  a  seed,
and  of  every  seed  having  its  own  body.

8.  All  nature  teaches,  that  the  stalk  or  tree,  which
beareth  seed,  when  it  falls  back  to  the  earth,  and  is
dissolved,  the  same  never  rises  again  into  the  same
form  ;  and  no  more  does  the  natural  body  of  man
rise  again .

9.  And  it  is  evident  that  the  seed  which  is  put  into
the  earth,  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  its  own  spe-
cies, never  rises  to  any  thing  higher  than  it  was  ;
but  that  which  is  gathered  as  fruit,  when  it  is  taken
and  changed  from  its  natural  state,  and  dressed  for
food,  in  such  a  manner  as  best  suits  him  by  whom  it
is  dressed,  that  alone  answers  the  highest  end  for
which  it  was  created.

10.  And  as  man,  in  preparing  bread  for  his  own
use,  does  not  raise  up  the  withered  stalk  upon  which
the  grain  grew;  but  separates  the  pure  flour  from  all
that  to  which  it  had  been  united :  so,  in  like  manner,
is  the  resurrection.  It  is  the  soul  that  is  to  be  re-
deemed from  all  iniquity,  and  purified  unto  God  in  a

JobnvL  peculiar  manner.  Thus  saiih  Christ,  I  am  the  bread
a5Cor.x.  °f  lift- — And  again,  the  apostle,  For  we  being  many
17,  are  one  bread,  one  body  :  for  %ve  *re  all  partakers  of

that  one  bread.

1 1 .  And  further,  as  seed  that  falls  back  to  the  earth,


P.  VIII.  THE  RESURRECTION.  5£  I

and  takes  root,  and  grows  there,  is  forever  lost  from  c"£f*
any  higher  use  ;  so  it  is  with  the  soul  that,  upon  ade-  ___
liberate  choice,  rejects  the  gospel,  and  causes  to  re-
main in  his  natural  state,  after  the  common  course  of
the  world,  and  enjoy  ihe  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season.

12.  "  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die  ;  but  if  Rom.vi%
through  the  Spirit  ye  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,

ye  shall  live/5  Thus  life  and  death  is  set  beiore  eve-
ry individual  soul,  upon  the  most  plain  and  reasona-
ble terms.

13.  As  man,  by  his  fall  and  apostacy  from  God,  be-
came flesh,  so  as  to  be  wholly  captivated  by  that  infe-
rior principle,  or  law  in  his  members,  by  which  he
served  himself,  and,  no  higher  purpose  ;  therefore*
until  the  way  of  redemption  was  opened  from  that
self-pleasing,  and  self-promoting  nature,  there  never
could  be  any  resurrection.

14.  And  hence,  through  all  the  ages  of  corruption
and  depravity,  the  promise  of  God had  respect  to
another  seed. They  which  are  the  children  of the  flesh,  Rom.  k$
these  are  not  the  children  of  God;  but  the  children  of
promise  are  counted  for  the  seed.

15.  And  as  Christ  Jesus  was  the  first  who  died  a
final  death  unto  sin,  and  did  not  his  own  will,  but  the
will  of  his  father  ;  therefore  he  was  the  first-fruit  of
the  Resurrection,  the  first-fruit  unto  God,  with  which

he  was  well  pleased. Mvery one  in  his  own  order,  icor.xv,
Christ  the  fir  st -fruits,  afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  23»
at  his  coming.

16.  Herein  then  consists  the  true  nature  of  the
Resurrection  :  When  man  ceases  from  man,  whose
breath  is  in  his  nostrils  ;  when  he  dies  to  himself
and  lives  to  God  alone  ;  when  he  ceases  from  his  own
works  and  does  the  work  of  God  ;  when  he  renoun-
ces the  will  of  the  flesh,  and  is  subject  to  the  will  of
the  Spirit  ;  then  he  is  raised  from  a  death  of  sin  to  a
life  of  righteousness  ;  and  this  is  his  resurrection.
Such  is  the  seed  which  God  hath  chosen,  to  bring
forth  fruit  unto  himself,  and  such  are  the  branches  of

the  true  vine,  which  he will  purge,  that  they  may  ij0tm
bring  forth  more  fruit.  sv-  %>*

17.  But  this  precious  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection,
like  all  others  that  were  taught  by  Christ  Jesus  and


$92  THE  RESURRECTION.  P.  VlII,


CHAI\
VII.


his  apostles,  has  been  wholly  perverted  by  Antichrist,
and  instead  thereof,  a  false  and  senseless  superstition
has  been  imposed  upon  mankind,  which  would  be  too
absurd  to  deserve  any  notice,  had  not  those  dark  ages
of  antiquity,  and  antichristian  authority,  in  which  it
was  invented,  given  it  a  kind  of  sanction,  from  which
the  present  age  is  not  altogether  released.

18.  In  direct  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,
it  has  been,  and  is  yet  maintained,  that  it  is  not  the
soul  of  man,  but  his  natural  body,  which  is  the  sub-
test- ject  of  the  Resurrection  : — That,  u  the  souls  of  be-

cate-161 Heversare,  at  their  death,  made  perfect  in  holiness,
^^ and  do  immediately  pass  into  glory,  and  their  bodies,

being  still  united  to  Christ,  do  rest  in  their  graves  till

the  Resurrection."

19.  The  inventors  of  this  groundless  doctrine,
ought  to  have  known  that  the  souls  of  true  believers
never  do  die  ;  and  therefore,  their  being  made  per-
fect in  holiness,  and  passing  into  glory,  is  not  to  be
dated  at  their  death,  nor  is  it  at  any  time,  immediately  y

Kph.  iv,  ]jUt  through  the  medium  of  the  gospel,  (by  which  they
grow  Ufa  in  ail  tilings,  into  Christ)  that  they  are  made
perfect  in  holiness.

20.  Nor  is  it  a  dead  corpse  that  is  united  to  Christ,
ifatrxii.  or  to  God,  For  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of
?2,  the  living.  Besides,  many  of  the  dead  bodies  of  believ-
ers were  not  suffered  to  be  put  into  graves  ;  and  if  they
had  been,  the  grave  could  never  preserve  a  dead
corpse  from  dissolving,  and  blending  together  with
the  common  elements  of  the  globe,  being,  in  this  re-
spect, nothing  superior  to  the  bodies  of  ocher  animals.

2 1 .  So  that  such  an  imaginary  resurrection  is  alto-
gether a  lying  vanity,  in  following  which,  the  deceiv-
ed soul  forsakes  its  own  mercy,  and  from  which  it
must  be  delivered,  or  perish  forever  in  its  own  cor-
ruption :  for  God  never  promised  to  invert  his  own
order  of  things,  nor  to  revoke  his  own  express  de-
claration in  this  particular :  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto
dust  shall  thou  return.

22.  And  as  that  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but
that  which  is  natural,  and  afterwards  that  which  is
spiritual  and  eternal  ;  so  the  apostle's  doctrine,  from
beginning  to  end,  has  the  most  plain  and  pointed  al«


P.  VIII.  THE  RESURRECTION.  595

lusion  to  the  spiritual  body,  and  spiritual  world,  and Cy£p*

not  to  that  which  is  natural.  _

2S.  When  the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the  resur-
rection cf  the  soul,  and  the  very  existence  of  the
spiritual  world,  questioned  with  Jesus  concerning  the
woman  who  had  been  the  wife  of  seven  husbands,
whose  wife  she  should  be  in  the  Resurrection  ?  His
answer  was,  "  The  children  of  this  world  marry,  and  Lnkexx*
are  given  in  marriage  :  but  they  which  shall  be  account-  34-
ed  worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and  the  resurrection
from  the  dead,  neither  many,  nor  are  given  in  mar-
riage. Neither  can  they  die  any  more  :  for  they  are
equal  unto  the  angels  ;  and  are  the  children  of  God,
being  the  children  of  the  Resurrection.

24.  Observe,  it  was  not  after  they  had  obtained  that
world,  and  the  Resurrection,  but  whenever  they  were
accounted  worthy  to  obtain  it  ;  that  is,  when  they  were
begotten  by  the  Word  of  faith,  they  began  to  crucify
the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,  to  die  unto  sin,
and  to  live  unto  God,  and  therefore  could  not  die  any
more,  being  the  children  of  the  Resurrection.

25.  Hence  said  Jesus,  on  another  occasion,  "  I  am  T  T

7  John  m,

the resurrection,  and  the  life  ;  he  that  believeth  on  25«
me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live. And
tvhosoever  liveth,  and  believeth  in  me,  shall never
die. And  again,  "  I  am  the  living  bread  which  came  John  vi.
down  from  heaven: II  any  man  eat  of  this  bread*  Ac  s\\S%,
shall  live  forever  " And  :  gain,  "  Verily,  verilv,  I
say  unto  you,  if  a  man  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never
tee  death"

26.  This  was  a  great  stumbling  block  to  those  who
denied  the  Resurrection  and  the  life.  Hence  said  the
deceived  hypocrites,  "  Now  we  knew  thatthou  hast
a  devil. — Art  thou  greater  than  cur  father  Abraham,
which  is  dead  ?  and  the  prophets  are  dead  :  whom
makest  thou  thyself  I

27.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  the  true  doctrine  of
the  Resurrection  was  misunderstood  and  apposed,  by
a  blind  and  superstitions  priesthood  from  the  begin-
ning :  for  by  these  the  cpmmi .ople  were  taught.

28.  Nor  was  it  truly  understood  even  by  the  disci-
ples of  Christ,  who  had  been  misguided  and  corrupt-
ed by  those  blind  guides,  until  they  received  the  Ho-


594  -»  THE  RESURRECTION.  P.  VIII.

^J^f* ly  Ghost,  and  came  into  he  Resurrection  themselves,

being dead with Christ  from  th Rudiments  of  the

Coi.ii.  12,  worlds  and  risen  with  him,  through  the  faith  of  the
20.  iii.  l.  0pt  reiiQH  Gf  God,  who  had  raised  him  from  the  dead.

29.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  were  all  things  brought
to  their  reniembhmce  which  Jesus  had  taught  them,
and  by  which  they  understood  the  many  infallible
proofs,  which  they  had  received  of  the  real  resurrec-
tion of  the  Son  of  God,  in  the  Spirit,  and  knew  what
his  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean.

30.  And  they  never  learned,  nor  taught  to  others,
that  Christ  Jesus  re-assumed  the  same  natural  appear-
ance of  sinful  flesh,  which  was  laid  in  a  new  tomb  ;
for  if  they  had,  the  most  glaring  contradictions  must
appear  through  the  whole  account.  But  they  spake
of  his  being  quickened  in  the  Sfiirit9  and  seen  in  the
Spirit-^  and  not  in  the  flesh  ;  therefore  the  contradic-
tion falls  upon  those  who  deny  his  resurrection  in  the
Spirit^  and  endeavour  to  prove  that  sin  and  the  curse
£for  such  he  was  made  as  to  the  flesh]  were  rased
again  to  life  everlasting.


CHAPTER  VIII.

The  Subject  continued.


I


T  is  clearly  manifest,  according  to  the  sense  of
the  gospel,  that  the  rising  from  the  dead  had  no
respect  to  the  resurrection  of  the  natural  body  or  tab-
ernacle of  Jesus,  nor  of  any  of  his  followers,  inas-
much as  it  was  testified  that  he  was  the  first -be  gotten
and  first-born  from  the  dead.

2.  In  the  natural  sense  of  a  Resurrection,  some
had  been  raised  from  the  dead,  among  the  Jews,  be-
fore Jesus  ;  so  that  he  could  not  be  the  first.  Elisha
had  raised  the  widow's  son  ;  Lazarus  had  been  raised,
and  the  widow's  son  at  Nain.  So  that  if  the  apos-
tles had  intended  to  testify  that  the  dead  corpse  of
i  cor,  r.  Jesus  had  been  raised  to  life  again,  they  had  more
#>• sense  of  the  truth  than  to  say  that  he  was  the  ^r5^.


P.  VIII.  THE  RESURRECTION.  595

fruits  of  them  that  slept)  or  the  frsX  that  should  rise c**ap.
from  the  dead,


3.  The  truth  is,  that  Christ  did  descend  into  the  Actsxxv>
state  of  the  dead,  by  taking  upon  him  the  likeness  of  23»
sinful  flesh,  the  state  of  those  who  were  dead  in  tres-
passes and  sins  ;  and  it  was  out  of  this  state  of  death

that  he  arose,  and  not  again  in  the  likeness  of  the
same  sinful  flesh.

4.  Who  is  he that  ascended,  but  the same also
that  descended  ? It  was  not  therefore  his  natural  bo-
dy that  ascended, for  this  was  brought  forth  by  a ,
natural  woman  ;  and  as  it  never  descended  from  hea-
ven, so  neither  was  it  that  which  ascended.

5.  The apostles  further  testified  that  they  were  uom#^
dead  and  buried,  and  risen  with  Christ,  and  sat  to-  3,4.
geth'er with him  in heavenly  places  ;  therefore  it
must  be  a  very  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  they  cJj-jS;*
had  any  reference  to  a  natural  death,  (as  it  is  called,)

or  to  any  carnal  resurrection  of  the  same  natural  bo-
dy, when  their  very  existence,  like  that  of  other  men,
must  have  contradicted  their  own  testimony.

6.  It  would  seem  a  wonderful  argument  with  some,
that  it  was  the  same  wounded  body  of  Jesus,  that
arose  from  the  dead  ;  because  he  appeared  unto  his
disciples  with  his  wounds,  and  eat  and  drank  with
them  ;  while  they  are  ignorant  that  his  spiritual  body
was  capable  of  assuming  any  form  or  appearance  that
might  encourage  the  faith  of  his  disciples.

7.  But  how  much  soever  the  inconsistent  inven-
tions and  false  systems  of  Antichrist,  may  have  blind-
ed the  minds  of  natural  men  ;  yet  that  order  can  nev-
er be  inverted,  in  which  God  hath  created  things
natural  and  spiritual,  the  one  for  time  and  temporal
use,  and  the  other  for  eternity.

8.  The  spiritual  body,  while  in  the  natural,  is  con-
fined to  time,  space,  and  natural  things  ;  but  when
separated,  and  released  from  it,  the  natural  is  of  no
further  use  ;  nor  can  they  ever  be  reunited  without  the
grossest  subversion  of  every  order  and  law  of  God.

9.  And  if  the  same  natural  body  that  was  crucified
of  the  Jews,  arose  from  the  dead,  and  could  enter
into  the  house  when  the  doors  were  shut,  why  did
not  the  same  body  come  forth  out  of  the  tomb  with-

Fff


595  THE RESURRECTION.  P.  VIII,

C'viiF' 0l1^  ass*stance  ?  Where  was  the  necessity  of  striking
the  keepers  of  the sepulchre  with  terror,  that they


>iatt. might  become  like  -dead  men,  and  of  rolling  away

^xviii.2,  tne  stone  from  the  tomb's  month  ?

10.  The  truth  is,  no  material  substance  can  pass
through  another  without  making  a  breach  ;  and  there-
fore, in  order  that  his  spiritual  body  might  enter  a
close  room  while  the  doors  were  shut,  the  natural
body  was  taken  care  of  by  the  angel,  who  rolled  away
the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  ;  and  thus,
in  the  order  and  nature  of  things,  one  thing  was  ta-
ken out  of  the  way  of  another,  that  the  everlasting
substance  might  appear.

Bent.  1 1.  The  Lord  took  care  of  the  body  of  Moses,  and

JudeV<??'  no  miin  knew  of  his  sepulchre  unto  tkis  day  :  Yet
Satan  had  the  confidence  to  dispute  with  the  angel
about  the  body  of  Moses.  And  in  the  same  manner,
at  this  day,  Satan  has  the  confidence  to  dispute  about
the  body  of  Jesus.

12.  In  the  accounts  given  of  all  the  different  forms
in  which  Christ  appeared  after  his  passion,  there  is
not  the  smallest  hint  of  his  possessing  the  same  nat-
ural body.  His  standing  in  the  midst,  the  doors  be-
ing shut ;  vanishing  out  of  their  sight ;  assuming  the
appearance  of  a  gardener,  then  of  a  stranger  ;  and
again,  of  a  lamb  with  seven  horns  and  seven  eyes  ;
these,  and  many  such  appearances,  were  as  different
from  the  body  which  had  been  nailed  to  the  cross,  as
any  one  thing  can  be  from  another.

Horn.  vi.  13.  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  ;  but  the  gift  of  God
is  eternal  life  ;  therefore  death  and  life  cannot  both  be
administered  to  one  and  the  same,  for  this  would  be
giving  eternal  life  to  sin.  But  as  it  is  the  mystery  of
iniquity  that  worketh  in  man,  and  merits  death  as
•  his  wages,  and  as  there  is  nothing  but  sin  that  rules
and  reigns  in  man,  before  he  receives  Christ ;  so  all
that  reigns  in  him  must  certainly  die,  in  order  to  his-
receiving  the  gift  of  eternal  life.

1  i.  Hence  the  plain  conclusion  of  the  apostle,  As

i Cor. xv.  in  jidam  all  diey  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive:

tJi or  more  properly,  As  all  in  Adam  die,  so  all  in  Christ

shall  be  made  alive. Therefore  it  is  not  all,  nor  any

thing  in  old  Adamy  that  is  made  alive  after  death  \  but


i


P.  VIII.  THE  RESURRECTION.  597

as  every  thing  in  him  and  of  him  dies,  or  in  other  <^1p*
words,  as  the  old  man  is  put  off  with  his  deeds,  so  the  _.

new  man is  put  on,  which after  God,  is  created  in  Eph.  ir.
righteousiiess,  and  true  holiness.  22,24.

15.  The  whole  error  of  Antichrist,  concerning  the
true  Resurrection,  is  founded  in  a  total  ignorance  of
the  spiritual  world.  Let  the  soul  be  quickened  to  a
sense  of  its  immortality,  and  its  capacity  for  an  inter-
course with  a  world  of  Spirits,  and  the  doctrine  of  a
carnal  resurrection  will  appear  as  it  really  is,  the  off-
spring of  darkness  and  ignorance.

16.  Let  the  man  come  to  himself  and  find  out  what
he  is,  that  he  is  not  a  mere  lump  of  flesh  and  blood,
but  an  immortal  being,  that  must  be  seen  in  his  full
shape  when  the  clay  that  he  animates  is  crumbled
to  atoms,  and  blended  with  the  common  elements  of
the  globe.  Let  him  be  convinced  of  the  heinousness
of  sin,  and  the  enmity  of  his  fleshly  nature  to  the
pure  and  holy  nature  of  God,  and  he  is  no  longer  anx-
ious about  what  becomes  of  that  mortal  frame  which
he  inhabits.

17.  Nor  is  it  the  far-fetched  arguments  and  pre-
tended evidences  of  a  future  resurrection  of  old  use-
less bones  and  rotten  flesh,  that  can  entertain  the  soul ;
but  a  fellowship  and  increasing  communication  with
the  Resurrection  and  eternal  life  that  now  is,  and
"which  is  sensibly  felt  and  enjoyed  by  those  who  are
in  it.

18.  "  But  (according  to  the  apostle)  some  will  say, ~
How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?  And  with  what  body  35-38.  '
do  they  come  ? Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is

not  quickened,  except  it  die. And  that  which  thou
sowest,  thou  sowest  not  that  body  that  shall  be  ; — but
God  giveth it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased  him,  and  to
every  seed  his  own  body.39

19.  The  body  of  a  grain  of  corn,  when  put  into  the
earth,  hath  its  own  first  principle  of  life  in  itself;
and  as  the  body  of  the  grain  dies,  so  the  seed  which
is  the  life  of  the  body,  is  quickened,  and  comes  forth,
and  produces  a  body  again,  whose  seed  is  in  itself
after  its  own  kind.

20.  But  this  is  very  far  from  being  the  case  with  a
dead  corpse,  which,  when  put  into  the  ground,  hath


598  THE  RESURRECTION.  I*.  VIII.

rvinP* nn^  ^ie  ^cas*  Prmciple  °f  Ufe  *n  itself  by  which  it  can
. . ever  be  re-animated  again,  or  that  can  ever  be  quick-
ened and  come  forth  out  of  it ;  but  it  remains  a  life-
less lump  of  clay,  and,  like  the  dead  bodies  of  all  oth-
er animals,  meets  with  a  total  dissolution  forever.

21.  Therefore,  when  the  apostle  saith,  "  It  is
sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body."
He  hath  no  allusion  to  the  matter  of  a  dead  corpse
when  it  is  put  into  the  earth,  but  to  the  human  soul
in  its  natural  state,  which,  through  the  operation  of
God,  becomes  dead  with  Christ,  from  the  rudiments
of  an  earthly  nature,  out  of  which  it  ascends,  and  is
raised  a  spiritual  body.

22.  Then  the  soul  or  seed  of  both  the  righteous
and  wicked,  have  each  their  own  body. Hence  the

j«b.nv. words  of  Christ:  "  They  that  have  done  good  (shall
2y-  come  forth)  unto  the  Resurrection  of  life  ;  and  they

that  have  done  evil,  to  the  Resurrection  of  damnation."
tl3.  Who  can  be  so  blind  and  perverse  as  to  ima-
gine that  the  millions  who  have  suffered  unto  death,
for  the  truth's  sake,  endured  those  extreme  suffer-
ings in  hopes  of  being  restored  again,  in  some  fu-
ture day,  to  the  same  bodies  in  which  they  suffered
every  imaginable  torture  ?

24.  It  must  be  acknowledged  by  all  who  pay  any
respect  to  their  testimony,  that  it  was  a  present  love
of  virtue,  salvation  and  immortal  glory,  and  their  faith
in  a  future  increase  of  the  same,  that  animated  them  to
face  the  most  frightful  flatties  and  bodily  tortures.

25.  The  blinded  Jews  denied  the  Resurrection,
not  knowing  the  scriptures  nor  the  power  of  God.

.  They  supposed  their  fathers  were  dead  ;  and  would
never  rise  until  the  last  day.  But  Jesus  knew  better,
and  his  apostles,  after  they  had  received  the  baptism
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  knew  better,  because  their  con-
versation was  in  heaven,  where  they  were  ;  and  they
knew,  according  to  the  scriptures,  that  they  had  slept,
but  had  not  been  dead.

26.  Hence  they  testified,  that  the  graves  [the
^v!l  52.  states  of  the  departed]  were  opened ;  and  many
63- bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  arose,  and went  into

the  holy  city,  [not  bloody  Jerusalem,]  and  appeared
unto  many.  They  appeared  unto  such  as  had  eyes
to  see  them.


I\  VIII.  ' THE  RESURRECTION.  599

27.  Upon  the  same  principle  Jesus  testified,  The  Cym/

maid  is  not  dead)  but  slee/teth,  but  they  laughed  him

to  scorn,  knowing  that  she  was  dead. That  is,  know-  LnkeviU
ing,  in  their  own  carnal  imagination,  that  he  was  a  52» 53*
liar  and  a  deceiver.

28.  In  like  manner  Jesus  knew  that  Lazarus  had  $0\m&
fallen  asleep,  and  it  was  merely  in  condescension  to  1L
their  dark  understanding,  that  he  said  plainly,  Laz-
arus is  dead  ;  and  he  could  as  well  have  called  him
forth  without  his  tabernacle  as  with,  had  they  been
possessed  with  eyes  to  see  him,  as  the  disciples  saw
Moses  and  Elias  talking  with  Jesus  on  the  mount.

29.  From  all  which  it  is  evident,  that  it  is  the  sep-
arate state  of  the  wicked  only,  which  is,  or  ever  was
counted  a  state  of  death,  and  that  of  the  righteous  a
state  of  sleep  ;  and  according  to  the  distinction  in
their  state  of  separation,  so  is  their  Resurrection.

30.  The  rising  of  those  who  sleep  in  Christ,  being
first  in  order,  is  called  The  first  resurrection.  And
the  quickening  of  the  wicked  to  a  sense  of  their  sit-
uation, although  sometimes  called  a  Resurrection,
yet  it  is  more  properly  denominated,  The  second  death.

31.  Then  as  it  is  by  the  power  of  Christ,  that  the  icor.xv.
dead  are  raised,  and  as  he  was  baptized  for  the  dead,  29'
with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  both  in  his  first

and  second  appearing,  and  therefore  quickeneth  whom
he  will,  it  is  beyond  all  controversy  that  the  dead  are
raised,  and  come  up  out  of  their graves — out  of  all  Ezekjei
their  dwelling  places ^  wherein  they  have  sinned.  SSI,

32.  And  as  Christ,  who  is  the  Resurrection  and
the  life,  dwells  in  the  members  of  his  body,  and  as

he  is,  so  are  they  in  this  world;  therefore  they  ask,  jjymf^
and  he  giveth  them  life,  for them  that  sin  not  unto  i7vv.  ic.
deaths  even  eternal  life  ;  and  they are raised  up  in
this  last  day,  and  do  enter  into  the  holy  city,  and  are
seen and  known  of many,  and  serve  God  day  and
night  in  his  temple.

33.  And  while  they  go  forth  and  worship  before  Isai  lxvj,
God,  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  they  look  upon  the  22.  Rev.'
carcases  of  them  that  have  transgressed,  and  contin-  Mar£  fe.
ue  to  worship  the  beast :  for  their  worm  dieth  not)  44*
and  their  fire  is  not  quenched.

Fff2


&0$~  THE  WORSHIP  OF  GOD.  *  P.  VIII.

CHAPTER  IX.

The  Worship  of  God,

*Sl- T  71  THAT  EVER  may  be  called  the  worship  of

»__ V  V God,  it  is  certain  that  no  external  exercise

can  be  any  thing  more  than  an  outward  expression  of

an  inward  spiritual  sensation  of  love  and  obedience  to

God,  arising  from  a  knowledge  and  understanding  of

his  will. And  as  nothing  is  more  expressive  of  love

and  respect  to God than  obedience,  therefore the

most  perfect  and  acceptable  worship  is  performed  by

those  who  keep  the  commandments  of  God.

. 2.  Hence  the  words  of  Christ,  u  If  ye  love mey

15.  keefi  my  commandments. — Why  call  ye  me  Lord,  Lord)

lAikevi.  a]K|  C|Q  not  tke  thjngS  which  I  say  ? — In  vain  do  they

Matt. xt.  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  command-
John  iv.  ments  of  men.— -Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what —
22,2o. jgut  tjie  j10U].  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  wor-

shijijiers  shall  wors/iifi  the  leather  in  sfiirii  and  in  truth  :
Matt.  iv.  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him. — Thou

shalt  worn/rift  the  Lord  thy Gcd>  and  him  only  shalt

thou  serve"

3.  As  man  is  an  active  intelligent  being,  formed
for  social  communion  ;  so  in  every  age,  there  have
always  been  certain  external  forms  of  divine  wor-
ship, which,  in  different  dispensations,  have  been  va-
rious, according  to  the  manifestation  of  the  will  of
God  in  each,  and  the  various  operations  of  his  Spirit,
for  the  time  then  present.

4.  The  manner  of  worship  in  the  first  appearing
of  Christ,  was  not  reduced  to  any  form,  but  accord-
ing as  true  Believers  were  moved  by  the  Spirit,  in
various  circumstances.  They  worshipped  God  in
prayer,  vocal  or  silent,  in  praise,  in  thanks-giving,
in  exhortations,  and  in  feasts  of  charity,  by  which
they  expressed  their  love  and  union  to  each  other.

5.  This  various  manner  of  worship  continued,
mostly,  with  all  the  true  witnesses  until  near  the  time
of  Christ's  second  appearing,  when  many,  like  the
guards  of  the  night,  sat  in  solemn  silence,  waiting
for  the  break  of  day,  denying  their  own  wisdom  and


P.  VIIL  THE  WORSHIP  CF  GOD.  601


CHAP,
IX.


judgment,  and  performing  no  act  of  worship  but  such
as  they  were  moved  to,  by  the inward  light  and  evi-  .
dence  of  the  quickening  Spirit.

6.  Being  thus  wholly  cut  off  from  the  fruitless  in-
ventions and  precepts  of  men,  and  wholly  dependent
on  the  author  and  fountain  of  life,  they  devoted  them-
selves to  do  his  will  in  all  things  wherein  it  might  be
made  manifest.  Hence  the  light,  and  truth,  and  rev-
elation of  God  increased  among  them,  until,  by  the
special  operation  of  his  power,  they  were  moved  to
go  forth  and  worship  God  in  the  dance  :  which  had
been  expressly  signified  by  the  law  and  the  prophets,
as  the  peculiar  manner  of  worship  to  be  established
in  the  latter  day.

7.  And  as  the  work  of  full  redemption,  and  the
worship  of  God  attending  it,  were  to  be  introduced
in  the  line  of  the  female  ;  therefore  it  is  particularly
worthy  of  notice,  that  through  the  order  of  the  fe-
male, both  the  example  and  promise  were  given,
through  all  the  law  and  the  prophets,  which  may  ev-
idently appear  from  what  follows.

8.  The  deliverance  of  the  children  of  Israel  from
under  Pharoah,  and  their  escape  through  the  Red  £°mf^*
sea,  was  a  plain  and  striking  figure  of  the  day  of  full  ito2o
redemption,  from  the  bondage  and  dominion  of  sin,  x*1^?*
as  may  appear  from  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  chil-
dren of  Israel. And  therefore  it  was  that  Miriam  the
firofihetess,  the  sister  of  Aaron,  took  a  timbrel  in  her

hand  ;  and  all  the  women  went  out  after  her,  with  tim-
brels, and  with  dances.

9.  The  same  manner  of  worship  was  also  continu-
ed, on  all  the  most  triumphant  occasions,  among  the
Israelites,  after  they  were  established  in  the  promised
land,  and  commonly  practised  on  obtaining  victory
over  their  enemies,  and  was  expressive  of  their  joy
and  thankfulness  for  the  extraordinary  power  and
presence  of  God.

10.  The  first  abode  of  the  Ark  of  Ged,  was  in  Shi-
loh,  and  it  was  there,  at  the  yearly  feasts  of  the  Lord,
that  the  virgins  or  daughters  of  Shiloh,  went  forth
to  dance  in  dances.  This,  all  the  time  that  the  house  of
God  was  in  Shiloh,  was  an  abiding  figure  of  the  true
worship  in  Christ,  at  the  bringing  in  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant  of  God  in  the  latter  day.


24-23.


602  THE  WORSHIP  OF GOD.  P.  VIII.

C9£V# Hi  Also  when  the  king  of  Israel  returned,  after
* the  victory  over  Goliah  the  Philistine,  (a  type  of  An-
1  Samuel  tichrist)  The  women  came  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Israel,
xviii.  6. singing  and  dancing.

12.  Again,  the  final  establishment  of  the  Ark  of
God  and  his  Testament,  was  prefigured  when  the
typical  Ark  was  removed  from  Shiloh  to  the  city  of
David, being  accompanied with  the  same  solemn

. n exerc^sc- ^nd  David  and  all  Israel  played  [that  is,

siii.  8.  "  danced]  before God  with  all  their  might,  and  with
singing.

13.  But  when  Michal,  the  proud  daughter  of  Saul,
2Sam.vi.  saw  David  leaping  and  dancing  before  the Lord,  she

despised  him  in  her  heart,  and  scornfully  reproached
him  for  dishonouring  his  dignity  as  a  king,  by  shame-
lessly uncovering  himself  (as  she  said)  in  the  eyes
of  the  handmaids  of  his  servants  ;  and  counted  him
and  all  the  rest  as  vain  fellows.

14.  But  David  said  to  Michal,  "  It  was  before  the
Lord,  who  chose  me  before  thy  father,  to  appoint  me
ruler  over  Israel  :  therefore  mil  I  play  before  the  Lord.
And  I  will  yet  be  more  vile  than  thus,  and  will  be"
base  in  mine  own  sight ;  and  of  the  maid-servants
which  thou  hast  spoken  of,  of  them  shall  I  be  had  in
honour"  Therefore,  as  a  punishment  for  despising
that  which  God  accepted,  Michal,  the  daughter  of
Saul,  had  no  child  to  the  day  of  her  death.

15.  It  is  therefore  evident,  that  it  was  a  peculiar
worship,  practised  among  the  children  of  Israel,  on
the  most  joyful  and  important  occasions,  during  their
prosperity  ;  and  that  it  was  acceptable  unto  God,  and
was  the  highest  expression  of  joy  and  gratitude  that
could  possibly  be  used  on  those  occasions,  and  served
as  a  figure  of  the  joy  and  triumph  of  the  saints  in
the  latter  day.

16.  But  in  the  time  of  their  captivity  at  Babylon,
this  sacred  exercise  was  entirely  lost  from  the  people
of  God,  and  like  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  pro-
faned by  the  wicked  in  the  service  of  the  Devil.
And  hence  the  lamentation  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,

ST*" The  joy  of  our  heart  is  ceased,  our  dance  is  turned  in*
1  to  mourning.

Vt \  And  although  the  wicked  unjustly  took;  and


Lam.  v.

15.

See  Psa


P.  VIII.  THE  WORSHIP  OF  GOB.  603

used  this  manner  of  worship  in  their  idolatrous  feasts,  **§*•
yet  there  was  a  promise  of  restoring  it  to  the  people


of  God  in  the  latter  day  :  hence  a  plain  figure  of  this  Dan.v.
restoration,  was  the  bringing  back  to  Jerusalem,  and  J^-^
cleansing  again,  those  vessels  and  ornaments  of  the
temple  which  had  been  so  impiously  abused  in  their
feasts  at  Babylon.

18.  The  promise  that  this  mode  of  worship  should
be  restored  to  the  people  of  God,  in  the  latter  day,
evidently  appears  from  the  most  express  and  pointed
prophecies,  given  in  the  time  of  the  captivity. Thus

the  Lord  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  :  "  Behold,  I  will  Jer#xxx<
bring  again  the  captivity  of Jacobus  tents,  and  have  is  tow.
mercy  on  his  dwelling  places  : — And  out  of  them  shall
proceed  thanks-giving,  and  the  -voice  oj  them  that  make
merry  : — In  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it."

19.  "  Again  I  will  build  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  xx:ii.4to
built,  O  virgin  of  Israel — and  thou shalt  go  forth  in  14-

the  dances  of  them  that  make  merry. — Therefore  they
shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and  shall
How  together  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord. — Then
shall  the  virgin  rejoice  in  the  dance,  both  young  men
and  old  together  :  for  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into
joy,  and  will  comfort  them,  and  make  them  rejoice
from  their  sorrow."

20.  The  same in substance was  also promised  Haseai.
through  the  prophet  Hosea,  speaking  of  the  valley  15«

of  Achor  (which  alludes  to  the  confession  and  morti-
fication of  sin)  it  is  expressly  said,  She  shall  sing  there,
as  in  the  days  of  her  youth,  as  in  the  day  when  she
came  u/i  out  of  the  land  af  Egypt.  Which  alludes  to
the  deliverance  of  Israel  on  the  banks  of  the  Red  sea.

2 1 .  Thus  it  is  evident,  that  the  promise  of  God  for
the  restoration  of  this  solemn  exercise,  was  given  in
the  line  of  the  female,  to  virgins,  or  such  as  were
pure  and  undefined  before  God  ;  and  it  was  to  such
only  that  this  worship  was  to  be  restored  in  the  latter
day.

22.  But  as  these  things  could  not  be  fulfilled  in
Christ's first  appearing,  therefore he renewed  the
promises,  which  were  made  through  the  prophets,
saying,  "  All  things  must  be  fulfilled which were  Lukft
written  in  the  lav/  of  Moses,  and  in  the  prophets  and  ^w.44,


604


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,


P.  VIII.


CI^P* in  the  Psalms,  concerning  me." Which,  in  this  par-

-  ]■■-  x ticular,  was  more  expressly  alluded  to  in  his  parable

of  the  younger son, who returned  to his father's

house, and  being stript  of his  old  garments,  and

Luke  xv.  cloathed with  the best  robe,  there was Music  and

Dancing*

23.  But  the  elder  son  was  offended,  and  would  not
go  in.  Which  was  particularly  expressive  of  the
effect  of  this  manner  of  worship,  in  making  a  sepa-
ration between  the  old  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked-
ness, and  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.

24.  It  is  not  merely  the  external  performance  of
the  present  worship  of  God,  by  which  any  are  jus-
tified ;  but  the  same  being  given  by  the  special  gift
and  revelation  of  God,  according  to  promise,  it  is
therefore  an  outward  manifestation  of  the  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  effectual,  in  the  hearts  of
the  faithful,  to  the  destruction  of  the  nature  of  sin.

25.  And  thus,  by  uniting  together  in  one  faith,  to
worship  God  according  to  his  own  appointment,  Be-
lievers are  baptized  into  one  Spirit,  and  grow  up  to-
gether in  Christ  as  the  members  of  one  body  :  and.
this  manner  of  worship  to  the  people  of  God,  is  not
empty,  nor  carnal  ;  but  mighty  through  God,  joyful
as  heaven,  and  solemn  as  eternity.


CHAPTEPv  X.


The  Holy  Scriptures.


THOSE  Books  which  have  been  collected  into
one,  under  the  title  of  Holy  Scriptures,  are  so
called  from  their  being  written  by  holy  men,  who
were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  as  far  as  they
have  been  preserved  entire,  in  their  original  sense,
free  from  the  errors  of  translators  and  transcribers,
they  are  justly  denominated  "  The  Scriptures  of
Truth."

2.  They  contain  a  true  account  of  the  will  and  pur-
poses of  God,  revealed  to  man  in  dnforent  ages  of  the


P.  VIII.  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.  605

world,  and  of  the  operations  of  his  power,  from  the C1^p*
beginning  of  the  world,  relative  to  the  salvation  of  r

souls,  until  the  real  work  of  redemption  began  :  and
they  contain  also  the  true  predictions  of  all  the  prin-
cipal events  that  were  to  take  place  in  the  earth,  until
the  work  of  redemption  should  be  finally  accomplished.

3.  But  as  the  scriptures  are  composed  of  letters,
and  letters  are  no  more  than  signs,  marks,  or  sha-
dows of  things,  and  not  the  very  substance  of  the
things  which  they  signify  ;  therefore  it  is  contrary  to
the  dictates  of  reason  and  common  sense  to  suppose
that  any  of  those  real  things  are  in  the  scriptures,  of
which  they  contain  a  written  account.  K

4.  They  contain  an  account  of  the  Spirit  by  which
the  writers  thereof  were  inspired,  hue  they  do  not
contain  that  Spirit  itself:  They  contain  a  true  record ,
of  the  promise  of  eternal  life,  but  that  eternal  life  is
not  in  the  Scriptures,  but  in  the  Son  of  God,  accord-
ing to  the  record  of  truth. "  Search  the  Scriptures,  j0hnT,
(said  Christ  to  the  Pharisees,)  for  in  them  ye  think  39,
ye  have  eternal  life  ;  and  they  are  they  which  testify

of  mej9

5.  The  Scriptures  contain  a  true account  of  the

law  of  God,  but  Scripture  is  not  that  law. "  I  will  Jer.rali
put  my  law  in  their  inward  parts,  and  write  it  in  thtir  33,
hearts:9 They  also  contain an  account  of  the  Gos-
pel of  Christ,  but  they  are  not  the  gospel  itself.

6.  The  beginning  of  the  Gospel  is  not  the  begin-
ning of  the  Bible,  but  the  beginning  of  the  power  of  Rom.  i»]
God  unto  salvation :  for  the  Gospel  itself  is  the  pow-  16*

er  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth
in  the  power  of  God,  wherever  it  is  made  manifest,
by  living  and  chosen  witnesses  of  God,  who  have  it
in  possession.

7.  The  Scriptures  also  contain  a  true  account  of
the  Word  in  different  ages,  according  as  it  was  deliv-
ered at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners  ;  but
the  Scriptures  themselves  are  not  that  Word,  but  a
record  of  the  operation  of  that  Word  in  different  ages.

8.  So  when  it  is  said, The  Word  of  God  came  to
Abraham,  or  Moses,  or  to  any  of  the  prophets,  it
was  not  the  Bible  that  came  to  them  ;  but  the  Word  Hefe
of  God  which  is  quick  and  powerful)  sharper  than  any  u.  '


606  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.  P.  VIIL

chap. two  exig€(i  sword, — and  is  adiscerner  of  the  thoughts
,  and  intents  of  the  heart :  And  this  cannot  be  Said  of

the  Scriptures.

9.  The  word  of  God  is  incorruptible,  and  liveth
23.  .  ' and  abide th  forever  ;  but  the  Bible  is  not  incorrupti-
ble, nor  doth  it  abide  forever. And  if  all  the  Scrip-
tures and  books  on  earth  were  consumed,  the  Word

Fph.  vi. of  God  would  still  be  the  same  quickening  sword  of
179  the  Spirit* Therefore  they  are  greatly  deceived,  who

imagine  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  Word  of  God  ;
there  is  no  such  idea  communicated,  in  any  part  of
the  Scriptures,  from  beginning  to  end.

10.  The  scripture  saith,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die  :'*
:  this  was  not  the  Word  of  God,  but  the  word  of

the Serpent It  is written, Make  thee  an  ark of
gofiher-wood. This  was  the  word  of  God  spoken  to
Noah,  but  it  was  not  the  word  of  God  to  any  other
person  under  heaven  ;  and  so  of  many  other  passages.

1 1.  The  Scriptures  contain  an  account  of  the  Word
of  God  in  different  ages,  and  of  the  sayings  of  wick-
ed men,  and  of  righteous  men  ;  the  sayings  of  true
and  false  prophets — of  honest  men  and  hypocrites,,
and  the  testimonies  of  true  and  false  witnesses ;  and
who  can  be  so  blind  as  to  imagine  that  all  this  record
of  good  and  evil,  can  either  be  the  Word  of  God,  or
a  rule  of  faith  and  practice  ?

12.  According  to  the  true  testimony  of  the  Scrip-
ture, the  Word  of  God  always  abode  in  a  man  of
God,  as  a  quickening  Spirit,  by  which  he  was  mov-
ed to  utter,  or  write  such  things  as  God  chose  to  re-
veal ;  and  what  was  thus  uttered  or  written,  might
be  perverted  or  destroyed,  or  the  man  of  God  might
be  put  to  death  ;  but  the  quickening  Spirit,  the  Word
which  liveth  and  abide  th  forever,  could  never  be  al-
tered, perverted  nor  destroyed,  but  would  always
come  forth,  and  appear  again  in  others.

13.  Thus,  from  one  dispensation  to  another,  the
word  of  God,  and  the  contrary  principle  which  rose
against  it,  in  man,  continued  to  increase  the  Scrip-
tures ;  and  those  writings,  which  had  been  acknowl-
edged before  as  a  record  of  truth,  were  used  in  con-
firmation of  every  present  work  of  God,  by  such  as
were  in  it,  and  had  the  Word  of  a  living  testimony.


P.  VIII.  THE  HOLY  SCRirTURES.  6C7

14.  And  hence  the  Scriptures,  in  their  proper  use,  CH£r*
could  never  be  given  or  administered  to  mankind  but


by  inspiration  of  God :  neither  could  they  be  profita-  2Tim.iii,
ble  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for correction,  or  in-  16> l7-
struction  in  righteousness,  but  through  the man  of
God,  who  had  the  Word  of  God  living  and  abiding
in  him,  by  which  he  was  perfect,  thoroughly  furnish-
ed unto  all  good  works.

15.  Hence  it  was  that  Christ  Jesus  expounded  un-  Luke
to  his  disciples,  in  all  the  scriptures,  the  things  con-  ^iv.27.
cerning  himself. And  the  apostle,  as his manner

was,  reasoned  out  of  the  scriptures,  alledging  that  ^3*'*™*
Christ  must  needs  have  suffered  ;  but  it  was  a  very
small  part  of  what  Jesus  taught,  or  the  apostles  rea-
soned, that  is  recorded  ;  yet  from  a  misunderstand-
ing of  what  little  was  recorded,  some  wrested  those
writings  to  their  own  destruction,  as  they  did  the
other  scriptures.

16.  From  all  which  there  appears  a  manifest  dis-
tinction between  the  word  of  God,  and  the  Scrip-
tures ;  and  notwithstanding  those  who  receive  the
word  of  God  as  their  guide,  are  led  according  to  the
scriptures  ;  yet  it  is  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power,
such  as  the  scriptures  never  could  communicate.  It
must  be  granted  by  all,  that  the  spirit  which  inspired
the  matter  of  the  sacred  writings,  is  greater  than
those  writings,  and  is  therefore  the  living  and  true
guide  into  all  truth,  which  was  but  in  part  written.

17.  The  command  of  God  to  Noah  respecting  the
ark,  could  be  no  rule  of  conduct  to  Abraham  ;  but
the  word  of  God  which  came  to  him,  must  be  his
rule,  and  in  obedience  to  that  alone,  could  he  be  jus-
tified. Likewise  the  command  of  God  to  Abraham,
to  offer  up  a  human  sacrifice,  could  be  no  rule  to  Mo-
ses, nor  to  any  other  person  under  heaven.

18.  What  was  commanded  through  Moses  to  the
children  of  Israel,  was  commanded  to  them  and  to  no
other  nation  upon  earth.  Besides,  a  thousand  things
were  commanded  to  individuals,  which  were  binding
on  no  other  person  but  those  to  whom  the  command
was  given.

19.  It  must  argue  the  most  extreme  ignorance  in
any  one,  to  suppose  that  what  was  expressly  reveal-
ed ^z


Gen.  v:


flosea  i.


60S  THE  HOI.? SCIUPTUUES.  P,  VIII.

chap. cc|  anc]  enjoined  on  one  nation  or  individual,  as  their
__  duty,  was  equally  binding  on  all  mankind  in  every
succeeding  age  and  nation.

20.  Because  Noah  was  commanded  to  build  an
ark,  must  all  mankind  build  arks  ?  Because  the  pro-

rsai.  x?:. phet  Isaiah  was  commanded  to  walk  naked  and  bare*

3-  foot,  for  a  sign  unto  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  were  all

mankind  to  follow  his  example,  without  regard  to

Ezek.  ir.  ]ieat  or  CQ\^  or  any  special  command  ?  Because  the

prophet  Ezekiel  was  commanded  to  prepare  his  bread
with  dung,  is  this  a  universal  rule  for  others  ?  Or  is
every  man  obliged  to  take  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  and
to  beget  children  of  whoredoms,  because  the  proph-
et Ilosea  was  commanded  so  to  do  ?

21.  What  greater  deception  could  Antichrist  pos-
sibly impose  upon  mankind*  in  order  to  blind  their
eyes  to  the  true  revelation  of  God,  than  to  pretend
that  "  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New-Testa-
ment (as  they  are  called)  are  the  only  rule  to  direct
w.9,"  and  under  this  pretence  to  reject  the  testimony
of  present  living  witnesses?

22.  God  never  was  beholden  to  letters,  as  the  on-
ly means  of  revealing  his  will ;  but  he  that  formed
the  soul  of  man,  can  also  form,  in  that  soul,  a  convic-
tion of  his  will.  And  nothing  but  the  ridiculous  doc-
trine that  God  actually  died,  could  ever  have  given
occasion  to  the  blind  error  of  the  Antichristian  world,
that  the  Bible  was  his  Last  Will  and  Testament,  and
the  priests  his  executors  and  administrators.

ricb.v*.  23.  The  oath  and  covenant  of  God,  (which  al-
l%*  ways  stood  between  two  immutable  agents,  in  which
it  was  impossible  for  God  to  fail  of  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  purpose,)  could  furnish  a  hope,  as  an  an-
chor of  the  soul,  sure  and  stedfast,  which  entered
into  that  within  the  vail.

24.  But  in  the  reading  of  the  Old-Testament,  the
...  vail  was  still  upon  the  heart :  and  although  it  was
t*?%  rent  in  the  first  appearing  of  Christ,  yet  that  vail  re-
mained untaken  away ;  and  therefore,  until  the  vail
was  fully  removed,  in  the  second  appearing  of  Christ,
the  Scriptures  could  never  be  fully  understood,  nor
could  the  very  things  themselves,  to  which  the  prom-
ises alluded,  be  fully  revealed  :  nor  could  even  the


P.  VIII.  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.  609

form  of  the  oath  be  kept  uncorrupted  through  the CI^AP'
dark  reign  of  Antichrist.

25.  Certain  it  is,  that  the  Scriptures  have  not  only
been  misunderstood,  but  have  been  grossly  pervert-
ed, and  forced  out  of  their  true  sense,  and  abused  to
the  purpose  of  misrepresenting  the  true  character
and  purpose  of  God,  and  all  his  designs  and  dispen-
sations to  man.  In  confirmation  of  this  truth,  we
need  but  look  to  the  numerous  divided  sectaries  now
upon  earth,  who,  for  ages,  have  been  contending
about  the  sense  of  the  Scriptures,  and  shedding  each
other's  blood  in  defence  of  their  respective  opinions.

26.  By  establishing  the  Scriptures  as  the  word  of
God,  for  all  future  ages,  the  most  inconsistent  ideas
have  been  formed  of  the  Divine  goodness  ;  while  the
comments  and  precepts  of  men  have  prevailed,  in-
stead of  the  living  Word  ;  and  a  total  ignorance  of
the  spiritual  world,  instead  of  the  knowledge  of  the
true  and  quickening  Spirit  of  revelation  :  which  is
particularly  manifest  in  that  horrid  and  blasphemous
doctrine  of  "  eternal  and  unconditional  decrees."

27.  By  this  unreasonable  doctrine,  millions,  who
never  had  the  offer  of  a  Saviour,  have  been  reproba-
ted and  doomed  to  final  perdition,  because  they  un-
happily came  into  the  world  before  the  coming  of
Christ,  or  lived  remote  from  where  his  name  was
named.

28.  How  far  are  the  sacred  Scriptures  from  once
intimating  that  souls,  in  all  ages,  were  destined  im-
mediately to  their  unchangeable  eternity  as  they  pas-
sed out  of  the  mortal  scenes  of  this  momentary  life  !
How  far  from  intimating,  that  the  small  glimmerings
of  Divine  light,  which  nations  in  dark  ages  enjoyed
for  a  moment,  contained  all  that  they  should  ever  en-
joy, or  that  they  were  fixed  in  a  state  unalterable,
and  yet  reserved  for  a  final  settlement  with  eternal
justice  !

29.  But  on  the  contrary,  those  sacred  records  of
inspired  truth,  as  far  as  they  ever  were  believed  with-
out prejudice,  and  understood  without  the  dark  cov-
ering of  false  systems,  have  allured  the  senses  of
mankind  towards  a  world  of  Spirits,  from  whence
their  sacred  light  was  inspired  :  a  world  real  and


610


THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,


P.  VIII.


CHAP.
X.


Julm  Hi.


Acts  ii.  34


Rom-  xi.
32.


X.uke  xi.
32.

Mark  vi.
11.  See
Isai.  >ix.
*8— 25.


Eze.  xvi

49-63.


substantial,  and  only  invisible  by  reason  of  human
depravity,  and  the  thick  clouds  of  darkness  occasion-
ed by  sin.  So  that  as  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  the  soul
liveth,  those  that  have  passed  out  of  this  present
world  are  not  more  justly  judged  to  be  dead,  than
those  who  remain  in  it.

SO.  Whatever  conjectures  may  be  formed  concern-
ing the  temporal  judgments  of  God  upon  the  wick-
ed in  past  ages,  certain  it  is,  that  the  Scriptures  most
pointedly  discard  the  idea  of  a  final  judgment  being
passed  on  any  soul  before  the  mystery  of  God  is  fin-
ished by  the  appearing  and  work  of  Christ.

31.  And  whatever  may  be  understood  concerning
any  one's  ascending  into  heaven,  yet  Christ,  who  de-
scended from  heaven,  testified,  saying,  No  man  hath
ascended  u/i  to  heaven.  And  Peter,  immediately  af*
ter  he  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  bore  a  similar  testi-
mony, saying,  David  is  not  ascended  into  the  heavens  :
and  St.  Paul  abundantly  proves,  in  his  Epistle  to  the
Romans,  that  there  was  no  difference  between  Jew
and  Greek)  but  that  God  concluded  them  all  in  unbe*
lief,  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  all.

32.  The  old  world,  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom,  and
the  unbelieving  Jews,  and  many  other  nations,  have
been  systematically  fixed  and  bound  in  chains  of  eter-
nal darkness,  by  men  more  wicked  and  beastly  than
they.  But  who  knew  their  state  the  best,  the  inven-
tors of  human  systems,  or  the  Son  of  God,  who  had
the  keys  of  death  and  hell  ?  He  testified,  saying,  The
men  cf  Nineveh  shall  rise  ufi  in  the  judgment  with
this  generation,  and  shall  condemn  it ;  and  also,  that  it
should  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  that  city  which  re-
jected his  testimony.

33.  Christ  Jesus,  who  was  before  all  worlds,  in
point  of  dignity  and  spiritual  travel,  before  whom
they  all  lay  naked  and  open  to  view,  did  not  confine
his  labours  to  a  little  flock  of  believers,  in  visible  bo-
dies on  this  globe.  The  thought  is  too  mean  for  any
rational  being,  and  is  nothing  short  of  tempting  the
Almighty,  and  limiting  the  Holy  One.

34.  The  apostles  knew  better,  and  witnessed  that
he  had  opened  the  way  to  the  city  of  the  living  God.


P.  VIII.  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.  611

The  dying thief knew  better,  when  he  said,  Lord, CHx.P*
remember  me  (not  when  thou goest, but)  when  thou  _____
co  meat  into  thy  kingdom. To-day  (said Jesus)  shalt  Lu^e
thou  be  with  me  in  fiaradise.  43™'42"*

35.  Now  this  was  the  same  day  in  which  the  Anti-
christians  ^say  he  died,  and  three  days  before  he
came  to  life,  and  more  than  forty  days  before  he  as-
cended to  heaven.  Is  this  like  immediately  passing
into  eternal  heaven  or  hell  ?  or  lying  dead  for  a  sea-
son, and  then  coming  to  life  again  ?  No  such  thing.

36.  Truly  said Christ  to  the  blind  leaders  of  the
blind, Ye  know  not  whither  I  go — but  I  know  whither  johnviii
I  go. And  verily,  it  was  not  into  Joseph's  new  tomb,  14,
for  the  malefactor  could  not  have  the  honour  of  go-
ing there  with  him  ;  but  into  fiaradise*  that  is,  a  state

of  happiness  and  rest,  where  many  bodies  of  the
saints  were  gathered,  and  from  which  they  arose  af-
ter his  resurrection,  and  came  into  the  holy  city,  in
which  God  had  placed  salvation  ;  which  things  thz
angels  desire  to  look  into.

37.  Nor  was  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  confined
to  the  saints  alone,  whether  in  this  world,  or  in  a
world  of  Spirits,  but  was  impartially  extended  to  all  \
and  not  overlooking  those  who  through  disobedience
had  forfeited the  blessings  of  former  dispensations,

he  went  and  preached  to the Sfiirits  in firison*  which  i*et3H.
were  disobedient  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark
was  preparing.

38.  It  is  inconsistent  with  a  God  of  infinite  justice
and  goodness,  that  his  work  should  be  confined  to
the  contracted  limits  of  this  inferior  globe,  while
worlds  of  worlds  lie  naked  and  open  to  his  view  ;  or
that  the  millions  who  have  departed  into  a  world  of
spirits,  without  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  should  be
bound  in  chains  of  eternal  darkness,  without  ever
hearing  the  gospel,  in  which  only  is  true  happiness

and  eternal  life. For  this  cause  was  the  gos/iel preach-  i  Pet.  j%.
ed  also to than  that  are dead*  that they  might  be
judged  according  to  men  in  the  ftesh*  but  live  accord-
ing to  God  in  the  Sfiirit.

39.  In  every  dispensation  of  God's  grace,  all  who
were  obedient  to  the  light  and  will  of  God  made
known  unto  them,  were  accepted  of  him,  in  every

Ggg3


612


THE  HOI,Y  SCRIPTURES.


P.  VIII


CHAP.
X.


Astsxxvi


Rev.vi.

9—11.


1E&X.  iii.


II1


Her.  xx  ii

27.


JL  John  v.
,16.

jftfatt. :  ii.
22.


nation,  left  this  world  in  peace,  and  rested  in  hope
of  a  future  resurrection.  "  Unto  which  (saith  the
apostle)  our  twelve  tribes,  instantly,  [or  in  the  world
of  spirits,]]  serving  God  day  and  night,  hope  to  come  ;
for  which  hope's  sake,  I  am  accused  of  the  Jews."

40.  And  as  that  order  and  eternal  glory,  which  God
had  reserved  for  the  latter  day,  was  not  fully  reveal-
ed in  Christ's  first  appearing  ;  all  the  apostles,  and
true  followers  of  Christ,  remained  in  a  state  of  rest,
and  acceptance  with  God,  waiting  in  hope  for  the
coming  of  that  day  of  glory  which  was  promised.

41.  Hence  the  state  of  the  true  witnesses  was  open-
ed in  vision  to  St.  John,  relating  to  the  period  of  An-
tichrist's reign  ;  and  he  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls
of  them  that  ivere  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for
the  testimony  which  they  held.  And  it  was  said  unto
them  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little  season,  un-
til their  felloe -servants  also,  and  their  brethren  that
should  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be  fulfilled.

42 «  Such  then  is  the  truth  recorded  in  the  sacred
writings,  which  cannot  be  broken,  and  all  things
written  therein,  in  relation  to  Christ,  and  the  work
of  Redemption,  will  have  their  full  and  final  accom-
plishment, and  not  one  jot  or  tittle  thereof  fail.

43.  And  as  it  is  eternal  truth,  that  God  shall  bring
every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  things
whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil ;  so  it  is  eter-
nal truth,  that  every  individual  soul,  whom  God  hath
created,  must  have  a  free  and  final  offer  of  the  gos-
pel, either  in  this  world,  or  in  the  world  of  Spirits.

44.  And  upon  the  principles  of  equal  and  impar-
tial justice,  the  day  of  God's  final  visitation  and  mer-
cy is  opened  to  all  ;  to  the  Jew  and  the  Greek,  the
Barbarian  and  Scythian,  the  bond  and  free,  the  male
and  female,  the  present  and  departed,  while  the  Spirit
and  the  bride  say,  Cortie ,-v-and  whosoever  willy  let  him
take  the  water  of  life  freely.

45.  And  as  there  is  a  sin  unto  death,  which  hath
neither  forgiveness  in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to
come,  which  is  the  sin  agaipst  the  Holy  Ghost,  in
the  day  of  her  revelation,  or  last  display  of  God's
grace  to  man  ;  therefore  a  final  and  deliberate  choice
•f  cyil>  in  defiance  of  known  and  positive  good,  is


P.  VIII.  THE  CONCLUSION.  613^

the  separating  bar  which  fixes  the  final  doom  of  the G^IP*
wicked  ;  and  from  such  tha  mercy  of  God  is  exclud-  .

ed  forever,  in  the  day  of  his  final  judgment,  while
death  and  hell  are  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,  which  is
the  second  death.

46.  But  to  the  soul  that  is  willing  to  rise  up  in  the
judgment  against  si«,  and  condemn  it,  the  gates  into
the  holy  city  are  open  continually,  which,  in  the  is-
sue, will  make  a  final  end  of  all  those  typical  distinct
tions  between  Pharoah  and  Moses,  Isaac  and  Ish-
mael,  Jacob  and  Esau,  and  the  rest.

47.  And  he  alone  that  rejects  the  last  and  final
opening  of  salvation  and  eternal  life,  shuts  himself

out with  dogs and-  sorcerers,  into outer  darkness,  Rev#XKiip
where  shall  be  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  is-
teeth  ;  while  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun,  in
the  kingdom  of  their  Father. Who  hath  ears  to  hear ,  *£***»**•
he t  him  hear,


CHAPTER XI.
THE  CONCLUSION  :

In  a  few  thoughts  addressed  to Young  Believers.

TO  all  who  have  received  the  faith  of  the  Son
of  God,  in  the  present  opening  of  the  everlas-
ting gospel,  and  in  obedience  thereunto,  have  con-
fessed and  forsaken  their  sins,  and  have  separated
themselves  from  the  common  course  and  practice  of
this  present  evil  world,  with  a  full  determination  to
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth.

2.  Brethren  and  Sisters,  dearly  beloved  for  the
truth's  sake,  before  we  close  this  present  work,  we
think  it  expedient,  in  a  few  words,  to  address  you  in
particular  ;  sensible  of  the  important  relation  which
Ave  bear  towards  you,  as  well  as  of  the  greatness  of
the  work  into  which  you  are  called,  and  the  effect
which  it  must  finally  have  upon  all  souls.

3.  According  to  the  gift  of  God  committed  to  us,


£14  THE CONCLUSION.  P. VIII.

CIxiP* anc*  tne  Present  state  of  mankind  to  receive  the  truth,
-  we  have  opened  the  most  essential matters  of  fact,

that  have  taken  place  in  different  ages  of  the  world,
from  the  beginning,  in  relation  to  the  salvation  and
redemption  of  souls.  And  as  the  way  of  God  is  in
the  great  deep,  whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  sec,
it  is  expected  that  many  things,  in  relation  to  his
work,  will  appear  dark  and  mysterious  to  all  flesh.

4.  However,  it  has  been  our  aim  to  state  thing's
agreeable  to  truth,  and  according  to  that  measure  of
light  and  understanding  which  we  have  received  from
God,  without  any  design  of  pleasing  man  :  we  have
therefore  used  great  plainness  of  speech,  both  in  ex-
posing the  lost  state  of  man,  in  all  ages,  as  sunk  in
the  corruptions  and  lusts  of  a  carnal  nature,  and  in
opening  the  strait  and  narrow  way  of  self-denial,  for
both  man  and  woman,  according  to  Christ's  first  and
second  appearing.

5.  We  are  fully  apprised  of  the  infinite  flood  of
objections,  which  naturally  arise  in  human  nature,
against  those  piercing  and  very  mortifying  truths,
although  we  have  not  thought  proper  to  investigate
or  answer  those  objections  so  fully  as  some  may  wish  ;
nor  do  we  suppose  that  they  ever  will  be  fully  answer-
ed by  paper  and  ink,  or  any  thing  short  of  that  con-
vincing arrowy  the  light  and  power  of  God,  by  which
they  shall  make  their  own  tongue  to  fall  upon  them-
selves.

6.  Whatever  reasonings  the  human  imagination
may  invent,  they  are  no  more  than  empty  bubbles,
when  compared  to  the  power  of  God,  which  is  made
known  by  real  facts,  according  to  the  times  and  sea-
sons of  his  work.  Therefore  it  is  not  for  us  to  in-
dulge a  spirit  of  vain  reasoning,  but  to  believe  what
God  hath  wrought,  and  by  obedience,  to  reap  the
everlasting  benefit.

7.  As  the  facts  which  we  have  stated  are  plain  and
simple,  it  requires  nothing  more  than  for  the  mind
to  be  divested  of  prejudice  and  a  false  education  to
believe  them  ;  and  in  truth,  it  is  impossible  for  any
soul  that  is  simply  honest  and  bent  after  the  truth  and
hears  it,  to  believe  any  thing  else.

8.  We  have  plainly  testified  the  well  known  ^ml


P.  VIII.  THE  CONCLUSION.  615

undeniable  fact,  that  man,  in  his  natural  state,  is  fal-  c "*p#
len  from  God  into  the  nature  of  the  wicked  one  ;  that  ._

all  mankind  remained  in  that  fallen  state,  until  Christ
the  Saviour  appeared  ;  that  he  took  that  nature  and
crucified  it,  as  an  example  to  all  souls  ;  and  that  aa
many  as  took  up  the  same  cross,  and  followed  him
in  that  day,  were  a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  his  crea-
tures.

9.  We  have  also  testified  that  there  was  a  falling
awray,  that  Antichrist  reigned,  and  that  no  true  church,
nor  the  perfect  way  of  God,  was  known  on  the  earth,
for  many  ages  ;  but  that  according  to  the  testimony
of  all  the  true  witnesses,  it  was  to  be  opened  in  the
latter  day.  Accordingly,  we  have  plainly  stated  how,
and  where,  and  when  the  perfect  way  of  God  was
opened  the  second  time  ;  and  what  those  souls  have
actually  obtained  who  have  come  into  it.

10.  These  things,  dearly  beloved,  are  not  cun-
ningly devised  fables,  nor  matters  of  mere  specula-
tion,  as  you  yourselves  also  know  ;  but  they  are  the
most  important  facts  that  ever  were  exhibited  on
earth.  And  we  can  confidently  say,  that  as  univer-
sally as  Jew  and  Gentile  were  convinced  of  sin,  sa
universally  they  all  expected  a  Saviour ;  and  as  ex-
tensive as  their  expectations  were,  so  extensive  hath
the  news  circulated  through  the  earth,  that  Jesus
was  the  person  ordained  of  God  to  that  office.

11.  And  again,  as  extensively  as  the  name  of
Christ  Jesus  hath  spread  through  the  earth,  and
souls  have  been  awakened  to  a  deeper  sense  of  their
loss,  so  universally  hath  the  second  appearing  of
Christ  been  expected  ;  and  to  the  same  extent  shall
it  be  known,  that  through  the  blessed  Mother  of  our
redemption,  the  glory  and  perfection  of  his  divine
nature  hath  been  revealed  for  salvation,  unto  the  ends
of  the  earth,  in  these  latter  days.

12.  It  would  doubtless  have  been  very  gratifying
to  the  idolatrous  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  had  the  bi-
ography of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  been  as  fully  and  clear-
ly stated  as  that  of  General  Washington,  or  some  of
the  great  and  noble  ones  of  the  earth.

13.  Could  they  have  ascertained  the  precise  time
of  his  birth  ;  the  name  of  the  inn-keeper  in  whose


616  THE  CONCLUSION.  P.  VIII.

°  xlP* Sta^le  he  was  born  ;  how  many  shepherds,  and  what

_  their  names  were,  who  found  him  and  his  mother  ;

to  what  size  he  grew,  and  what  was  his  shape  and
colour ;  such  frivolous  circumstances  would  have
feasted  their  refined  taste,  while  the  main  subject  of
his  mission  was  wholly  disregarded.

14.  But  whatever  curious  minds  were  in  search
after,  certain  it  is,  the  true  believer  gloried  only  in
his  having  found  the  Messias  ;  and  it  was  immaterial
to  such  how  he  came,  seeing  this  was  he,  of  whom
Moses  and  the  prophets  did  write.  So  in  regard  to
his  second  appearing,  a  thousand  curious  enquiries
may  be  raised,  relating  to  temporal  circumstances,
which  are  mere  bubbles  of  vanity  to  souls  who  are
groaning  under  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  earnestly
longing  for  redemption.

15.  The  first  in  America  who  received  the  testi-
mony of  the  Gospel,  were  satisfied  that  it  was  the
truth  of  God  against  all  sin,  and  that  in  faithful  obe-
dience thereunto,  they  should  find  that  salvation  and
deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin,  for  which  they
sincerely  panted.  And  being  made  partakers  of  the
glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  it  was  a  matter
of  no  importance  with  them  from  whence  the  means
of  their  deliverance  came,  whether  from  a  Stable  in
Bethlehem,  or  from  Toad-lane  in  Manchester.

16.  Nor  could  any  circumstance,  demeaning  to  the
pride  of  man,  be  construed  in  any  other  light,  than
as  an  evidence  that  God  had  chosen  things  that  are
despised,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are  highly
esteemed  among  men,  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in
his  presence.

17.  It  was  sufficient  that  the  testimony  of  God  had
reached  them,  and  that  the  requirement  of  God  was
plainly  made  known,  and  all  they  had  to  do  was  to
improve  their  privilege,  and  be  thankful  that  they
were  counted  worthy  to  receive  the  word  of  God,
through  whatever  medium  he  was  pleased  to  bestow  it.

18.  This  they  have  done  by  a  patient  continuance
in  well-doing,  amidst  false  and  slanderous  reports,
amidst  scoffings,  railings,  bufferings,  stripes  and  im-
prisonments. And  thus,  by  the  overcoming  spirit
and  power  of  the  gospel,  they  have  transmitted  unto
you  the  testimony  of  Christ,  pure  and  undefined.


P.  VIII.  THE  CONCLUSION.  617

19»  And  by  no  higher  argument  will  you  ever  be  c^p«
able  to  vindicate  the  past,  or  recommend  the  present  *
work  of  God,  than  by  the  innocence  of  your  lives  and
the  purity  of  your  morals  ;  while,  by  the  present  gift
and  power  of  God,  your  only  guardian,  you  grow  up
into  the  divine  nature,  resisting  and  overcoming
fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul ;  having  your
conversation  honest ;  that  whereas  they  speak  evil
against  you  as  evil  doers,  they  may,  by  your  good
works  which  they  behold,  glorify  God  in  the  day  of
visitation.  For  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with  well-
doing, ye  may  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish
men.

20.  The  false  spirit  of  Antichrist  may  yet  contin-
ue, for  a  season,  to  slander  and  misrepresent  all  you
do  and  say.  A  time-serving  priesthood,  who  neither
know  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm,  may
palm  upon  you  the  character  of  deceivers,  wolves  in
sheep's  cloathing,  and  gather  up  and  circulate  every
lying  report  against  you.  Or  seeing  the  hope  of  their
gain  cut  off,  they  may,  through envy,  stir  up  lewd

fellows  of  the baser  sort,  to abuse your  persons  or
property,  as  they  have  often  done.

21.  But  if  they  have  persecuted  me,  (said  Jesus,)
they  will  also  persecute  you.  And  if  they  have  called
the  master  of  the  house  Belzebub,  how  much  more  they
of  his  household.  |C7*  The  true  followers  of  Christ
never  persecuted  any  :  Therefore  by  their  fruits  ye
shall  know  them.

22.  But  whatever  subtle  argument,  or  false  accusa-
tion may  be  brought  against  the  faith  or  practice  of
the  followers  of  Christ  in  this  day,  no  supposable  or
imaginary  future  event  can  be  any  rule  for  our  pres-
ent conduct ;  but  the  certain  will  of  God  we  are  to
do,  as  revealed  to  us,  and  to  submit  the  event  to  the
disposer  of  all  things  :  knowing  of  a  certainty,  that
those  who  are  without,  as  well  as  those  who  are  with-
in, must  sooner  or  later,  pass  through  the  same  equi-
table judgment.

23.  Therefore  we  are  in  no  wise  bound  to  answer
the  inconsistent  query,  "  What  would  become  of  the
world,  if  all  the  human  race  were  to  live  as  we  do  ?"
With  as  much  propriety  we  might  ask,  what  would


618  THE  CONCLUSION.  P.  VIII.

CxiP" ^ave  Deconie  of  beasts  and  men,  if  Noah  had*  dis-

obeyed  God,  and  lived  like  the  rest  of  the  world  ?  Or

what  would  have  become  of  Jesus  and  the  millions
who  have  been  taught  to  follow  his  example,  if  Jo-
seph and  Mary,  through  disobedience,  had  refused
to  fly  from  the  persecuting  cruelty  of  Herod  ?

24.  A  thousand  such  questions  might  be  asked  ;
but  it  is  not  a  question  of  so  much  concern  to  the  peo-
ple of  God,  what  will  become  of  the  world,  as  it  is  to
know  their  Lord's  will,  and  to  do  it,  and  thereby  to

flee  from.  the.  wrath  to  come.

25.  Thousands  and  millions  maybe  butchered,  na-
tion be  destroyed  by  nation,  and  the  earth  be  involv-
ed in  blood  and  calamity,  and  nothing  said  about  the
danger  or  wickedness  of  such  an  example,  nor  any
concern  expressed  about  the  world's  coming  to  an
6nd.  But  no  sooner  do  souls  confess  and  forsake
their  sins,  and  set  out  to  follow  the  example  of  Christ
Jesus,  but  the  hue  and  cry  is  raised,  The  world  will
come  to  an  end  !  As  if  man  was  a  mere  lump  of  flesh
and  blood,  created  for  no  higher  end  than  to  live  af-
ter the  flesh,  in  the  gratification  of  their  lusts,  and
to  destroy  one  another.

26.  Still  more  inconsistent,  is  the  query  of  the  vain
antichristiaiij  "  If  all  were  to  cease  from  the  works
of  the  flesh,  how  would  the  church  be  supplied,  or
what  would  God  do  for  preachers  and  saints  to  wor-
ship and  praise,  him  ?"  For  it  is  abundantly  manifest,
that  they  who  live  after  the  flesh  cannot  filease  God,
and  that  it  was  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  raising
up  a  people  to  serve  God,  that  Christ  came  and  set
the  example  of  crucifying  the  flesh  with  its  affections
and  lusts.  In  answer  to  this  spirit  of  cavilling  in  the
Jews,  it  was  testified,  that  God  is  able  of  these  stones
to  raise  ufi  children  unto  Abraham.

27.  Therefore  the  true  ministers  of  Christ  and
worshippers  of  God,  being  born  of  the  Spirit,  are
not  debtors  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  the  flesh,  in  any  of
its  gratifications  ;  but  are  those  who  live  the  life  of
heaven  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in
them,  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  being  re-
deemed from  men,  even  from  the  corrupt  nature  of


P.  VIII.  THE  CONCLUSION.  61?


XI.


man,  and  are  not  defiled  with  women,  for  they  are  CI4fp*
virgins^  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God.

28.  The  last  blind  argument  to  foster  and  soothe
the  flesh,  is  the  doctrine  of  a  final  resurrection  of  all
those  human  bodies  that  have  mingled  with  the  com-
mon elements  of  the  globe,  through  all  ages,  since
the  first  man.  But  if  there  were  no  other  argument
to  confute  such  an  absurd  doctrine,  its  own  inconsis-
tency might  be  fully  sufficient  to  render  it  contempt-
ible in  the  eyes  of  every  wise  man.

29.  From  such  unreasonable,  unscriptural,  and
senseless  superstition,  God  hath  in  mercy  delivered
you  :  whereas  it  was  but  a  few  years  ago,  that  the  al-
tar of  superstition  was  reeking  with  the  blood  of  the
innocent  and  virtuous,  who  dared  to  hope  for  that
better  resurrection,  of  which  you  are  the  living  wit-
nesses.

30.  What  millions,  from  sequestered  vallies  and
desolate  mountains,  from  lonely  cottages,  and  silent
groves,  from  torture-rooms,  and  racks,  and  devour-
ing flames,  have  looked,  and  wept,  and  prayed,  to-
wards this  latter  day  of  liberty  and  peace  !  How  have
they  talked  of  the  rights  of  man,  and  laboured  to  de-
scribe in  words  what  your  eyes  behold,  and  your  souls
daiiy  enjoy,  namely,  the  blessings  of  peace  and  sal-
vation, in  a  land  sacred  to  freedom  !

31.  Then  how  unspeakably  greatis  your  privilege,
seeing  the  eyes  of  ail  who  have  ever  suffered  in  the
cause  of  virtue,  have  earnestly  looked  towards  the
privileges  you  enjoy,  and  have  justly  expected,  with
you,  to  receive  the  crown  of  eternal  glory,  and,  with
you,  to  drink  of  the  river  of  the  water  of  life.

32.  And  from  whence  have  flowed  those  blessings,
both  civil  and  sacred,  which  you  enjoy,  but  from  Al-
mighty God,  the  wise  disposer  of  all  events  ;  by  whose
providence  you  are  placed,  not  only  under  the  Amer-
ican Eagle,  the  brightest  ensign  of  civil  and  religious
liberty  ever  raised  on  the  earth  since  the  fall  of  man,
but  under  the  sunshine  of  the  everlasting  gospel,  the
only  object  of  real  and  abiding  happiness.

33.  Therefore,  while  you,  with  others,  enjoy  your
just  and  natural  rights,  those  wholesome  laws  of  free-
dom will  ever  be  respected  by  every  true  Believer  ;

Hhh


620  THE  CONCLUSION.  P.  VIII,

C1xiP* anc^  mucn  more  that  sacred  and  eternal  law  of  the

spirit  of  life,  in  Christ's  second  appearing,  by  which

you  are  freed  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  made
partakers  of  that  knowledge  and  virtue,  which  will
eventually  become  the  desire  of  all  the  nations  of  the
earth.

34.  Unshackled  by  superstition,  unbiassed  by  the
terrors  of  tyranny,  and  redeemed  from  false  systems,
and  the  reigning  power  of  iniquity,  by  which  your
souls  were  held  in  bondage,  you  stand  free  to  judge
between  truth  and  error,  light  and  darkness,  good
and  evil,  and  to  chuse  that  which  you,  as  a  free  and
chosen  people,  deliberately  judge  to  be  productive  of
the  greatest  present  and  eternal  good.

35.  And  being  the  seed  of  the  woman,  chosen  of
God  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head,  to  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  maintain  the  testimony  of
Jesus,  it  is  your  inestimable  privilege  to  follow  the
example  of  those  through  whom  ye  are  begotten  in-
to the  enduring  substance  of  eternal  life.  And  be-
ing called  and  chosen,  be  ye  faithful  to  prove  that
you  are  not  bastards,  but  sons  and  daughters,  just  and.
rightful  heirs  to  the  promised  inheritance,  through
whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed,
in  turning  every  one  from  his  iniquity.

36.  Finally,  Brethren  and  Sisters,  farewell  ;  be
wise,  be  perfect,  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of  one
mind  ;  keep  the  gift  of  God,  and  the  gift  of  God  will
keep  you  ;  live  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  love  and
peace  will  be  with  you,  and  establish  you  unshaken,
and  immovable,  in  his  kingdom  of  righteousness  and
Eternal  Truth.


THE  END


A  POEM,


Containing  a  short  Abridgement  of  the  foregoing  Testimony.


G


OD  of  salvation,  power  and  grace,
Unknown  to  man's  apostate  race ,
Thy  glory,  veil'd  within  a  cloud,
Eludes  the  searches  of  the  proud.
Thy  nature  and  eternal  law,
The  wisest  mortal  never  saw  ;
Nor  can  thy  works  be  truly  seen,
But  by  the  soul  that's  pure  ancf  clean.

Now  from  a  carnal  nature  freed,
Thy  everlasting  name  we  read  ;
And  love  that  full  parental  name,
From  which  our  living  spirits  came.
Long  ere  this  fleeting  world  began,
Or  dust  was  fashion'd  into  man,
There  Pciver  and  Wisdom  we  can  view,
Names  of  the  Everlasting  Two.

The  Father's  high  eternal  throne
Was  never  fill'd  by  one  alone  :
There  Wisdom  holds  the  Mother's  seat,
And  is  the  Father's  helper-meet.
This  vast  creation  was  not  made
Without  the  fruitful  Mother's  aid  ;
For  by  the  works  of  God  we  know
The  fountain-head  from  which  they  flow.

"  Let  us  make  man"  was  rightly  sakl,
And  in  God's  image  man  was  made,
One  flesh  and  blood,  two  in  one  name,
Both  naked,  yet  no  cause  of  shame.
While  in  one  form  alone  he  stood,
His  maker  saw  it  was  not  good  ;
Nor  could  his  order  be  complete,
Until  he  found  an  helper-meet.

To  be  as  gods,  before  the  time,
Was  man's  temptation,  and  his  crime  :
While  in  his  weak  and  infant  state,
It  was  not  for  him  to  create  :
But  tempted  by  a  pois'nous  brute.
He  took  of  the  forbidden  fruit,
And  cleaving  to  Ids  kindred  dust,
Became  a  slave  to  his  own  lust.


Now  on  inferior  pleasures  bent,
His  soul  forgets  its  true  descent :
But  though  vain  man  became  a  beast,
The  law  of  nature  never  ceas'd  :
By  male  and  female  join'd  in  one,
The  old  creation  still  goes  on  ;
But  sure  they  must  be  born  again,
Or  linger  in  eternal  pain.

When  the  old  world  of  flesh  and  blood.
Was  swept  away  by  Noah's  flood,
The  ark  preserv'd  a  chosen  few,
To  typify  what  Christ  would  do.
But  circumcision  first  reveal'd
The  seat  where  lust  had  been  conceal'd,
And  in  the  flesh  of  the  foreskin,
Was  found  the  root  of  ev'ry  sin.

The  law  gave  yet  a  sorer  wound,
And  made  t.h'  offence  of  sin  abound  ;
And  though  in  Moses  many  trust,
His  law  condemns  their  carnal  lust.
Succeeding  prophets  saw  the  day
When  sin  and  lust  should  pass  away,
Till  under  John  the  work  began,
Which  introdue'd  the  Son  of  man.

Before  John's  mission  had  begun,
The  Holy  Ghost  conceiv'd  a  Son  ;
And  when  he  grew  to  proper  age,
He  show'd  his  heav'nly  parentage,
Renounc'd  the  flesh  in  branch  and  root,
Condemn'd  the  tree  and  all  its  fruit ;
And  through  his  suff 'rings  did  create
The  substance  of  a  better  state.

Four  hundred  years  the  tidings  spread,
That  Christ  was  risen  from  the  dead  ;
And  such  as  kept  his  new  command,
Arose  in  one  united  band.
Though  persecuted  and  revil'd,
They  kept  their  doctrine  undefil'd,
Till  wicked  priests  the  pow'rdid  gain>
And  Antichrist  began  his  reign.


A  POEM.


The  monstrous  beast,  and  bloody  whore
Iteign'd  thirteen  hundred  years  and  more ;
And  under  foot  the  truth  was  trod,
By  their  mysterious  three-fold  Clod :
But  while  they  placed  in  the  He
Their  sacred  co-eternal  Threet
A  righteous  persecuted  few
Ador'd  the  everlasting  Tzvo.

The  Holy  Ghost  at  length  did  bear
Th'  anointed  one,  the  second  heir,
A  virgin  soul,  a  holy  child,
A  Mother  pure  and  undefiTd :
In  her  the  heirship  is  complete,
In  her  the  types  and  figures  meet,
And  God's  last  building  stands  upon
The  sacred  truth  of  two  in  one.

The  law  and  prophets  all  unite
To  seal  this  true  eternal  light :
Two  tables  did  the  law  complete,
Two  cherubs  on  the  mercy-seat,
Two  silver  trumpets  plainly  shew
That  gospel  truth  proceeds  from  tAvo :
And  though  the  priest  one  goat  did  slay,
The  second  bore  their  sins  away.

The  order  of  eternal  rest,
Next  by  the  temple  was  express'd  i
This  building  was  laid  off  in  two,
The  one  eonceal'd  from  public  view :
Thus  in  the  temale  and  the  male,
The  flesh  was  still  the  parting  vail :
But  when  this  vail  is  rent  and  gone,
The  building  is  complete  in  one.


The  prophets  saw  in  visions  clear,
By  whom  redemption  would  appear,
That  "  two  anointed  ones"  would  stand
Before  the  God  of  all  the  land.
Two  olive  trees  suppli'd  the  bowl,
As  life  from  Christ  supplies  the  soul ;
And  certain  as  the  vision's  true,
The  male  and  female  are  the  two*

Ezekiel  saw  a  liver  wide,
With  many  trees  on  either  side:
The  tree  of  lite  appear'd  to  John,
And  truly  there  were  more  than  one;
On  either  side  the  tree  was  seen,
While  living  watei's  flow  between :
This  tree  of  life  on  either  side,
He  calls  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride.

We  surely  know  by  what  we  feel,
Their  leaves  will  yet  the  nations  heal :
Ye  lame  and  blind,  ye  deaf  and  dumb,
"  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come  :M
Let  him  that  heareth  swell  the  sound,
And  let  it  go  the  nations  round,
That  all  who  will  their  sins  forsake,
May  everlasting  life  partake.

Since  Christ  has  in  his  glory  come,
We've  found  our  everlasting  home ;
Our  parentage  in  all  its  height,
Is  by  the  gospel  brought  to  light.
Th'  eternal  truth  is  on  our  side,
The  quick'ning  Spirit  and  the  Bride,
With  all  the  bright  and  heav'nly  host,
The  FATHER  and  the  HOLY  GHOST.
