Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot (Soyen Shaku, 1906)
==========================================================
Soyen Shaku's 1906 Sermons — the addresses of the Zen abbot who brought Zen to America at the 1893 Parliament of Religions, translated by D.T. Suzuki. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

QJarncU UtiittctBtta ffiibrarg 

at^aca, Ken Inrk 


THE GIFT OF 


<3j.BoOTSircrun, 


Cornell University Library 
BQ 5345.S52 1906 


3 1924 023 155 223 


All books are subject to recall after two weeks. 
Library Annex 

DATE DUE 


i^*enn3r 


3ry UMi 


1 


1 


GAVLOHO 


PRINTED IN U.S.A. 


The original of tliis book is in 
tlie Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023155223 


SERMONS 

OF A 

BUDDHIST ABBOT 

ADDRESSES ON RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS 


BY 

THE RT. REV. SOYEN SHAKU 

LORD ABBOT OF BNGAKU-JI AND KENCHO-JI, KAMAKURA, JAPAN 


INCLUDING THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 


TRANSLATED PROM THE JAPANESE MS BY 

DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI 


WITH PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR 


CHICAGO 
THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY 

LONDON AGENTS 
Kbgan Paul, Trench, TrObner & Co., Ltd. 

1906 

5 


y^. 


9 


-:rf^ 


A-3]3Z.33 


copyright by 

The Open Court Publishing Co. 

1906 


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 

THIS little work is a collection of some of 
the lectures delivered by the Right Rev- 
erend Soyen Shaku, Lord Abbot of Engaku-ji 
and Kencho-ji, Kamakura, Japan, during his 
sojourn in this country, 1905-1906. He came 
here early in the summer of 1905 and stayed 
with friends on the Pacific coast until March in 
the following year. Lectures on Buddhism were 
frequently delivered at the request of his hostess, 
Mrs. Alexander Russell of San Francisco, for the 
benefit of her friends. He lectured on the Sutra 
of Forty-two Chapters, and naturally chose the 
texts for his sermons from this most popular 
among the canonical books. As His Reverence 
did not speak English, the burden of interpreting 
his speeches fell upon my shoulders. 

During his stay on the coast, His Reverence 
was occasionally invited by his countrymen, scat- 
tered throughout the State, to such places as 
the Buddhist Mission and the Japanese Con- 
sulate in San Francisco, to Los Angeles, Sacra- 
mento, Fresno, San Jose, and Oakland. Wher- 
ever he went, his addresses were most enthu- 
siastically received and greatly appreciated by 


iv translator's preface 

the Japanese residents, and by Americans when 
his speeches were repeated in English. 

In March, 1906, the Right Reverend Soyen 
Shaku crossed the continent to the Atlantic 
coast, visiting Washington, New York, Phila- 
delphia, and Boston. Whenever he was asked 
by his countrymen or by his American friends, 
to speak on his faith, he always acceded to their 
wish. These addresses were added to the ser- 
mons already under my charge, and when His 
Reverence was leaving for his European tour 
towards the end of April, he left all the manu- 
scripts with me with a view of publishing them 
in book form. 

In going over these documents critically, I 
found that I could not make use of all the 
material as it stood; for the talks during his 
stay on the Pacific coast were mostly of a very 
informal nature, and a copy of them prepared 
from shorthand notes needed a great deal of 
revision; besides, some of the. talks were suited 
only to special audiences and adapted to their 
peculiar needs. So with his permission I con- 
densed several articles into one, while in other 
cases I selected a subject only incidentally or 
cursorily referred to in several different addresses, 
and made a special essay of the scattered passages. 
Sometimes I found his expressions too Buddhistic, 
that is, too technical, and intelligible only to 
those who have made Buddhism a special study. 
In such cases, I put the thoughts in a more con- 


TRANSLATOR S PREFACE V 

vehtional and comprehensible form for the benefit 
of the American public. Again, when I thought 
that His Reverence took too much knowledge 
of his subject for granted on the part of his audi- 
ence, I endeavored to express his thoughts more 
plainly and explicitly. ' 

In spite of these alterations and the liberties 
I have taken vnth the manuscripts of the Rev- 
erend Shaku, these lectures remain a faithful 
representation of the views as well as the style 
of preaching of my venerable teacher and friend. 

* * * 

As to the text of the Sutra of Forty-two Chap- 
ters, I have decided after rnuch consideration to 
incorporate it here. In the first place, it is not 
a long sutra, and like the Dharmapada it contains 
many characteristic Buddhist thoughts. Sec- 
ondly, most of the Reverend Shaku's lectures 
have a close relation to the sutra ; and when they 
are read after the perusal of the text, his stand- 
point as a modern Japanese representative of 
Buddhism will be better understood. Thirdly, 
being the first Buddhist literature introduced 
by the first official Hindu missionaries into the 
Middle Kingdom (a. d. 67), the sutra has a very 
interesting historical background. 

* * * 

I have to add that this collection also contains 
two articles and one letter by the Reverend 
Shaku, all of which previously appeared in The 
Open Court. The letter was addressed to the 


VI TRANSLATOR S PREFACE 

late Dr. John H. Barrows as a sort of protest 
against his lecture delivered at the Chicago Uni- 
versity, 1896, in which Dr. Barrows unfortunately- 
fell in line with the popular misconception of the 
spirit of Buddhism. The two articles referred 
to deal with the problem of war as seen from the 
general Buddhist point of view ; and I may remark 
that the first of the two attracted at the time the 
attention of such an eminent thinker of our day 
as Count Leo Tolstoy and was alluded to in his 
famous anti-war declaration. 

Daisetz TeitAro Suzuki. 
La Salle, III., 1906. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface iii 

The Sutra of Forty-two Chapters 3 

The God-Conception 25 

Assertions and Denials 37 

Immortality 53 

Buddhist Faith 62 

Buddhist Ethics 69 

What is Buddhism? 79 

The Middle Way 90 

The Wheel of the Good Law loi 

The Phenomenal and the Supra-phenomenal . . . in 

Reply to a Christian Critic 121 

Ignorance and Enlightenment 126 

Spiritual Enlightenment 132 

Practice of Dhy&na 146 

Kwannon Bosatz 160 

Buddhism and Oriental Culture 170 

The Story of Deer Park 182 

The Story of the Gem-Hunting 186 

The Sacrifice for a Stanza 189 

Buddhist View of War 193 

At the Battle of Nan-Shan Hill ....... ig8 

A Memorial Address 204 

Index 215' 

7 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS' 

HAVING attained Buddhahood, the World- 
honored One thought thus: "To be free 
from the passions and to be calm, this is the 
most excellent Way." 

'This is the first Buddhist literature ever translated into 
the Chinese language. It was brought into China by the 
first missionaries from Central India, a. d. 67, who were 
specially invited by the Emperor Ming of the Han Dynasty. 
Though some authorities think that the sutra existed in 
Sanskrit in the present Chinese form, the most probable fact 
is, as maintained by another authority, that the translators 
extracted all these passages from the different Buddhist 
canonical books which they brought along for their mis- 
sionary purposes, and compiled them after the fashion of 
the Confucian Analects, beginning each chapter with the 
stereotyped "The Buddha said," which corresponds to the 
Confucian "The Master said." This was the most natural 
thing for the first Buddhist workers from India to do in the 
land of Confucianism. 

The sutra, besides being a collection of moral and religious 
sayings of the Buddha, is interesting to us at least in the 
following two points: (i) It throws some light on the 
development which Buddhism made in India from the 
Parinirv&na of Buddha down to the times of these two 
translators; and (2) it allows us to see what the first Buddhist 
propagandists thought best to introduce, as the most essen- 

3 


4 SERMONS BY A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

He was absorbed in Great Meditation,' sub- 
dued all evil ones, and in Deer Park^ caused to 
revolve the Wheel of Dharma, which was the 
Fourfold Truth,' and converted the five Bhik- 
shus,' Kaudinya, etc., inducing them to attain 
Enlightenment." 

Again,, there were other Bhikshus who im- 
plored the Buddha to remove their doubts 
which they had concerning his doctrine. The 
World-honored One illumined all their minds 
through his authoritative teachings. The Bhik- 

tial doctrines of their faith, among the people who had 
hitherto been educated mostly by the Confucians but partly 
by the Laotzeans. 

The first translators did not think it wise to present their 
doctrine systematically by writing a discourse or a lengthy 
treatise, as they were wont to do in their native country, 
nor did they think it advisable to reproduce an entire sutra 
in the language of their newly adopted country. On the 
other hand, they culled Buddha's short sayings and dialogues 
from various sutras, imitating the general style of the Con- 
fucian sacred book Lun Yu. They must have thought that 
Buddhism, which has so many voluminous canonical books 
and deeply metaphysical treatises, would be best promul- 
gated in China through an anthology, and not through an 
exact reproduction of the original texts. The present sutra 
is undoubtedly the result of these considerations, and 05 
this account it must be said to be well suited for popular 
reading. 

'Cf. "The Practice of Dhyana." (P. 146.) 
''"The Story of Deer Park" is told elsewhere. (P. 182.) 
'This is explained in the article entitled "The Wheel of 
the Good Law." (P. loi.) 

^Buddhist monks are called Bhikshus, literally "beggars." 
'What the Buddhists understand by Enlightenment is 
explained in the sermons, (^ee p. 132.) 


THE SUTRA OP FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS ^ 

shus, joining their hands and reverentially 
bowing, followed his august instructions. 

(i) The Buddha said: "Those who leave 
their parents, go out of the home, understand 
the mind, reach the source, and comprehend 
the immaterial, are called Qramana/ 

" Those who observe the two hundred and fifty 
precepts' of morality, who are pure and spot- 
less in their behavior, and who exert themselves 
for the attainment of the four fruits of saint- 
ship,' are called Arhats. 

,"The Arhat is able to fly through space and 
assume different forms; his life is eternal, and 
there are times when he causes heaven and earth 
to quake.* 

"Next is the An^glimin.' . At the end of his 
life, the spirit of the An^g^min ascends, to the 
nineteenth heaven and obtains Arhatship. 

" Next is the Skridagamin." The Skridagamin 

'Or Qramanera, from the root (ram, "to exert oneself,", 
"to make effort." 

'This is fully explained in the Vinaya texts in the Sacred 
Books of the East, Vols. XIII, XVII, XX. 

'The Arhats, the An4gamins, the SkridAgamins, the 
SrotS-pannas. These are explained below. 

*This and the following three passages seem to be a gloss, 
incorporated in the text later by a copyist. Arhat, accord- 
ing to the traditional Chinese interpretation , means "one 
who kills robbe;rs," that is, the robbers of passion and 
prejudice. 

"AnAgimin means "one who never returns." The nine- 
teenth heaven is called Akanishtha, the highest in the world 
of form {r-apaloka}. 

°Skrid4gS,min means "one who comes back." 


6 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

ascends to the heavens [after his death], comes 
back to the earth once more, and then attains 
Arhatship. 

" Next is the Srotadpanna.' The Srotadpanna 
dies seven times and is born seven times, when 
he finally attains Arhatship. 

"By the severance of the passions is meant 
.that like the limbs severed they are never again 
made use of." 

(2) The Buddha said: "The homeless gra- 
mana cuts off the passions, frees himself of 
attachments, understands the source of his own 
mind, penetrates the deepest doctrine of Buddha, 
and comprehends the Dharma which is immaterial. 
He has no prejudice in his heart, he has nothing 
to hanker after. He is not hampered by the 
thought of the Way, nor is he entangled in karma. 
No prejudice, no compulsion, no discipline, no 
enlightenment, and no going up through the 
grades, and yet in possession of all honors in 
itself, — this is called the Way." 

(3) The Buddha said: "Those who shaving 
their heads and faces become Qramanas and who 
receive instruction in the Way, should surrender 
all worldly possessions and be contented with 
whatever they obtain by begging.^ One meal a 
day and one lodging under a tree, and neither 
should be repeated. For what makes one stupid 
and irrational is attachments and the passions." 

'Srota^panna means "one who gets in the stream." 
'Cf. Luke, xii, 33 et seq. 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 7 

(4) The Buddha said: "There are ten things 
considered good by all beings, and ten things 
evil. What are they? Three of them depend 
upon the body, four upon the mouth, and three 
upon thought. 

"Three evil deeds depending upon the body 
are: killing, stealing, and committing adultery. 
The four depending upon the mouth are: slan- 
dering, cursing, lying, and flattery. The three 
depending upon thought are: envy, anger, and 
infatuation. All these things are against the 
Holy Way, and therefore they are evil. 

"When these evils are not done, there are ten 
good deeds." 

(5) The Buddha said: "If a man who has 
committed many a misdemeanor does not repent 
and cleanse his heart of the evil, retribution will 
come upon his person as sure as the streams run 
into the ocean which becomes ever deeper and 
wider. 

"If a man who has committed a misdemeanor 
come to the knowledge of it, reform himself, 
and practise goodness, the force of retribution 
will gradually exhaust itself as a disease gradu- 
ally loses its baneful influence when the patient 
perspires." 

(6) The Buddha said: "When an evil-doer, 
seeing you practise goodness, comes and mali- 
ciously insults you, you should patiently endure 
it and not feel angry with him, for the evil-doer 
is insulting himself by trying to insult you." 


8 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

(7) The Buddha said: "Once a man came 
unto me and denounced me on account of my 
observing the Way and practising great loving- 
kindness. But I. kept silent and did not answer 
him. The denunciation ceased. I then asked 
him, 'If you bring a present to your neighbor 
and he accepts it not, does the present come 
back to you?' The man replied, 'It will.' I 
said, 'You denounce me now, but as I accept it 
not, you must take the wrong deed back on 
your own person. It is like echo succeeding 
sound, it is like shadow following object; you 
never escape the effect of your own evil deeds. 
Be therefore mindful, and cease from doing evil.'" 

(8) The Buddha said: "Evil-doers who de- 
nounce the wise resemble a person who spits 
against the sky; the spittle will never reach the 
sky, but comes down on himself. Evil-doers 
again resemble a man who stirs the dust against 
the wind ; the dust is never raised without doing 
him injury. Thus, the wise will never be hurt, 
but the curse is sure to destroy the evil-doers 
themselves." 

(9) The Buddha said: "If you endeavor to 
embrace the Way through much learning, the 
Way will not be understood. If you observe 
the Way with simplicity of heart, great indeed 
is this Way." 

(10) The Buddha said: "Those who rejoice 
in seeing others observe the Way will obtain 
great blessing." A Qramana asked the Buddha, 


THE SUTRA OP FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 9 

"Would this blessing ever be destroyed?" The 
Buddha said, "It is like a lighted torch whose 
flame can be distributed to ever so many other 
torches which people may bring along; and 
therewith they will cook food and dispel dark- 
ness, while the original torch itself remains burn- 
ing ever the same It is even so with the bliss 
of the Way." 

(11) The Buddha said: "It is better to feed 
one good man than to feed one hundred bad men. 
It is better to feed one who observes the five 
precepts of Buddha than to feed one thousand 
good men. It is better to feed one Srota^panna 
than to feed ten thousands of those who observe 
the five precepts of Buddha. It is better to 
feed one Skrid4gS,min than to feed one million 
of SrotaS,pannas. It is better to feed one 
Anagimin than to feed ten millions of Skrida- 
gamins. It is better to feed one Arhat than to 
feed one hundred millions of Anigamins. It is 
better to feed one Pratyekabuddha than to feed 
one billion of Arhats. It is better to feed one of 
the Buddhas, either of the present, or of the 
past, or of the future, than to feed ten billions 
of Pratyekabuddhas. It is better to feed one 
who is above knowledge, onesidedness, discipline, 
and enlightenment than to feed one hundred 
billions of Buddhas of the past, present, or 
future."^ ^ 

'This seems to be a very sweeping assertion on the part 
of the Buddha, but the principle remains ever true. The 


10 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

(12) The Buddha said: "There are twenty- 
difficult things to attain [or to accomplish] in 
this world: (i) It is difficult for the poor to 
practise charity ; (2) It is difficult for the strong 
and rich to observe the Way;' (3) It is difficult 
to disregard life and go to certain death; (4) It 
is only a favored few that get acquainted with a 
Buddhist sutra; (5) It is by rare opportunity 
that a person is bom in the age of Buddha; 
(6) It is difficult to conquer the passions, to 
suppress selfish desires; (7) It is difficult not to 
hanker after that which is agreeable; (8) It is 
difficult not to get into a passion when slighted; 

(9) It is difficult not to abuse one's authority; 

(10) It is difficult to be even-minded and simple, 
hearted in all one's dealings with others; (11) 
It is difficult to be thorough in learning and 
exhaustive in investigation; (12) It is difficult 
to subdue selfish pride; (13) It is difficult not 
to feel contempt toward the unlearned; (14) It 
is difficult to be one in knowledge and practice; 
(15) It is difficult not to express an opinion about 
others;'' (16) It is by rare opportunity that one 

fundamental fact of the religious life is purity of heart. If 
there is a dark comer in your heart, all that you do is hypoc- 
risy. When the Emperor Wu of Liang saw Bodhidharma, he 
asked the saint, "I have built so many monasteries, I have 
converted so many souls, I have copied so many sacred 
sutras; now what does Your Holiness think my merit will 
be?" To this, Bodhidharma made a curt response, "No 
merit whatever.". 

'Cf. Matt, xix, 24. ^cf ]yiatt. vii, i, 2. 


THE SUTRA OP FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS II 

is introduced to a true spiritual teacher; (17) It 
is difficult to gain an insight into the nature of 
being and to practise the Way; (18) It is diffi- 
cult to follow the steps of a savior; (19) It is 
difficult to be always the master of oneself; 
(20) It is difficult to understand thoroughly the 
Ways of Buddha." 

(13) A monk asked the Buddha: "Under 
what conditions is it possible to come to the 
knowledge of the past and to understand the 
most supreme Way?" The Buddha said : "Those 
who are pure in heart and single in purpose 
are able to understand the most supreme Way. 
It is like polishing a mirror, which becomes bright 
when the dust is removed. Remove your pas- 
sions, and have no hankering, and the past will 
be revealed unto you." 

(14) A monk asked the Buddha: "What is 
good, and what is great?" The Buddha an- 
swered: "Good is to practise the Way and to 
follow the truth. Great is the heart that is in 
accord with the Way." 

(15) A monk asked the Buddha: "What is 
most powerful, and what is most illuminat- 
ing?" The Buddha said: "Meekness is most 
powerful, for it harbors no evil thoughts, and, 
moreover, it is restful and full of strength. 
As it is free from evils, it is sure to be honored 
by all.' 

"The most illuminating is a mind which is 
•Matt. V, 5. 


12 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

thoroughly cleansed of dirt, and which, remain- 
ing pure, retains no blemishes. From the time 
when there was yet no heaven and earth till the 
present day, there is nothing in the ten quarters 
which is not seen, or known, or heard by such a 
mind, for it has gained all-knowledge, and for 
that reason it is called 'illuminating.'" 

(i6) The Buddha said: "Those who have 
passions are never able to perceive the Way; 
for it is like stirring up clear water with hands; 
people may come there wishing to find a reflec- 
tion of their faces, which, however, they will 
never see. A mind troubled and vexed with the 
passions is impure, and on that account it never 
sees the Way. O monks, do away with passions. 
When the dirt of passion is removed the Way 
will manifest itself." 

(17) The Buddha said: "Seeing the Way is 
like going into a dark room with a torch; the 
darkness instantly departs, while the light alone 
remains. When the Way is attained and the 
truth is seen, ignorance vanishes and enlighten- 
ment abides forever." 

(18) The Buddha said: "My doctrine is to 
think the thought that is unthinkable, to prac- 
tise the deed that is not-doing, to speak the 
speech that is inexpressible, and to be trained in 
the discipline that is beyond discipline. Those 
who understand this are near, those who are con- 
fused are far. The Way is beyond words and 
expressions, is bound by nothing earthly. Lose 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 13 

sight of it to an inch, or miss it for a moment, 
and we are away from it forevermore." 

(19) The Buddha said: "Look up to heaven 
and down on earth, and they will remind you 
of their impermanency. Look about the world, 
and it will remind you of its impermanency. 
But when you gain spiritual enlightenment, you 
shall then find wisdom. The knowledge thus 
attained leads you anon to the Way." 

(20) The Buddha said: "You should think 
of the four elements' of which the body is com- 
posed. Each of them has its own name, and 
there is no such thing there known as ego. As 
there is really no ego, it is like unto a mirage.'" 

(21) The Buddha said: "Moved by their 
selfish desires, people seek after fame and glory. 
But when they have acquired it, they are already 
stricken in years. If you hanker after worldly 
fame and practise not the Way, your labors are 
wrongfully applied and your energy is wasted. 
It is like unto burning an incense stick. How- 
ever much its pleasing odor be admired, the fire 
that consumes is steadily burning up the stick." 

(22) The Buddha said: "People cleave to 
their worldly possessions and selfish passions so 

'Earth, water, fire, and air. 
^A Japanese poet sings: 

"When pulled together 

And bound, there stands 

A hut well thatched : 

But take it apart, 

And we have the wilderness eternal." 


14 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

blindly as to sacrifice their own lives for them. 
They are like a child who tries to eat a little 
honey smeared on the edge of a knife. The 
amotmt is by no means sufficient to appease his 
appetite, but he runs the risk of wounding his 
tongue." 

(23) The Buddha said: "Men are tied up to 
their families and possessions more helplessly 
than in a prison. There is an occasion for the 
prisoner to be released, but householders enter- 
tain no desire to be relieved from the ties of 
family. When a man's passion is aroused noth- 
ing prevents him from ruining himself. Even 
into the maws of a tiger will he jump. Those 
who are thus drowned in the filth of passion are 
called the ignorant. Those who are able to 
overcome it are saintly Arhats." 

(24) The Buddha said : " There is nothing like 
lust. Lust may be said to be the most powerful 
passion. Fortunately, we have but one thing 
which is more powerful. If the thirst for truth 
were weaker than passion, how many of us in the 
world would be able to follow the way of right- 
eousness?" 

(25) The Buddha said: "Men who are 
addicted to the passions are like the torch- 
carrier running against the wind; his hands are 
sure to be burned." 

(26) The Lord of Heaven offered a beautiful 
fairy to the Buddha, desiring to tempt him to the 
evil path. But the Buddha said, "Be gone. 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 1 5 

What use have I for the leather bag filled with 
filth which you have brought to me?" Then, 
the god reverently bowed and asked the Buddha 
about the essence of the Way, in which having 
been instructed by the Buddha, it is said, he 
attained the SrotaS,panna-fruit. 

(27) The Buddha said: "Those who are fol- 
lowing the Way should behave like a piece of 
timber which is drifting along a stream. If the 
log is neither held by the banks, nor seized by 
men, nor obstructed by the gods, nor kept in 
the whirlpool, nor itself goes to decay, I assure 
you that this log will finally reach the ocean. 
If monks walking on the Way are neither tempted 
by the passions, nor led astray by some evil 
influences, but steadily pursue their course for 
Nirvana, I assure you that these monks will 
finally attain enlightenment." 

(28) The Buddha said: "Rely not upon your 
own will. Your own will is not trustworthy. 
Guard yourselves against sensualism, for it 
surely leads to the path of evil. Your own will 
becomes trustworthy only when you have 
attained Arhatship." 

(29) The Buddha said : "O monks, you should 
not see women.' [If you should have to see 
them], refrain from talking to them. [If you 
should have to talk], you sTiould reflect in a right 
spirit: 'I am now a homeless mendicant. In 
the world of sin, I must behave myself like unto 

'Matt. V, 28. 


l6 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

the lotus flower whose purity is not defiled by 
the mud. Old ones I will treat as my mother; 
elderly ones as elder sisters; younger ones as 
younger sisters; and little ones as daughters.' 
And in all this you should harbor no evil thoughts, 
but think of salvation." 

(30) The Buddha said: "Those who walk in 
the Way should avoid sensualism as those who 
carry hay would avoid coming near the fire." 

(31) The Buddha said: "There was once a 
man who, being in despair over his inability to 
control his passions, wished to mutilate himself.' 
The Buddha said to him: 'Better destroy your 
own evil thoughts than do harm to your own 
person. The mind is lord. When the lord him- 
self is calmed the servants will of themselves be 
yielding. If your mind is not cleansed of evil 
passions, what avails it to mutilate yourself?'" 
Thereupon, the Buddha recited the gatha, 

"Passions grow from the will, 
The will grows from thought and imagination : 
When both are calmed, 
There is neither sensualism nor transmigration." 

The Buddha said, this g^th^ was taught before 
by K^shyapabuddha. 

(32) The Buddha said: "From the passions 
arise worry, and from worry arises fear. Away 
with the passions, and no fear, no worry." 

(33) The Buddha said: "Those who follow 
'Matt. V, 29 and 30, 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 1 7 

the Way are like unto warriors who fight single- 
handed with a multitude of foes. They may all 
go out of the fort in full armor; but among them 
are some who are faint-hearted, and some who 
go halfway and beat a retreat, and some who are 
killed in the affray, and some who come home 
victorious. O monks, if you desire to attain 
enlightenment, you should steadily walk in your 
Way, with a resolute heart, with courage, and 
should be fearless in whatever environment you 
may happen to be, and destroy every evil influ- 
ence that you may come across; for thus you 
shall reach the goal." 

(34) One night a monk was reciting a sutra 
bequeathed by K^shyapabuddha. His tone was 
so mournful, and his voice so fainting, as if he 
were going out of existence. The Buddha asked 
the monk, "What was your occupation before 
you became a homeless monk?" Said the monk, 
"I was very fond of playing the guitar." The 
Buddha said, "How did you find it when the 
strings were too loose?" Said the monk, "No 
sound is possible." "How when the strings 
were too tight?" "They crack." "How when 
they were neither too tight nor too loose?" 
"Every note sounds in its proper tone." The 
Buddha then said to the monk, "Religious disci- 
pline is also like unto playing the guitar. When 
the mind is properly adjusted and quietly applied, 
the Way is attainable; but when you are too 
fervently bent on it, your body grows tired ; and 


1 8 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

when your body is tired, your spirit becomes 
weary; when your spirit is weary, your discipline 
will relax; and with the relaxation of discipline 
there follows many an evil. Therefore, be cahn 
and pure, and the Way will be gained." 

(35) The Buddha said: "When a man makes 
utensils out of a metal which has been thor- 
oughly cleansed of dross, the utensils will be 
excellent. You monks, who wish to follow the 
Way, make your own hearts clean from the dirt 
of evil passion, and your conduct will be unim- 
peachable." 

(36) The Buddha said: "Even if one escapes 
from the evil creations, it is one's rare fortune 
to be bom as a human being. Even if one be 
bom as human, it is' one's rare fortune to be 
bom as a man and not a woman.' Even if 
one be born a man, it is one's rare fortune to be 
perfect in all the six senses. Even if he be per- 
fect in all the six senses, it is his rare fortune to 
be bom in the middle kingdom. Even if he be 
bom in the middle kingdom, it is his rare fortune 
to be born in the time of a Buddha. Even if he 
be bom in the time of a Buddha, it is his rare 
fortune to .see the enlightened. Even if he be 
able to see the enlightened, it is his rare fortune 
to have his heart awakened in faith. Even if 
he have faith, it is his rare fortune to awaken 
the heart of intelligence. Even if he awakens 
the heart of intelligence, it is his rare fortune to 

»Cf. I Cor. xi, 3, 7, 8, 9, " 


THE SUTRA OF FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 19 

realize a spiritual state which is above discipline 
and attainment." 

(37) The Buddha said: "O children of Bud- 
dha! You are away from me ever so many- 
thousand miles, but if you remember and think 
of my precepts, you shall surely gain the fruit 
of enlightenment. You may, standing by my 
side, see me alway, but if you observe not my 
precepts, you shall never gain enlightenment." 

(38) The Buddha asked a monk, "How do 
you measure the length of a man's life?" The 
monk answered, "By days." The Buddha said, 
"You do not understand the Way." 

The Buddha asked another monk, "How do 
you measure the length of a man's life?" The 
monk answered, " By the time that passes during 
a meal." The Buddha said, "You do not under- 
stand the way." 

The Buddha asked a third monk, "How do 
you measure the length of a man's life?" The 
monk answered, "By the breath." The Buddha 
said, "Very well, you know the Way." 

(39) The Buddha said, "Those who study the 
doctrine of the Buddhas will do well to beUeve 
and observe all that is taught by them. It is 
like unto honey; it is sweet within, it is sweet 
without, it is sweet throughout; so is the Bud- 
dhas' teaching." 

(40) The Buddha said : " O monks, you must 
not walk on the Way as the ox that is attached 
to the wheel. His body moves, but his heart is 


20 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

not willing. But when your hearts are in accord 
with the Way, there is no need of troubling 
yourselves about your outward demeanor." 

(41) The Buddha said: "Those who practise 
the Way might well follow the example of an ox 
that marches through the deep mire carrying a 
heavy load. He is tired, but his steady gaze, 
looking forward, will never relax until he come 
out of the mire, and it is only then that he takes 
a respite. O monks, remember that passions 
and sins are more than the filthy mire, and that 
you can escape misery only by earnestly and 
steadily thinking of the Way." 

(42) The Buddha said: "I consider the dig- 
nities of kings and lords as a particle of dust 
that floats in the sunbeam. I consider the 
treasure of precious metals and stones as bricks 
and pebbles. I consider the gaudy dress of 
silks and brocades as a worn-out rag. I consider 
this universe as small as the holila (?) fruit. I 
consider the lake of Anavatapta as a drop of 
oil with which one smears the feet. I consider 
the various methods of salvation taught by the 
Buddhas as a treasure created by the imagination. 
I consider the transcendental doctrine of Bud- 
dhism as precious metal or priceless fabric seen 
in a dream. I consider the teaching of Buddhas 
as a flower before my eyes. I consider the prac- 
tice of Dhy^na as a pillar supporting the Mount 
Stmieru. I consider Nirvana as awakening from 
a day dream or nightmare. I consider the strug- 


THE SUTRA OP FORTY-TWO CHAPTERS 21 

gle between heterodox and orthodox as the 
antics of the six [mythical] dragons. I consider 
the doctrine of sameness as the absolute ground 
of reality. I consider all the religious works 
done for universal salvation as like the plants 
in the four seasons." 


SERMONS 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM' 

AMONG the many critical opinions which 
are passed upon Buddhism by Christian 
or Western scholars, there are two which stand 
out most conspicuously and most persistently. 
One of them declares that Buddhism is a religion 
which denies the existence of the soul, and the 
other that it is atheistic or at best pantheistic, 
which latter term implies what is practically 
tantamount to the rejection of a God, that is, 
a personal God as believed in by the Christians. 
The object of this discourse is to see to what 
extent the second criticism is, if at all, justifiable. 
In other words, I propose here to elucidate the 
Buddhist conception of God. 

At the outset, let me state that Buddhism is 
not atheistic as the term is ordinarily under- 
stood. It has certainly a God, the highest 
reality and truth, through which and in which 
this universe exists. However, the followers of 
Buddhism usually avoid the term God, for it 
savors so much of Christianity, whose spirit is 

'It may be interesting for our readers to read in connec- 
tion with this article Dr. Paul Carus's Buddhist story entitled 
Amitdbha. 

25 


26 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOf 

not always exactly in accord with the Buddhist 
interpretation of religious experience. Again, 
Buddhism is not pantheistic in the sense that it 
identifies the universe with God. On the other 
hand, the Buddhist God is absolute and tran- 
scendent; this world, being merely its manifes- 
tation, is necessarily fragmental and imperfect. 
To define more exactly the Buddhist notion of 
the highest being, it may be convenient to bor- 
row the term very happily coined by" a modem 
German scholar, " panentheism, " according to 
which God is -n-av koL Iv (all and one) and more 
than the totality of existence. 

One of the most fundamental beliefs of Bud- 
dhism is that all the multitudinous and multi- 
farious phenomena in the universe start from, 
and have their being in, one reality which itself 
has "no fixed abode," being above spatial and 
temporal limitations. However different and 
separate and irreducible things may appear to 
the senses, the most profound law of the human 
mind declares that they are all one in their 
hidden nature. In this world of relativity, or 
ndndtva as Buddhists call it, subject and object, 
thought and nature, are separate and distinct, 
and as far as our sense-experience goes, there is 
an impassable chasm between the two which no 
amount of philosophizing can bridge. But the 
very constitution of the mind demands a unify- 
ing principle which is an indispensable hypothesis 
for our conception of phenomenality ; and this 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM 27 

hypothesis is called "the gate of sameness," 
samatd, in contradistinction to "the gate of 
difference," ndndtva; and Buddhism declares 
that no philosophy or religion is satisfactory 
which does not recognize these two gates. In 
some measure the "gate of sameness" may be 
considered to correspond to "God" and the 
"gate of difference" to the world of individual 
existence. 

Now, the question is, "How does Buddhism 
conceive the relation between these two entrances 
to the abode of Supreme Knowledge (sambodhi) ? " 
And the answer to this decides the Buddhist 
attitude towards pantheism, theism, atheism, and 
what not. 

To state it more comprehensively. Buddhism 
recognizes the coexistence and identity of the 
two principles, sameness and difference. Things 
are many and yet one; they are one and yet 
many. I am not thou, and thou art not I ; and 
yet we are all one in essence. When one slays 
another, there is an actor, an act, and a sufferer, 
all distinct and separate; and yet 

"If the red slayer think he slays, 
Or if the slain think he is slain, 
They know not well the subtle ways 
I keep, and pass, and turn again." 

Buddhism, therefore, says that while we have 
to acknowledge the world of particulars in which 
individuality predominates, we must not forget 
that looking through the gate of sameness all 


28 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

distinctions and contradictions vanish in a higher 
principle of unity. A Japanese poet thus sings: 

"Rain and hail and ice and snow, 
Neither like the other. So! 
When they melt, however, lo, 
See one stream of water flow! " 

Intellectually, the coexistence of the two 
mutually excluding thoughts is impossible, for 
the proposition, "Mine are not thine," cannot 
be made at the same time the proposition, 
"Mine are thine." But here Buddhism is speak- 
ing of our inmost religious experience, which 
deals directly with facts and not with their more 
or less distorted intellectual reflections. It is, 
therefore, really idle to say that Buddhism is 
pantheistic or atheistic or nihilistic. Buddh ism 
is not a,^hilosophical system, t houg h it is the 
most rational and intellectual religion^in the 
world. What It proposes is to make_ clear facts 
of the deepest spiritual life and to formulate a 
doctrine which leads its followers to the path of 
inward experience. 

Thus, according to the proclamation of an 
enlightened mind, God or the principle of same- 
ness is not transcendent, but immanent in the 
universe, and we sentient beings are manifesting 
the divine glory just as much as the lilies of the 
field. A God who, keeping aloof from his crea- 
tions, sends down his words of command through 
specially favored personages, is rejected by 
Buddhists as against the constitution of human 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM 29 

reason. God must be in us, who are made in 
his Ukeness. We cannot presume the duality of 
God and the world. Religion is riot to go to 
God by forsaking the world, but to find him 
in it. Our faith " is to believe in our essential 
oneness with him, and not in our sensual 
separateness. "God in us and we in him," 
must be made the most fundamental faith of all 
religion. 

We must not, however, suppose that God is 
no more than the sum-total of individual exist- 
ences. God exists even when all creations have 
been destroyed and reduced to a state of chaotic 
barrenness. God exists eternally, and he will 
create another universe out of the ruins of this 
one. To our limited intelligence there may be 
a beginning and an end of the worlds, but as 
God surveys them, being and becoming are one 
selfsame process. To him nothing changes, or, 
to state it rather paradoxically, he sees no change 
whatever in all the changes we have around us; 
all things are absolutely quiet in their eternal 
cycle of birth and death, growth and decay, 
combination and disintegration. This universe 
cannot exist outside of God, but God is more 
than the totality of individual existences; God 
is here as well as there, God is not only this but 
also that. As far as he is manifested in nature 
and mind, they glorify him, and we can have a 
gUmpse of his image and feel, however imperfectly, 
his inner Hfe. But it will be a grievous error. 


30 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

let US repeat, to think that he has exhausted his 
being in the manifestation of this universe, that 
he is absolutely identical with his creations, 
and that with the annihilation of the world he 
vanishes into eternal emptiness. 

There is a favorite saying in Buddhism which 
declares that "sameness without difference is 
sameness wrongly conceived, while difference 
without sameness is difference wrongly con- 
ceived"; to express this in Christian terms, "God 
not in the world is a false God, and the world 
not in God is unreality." All things return to 
one, and one operates in all things ; many in one 
and one in many; this is the Buddhist concep- 
tion of God and the world. Billows and waves 
and ripples, all Surging, "swelling, and ebbing, 
and yet are they not so many 'different motions 
of the eternally selfsame body bF~water? The 
moon is serenely shining up in the sky, and she 
is alone in all the heavens and on the entire 
earth; but when she mirrors herself in the bril- 
liant whiteness of the evening dews which appear 
like glittering pearls broadcast upon the earth 
from the hand of a fairy, — how wondrously 
numerous her images! And is not every one of 
them complete in its own fashion? This is the 
way in which an enlightened mind contemplates 
God and the world. 

God is immanent in the world and not outside 
of it; therefore, when we comprehend the secret 
of the "little flower in the crannied wall," we 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM 3J 

-know the reason of this universe. Reason is the 
inner Ufe of all beings, it is the subjectivity of 
existence, it is the quickening spirit of all creation, 
it is a realization in our finite minds of infinite 
divinity. When we know ourselyes,_jwe know 
heaven and earth~""we Eiow God, we_know every- 
thing and aiiything. We know his presence 
even in the most insignificant flower in the field 
which is trampled under foot by men and beasts 
carelessly and pitilessly, to say nothing about 
the starry heavens with their grandeur which is 
replete with suggestions, or about the huge mass 
of inert matter on which mountains rise, oceans 
roar, and sentient beings walk. When we come 
to realize this mysterious presence of the highest 
reason in all things, we are struck with the fact 
and there arise mingled feelings of awe, admira- 
tion, and helplessness, which latter is strangely 
tinged with a sense of self -exaltation. We are 
awe-stricken because it is beyond our human 
intelligence to grasp thoroughly the scheme of 
God. We admire it because of the wonderful 
beauty and harmony which are traceable in every 
step of his, though our imperfect minds are some- 
times set against almost insurmountable difficul- 
ties in the reconciliation of contraries and oppo- 
sites. We feel helpless because our fragmentary 
consciousness is unable to review the entire range 
of divine operation and thus to know the why 
of all these things, though the recognition of 
divinity in us Ufts us above the wearisome con- 


32 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

demnation piled upon humanity by some moral- 
ists and religionists. 

* * * 

Having thus expounded the Buddhist concep- 
tion of God and his relation to us, I wish to pro- 
ceed to explain some terms which are generally 
used by Buddhists to designate the highest being 
in its various modes and phases. 

As I mentioned before, Buddhists do not make 
use of the term God, which characteristically 
belongs to Christian terminology. An equivalent 
most commonly used is DharmaMya, which word 
has been explained in one of the sermons herein 
collected, and it will not be necessary to enter 
again upon the discussion of its signification. 
Let us only see what other equivalents have been 
adopted. 

When the DharmaMya is most concretely 
conceived it becomes the Buddha, or Tathagata, 
or Vairochana, or Amitabha. Buddha means 
"the enlightened," and this may be understood 
to correspond to "God is wisdom." Vairochana 
is "coming from the sun," and Amitabha, 
"infinite light," which reminds us of the Chris- 
tian notion, "God is light." As to the correct 
meaning of Tathagata, Buddhists do not give 
any definite and satisfactory explanation, and 
it is usually considered to be the combination of 
toiM="thus" and gato="gone," but it is diffi- 
cult to find out how "Thus Gone" came to be 
an appellation of the supreme being. There are 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM 33 

some scholars, however, who understand gata in 
the sense of "being in" or "situated in." If 
this be correct, Tath^gata meaning "being thus," 
or "being such," can be interpreted in the same 
sense as Tath^t^ or Bh-dtatath^t^ or Tattva as 
explained below. But in this case Tathagata 
will lose its personification and become a meta- 
physical term like the others, though it has been 
so persistently used by Buddhists in connection 
with the historical Buddha that it always awakens 
in their minds something more concrete and 
personal than a mere ontological abstraction. 

Buddhism is the most speculative of all the 
existing religions in the world and abounds with 
many highly abstract terms which may sound 
empty to ordinary minds. Among them we have 
such words as Tath^t^ (or Tath^tva), Tattva, 
BhiitatathS,ta, Bhiitakoti, Q<inyatd, Alakshitam, 
Nirvana, etc. These are all philosophical terms 
for Dharmak^ya. To explain: Tathat^ or 
tathatva or tattva is "suchness," or "being 
such," and Buddhist scholars assert that, strictly 
speaking, these terms alone rightly designate 
the nature of the highest reality. When we 
speak of its absolute transcendentality, people 
are liable to take it for an empty nothing; while 
if we state that it is eternally true and real, they 
may consider it something concrete and particular. 
To avoid both extremes, or rather to synthesize 
them, the term "Suchness" has been coined; 
but in reality all human efforts are altogether 


34 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

insufficient to express the true nature of the 
ultimate. Says Agvaghosha, "The Immortal 
Essence is absolutely beyond intellectual demon- 
strability, but we as rational beings need some 
words to express ourselves, and for that purpose 
the term ' suchness ' has been selected, disposing 
of all others." The words in which Goethe makes 
Faust utter his feeling concerning God may here 
be quoted also as corroborating Agvaghosha's 
conception of Suchness : 

"Who dare express Him? 
And who profess Him, 
Saying: I believe in Him! 
Who, feehng, seeing. 
Deny this being, 
Saying: I beUeve Him not! 
The All-enfolding, 
The All-upholding, 
Folds and upholds He not 
Thee, me. Himself? 

* * * 

* * * 

Vast as it is, fill with that force thy heart, 

And when thou in the feeling wholly blessed art, 

Call it, then, what thou wilt, — 

Call it Bliss! Heart! Love! God! 

I have no name to give it! 

Feeling is all in all: 

The name is sound and smoke. 

Obscuring Heaven's clear glow." 

When even this Tathdtva is found inadequate 
for certain purposes, Buddhists add BMta= 
reality thereto and coin the word Bhiltatathata, 
which means "that which really exists as such." 
Suchness, being an abstract term, may breed 


THE GOD-CONCEPTION OF BUDDHISM 35 

some misconception, when the term is used 
alone, on the part of the uninitiated. To avoid 
this, "reaHty" has been prefixed, which purposes 
to make it clear that the ultimate reason is not 
an abstraction, not a mere subjective creation, 
but a real objective (or rather transcendental) 
existence. Bhiitakoti serves the same end, as 
it means the "highest point of reality," or "the 
real end of things." 

Alakshitam, Q^nyata, and Nirv§,nam express 
the negative phase of the Dharmakiya. When 
affirmation alone is not sufficient, we frequently 
resort to the negative way of defining things, 
showing thereby at least what they are not. 
The human mind cannot have a positively 
adequate conception of things which are beyond 
the realm of conditionality, for it is bound up 
within spatial and temporal relations; and in 
order to give expression to these non-conditional 
objects, we use the negative method and say 
that they are not such and such. In innumerable 
ways, this negation is as effective in defining 
things as affirmation. 

When Buddhists assert that the Dharmakaya 
is giinya = empty, or alakshana = devoid of par- 
ticular marks, or nirvana = emancipating, or 
nAgrava = faultless, they are following the inevi- 
table course of mentation. All these and some 
other negative terms unfortunately have caused 
a great deal of misunderstanding on the part of 
unsympathetic critics who have either forgotten 


36 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

or ignored the peculiar proclivity of human reason 
to onesidedness and exclusiveness. 

Lastly, ParamS.rtha and Satya are the terms 
used to designate the epistemological phase of 
the DharmaMya. Param^rtha is the first or 
highest reason, and Satya is truth or that which 
truly is. And for the psychological aspect of the 
DharmaMya, or as it is manifested in the human 
consciousness, we have Bodhi or Hridaya. Bodhi 
is the divine wisdom incarnated in our limited 
intelligence, or the divine love as reflected in our 
human sympathy and compassion. Hridaya is 
the inner life of existence which prompts and 
quickens us to do the will of the DharmaMya, 
and which is awakened to its full dignity and 
glory when intelligence passes over the limits of 
relativity. The reason why we are able to have 
an insight into the nature of the ultimate being 
and to recognize the truth that sameness and 
difference are co-existent and really identical, is 
because our Bodhi or Hridaya is essentially one 
with the Dharmakaya. When the Bodhi comes 
to know itself, it also knows the inner being of 
Dharmakaya, however fragmentary the knowledge 
be, and we lie blissfully at rest in the bosom of 
eternal motherliness. 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 

THERE are two avenues leading to the 
realization of the Buddhist life; one may 
be called positive and the other negative. They 
are complementary and mutually supporting. 
They are like the two sides of a shield, the two 
wings of a bird, or the two wheels of a cart. 
When one is asserted, the other necessarily 
follows as a logical consequence. What are 
they? The negative phase of Buddhism I may 
call the doctrine of the non-ego and the positive 
phase the doctrine of Dharmak§,ya (which latter 
may be considered to correspond to the Christian 
conception of God, though not exactly, as 
explained later) . 

Let me first expound the doctrine of the 
non-ego. Non-ego may not be a very appro- 
priate term to express the Buddhist conception 
of An^tman, but what I mean by this will become 
clearer, I hope, as I proceed. The Sanskrit term, 
Atman, which is generally translated by "ego," 
"self," "soul," or "individuality," is rather 
comprehensive and is used by different philo- 
sophical schools in different senses. Buddhists 
understand by Atman that something which, 

37 


38 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

lurking behind all our mental experiences, directs 
them as it pleases, somehow after the fashion 
of an organist striking the notes as his whim or 
sentiment moves, or like a show-performer who 
makes his marionettes dance up and down 
according to his good pleasure. This strange 
something which is popularly supposed to be a 
concrete individual existence abiding somewhere 
within the body, and which is known by the 
masses as the ego or soul forming the central 
part of our existence, is denied by Buddhists as 
a superstitious belief, which has no foundation 
in reality. And this denial constitutes the 
negative side of Buddhism. 

The absolute denial by Buddhism of the 
existence of the ego-soul may be somewhat 
startling to our Christian audience. They have 
been accustomed to such expressions as "the 
resurrection of the soul," "the immortality of 
the soul," "the redemption of the soul," "the 
reality of individuality," and so forth. Besides, 
we use the term "soul," or "ego," so constantly 
in our common parlance, taking the notion as the 
most positive fact, which does not allow of any 
doubt or refutation whatever. Our thoughts 
have thus become saturated, as it were, with the 
ego-conception; and when we see some one 
attempting to prove the phantasmagorial char- 
acter of the ego or soul, we are unconsciously 
and unrestrainingjy inclined to ridicule him. 
But let us stop for a moment and reflect seriously 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 39 

whether there is really such a thing as soul or 
self. Are we not deceiving ourselves when we 
condemn those who refuse to believe in the reality 
of self as agnostics, atheists, blasphemers, and 
charge them as immoral and faithless? Is not 
our own deception so fundamental and thorough- 
going as to put ourselves in a most puzzHng 
position, difficult to extricate from when our 
cherished notion is brought out into the daylight 
and mercilessly examined by the tribunal of most 
advanced thoughts? Let us see how it is. 

The first question I wish to ask is: "What 
do we understand by the soul or ego?" For 
instance, when we speak of the immortality of 
the soul, what mental image do we have about 
the soul? Do we not think that there is some- 
thing, possibly within the body, as it cannot be 
abiding outside of us, which is so subtle and 
ethereal as to elude our gross senses, but which 
is a sort of concrete individual existence not 
belonging to any part of the body, and which 
departs from the latter when it breathes its last 
and either ascends to Heaven or goes into Hell, 
whereby this mythical entity receives its due 
and last judgment? As to the manner of its 
ascent or descent after the expiration of its 
earthly life, we are entirely ignorant, for no soul 
has ever come down among us to tell its unique 
experience, its flight through the air. It may be 
conceived that the soul performs this miraculous 
deed after the fashion of the Egyptian Ba, which 


40 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

is pictured commonly with two wings, earthly 
and material. Does such a ghostly being really 
reside within us? The very idea seems ridiculous. 

We wanted to make the soul as immaterial 
as possible, but we have only succeeded in making 
it as material as any body which we have around 
us. For, however ethereal and astral the soul 
may be conceived, it cannot be anything but 
material, as long as it is concrete and individual. 
And for this reason I can declare that those self- 
advertising spiritualists are no more nor less than 
crass materialists, — the designation they wanted 
so much to hurl upon others. 

Next, let us search in our own minds whether 
there abides such a thing as the self, to which 
we are so fatally attached. Is the will my self? 
Is intelligence my self? Are my ideas my self? 
Is consciousness my self? Are my ntmierous 
desires my self? My instincts? my judgment? 
my imagination? my experience? They are all 
my self in a sense, to be sure, but are they of 
such nature as to be thoroughly simple, constant, 
self-willing, and permanent, as we imagine the 
soul to be? Consciousness seems to be so, but 
are there not many occasions in our mental life 
when consciousness is altogether gone? And, 
again, are there not many cases of double or 
triple personality? In these cases, which con- 
sciousness shall I have to call my own real, 
permanent self or soul, which goes after my death 
to some unknown region? And, again, every one 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 4I 

of US is acquainted with the fact that when I 
was a child I had a child-consciousness, that when 
I was a young man, I had a youth-consciousness, 
and that when I have grown to full manhood, 
I have a man-consciousness, and that when I am 
an old man, I shall have an old-man conscious- 
ness. My personality is thus constantly chang- 
ing, in no case being the same. Which of these 
consciousnesses shall I call my real and true ego 
or soul and wish its immortality? 

Of course, we have to admit that there is a 
unity of consciousfiess in our mental activities. 
But how fragile and inconstant is this so-called 
unity! This is so, not only in pathological cases, 
but in our normal condition. When I have an 
idea, I am the idea; when I have a desire, I 
am the desire; when I will, I am the will; for 
it is not warranted by experience to say that I 
have such and such thoughts or desires or im- 
pulses. But I am those thoughts or desires or 
impulses. I am constantly shifting from one 
thing to another, now a desire, now an idea, and 
so forth. However hard you may endeavor to 
catch this sort of "Wandering Jew," you will find 
it so slippery, so evasive, so inconstant, and finally 
you have to give it up as wasting labor. 

A learned scholar was once very much troubled 
with the problem of the soul. He utterly lost 
peace of mind, and spent many years in agony 
and vexation, when at last he was informed of 
the news of the arrival of a saintly Buddhist 


42 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

monk in his land. He hastened to the monas- 
tery where the monk was settled in his temporary 
sojourn, and most piteously implored him to be 
instructed in spiritual discourse. The monk was, 
however, apparently so absorbed in his contem- 
plation that he did not even turn his head to 
acknowledge a stranger. The scholar was not 
disappointed, however, and it is said that he 
stood at the same spot for a period of seven days 
and nights. Finally, he drew a sword which he 
carried in the belt as was the fashion of the time, 
and cut off his own left arm, which he reveren- 
tially presented to the inscrutable mystic, saying : 
"This is a token of my sincere desire to be 
instructed in your religion. I have been search- 
ing for my soul for so many years, and I am 
indescribably vexed in my spirit. Please be 
gracious enough to pacify my soul." The Bud- 
dhist monk then slowly turned toward the 
supplicant and said, "Where is your soul? Bring 
it to me, and I will have it pacified." The 
scholar said, "The very trouble is that I cannot 
find it." The monk exclaimed, "Pacified is 
your soul!" and it happened that upon hearing 
this a sort of spiritual flashlight went across the 
mind of the scholar. 

A favorite parable used by Buddhists to illus- 
trate the unreality of soul or self (I take these 
two meaning the same thing) , is that of the house. 
The house is composed of the roof, walls, posts, 
floor, windows, and so forth. Now, take each 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 43 

one of these apart, and we have no such thing 
as a house, which appeared to have a permanent 
actuality awhile ago. The house did not have 
any independent existence outside the material 
whose combination only in a certain form makes 
it possible. From the beginning there was no 
house-soul or house-ego, which willed according 
to its own will to manifest itself in such and such 
way by combining the roofs, walls, et cetera. 
The house came into existence only after all 
these component parts were brought together. 
If the house-soul insisted that "I am a thing 
by itself, distinct from any of you, members of 
my being, and therefore I shall abide here forever 
even when you, component parts, are disorganized. 
I will go up to heaven and enjoy my reward there, 
for I have sheltered so many worthy people 
under my roof," this soul would be the most appro- 
priate object of laughter and derision. But are 
we not standing in a similar situation when we 
speak of our eternal self dwelling within us and 
departing after death in its heavenward course? 
* * * 

So far the argument has been theoretical. 
-Let me see the practical, ethical consequence of 
the ego-soul hypothesis. I find it producing 
most pernicious effects on our daily life, for the 
assertion of self-will, which is the root of all evil, 
is the logical, inevitable conclusion of the belief 
in the existence of a real ego-soul. But most 
people seem not to be aware of this fact. They 


44 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

complain so much of the weakness of the flesh, 
or the worldly inclinations of the "old man," 
but they do not endeavor to go to the bottom 
of the matter and to find there the cause of all 
spiritual vexations. When the cause is discov- 
ered the remedy is at hand. Let us ask, there- 
fore : ' ' What IS the flesh ? Who is the ' old man ' ? 
Why does the flesh eternally interfere with the 
aspirations and doings of the spirit? Why is 
the flesh so meddlesome? Why has the old man 
an evil eye on the new man?" When these 
spirit-harassing questions are thoroughly inves- 
tigated, we find that the arrogance of the flesh 
is based on belief in the ultimate reality of the 
ego-soul, that the impertinence of the "old man" 
comes from the secret thought that the self is 
real and abiding. "Crucify him," therefore, 
says Buddhism, "as the first work in your 
religious discipline; destroy this chimerical, illu- 
sory notion of self; get convinced of the truth 
that there is no such creature dwelling in the 
coziest corner of our minds; free yourselves from 
the yoke of the ego-soul which exists not; and 
you will see how vexatious and spirit-harrowing 
it was to be confined within the self-made, self- 
imposed prison. You will see again how free 
and unhampered your life is in the ego-less 
atmosphere where we all forget the limitations 
of individualism and participate in the feeling 
of universal brotherhood." The so-called "I" 
is possible only when it is thought of in connection 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 45 

with its fellow-selves. Indeed, this self and 
other selves are one in each other, I in you and 
you in me; and this sense of universal oneness 
breaks most effectually the barrier of egoism and 
glorifies the significance of individual existences. 
When we realize this exalted spirituality, we can 
truly say with the Gospel of John that "all 
mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am 
glorified in them." 

The conclusion thus here reached sheds light 
on another field of spiritual experience where 
many religionists are groping in the dark. They 
tell us that we must love our neighbors and even 
enemies. The injunction is noble, but we are not 
enlightened as to the reason why we must not 
assert ourselves to the destruction of enemies 
or to the disadvantage of neighbors. They 
simply insist that it is the command of a divine 
authority. This is very well with those who 
blindly accept it. But there are other religious 
people, often designated as heathens or pagans 
or atheists, who want to know the reason why. 
Seeing that man is a rational being in some 
measure, we cannot afford altogether to suppress 
their legitimate doubt by the name of some 
august being. When we want to prove the 
universality of a certain proposition, we find 
mere appealing to a power above us not so 
convincing and satisfactory as appealing to our 
own human nature or rationality. When we are 
told, "Say this, or do that, because it is in 


46 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

accord with the inner reason of our being," we 
feel more the nobility of human nature. 

According to Buddhism, the question why we 
must not discriminate between friends and foes 
is answered by the doctrine of non-ego, as above 
explained at some length. Therefore, the Bud- 
dhists declare: Regulate your thoughts and 
deeds according to the feeling of oneness, and 
you will find a most wondrous spiritual truth 
driven home to your hearts. You are not neces- 
sarily thinking of the welfare and interest of 
others, much less of your own; but, singularly 
enough, what you aspire and practise is naturally 
conducive to the promotion of the general happi- 
ness, of others as well as of yourselves. In such 
an enlightened mind as has realized this most 
homely and yet most ennobling truth, there is 
no distinction to be made between friend and 
enemy, lover and hater. He is filled with loving- 
kindness and brotherly-heartedness. And such 
a one is called by Buddhists a Bodhisattva, 
which translated means "intelligence-being," or 
"one who has realized wisdom." 

* * * 

At this point we can turn to the positive 
phase of Buddhism and ask ourselves what is 
the doctrine that supplements the theory of 
non-ego; for the latter is mainly concerned 
with the destruction of the popular belief relating 
to the nature of the ego, and, on that account, 
it tends to emphasize the negative aspect of 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 47 

Buddhism. We must have something positive 
when this erroneous beUef is removed and be 
taught how to behave among the new surround- 
ings into which we have thus been ushered. 
Most people are exceedingly alarmed when they 
are told that the self or the soul, which they 
cherished so fondly, is void in its nature, and 
win overwhelm us with a multitude of, questions. 
To answer all these, however, is not my present 
purpose, as it will require a volume to satisfy 
those anxious truth-seekers. I wish only to say 
a few words here concerning the doctrine of 
Dharmakaya, which is the affirmative side of 
Buddhism. 

Dharmakaya is a Sanskrit term, and it is very 
difficult to find a good English equivalent for it. 
Dharma means "doctrine," "law," "religion," 
"righteousness," "being," "essence," "norm," 
and such like ; while kdya means "body," " organ- 
ized being," "system," and so forth. Dhar- 
makaya as a combined form of the two may be 
rendered "essence-body," "system of being," 
or "totality of existence." Whichever way we 
translate it, we find it very inadequate to express 
all that is contained in the original. In a word, 
it may be considered to be equivalent to the 
Christian conception of Godhead, and as such I 
will treat it in this discourse. 

The Dharmakaya, however, differs from the 
Christian God, perhaps in its most essential 
aspects. Of course, even among Christians the 


48 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

God-conception is subject to various interpre- 
tations ; and the Buddhist notion of DharmaMya, 
I venture to say, somewhat corresponds to the 
Johannean view of God. InteUigent Christians, 
I think, are well aware of the fact that the Gospel 
of John strikes quite an independent key among 
the Synoptics. Philosophically speaking, it rings 
with a pantheistic note, while the other gospels 
are monotheistic, true to the Jewish tradition. 
Buddhism has a pantheistic tendency, too, and 
in this respect the Gospel of John may be con- 
sidered echoing somewhat the Buddhist senti- 
ment. 

Buddhists do not think that God has any 
special abode, that his administration of the 
universe comes from a certain fixed center or 
headquarters, where he sits in his august throne 
surrounded by angels and archangels and saints 
and pious spirits who have been admitted there 
through his grace. In short, the Buddhist God 
is not above us, nor below us, but right in the 
midst of us; and if we want to see him face to 
face, we are able to find him in the lilies of the 
field, in the fowls of the air, in the murmuring 
mountain streams; we can trace his footsteps 
in the sea, we can follow him as he rides upon 
the storm ; we can meet him in the bush ; indeed, 
wheresoever we may turn, we are sure to be 
greeted by the smiling countenance of the author 
of this universe. Who says, then, that God is in 
Heaven, in some unknown region where we 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 49 

mortals are never allowed to venture in without 
his special permit? 

This God of Buddhism works constantly and 
everlastingly; he knows no rest, no fatigue, he 
has not to stop his work after six days of toil; 
he does not resort to any special revelation in 
order to announce his existence to the world; 
he has no favored son to sacrifice for the sake 
of the sin of which the poor innocent child has 
no conception. On the other hand, the Buddhist 
God is able to turn the meanest creature in the 
world to the noblest figure in which his glory is 
manifest to its full extent. He can destroy this 
whole universe and raise it again in the twinkling 
of an eye, it not being necessary for him to wait 
even for three days. His revelation is not an 
historical event, but it is happening every minute, 
and those who have eyes see it, those who have 
ears hear it. And to know the truth of this, it 
is only necessary to cleanse the heart of its 
egoistic impurities and defilements, which have 
been accumulating by virtue of our subjective 
ignorance. When this fundamental purification 
is completed, "we all, with unveiled face reflect- 
ing as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are 
transformed into the same im^-ge, from glory to 
glory." Again, we are glorified with the "glory 
which he had with him before the world was." 
When we arrive at this exalted stage of spiritual 
enlightenment. Buddhism declares that we have 
attained Nirvana. (Most Christian critics have 


50 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST- ABBOT 

a very mistaken notion about the nature of 
Nirvana, and this allusion is made with the view 
to clearing their minds.) 

* * * 

Supposing that I have made the Buddhist 
conception of God now somewhat intelligible to 
you, however broadly and sketchily, let me see 
what practical conclusion is drawn by the Bud- 
dhists from the above statement. If Buddhism 
teaches, as the Gospel of John declares, that 
"the Father is in me and I in him," or that 
"I and my Father are one," the practical ethics 
of Buddhism, it is evident, is to manifest the 
glory of God in all our conduct, in all our thoughts, 
in all our wishes and desires. It is evident, 
further, that as we are all one in God, his glory 
cannot be made manifest unless we break down 
the barrier of egoism which our ignorance and 
shortsightedness have built between mine and 
thine. Though this world, as it is, is manifesting 
the glory and love of God, the thought of selfish- 
ness which is so dearly cherished by our limited 
consciousness must be removed from the root, 
in order fully to appreciate the fact and truth. 
Buddhism does not exactly agree with Chris- 
tianity when the latter emphasizes so much the 
distinction between the flesh and the spirit, as 
if they were altogether antagonistic to each 
other in their fundamental nature. 

Buddhism, on the other hand, declares that all 
such distinctions as thine and mine, ego and God, 


ASSERTIONS AND DENIALS 51 

soul and flesh, "old man" and "new man," 
come from our own subjective ignorance, and 
that when this darkness of nescience is eradi- 
cated the flesh becomes at once the spirit, the 
ego instantly assumes the aspect of the Holy 
Ghost, as Christians would say. For from the 
begiiming there is neither flesh nor spirit, neither 
"I" nor "thou," but the infinite intelligence 
and love of the Dharmakaya. Therefore, Bud- 
dhists do not complain, "The spirit is willing, 
and the flesh is weak"; but of the evil influence 
of ignorance; and they concentrate all their 
spiritual energy on the eradication of this ignor- 
ance and on the bringing about of enlightenment. 
For enlightenment is Nirvana; and herein the 
doctrine of non-ego merges with the doctrine of 
Dharmakaya. 

* * * 

I am not going here to draw a parallelism 
between Buddhism and Christianity, nor to 
present you a list of differences between the two : 
I wish to give you in a summary- way the main 
points of the preceding discourse and conclude 
this address. In a word, Buddhism is the 
religion of enlightenment, in which the intellect 
and the sentiment are harmoniously blended 
together so as to realize the beatific state of 
Nirvana. Through the intellect Buddhists know 
that there is no ego-soul which hides itself 
snugly in the deepest recesses of the mind, that 
the universe is the immanent expression of an 


52 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

absolute, whence we come and whither we go, 
and that when we recognize negatively the 
unreality of the ego-monster we positively per- 
ceive the truth of the universal oneness of all 
sentient beings in the Body of Intelligence. 
While this is attained through the intellect, we 
come to feel through the objectives of the reli- 
gious consciousness that the ultimate reality in 
which we live and move and have our being is 
not only intelligence but love — ^by love meaning 
the complete union and sameness of me and you. 
Therefore, the Buddhist does not make it the 
purpose of his life to rise from the dead, to gain 
the immortality of a mythical being known as 
self, to lay up treasure for the future, to expect 
some reward in Heaven however spiritually that 
reward be considered, or to find consolation, to 
seek tranquillity of mind in relying upon some 
historical personage; but he endeavors to actu- 
alize the glory of God in this world while he is 
alive — the glory which he had before the world 
was— and which is made manifest only by 
following the way of God, by doing his will, that 
is, by practising in thought as well as in person 
the doctrine of non-ego, the precept of loving- 
kindness. 


IMMORTALITY' 

ONE of the many questions which I am very 
often requested to answer from the Bud- 
dhist point of view concerns the immortality of 
the soul. Thinking that this will also interest 
you, I wish to present my view on the question 
here. 

It seems, everything depends upon the con- 
ception of the soul. Both you and I may use 
the same term, but if it is understood differently 
we cannot expect to come to any definite conclu-. 
sion. I often think that if every notion, every 
concept, every sentiment we may happen to 
have, is so clearly defined as not to leave any 
point in obscurity, a great bulk of philosophical 
and religious controversy, which seems almost 
to make up the history of thought, will vanish. 
However this may be, let me first try to show 
you what I understand by the soul. 

Buddhism uses the term Atman in place of 
soul and makes it signify that mysterious some- 
thing which lurks in the background of our 
mental activities, and which soars up to an 

'Read before Green Acre Fellowship, Washington, D. C, 
April, 1906. 

53 


54 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

unknown quarter usually known as heaven after 
its departure from the body, within which it has 
been imprisoned, and on which account it used 
to long for liberation. The S,tman or soul, 
according to this conception, is not material, 
exactly speaking, but something very much akin 
to it, for it is an individual existence and there- 
fore subject to the limitations of space and time 
as well as to the law of causation. Though it 
is impossible to think the soul other than material 
if it is at all individual as conceived by ordinary 
people, yet they make it at once spiritual and 
individual — two qualities impossible to recon- 
cile. Therefore, in point of fact, Ihey materialize 
the soul by their unwarranted — though pious 
enough — attempt to make it immaterial and 
spiritual. They are not indeed spiritualistic in 
spite of their persistent claim to be so. They are 
in fact materialistic. For if things are truly 
spiritual and immaterial, in them there must be 
the absence of all those qualities which make up 
materiality, that is, they must not be bound by 
the conditions of space and time. The existence 
of a soul of this nature is most positively denied 
by Buddhism. And those who aspire after its 
immortality are designated ignorant, however 
wise and intelligent they may be in affairs other 
than religious. 

It needs a certain amount of reflective power 
to see in the popular conception of the soul a 
grievous error which Buddhism endeavors to 


IMMORTALITY 55 

remove. It may be more readily comprehended 
by the majority of people when we say that there 
is a mysterious metaphysical something in the 
mind which directs all its functions and operations 
according to its whimsical will, and which makes 
us believe in the reality of an ego-substance; 
than when we say that the so-called soul is no 
more than the unity of consciousness which is 
liable at any moment to dissolve, and which comes 
to exist when there is a certain co-ordination of 
all mental faculties. If you make the soul 
signify the notion which is popularly more intel- 
ligible, Buddhism will give you a very poor con- 
solation, as it denies even the existence of such a 
shadowy object, not to speak of its continuance 
after the decay and dismemberment of the cor- 
poreal existence. 

If this is found by you to be a little too abstract 
to be quite comprehensible, let me give you a 
favorite illustration frequently used by Buddhists 
to show the fallacy of belief in the existence of 
the soul. Do you think there is such a thing as 
the soul of the house who picks up the beams, 
roof, floor, walls, windows, etc., and puts them 
together in such a fashion as to make a house, 
and then hides himself in it somewhere, though 
altogether unrecognizable? Do you think again 
there is what is to be called the spirit of water 
who mixes up a certain amount of hydrogen 
with a portion of oxygen in order to make that 
most familiar and useful liquid and then convert 


56 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

it into his own hiding-place? When the intellect 
had not yet attained the present stage of devel- 
opment, people thought that there was in every- 
thing' a spirit or a soul residing and living, and 
who, when in wrath, found expression in raising 
a tempest, in creating a hurricane, or in quaking 
the foundation of the earth. But that time seems 
to have departed forever. 

A house is here when all the necessary things, 
such as walls, pillars, beams, etc., are brought 
together according to a certain form. Water 
comes into existence when hydrogen and oxygen 
combine themselves, each in a certain definite 
percentage, according to their inherent consti- 
tution. It will be ridiculous, then, to imagine 
that whenever we observe the waves stirring 
or a mountain-stream rushing there is a soul in 
the water who makes all these phenomena. The 
conception of the human ego-soul is in perfect 
parallel with that of the water soul-entity. .If 
waves, cataracts, whirlpools, or fountains are 
possible without presuming the existence of a 
water-ego, why do we hypostatize mentality 
and conceive the ego as an ultimate reality? 
Even scientifically speaking, this hypothesis does 
not at all satisfactorily explain our mental 
phenomena, but instead involves us in more 
difficulties and complications. Accordingly, those 
who hanker after the immortality of the soul 
are said to be pursuing fata morgana which 
vanish into airy nothingness as you approach. 


IMMORTALITY 57 

Buddhism seems to be perfectly justified in 
declining to acknowledge the ego-soul. 

What will then become of our innate desire 
after immortality? This is the question which 
will naturally come to you after you have fol- 
lowed me so far. To this I will answer: Seek 
that which is above birth and death, identify 
yourselves with it, and in that measure in which 
your identification is complete you will acquire 
immortality, and your religious sentiment will 
be thoroughly satisfied. Buddhism does not 
seek enlightenment in egoism, does not realize 
Nirvtoa in the assertion of selfishness. Have 
your self-will removed and put in its place the 
divine will. "Not my will, but thy will," as 
Christians say, is that which is immortal in us, 
as well as that which constitutes the reason of 
our individual existences. As long as you have 
your selfish desires, impure motives, ignorant 
impulses, your immortality will never be gained. 
To be egoistic and to be immortal is to make 
"a" equal to "not-a," or to mix water with oil, 
as a Japanese saying goes; they exclude each 
other, and the result is unspeakable tribulation 
of spirit. 

The problem of immortality has never troubled 
Buddhists, . to spealc 'frankly. When we were 
first asked about it,, we. did^not^Eiow exactly Eow 
to grapple with it, forBuddhists are used to look 
at~ the^ matter from a^tally_ different poin^^ 
view. Their first effort is to comprehend the 


5^ SERMONS 6f a BUDDttiST ABBOT 

whole, leaving the details behind. They first 
want^ to grai.fiJJia£ladiicbJ.s„x^ ^ S ^ above 

the transiency of phenomgnalit y. When t his is 
accornplished'r "they find_t hat they ^ themselves 
are part " and parcel of that, im perishabl e some- 
thing. Though mortal as individual, particular 
beings, they are a manifestation of the Great AU, 
and as such they will most assuredly survive all 
forms of change and transformation. They have 
then nothing to trouble themselves concerning soul 
or no-soul and much less with its immortality. 
All that they have to do is to come to a clear 
consciousness of the reason of the universe and 
to make its realization in them as perfect as they 
can. Whether they live or not after the expira- 
tion of their physical lives does not concern them 
at all. Let "thy will be done," and everything 
else will run its own course, and are we not 
relieved of the useless, wasteful worry and 
anxiety? 

If, in spite of all this, you feel somehow incon- 
solable on account of nothing concrete surviving 
after you but cold ashes and crumbling bones, 
I would give you the immortality of work 
(karma) instead of the immortality of the soul. 
Or we might say that what you wish to under- 
stand by the soul does not exist in the ego- 
entity but in the work you do, in the sentiment 
you feel, in the thought you think, and if all these 
are in accordance with "thy will" which disposes, 
they will be what is left after you, that is to say, 


IMMORTALITY 59 

you will forever live in them. When we stand 
before a canvas painted by a great painter, 
do we not feel the presence of the artist, as his 
ideas and feelings are embodied in it? Cannot 
we say that the artist is still living in his work? 
We do not know whether his soul has gone up 
to the heavens and is enjoying the celestial 
happiness, but we do know for certain that he 
is still living among ourselves and inspiring us 
to higher ideals of life. 

Do you prefer the immortality of the soul as 
popularly understood to this kind of immor- 
tality that I have endeavored to expound here? 
If. you do, I have nothing further to say, but that 
the immortality of work or deed or thought or 
sentiment seems to be more in accordance with 
the result of modem scientific investigation — 
not only that, but to be more satisfactory to our 
religious consciousness. 

Before concluding, there is one thing I should 
like to ask the believers in a materialistic, indi- 
vidual soul and its immortality; that is. What 
do you want to do up in heaven when you are 
ushered in there after you have finished your 
earthly career? Is it your wish to sit quietly 
beside your Father and among the host of celestial 
beings and passively enjoy inexpressible bless- 
ings? If this is your wish for individual immor- 
tality, I fail to see the purpose and significance of 
this life on earth. The history of civilization seems 
to lose its purport when you are away from here. 


6o SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

Buddhists think otherwise than Christians in 
this respect. We" consider our existence here 
below as a sort of link in the eternal chain of 
the divine revelation in the universe. We have 
not come on earth, each singly and_separately, 
to assert only our individuality; but our fates 
are most solidly linked to our ancestors and their 
civilization as well as to our successors and their 
destiny. What we are to-day is due to the 
karma of our predecessors and at the same time 
will determine the fates of posterity. If we fail 
to enrich and ennoble our spiritual inheritance 
which originally came from the hand of the 
Dharmakaya, we entirely ignore the meaning of 
the history of humanity, we altogether disregard 
our responsibility to our forefathers and grand- 
children. We must not go to heaven and selfishly 
enjoy our individual immortality. On the con- 
trary, we must abide where we are, and co-operate 
with one another for the ennoblement and enrich- 
ment of our earthly life. We must not be ungrate- 
ful for what our ancestors did for us, nor must 
we be inconsiderate of the welfare and enlighten- 
ment of coming generations. We must behave 
nobly, we must think rationally, we must feel 
unselfishly, and let us live in -this karma which 
endureth forever, even after the dissolution of 
this physical existence. 

Again, according to Buddhism, this universe 
is a sort of spiritual laboratory, in which all our 
ideal possibilities are experimented upon and 


IMMORTALITY 6 1 

developed and perfected. When this material 
garment wears out after a long use, we throw it 
away and put on a new one and appear in the 
same laboratory (and not anywhere else, not 
even in Heaven, let me remind you) as our own 
successors. We examine what our former lives 
have accomplished and apply all our moral and 
spiritual energy to the furtherance and perfection 
of the karma. The doctrine that the Buddha 
was able to reach his ideal eminence after his 
untiring practice of the six virtues of perfection 
(pdramitdsY throughout his inntunerable lives 
since the dawn of consciousness, is no more than 
the Buddhist conception of immortality and of 
the eternal striving after ideals. Let us, there- 
fore, go not anywhere else after death even if an 
indulging benefactor should attempt to persuade 
us to join his celestial hosts; but let us remain 
in this universe, let the karma we have accu- 
mulated here bear its fruit and be brought to a 
happy consummation; for we are not strong 
enough to stand the grave charge to be preferred 
by posterity to the effect that we have scattered 
all our precious ancestral legacy to the four winds. 

'(i) Charity, (2) Observation of Moral Precepts, (3) 
Meekness, (4) Energy, (5) Meditation, (6) Wisdom. 


BUDDHIST FAITH. 

BUDDHISM is so deep and comprehensive — 
and, we might say, even unfathomable — that 
scholars are sometimes at a loss how and where 
to begin its measurement. In some respects it 
appears to be a chaotic mass of superstitions, 
while in others it is a systematic and thorough- 
going application of an idealistic-pantheistic 
theory. The present discourse does not propose, 
however, to clear up all these difficulties, but only 
to give a certain clue with which students of 
Buddhism may be guided in their exploration. 
Buddhism, then, will be treated here broadly 
under two headings. Faith and Discipline. 

First, of Buddhist faith, which is summed up 
in this gatha: 

"The Buddha-Body fills the world, 
Being immanent universally in all things; 
It will make itself manifest wherever and whenever 

conditions are matured, 
Though it never leaves this Seat of Bodhi." 

Generally speaking, faith means trusting — 
trusting in something external to oneself. When 
religion is defined as a faith, it is considered to 
imply that there is a being or power which has 
created this world and presides over it, directing 

6? 


BUDDHIST FAITH 63 

its course and shaping its destiny; and that 
religion teaches to trust or believe in this being 
or power, which is thus proved to be greater and 
wiser than human beings. Therefore, Christians 
believe in a God who is a personal reality and 
who is supposed to exist above and outside of 
us poor mortals; and some Buddhists believe in 
Amitabha Buddha, who resides in Pure Land or 
Western Paradise (Sukhdvatt) ; and for this 
reason religion has come to be identified with a 
belief in an external object, whatever this be, 
particularly by Occidental scholars. But Bud- 
dhist faith does not belong to this category, for 
Buddhism rejects the existence of a personal 
God as he is ordinarily understood by some 
religionists. What, then, is the faith that keeps 
Buddhists together? 

Briefly, Buddhists believe in three most funda- 
mental facts which are universally observable 
about us and which cannot be refuted" by any 
amount of argument. They believe ^iirst_ in the 
sameness of things (samaid). By sameiiss_s. is 
understood the presence of a unifying ^principle 
in" all phenomena. However diversified and 
differentiated may appear those particular exist- 
ences with which we come in contact in this 
world of the senses, they universally partake of 
one nature, of one essence; and it is on account 
of this presence of a supra-individual reason that 
life becomes possible, that existence, this phe- 
nomenal world, becomes possible. 


64 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

Secondly, Buddhists believe in the difference 
between things (ndndtva), in their manifoldness, 
in their particularity, in their individuality; for 
it is an undeniable fact that things are aU 
separate and distinct, that each has its own 
individuality, that each moves according to its 
own inherent necessity. 

Thirdly, Buddhists believe in the fact that all 
things move or work. For there is nothing in 
this world that is not endowed with the possi- 
bility of motion, the power of doing something, 
the capacity of accomplishing'" a work; and in 
exercising this power everything works upon 
another and is at the same time worked upon 
by another. The universe is a network of all 
these particular forces mutually acting and 
mutually being acted upon. This is called the 
principle of karma, and Buddhists apply it not 
only to the physical world but to the moral and 
spiritual reakn. 

This threefold faith constitutes the comer- 
stone of Buddhism, which makes it appear 
somewhat too metaphysical to be a religion of 
the masses, but the fact is that Buddhism is far 
from being a system of philosophy. Those who 
take Buddhists for speculative thinkers will lose 
sight of the inner life of the religion in which 
its followers are living. It must never be sup- 
posed that Buddhists try to get us entangled in 
the endless maze of sophistic reasoning. Any- 
thing that is to be designated at all as a religion 


BUDDHIST FAITH 65 

never proposes to argue with us after the fashion 
of a philosopher; for religion is not to analyze, 
to demonstrate, or to argue with logical thor- 
oughness, but to see facts directly and to believe 
and to live them accordingly. 

In the g^tha recited in the beginning, the idea 
of sameness is rather dogmatically expressed: 
"The Buddha-Body fills the world." In this 
the content of sameness is called Buddha- 
Body or in Sanskrit Buddhakaya. The Bud- 
dhakdya, which is also often called Dharma- 
kaya, is the reason, life, and norm of all 
particular existences. When we penetrate 
through the diversity of all these individual 
phenomena, we encounter everywhere this in- 
dwelling Body and therein find the unity or 
sameness (samatd) of things. 

The principle of diversity is declared in the 
second line of the g^th^ which makes the Buddha- 
Body universally immanent in all things. The 
Buddha-Body, the essence of existence, though 
absolutely one in itself, allows itself to be diver- 
sified as the Hlies of the field, as the fowls of the 
air, as the creatures of the water, or as the 
inhabitants of the woods. For it is in the inherent 
nature of the Buddha-Body that it individualizes 
itself in the manifoldness of the phenomenal 
world. It does not stand alone outside particular 
existences, but it abides in them and animates 
them and makes them move freely. By thus 
abandoning its absolute transcendentality, it 


66 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

has subjected itself to certain conditions such as 
space, time, and causation. Its essence is infinite, 
but its manifestations are finite and limited. 
Therefore, the Buddha-Body has to wait to 
express itself in this relative world till all the 
necessary conditions are matured. This creation, 
so called, is no more than a manifestation of the 
self-limiting Buddha-Body. 

Suppose here stands a mirror — the mirror of 
Buddha-Body. Anything that comes in front of 
it is reflected therein, and this without any pre- 
meditation on the part of the mirror. If there 
comes a man, he is reflected there; if a woman, 
she finds herself reflected in it ; if it is a beautiful 
flower now which presents itself before the 
inirror, it is immediately and instantly reflected 
with all its magnificence. It is even so with 
things unsightly or even repugnant, for the 
mirror does not refuse its illuminating power to 
anything, high or low, rich or poor, ugly or 
beautiful, good or evil. Wherever and whenever 
conditions are ripe, all particular things will be 
reflected in the supra-natural mirror of Buddha- 
Body, without hesitation, without reasoning, 
without demonstration. This is the way in 
which the principle of karma works. 

The fourth line of the gatha is more or less a 
continuation of the third and expresses the same 
sentiment from another point of view. Things 
are many, and are subject to constant transfor- 
mation as regulated by their karma, but the 


BUDDHIST FAITH 67 

Buddha-Body eternally abides in the Seat of 
Bodhi, which is our inmost being. 

The moon is one and serenely shines in the 
sky, but she will cast her shadow, wherever the 
conditions are mature, in ever so many different 
places. Do we not see her image wherever 
there is the least trace of water? It may be 
filthy, or it may be clean; it may consist of only 
a few drops, or it may be a vast expanse, such as 
the ocean; but they all reflect one and the same 
moon as best suited to their inherent nature. 
The shadows are as many as different bodies of 
water, but we cannot say that one shadow is 
different from another. However small the moon 
may appear when there is only a drop of water, 
she is essentially the same as the one in the 
botmdless sheet of water, where its heavenly 
serenity inspires awe and reverence. So many, 
and yet one in all ; so diverse, and yet essentially 
the same ; we see it reflected everjrwhere, and yet 
is not the Buddha-Body sitting, all alone, in the 
Seat of Bodhi? 

Several questions present themselves here: 
How can we attain a spiritual insight into the 
sameness of things, and have our minds so trans- 
parent as to reflect one eternal truth? How can 
we understand the principle of sameness in its 
phenomenal aspect and recognize it in the diver- 
sity of desires, feelings, passions, instincts, 
motives, etc.? How can we see the Buddha- 
Body in its manifold activities and recognize it 


68 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

at once without abstraction and premeditation 
and elaboration? 

The most practical way to solve these problems 
is not through mere intellection. We must first 
acquire mental tranquillity, we must be purified 
spiritually, we must be freed from all disturbing 
passions, prejudices, and superstitions. Bud- 
dhism is a religion first and last, and its aim is 
always practical and spiritual. Philosophers and 
scientists will endeavor to come to a definite 
solution of the problems here cited logically, 
intellectually, metaphysically, analytically, rely- 
ing on their demonstrative knowledge. But the 
way that leads us practical religionists most 
effectively to the satisfactory adjustment of the 
puzzling world-riddles which so greatly disturb 
all deep, serious souls is the practice of medita- 
tion, called Dhy^na' by Buddhists. 

As to the practical part of Buddhism, or Disci- 
pline, it will be treated under " Buddhist Ethics," 
which follows. 

'See the article "Practice of Dhy4na." (See P. 146.) 


BUDDHIST ETHICS 

PAI LU-TIEN, a famous Chinese poet, 
author, and statesman who lived in the 
thirteenth century of the Christian era, once 
went to see an eminent Buddhist monk whose 
saintly life was known far and near, and asked 
him if he would instruct him in the essentials 
of Buddhist doctrine. The monk assented and 
recited the following gatha: 

"Commit no wrong, but good deeds do. 
And let thy heart be pure, 
All Buddhas teach this truth. 
Which will for aye endure."' 

The statesman-poet was not at all satisfied with 
this simple moral teaching, for he expected to 
have something abstruse, recondite, and highly 
philosophical from the mouth of such a promi- 
nent and virtuous personality. Said the poet, 
"Every child is familiar with this Buddhist 
injunction. What I wish to learn from you is 
the highest and most fundamental teaching of 

'Translation by Dr. Paul Cams. In P&li : 
Sabbap&passa akaranam, kusalassa upasampadd, 
Sacittapariyodapanam : etam BuddhAna sAsanam. 

— Dhammapada, v. 183. 
69 


70 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

your faith." But the monk retorted, "Every 
child may know of this g^tha, but even a silvery- 
haired man fails to put it into practice." There- 
upon, it is said, the poet reverentially bowed 
and went home meditatively. 

If we are requested to-day to state what is the 
most fundamental in Buddhist ethics, we have 
to make the same assertion. There may be and 
in fact are many schools and denominations in 
Buddhism, each claiming to have transmitted 
the true spirit of Buddha; but they will be 
unanimous in declaring that the gath^ afore- 
mentioned is one of the common grounds on 
which they all stand. "Sabba papassa akara- 
nam" is heard in all Southern monasteries, and 
the lines "Chu wo mo tso, etc.," are seen every- 
where in the Eastern lands of Buddhism. If 
Buddhism were called a sort of ethical culture 
society on account of this simple code of morality, 
its followers would make no objection to it, for 
the recognition of a personal God, or the concep- 
tion of original sin, or belief in a risen Christ is 
not thought indispensable to Buddhist salvation. 
Let a man do what is good and avoid what is bad 
and have his heart as pure as he can of all egotistic 
impulses and desires, and he will be delivered from 
the clutches of ignorance and misery. What- 
ever his dogmatic views on religion, he is one 
of the enlightened who are above bigotry, intol- 
erance, vanity, conceit, pedantry, and prejudice. 
He must truly be said to be one whose spiritual 


BUDDHIST ETHICS 71 

insight has penetrated into the depths of exist- 
ence. 

Now, the question is: What is good? What 
is evil? And how is the heart to be cleansed? 
I am not going to discuss here these great 
ethical and religious problems from a mere 
theoretical point of view. Buddhism has nothing 
to do with utilitarianism or intuitionalism or 
hedonism or what not. Buddhism is most 
practical in its announcement of what consti- 
tutes goodness. It dogmatically and concretely 
points out good deeds one by one. First, nega- 
tively, it enumerates ten deeds of goodness 
(kusalam) as most fundamental in Buddhist 
ethics ; while, positively, it considers the six 
paramitas (virtues of perfection) or eightfold 
path as the route leading to a virtuous life. 

The ten deeds of goodness are: (i) Not to 
kill any living being; (2) Not to take anything 
that does not belong to oneself; (3) Not to 
look at the other sex with an unclean heart; 
(4) Not to speak falsehood; (5) Not to calum- 
niate; (6) Not to use vile language; (7) Not 
to make sensational utterances; (8) Not to be 
greedy; (9) Not to be out of temper; and 
lastly, (10) Not to be confused by false doc- 
trines. Later Buddhists, ho'tfv'ever, make ten 
affirmative propositions out of those just men- 
tioned, thus: It is good (i) to save any living 
being, (2) to practise charity, (3) to be clean- 
minded, (4) to speak truth, (5) to promote 


72 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

friendship, (6) to talk softly and gently, (7) to 
be straightforward in speech, (8) to be content 
with one's own possessions, (9) to be meek and 
humble, and (10) to think clearly and rightly. 

The six paramit^s or virtues of perfection are: 
(i) Charity, which includes the giving away of 
worldly possessions as well as the proclamation 
of the Good Law, (2) The observation of the 
moral precepts as formulated by Buddha, (3) 
Meekness, (4) Strenuosity, (5) Contemplation, 

(6) Spiritual enlightenment. 

The eightfold path is: (i) Right view, (2) 
Right reflection, (3) Right speech, (4) Right 
deed, (5) Right livelihood, (6) Right striving, 

(7) Right understanding, (8) Right contem- 
plation. 

In these various enumerations of Buddhist 
virtues, what is most unique are perhaps the 
virtues of strenuosity and those of contemplation 
and enlightenment. To be good Buddhists, we 
must never be indolent, whiling away our time 
to no purpose. Mere piety will not do, so long 
as there is some work to be accomplished for 
the sake of humanity and civilization. Love, 
again, must be accompanied with enlightenment, 
for the affection is very frequently wasted on 
account of its blindness. God-fearing is recom- 
mendable, but without contemplation we fail 
to recognize the purport of our own position in 
the system of the universe. Mere passion leads 
to fervor and violence if not properly guided 


BUDDHIST ETHICS 73 

by contemplation which brings enlightenment, 
revealing the reason of existence and purifying 
the heart of ignorance. 

Ignorance, according to Buddhism, is the root 
of all evil, and therefore it advises us in strong 
terms to have ignorance completely destroyed. 
And it is only then that the all-illuminating 
light of enlightenment guides us gloriously to 
the destination of all beings, where we gain 
purity of heart, and whatever flows from this 
eternal fountain of purity is good. 

It is evident, then, that by purity of heart is 
meant absence of ignorance and self-will. But 
it is not a negative condition, for the most essen- 
tial postulate of Buddhism is that in each of us 
there abideth the indwelling reason of the 
universe, which, when released from the tem- 
poral bondage of ignorance and self-will, becomes 
the master of itself by reducing everything to 
subjection and restoring it to its right place. 
In a pure heart, therefore, the universal reason 
manifests itself in its full glory and works its own 
destiny unmolested. What one with such a heart 
wills is what makes the bird sing and the flower 
smile, what has raised the mountain and makes 
the water flow. He is hungry and the universe 
wishes to eat; he is asleep and all the world 
hybemates. This sounds extraordinary, but the 
enlightened understand it perfectly well. We 
caimot make the blind see what we ourselves 
see. The blind may protest that we are deceiving 


74 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

them; but could we do otherwise, inasmuch as 
they are deprived of the sense we have, or they 
have not yet learned how to make use of it? It 
is declared by Buddhists, therefore, that to 
realize fully the sanctity of religious life one 
must have Buddha-wisdom awakened from its 
unconscious slumber in which it is indulging 
from time out of mind. 

Analytically, purity of heart consists of sym- 
pathy and intelligence, and on this groundwork 
the structure of practical Buddhism is founded. 
Sympathy is the tremulation of the spiritual 
cord which unites the hearts of all sentient 
beings; and it is intelligence that discovers the 
presence of the sacred cord in every one of us 
and keeps it from being entangled. The cord 
freely responds to cries of suffering. The heart 
contrives to effect all the possible means to 
relieve sentient beings from misery and ignor- 
ance. The ten deeds of goodness, the eightfold 
path, the six virtues of perfection, and many 
other good things all flow from this one source 
of pure-heartedness. 

It is, then, of unqualified importance in the 
ethics of Buddhism to have one's heart perfectly 
cleansed and free from the dust of egotism 
which has been accumulating through the want 
of enlightenment. In this sense "blessed are the 
pure in heart"; they may not see God as he is 
superficially and superstitiously understood, but 
they will surely come into personal touch with the 


BUDDHIST ETHICS 75 

ultimate authority of conduct and also perceive 
that the author is not residing outside of their 
being but within themselves. We read in the 
Dharmapada: 

" Manopubbangama dhamin4, manosettha, manomay4; 
Manasa ce padutthana bhisati v4 karoti vk, 
Tato nam dtikkham anveti, cakkam va vahato padam. 

" ManopubbangamA dhamma, manosetthS., manomayA; 
Manasa ce pasannena bhasati va karoti va, 
Tato nam sukham anveti, chiyS. va anapayin!."' 

In this respect Buddhism can be said to have 
a decidedly idealistic tendency, since it fully 
recognizes the paramountcy of ideas in the 
moral realm. But we must not lose sight of the 
fact that Buddhism is not a system of meta- 
physics, but a religion which is practical more 
than anything else. What it teaches is the pro- 
found spiritual experience of every enlightened 
man, while the philosopher and theorist will 
speculate on the facts and offer whatever inter- 
pretation they may please or feel compelled to 
give to account adequately for them. 

Buddhism is often charged with passiveness 
and quietism, lacking the "push" of some other 
religions; and the backwardness of Asiatic 

'All that is, is the result of thought, it is founded on 
thought, it is made of thought. If a man speaks or acts 
with an evil thought, pain follows him, as the wheel follows 
the foot of the ox that draws the carriage. All that is, is 
the result of thought, it is founded on thought, it is made 
of thought. If a man speaks or acts with a pure thought, 
happiness follows him, like a shadow that never leaves him. 


76 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

nations in the general march of humanity is 
sometimes ascribed to the influence of Buddhism. 
Though I am not here entering upon any lengthy 
polemics, a few words may not be altogether 
inopportune to refute such an erroneous opinion 
as this. 

If there is anything passive in Eastern culture, 
which is often no more than tolerance or indif- 
ference or self-restraint, it is not due to Buddhism 
but to the racial idiosyncrasy of Asiatic peoples. 
Buddhism teaches contemplation and tran- 
quillity and at the same time strenuosity, inde- 
fatigable energy in following truth and in 
destroying ignorance. We see many admirable 
examples among its believers who have fully 
illustrated these virtues in their person. The 
history of Buddhism, while perfectly free from 
bloodshed and inhumanity, evidences how far 
its moral teachings have been carried out. Bud- 
dhist ethics is not certainly passive or negative, 
unless the absence of arrogance, aggressiveness, 
intolerance, bigotry, and fanaticism could be 
called so. 

Religion in its social aspect is notjcmnipotent, 
nor is it absolute, as is imagined by some. It is, 
like many other things created by man, ,a .human 
institution; it has been discovered^ shaped, 
developed according to the inner necessity of 
mankind; and as long as he is imperfect and 
steering his course through innumerable obstacles, 
religion also must share his imperfection ._and 


BUDDHIST ETHICS 77 

adapt itself to ever-changing surroundings. 
Instead of imposing its ideals upon man tyran- 
nically and absolutely, religion reconciles itself 
to his needs, going through all the necessary 
modifications. Therefore, one religion is diversely 
interpreted by different peoples among whom 
it may thrive. To suppose that religion could 
do anything it desires without regard to indi- 
vidual, national, racial peculiarities is far from 
the fact. The difference between Oriental and 
Occidental civiIizafiori"is"By~no means due to the 
difference between Christianity and Buddhism. 
On the other hand, " the ' difference between the 
two religions is due to the difference between 
the two great types of civilization. Truth, be 
if religious or philosophical or scientific, is univer- 
sal, and as such does not allow any 'mo dification 
or distortion. But it suffers modification in its 
practical application, for it is like a mathematical 
formula or figure. When conceived a priori, it is 
formal and not subject to any concrete individu- 
alization, which latter in fact is the condition of 
its particular forms. 

In conclusion let me say most emphatically 
that the ethics of Buddhism is summed up in 
the purification of the heart, in keeping oneself 
unspotted even though living in the world; and 
from this eternal root must sprout such things 
of God as love, a heart of compassion, the virtue 
of strenuosity, humbleness of mind, longsuffering, 
forbearing one another, forgiving one another, 


78 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

and freedom from all evils. It is said that there 
were eighty-four thousand virtues of perfection 
practised by all Bodhisattvas, but they are no 
more than so many leaves and branches growing 
from the one stem of pure-heartedness. 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM?' 

IT seems to be very appropriate and even 
necessary at the outset to draw a well- 
defined line of demarcation between what is 
understood as Hinay^na Buddhism and what 
is known as Mahay ana Buddhism. Most people 
imagine that there is only one school of Buddhism 
and that that one school is no other than the 
Buddhism they have learned from the Buddhist 
books written or compiled or translated by 
Western Orientalists — Orientalists who are in 
many respects prejudiced against the doctrine 
which they propose to study most impartially. 
Owing to these unhappy circumstances, the 
outsiders are either generally ignorant or alto- 
gether misinformed of the true character of 
Buddhism. For what is understood by the 
Western people as Buddhism" is no more than 
one of its main divisions^ which only partially 
expresses the spirit of its founder. 

I said here "diyisions," but it may be more 
proper . to. say "stages of development." For 
Buddhism, like so many other religions, has gone 

'Read before the National Geographic Society, Washing- 
ton, D. C, April, 1906. 

79 


8o SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

through several stages of development before it 
has attained the present state of perfection among 
the Oriental nations. And it will be evident to 
you that if we catch only a glimpse of an object 
and try to judge the whole from this transient 
impression, we place ourselves in a most awkward 
position, and shall be at a loss how to extricate 
ourselves from it. Therefore, let me try in the 
beginning to take a comprehensive view of the 
subject we here propose to expound. 

Properly speaking, Hinayana Buddhism is a 
phase of Mah^yana Buddhism. The former is 
preparatory for the latter. It is not final, but 
merely a stepping stone which leads the walker 
to the hall of perfect truth. HinayS.nism is 
therefore more or less pessimistic, ascetic, ethical 
(to be distinguished from religious), and monas- 
tical. It fails to give a complete satisfaction to 
a man's religious yearnings. It does not fully 
interpret the spirit of Buddha. The Buddhism 
now prevailing in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam may 
be considered to be betraying in a certain way 
a Hinayana tendency. 

The Buddhism of present Japan, on the other 
hand, TsT MahSyS,nistic. It is more comprehen- 
sive, more religious, more humanistic, and more 
satisfying to the innermost needs of the religious 
consciousness. It cannot be said to be abso- 
lutely free from superstition, error, prejudice, 
etc., for it is a constantly growing, ever-living; 
faith which knows no ossification or fossilization. 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM? 8l 

Some pious people are apt to consider their 

religious belief to be absolutely fixed and 

unchanging. since the dawn of Titunan conscious- 
ness ; but they have forgotten, in my opinion, 
the fact that the htiman mind is still keeping 
on unfolding itself, that it has not yet exhausted 
all its possibiUties, that it is constantly coming 
to J. clearer consciousness as to its own nature, 
origin, and destiny. But what I firmly believe 
is that in the Buddhism of Japan to-day are 
epitomized all the essential results reached 
through the unfolding of the religious conscious- 
ness during the past twenty or thirty centuries 
of Oriental culture. 

In a word, what has been known in the West 
as the teaching of Buddha does not represent it 
in its true, unadulterated color, for it is Hina- 
y^nistic in tendency; that is, it is exclusive and 
not comprehensive, narrow and limited, and not 
all absorbing and assimilating. What I propose 
to expound in this lecture to-night is the Mah^- 
yana Buddhism, so called by Buddhist scholars 
of the East. 

Let me point out in this connection what is 
most characteristic of Buddhism as distinguished 
from any other religion. I refer to a predominant 
tendency of Buddhism toward intellectuality, 
and it seems to me that the reason why Buddhism 
is always ready to stand before the tribunal of 
science and let her pass a judgment upon its 
merits or demerits is due to this intellectual tenor. 


82 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

It goes without saying that the intellect does 
not constitute the most essential element of 
religion, but we must not forget that a religious 
system too much given up to sentimentalism 
(understanding it in its purely psychological 
sense) is generally prone to accede to unwar- 
ranted mysticism, ignoring altogether the legit- 
imate claim of the intellect. Buddhism is 
fortunately saved from this grievous blunder, 
and always endeavors not to give a free rein to 
the wantonness of imagination and the irra- 
tionality of affection. Love without enlighten- 
ment excludes, discriminates, and contradicts 
itself. Love is not love unless it is purified in 
the mill of spiritual insight and intellectual 
discrimination. 

What are, then, the fundamental teachings of 
Buddhism? I deem it best to consider it from 
two standpoints, ethical and philosophical, or 
practical and speculative, or affective and intel- 
lectual. The philosophical or speculative is 
preparative for the ethical or practical, for 
religion is not a system of metaphysics which 
plays with verbalism and delights in sophistry, 
but its aim is pre-eminently practical and spir- 
itual. It must bear fruit in this our everyday life. 

To begin with the metaphysical side of Bud- 
dhism: (i) We Buddhists believe that as far as 
phenomenality goes, things that exist are all 
separate and discrete, they are subject to the 
law of individuation and therefore to that of 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM? 83 

limitation also. All particviar things exist in 
time and space and move according to the law 
of cause and effect, not only physically but 
morally. Buddhism does not, though sometimes 
imderstood by Western people to do so, advocate 
the doctrine of emptiness or annihilation. It 
most assuredly recognizes the multitudinousness 
and reality of phenomena. This world as it is, is 
real, not void. This life as we live it, is true, 
and not a dream. 

(2) We Buddhists believe that all these par- 
ticular things surrounding us come from one 
ultimate source which is all-powerful, all-knowing, 
and all-loving. The world is the expression or 
manifestation of this reason or spirit or life, 
whatever you may designate it. However 
diverse, therefore, things are, they all partake 
of the nature of the ultimate being. Not only 
sentient beings, but non-sentient beings, reflect 
the glory of the Original Reason. Not only man 
but even the lower animals and inorganic sub- 
stances manifest the divinity of their source. 
To use the Christian term, God, it' is visible 
and audible not only in one of its highest mani- 
festations, whom Christians call Jesus Christ, 
but also in the meanest and most insignificant 
piece of stone lying in a deserted field. God's 

'Let me remark here that it is not at all proper to refer 
to God, the ultimate source of everything, as masculine as 
is usually done. God is above sex. It is neither "he" 
nor "she." Even "it" is not appropriate, but will be prefer- 
able to the other pronouns. 


84 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

splendor is seen not only in the Biblical lilies, 
but also in the mud and mire from which they 
grow. The melody of divine reason is heard 
not only in the singing of a bird or in the com- 
position of an inspired musician, but also in the 
"slums of life" as Emerson phrases it. 

(3) This recognition of the oneness of things 
naturally leads to our third belief, that the one 
is the many and the many is the one. God does 
not dwell in the heavens. It does not direct its 
affairs in a closed office situated somewhere out- 
side this world. It did not create heaven and 
earth out of nothingness. According to Bud- 
dhism, it is a serious error to seek God outside 
this life, outside this universe. It is living right 
among ourselves and directing the course of 
things according to its innate destiny. Though 
Buddhists refuse to have God walk out of us, 
they do not identify it with the totality of exist- 
ence, they are not willing to cast their lot with 
pantheists so called. God is immanent, surely 
enough, but it is greater than the totality of 
things. For the world may pass away, the 
universe may be shaken out of its foundation, 
but God will remain and will create a new system 
out of the former ruins. The ashes of existence 
will never be scattered to the winds, but they 
will gather themselves in the ever designing hand 
of God and build themselves up to a new order 
of things, in which it is ever shining with its 
serene radiance. 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM? 8$ 

To sum up the first part of this discourse, what 
may be called the metaphysical phase of Bud- 
dhism is to recognize (i) the reality of the 
phenomenal world, (2) the existence of one 
ultimate reason, and (3) the immanence of this 
reason in the universe. 

Now to come to the practical side of Buddhism : 
The aim of Buddhism, to state it briefly, is to dispel 
the clouds of ignorance and to make shine the 
sun of enlightenment. We are selfish because we 
are ignorant as to the nature of self. We are 
addicted to the gratification of the passions, 
because we are ignorant as to the destiny of 
humanity. We are quarrelsome and want to 
make ourselves powerful and predominant at 
the expense of our fellow-beings, because we are 
ignorant of the ultimate reason of the universe. 
Buddhists do not recognize any original sin, but 
acknowledge the existence of ignorance, and 
insist on its total removal as the surest means 
of salvation. Let us, therefore, all be enlight- 
ened as to the statement made before. Let us 
know that we are all one in the reason of the 
universe, that the phenomenal world is real only 
to the extent it manifests reason, that egoism 
has no absolute sway in this life, for it destroys 
itself when it tries to preserve itself through its 
arrogant assertion, and that perfect peace is only 
attained when I recognize myself in you and 
you in me. Let us all be enlightened as to these 
things, and our ignorance and egoism are forever 


86 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

departed; the wall that divides is destroyed, 
and there is nothing which prevents us from 
loving our enemies ; and the source of divine love 
is open in our hearts, the eternal current of 
sympathy has now found its unobstructed path. 
This is the reason why Buddhism is called the 
religion of enlightenment. 

Now that we stand on this eminence of reli- 
gious sanctity, we know what Buddhist practical 
faith is. It is threefold: (i) to cease from 
wrong-doing, (2) to promote goodness, and (3) 
to enlighten the ignorant. Buddhist ethics is 
the simplest thing to practise in the world. It 
has nothing mysterious, nothing superstitious, 
nothing idolatrous, nothing supernatural. Stop 
doing anything wrong, which is against the reason 
of things; do whatever is good, which advances 
the course of reason in this life; and finally help 
those who are still behind and weary of life to 
realize enlightenment: and here is Buddhism in 
a nutshell. It has nothing to do v/ith prayer 
and worship and singing and what not. Our 
simple everyday life of love and sympathy is all 
that is needed to be a good Buddhist. 

I was once asked whether there was such a 
thing as religious life particularly. To which 
my answer was simple enough: "Attend to 
your daily business, do all you can for the pro- 
motion of goodness in this world, and out of 
fulness of heart help your fellow-beings to gain 
the path of enlightenment. Outside of this there 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM? 87 

cannot be anything to be specially called a reli- 
gious life." 

In the latter part of the T'ang Dynasty in 
China, there was a famous poet-statesman who is 
known in Japanese as Hak-Rak-Ten. He learned 
that there resided in his district a Buddhist 
monk greatly noted for his saintly life and schol- 
arly learning. The governor went to see him, 
intending to discuss some deeply religious topics. 
As soon as he was ushered into the presence of 
the monk, he inquired what was thought by the 
saint to be the most fundamental teaching of 
Buddhism. The monk immediately replied that 
it is the teaching of all enlightened ones to cease 
doing anything evil, to promote goodness, and 
to purify one's own heart. 

Hak-Rak-Ten was nonplused to receive such 
a commonplace instruction from the mouth of 
such a scholarly personage professing the faith 
of Buddha; for he secretly expected to have 
something highly metaphysical and profoundly 
speculative, which would naturally lead them to 
further philosophizing and contentless abstrac- 
tion. The poet-statesman therefore retorted: 
"This is what every child of three summers is 
familiar with. I desire on the other hand what 
is most abstruse, most essential, most vital in 
Buddhism." The monk, however, coldly replied: 
" Every child of three summers may know what 
I said now, but even a silvery-haired man of 
eighty winters finds it difficult to put the Bud- 


88 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

dhist instruction into the practice of everyday 
life." 

And it is said that thereupon the Governor 
reverentially bowed and went home wiser. 

What is philosophical in Buddhism is no more 
than a preliminary step toward what is practical 
in it. _Eyery religion, if it deserves the name, 
must be essentially practical and conducive_to 
the promotion of the general welfare and to the 
realization of Reason. Though intellectualism is 
one of the most characteristic features of Bud- 
dhism, making it so distinct from any other 
religious system, it never forgets the fact that 
our religious consciousness ever demands some- 
thing concrete, that which is visible to our 
senses, that which is observable in our everyday 
life. Religion does not necessarily consist in 
talking on such subjects as the continuation after 
death of individual personality, original sin com- 
mitted by some mythical personages, the last 
judgment to be given by an unknown quantity, 
a special historical revelation which takes place 
in a congested brain, and what not. At least, 
practical Buddhism does not trouble itself with 
solving these problems through speculation or 
imagination or sophistry. Let those theologians 
who delight in abstraction and supematuralism 
discuss them to their hearts' content, for that 
is their profession. We, plain ordinary Bud- 
dhists, will keep on removing selfishness, seeking 
the light that is everywhere, practising loving- 


WHAT IS BUDDHISM? 89 

kindness that does not contradict or discriminate. 
Says an ancient sage, "The Way is near, and 
thou seekest it afar." Why, then, shall we ever 
attempt to walk away from the path which 
extends right in front of us, so wide and well 
paved? 


THE MIDDLE WAY 

HUNG JEN, the fifth patriarch of the 
Dhy^na sect in China, who died in 
675 A. D., had many disciples. One day he 
made an announcement to them, saying that 
whoever was capable of giving a satisfactory 
proof of his thorough comprehension of Bud- 
dhism would succeed him in religious authority. 
And its outcome was the following two stanzas, 
the first by one of his most learned disciples and 
the second by his humble rice-pounder, who, 
however, was awarded the prize and came to 
be known later as the sixth patriarch. 

"The body is the holy Bodhi tree, 
The mind is like a mirror shining bright; 
Exert yoiirself to keep them always clean, 
And never let the dust accumulate." 

* * * 

"No holy tree exists as Bodhi known, 
No mirror shining bright is standing here; 
Since there is nothing from the very first, 
Where can the dust itself accumulate?". 

* * * 

The thesis I am going to expound this evening 
is that these two views of Buddhism must be 
reconciled and harmonized in order to walk on 
the middle path of truth. But before doing so 

90 


THE MIDDLE WAY QI 

let me acquaint you with the story of the blind 
men and the elephant. 

There was once a powerful king in India, who 
called all his blind retainers together to his 
court, and then brought out one of his largest 
elephants before them, asking what they thought 
of it. Being born blind, of course they had 
never seen an elephant, and now in obedience 
to the royal command they all came around the 
animal. Each of them touched only a certain 
portion of the huge body and came to the hasty 
conclusion that the portion he handled was 
really the entirety of the beast. 

Those that touched the tail thought the ele- 
phant was like a broom; those that touched the 
leg thought it resembled a huge column; those 
that touched the back imagined the elephant 
had a body with the shape of a gigantic drum; 
those that handled the ear thought it reminded 
them of the wing of a bird; those that touched 
the tusk thought it had the shape of a • flail. 
Though thus none of them could describe the 
complete and exact figure of the elephant, each 
was narrow-minded enough to insist on the 
verity of his testimony. The king was very 
much amused to see how utterly they failed to 
comprehend the object and how fruitless their 
quarreling was. 

Even so, says the Buddha, is the way most 
of us look at the truth and quarrel over it. 
Buddhists may think that Buddhism is the whole 


92 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

truth and that all other religions are nothing 
but superstition and prejudice; while Christians 
will imagine that their religion is the only thing 
in the world, that they are monopolizing the 
divine grace, and that therefore all other teach- 
ings are impostures and idolatries and heathen- 
isms. The adherents of Mohammedanism may 
also be convinced of their absolute possession 
of God; and so with all the other religious sys- 
tems of the world. Indeed, every religion is 
disposed to consider that it alone and no one 
else holds the key to Heaven and eternal life; 
and on account of this conviction religionists 
are ever ready to denounce each other with 
bitterness hardly worthy of their profession and 
dignity. But to get at the real truth of things 
we must shake off all these prejudices and 
endeavor to comprehend the truth as a whole 
and be always humble and broad-minded and 
tolerant. 

Now to return to the subject. These two 
stanzas recited at the beginning are suited, I 
believe, to illustrate in a way my point just 
made; that is, to obtain a comprehensive view 
of truth it is not enough to know only one side 
of the shield, but we must turn it around and 
see the reverse, as one is complementary to the 
other. Judging superficially, the two stanzas 
appear to be directly contradicting each other, 
for while one advocates the strenuous life the 
other seems to be tending to nihilism and liber- 


THE MIDDLE WAY 03 

tinism. In my opinion, however, Buddhism would 
be incomprehensible if these two apparently 
antagonizing views were not synthesized and 
harmoniously blended. To take hold of only 
one of these and to think that it comprises the 
whole of Buddhism will be committing the same 
error as the blind men in the story of the elephant. 
Those two stanzas are the two wings of a bird, 
or the two wheels of a cart, or, perhaps more 
exactly, one is like the eye and the other the 
legs. With the eye we can see, but we cannot 
move, as we have no legs; with the legs we are 
able to move, but we are bHnd, as we are without 
sight. From the standpoint of absolute truth, 
there is no such thing as mind or matter or even 
God or universe. But if we confine ourselves to 
this view and become blind to the other side, 
which says that the many exists, that the world 
actually is, we are like the man who has no legs ; 
we are unable to move, we cannot carry ourselves, 
we are helpless, we cannot live our daily life. 
Philosophical insight may be far-reaching enough, 
but it is contentless, it lacks the material on 
which to work. Therefore, we must look at the 
other side and see how our practical life is to be 
regulated; we must see how our legs are fixed, 
whether they are strong enough to take us 
where the eye is directing. 

Again, we must not forget that practical disci- 
pline alone does not lead us to the abode of final 
enlightenment. It is very excellent not to 


94 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

neglect the cleaning of the mirror, the purifying 
of the mind, which is likely all the time to collect 
the dust of passion on it. But if we fail to see 
that a merely conventional, superficial purifica- 
tion is very much like groping in the dark without 
the knowledge of the import of existence, our 
spiritual horizon will draw itself within narrow 
limits like a snail retiring within the shell, and 
we may lose our original, intrinsic, spontaneous 
freedom and tranquillity, which belong to the 
mind by its own constitution; we may put our- 
selves under an unnecessary yoke, moving only 
within a prescribed circle. In other words, we 
may lose simplicity, naturalness, ease of move- 
ment in all our thinkings and doings. 

In what follows I will consider the teaching of 
Buddhism as stated in those two stanzas harmo- 
niously viewed. 

The first stanza begins with the line, "The 
body is the holy Bodhi tree." In this, our body 
is compared to the sacredness of the Bodhi tree 
under which the founder of Buddhism attained 
his spiritual enlightenment and laid down the 
foundation of his system. The body, however 
evanescent in its character, must be considered 
holy even as the holy tree, and all the necessary 
care should be taken to keep it the worthy vessel 
in which the spirit is lodged. There are many 
fanatic believers in asceticism and self -mortifica- 
tion, thinking that this material existence is the 
root of evil and therefore the more is it tortured 


THE MIDDLE WAY 95 

the purer and holier will grow the spirit. The 
flesh is in its very nature antagonistic to the 
spirit. They cannot thrive in harmonious rela- 
tion with each other. The stronger the flesh 
the weaker the spirit, and vice versa. The line, 
"The body is the holy Bodhi tree," is directed 
against those who hold this kind of view. That 
is to say, Buddhism does not espouse any ascetic 
practice, nor does it hold a doctrine tending to 
a dualistic conception of existence which makes 
the flesh the source of evil and the spirit the 
foundation of everything good. The body as a 
material phenomenon has its limitations, as a 
living organism has its impulses, desires, pas- 
sions, and moods; and there is nothing evil or 
wicked in it. It is thirsty and it must drink; 
it is hungry and it must be fed. Exposure in 
cold affects its well-being and it must be clothed. 
Too much strenuosity exhausts its energy and 
it must rest. All these things are inherent in it, 
and unless we demand that the tree grow as the 
fish, as a Japanese saying goes, it is altogether 
irrational to wish our bodily existence to be free 
from all its constitutional wants. Therefore, 
Buddhism teaches us not to curb them and 
torture the body, but to regulate them and 
prevent their going to self-destruction through 
wantonness. 

The second line reads, "The mind is like a 
mirror shining bright." This may suggest, when 
contrasted with the first line, a dualistic con- 


96 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

ception of our existence, making mind inde- 
pendent of body. But I am not going to 
enter into this complicated problem, — the prob- 
lem of mind and body, whether they are one or 
separate. For convenience^^ sake, I__take the 
mind as the"subjective aspect of the body and 
the body as the objective aspect of the^mind. 
To speak more popularly, the mind is the inner 
side of the body and the body the outer case of 
the mind. They both make up one solid reality. 
Within, it is felt as consciousness; without, it 
is perceived as body. Now, this body is sacred 
as the Bodhi tree, and every care has to be taken 
for its well-being. So with the mind: it must 
be kept perfectly free from the dirty particles 
of passion, it must be made to retain its original 
purity through moral discipline. 

The mind as it first came from the hands of 
God was pure, simple, illuminating as the mirror. 
But in its constant contact with the world of 
sense, it has become liable to be carried away 
by its impressions and impulses without ever 
reminding itself of its original immaculacy. 
What comes from outside does not, of course, 
defile the mind, but when the latter loses its own 
control and gives way to sensuality, the dust 
begins to accumulate on it. When its trans- 
parency is thus gone, the mind becomes a play- 
thing of all chance impulses and haphazard 
impressions, like a river-ark drifting in the ocean 
and being tossed up and down by the capricious 


THE MIDDLE "WAY 97 

waves. Buddhism calls such a one ignorant 
and wanting in the Bodhi (wisdom). It there- 
fore admonishes us to reflect within ourselves 
constantly and not to give a free rein to the 
sensual, selfish, unenlightened passions. The 
reason why Buddhism has so many moral pre- 
cepts and monastic rules to regulate the lives 
of lay disciples and monks will now be under- 
stood. They are all intended for the purification 
of the mind and the regulation of bodily desires. 
They are all meant to ward off the evil influences 
that disturb serenity of mind and simplicity of 
heart, in order that our divine nature residing 
within us may fulfil its own significance and be 
free in its own operations. Buddhism does not 
desire to impede in any way our rational activ- 
ities on account of those moral regulations, 
but simply to check the progress of evil desires, 
selfish impulses, and unenlightened motives. 

So far we have dealt with the ethical and 
practical phase of Buddhism as enunciated in the 
first stanza. Now we must go round and see 
what is the other side of Buddhism, which con- 
stitutes the philosophical foundation of the 
system. It is not enough for us, it is not worthy 
of the name of a human being, merely to live 
and not to endeavor to unravel the mysteries 
of life. As a rational, conscious being, we must 
look into the reason of things, we must know the 
why of existence. To live even as a saint is not 
quite gratifying to the intellectual cravings of 


98 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

the human mind. Of course, every religion must 
find its culmination in our practical life and 
not in our abstract speculation. Yet we must 
seek a philosophical basis of conduct. And Bud- 
dhism finds this in the second stanza cited at 
the beginning of this discourse. 

At the first blush the gath^ seems to smack 
not a little of nihilism, as it apparently denies 
the existence of individuality. But those who 
stop short at this negative interpretation of it 
are not likely to grasp, the deep signification of 
Buddhism. For Buddhism teaches in this gatha 
the existence of the highest reality that tran- 
scends the duality of body and mind as well as 
the limitations of time and space. Though this 
highest reality is the source of life, the ultimate 
reason of existence, and the norm of things 
multifarious and multitudinous, it has nothing 
particular in it, it cannot be designated by any 
determinative terms, it refuses to be expressed in 
the phraseology we use in our common parlance. 
Why? For it is an absolute unity, and there 
is nothing individual, particular, dualistic, and 
conditional. It is a great mistake, an intellectual 
weakness, to suppose that there is such a thing 
as a personal God or an immortal soul which 
stands like a mirror bright and shining and 
which is susceptible of contamination or corrup- 
tion. For practical purposes we may provision- 
ally admit the existence of an entity which some 
people call God and which is independent of this 


THE MIDDLE WAY 


99 


world; we may again admit the existence of the 
soul which is the master of this material phe- 
nomenon called body. But to understand these 
things as actually existing as our short-sighted 
intellect conceives them will be a fatal mistake. 

We must first directly comprehend the spir- 
itual reason of things, and then let us with this 
insight look upon things that are about us. It 
would be madness to deny the reality of the 
phenomenal world, but in the midst of these 
realities the enlightened see their non-reality. 
There towers a huge mountain, here lies a bound- 
less ocean, birds are singing, trees are growing, 
and I sit here looking over the verdant meadow; 
yet, in spite of all these, nay, indeed by reason of 
these, I believe in the nothingness of existence, 
in the non-reality of realities, and in the abso- 
lute oneness of all things ; and it is thereby that I 
gain my peace of mind and realize the sense of 
perfect freedom in my everyday life. 

All those moral laws and religious regulations 
which I at first found unreasonably fettering my 
free activity are now blessings, for I am no more 
than those laws and rules themselves. I have 
become master of them. I am the maker of all 
those moral laws, and my existence consists in 
the execution of them. I say this, my dear 
Christian audience, and then ask you, "Does 
your God feel himself hampered in his activity 
when he has so many laws of nature to observe? 
Does he, for instance, complain of the law of 


lOO SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

gravity when he wants an apple to drop on the 
ground?" Is he not perfectly free in following 
the laws of nature? and are we not made in his 
image? I see, then, no obstacles, no hampering, 
no discordant jarring in my following the laws 
of my being. And hereby we go back to the 
first stanza of moral discipline. We find now the 
middle course of truth, a complete harmonization 
of rigorism and naturalism, as the principles 
advocated by those two stanzas may respectively 
be so termed. 

At first we had a feeling of compulsion and 
restraint, but now at the mastery of the second 
stanza we have philosophical intuition and feel 
perfectly at ease. We move as we will, yet we 
do not transgress. Our conduct, when our 
spiritual enlightenment reaches this stage, is in 
complete accord with the reason of heaven and 
earth, for we are now identified with it. From 
the start our religious discipline has been to 
attain this ease, this freedom, this simplicity, 
this spirituality, and we have at last reached 
the goal and are at rest. The bird has acquired 
two strong wings, the cart is supplied with a 
pair of running wheels, and we have the eyes 
that see and the legs that walk. There is nothing 
now in this life that will possibly cause vexation 
of spirit or the gnashing of teeth and the palpi- 
tation of heart. 


THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW 

BUDDHISM is a religion which originated 
in India some five hundred years before 
the Christian Era. Its founder was Siddhartha 
Gautama, of royal lineage, who, becoming dis- 
satisfied with the life he was born to enjoy, 
turned away from all forms of ease and luxury 
which surrounded him. He retired into the 
Himalaya Mountains when he was nineteen 
years old, or, according to another tradition, at 
the age of twenty-nine. He then devoted himself 
to penance and mortification, which was at the 
time considered a necessary discipline for those 
who sought wisdom and enlightenment. He 
visited many saints and philosophers whose 
virtue and wisdom were recognized by the 
people. Some years of rigorous ascetic life 
passed, and he was acknowledged by his religious 
comrades as their spiritual leader. But Gautama 
himself was not satisfied with this, because he 
was quite convinced that asceticism was not at 
all conducive to moral culture and spiritual 
enlightenment. He then altogether abandoned 
the practice of fasting and other modes of self- 
torture, and for taking this course of life he was 


I02 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

deserted by his comrades. But his conviction 
and determination were not to be shaken by 
such trifling affairs; he kept on following what 
he thought would help him best to attain to 
wisdom and enlightenment. 

After several years of deep meditation he 
awoke one morning under the Bodhi tree and 
most clearly perceived the way of enlightenment. 
He was now no more Gautama, a royal prince, but 
a Buddha, the enlightened one. He was so over- 
joyed with the revelation that he spent about a 
week most profoundly absorbed in contempla- 
tion, and it is even said that he was not at all 
inclined to come out of his transcendental ecstasy 
and self -reflection and to engage in active propa- 
ganda work in the world. But in the meantime 
his great compassionate heart asserted itself. 
His thought turned toward the miserable spir- 
itual conditions under which his former asso- 
ciates were laboring and from which he was now 
completely free. He went back to the woods 
where they were living. At first, they were 
disposed to deride their former leader, but as he 
approached his serene countenance and majestic 
demeanor completely unnerved them, and they 
prostrated themselves before him and asked his 
instruction. They were all converted to his 
view and came to enjoy the real bliss of life and 
enlightenment. 

Buddha now thought of the world at large: 
"Though the masses are wretchedly struggling 


THE WHEEL OP THE GOOD LAW 1 03 

under delusion, prejudice, narrow-mindedness, 
bigotry, and superstition, there must be some 
in the world who are open to conviction, seeking 
the hght of Dharma, Good Law, and those must 
be saved by all means. If they become enlight- 
ened, they will be able to perpetuate my teaching, 
posterity will learn through them of wisdom and 
enlightenment, and the truth will not be lost 
among sentient beings." Thus resolved, the 
Buddha came out into the world and made Deer 
Park in Central India the place of his first mis- 
sionary activity. In describing this event, the 
Buddhists say that the Wheel of the Good Law, 
Dharmachakra, has been caused to revolve in 
this place for the first time in the history of 
mankind, marking the formal establishment of 
Buddhism. 

The Buddha's long life of near ninety years 
consisted in never-tiring peregrinations along 
the banks of the Ganges and over the plains of 
Central India. He died while thus traveling, 
and there were present at the time only a few 
of his disciples surrounding his death-bed. His 
body was cremated and distributed among eight 
principal Buddhist kings of India who wished 
to honor their spiritual benefactor, each by 
erecting a splendid stupa or pagoda over his 
earthly remains. 

* * * 

Having thus roughly sketched the life of the 
founder of Buddhism, we ask now what is the 


I04 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

Wheel of the Good Law caused by him to revolve 
more than twenty-four centuries ago. 

The most powerful motive that influenced 
Buddha, who was a royal prince, to abandon all 
his claims to the earthly advantages and to live 
a monkish, retiring, contemplative life, was his 
deep insight into the nature of life. He knew that 
life as it is lived by most of sentient beings was 
no more than a series of sufferings, for in trying 
to escape one misery they invariably fall into 
another misery which is perhaps greater and 
heavier to endure. He asked himself whether 
this misery could be exterminated. To ascertain 
this it was necessary to find out the real funda- 
mental cause of it all. The removal of the cause 
was the removal of the effect. 

In Ignorance he found the cause of misery 
that surrounds and oppresses us, sentient beings. 

People are ignorant as to the real significance 
of existence; they blindly crave for it and its 
continuance merely for its own enjoyment; they 
do not know what destiny is awaiting them at 
the end of their earthly career; they do not 
know how pregnant of meaning is their every 
act, their every thought, their every feeling; 
they do not know under what conditions a phe- 
nomenon called life is possible, and finally they 
have a very confused notion concerning the true 
nature of the soul which they identify with the 
ego, simple, permanent, and absolute. On 
account of this ignorance, they suffer ; on account 


THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW 105 

of this ignorance, they keep oh augmenting the 
causes of misery, and are unable to see the light 
of wisdom. 

Buddha declares, there is no doubt that life 
is suffering, but it also affords enjoyment. The 
Buddhist life, however, is not to cling to either, 
for its real purpose is above the concatenation of 
pain and pleasure, sorrow and joy. Let us first 
be enlightened and not deviate from the path of 
righteousness, and we are saved. 

The world in which we abide is a world of 
contrasts; the life we live is a life of opposites. 
We have the day and the night, we have the 
spring and the fall, we have men and women. 
Some are young, others are old; some are just 
breathing their last, others have now come to 
the world. The elements attract and repulse 
one another. The moon waxes and wanes. 
The waves are rising and receding. The stars 
are running toward one another and running 
away from one another. This is the world of 
constant change, of eternal motion, where takes 
place a never-ending interaction of forces. It is 
one force or one set of forces now that predomi- 
nates, and then another. The point of concen- 
tration is eternally shifting. This is the actual 
experience of life and also its necessary condition. 

Therefore, they will come inevitably to grief 
— ^they that disregard this experience and con- 
dition of life, they that seek in this world nothing 
but an everlasting continuation of pleasant, 


Io6 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

agreeable sensations. They want to live, and 
they do not know that their living is really their 
death. This contradiction causes them an im- 
measurable amount of suffering. Apparently 
they are living, that is, they are moving bodily 
in the world of contrasts and opposites, of pleas- 
ures and pains, of sorrows and joys, of good and 
evil; and yet they want to escape from this 
actual state of things, they want to enter into a 
region where they have only monotony, stag- 
nation, and abeyance, and even extinction. 
For are they not trying to keep the pendulum of 
life always up on one side only? The penduliun 
owes its existence to a constant swinging from 
one side to the other. When this is stopped, it 
ceases to be itself and exists no more; To live 
is to move, to change, to walk up and down, 
to come in and out, to enjoy and to suffer, to 
smile and to weep. To refuse to do so is simply 
courting death. Life is a fabric interwoven 
with the woof of pain and the warp of pleasure. 
It cannot be a monotonous series of pleasures, 
nor that of pains. Therefore, to enjoy life is not 
to crave for agreeable stimulations alone, nor is it 
to shun evils. It is to be above them, both 
pain and pleasure. It is to use the world, as not 
abusing it, to state it from the Christian point 
of view. 

But many are they that are ignorant of this 
our actual experience of life. How hard they 
endeavor to create as much pleasure as they can 


THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW I07 

and to • cling to it as long as they can, utterly 
regardless of the true meaning of life! But it 
is altogether outside of their power to check the 
approaching shadow of misery which gradually 
and stealthily but surely envelops them in the 
end. The greater the joy of the moment, the 
stronger its reverse. For where the mountains 
are high, the seas are deep ; and the blackness of 
a raven looks blacker in the whiteness of snow. 
It is therefore well to remind these hedonists of 
the necessary condition of life, that there is no 
pleasure that is not mingled with pain, that there 
is no bliss which can be obtained without struggle. 
Whatever blind pleasure-seekers think to be 
bliss or curse is no other than the products of 
sensualism and egoism, so long as they are 
bound with the iron chain of ignorance. Their 
deeds, sentiments, and thoughts have no moral 
or religious significance whatever. Their lives 
are like the bubbles or foam that vanish without 
leaving any mark on the water. They die just 
as they are born, blind, ignorant, and benighted. 
Life, according to Buddhism, is worth living, 
because it enables us to do something, because it 
gives us a chance to work, to apply ourselves, 
because it is the condition which makes possible 
the reahzation of our moral and spiritual aspira- 
tions. Even if it is thought by some to be 
worth living because it supplies us with pleasures 
of passing moments or because -it is desirable for 
its own sake, Buddhists will not hesitate to sur- 


Io8 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

render their lives once for all and will most 
gladly be absorbed m the eternal abyss of death. 
Life has nothing in itself worth clinging to, if 
it did not promise us an opportunity to work. 
As sentient, conscious beings that we are, it 
would be most degrading in us to live the life 
of a stone, to exist just for the sake of existence 
and for no other purpose. 

All conscientious Buddhists realize that there 
are laws, natural as well as spiritual, in this 
universe, and that those who dare to infringe 
upon them are unerringly and even mercilessly 
punished therefor. It does not make any differ- 
ence that this infringement is unknowingly or 
knowingly done, nor does it help the violator to 
ask for a special grace. An evil act is committed, 
and the universe is sorrowful for it, as it retards 
so much the progress and realization of goodness. 
But it will not let the evil-doer go unpunished. 
Therefore, this existence has a purpose to attain, 
an end to reach, an ideal to manifest; and all 
beings animate and inanimate are working for 
this universal goal. Our limited consciousness 
may not have a very clear conception as to every 
phase of the significance of life, but all enlight- 
ened minds are aware of this, that life is not for 
mere living, but that it is the path which leads 
to goodness, suchness, and oneness. The moral 
and spiritual laws are instrumental for these 
causes, and as long as we are moving in confor- 
mity to the laws of conduct, we are promoting the 


THE WHEEL OF THE GOOD LAW 109 

ftoble, worthy ideals, and our duties of life are 
thereby discharged. Pleasures and pains, joys 
and sorrows are merely accidents of life. They 
do not enter into its essential fabric. And con- 
sequently they are ignored by the Buddhists. 
They are not taken into any serious consideration 
in the determination or selection of duties of 
life. 

Therefore, let us work, let us develop all our 
possibilities ; not for ourselves, but for our fellow- 
creatures. Let us be enlightened in our efforts, 
let us strive after the general welfare of humanity 
and indeed of all creations. We are born here 
to do certain things. Life may be misery or not ; 
it concerns us not; let us do what we have to do. 
We are not here wholly alone, we are not the 
center of the universe, everything is not coming 
to us. But our existence is conditioned. The 
fact that we are here at all is due to our mutual 
support and dependence. We cannot save our- 
selves unless others are saved. We cannot 
advance unless the general progress is assured. 
We must help one another, we must abandon 
our vulgar ego-centric ideas, we must expand 
ourselves so that the entire universe is identified 
with us, and so that our interests are those of 
humanity. TEt is therefore most evident that the 
assertion of the self-will and the giving way to 
the clamors of the ego-soul is against the reason 
of life. The attainment of Nirvana and the 
manifestation of the Buddhist life is possible 


no SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

only through the denial of selfhood and through 
the united labor of all our brother creatures. 

This is the doctrine proclaimed by the Buddha 
after many years of profound meditation on the 
bank of the Ganges, and constitutes the essence 
of the Wheel of the Good Law which has been in 
fact revolving ever since the dawn of sentiency. 

The statements above made are usually put 
down in formula and called the Fourfold Noble 
Truth; viz., (i) Life is suffering, (2) There is 
cause for it, which is ignorance, (3) Nirvana, 
which transcends pain and pleasure, is the goal 
of our life, and (4) To reach it the moral laws 
must be put into practice.' 

'As for what is the practical ethics of Buddhism, read 
the article entitled "Buddhist Ethics." (P. 69.) 


THE PHENOMENAL AND THE SUPRA- 
PHENOMENAL' 

Anicc4 vata sankhAra, 
Uppadavaya dhammino; 
Uppajjitva nirujjanti; 
Tesam vlipasamo sukho.^ 

BEFORE entering upon an exposition of this 
stanza which I have selected for the 
subject of this morning's discourse, I wish to 
make a short preliminary remark concerning 
Buddhism generally. 

In the study of Buddhism, one important 
thing which should be borne in mind by scholars 
is that the religion of Buddha has nothing to do 
with supernaturalism. Adhering to facts and 
their plain statements, Buddhists are always 
reluctant to give themselves away to personal 
authority or supernatural — which is, in fact, 
unnatural — revelation. Buddhism may there- 
fore appear to some people rather flat, prosaic, 

'A sermon delivererd at the Buddhist Mission of San 
Francisco, November, 1905. 
^Translated into EngHsh : 

Transitory, verily, are things, 
Subject to law of birth and death; 
Things born are doomed to die; 
Their termination is bliss. 
Ill 


112 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

and unentertaining, lacking in the fertility and 
brilliancy of imagination — though this is by no 
means the case — and they call it sometimes a 
sort of ethical culture society and not a religious 
institution. For they think that no religion can 
exist without a belief in something extraordi- 
nary, miraculous, or supramundane which cannot 
be logically proved and individually experi- 
enced. But Buddha most emphatically insists 
that what he teaches is nothing unusual, being 
simply the recognition of a plain fact which can 
be attested by every mortal, that truth is not 
revealed to us from an unknown source, but is 
discovered by ourselves through the exercise of 
a faculty that can be acquired by all self-conscious 
beings, and that Buddhism is to be believed 
rationally and not blindly, to be believed because 
it is true and not because it has been proclaimed 
by some mythical personage. Whatever defects 
the teaching of Buddha may possess, I consider 
its rationality and matter-of-factness as one of 
its most characteristic and important features, 
distinguishing it from many another religion. 

Further, this rationality of Buddhism is per- 
haps one of the many causes which make Bud- 
dhists remarkably tolerant and broad-minded 
toward their rival religionists. It is the pride 
of every conscientious Buddhist that the history 
of his faith is perfectly free from the stain of 
blood. When we of modern days turn over the 
pages of religious cruelty, and barbarism, we are 


THE SUPRA-PHENOMENAL 1 13 

struck with a bitter sense of irony. It seems 
incredible that a religion proclaiming the gospel 
of love could practise such inhumanity. But 
I regret to say that even to-day there are some 
who are so hopelessly dogmatic and fanatical 
as to think that the rose could be sweet and 
fragrant only under its own name, that truth 
loses its worth and verity when known by any 
other name than their own, and that they would 
fight even unto death in order to replace one 
set of superstitions with another. 

Science is steadily making its progress in 
various fields of human knowledge, and our intel- 
lectual sphere is being constantly widened; 
while pious, God-fearing religionists are still 
dreaming of the by-gone days, when their fore- 
fathers were engaged in the so-called holy wars, 
or when they were conducting the most atrocious, 
most diabolical outrage against humanity called 
the Inquisition. These facts often make me pause 
and think of their ultimate significance, wondering 
how slow man's progress is in things spiritual. 

However this may be. Buddhism through its 
rationality and matter-of-fact-ness has never 
been intolerant and narrow-minded. It has 
always borne in mind that howsoever many 
avenues there may be to the summit of enlight- 
enment, the position once gained will allow us all, 
regardless of racial and national variations, to 
see but one universal Hght of truth. The highest 
being is known under various names and appel- 


114 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

lations among various peoples on earth, accord- 
ing to their culture, education, and environment. 
Humanity, being essentially the same everywhere, 
it will sooner or later come to the knowledge of a 
supreme moral and spiritual power which governs 
the universe and whose commands we are com- 
pelled under penalty of annihilation to respect 
and obey. Whatever circumstances may lead to 
a difference of conception as to the details of its 
operation, the power of religion is fundamentally 
love, — ^love that does not exclude nor discrimi- 
nate nor particularize; and this kind of love is 
realizable only when we recognize naturally and 
rationally and humanly the divinity of all exist- 
ence and the universality of truth, in whatever 
divers aspects they may be considered and by 
whatever different paths they may be approached. 
* * * 

Now to return to the subject-proper of this 
discourse. Buddhism views the world under 
two aspects, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal. 
In the phenomenal world, the law of birth and 
death rules supreme, and here is nothing that 
will endure forever. Everything that exists under 
the sun is fleeting; it passes away as rapidly as 
the swift ships or as the eagle that swoopeth on 
the prey. The sun that has risen will set, the 
mountains so towering will crumble, the turbulent 
ocean will be drained, and the earth itself will 
be shaken from its foundations. That which has 
been is no more, and that which is is changing 


THE SUPRA-PHENOMENAL 115 

fast. Indeed, the world is no more than a con- 
stant flux of becoming. Therefore, the Buddha 
declares: "Transitory, verily, are things, sub- 
ject to the law of birth and death; and things 
bom are doomed to die." 

Mutability or impermanence is one of the most 
universal facts of the world, and any one who 
has his eyes wide open will certainly have to 
recognize it. And this recognition, when logically 
carried out, will again certainly lead to non- 
attachment; and non-attachment will in turn 
bring out in us the desire for immortality. The 
reason why we cling to worldliness is because 
we are not thoroughly acquainted with its true 
character. Its superficiality, its vainglory, its 
illusiveness, its butterfly-like carelessness and 
capriciousness, — all this seems to have a peculiar 
fascination for the sensuous. They have no time 
to reflect deeply on the nature of these attrac- 
tions, for they find themselves hopelessly involved 
in the whirlpool of vanities before they can at all 
think of extricating themselves therefrom. They 
look aghast at those who remind them of the 
mutability of things and of the evanescent nature 
of pleasures. 

We can well imagine how desperate is the 
situation of an undisciplined, unreflective mind 
that almost mechanically pursues objects of sense 
as the moth follows the flame. But as soon as the 
mind is awakened to the real state of the phe- 
nomenal world, it is unspeakably mortified at its 


Il6 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

-past folly and infatuation, and it will gradually 
develop the desire for non-attachment or free- 
dom, in which it becomes estranged from its 
sensuous surroundings. 

But can a mortal secure anything approaching 
eternity in this phenomenal realm? If every- 
thing here is subject to the irrefragable law of 
birth and death, we cannot in any way give 
satisfaction to our inner craving for things ever- 
lasting and immortal. Buddhism knows this our 
spiritual demand and teaches us that there exists 
a region which is supra-phenomenal and of which 
the spirit can drink to its satiety. 

This supra-phenomenal world has no material 
limitations and therefore is not subject to the 
law of birth and death. As it is thus transcen- 
dent, it is beyond the reach of pain and pleasure, 
which is the pendulum that regulates the motive 
and conduct of the sensuous man. This latter 
is therefore unable to have even a glimpse of this 
heavenly region that lies beyond. He only who 
has freed himself from the shackle of phenom- 
enality is no more affected by its mutability, 
and he is said to be living on the higher plane of 
existence. The mountains may be removed 
from their foundation, and the oceans may be 
exhausted, but a spiritual man will be above all 
such material vicissitudes, living a life of eternal 
peace. He calmly reviews the course of exist- 
ence as it comes and disappears. He serenely 
abides in the realm of supra-phenomenality. He 


THE SUPRA-PHBNOMENAL II7 

sees the lamp of eternity shining through the 
mist of transiency. He rises from the howling 
tempest of birth and death. Physically, he is, 
and will be no more, but spiritually he is living 
forever, unborn and imperishable. Because he 
has founded his kingdom in the Pure Land; 
where the waves of being and non-being beat 
no more ; where the veil of ignorance and misery 
no longer hangs low; where the transitoriness of- 
particulars is forever gone; where love, pure and 
infinite, embraces, absorbs, unifies every separate 
existence ; and where joy inexpressible flows from 
the well of eternal peace. Therefore, the stanza 
above recited concludes with this line: "The 
termination of birth and death is bliss." 
* * * 

Now, the question again arises. Is this supra- 
phenomenal absolutely separated from the phe- 
nomenal world? If so, how can we of the latter 
ever expect or aspire to raise ourselves to the 
higher level of existence? If not, how can the 
supra-phenomenal be the phenomenal, and vice 
versa, seeing that they each have apparently 
irreconcilable characteristics? Learned Buddhist 
scholars will tell us how the identity of the supra- 
phenomenal and the phenomenal can be meta- 
physically established, and that our mental con- 
stitution demands this oneness, or, otherwise, 
a dualism, which inevitably results, will destroy 
the fundamental harmony of our logical reason- 
ing. But we who are aiming at the practical 


Il8 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

result of religious discipline would better eschew 
the theoretical part and be content with our 
inner individual experience. We would best avoid 
theorization and state the verdict of Buddhism 
on this problem rather dogmatically, which is: 
All depends upon our spiritual condition. If it 
is irreproachable and immaculate, supra-phe- 
nomenal is phenomenal, phenomenal is supra- 
phenomenal. Both are one and the same. Our 
earthly life is most exalted, most sacred, most 
divine, most religious. But if the spirit be defiled 
and corrupted, even a manifestly holy life is no 
more than gross blasphemy. All hinges on how 
we keep the spirit, pure or impure. Buddhism is 
thus thoroughly idealistic, as every true religion 
ought to be. It teaches the purification of the 
heart as the beginning and the end of all religious 
training. 

Therefore, the heart holds the key which opens 
either the portal of sensuality or that of spir- 
ituality. In fact, these different portals do not 
exist objectively. The universe is one and the 
same for the just as well as for the unjust, but 
they approach it from various points of view 
and color it with their own inner pigment. Some 
are ignorant and selfish, and they interpret life 
accordingly. Others are simple-hearted and 
defilement-free, and thus they read the world. 
Conventionally, a distinction is made between 
the two worlds, supra-phenomenal and phenom- 
enal, or sensual and spiritual, or worldly and 


THE SUPRA-PHENOMENAL II9 

saintly; in reality this is our own creation. Let 
us be free from delusion and sensualism, and 
things will present themselves in their own true 
color and form. 

The termination of birth and death, pain and 
pleasure, desire and satisfaction, in short, of all 
sorts of dualism, does not mean to escape from the 
world and to lead an ascetic life, nor does it mean 
to commit suicide and put an end to existence, 
which is thought the root of all evil. Buddhism 
understands by the last line of the stanza recited 
at the beginning of this discourse the purification 
of the heart from all its selfish desires and defiled 
sentiments arising from ignorance and prejudice. 
For the self is no more than an illusory existence, 
and the separation of "me" from "thee" is fata 
morgana, and those who believe in their absolute 
reality are said to be confused. The heart essen- 
tially free and pure becomes contaminated as 
soon as it is caught in the meshes of egoism, 
and the result is the production of the three 
venomous desires' and the five consuming pas- 
sions.'' Of course, it would be madness to deny 
the relative reality of objects of the senses; no 
one can refute it. But if we go one step further 
and declare that their reality is final and ultimate, 
we logically put ourselves in the most awkward 
position and morally stand on the most unsteady 
ground. The irreconcilable egoism which char- 

'Avarice, hatred, and infatuation. 

''Inordinate desires arising from the five senses. 


120 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

acterizes the life of the ordinary man is no more 
than the natural outcome of this fatal realism. 
To be saved, we must lift the veil of ignorance 
and come out into the realm of "calm radiance," 
which is the abode of the enlightened. 

The conclusion of the whole affair, then, is: 
The world is characterized by mutability and 
impermanence ; those who do not rise above 
worldliness are tossed up and down in the whirl- 
pool of passion. But those who know the consti- 
tution of things see the infinite in the finite and 
the supra-phenomenal in the phenomenal, and 
are blessed in the midst of sufferings and tribu- 
lations. 


The Engaku Monastery of Kamakura is a complex of sev- 
eral groups of buildings surrounded by pine-covered hills ; and 
our picture shows the Right Rev. Soyen Shaku standing 
under the gate that leads to the Meditation Hall. 


REPLY TO A CHRISTIAN CRITIC 

(Letter written in 1896 to Dr. John H. Barrows.)' 
Dear Sir: 

Friends in America have sent me a number of 
the Chicago Tribune, dated Monday, January 13, 
1896, which contains the report of your second 
Haskell lecture, delivered at the Kent Theater 
in the Chicago University. The subject is 
"Christianity and Buddhism," and I anticipated 
a friendly and sympathetic treatment of Bud- 
dhism at your hands, for I do not doubt that 
you desire to be just in your judgment. Your 
utterances are of importance because they will 
be received as an impartial representation of our 
religion, since you, having been Chairman of the 
Religious Parliament, are commonly considered 
to have the best of information about those reli- 
gions that were represented at this famous 
assemblage. I was greatly disappointed, how- 
ever, seeing that you only repeat those errors 
which are common in the various Western books 
on Buddhism. You say, "The goal which made 
Buddha's teachings a dubious gospel, is Nirvana, 
which involves the extinction of love and life, 

'Reproduced from The Open Court, January, 1897. 


122 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ASBOt 

as the going out of a flame which has nothing else 
to feed upon." Now the word Nirvana means 
"extinction" and it means the eradication of 
all evil desires, of all passions, of all egotism, 
so that the flame of envy, hatred, and lust will 
have nothing to feed upon. This is the negative 
side of Nirvana. The positive side of Nirvana 
consists in the recognition of truth. The destruction 
of evil desires, of envy, hatred, extinction of selfish- 
ness implies charity, compassion with all siiffer- 
ing, and a love that is unbounded and infinite. 
NirvS,na means extinction of lust, not of love; 
extinction of evil, not of existence; of egotistic 
craving, not of life. The eradication of all that 
is evil in man's heart will set all his energies free 
for good deeds, and he is no genuine Buddhist 
who would not devote his life to active work, 
and a usefulness which would refuse neither his 
friends nor strangers, nor even his very enemies. 
You say that "human life does not breathe, 
in Buddhism, the atmosphere of divine father- 
hood, but groans under the dominion of inex- 
orable and implacable laws." Now, I grant that 
Buddha taught the irrefragability^ oFTaw^ZSit 
thig' is a point in which, as in^sornany others, 
Buddha's ■ teachings are in exact agreement_with 
the doctrines of modern science. However, you 
ou^ht to consider that while the law~isnrfefra- 
gable, no one but those who infringe upon it 
groan under it. He who understands the laws 
of existence, and especially the moral law that 


REPLY TO A CHRISTIAN CRITIC 1 23 

underlies the development of human society, 
will accommodate himself to it, and thus he will 
not groan under it, but in the measure that he 
is like Buddha he will be enlightened, he will be 
a master of the law and not a slave. In^ the same 
way that the ignorant savage is killed by the 
electric shock of lightning, while an electric 
engiiieer uses it for lighting the halls and streets 
of our cities, the immoral man suffers from the 
moral law, he groans under its inexorable and 
implacable decree,_ while the moraL man enjoys 
it, and turning it to advantage glories in its 
boundless blessings. 

This same moral law is the source of enlight- 
enment and its recognition constitutes Buddha- 
hood. This same moral law we call Dharmakaya, 
which is eternal, omnipresent, and all-glorious. 
We represent it under a picture of a father, and 
it was incarnated not only in Gautama-Buddha, 
but also in all great men in a higher or lesser 
degree, foremost among them in Jesus Christ, 
and, allow me to add, in George Washington, 
Abraham Lincoln, and other great men of your 
country. Allow me to add, too, that Buddha's 
doctrine, far from being skepticism, proclaims 
the doctrine that man can attain enhghtenment 
and that he attains it not only through study 
and learning, which, as a matter of course, are 
indispensable, but also and mainly through the 
earnest exertions of a life of purity and holiness. 

There are many more points in your lecture 


124 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

which I feel tempted to discuss with you, but 
they refer more to Christianity than to Buddhism, 
and may imply a misunderstanding of Christian 
doctrines on my part. I am anxious to know all 
that is good in Christianity and the significance 
of your dogmas, so that I may grow in a compre- 
hension of truth, but I have not as yet been 
able to see that mankind can be benefited by 
believing that Jesus Christ performed miracles. 
I do not deny the miracles nor do I believe them ; 
I only claim that they are irrelevant. The 
beauty and the truth of many of Christ's sayings 
fascinate me, but truth does not become clearer 
by being pronounced by a man who works mira- 
cles. You say that, "We can explain Buddha 
without the miracles which later legends ascribe 
to him, but we cannot explain Christ — either 
his person or his influence — ;without granting the 
truth of his own claim that he did the super- 
natural works of his father." We may grant 
that Jesus Christ is the greatest master and 
teacher that appeared in the West after Buddha, 
but the picture of Jesus Christ as we find it in the 
Gospel is marred by the accounts of such miracles 
as the great draft of fishes, which involves a great 
and useless destruction of life (for we read that 
the fishermen followed Jesus, leaving the fish 
behind), and by the transformation of water 
into wine at the marriage-feast at Cana. Nor 
has Jesus Christ attained to the calmness and 
dignity of Buddha, for the passion of anger 


REPLY TO A CHRISTIAN CRITIC 1 25 

overtook him in the temple, when he drove out 
with rope in hand those that bargained in the 
holy place. 

How different would Buddha have behaved 
under similar conditions in the same place! 
Instead of whipping the evil-doers he would 
have converted them, for kind words strike 
deeper than the whip. 

I do not dare to discuss the statements you 
make about Christianity, for fear that I may be 
mistaken, but I am open to conviction and 
willing to learn. 

I hope you will not take offense at my frank 
remarks, but I feel that you, if any one in Chris- 
tendom, ought to know the real teachings of 
Buddha, and we look to you as a leader who will 
make possible the way for a better understanding 
between all the religions of the world, for I do 
not doubt that as you unknowingly misrepresent 
the doctrines of the Tathagata, so we may mis- 
understand the significance of Christianity. We 
shall be much obliged to you if in justice to the 
religion of Buddha you will make public this 
humble protest of mine, so that at least the 
most important misconceptions and prejudices 
that obtain among Christians may be removed. 

I remain, with profound respect, 

Your obedient servant, 
Kamakura, Japan. Soyen Shaku. 


IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT. 

THE fundamental idea of Buddhism is "to 
disperse the clouds of ignorance in order 
to make the moon of enlightenment shine out 
in her glory." 

By ignorance Buddhism understands the asser- 
tion of self-will, which is the root of all evil and 
misery in this world. Self-will is ignorance, 
because it is blind to the truth that the world 
is a relative existence, that the self separated 
from other fellow-selves is non-entity, and that 
individuals acquire their reality in proportion 
as they penetrate the foundation of existence. 
This truth is ignored by the principle of self- 
assertion. A man who is self-assertive pushes 
himself forward without any regard to the 
welfare of his brother creatures; he hails him- 
self when he reaches the heights of self-aggran- 
dizement; but unfortunately he fails to perceive 
that his success is but the road to his final 
destruction. For self-assertion really means self- 
annihilation. We live in fact in the oneness of 
things and die in isolation and singleness. 

In Christian terminology, selfhood is the 
"flesh," or "the old man"; such is the meaning 

126 


IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT 


127 


when Jesus exclaims that "the spirit is truly 
ready, but the flesh is weak" (Mark xiv, 38), 
or when Paul speaks of "the old man which is 
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts" (Eph. 
iv, 22), or when the flesh is spoken of as profiting 
nothing (John vi, 63), or allusion is made to its 
infirmity (Rom. vi, 19), or to its not pleasing 
God (Rom. viii, 8), or to its lusting against the 
spirit (Gal. V, 17). Christians are not so intel- 
lectual as Buddhists, and therefore, philosophically 
considered, the terminology of the former is not 
so definite and to the point as is that of the 
latter. Besides, the adoption of popular terms 
often suggests a wrong conception which is not 
intended; for instance, the distinction between 
the flesh and the spirit has a tendency to a 
dualistic interpretation of life. To conceive the 
nature of the flesh to be diametrically and radi- 
cally opposed to that of the spirit is not in accord 
with the essentially monistic teaching of Bud- 
dhism. Those who are prone to asceticism and 
self-mortification are as much condemned by 
Buddha as the followers of hedonism for being 
ignorant and far from attaining the path of 
enlightenment. 

When the ignorance of self-assertion is removed. 
Buddhism teaches, the enlightenment of universal 
lovingkindness takes its place ; and the arrogance, 
tenacity, indefatigability, and impertinence which 
characterize egotistic impulses are all converted to 
do service for the general welfare of humanity, 


128 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

and they will then assume different names as 
most desirable virtues. As soon as the veil of 
ignorance is raised, the glory of enlightenment 
which is love is revealed, and we do no more 
hanker after self-gratification. Why? Because 
the Buddha-intelHgence is universal and works 
in every one of us to bring out the consciousness 
of oneness underlying all individual phenomena. 
We as individuals are all different; mine is not 
thine and vice versa; and in this sense egoism 
is true, and the assertion of self-will is permis- 
sible to that extent. But we must never lose 
sight of "the same God that worketh all in all," 
and "in which we move and live and have our 
being," for he is the source of eternal life and the 
fountain of love. "Not what I will, but what 
thou wilt," is the most fundamental religious 
truth, not only in Christianity, but in Buddhism. 
Not the assertion of self-will, but the execution 
of the will of that being in which we are all one, 
constitutes the condition of enlightenment. 

We must not, however, suppose that the 
divine will becomes manifest only when all the 
lust and passions of the flesh are destroyed. 
This is the teaching of anchorites and not of 
Buddhists. What the latter teach is to make 
the inclinations of the flesh those of the spirit, 
so that there will be left no hiatus between the 
two. What one wills, the other wills, and no 
discord or mutual exclusion is then allowed. To 
express this more Buddhistically, ignorance does 


IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT 1 29 

not depart when enlightenment comes in, but 
ignorance itself becomes enlightenment; self-will 
is not annihilated in order to make room for the 
divine will, but self-will itself assumes divinity. 
In the beginning of this discourse, I said that 
the fundamental idea of Buddhism is to disperse 
the clouds of ignorance in order to see the moon 
of enlightenment in her glory. This may sug- 
gest the thought that ignorance and enlighten- 
raent are fundamentally different and mutually 
contradicting, and that one thing called ignor- 
ance goes out and another thing called enlighten- 
ment comes in to take its place, as these two 
do -not agree. But in truth I have there followed 
the popular dualistic conception of the matter; 
and therefore let me repeat that in Nirvana, 
according to Buddhism, there is not such dis- 
tinction as light and shade, ignorance and enlight- 
enment, coming and going. If there is anything 
in Nirvana, it is all enlightenment, all purity, 
and an unconditioned freedom from selfishness. 
Accordingly, when one attains Nirvana, which 
is the realization of the Buddhist life, ignorance 
itself becomes enlightenment and self-will the 
divine will. What we thought ignorance is now 
enlightenment ; where we located the final abode 
of the ego-soul, we have now the fount of divine 
will. This may sound somewhat sacrilegious, 
but the Buddhists are such consistent and never- 
yielding monists that they do not shrink from 
carrying out their logic to the end; they are not 


130 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

at all afraid of the charge of blasphemy or irre- 
ligiosity likely to be preferred by some pious 
Christians. 

This purification or illumination of self-will, 
however, must not be confused with antinomi- 
anism or libertinism. The latter is given up to 
the wantonness of self-wiU and not to the free 
activity of the divine will. What the pure-hearted 
do is always pure, while whatever comes from a 
heart defiled with egoism is defiled and irrational. 
There are many points in the religious life which 
make it very difficult to distinguish the latter 
from the ethical life, for both are so closely related. 
But we could consider the subjectivity of religion 
as most characteristically contrasted to the 
objectivity of ethics. The distinction between 
the self-will and the divine will must be personally 
felt and individually experienced. This may 
sound vague and be considered as taking refuge 
in the maze of subjectivism ; but the fact is that 
religion has its foundation in our subjective life, 
and anything that relates to it lacks in definition 
and exactitude so typical of things objective and 
intellectual. Religion, when devoid of this 
mystical element, loses its irresistible fascination. 
Of course, we must not make it abide always in 
the camera obscura of imagination and mysti- 
cism. We must take it out in the broad daylight 
of science and subject it to an intellectual scru- 
tiny. But we cannot for all that ignore the fact 
that there is something in religion which defies 


IGNORANCE AND ENLIGHTENMENT 13 1 

or escapes the most penetrating searchlight of 
intellectual analysis. And in this something 
there lies its charm, its raison d'etre, and its 
power to remove vexation of spirit. 

Whatever this be, Nirvana, in which the spir- 
ituality of a human being is fully realized, can be 
attained only after most strenuous moral efforts 
on the part of the aspirant. Intellectual knowl- 
edge can be acquired through an outside agency ; 
we of latter days may be far wiser in this par- 
ticular respect than all our venerable moral and 
religious teachers of bygone ages, such as Socrates, 
Plato, Buddha, and Christ. But the spiritual 
region lies within, and each of us must strive, 
through our own inner and individual efforts 
and not through any outside agency, to unfold 
ourselves and bring about enlightenment. We 
may have high ideals, but let us remember that 
they can be realized only after long discipHne 
and untiring exertion. Let those therefore for- 
ever strive — those that wish to follow the funda- 
mental idea of Buddhism. 

"When the scholar driveth away sloth by earnestness, 
He attaineth to the palace of wisdom, 
Sorrowless in the sorrowing world, 
And the wise one, he, looks upon the ignorant, 
Even as one on the mountain-peak looks upon one on 
the ground,". — Dharmapada, 28. 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 

THERE are many characteristic points of 
divergence between religion and philosophy, 
though they have so much in common that 
some scholars, broadly speaking, take religion 
for practical philosophy and philosophy for 
speculative religion. The difference between the 
two, however, is not merely that of practicability 
and theorization. It is, in my judgment, more 
deeply rooted and fundamental. What is it, 
then? I believe that that which makes religion 
what it is in contradistinction to philosophy or 
ethics consists in the truth that it is essentially 
founded on facts of one's own spiritual experi- 
ence, which is beyond intellectual demonstra- 
bility and which opens a finite mind to the light 
of universal effulgence. In short, spiritual en- 
lightenment is indispensable in religion, while 
philosophy is mere intellection. 

By spiritual enlightenment I mean j, man's 
becoming conscious through personal experience 
of the ultiniate nature prhis~inner~5eing. This 
insight breaks as it were the wall of intellectual 
limitation and brings us to a region which has 
been hitherto concealed from our view. The 

132 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 133 

horizon is now so widened as to enable our spir- 
itua1"visron to sufv^ the totality of existence. 
As long as we groped in the darkness of ignor- 
ance, we could not go beyond the threshold of 
individuation; we could not recognize the pres- 
ence of a light whose most penetrating rays 
reveal all the mysteries of nature and mind. 
The spirit has found that the light is shining 
within itself even in its fullest glory, that it even 
partakes something of this universal light, that 
it blundered miserably in seeking its own ground 
outside of itself, that "Alpha and Omega, the 
beginning and the end, which is, and which was, 
and which is to come," is no more nor less than 
itself. And it is through this kind of enlighten- 
ment only that we fully satisfy our inmost spir- 
itual yearnings and groanings. Without this, 
religion loses its significance, becoming merely 
an applied philosophy or system of metaphysics. 
The enlightenment which thus constitutes the 
basis of the religious life is altogether spiritual and 
not intellectual. The intellect in its very nature 
is relative and cannot transcend its own limita- 
tions. It is dualistic no matter how high it may 
take a flight. It always needs an object with 
which to deal, and it never identifies itself with 
it, for it cannot do so without destroying itself. 
There must be the "I" and the "not-I" when- 
ever intellection takes place. Self-alienation or 
keeping itself aloof from the object on which it 
exercises itself is the raison d'etre of intellect, 


134 SERMONS OP A' BUDDHIST ABBOT 

being its strongest as well as its weakest point. 
Its strongest point is seen in science and phi- 
losophy, while its weakest point is revealed in 
religion. For religion needs a synthetic faculty 
by which it can comprehend the realm of par- 
ticulars, the realm of constant strivings and 
eternal contradictions. Religion wants to under- 
stand and preserve life as it is found, and not to 
"dissect and murder" it as is done by the intel- 
lect. Religion wants to see and not to demon- 
strate; to grasp directly with her own hands 
and not to rely upon a medium; to see intui- 
tively and not discursively. What is therefore 
asked for by a religious spirit is fact and not 
representation, enlightenment and not reflection; 
and this will be supplied by no amount of specu- 
lation and imagination. We must advance one 
step further beyond the limits and boldly plunge 
into the abysmal depths of the Unknowable. 

Can a mortal being with his limited conscious- 
ness have an insight into a field without its ken? 
No; as long as he relies solely upon his intellec- 
tual faculty, he is forever barred from so doing. 
For the intellect is really superficial and cannot 
penetrate through spatial and temporal relations, 
nor can she free herself from the bondage of 
logical sequence; and therefore the inner life of 
our being is altogether unknown to the intellect. 
We cannot be said to know an object thoroughly 
by merely becoming familiar with all its attri- 
butes, qualities, potentialities, and what not. 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 135 

All these can be understood through the senses 
and the reasoning faculty. There yet remains 
a certain feature of the object, the knowledge 
of which alone completes our understanding of it. 
Philosophy and science have done a great deal 
for the adyaricement of our knowledge of the 
universe, and. there _is a fair prospect of their 
further service for this end. But "they "are con- 
stitutionally incapable of giving rest, bliss, joy, 
and faith to a troubled spirit; for they do not 
provide us with a complete knowledge of exist- 
ence, and are unable to lay bare th"e secrets' of 
life. What they teach concerns the shell and 
husk of reality. In "order to satisfy fully our 
religious yearnings we must not stop short at 
this ; we must appeal to a different faculty, which 
will reveal to us the inmost life of the universe. 

Fortunately, we are in possession of this peculiar 
faculty which might be called the religious sense, 
and through the exercise of which we come to 
realize the significance of our existence. How 
unbearable life would be, if we were not allowed 
to have this religious faculty and yet we had to 
raise those spirit-harassing questions which could 
not be solved by logic! 

The faculty seems to have all the essential 
characteristics of the feeling. It is intuitive and 
does not analyze; it is direct and refuses a 
medium of any form. It allows no argument, it 
merely states, and its statement is absolute. 
When it says "yes," the afQrmation has such a 


136 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

convincing force as to remove all doubts, and 
even skeptically disposed intellectual minds have 
to admit it as a fact and not a whim. It speaks 
as one with authority. True, it has only a sub- 
jective value, which, however, is just as ultimate 
and actual as sense-perception. Being immediate, 
there is no other way to test its validity than 
that each experience it personally, individually, 
and inwardly. The sun is risen on the horizon 
and all that have eyes see it and harbor not the 
shadow of a doubt as to its presence there. The 
inner sense which I have called religious faculty 
makes us feel the inmost life that is running 
through every vein and every artery of nature; 
and we are completely free from skepticism, 
unrest, dissatisfaction, and vexation of spirit. 
We never try to raise a doubt about the true 
nature of the feeling and ask ourselves whether 
it is merely a phenomenon of mental aberration 
or due to a calenture of the brain. We simply 
feel, and nothing more or less is to be asserted 
or denied. And this is what constitutes spiritual 
enlightenment. 

Mere talking about or mere believing in the 
existence of God and his infinite love is nonsense 
as far as religion is concerned. Talking and 
arguing belong to philosophy, and believing in its 
ordinary sense is a sort of hypothesis, not neces- 
sarily supported by facts. Religion, however, 
wants above _e very thing else solid .facts and 
actual personal experience. If God ejdsts, he 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 137 

roust be_felt. If he is love, it must be experi- 
enced and become the fact of one's inmost .Hfe. 
Without spiritual enlightenmentj_ all is an idle 
talE^like a bubble which vanishes under the least 
pressure. Without the awakening of the religious 
sense or faculty, God is a shadow, the soul a 
ghdstV and life a dream. In Buddhism this 
faculty is known as Prajnd. 

If we distinguish faith from knowledge, the 
latter can be understood as simply intellectual, 
while the former is intuition gained through the 
exercise of the Prajnd. In knowledge subject 
and object coexist and condition each other; 
in faith they become one, there is identity only 
and no mutuality. Transcending the reciprocity 
of the "I" and the "not-I," the PrajM beholds 
the universe in its ultimate oneness and feels, all 
forms of life in their essential sameness. It 
knows that the impulse it feels is the quickening 
spirit of all existence, and that the pulsation of 
sympathy which beats in response to outside 
stimuli is the source of universal animation. 
Why? Because the Prajnd feels so by reason 
of its own constitution. 

The dictates of the Prajnd are final and there 
is no higher faculty in our consciousness to annul 
them. Faith is absolute within its own limits 
and the office of the intellect is to explain or 
interpret it objectively. Speaking religiously, 
faith is fact and has to be reckoned with as such. 
It is only when it wants to express itself that 


138 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

intellection comes in, and individual culture or 
personal equation makes itself felt. To a great 
extent, I feel that differences or quarrels among 
the so-called religionists concerning their con- 
fession of faith are due to personal differences in 
esthetic taste, intellectual calibre, and the influ- 
ence of environment, while the fact of faith as 
such remains fundamentally the same with 
Christians, Buddhists, or Taoists. As everybody 
endowed with sentiency feels the ice cold and the 
fire warm, so what the Prajii^ sees or feels in its 
inmost being must be universally the same. 
God, Allah, Dharmakaya, Tao, Holy Ghost, 
Brahma, and what not, are a mere verbal quib- 
bling over the same fact which is felt in the deepest 
depths of our being. The inner reason of things 
which creates or destroys the three thousand 
worlds in the same breath must be smiling at 
the human trifling over naught. 

Spiritual enlightenment must not be confused 
with trance, a state of consciousness in which 
there is nothing but blankness. Those who 
have had no spiritual experience or who have 
not come to recognize in the awakening of 
Pfajna something altogether unique in our sub- 
jective life-phenomena frequently speak of 
enlightenment as an abnormal psychical con- 
dition, and try to explain it, under the same 
category as hallucination, somnambulism, self- 
suggestion, and the like. But the fact is_that 
enlightenment is not a special psychic state 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 139 

"vdaich excludes or sup presses the ordinary §i^^' 
cise of other mental faculties. Enlightenment 
goes and must go along with all psychological 
phenomena. If enlightenment" is to be gained 
through the suspension of mentation, religion is 
false and faith is barren. Enlightenment is 
enlightenment because it enlightens all our 
motives, desires, whims, determinations, impulses, 
thoughts, etc. It does not stand separate from 
other states of consciousness, sending its com- 
mands from a certain vantage ground. In an 
enlightened mind a feeling or thought as it occurs 
is purified and free from the taints of ignorance 
and egotism. Enlightenment is constant and not 
sporadic. It permeates every mental fibre and 
works without rest. It is not something extraor- 
dinary that takes place by fits and starts. 
Spiritual enlightenment sheds light on the very 
reason of consciousness, for it is not a particular 
event of our psychical life. 

When a Buddhist scholar was asked what was 
the Path, he answered, "The normal state of 
mind." In other words, spiritual enlightenment 
consists in following the natural course of human 
activity, for the enlightened find the ultimate 
reason of existence in their desire to drink or to 
eat according to their natural appetite, in their 
sympathy for the misery and suffering which are 
endured by the ignorant masses, in their aspira- 
tion to fathom the mysteries of nature and Hfe, 
in their ever-assiduous attempt to realize the 


140 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

ideals of lovingkindness and universal brother- 
hood on this earth, in their ever- varying devices 
to let each creation fulfill its inherent mission 
and rest in its reason of existence. The reli- 
giously ignorant behave outwardly just as the 
enlightened, for as far as intellect and morals 
go there is no manifested difference between the 
ignorant and the enlightened. But, spiritually 
speaking, there is a wide gap dividing them, 
because one knows what he is striving after while 
the other is blindly feeling his way, and again 
because one finds an unspeakable bliss in all 
his doings and thinkings and feelings, while the 
other labors under a peculiar sensation of 
uneasiness and compulsion which he cannot well 
define but feels at the bottom of his heart. 

A person may be very learned in all things, 
and his philosophical knowledge may be very 
profound. He has studied all the ancient lore 
of wisdom, and has even formulated his own 
system of metaphysics in which he has incorpo- 
rated all the results of his erudition and specu- 
lation. But from the religious point of view 
he is yet far from enlightenment, for his study 
is like that of the artist who has painted a dragon 
and forgot to put the eyes in. His elaborate 
delineation and coloring in various hues of this 
huge mystic animal have miserably failed to 
produce the effect desired and attempted, for the 
eyes are blank and show no trace of the fiery 
animation which is possessed by the monster. 
The scholar has neglected the most important 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 141 

factor that is absolutely necessary in making 
up the complete knowledge of the universe. He 
thought that he knew everything under the sun 
when he exercised his intellectual power to its 
full extent and considered existence from all the 
possible standpoints which his understanding 
could grasp. But, as I stated before, the knowl- 
edge of an object is not complete unless its inner 
life or reason is felt; in other words, unless the 
duality of a knowing mind and a known object 
vanishes, and life is comprehended as it is and 
not in its intellectual mutilation. Buddhism says 
that even a blade of grass trembling in the even- 
ing breeze cannot be known so long as we cling 
to this form of individuation and are unable to 
merge our particular selves with the self of 
grass. Buddha, it is reported, once brought a 
flower before an assemblage of his disciples and 
showed it to them without any comments what- 
ever, and the entire congregation was bewildered 
what to make of this strange behavior on the 
part of their master, except Kashyapa, who, 
thoroughly understanding the import of this 
incident, softly smiled and nodded. Thereupon 
the Buddha solemnly proclaimed, "I am in 
possession of the Eye which penetrates into the 
depths of the Dharma and the mysteries of 
Nirvana. I now give it to thee, O Kashyapa, 
that thou mayest guard it well." What sort of 
eye could it have been which was transmitted 
from Buddha to Kashyapa and which made the 


142 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

latter comprehend something incomprehensible 
in the flower in Buddha's hand? 

In this we see the discrepancy between phi- 
losophy and religion more and more accentuated. 
It is sufficient for philosophy to know, but 
religion demands more than that. When the 
existence or non-existence of God is proved, 
philosophers are satisfied, for they have made 
the utmost use of the intellect, which is their sole 
weapon of attack and defense. In fact, they 
sometimes show a disposition to deride those who 
disagree with them. But as long as there is 
some unutterable yearning in the human heart 
for something more real, more vital, more tangible 
than mere abstraction, mere knowing, and mere 
"proving," we must conclude that our conscious- 
ness, however fractional, is capable of coming 
in touch with the inmost life of things in another 
way than intellection. The existence of Prajn^, 
the organ of spiritual insight, therefore, is 
admitted by Buddhism, and their religious disci- 
pline is directed towards the awakening of this 
faculty, which is rightly designated "the mother 
of all Buddhas," and "the sharpest sword that 
cuts ignorance and egotism." 

But one must not imagine that there is con- 
sciousness, there is Prajna, and there is enlighten- 
ment. In point of fact, they are all one simul- 
taneous act of the universal reason. We speak 
of them as if they were three different things: 
the sentient being is endowed with consciousness, 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT I43 

and this consciousness has the faculty to become 
acquainted with its own reason of existence, 
and the resultant mental state constitutes what 
is called spiritual enlightenment. Intellectually, 
this distinction of course is inevitable, but as a 
man actually experiences it, the only fact he is 
conscious of is that he is, not as a particular 
being separate from others, but as simply existing 
and living. Buddhist scholars call this exalted 
state of spirituality gtlnyatd = emptiness, or 
0nti = tranquillity, or samddhi = contemplation. 

A few words may not be amiss here to explain 
these terms, which have been frequently misun- 
derstood by the outsider. "Emptiness" may 
suggest a deprivation of all mental operations 
as in the trance, and "tranquillity" a dormant, 
sleeping, or "not-yet-awakened" state of men- 
tality, while "contemplation" tends to indicate 
a withdrawal or suspension of all psychical 
functions; thus making spiritual enlightenment 
a synonym of death or annihilation. Such mis- 
interpretations as these, however, ever prove the 
inherent onesidedness of the understanding and 
consequently its inability to lead us to the final 
abode of eternal reason which has really "no- 
abode." Buddhists use the term "emptiness" 
to describe the "deep things of God" which are 
absolute and not relative. For when we say, "he 
is," it may be taken as meaning that he is as 
we individuals are. 

By "All is empty, quiet, and abiding in eternal 


144 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

contemplation," Buddhists understand that the 
ultimate reason of the universe as manifested in 
all forms of animation and intelligence knows no 
disturbance, no commotion, no transgression, in 
the midst of all the stirring-up and moving-on 
of this phenomenal world. This, again, I have 
to state, guarding against misapprehension, does 
not mean that there is something within each 
existence which like the axle of a wheel or like 
the kernel of a seed forms its central part and 
remains quiet or alive even when the peripheral 
parts are whirling around or going to decay. 
Buddhism most emphatically condemns this sort 
of dualism as heretical and evil-breeding. The 
ultimate reason is absolutely quiet when it is 
moving on; it is perfectly empty when it is 
filled to the brim; it is eternally one when it is 
differentiating itself into myriads; it has no 
abode whatever where it finds itself located, 
housed, and roomed. And there is nothing 
paradoxical or enigmatic in this statement; it is 
plain as daylight and simple as the logical axiom 
a = a. But to realize its truth one must be spir- 
itually enlightened, must go beyond the narrow 
limits of intellection, must drink directly from 
the well of eternal vitality and find out per- 
sonally how it tastes, bitter or sweet. 

Let philosophers and theologians say whatever 
they wish concerning the existence, nature, and 
activity of God; let them speculate as much as 
they wish on the theology of the universe and 


SPIRITUAL ENLIGHTENMENT 145 

the destiny of mankind and many other abstruse 
problems of metaphysics; but let you who 
earnestly aspire to know what this life really 
means turn away from those wise men and 
reflect within, or look around yourselves with 
an open heart which watches and receives, and 
all the mysteries of the world will be revealed 
to you in the awakening of your Prajfia. 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA 

THREE things are usually considered neces- 
sary for the realization of the Buddhist 
hfe: I. ^ila (moral precepts), 2, Dhyana (con- 
templation), 3, Prajnd (wisdom); and these are 
cooperative and mutually related. 

To be a good Buddhist, first of all, a man must 
be ethical and regulate his life according to the 
moral precepts, which were laid down by Buddha 
and are universally appHcable. Next, he mu st 
be philosophical, that is, he must train his mind 
so as to be capable of .practising^ introspection. 
The mechanical observance of the moral laws is 
not becoming to the dignity of a rational, con- 
scious being. Man must be master of himself, 
intellectually, morally, and spiritually. To be 
so, he must be able to examine his own states 
of consciousness and direct his thoughts and 
desires to the end where lies the rationale of 
existence. This habit of self-examination is 
attainable only through the practice of dhyana, 
contemplation. Lastly^ he_mu^jt^ be religious, 
by which is meant that he should have an insight 
going deep into the indwellings reason, of _ things, 
and this insight, according to Buddhism, is the 

r4^ 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA 1 47 

outcome of the mental training acquired by self- 
introspection. Prajna, which is the most funda- 
mental of all the psychic faculties possessed by 
man, lies inactive and altogether unrecognized 
when the mind is busily engaged in receiving 
impressions and elaborating on them through the 
ordinary process of understanding. It has no 
time to withdraw within itself and watch how 
impulses are awakened, stimuli felt, thoughts 
matured, in short, how the inner working goes 
on. It never knows what a precious stone it 
harbors within its being, which, when discov- 
ered, will illuminate the inmost significance of 
life and put an end to all vanities and vexations 
of spirit. The practice of dhyana, however, 
brings this latent faculty of consciousness to the 
surface and makes a new man out of old, worn- 
out, and apparently unpromising stuff. 

Therefore, the three requisites of the Buddhist 
life are helping one another like a tripod to stand 
together and to accomplish their common pur- 
pose. The moral precepts cannot be intelli- 
gently and thoroughly followed unless a man has 
gained a complete control of himself through 
contemplation and self-introspection. But this 
dhyana-practice will not be of much value, 
religiously considered, to his daily life unless it 
leads to the awakening of'Prajna (wisdom) and 
to the comprehension of the ultimate facts of 
life. Whatever difference there may be in the 
different schools of Buddhism, those three forms 


148 SERMONS. OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

of discipline, as they are often called, are admitted 
by them all as most essential for the realization 
of their ideal life. The importance of the moral 
codes as formulated by Buddha will not be 
questioned even by followers of non-Buddhist 
faiths, and as to the signification of spiritual 
insight, which constitutes the essence of religious 
life, I have somewhere touched upon the subject. 
In this short discourse I wish to say a few words 
concerning the practice of dhyana. 
* * * 

Dhyana is essentially Hindu or, rather broadly 
speaking. Oriental in its origin as well as in its 
significance. In this we can trace one of the many 
characteristics which lend a peculiarly charming 
color to Oriental culture. The Oriental mind 
ever strives after the One and is so idealistic in 
all its tendencies as sometimes altogether to 
ignore the external world. It shuts out all the 
impressions the senses may bring in from with- 
out, thus endeavoring to realize the aspiration 
after unity and eternality. It does not care so 
much for the subjugation of natural forces to its 
own will as for the deliverance of self from its 
illusory imprisonment. It does not antagonize 
the world in which it lives, but calmly contem- 
plates it, reviewing its vagaries or vicissitudes, 
or whatever they may be termed. It dwelleth 
not in the manyness of things, but in their 
oneness, for its ultimate abode is in the region 
of the absolute and not in the phenomenal realm. 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA I49 

A mind like this naturally takes more to contem- 
plation than to the strenuous life ; it thinks more 
and acts less ; it appreciates instead of criticizing ; 
it synthesizes instead of analyzing. The practice 
of dhy^na, therefore, was the most natural thing 
for the Oriental people. 

The Western people were not altogether unfa- 
miliar with dhyana, as we can judge from the life 
of a mystic or a medieval Christian monk. But 
their so-called contemplation or meditation was 
not as systematic and did not necessarily form 
a part of their religious discipline. The Hebrews 
were too fanatically religious to allow them- 
selves the time to reflect. The Greeks were 
rather scientific and intellectual, while the 
Romans were pre-eminently practical. The Ger- 
man mystics perhaps were more or less after the 
Hindu type in their general mental constitution, 
but they seem not to have made the practice of 
dhyana a prominent feature of their doctrine. 
Be that as it may, there is no doubt that dhyana 
is an Oriental production 

What is dhyana, then ? DhyS-na literally means, 
in Sanskrit, pacification, equilibration, or tran- 
quillization, but as religious discipHne it is rather 
self-examination or introspection. It is not 
necessarily to cogitate on the deep subjects of 
metaphysics, nor is it to contemplate on the 
virtues of a deity, or on the transitoriness of 
muridane life. To define its import in Buddhism, 
roughly and practically, it is the habit of with- 


150 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

drawing occasionally from the turbulence of 
worldliness and of devoting some time to a quiet 
inspection of one's own consciousness. When 
this habit is thoroughly established, a man can 
keep serenity of mind and cheerfulness of dispo- 
sition even in the midst of his whirlwind-like 
course of daily life. Dhy3,na is then a discipline 
in tranquillization. It aims at giving to a mind 
the time for deliberation and saving it from 
running wild; it directs the vain and vulgar to 
the path of earnestness and reality; it makes 
us feel interest in higher things which are above 
the senses; it discovers the presence in us of 
a spiritual faculty which bridges the chasm 
between the finite and the infinite ; and it finally 
delivers us from the bondage and torture of 
ignorance, safely leading us to the other shore 
of Nirvana. 

Dhyana is sometimes made a synonym for 
gamatha and samS,dhi and samapatti. Qamatha 
is tranquillity and practically the same as 
dhyana, though the latter is much more frequently 
in use than the former. Samapatti literally is 
"put together evenly" or "balanced," and means 
the equilibrium of consciousness in which takes 
place neither wakefulness nor apathy, but in 
which the mind is calmly concentrated on the 
thought under consideration. Samadhi is a per- 
fect absorption, voluntary or involuntary, of 
thought into the object of contemplation. A 
mind is sometimes said to be in a state of 


P&ACTICE OF DHYANA 151 

samMhi when it identifies itself with the ultimate 
reason of existence and is only conscioiis of the 
unification. In this case, dhydna is the method 
or process that brings us finally to samidhi. 
* * * 

Now, the benefits arising from the exercise of 
dhyana are more than one, and are not only 
practical but moral and spiritual. Nobody will 
deny the most practical advantage gained through 
presence of mind, moderation of temper, control 
of feelings, and mastery of oneself. A passion 
may be so violent at the time of its agitation 
that it will fairly consume itself to utter destruc- 
tion, but a cool-headed man knows well how to 
give it the necessary psychological time of rest 
and deliberation and thus to save himself from 
pliinging headlong into the Charybdis of emotion. 
And this cool-headedness, though in some meas- 
ure due to heredity, is attainable through the 
exercise of dhyana. 

Intellectually, dhyana will keep the head clear 
and transparent and, whenever necessary, make 
it concentrate itself on the subject at issue. 
Logical accuracy depends greatly on the dispas- 
sionateness of the arguing mind, and scientific 
investigation gains much from the steadiness of 
the observing eye. Whatever be a man's intel- 
lectual development, he has surely nothing to 
lose, but a great deal to gain, by training him- 
self in the habit of tranquillization. 

In these days of industrial and commercial 


152 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

civilization, the multitudes of people have very 
little time to devote themselves to spiritual 
culture. They are not altogether ignorant of 
the existence of things which are of permanent 
value, but their minds are so engrossed in details 
of everyday life that they find it extremely diffi- 
cult to avoid their constant obtrusion. Even 
when they retire from their routine work at night, 
they are bent on something exciting which will 
tax their already over-stretched nervous system 
to the utmost. If they do not die prematurely, 
they become nervous wrecks. They seem not to 
know the blessings of relaxation. They seem to 
be unable to live within themselves and find 
there the source of eternal cheerfulness. Life 
is for them more or less a heavy burden and their 
task consists in the carrying of the burden. The 
gospel of dhyana, therefore, must prove to them 
a heaven-sent boon when they conscientiously 
practise it. 

Dhyana is physiologically the accumulation of 
nervous energy; it is a sort of spiritual storage 
battery in which an enormous amount of latent 
force is sealed, — a force which will, whenever 
demand is made, manifest itself with tremendous 
potency. A mind trained in dhyana will never 
waste its energy, causing its untimely exhaustion. 
It may appear at times, when superficially 
observed, dull, uninteresting, and dreamy, but 
it will work wonders when the occasion arises; 
while a mind ordinarily addicted to dissipation 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA 1 53 

succumbs to the intensity of an impulse or a 
stimulus without much struggling, which ends in 
complete collapse, for it has no energy in reserve. 
Here, let me remark incidentally, can be seen 
one of the many characteristic differences between 
Orientalism and Occidentalism. In all depart- 
ments of Oriental culture a strong emphasis is 
placed upon the necessity of preserving the 
latent nervous energy and of keeping the source 
of spiritual strength well fed and nourished. 
YoTong minds are trained to store up within and 
not to make any wasteful display of their prowess 
and knowledge and virtue. It is only shallow 
waters, they would say, that make a noisy, rest- 
less stream, while a deep whirlpool goes on 
silently. The Occidentals, as far as I can judge, 
seem to be fond of making a full display of their 
possessions with the frankness of a child ; and they 
are prone to a strenuous and dissipating life 
which will soon drain all the nervous force at 
their command. They seem not to keep any- 
thing in reserve which they can make use of later 
on at their leisure. They are indeed candid 
and open-hearted — traits which sometimes seem 
wanting in the Orientals. But they certainly 
lack the unfathomableness of the latter, who never 
seem to be enthusiastic, clamorous, or irrepres- 
sible. The teaching of Lao-tze or that of the 
Bhagavadgtta was not surely intended for the 
Western nations. Of ^ourse,-tliere are, exceptions 
in the West as well as in the East. Generally 


154 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

speaking, however, the West is energetic, and 
the East mystical; for the latter's ideal is to be 
incomprehensible, immeasurable, and undemon- 
strative even as an absolute being itself. And 
the practice of dhyana may be considered in a 
way one of the methods of realizing this ideal. 
* * * 

In the Chandradipa-samddhi SMra, the benefits 
of dhyana-practice are enximerated as follows: 
(i) When a man practises dhy§,na according to 
the regulation, all his senses become calm and 
serene, and, without knowing it on his part, he 
begins to enjoy the habit. (2) Lovingkindness 
will take possession of his heart, which, then 
freeing itself from sinfulness, looks upon aU 
sentient beings as his brothers and sisters. (3) 
Such poisonous and harassing passions as anger, 
infatuation, avarice, etc., gradually retire from 
the field of consciousness. (4) Having a close 
watch over all the senses, dhyana guards them 
against the intrusion of evils. (5) Being pure 
in heart and serene in disposition, the practiser 
of dhyana feels no inordinate appetite in lower 
passions. (6) The mind being concentrated on 
higher thoughts, all sorts of temptation and 
attachment and egotism are kept away. (7) 
Though he well knows the emptiness of vanity, 
he does not fall into the snare of nihilism. (8) 
However entangling the nets of birth and death, 
he is well aware of the way to deliverance there- 
from. (9) Having fathomed the deepest depths 


PRACTICE OP DHYANA 


ISS 


of the Dharma, he abides in the wisdom of 
Buddha. (lo) As he is not disturbed by any 
temptation, he feels Uke an eagle that, having 
escaped from imprisonment, freely wings his 
flight through the air, 

* * * 

The practice of dhyana is pjten^ confounded 
with a trance"or self-hypnotism,-7a graye^error 
which I here propose to refute. The difference 
between the two is patent to every clear-sighted 
mind, for a trance is a pathological disturbance 
of consciousness, while dhyana is a perfectly 
normal state of it. Trance is a kind of self- 
illusion which is entirely subjective and cannot 
be objectively verified, but dhy§,na is a state of 
consciousness in which all mental powers are 
kept in equilibrium so that no one thought or 
faculty is made predominant over others. It is 
like the pacification of turbulent waters by pour- 
ing oil over them; no waves are roaring, no 
foams are boiling, no splashes are spattering, 
but a smooth, glossy mirror of immense dimen- 
sion. And it is in this perfect mirror of con- 
sciousness that myriads of reflections, as it were, 
come and go without ever disturbing its serenity. 
In trances certain mental and physiological 
functions are unduly accelerated, while others 
are kept altogether in abeyance, the whole 
system of consciousness thus being thrown into 
disorder; and its outcome is the loss of 
equilibrium in the organism — which is very 


156 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

opposite to what is attained through the practice 
of dhy^na. 

Again, some superficial critics think that 
Buddhist dhyana is a sort of intense meditation 
on some highly abstracted thoughts, and that 
the concentration which works in the same way 
as self-hypnotism leads the mind to the state 
of a trance, called NirvS,na. This is a very 
grievous error committed by those who have 
never comprehended the essence of religious con- 
sciousness, for Buddhist dhyana has nothing to 
do with abstraction or hypnotization. What it 
proposes to accomplish is to make our conscious- 
ness realize the inner reason of the universe 
which abides in our minds. Dhyana strives to 
make us acquainted with the most concrete and 
withal the most universal fact of life. It is the 
philosopher's business to deal with dry, lifeless, 
uninteresting generalizations. Buddhists are not 
concerned with things like that. They want to 
see the fact directly and not through the medium 
of philosophical abstractions. There may be a 
god who created heaven and earth, or there may 
not; we could be saved by simply believing in 
his goodness, or we could not; the destination 
of evil-doers may be hell and that of good men 
paradise, or this may be reversed : true Buddhists 
do not trouble themselves with such propositions 
as these. Let them well alone; Buddhists are 
not so idle and superficial as to waste their time 
in pondering over the questions which have no 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA 


157 


vital concern with our religious life. Buddhists 
through dhy^a endeavor to reach the bottom 
of things and there to grasp with their own 
hands the very life of the universe, which makes 
the sun rise in the morning, makes the bird 
cheerfully sing in the balmy spring breeze, and 
also makes the biped called man hunger for love, 
righteousness, liberty, truth, and goodness. In 
dhyana, therefore, there is nothing abstract, 
nothing dry as a bone and cold as a corpse, but 
all animation, all activity, and eternal revelation. 
Some Hindu philosophers, however, seem to 
have considered hallucinations and self-suggested 
states of mind as real and. the attainment of 
them as the aim of dhyana practice. Their 
conception of the eightfold dhyina-heaven in 
which all sorts of angels are living is evidence 
of it. When the mythical beings in those regions 
practise dhyana, they enter into different stages 
of samadhi. They first come to think that they 
are lifted up in the air like a cloud; (2) they 
feel the presence of some indescribable lumi- 
nosity; (3) they experience a supernatural joy; 
(4) their minds become so clarified and trans- 
parent as to reflect all the worlds like a very 
brilliant mirror; (5) they feel as if the soul has 
escaped bodily confinement and expanded itself 
to the immensity of space; (6) they now come 
back to a definite state of consciousness in which 
all mental functions are presented and the past 
and present and future reveal themselves; (7) 


IS8 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

they then have the feeling of absolute nothing- 
ness, in which not a ripple of mentation stirs; 
(8) lastly, they are not conscious of anything 
particular, nor have they lost consciousness, 
and here they are said to have reached the 
highest stage of samidhi. 

But according to Buddhism all these visionary 
phenomena as the outcome of dhy^na are rejected, 
for they have nothing to do with the realization 
of the • religious life. In the ^ilrangdma SMra 
fifty abnormal conditions of consciousness are 
mentioned against which the practiser of dhyina 
has to guard himself, and among them we find 
those psychical aberrations mentioned above. 
* * * 

To conclude. Dhydna, beside its being an 
indispensable religious discipline for attaining 
enlightenment, is one of the most efficient means 
of training oneself morally and physically. It 
is beyond question that dhyana leads to the 
awakening of a hidden spiritual faculty pos- 
sessed by all conscious beings and to the reali- 
zation of one's spiritual significance in spite of 
the various material limitations. But, apart 
from this religious importance, dhyana is sin- 
gularly effective in the tranquillization of the 
mind, the purification of the heart, as well as 
in the relaxation of the nervous tension. A 
man will never realize, until he is thoroughly 
trained in dhyana, how confused and entangled 
his thoughts are, how susceptible he is and how 


PRACTICE OF DHYANA 1 59 

easily his mind is unbalanced, how soon his 
nervous force in reserve is exhausted and his 
entire system is given up to an utter breakdown, 
how fully his senses are occupied in seeking 
excitement and gratification, and finally how 
neglectful he has been in the promotion of higher 
and nobler interests of life and in the cultivation 
of refined thoughts and purer feelings. Dhyana, 
therefore, whatever its religious merits, is not 
devoid of its practical utilities and even for this 
reason alone its exercise is universally to be 
recommended. 


KWANNON BOSATZ 

THE topic of my discourse to-day is Kwannon 
Bosatz, or Goddess of Mercy as she is com-, 
monly known. 

I am not- going, let it be remarked at the 
beginning, to make any historical investigation 
of this deity, or Bodhisattva according- to Bud- 
dhist terminology. I am not concerned here 
with the pedigree of Kwannon, who was origi- 
nally a Hindu male deity of greatest energy, 
called Avalokiteshvara. Whatever history she 
may have had in ancient India, the deity is no 
more known to us as she or he was. According 
to our present knowledge, Kwannon has come 
to be identified with his consort Tkvk and is no 
longer a male deity representing supreme energy, 
but as the goddess of mercy and love, the prin- 
ciple of universal lovingkindness. We shall take 
her, then, as we understand her in these latter 
days, ignoring altogether her historical develop- 
ment. Moreover, Kwannon is no more a Hindu 
deity, but has completely been naturalized in 
the Far Eastern soil. 

In my opinion, man's religious needs are essen- 
tially the same whether he has his accidental 

1 60 


KWANNON BOSATZ l6l 

place of birth in the East or in the West. When 
he feels the needs, he endeavors to find the best 
means of gratification according as he is situated, 
either in his history or tradition or folklore or 
superstitious beliefs. From the material thus 
obtained he constructs the real thing needed, 
and with his intellectual development he elabo- 
rates it and brings it to perfection. When we see 
this finished production of man's inner religious 
yearnings, we altogether put aside its historical 
relations and appreciate it as it is as a manifes- 
tation of man's inner nature. Our consideration 
of Kwannon will then be from this standpoint. 

Now, Kwannon consists of two words, kwan 
and on, which is an abbreviation of a fuller title, 
Kwan-ze-on. Kwan literally means "to see," 
"to perceive," or "to look upon." But let me 
remind you that this perception is not physical, 
not sensorial, but spiritual, inward, and tran- 
scendental. It is an insight into the true signifi- 
cance of things with the mental eye which is 
possessed by all sentient beings. The next char- 
acter, ze, means the "world" or "universe," 
including everything that exists; and the last, 
on, is "sound" or "voice." Taken altogether, 
Kwan-ze-on is "one who perceives the world- 
sound." 

Here I have to remark that the sound Kwan- 
non perceives^ it may be known to you, is not 
physical, that it has no reference to the wave- 
motion of atmosphere, which reaching our audi- 


l62 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

tory nerves is interpreted as sound. When we 
view things that are about us with the spiritual 
eye, they all become convertible to one another, 
so that one can be expressed by the terms of 
another: sound is color, color is taste, odor is 
sound, etc. From the sensuous point of view, 
this is altogether incomprehensible, for what the 
eye sees is color and what the ears hear is sound, 
and they are absolutely irreducible to each other's 
terms. In the phenomenal world individuation 
rules, and things cannot be otherwise than they 
appear to our particularizing senses. But when 
we transcend the limits of phenomenaUty, or 
when we look inward into the very reason of 
things, all forms of separation and particulariza- 
tion vanish, and taste becomes smell, sight 
becomes hearing, etc., which is characteristic of 
the supra-individual realm of ideality. 

This being so, one who hears the world-sound 
is no more nor less than he whose spiritual insight 
has gone deep into the very foundation of exist- 
ence, whose knowledge comprehends ever5rthing 
and understands the reason of things, why they 
are so and not otherwise, and whose life and 
thought are in perfect harmony with the mind 
that controls the destiny of the universe. He 
has gone, as we say, to the other shore, he is a 
Buddha, the enlightened. 

If we wish to reach this stage of spirituality, 
we must train ourselves not to be distracted by 
the phenomenaUty of things, but directly to 


KWANNON BOSATZ 163 

envisage the ultimate essence of existence which 
is free from all modes of duality. In this, the 
perceiving and the perceived are not two, the 
hearing and the heard are not separate, the "I" 
and" the "not I" are not what they appear to the 
senses. But there is but one reality and we can 
call it by any name. Buddhism is not particular 
in this matter of designation. You may call it 
God or reason or life or suchness or love, but let 
it only be noticed that you must not make it 
something altogether outside this universe, nor 
must you consider it a mere abstraction which 
has no business in this concrete world. To avoid 
this miscomprehension on the part of the un- 
trained, Buddhism has called it "Sound" in this 
particular relation and declares that all things 
are of one Sound in which every discordant note 
is eternally synthesized. Not only the wind that 
blows, the waves that roar, the flute that whis- 
tles, but the mountains, rivers, oceans, suns, 
heavens, and everything that exists, are no more 
than so many variations of the Sound, eternal, 
ultimate, and unifying. Do not think that this 
is too hidden and esoteric; only train yourselves 
in the meditation of Buddhism, and you come to 
realize the truth of my statement. First, recog- 
nize the oneness of the ultimate principle, and 
think of its abiding in all things; and you will 
surely comprehend the point here somewhat 
mystically presented. 

We often find another appellation attached to 


164 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

Kwannon, the Goddess of Mercy, and that is 
Bodhisattva {Bosatz in Japanese and Pu sa in 
Chinese). It means a sentient being whose 
essence is wisdom, and is a title generally given to 
a highly enlightened, saintly Buddhist, or, in 
fact, to any sage of any faith. 

What constitutes the essence of this being is 
love that sacrifices itself for the sake of others. 
A Bodhisattva will deny himself if he knows that 
by so doing he can save his fellow-beings from 
suffering, misery, ignorance, and self-delusion. 
Or he may assert himself if he sees that his crea- 
tures can be saved best through this assertion. 
His only object of life is to benefit others, his 
only principle of life is love, and his means of 
achieving this end and of realizing this principle 
is wisdom. He moves by love and regulates his 
movement by wisdom. His fountain of love is 
inexhaustible, and every feeling and thought and 
desire and resolution and everything else comes 
from this divine source; but his love does not 
move blindly, but most intelligently, for he is 
not only pure in heart but enlightened in mind. 
He knows that his self is a delusion, that if it 
exists at all it is in others and not in himself, 
that it embraces the whole universe and is not 
groaning within the narrowest and darkest cell 
of his own person. 

Kwannon, therefore, is not only love incarnate, 
but a representation of wisdom and enlighten- 
ment. But as we have wisdom more emphatic- 


KWANNON BOSATZ 165 

ally represented by such Bodhisattvas as Monju 
(Manjugri in Sanskrit) and Seshi, we see in 
Kwannon the virtue of lovingkindness made 
most predominant, and for this reason the Bo- 
dhisattva has come to be represented as feminine. 
Whatever other virtues may be possessed by 
woman, she is adored for her tenderness, loving- 
kindness, longstoffering, and self-sacrifice. If she 
be without these qualities, however brilliantly 
intellectual or majestically imposing, she might 
be honored and respected, but she will never be 
an object of worship and adoration, for nobody 
will come before her, fall on his knees, and ask 
her for an all-embracing love — love which is pure, 
unselfish, and ennobling. Kwannon, therefore, 
will best be conceived as feminine. 

When we ordinarily speak of love, we are apt 
to think of its blindness and exclusiveness. For 
love is contrasted with hate and associated with 
impulse. Because of the former, love necessarily 
discriminates and is prone to partiality and con- 
centration ; and because of the latter, love moves 
without regard to its consequence and knows not 
its ultimate purpose. But the love that makes 
up the being of Kwannon is not that kind of love, 
but that which is most comprehensive and uni- 
versal as to embrace the entire universe, just 
and unjust, good and evil, pious and sacrilegious. 
In this love there is not a trace of partiality or 
discrimination. It is like rain that falls on all 
forms of vegetation, while each plant is benefited 


l66 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

in its own peculiar way. It is, again, like the sun 
that shines upon all forms of life, while the latter 
make use of the sunshine each according to its 
own nature. The sun or rain thus benefiting 
everything harbors no thought of discrimination. 
Kwannon's love for all sentient beings is no more 
than an exhibition of the universal energy of 
animation and enlightenment, which creates, 
fashions, and regulates the world. 

It is now evident to you, I believe, that in 
such spiritual love as that of Kwannon there is 
no commercialism, no mercenary principle, which 
says, "I give you so much and in return expect 
from you such favor." Kwannon abhors this 
spirit of modem times which penetrates almost 
every fibre of our civilization. If you want to 
worship Kwannon, she must be worshiped in 
spirit and truth. You must have your heart 
cleansed of impurity, selfishness, and ignorance. 
You must have your egoistic impulses baptized 
by the water of enlightenment. It is only when 
you are pure in heart and humble in spirit that 
you are ushered into the presence of Kwannon 
Bosatz and become the recipient of all her infinite 
blessings. This is what Buddhism would call 
grace. Grace is not a special favor conferred 
upon an unworthy subject, but the legitimate 
result of self-purification. 

Buddhists think love emanates from wisdom 
or samddhi or self -reflection. As long as we are 
sense-bound, we are not able to destroy the wall 


KWANNON BOSATZ 167 

of individuation and to realize the universal 
principle of love; and accordingly our love is 
limited, impulsive, and exclusive. In order to 
realize the love of Kwannon, we must shake off 
the iilthy garment of selfishness by means of 
sound contemplation and earnest self-discipline. 
Unreflective persons live generally on the surface 
of things. They are unable to assort and sys- 
tematize the ever-varying impressions which 
they get through the senses. They move accord- 
ing to blind impulses and selfish desires, by which 
they are bound hands and feet. They are unrea- 
sonable. They do not penetrate the bottom of 
things where lies the reason of existence. They 
may sometimes do some noble deeds, but that is 
not enlightenment, only madness. What is done 
by fits and starts does not constitute wisdom. 
The love that originates from an impure source 
cannot be made the foundation of our religious 
life. 

When the love of Kwannon is made concrete, 
it expresses itself in various forms according to 
the needs of circumstance. In the Pundartka 
SMra Kwannon is described as incarnating her- 
self in many different personages. For instance, 
when she sees it most expedient to save a certain 
class of people through a certain mode of expres- 
sion, she will assume the special mode and 
exercise all her influence in that capacity. She 
will be a philosopher, or merchant, or man of 
letters, or person of low birth, or anything else 


1 68 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

as required by the occasion, while her sole aim 
is to deliver all beings, without exception, from 
ignorance and selfishness. Therefore, wherever 
there is a heart groping in the dark, Kwannon 
will not fail to extend her embracing arms. 

It will be interesting in this connection to 
compare the activity of Kwannon with what 
Paul conceives of the activity of God as in his 
first epistle to the Corinthians (xii, 4 et seq.) : 
" Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same 
spirit. And there are differences of administra- 
tions, but the same Lord. And there are diver- 
sities of operations, but it is the same God which 
worketh all in all." .... 

This conception of Kwannon, it seems to me, 
has had a great influence in shaping the national 
character of my countrymen. Whatever tender- 
ness of heart they may have, they owe it to the 
lovingkindness of Kwannon. Those who have 
traveled in Japan must have seen a great many 
shrines dedicated to her and multitudes of people 
gathering before them and offering flowers and 
incense and prayers. This may be a superstitious 
practice, — this worshiping of a mythological 
deity; but when we think what spiritual conso- 
lation and benefit the masses derive therefrom, 
we must be a little lenient in our judgment of 
their intellectual attainment. Being simple- 
hearted, they believe in the response by Kwan- 
non to their earnest prayers. The universal wave 
of love is vibrating in every sentient being, and 


KWANNON BOSATZ 169 

when this innermost chord is touched through 
the deepest spiritual commotion one can suffer, 
it vibrates, and the vibration reaches the very- 
source of life, which is the love of Kwannon, 
and there takes place the phenomenon called 
communion. The universal love-principle has 
thus made itself known to the human heart. 

To add one more word. It seems to me that 
the Virgin Mary of your religion corresponds to 
the Buddhist Goddess of Mercy, Kwannon 
Bosatz. Human nature everywhere seems to 
request what Goethe calls "eternal femininity." 
Christians according to their needs have created 
Maria. Though she is a historical figure, she 
has been invested with all the necessary qualities 
that will satisfy their inner yearnings. Buddhists 
have Kwannon, who, whatever her historical 
standing in critical Buddhism, fully answers their 
religious cravings. From the Christian point of 
view, Kwannon is a Maria incarnate; and from 
the Buddhist standpoint, Maria is a represen- 
tative of Kwannon among a class of people who 
designate themselves Christians. The truth must 
be one and humanity the same everywhere, and 
it is my earnest wish that the time will soon 
come when the East and the West will all join 
in the adoration of truth, disregarding all their 
accidental differences and contradictions. 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE' 

ONE of the features peculiar to Buddhism 
and which appeals most powerfully to 
Oriental imagination is that man's life is not 
limited to this existence only, that if he thinks, 
feels, and acts truthfully, nobly, virtuously, 
unselfishly, he will live forever in these thoughts, 
sentiments, and works ; for anything good, beau- 
tiful, and true is in accordance with the reason 
of existence, and is destined to have a life eternal. 
It is not the ideal of the Buddhist life to 
escape worldliness and to enter into eternal 
stillness, as is sometimes understood by Occi- 
dental scholars. Buddhists do not shun struggle 
and warfare. If a cause is worth contending 
for or defending, they will not hesitate to sacrifice 
for it not only this life but all of their future lives. 
They will appear upon this earth over and again 
and will not rest until they have gained the end, 
that is, until they have attained the ideal of life. 
Man, therefore, lives as long as his ideas and 
feelings conform to the reason of the universe. 
This is the Buddhist conception of life eternal. 

'Address at the George Washington University, April, 
1906. 

170 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE 171 

If I am not mistaken, it was at the time of the 
Independence War, or it might have occurred 
somewhere in the Old Country,— you will pardon 
my imperfect memory,— but the fact is that a 
military ofificer who served as a spy for his native 
country was caught by the enemy and was 
sentenced to be hung. At the execution the 
ofificer exclaimed, "The pity is that I have only 
one life to sacrifice for my country." Pity 
indeed it was that the ofificer did not know the 
truth and fact that from his very corpse there 
have risen so many patriotic spirits breathing the 
same breath that he breathed. He was not 
dead, he was never hung, he did not vanish into 
an unknown region ; but he is living a life eternal, 
he is being born generation after generation, 
not only in his own country, but also in my 
country, and in your country, and in fact all 
over the three thousand worlds (as they were 
believed to be existing in Hindu mythology). 

In this respect a Buddhist general quite famous 
in the history of Japan had a decided advantage 
over the Christian ofificer just mentioned. The 
general is still worshiped in Japan as the type 
of loyalty and patriotism. He lived about six 
hundred years ago. Before the Emperor of the 
time came to know him, he was a rather obscure 
general and would have died without imprinting 
his immortal name on the pages of Japanese 
history. But Fate decreed otherwise, and he 
was requested by the Emperor to lead his royal 


172 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

army against the invading enemy, who greatly 
outnumbered his forces and was led by a very 
able general. Masashig6, which is the name of 
our hero, had his own plan as to how best to 
make a stand against the onslaught of the over- 
whelming enemy. But some ignorant court 
favorite influenced the Emperor and the hero's 
proposition could not prevail. He then knew 
he wis going to fight a losing battle, but deter- 
mined to do his best under the circumstances, 
if necessary to fight to the bitter end. At last 
came the day, and the enemy developed the plan 
as he had calculated. There was nothing for 
him to do but to check the advance of the enemy 
as long as he could, so that the Emperor could 
find time enough to make his safe escape from 
the capital. He fought most gallantly, and 
repeatedly repulsed the furious attacks of the 
enemy. But many times outnumbered, and 
occupying a strategically disadvantageous posi- 
tion, and himself covered with many wounds, 
he saw the uselessness of further resistance. 
He then gathered his commanding generals 
around him and asked them if they had anything 
to desire in this life before they bid farewell to 
all things earthly. They replied that they had 
done everything within their power, their obli- 
gations were completely filled, and there was 
nothing more to be desired. But our hero, 
Masashig6, made a solemn utterance: "I pray 
that I be born seven times on this earth and 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE 173 

crush all the enemies of our Imperial House." 
They all then drew their daggers and put an end 
to their present lives. 

I do not know how this story strikes you 
Christian audience, but upon us Buddhists it 
makes a very profound impression. It seems 
to be pregnant with a great religious significance. 
It is not altogether necessary to specify how 
many times we are to be reborn. Let us only 
have a thought or feeling that is worth preserv- 
ing and actualizing, and we shall come to this 
life as many times as is necessary to complete 
the task, even to the end of the world. Let us 
only do what is in accordance with the reason 
of things, and the work, which is no more than the 
world-reason actualized, will create a new agency 
as needed through successive generations. This 
corporeal existence, this particular temporary 
combination of feelings and thoughts and desires, 
may dissolve, may not last forever as it is, for 
it is no more than an agent in the hands of the 
world-soul to execute its own end. When it 
decrees that its agent must put on a new garment, 
this will take place as it is willed. "Let there 
be light," it commands, and behold there it is! 

It is not Buddhistic, therefore, to hanker after 
personal immortality and to construct diversity 
of theories to satisfy this illegitimate hankering. 
Do whatever you think right and be sincere 
with it and the work will take care of itself, 
hankering or no hankering after immortality. 


174 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

My Japanese hero gave an utterance to his inner 
feeling and conviction only to make his generals 
perfectly understand the significance of his and 
their work. He did not mean to come to this 
life exactly seven times, nor did he mean to 
continue his personal existence as he was indi- 
vidually. He did mean this, that his work 
should find its new executors in the form of a 
worshiper or an imitator or a successor or a dis- 
ciple or a friend, who would be inspired by that 
noble example. And most certainly did he find 
a legion of his selves following closely behind his 
back. Are not all loyal and patriotic soldiers 
and sailors who died in the recent war with 
Russia all the incarnations of our most beloved 
hero-general, Masashige? Did he not find his 
selves in all those brave, courageous, self-sacri- 
ficing hearts? Was he not leading in spirit all 
these soldiers to the execution of the work he 
once planned? Who says, then, that the hero 
breathed his last when he fought this losing 
battle some six hundred years ago? Is he not 
indeed still living in the heart of every patriotic 
and loyal citizen of Japan, nay, of any people 
that aspires to be a nation? 

When the late commander Hirose went to 
blockade the entrance to Port Arthur, he must 
have been inspired by the same sentiment which 
he expressed in his swan song; he must have 
become conscious of the immortality of the work 
in which he has thoroughly incarnated himself. 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE 175 

In his last utterance he put this in verse : " Though 
I may die here while executing this work, I will 
come back seven times over and again to dis- 
charge my duties for my country. I have nothing 
to fear, nothing to desire at the present moment. 
Calmly and smilingly I embark on this fated 
boat.'" Can we not say here that the idea 
which was our long deceased hero himself, found 
its conscious expression in this brave Commander? 
Those who fell in the field and on the water were 
equally his incarnations, only with this difference 
that the former gave utterance to his conscious 
sentiment, while the latter remained mute, 
though in their inmost hearts the same sentiment 
was moving. If otherwise, how could they enjoy 
that serene contentedness which characterized 
every stricken warrior of my country in the 
recent war? 

Some may say that this is fatalism or deter- 
minism, but every clear-headed thinker would 
see in this not a fatalistic conception of life but 
a hopeful solution of existence, a firm belief in 
the final triumph of good over evil, and the calm 
assurance that the individual lives as long as it 
identifies itself with a noble thought, worthy 
work, exalted sentiment, uplifting impulse,- in 
short, with anything that cements the brotherly 
tie of all mankind. Those who are used to look 
at things from the individualistic point of view 
may not understand very clearly what I have so 

'From memory. 


176 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

far endeavored to explain to you; but the fact 
is, however tenaciously we may cling to our indi- 
vidual existences, we are utterly helpless when 
that which comprehends everything wills other- 
wise than our selfish desires; we have but to 
submit meekly to the ordinance of the un- 
known power and to let it work out its own 
destiny regardless of ourselves. When Schleier- 
macher defines religion as a feeling of absolute 
dependence, he has rightly laid his hand on that 
indefinable, uncertain sense which lurks in the 
dark recesses of every conscious mind, — the 
sense which intuitively recognizes the weakness 
of individuals as such, but which feels an immense 
strength in their identification with a supra- 
individual being or power. In this, it must be 
evident to you, there is nothing fatalistic nor 
fantastic. 

All sincere Buddhists are firmly convinced of 
the truth of non-egoism, and they do not think 
that the value of an individual as such is ulti- 
mate. On account of this, they are not at all 
disturbed at the moment of death; they calmly 
accept the ordinance and let the world-destiny 
accomplish what end it may have in view. This 
freedom from the individualistic view of life 
seems to have largely contributed to the perfec- 
tion of the Japanese military culture known as 
Bushido. Old Japanese soldiers, nobles, and men 
bf letters, therefore, displayed a certain sense of 
playfulness even at the most critical moment 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE 177 

when the question of Ufe and death was to be 
decided without the least hesitation. This play- 
fulness, as I view it, stands in a marked contrast 
to the pious, prayerful attitude of the Christians 
in their dying moments. 

Ota Dokwan, a great Japanese statesman- 
general of some four hundred years ago, was 
assassinated in his own castle by a band of spies 
sent by his enemy. They surrounded him when 
he was altogether unarmed. He was stabbed, 
and he fell on the ground, covered with wounds 
and helpless. One of the assassins approached 
closer, and applying the dagger at the victim's 
throat to finish their cowardly work, he asked 
what the unfortunate general had to say before 
he bade farewell 1;o this world. The general 
most calmly answered : 

"At the moment like this 
It must be a struggle indeed 
To part with this life so dear, 
If I had not abandoned altogether 
The thought of ego, which is a non-reality." 

Finding peace of heart in this solution of life, 
Buddhists, whatever their social positions, are 
ever ready to sacrifice their lives for a cause 
which demands them. They know that the 
present individual existences will come to an 
end, they will not be able to see the faces dearest 
to them, to hear the voices tenderest to them, 
as they depart from this world; but they know 
at the same time that spiritually they live for- 


178 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

ever and are in constant communication with 
their friends, that they never lead a soUtary, 
unconnected life in some invisible region. What 
Buddhism has contributed to Japanese culture 
is its higher conception of life and nobler inter- 
pretation of death. 

Buddhists do not think that "I" is "I" and 
"you" is "you" when each of us is separated 
from the other. "I" is possible when "you" 
exists, so with "you" who is possible through 
the existence of "I." This consideration is very 
important, as it constitutes one of the funda- 
mental principles of Buddhist ethics. For accord- 
ing to Buddhism an unconditional assertion of 
egoism is due to the ignorance of the significance 
of the individual. Most people imagine that the 
individual is a final reality, stands by itself, has 
nothing to do with other fellow-individuals; in 
fact their existence is tolerated only so far as it 
does not interfere with his own interests. They 
first build a formidable fort around individualism 
and look down at their surroundings, thinking 
that the position must be defended at all costs. 
For it is their conception of life that with the 
downfall of individualism the universe goes to 
pieces. 

The Oriental mode of thinking, however, differs 
from this. We take our standpoint first on that 
which transcends individuals, or we take into 
our consideration first that which comprehends 
all finite things, that which determines the 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE 179 

destiny of the universe ; and then we come down 
into this world of relativity and conditionality, 
and believe that the earth will sooner or later 
pass away according to the will of that which 
controls it. That is to say, individuals will not 
stay here forever, though the whole which com- 
prises individuals will. Therefore, Oriental ethics 
considers it of paramount importance to preserve 
the whole at all hazards, whatever may be the 
fate of individuals. 

For instance, suppose my country is threatened 
by a powerful enemy, and I will, when called for, 
sacrifice everything personal and try to do my 
best for the conservation of my national honor 
and safety. This is what is called patriotism. 
My parents are old and they are not able to take 
care of themselves, and I will do everything for 
their comfort and alleviate the loneliness of their 
declining age. Did they not bring me up to this 
stage of manhood? Did they not go through 
all forms of hardship for my sake? Did they not 
care for me with infinite tenderness of heart? 
Do I not owe them all that I am to-day? Did 
they not help me to this position and enable me 
to do whatever is within my power for the wel- 
fare and preservation of the whole to which I 
belong? When I think of this, the feeling of 
gratitude weighs heavily on me, and I endeavor 
to be relieved of it by doing all acts of loving- 
kindness to my parents. This is what you call 
filial piety, and the same consideration will apply 


l8o SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

to the cases of teachers, elder people, friends, 
and family. 

Whatever be the defects of Oriental ethics, — 
and I think they are not a 'few, — I firmly believe 
that what makes Oriental culture so unique is 
due to the emphasis laid upon patriotism, filial 
piety, faithfulness, and abnegation of self. 
* * * 

Before concluding, I wish to add a few words 

/ as a Buddhist subject of Japan. All the world 
knows what Japan has achieved so far in the 
history of mankind, especially what she has 
accomplished in her gigantic struggle with a most 
powerful nation of Europe. There must have 
been many causes and conditions through a 
happy combination of which Japan was able to 
do what she has done; and among those con- 
ditions I would count the influence of American 
friendship and sympathy as one of the most 
powerful. If America had tried to play some 
high-handed diplomacy, imitating some of the 
European powers, she could have easily seized 
my country and held it under subjection since 
Commodore Perry's entrance into Uraga. The 
fact that the United States did not stoop to play 
a mean trick upon Japan helped not a little to 
lift her to the present position. For that reason, 

I we, people of Japan, owe a great deal to you, 
people of the United States of America. 

As a Buddhist I have been long thinking how 
best to repay this speciar favor received from the 


BUDDHISM AND ORIENTAL CULTURE l8l 

friendly people among whom I am traveling now. 
You have everything you need in the line of 
material, industrial, commercial civilization. By 
this I do not mean that you are wanting in spir- 
itual culture and moral refinement, but I am 
inclined to think that it would not be altogether 
inappropriate to ask you to get more and more 
acquainted with what constitutes Oriental cul- 
ture and religious belief. And it shall be my 
duty and pleasure to make such an opportunity 
of mutual understanding readily possible in 
every way. Accordingly, I thank you, ladies and 
gentlemen, for your efforts which have resulted 
in this enjoyable meeting with each other. 


THE STORY OF DEER PARK' 

BRAHMADATTA, king of Bar^nasi, one day- 
went out hunting in the forest, where he 
saw two groups of deer, each of which consisted 
of five hundred individuals and was escorted by 
a leader. One of them wore a coat decorated 
in the colors of the seven precious jewels. He 
was one of the former incarnations of Bodhisattva 
Shakyamuni, while the other leader was that 
of Devadatta. 

The Deer-Bodhisattva was greatly grieved at 
the sight of so many of his fellow-animals being 
killed by the royal hunting party. His great 
loving heart was stirred to its core and he could 
not endure any longer to witness the butchery. 
He determined to see the king in person and to 
have the matter settled in a more humane way. 
When he moved forward, a veritable shower of 
arrows greeted him, but he was not to be over- 
come and made a steady advance towards the 
king. Observing this indomitable resolution dis- 
played by the Deer-Bodhisattva, the king ordered 

'Deer Park in Benares was the place where Buddha 
first caused the Wheel of the Good Law to revolve. See the 
beginning of the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters. 


THE STORY OF DEER PARK 183 

the party to cease shooting and allowed him to 
approach unmolested. 

Said the deer, "It grieves my heart to see so 
many innocent creatures sacrificed merely to 
gratify your selfish passions. If you wish to 
have us for your table, we could arrange to send 
you each day one victim, to be chosen alternately 
from our two groups. Only let us be spared 
from a general massacre." The king consented 
to this arrangement. 

For a while the plan worked without obstruc- 
tion, but now it happened that a prospective 
mother-doe had to be chosen for the victim. 
She was exceedingly mortified over the ill fate, 
not for her own sake, but for that of her baby 
that was coming to see the light ere long. She 
went to Devadatta, to whose group she belonged, 
and asked him for a special dispensation, saying 
that " It being my fate to be sacrificed this time, 
I have no complaint to make as far as I alone 
am concerned, but the baby I am about to give 
birth to is not to be deprived of existence with 
its mother, for its doomsday has not yet arrived. 
Would that your majesty would contrive some 
means to execute the plan as arranged and yet 
to save my innocent child." 

But Devadatta was cold-hearted and bluntly 
said, "Who in the world desires to be killed? 
Does not every living creature wish to preserve 
its life as long as it can? The turn is yours. 
Be gone, and no more of this wailing." 


184 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

The doe thought within herself that she did 
not at all deserve the wrath of Devadatta, and 
this added to her grief and despondence. But 
a happy idea occurred to her. As the last resort 
she resolved to go and see the Bodhisattva, 
asking him if he knew some way of saving her 
at this critical moment. Being questioned by 
him as to the steps taken by Devadatta concern- 
ing this matter, she said : " My king has no 
compassion for me, but is enraged without due 
cause — it seems to me. I know, however, that 
your love is botindless and that you are the last 
refuge for the helpless and despondent. This is 
the reason why I, though not belonging to your 
group, am here to ask for your infinite wisdom." 

The Bodhisattva took a great pity on the 
despairing mother-doe and thought: "If she 
has to be sacrificed, her innocent unborn child 
will have to share the same fate. If a substitute 
were to be selected, an injustice would be done. 
The only person that could take her place with- 
out disturbing the prearranged order is nobody 
else than myself. I shall then be the victim this 
time instead of the mother-doe." 

Coming to this conclusion, the Bodhisattva 
offered himself to the king as the victim of the 
day. Asked the king, "What brings you here? 
Are all your deer gone already?" Replied the 
Bodhisattva, "Your grace and benevolence is 
known the world over, and nobody would dare 
violate your injunctions ; but it grieves me to see 


THE STORY OF DEER PARK 185 

the propagation of my race unnecessarily checked. 
I have come to the knowledge of such a case 
to-day and I pity it. If I make any change in 
the order of victims as arranged at the outset, 
it will be unreasonable. If I do not save the 
mother, it is against the nature of a sentient 
being. This is the reason why I present myself 
to-day before you. Life is short and everything 
is subject to the law of impermanence. Why 
shall I not practise lovingkindness while I am 
yet alive?" 

The king was greatly moved by the words of 
the Bodhisattva and expressed his deep appre- 
ciation as follows : " It is myself and not you that 
belongs to the beastly creation. I am a deer in 
a man's form. Though you are in appearance a 
lower animal, you are in heart a human being. 
What makes one differ from another is not out- 
ward signs but inner reason. If endowed with 
a loving heart, though a beast in form, one is 
human. From this day I swear not to delight 
any more in partaking of animal flesh. Fear not, 
my friend, but be at ease forever." 

It was in this wise that the forest was reserved 
for the deer to roam about in as they pleased 
and came to be known as Deer Park. 


THE STORY OF THE GEM-HUNTING' 

IN ancient times there was a king who had 
among his valuable possessions a precious 
stone which he most highly prized. An attendant 
of his one day dropped it accidentally in a very 
deep lake which was in his palace garden. The 
king was greatly troubled and immediately made 
an inquiry among his subjects whether there was 
any one who could locate the precious treasure 
in the water and safely restore it to his hands, 
adding that such a one would receive a hand- 
some reward. 

There was among his retainers a man called 
Clear-Sighted, whose optical power was consid- 
ered almost supernatural, and everybody thought 
that he was the man who could find the lost 
gem in the lake, however deep and wide it might 
be. The man was brought before the king and 
was directly commissioned to make a search for 
the gem. 

Clear-Sighted dived deep into the water and 
tried to locate the precious stone at its bottom. 
But, singularly, his sight did not avail him to any 

'This story was told by the Rev. Shaku to illustrate 
Chapter 9 of the Sutra of Forty-two Chapters. 

186 


THE STORY OP THE GEM-HUNTING 187 

great extent, for he was utterly unable to observe 
it anywhere. The harder he strove the dimmer 
became his sight. Completely disappointed at 
this unexpected discovery of his shortsightedness, 
he came out from the bottom of the lake, and 
reported his miserable failure to the king, whose 
mortification now knew no bounds. 

The king did not know what to do; he could 
not reconcile himself to the new situation. A 
long consultation was held again, but no one 
seemed to be able to solve the problem in a 
practical way. In despair they finally came to 
test a most unusual method, which seemed almost 
absurd and ridiculous. 

They knew there was a man called Sightless, 
and thought if Clear-Sighted was of no avail 
this blind man might be found useful in such a 
case as this, which was so extraordinary. At 
any rate, the attempt would not result in making 
the situation worse. Things miraculous have 
frequently been performed by the blind, and 
why not in this case? 

Sightless was sent for and asked to go down 
into the water and find the lost gem. The man 
went down as he was told, without any pro- 
testation. When he came out after a short 
time, the treasure was in his hand. The king 
was overjoyed and rewarded him most gen- 
erously 

The moral of this allegorical story is that 
much cunning and great learning are not the 


l88 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

most effective means, as ordinarily supposed, to 
obtain the priceless gem of religious truth, but 
that the simple in heart and poor in spirit will 
find the way to heavenly bliss. 


THE SACRIFICE FOR A STANZA' 

IN one of his many previous births on this 
earth, Buddha appeared as a son of a Hindu 
prince. Desirous to gain spiritual insight into 
the ultimate reason of existence, he retired to 
the solitude and quietness of the mountains, as 
was customary in India, and became deeply 
absorbed in meditation. He thought: "Life is 
misery; it is nothing but a series of sufferings. 
How can I escape this everlasting torture? 
Unless I gain all-knowledge and grasp eternal 
life and realize perfect bliss, it is of no use to 
come here and live this life repeatedly. Of what 
worth is this life to me, to all beings, unless we 
escape the curse of ignorance by penetrating the 
ultimate foundation of existence? Until I gain 
enlightenment and immortality, I will not move 
from my seat which I have taken here under this 
tree, and I will bring all my spiritual powers 
into activity toward that end. If I am fortunate 
enough to realize it, I will not keep the spiritual 

'From the Mahdnirv&na Sutra (Nanjo's Catalogue, 
No. 113). This story was told to explain the miraculous 
origin of the famous stanza beginning with "Anicca vata 
sankhara." See the sermon "The Phenomenal and the 
Supra-phenomenal." (Seep, m.) 


IQO SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

bliss all to myself, but will proclaim it to all 
sentient beings on earth, and enlighten them, 
and make them happy as well." 

It was midnight and silence reigned upon the 
earth. Buddha was deeply enwrapt in his 
thoughts. Suddenly he heard a voice which 
came from nowhere he knew. It did not sound 
like a human voice; it was clear, penetrating, 
and resounding; he thought the universe was 
filled with a resonant reverberation of this 
mysterious voice. As he listened to it he could 
understand these two lines of a githa: 

"All component things are transient; 
The law is to be born and die." 

When he could make out these two lines, a 
spiritual illumination came over his mind, and 
he felt in himself something superhuman, some- 
thing divine. His mind became so widened as 
to embrace the entire universe, and he experi- 
enced a feeling of inexpressible joy. He looked 
across the valley, and lo! there his gaze fell on a 
hideous monster straightway confronting him. 
Buddha was bewildered and did not know what 
this all meant. 

The monster was a Yaksha, so inhuman and 
awe-inspiring, with the eye so furiously glaring 
on Buddha, and the mouth stained with dripping 
blood. It was this monstrous devil that had just 
recited those two lines which had so greatly 
inspired him that he thought they came from a 
mouth other than that of this evil genius. 


THE SACRIFICE FOR A STANZA 191 

This unexpected and altogether mysterious 
appearance, however, did not at all disconcert 
Buddha, as he was still under the spiritual spell 
induced by those two noble lines. His only 
thought which he had at that moment was that 
the lines were not quite complete and that some- 
thing was needed to make them so. Stating 
only the fact of universal impermanence, they 
did not show the way to escape it or to transcend 
it. The reason why we mortals are groaning 
under the yoke of karmaic causation is that we 
are yet ignorant of its true significance, that we 
have not yet severed the tie of birth and death. 

So said Buddha to the Yaksha: "Those lines 
which you have just recited are beautiful but 
incomplete. Let me have the remaining two, 
which will complete the g^thS,. For this is not 
only for my own benefit, but for the benefit of 
all mankind. Pray be good enough to disclose 
what is yet kept behind." 

Said the monster: " I will gladly comply with 

your request, but at this very moment I suffer 

from a bodily need and have not strength enough 

to recite the remaining two lines for you. My 

empty stomach must be fed and I live on human 

flesh. Would you first satisfy my appetite? I 

should then be able to let you have what you 

desire 

Buddha said: "I am ready at any moment 

to sacrifice myself, O Yaksha, but when I exist 

no more, who in this world will transmit these 


192 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

lines all complete to posterity? The truth will 
then be eternally lost to mankind. I, therefore, 
beseech you to recite those two remaining lines 
before I die, and I will engrave the whole stanza 
on this rock standing near by. After this is 
done, you can dispose of my body as you please. 
The stanza thus left on the stone will be noticed 
some day by a passer-by and brought out to the 
world for the enlightenment of my fellow-beings." 
The Yaksha said: "As you are so earnest and 
sincere, I grant your wish. Listen to my reci- 
tation : 

"Transcending birth and death, 
How blissful is the Absolute!", 

When the Yaksha finished, Buddha made one 
of his fingers bleed, and with the dripping blood 
inscribed the whole stanza on the rock. This 
being done, Buddha threw himself over the 
precipice in order to fulfill his promise. But 
behold! at this crisis the hideous vampire sud- 
denly changed his features, he became Sakrendra, 
a reigning god of the heavens and a most pow- 
erful guardian angel of Buddhism. Buddha, 
falling into the abyss, was miraculously received 
in the arms of this god, who now honored and 
revered him. The heavens showered flowers and 
the universe resounded with divine music. 


BUDDHIST VIEW OF WAR' 

THIS triple world' is my own possession. 
All the things therein are my own chil- 
dren. Sentient or non-sentient, animate or inani- 
mate, organic or inorganic, the ten thousand 
things in this world are no more than the reflec- 
tions of my own self. They come from the one 
source. They partake of the one body. There- 
fore I cannot rest quiet, until every being, even 
the smallest possible fragment of existence, is 
settled down in its proper appointment. I do 
not mind what long eons it will take to finish 
this gigantic work of salvation. I work at the 
end of eternity when all beings are peacefully 
and happily nestled in an infinite loving heart." 

This is the position taken by the Buddha, 
and we, his humble followers, are but to walk 
in his wake. 

Why, then, do we fight at all? 

Because we do not find this world as it ought 
to be. Because there are here so many perverted 

'Reproduced from The Open Court, May, 1904. 

^The "triple world" (triloka) is a common Buddhist 
term for "universe." The three worlds are "the world of 
desire" (kdmaloka), "the world of bodily form" (rUfaloka), 
and "the immaterial world" {ar'Apaloka) . 

193 


194 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

creatures, so many wayward thoughts, so many 
ill-directed hearts, due to ignorant subjectivity. 
For this reason Buddhists are never tired of com- 
bating all productions of ignorance, and their 
fight must be to the bitter end. They will show 
no quarter. They will mercilessly destroy the 
very root from which arises the misery of this life. 
To accomplish this end, they will never be afraid 
of sacrificing their lives, nor will they tremble 
before an eternal cycle of transmigration. Cor- 
poreal existences come and go, material appear- 
ances wear out and are renewed. Again and 
again they take up the battle at the point where 
it was left off. 

But all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas never 
show any ill-will or hatred toward enemies. 
Enemies — the, enemies of all that is good — are 
indeed wicked, avaricious, shameless, hell-bom, 
and, above all, ignorant. But are they not, 
too, my own children for all their sins? They 
are to be pitied and enlightened, not persecuted. 
Therefore, what is shed by Buddhists is not 
blood, — which, unfortunately, has stained so 
many pages in the history of religion, — ^but tears 
issuing directly from the fountain-head of loving- 
kindness. 

The most powerful weapon ever used by Buddha 
in the subjugation of his wayward children is 
the practice of non-atman (non-egotism). He 
wielded it more effectively than any deadly, 
life-destroying weapons, When he was under the 


BUDDHIST VIEW OF WAR 195 

Bodhi-tree absorbed in meditation on the non- 
atmanness of things, fiends numbering thousands 
tried in every way to shake him from his tran- 
scendental serenity; but all to no purpose. On 
the contrary, the arrows turned to heavenly 
flowers, the roaring clamor to a paradisiacal 
music, and even the army of demons to a host 
of celestials. And do you wonder at it? Not 
at all! For what on earth can withstand an 
absolutely self -freed heart overflowing with loving- 
kindness and infinite bliss? 

And this example should be made the ideal 
of every faithful Buddhist. Whatever calling he 
may have chosen in this life, let him be freed 
from ego-centric thoughts and feelings. Even 
when going to war for his country's sake, let 
him not bear any hatred towards his enemies. 
In all his dealings with them let him practise 
the truth of non-atman. He may have to 
deprive his antagonist of the corporeal presence, 
but let him not think there are atmans, con- 
quering each other. From a Buddhist point of 
view, the significance of life is not limited to the 
present incarnation. We must not exaggerate 
the significance of individuals, for they are not 
independent and unconditional existences. They 
acquire their importance and a paramount mean- 
ing, moral and religious, as soon as their fate 
becomes connected with the all-pervading love 
of the Buddha, because then they are no more 
particular individuals filled with egotistic thoughts 


196 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

and impulses, but have become love incarnate. 
They are so many representative types of one 
universal self-freed love. If they ever have to 
combat one another for the sake of their home 
and country, — which under circumstances may 
become unavoidable in this world of particu- 
larity, — let them forget their egotistic passions, 
which are the product of the atman conception — 
of selfishness. Let them, on the contrary, be filled 
with the lovingkindness of the Buddha; let them 
elevate themselves above the horizon of the 
mine and thine. The hand that is raised to strike 
and the eye that is fixed to take aim, do not 
belong to the individual, but are the instruments 
utilized by a principle higher than transient 
existence. Therefore, when fighting, fight with 
might and main, fight with your whole heart, 
forget your own self in the fight, and be free 
from all atman thought. 

It is most characteristic of our religion, as we 
understand it, that while Buddha emphasized 
the paramount significance of synthetic love, he 
never lost sight of the indispensableness of analyt- 
ical intellect. He extended his sympathy to all 
creatures as his own children and made no dis- 
crimination in his boundless compassion. But 
at the same time he was not ignorant of the fact 
that there were good as well as bad people, that 
there were innocent hearts as well as guilty ones. 
Not that some were more favored by the Buddha 
than others, but they were enabled to acquire 


BUDDHIST VIEW OF WAR I97 

more of the love of the Buddha. One rain falls 
on ail Idnds of plants ; but they do not assimilate 
the water in the same fashion. Buddha's love 
is universal, but our hearts, being fashioned of 
divergent karmas, receive it in different ways. 
He knows where they are finally led to, for his 
love is unintermittently working out their 
salvation, though they themselves be utterly 
unconscious of it. 

Above all things, there is the truth, and there 
are many roads leading to it. It may seem at 
times that they collide and oppose one another. 
But let us rest confident that finally every ill will 
come to some good. 


AT THE BATTLE OF NAN-SHAN HILL' 

ALL that I can say is, "It beggars descrip- 
tion!" Verily, it is the acme of brutality 
and recklessness conceived in this world of indi- 
vidualization {ndmarUpa) . Even the fight between 
the Asura and Sakrendra, the demons and the 
angels, witnessed by our Buddha, seems here to 
sink into insignificance. 

As far as my unaided eye can see, nature 
around me is calm. The Tai-lien Bay to the 
left and the Kin-chou Bay to the right, both as 
tranquil as mirrors, and above us and over the 
Nan-Shan Hill, where directly in our front the 
Russian fortifications stand, the sky expands in 
majestic serenity. Nothing suggests the awful 
carnage which there is enacted. Guns roar, 
bombs burst, but we do not see whence they 
come, and their knell only offsets the solemnity 
of these peaceful surroundings. But when I look 
through a powerful field-glass, I behold the hill- 
sides strewn with dead and wounded, and soldiers 
rush onward over these wretches, while the 

'Reproduced frora The Open Court, December, 1904. 
iq8 


AT THE BATTLE OP NAN-SHAN HILL 199 

enemies on the hill are madly scrambling, stttm- 
bling, and falling. I shudder at the sight. 

* * * 

Still more appalling is a visit to the battle- 
field after the fight. Yesterday, when I viewed 
Nan-Shan Hill from a distance, imagination lent 
enchantment to the spectacle, and at timeg the 
cannonade even impressed me with grandeur. 
But I am now confronting actualities, — actualities 
whose terror and horror can never be forgotten. 
From the top of yonder hill, where, under the 
calm summer sky, nature smiled in beauty, I 
could form no true conception of the tragedy, 
which, as I see now, took place here in unparal- 
leled fury and madness. What a strange paradox 
is this contrast, — a most horrible catastrophe of 
human life happening in the most delightful 
surroundings! It makes me meditate again on 
the doctrine of our teacher. 

* * * 
Buddhism provides us with two entrances 

through which we can reach the citadel of perfect 
truth. One is the gate of love (karund) and the 
other the gate of knowledge (prajnd). The 
former leads us to the world of particulars and 
the latter to the realm of the absolute. By 
knowledge we aspire to reach the summit of 
spiritual enlightenment; by love we strive to 
rescue our fellow-creatures from misery and 
crime. View the vicissitudes of things from the 
unity and eternity of the religious standpoint. 


200 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

the Dharmadhatu, and everything is one, is on 
the same plane,, and I learn to neglect the worldly- 
distinction made between friend and foe, tragedy 
and comedy, war and peace, samsara and nirvana, 
passion {Mega) and enlightenment (bodhi). A 
philosophical calm pervades my soul and I feel 
the contentment of Nirvana. For there is 
nothing, as far as I can see, that does not reflect 
the glory of Buddha. Even in the midst of this 
transcendent universality, however, my heart 
aches with a pain, undefinable yet itisuppressible. 
Love for all sentient beings asserts itself, and 
that frigid indifference of the intellect gives way. 

And why was it necessary that the many horrors 
of this present war should come to pass? Why 
had those poor soldiers to sacrifice their lives? 
In every one of them a warm heart has been 
beating, and now they are all lying on the ground 
in piles, stiff and stark like logs. 

O Mother Earth! All these my fellow-crea- 
tures, it is true, are made of the same stuff of 
which thou art made. But do not their lives 
partake of something not of the earth earthy, 
altogether unlike thyself, and, indeed, more than 
mere gross matter? Are theirs not precious 
human souls which can be engaged in the works 
of peace and enlightenment? Why art thou so 
gravely dumb, when thou art covered with things 
priceless that are being dissolved into their 
primitive elements ? 

In this world of particulars, the noblest and 


AT THE BATTLE OP NAN-SHAN HILL 201 

greatest thing one can achieve is to combat evil 
and bring it into complete subjection. The moral 
principle which guided the Buddha throughout 
his twelve years of preparation and in his forty- 
eight years of religious wanderings, and which 
pervades his whole doctrine, however varied it 
may be when practically applied, is nothing else 
than the subjugation of evil. To destroy the 
ninety-eight major and eighty-four thousand 
minor evils, that are constantly tormenting 
human souls on this earth, was the guiding thought 
of the Buddha. Therefore, every follower of the 
Buddha builds a great boat of love, launches it 
on the great ocean of birth and death, steers it 
with the great rudder of faith, and sails forth 
with a steadfast mind through the whirling tem- 
pest of egotistic desires and passions. No Bud- 
dhist will ever relax his energy, until every one 
of his fellow-creatures be safely carried over to 
the other shore of perfect bliss. 

War is an evil and a great one, indeed. But 
war against evils must be unflinchingly prose- 
cuted till we attain the final aim. In the present 
hostilities, into which Japan has entered with great 
reluctance, she pursues no egotistic purpose, but 
seeks the subjugation of evils hostile to civili- 
zation, peace, and enlightenment. She deliber- 
ated long before she took up arms, as she was 
well aware of the magnitude and gravity of the 
undertaking. But the firm conviction of the 
justice of her cause has endowed her with an 


202 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

indomitable courage, and she is determined to 
carry the struggle to the bitter end. 

Here is the price we must pay for our ideals — 
a price paid in streams of blood and by the sacri- 
fice of many thousands of living bodies. How- 
ever determined may be our resolution to crush 
evils, our hearts tremble at the sight of this 
appalling scene. 

Alas! How much dearer is the price still 
going to be? What enormous losses are we 
going to suffer through the evil thoughts of our 
enemy, not to speak of the many injuries which 
our poor enemy himself will have to endure? 
All these miserable soldiers, individually harm- 
less and innocent of the present war, are doomed 
to a death not only unnatural, but even inhuman! 

Indeed, were it not for the doctrine of love 
taught by the Buddha, which should elevate 
every individual creature to the realm of a pure 
spirituality, we would, in the face of the terrible 
calamities that now befall us, be left to utter 
destruction and without any consolation what- 
ever. Were it not for the belief that the bloom 
of truly spiritual light will, out of these muti- 
lated, disfigured, and decomposing corpses, return 
with renewed splendor, we would not be able 
to stand these heart-rending tribulations even 
for a moment. Were it not for the consolation 
that these sacrifices are not brought for an 
egotistic purpose, but are an inevitable step 
toward the final realization of enlightenment. 


AT THE BATTLE OF NAN-SHAN HILL 203 

how could I, poor mortal, bear these experiences 
of a hell let loose on earth? 

The body is but a vessel for something greater 
than itself. Individuality is but a husk contain- 
ing something more permanent. Let us, then, 
though not without losing tenderness of heart, 
bravely confront our ordeal. 

* * * 

I came here with a double purpose. I wished 
to have my faith tested by going through the 
greatest horrors of hfe, but I also wished to 
inspire, if I could, our valiant soldiers with the 
ennobling thoughts of the Buddha, so as to 
enable them to die on the battlefield with the 
confidence that the task in which they are 
engaged is great and noble. I wished to convince 
them of the truths that this war is not a mere 
slaughter of their fellow-beings, but that they 
are combating an evil, and that, at the same 
time, corporeal annihilation really means a 
rebirth of soul, not in heaven, indeed, but here 
among ourselves. I believe I did my best to 
impress these ideas upon the soldiers' hearts; 
and my own sentiments I express in the following 
stanza, one of the many poems composed on the 
field of battle : 

Here, marching on Nan-Shan, 

Storming its topmost crest, 
Have thousands of brave men 

With dragon valor pressed. 
Before the foe my heart 

Is calmed, composure-blessed, 
While belching cannons sing 

A lullaby of rest. 


AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT A SERVICE 

HELD IN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO 

DIED IN THE RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR 

(At the Golden Gate Hall, November, 1905.) 

I AM requested here to-night to speak con- 
cerning our brethren who fell in the greatest 
and most sanguinary war of modem times, — the 
war that only recently was brought to a conclu- 
sion. But what shall I say? Shall I eulogize 
the glory of their death? or shall I depict to 
you the unimaginable horrors of war? or have 
I to praise the prowess and success of our Jap- 
anese army and navy? or have I to dwell upon 
the innumerable sufferings of our people at 
home which have been brought about by the 
war? I am not, however, an orator in any sense 
of the word, and am utterly disqualified for the 
task laid down before me, either to glorify the 
dead or to denounce war. All that I can do is 
to look upon the matter from a purely religious 
viewpoint and to express my own ideas concern- 
ing those unfortunate dead who fell in the defense 
of our fatherland. And, if I can, let me try to 
make their departed spirits calmly repose where 
they fell, while I demonstrate to those left behind 

204 


A MEMORIAL ADDRESS 205 

the fact that the immortality of the soul consists 
in the realization of noble deeds, and not in the 
continuation of personality after death, if such 
a thing be at all possible 

* * * 

When we are talking in the abstract we are 
apt to see only the bright side of war — its inevi- 
tableness, its sublimity, its awe-inspiring scene, 
its perfect organization, its earnestness, its patri- 
otism, and so forth, and we forget at what price 
these glorious things are bought, we forget that 
war is the most horrible evil of human life, that 
killing one another with whatever beautiful 
excuse is a proof of moral depravity, that our 
mission here under the sun is not to destroy life, 
but to preserve and develop it. Are we not here 
to realize the ideals of universal brotherhood 
and eternal peace? Are we not here to help one 
another and to promote our mutual welfare? Are 
we not here to make a grand universal home in 
which everybody is respected, believed, and 
loved? Let me ask, then: Does war in any way 
subserve this end? does it augment our happi- 
ness? does it make us respect one another? does 
it bring more life into the world? Let those 
who would answer affirmatively these questions 
go to one of those bloody battlefields in Man- 
churia and tell us what is disclosed before their 
unprejudiced eyes. 

This is one of the most hotly contested hills 
around Port Arthur. Battles have been fought 


2o6 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

all morning and all afternoon, positions have 
been alternately taken by our soldiers and 
enemies. Battalions after battalions have been 
rushed forward only to fall under the veritable 
showers of death-dealing missiles, while those 
fortunate ones who have escaped the hell of fire 
are greeted with a phalanx of cold steel. And 
what do we see before us now? Hundreds of 
hundreds of dead and wounded are scattered all 
over the hill, friends and foes indiscriminately. 
Are not some of them yet writhing in their last 
agony? Where does that faint groaning come? 
Were not those stark corpses the most lively, 
most briskly moving bodies a few hours ago? 
Were not a courageous heart and a noble mind 
abiding in each one of them? The moon is just 
rising, and her pale light but enhances the ghast- 
liness of the sight. The perfect stillness of hor- 
ror! And I speak of this from my personal 
experience. 

Now let me again ask: From where do these 
soldiers come? They must have parents — some 
of whom are aged and perhaps decrepit— sisters 
and brothers, and some of them must be even 
husbands and fathers on whom tender women 
and helpless children are depending. Now that 
their mainstays are gone and their beloved 
are forever departed, grief and suffering inde- 
scribable must be reigning in all these thousands 
of homes. Some of them, reduced to abject 
poverty and utter helplessness, must go begging 


A MEMORIAL ADDRESS 207 

or to self-destruction to save themselves from 
shame. What wrong did they commit to be 
thus terribly punished? The wrong, if it be so 
called, was that they had able-bodied, strong- 
minded sons or husbands. What a heart-rending 
ordeal they have to pass! 

This most saddening fact is brought home 
more forcibly when we are personally related 
to the unfortunate dead. 

News of victory is welcome and we feel elated 
over it. But think of the price we have paid for 
it with thousands of precious human lives. And 
especially when we find some of our personal 
friends and acquaintances mentioned among the 
dead or seriously wounded, how depressingly the 
news weighs upon us ! I often spend many hours 
at a time brooding over the sad event, my thoughts 
being deeply buried in the unfathomable prob- 
lems of philosophy and religion, which have 
bafHed many a wise man ever since the dawn of 
intellect. Though I have formed in my humble 
way my own welt- and lebensanschauung with 
which I interpret the affairs of the world and 
the phenomena of soul-life, I cannot help being 
struck with the calamities which follow in the 
wake of war. I am not necessarily absorbed in 
pessimism, but I feel an unspeakable feeling at 
the bottom of my heart and with wonder and 
awe think of a power by whose hand the course 
of this life and the destiny of the universe are 
directed. 


208 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

' Why is human life so cheap? Why can it not 
be made to resist flying lead? Why is it so frail 
as to succumb to the thrust of cold steel? Why 
was it not made invulnerable, so that water could 
not drown and fire could not consume? Man, 
how conceited thou art when thy pulse beats 
and thy blood is warm! How haughty, god- 
like, immortal thou art when thou sittest alone 
and uninterruptedly pursuest thy egotistic 
schemes and intrigues! But, alas! thy dreams 
depart and thou must face cold, brutal realities. 
What a pitiful sight thou presentest now! Thou 
runnest against a mass of granite, cement, and 
steel, or against the exploding nitroglycerin, 
which is thine own handiwork, and thou art 
reduced to atoms, thou art blown to nothingness, 
whence thou perhaps didst come. How fragile 
thou art! Is this not the thought that agitates 
those who reflect upon the horrors of war and 
the destiny of mankind? 

But are we not made for some other and better 
purposes than being merely material, physical, 
sensual, earthly, corporeal? Has not human 
existence more significance than a mere sentient 
organism whose life is as delicate as a drop of 
dew? Are we not capable of being more than 
what we appear to the senses? Are we not also 
living in a realm which transcends the world of 
sense and perception? To these questions I 
answer most definitely, and say "yes." How- 
ever weak and helpless and flickering like a 


A MEMORIAL ADDRESS 209 

solitary lamplight before the wind, we are most 
assuredly more than a corporeal existence. Our 
limbs may be torn to pieces, our brains be 
smashed to nothing, our bones be ground to 
powder; but our deeds, our thoughts, our feel- 
ings will survive. It is in the realm of sense and 
perception that we are born and die. In the 
realm where our true being resides there is no 
such thing as birth and death. In the spiritual 
kingdom ours is an eternal growth, a perpetual 
unfolding, a never-ending development. The 
flesh will decay and return to dust, but the spirit 
which consists of our noble deeds and thoughts 
forever rejuvenates itself. It is like the snake's 
shedding its skin: the bodily existence is the 
skin, which is cast off whenever the spirit so 
desires. It is immaterial how the body fares, 
for the spirit is the master and its commands 
have to be obeyed at all hazards. The spirit 
decides when and how its outer integument 
shall be renewed. To be more exact and 
literal, the spirit which is immortal has limited 
itself to effect its own differentiation and devel- 
opment under the bodily condition. The body 
is therefore needed to complete the mission of 
the spirit, but the body is so created as to be 
subservient to the spirit and to be willing to 
carry out what the latter wills. 

In ancient Oriental mythology we have a 
divine phenix, the only one of its kind and of 
remarkable beauty, that living five or six hun- 


2IO SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

dred years in the Arabian desert built a funeral 
pile of Spices and aromatic gums, ignited it with 
the fanning of its wings, sang a melodious dirge, 
and burned itself in the all-purifying fire, only to 
come out again in the freshness of youth and to 
continue its former life. Is it not a wonderful 
bird, this divine phenix of eternal life? But 
more wonderful indeed is our spiritual life. 

I beUeve all Japanese are familiar with the 
story of Kusunoki Masashige, who exclaimed in 
his last moment that he would be reborn seven 
times and protect his royal family against the 
enemy. You also know well the anecdote of the 
late Commander Hirose, who expressed the same 
sentiment in one of his last poems. But in point 
of fact these heroes are not only seven times 
reborn, but infinitely, so long as this universe 
endureth and humanity survives. Do not think 
for a moment that this is merely theoretical and 
has no concrete significance. Far from it. We 
who are breathing to-day the spirit of the illus- 
trious general and the valiant sailor are no 
more nor less than their reincarnations. Those 
who come after us and become possessed of the 
same sentiment are their and our spiritual descend- 
ants. Rebirth does not mean the reawakening of 
the dead. Reincarnation does not mean the 
resuscitation of a dried-up mummy. The immor- 
tality of the soul does not mean the continuation 
of the individual soul as conceived by most 
religionists. The spirit is not a thing material 


A MEMORIAL ADDRESS 211 

and sensual, however ethereally or astrally you 
may conceive it. It is a transcendental exist- 
ence, which knows no limiting conditions such as 
space, time, or causation. Where you feel a 
noble feeling, where you think a beautiful 
thought, where you do a self-sacrificing deed, 
there is the spirit making itself felt in your con- 
sciousness. 

There is but one great spirit and we individuals 
are its temporal manifestations. We are eternal 
when we do the will of the great spirit; we are 
doomed when we protest against it in otir egotism 
and ignorance. We obey, and we live. We 
defy, and we are thrown into the fire that quench- 
eth not. Our bodily existences are like the 
sheaths of the bamboo sprout. For the growth 
of the plant it is necessary to cast one sheath 
after another. It is not that the body-sheath is 
negligible, but that the spirit-plant is more essen- 
tial and its wholesome growth of paramount 
importance. Let us, therefore, not absolutely cling 
to the bodily existence, but, when necessary, 
sacrifice it for a better thing. For this is the 
way in which the spirituality of our being asserts 
itself. 

This being the case, war is not necessarily 
horrible, provided that it is fought for a just 
and honorable cause, that it is fought for the 
maintenance and realization of noble ideals, that 
it is fought for the upholding of humanity and 
civilization. Many material human bodies may 


212 SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

be destroyed, many humane hearts be broken, 
but from a broader point of view these sacrifices 
are so many phenixes consumed in the sacred 
fire of spirituality, which will arise from the 
smouldering ashes reanimated, ennobled, and 
glorified. The spirit which dwelt in them and 
brought them to the altar now assumes another 
material expression in the form of coming genera- 
tions. Those fallen in the field are returning to 
dust in order to nourish vegetation, or, as the 
Japanese would express it, to fill the hungry 
stomach of the wild dog. But this is true only 
of their particular bodily forms. As to the 
spirit, it has not gone up to a mythical region 
which some religious people call heaven. It has 
not vanished into the air in the fashion of a 
ghost. Nor is it sitting by the so-called Heav- 
enly Father encircled by a host of angels. We 
Buddhists are not believers in fiction, supersti- 
tion, or mythology. We are followers of truth 
and fact. And what we actually see around us 
is that the departed spirits are abiding right 
among ourselves, for we have the most convincing 
testimony of the fact in our inmost consciousness 
which deceives not. They descend upon us, they 
dwell within us; for are we not being moved by 
their courage, earnestness, self-sacrifice, and love 
of country? Do we not feel supematurally 
inspired and strengthened in our resolution to 
follow them and to complete the work they have 
so auspiciously started? Personally and indi- 


A MEMORIAL ADDRESS 21 3 

vidually, we may grieve over their being no more 
among us in their material garb, but super- 
personally our Hf e is enriched and illuminated 
by their death. 

We understand, therefore, by the immortality 
of the soul the perpetuation of spiritual life, not 
individually but supra-individually. The life 
runs in and through individuals, but it is more 
than the totality of them. It does not die with 
their annihilation, it survives them, and wears 
another garment of bodily existence, making 
itself ever younger, stronger, and nobler. In 
this sense, Japanese belief in the ancestral shades 
is justifiable. They are not really vanished in 
the haze of bygone ages; they are living in the 
freshness of youth in our midst, and what we 
worship is not their ghostly presence but their 
living spirit. Those who fell in the late war are 
not really fallen ; they are still alive in the minds 
and hearts of their friends and worshipers. 
From the world of sense they are forever 
departed, but they have found their enduring 
home in the supra-individual realm. Their bones 
are crumbling in the dust, but their spirit is 
enkindled in our hearts. This, one of the plainest 
facts in the world, will be doubted only by those 
near-sighted, grossly material egoists who refuse 
to see the significance of human life. 

I am by no means trying to cover the horrors 
and evils of war, for war is certainly hellish. 
Let us avoid it as much as possible. Let us 


2l4 SERMONS OP A BUDDHIST ABBOT 

settle all our international difficulties in a more 
civilized manner. But if it is unavoidable, let 
us go into it with heart and soul, with the firm 
conviction that our spiritual descendants will 
carry out and accomplish what we have failed 
personally to achieve. Let, therefore, the dead 
quietly repose in their last sleep. Nobody will 
dare stir their glorious ashes. As for us who 
are left behind, no superfluous words are in 
place, only we must not disgrace the honor and 
spirit of the dead who have solemnly bequeathed 
to us their work to perfect. Mere lamentation 
not only bears no fruit, it is a product of egoism, 
and has to be shunned by every enlightened 
mind and heart. 


INDEX. 


rXhe Roman numerals in pareiitheses refer to the chapters in The 
Sutra of Forty-two Chapters.'] [ 


Agvaghosha, 34. 

Agnostics, 39. 

Akanishta, 5 fn. (I). 

Alakshitam, 33, 35. 

"All component things are tran- 
sient," 190. 

All-knowledge, 12 (XV). 

Amitabha, 32. 

Amitabha, by Dr. Carus, 2$ fn. 

Anagamin, 5 (I), 9 (XI), 

Anatman, 37 (See also "Non- 
ego.") 

Anavatapta Lake, 20 (XLII). 

Ancestral shades, 213. 

"Anicca vata sankhara," iii. 

Antinomianism, 130. 

Arhat, 5 (I), 9 (XI), 14 (XXIII). 

Arhatship, 15 (XXVIII). 

Asceticism, not upheld, 94. 

Asura, 198. 

"At the moment like this," 177. 

Atman (ego-soul), 37, 53. 

Attachment, 6 (III). 

Avalokiteshvara, 190. (See also 
"Kwannon.") 

Barrows, Dr. John H., vi, 121, 

Being, Nature of, 11 (XII). 

Bhagavadgita, 1 53. 

Bhikshu, 4. 

Bhutakoti, 33* 

Bhutatathata, 33, 34. 

Blind men and the elephant, 91. 

Blessing, 8 (X), 9 (X). 

Bliss of the Way, 9 (X). 


Bodhi, the, 36, 67; and the body, 
94. 

Bodhidharma, 10 fn.; and Hui 
Ko, 42. 

Bodhisattva, 46. 

"Body is the holy Bodhi tree," 90. 

Brahmadatta, 182. 

Bricks, 20, (XLII). 

Buddha, and the flower, 141; as a 
prince, 189. 

Buddhas, 9 (XI). 

Buddha-body, The, limited itself, 
66; compared to mirror, 66; 
compared to moon, 67; (see also 
"Dharmakaya"), 

Buddha-intelligence, 128. 

Buddhakaya, 65. 

Buddhism, and atheism, 25, 28; 
rational, 28; and pantheism, 25, 
26, 28 , 84; and Gospel of John, 
48; Religion of enlightenment, 
51, 86; and quietism, 75; Aim 
of, 85; and supernatural ism, 
m; its rationality, 112; ideal- 
istic, 118; and asceticism, 127; 
and hedonism, 127 ; and Ori- 
ental culture, 170 et seq. 

Buddhist ethics, simple, 70. 

Buddhist faith, explained in a 
gatha, 62; threefold, 86. 

Buddhist Sutra, 10, (XII), 

Bushido, 176. 

Calm, 3, 18 (XXXIV). (See also 

"Tranquility.") 


2l6 


SERMONS O? A BUDDHIST ABBOT. 


Camatha, 150, 

Canti, 143. 

Chandradipa-samidhi S&tra, 154. 

Charity, lo(XII). 

Child, 14 (XXII). 

Christ, 123, 124; and Buddha, 124, 

125. 
Christian critic, 121. 
Christian scholars, 25. 
Christians in their dying moments, 

177- 
Cila (morality), 146. 
Clear-sighted, 186. 
Cleave, To, 13 (XXII). (.See 

also "Hanker.") 
"Commit no wrong," 6g. 
Compulsion, 6 (II). 
Confucian Analects, 3 fn. 
Consciousness and the soul, 40. 
Contemplation, 72, 143. ( See also 

"Dhyana.") 
Corinthians, I, (quoted), 18 fn. 
Cramana, 5 (I), 6 (II), 6 (III). 
Cilnyata, (emptiness), 33, 35, 143. 

Dark room, 12, (XVII). 

Darkness, 9 (X), 12 (XVII). 

Deed, not-doing, 12 (XVIII). 

Deer Park, 4, 103. 

Devadatta, 182. 

Dharma, The, 6 (II). 

Dharmachakra, 103. 

Dharmadhatu, 200. 

Dharmakaya, 32 et seq., 37, 123, 
138; Literal meaning of , 47 ; and 
Godhead, 47; Affirmative phase 
of Buddhism, 47; as love and 
intelligence, 51; Body of In- 
telligence, 52. (See also "Bud- 
dha-body.") 

Dharmapada, (quoted), 6g, 75, 
131- 

Dhyana, 20 (XLII), 68, 146; and 
Prientl culturue, 148; its mean- 
ing, 149; and Christian mystic, 
149; its benefits, 151; its phys- 
iological aspect, 152; in Chan- 
dradtpa-samadhi Sutra, 154; and 
trance, 155; and concentration, 
156; and hallucination, 157; in 
QUramgama Sutra, 158. 


Difference (ndndtva), 64; Gate of, 
2y. (See also "Diversity.") 

Difficult things. Twenty, 10 (XII). 

Dirt, 12 (XV), 18 (XXXV). 

Discipline, 6 (II), 9 (XI), 17 
(XXXIV), 18 (XXXIV), 19 
(XXXVI) ; beyond discipline, 
12 (XVIII). 

Diversity, Principle of, 65. 

Divine will, 128. 

Doctrine of Buddhas, 6 (II), 19 
(XXXIX) ; transcendental, 20 
(XLII). 

Dragon(s), 21 (XLII); and schol- 
ars, 140. 

Dream, 20 (XLII). 

Dross, 18 (XXXV). 

Dualism, and ignorance, 51- 

Dust, 8 (VIII), II (XIII), 20 
(XLII). 

Echo, 8 (VII). 

Effect, 8 (VII). 

Ego, 13 (XX) ; and the soul, 104 

(See also "Soul.") 
Ego-conception and ethics, 43 et 

seq. 
Egoism, 107; and enlightenment, 

57: and ignorance, 178. 
Eightfold Path, 71, ^2. 
Elements, Five, 13 (XX). 
Elephant, and the blind men, 91. 
Emptiness, 143. (See also "Cun- 

yatd,"') 
Enlightened, The, 18 (XXXVI). 
Enlightenment, 4, 6 (II), 9 (XI), 

12 (XVII), 15 (XXVII), 1.7 

(XXXIII), 19 (XXXVII), 72; 

spiritual, 13 (XIX); is Nirvana, 

51; and love, 82; and ignorance, 

126 et seq.; and intellect, 133: 

and trance, 138; is the normal 

state of mind, 139. 
"Eternal femininity," 169. 
Ethical life, 130. 
Evil, 7 (IV), 8 (VII); Path of, 

15 (XXVIII); Subjugation of, 

201. 
Evil creations, 18 (XXXVI). 
Evil-doer(s), 7 (VI), 8 (VIII). 
Evil influence(s), 15 (XXVII), 


INDEX. 


217 


17 (XXXIII); Evil passions, 16 
(XXXI), 18 (XXXV) ; Evil 
thoughts, II (XV), 16 (XXIX). 

Existence, The purpose of, 108. 

Experience, Inward, 28. 

Eye of the Dharma, The, 141. 

Fairy, 14 (XXVI). 

Faith, 18 (XXXVI), 137. 

Fame, 13 (XXI). 

Families, 14 (XXIII). 

Fatalism, 175. 

Faust, quoted, 34. 

Fear, 16 (XXXII). 

Filial piety, 179. 

Flesh, 126 et seq. 

Flower, 20 (XLII). 

Fortune, Rare, 18 (XXXVI). 

Fourfold Truth, 4. 

Freedom, 99, 116. (See also 

"Non-attachment.") 
Fundamental beliefs. The three, 

of Buddhism, 82. 

Gautama, Siddhartha, 10 1; Bud- 
dha, 123. 

God, of Buddhism, 25; immanent, 
28, 30; as the Principle of same- 
ness, 28 ; and individual exist- 
ences, 29 et seq.; and the world, 
29 ; in Gospel of John, and Bud- 
dhism, 48; and non-ego, 50; as 
'*it,'* 83 fn. ; and laws of nature, 
99; talking about, 136; and the 
intellect, 142; and theologians, 
144; as "sound," 163. 

Goethe, 34. 

Good, 7 (IV), II (XIV). 

Good man, 9 (XI). 

Good Law, Wheel of the, loi et 
seq. (See also "Dharmacha- 
kra.") 

Goodness, Ten deeds of, 71. 

Great, 11 (XIV). 

Guitar, 17 (XXXIV). 

Hak Rak-ten, 87. (See also "Pai 

Lu-Tien.") 
Hanker(ing), 6 (II), 10 (XII), 

II (XIII), 13 (XXI). 
Hay, 16 (XXX). 


Heart, Simplicity of, 8 (IX); Pu- 
rity of, 10 fn., 49; Pure in, 11 
(XIII) ; in accord with the 
Way, II (XIV). 

Heart of Intelligence, 1 8 
(XXXVI). 

Heavenly Father, 212. 

Hedonists, 107. 

"Here, marching on Nan-Shan," 
203. 

Heterodox, 21 (XLII). 

Hinayana Buddhism, 79 et seq. 

Hirose, 174, 210. 

History, and soul-conception, 59. 

Holila, 20 (XLII). 

"Holy tree exists as Bodhi known, 
No," 90. 

Honey, 14 (XXII), 19 (XXXIX). 

Hridaya (heart), 36. 

Hui Ko, second patriarch of the 
Zen sect, 41 et seq. 

Human life, not material, 208. 

Hut and ego, (in a Japanese 
poem), 13 fn. 

Idealism, in Buddhism, 75. 

Ideality, Realm of, 162. 

Ignorance, 12 (XVII), 14 
(XXIII), 51, 73t 104; and dual- 
ism, 51; and enlightenment, 126. 

Illuminating, 11 (XV), 12 (XV). 

Imagination, 16 (XXXI), 20 
(XLII). 

Immortality, 173, 210; Buddhist 
conception of, 52, 53 et seq.; 
and egoism, 57; of work, 58. 

Impermanence, 13, (XIX), 115. 

Incense stick, 13, (XXI). 

Inquisition, 113. 

Insult, 7 (VI). 

Intelligence, 74, (see also "Praj- 
na"); Heart of, i8 (XXXVI). 

Intuition, Philosophical, 100. 

John, Gospel of, and Buddhism, 
45 ; quoted, 50. 

Karma, 6 (II); immortal, 58; 

Principle of, 64 et seq. (See also 

"work.") 
Kashyapa, 141. 


-218 


SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT. 


Kashyapabuddha, i6 (XXXIJ, 17 
(XXXIV). 

Kings and lords, 20 (XLII). 

Knowledge, 13 (XIX), 9 (XI); 
and practice, 10 (XII) ; Su- 
preme (sambodhi), 27. 

Kwannon, 160; and Japanese cul- 
ture, 168. 

Kwan-ze-on, 161. 

Lao-tze, 153. 

Laotzeans, 4 fn. 

Learning, 8 (IX), 10 (XII), 

Leather bag, 15 (XXVI). 

Life, Length of a man's, 19 
(XXXVIII); characterized,io5; 
a pendulum, 106; Buddhist con- 
ception of, 107; eternal, 170. 

Light. 12 (XVII). 

Log, 15 (XXVII). 

Lord of Heavens, 14 (XXVI). 

Lotus flower, 16 (XXIX). 

Love, 52, 163; and enlightenment, 
82; The power of religion, 114; 
and life, 1 64 ; exclusive, 165; 
and samadhi, 166; and knowl- 
edge, 199; and spirituality, 202. 

Lovingkindness, 8 (VII). 

Luke, Gospel of, (referred to), 6 
fn. (III). 

Lun Yu, see "Confucian Ana- 
lects.*' 

Lust, 14 (XXIV). 

Mahdparinirvdna Sutra, 189 fn. 
Mahayana Buddhism, 79 et seq. 
M asashige, 171, 210. 
Matthew, Gospel of (referred to), 

10 fn., II fn., 15 fn., 16 fn. 
Meditation, 4. (See also "Dhy- 

ana.") 
Meekness, 11 (XV). 
Mercy, Goddess of, 1 60. (5*^^ 

also "Kwannon.") 
Metal, 18 (XXXV): Precious. 20 

(XLII). 
Middle kingdom, 18 (XXXVI). 
Middle Way, 90 et seq. 
Mind, 5, 6 (II), 12 (XVI), 16 

(XXXI), 17 (XXXIV) ; and 

Body, 97. 


Ming, Emperor, of Han dynasty, 
■3 fn. 

Mirage, 13 (XX). 

Mire, 20 (XLI). 

Mirror, 11 (XIII); and Buddha- 
body, 66. 

Misdemeanor, 7 (V). 

Monju, a Bodhisattva, 165. 

Moon, compared to the Buddha- 
body, 67. 

Moral discipline, 1 00. 

Morality, Precepts of, 5 (I). 

Motherliness, Eternal, 36. 

Mud, 16 (XXIX). 

Mutilation, 16 (XXXI). 

Mysticism, 130. 

Nacrava (non- defilement), 35. 

Nanatva, (difference), 26; (See 
also "Difference" and "Divers- 
ity.") 

Nan-Shan, 198. 

Nihilism, 98. 

Nirvana, 20 (XLII), 33, 35, 121, 
122, 129, 131, 141, 150, 156, 
200; and purity of heart, 49; 
and Enlightenment, 5 1 ; and ego- 
ism, 57; and humanity, 109. 

Non-attachment, 115. (See also 
"freedom.") 

Non-ego, 37; and immortality, 39 
et seq. ; and love of enemies, 
46; and God-conception, 50; and 
lovingkindness, 52; and immor- 
tality, 57; and war, 194. 

Nothingness of existence, 99. 

Ocean, 7 (V), 15 (XXVII). 
"Old man," 126. 
Onesidedness, 9 (XI). 
Orientalism and Occidentalism, 

153- 
Orthodox, 21 (XLII). 
Ota, Dokwan, 177. 
Ox, 19 (XL), 20 (XLI). 

Pai Lu-tien, 69. iSee also "Kak 
Rak-ten.") 

Pan kai en, 26. 
Panentheism, 26. 
Paradise, 63. 


INDEX. 


219 


Paramartha, 36. 

Paratnitas (virtues of perfection), 
61, 71, 72. 

Passion, 14 (XXIII); The most 
powerful, 14 (XXIV). 

Passions, The, 3, 6 (III), 10 
(XII), II (XIII), 12 (XVI), 
14 (XXV), 15 (XXVII), 16 
(XXXI, XXXII), 20 (XLI); 
Severance of the, 6 (I). 

Patriotism, 179. 

Pauline Epistle, quoted, 168. 

Perry, Commodore, 180. 

Phenix, 209. 

Phenomenal, world, 114; and the 
supra-phenomenal, 117. 

Plants, 21 (XLII). 

Poor, The 10 (XII). 

Possessions, 14 (XXIII) ; Worldly 
6 (III), 13 (XXII). 

Prajiia, 137, 145 et seq., 199; like 
the sword, 142; as mother, 142. 

Pratyekabuddha, 9 (XI), 

Precepts, five, 9 (XI) ; My, 19 
(XXXVII). 

Prejudice, 6 (II). 

Prison, 14 (XXIII). 

Pundarika Sutra, 167. 

Pure, 12 (XV), 18 (XXXIV). 
iSee also "Heart" and "Pu- 
rity.") 

Pure-heartedness, 78. 

Pure Land, 1 17. 

Purity of heart, 73, 74. 

Rag, zo (XLII). 

"Rain and hail," (Japanese poem) , 
28. 

Reality, 21 (XLII). 

Reason, inner life of things, 31; 
and love of enemies, 45; Uni- 
versal, 72; of the universe, 85; 
realization of, 88; ultimate, 98, 
144; spirituaul, 99; real, 163. 

Red Slayer, (Emerson), 27. 

Religion, not to analyze, 63 ; as an 
institution, 76; and mysticism, 
130; and philosophy, 132. 

Religious life, 130. 

"Religious sense," 135. 

Retribution, 7 (V). 


Rich, The, 10 (XII). 
Righteousness, 14 (XXIV), 
Rupaloka, 5 fn. (I). 

Sacred Boobs of the East, 5 fn. 
(I). 

Saintship, four fruits of, s (I). 

Sakrendra, 192, 196. 

Salvation, 20 (XLII). 

Samadhi, 143, 150. 

Samapatti, 150. 

Samata, see "sameness." 

Sameness (samata), 63, 65; doc- 
trine of, 21 (XLII); Gate of, 
27. 

Satya (truth), 36. 

Schleiermacher, 176. 

Self-assertion, 126, 127; and lov- 
ingkindness, 127. 

Self-will, 126; and divine will, 129. 

Selfish desires, 10 (XII), 13 
(XXII) ; Selfish passions, 13 
(XXII); Selfish pride, 10 
(XII). 

Sensualism, 15 (XXVIII), 16 
(XXX and XXXI), 107. 

Seshi, a Bodhisattva, 165. 

Shadow, 8 (VII). 

Shakyamuni, 182. 

Sightless, 187. 

Silks, 20 (XLII). 

Simple-hearted, 10 (XII). (.See 
also "Heart.") 

Skridagamin, 5 (I), 9 (XI). 

Soul, Immortality of the, 39; as 
popularly conceived, 39 et seq.; 
and consciousness, 40 ; compared 
to house, 42, 5S; as the "old 
man," 44; as Atman, 53; mate- 
rially conceived, 54; compared 
to water, 5 s, 56; and ego, 104. 

Soul-conception, and history, 59. 

Speech, inexpressible, 12 (XVIII). 

Spirit, and body, 209; One Great, 
211. 

Spiritual Enlightenment, 132. 

Spirituality, 1 18. 

Spittle, 8 (VIII). 

Srotaapanna, 6 (I), 9 (XI); 
-fruit, 15 (XXVI). 

Stream, 15 (XXVII). 


220 


SERMONS OF A BUDDHIST ABBOT. 


Strenuosity, 72. 

Suchness, 33. 

Sumeru mountain, 20 (XLII). 

Supra-phenomenal, The, 116. 

Sympathy, 74. 

Tara, as Kwannon, 160. 

Tathagata, 32. 

Tathata (or Tathatva), 33, 34, 35. 

Thought, unthinkable, 12 (XVII). 

"Thy will," 58, 12S. 

Tiger, 14 (XXIII). 

Timber, 15 (XXVII). 

Tolstoy, Count Leo, ii. 

Torch, 9 (X), 12 (XVII) I -car- 
rier, 14 (XXV). 

Tranquillity, 143. (See also 
"Calm" and "Dhyana.") 

Transmigration, 16 (XXXI). 

Treasure created . by imagination, 
20 (XLII). 

Triple world, 193. 

Truth, II (XIV); seen, 12 
(XVII); thirst for the, 14 
(XXIV) ; Fourfold Noble, 
no; one universal, 113. 

Universe, spiritual laboratory, 60. 
Unknowable, The, 134. 

Vairochana (Buddha idealized), 

32. 
Virgin Mary, 169. 

War, and non-atman, 194; is evil, 
205; not necessarily evil, 211. 


Warriors, 17 (XXXIII). 

Water, 12 (XVI). 

Way, The, 3, 6 (II), 8 (VII, IX, 
X), II (XII, Xin, XIV), 12 
(XVI); Holy, 7 (IV); seeing 
the, 12 (XVII); attained, 12 
(XVII) ; beyond words and 
expressions, 12 (XVIII) ; leads 
to the, 13 (XIX) ; practice not 
the, 13 (XXI) ; The essence of 
the, 15 (XXVI); walking on 
the, IS (XXVII); Those who 
follow the, 15 (XXVIII); walk 
in the, 16 (XXX); Those who 
follow the, 17, (XXXIII); is 
attainable, 17 (XXXIV) ; to fol- 
low the, 18 (XXXV); under- 
stand the, 19 (XXXVIII); in 
accord with, 29 (XL) ; to prac- 
tice the, 20 (XLI) ; thinking of 
the, 20 (XLI) ; is near, Bg. 

Wheel of Dharma, The, 4. 

"When the scholar driveth away 
sloth..," 131. 

"When pulled together," 13 fn. 

Will, 15 (XXVIII), 16 (XXXI). 

Wind, 8 (VIII), 14 (XXV). 

Wisdom, 13 (XIX) ; and Love, 
164. 

Women, i5(XXIX), 18 (XXXVI) 

Worry, 16 (XXXII). 

Wu, Emperor of Liang, 10 fn. 

Yaksha (a demon), 190. 


TITLE LIST OF OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 
ARRANGED ALPHABETICALLY BY AUTHORS 


ANESAKI, M. 

345. BUDDHIST AND CHRISTIAN GOSPELS, Being Gospel Paral- 

bv Albe?t ^ fJ,^^''A ^IZ:^^/*- ?°°>Pa'-=d from the originals 
r^ ru" •'•,,^??^H"ds. Edited with parallels and notes from 
the Chinese Buddhist Triptaka by M. Anesaki $1.50 net. 

BAYNE, JULIA TAFT. 

323. HADLEY BALLADS. Julia Toft Bayne. 75c net. 

BERKELEY, GEORGE. 

^°^" ^ KNfwT Inr^^??^^™!? m^ PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE. George Berkeley. Cloth, 6oc net. (3s. net.) 

308. THREE DIALOGUES BETWEEN HYLAS AND PHILONOUS. 
George Berkeley. Cloth, 6oc net. (3s. net.) 

BINET, ALFRED. 

201. THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. Alfred Binet. 
7SC. (3s. 6d.) 

270. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. Alfred Binet. Transl. 
by Adam Gowans Whyte. 75c net. (3s. 6d.) 

296. ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS. Alfred Binet. Cloth, 50c net. 
(2S. 6d. net.) 

BLOOMFIELD, MAURICE, 

334- CERBERUS, THE DOG OF HADES. The History of an Idea. 
Prof. M. Bloomfield. Boards, soc net. (2s. 6d. net.) 

BONNEY, HONORABLE CHARLES CARROLL. 

304. WORLD'S CONGRESS ADDRESSES, Delivered by the Presi- 
dent, the Hon. C. C. Bonney. Cloth, 50c net. (2S. 6d. net.) 

BONNEY, FLORENCE PEORIA. 

286. MEDITATIONS (Poems). Florence Peoria Bonney. Cloth, $1.00 

nttj 

BUDGE, E .A. WALLIS. 

325. THE GODS OF THE EGYPTIANS OR STUDIES IN EGYP- 
TIAN MYTHOLOGY. B. A. Wallis Budge. With plates and 
illustrations. 2 vols. Cloth, $20.00 net. 

226. THE BOOK OF THE DEAD, a translation of the Chapters, 
Hymns, etc., of the Theban Recension. E. A. Wallis Budge. 
Illustrated. 3 vols. $3.75 per set net. Vols. VI, VII, VIII 
in the series of Books on Egyj>t and Chaldea. 


tS'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.' 


TITLE LIST 


317. A HISTORY OF EGYPT, From the End of the NeoUthic Period 
to the Death of Cleopatra VII, B. C. 30. E. A. Wallis Budge. 
Richly illustrated. 8 vols. Cloth, $10.00 net. 

I. Egypt in the Neolithic and Archaic Period. 

II. Egypt Under the Great Pyramid Builders. 

III. Egypt Under the Amenembats and Hyksos. 

IV. Egypt and her Asiatic Empire. 

V. Egypt Under Rameses the Great. 

VI. Egypt Under the Priest Kings and Tanites and Nubians. 

VII. Egypt Under the Saites, Persians and Ptolemies. 

VIII. Egypt Under the Ptolemies and Cleopatra VII. 

CARUS, DR. PAUL. 

204. FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS, the Method of Philosophy as a 
Systematic Arrangement of Knowledge. Paul Cants. Cloth, 
$1.50. (7s. fid.) 

207. THE SOUL OF MAN, an Investigation of the Facts of Physio- 

logical and Experimental Psychology. Paul Cams. Illustrated. 
Cloth, $1.50 net. (6s. net.) 

208. PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY. Paul Carus. Cloth, $1.00. (ss.) 

210. MONISM AND MELIORISM, A Philosophical Essay on Causal- 
ity and Ethics. Paul Carus. Paper, 50c. (2s. fid.) 

213. (a) THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE TOOL. loc. (fid.) (b) OUR 
NEED OF PHILOSOPHY. 5c. (3d.) (c) SCIENCE A 
RELIGIOUS REVELATION. 5c . (3d.) Paul Carus. 

290. THE SURD OF METAPHYSICS, An Inquiry into the Question 
Are there Thincs-in-theuselves ? Paul Carus. Cloth, $1.25 
net. (5s. fid, net) 

303. KANT AND SPENCER, A Study of the Fallacies of Agnosticism. 
Paul Carus. Cloth, soc net. (2s. fid. net.) 

312. KANT'S PROLEGOMENA TO ANY FUTURE METAPHYS- 
ICS. Edited by Paul Carus. Cloth, 75c net. (3s. fid. net.) 

215. THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA, According to Old Records, told by 

Paul Carus. Cloth, $1.00. (ss.) 

254. BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. Paul Carus. 
$1.25. (6s. fid.) 

261. GODWARD, A Record of Religious Progress. Paul Carus. soc. 
(2S. fid.) 

278. THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL AND THE IDEA OF EVIL, 
From the Earliest Times to the Present day. Paul Carus. Il- 
lustrated. $6.00. (30s.) 

280. HISTORY OF THE CROSS. Paul Carus. (In preparation.) 

321. THE AGE OF CHRIST. A Brief Review of the Conditions 
under which Christianity originated. Paul Carus. Paper, isc 
net. (lod.) 

341. THE DHARMA, or the Religion of Enlightenment, An Exposi- 
tion of Buddhism. Paul Carus. 15c. (gd.) 

216. DAS EVANGELIUM BUDDHAS. A German translation of The 

Gospel of Buddha. Cloth, $1.25. (5 marks.) 


iS'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.' 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 


255. LAO-TZE'S TAO TEH KING. Chinese Enelish With Tnt,„^ 

tion, Transliteration and Notes by Pa„f & ^300 (155)"" 

205. HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. Paul Carus. Cloth, gilt top. $:.5o. 

206. THE IDEA OF GOD. Paul Cans. Paper, 150. (pd.) 

21. . THE^ RELIGION OF SCIENCE. Paul Carus. Cloth. 50c net. 

212. KARMA. A STORY OF BUDDHIST ETHICS. Paul Carus 
Illustrated by Kwason Suzuki. American edition. 15c. (i^.^ 

268. THE. ETHICAL PROBLEM. Three Lectures on Ethics as » 
Science. Paul Carus. Cloth, $1.25. (6s. 6d.) 

28s. WHENCE AND WHITHER. An. Inquiry into the Nature of 
the Soul, Its Origin and Its Destiny. Paul Carus. Cloth, 7sc 
net. (3s. 6d. net.) ' " 

291. NIRVANA A STORY OF BUDDHIST PSYCHOLOGY, Paul 
Carus. Illustrated by Kwason Suzuki. Cloth, 6oc net. (3s. net.) 

3°^- ™p^«<J14iS'N OF A NEW RELIGIOUS ERA, AND OTHER 
ESSAYS. Paul Carus. Cloth, 50c net. (2s. 6d. net.) 

209. TRUTH IN FICTION, Twelve Tales with a Moral. Paul Carus. 
Cloth, 1.00 net. (5s.) 

217. KARMA, A STORY OF EARLY BUDDHISM. Paul Carus. 
Illustrated. Crepe paper, tied in silk. 7sc. (3s. 6d.) 

217G. KARMA, Eine buddhistische Erzahlung. Paul Carus. Illustrated 
3SC. 

246. THE CROWN OF THORNS, a story of the Time of Christ 

Paul Carus. Illustrated. Cloth 75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

247. THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER, a Legend of Niagara. Paul Carus. 

Illustrated. Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. fid.) 

267. SACRED TUNES FOR THE CONSECRATION OF LIFE. 
Hymns of the Religion of Science. Paul Carus. Soc. 

281. GREEK MYTHOLOGY. Paul Carus. In preparation. 

282. EROS AND. PSYCHE, A Fairy-Tale of Ancient Greece, Retold 

after Apuleius, by Paul Carus. Illustrated. $1.50 net. (6s. net.) 

295. THE NATURE OF THE STATE. Paul Carus. Cloth soc net. 
(2S. 6d. net) 

224. GOETHE AND SCHILLER'S XENIONS. Selected and trans- 
lated by Paul Carus, Paper, ,soc. (2s. 6d.) 

243. FRIEDRICH SCHILLER, A Sketch of His Life and an Appre- 
elation of His Poetry. Paul Carus. Bds. 7Sc. 

SS'Send for Complete Illustrated Caialogue.^ti 


TITLE LIST 


CLEMENT, ERNEST W. 

331. THE JAPANESE FLORAL CALENDAR. E. W. Clement. Il- 
lustrated. Boards, 50c net. (2s. 6d. net.) 

CONWAY, MONCURE DANIEL. 

277. SOLOMON AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE. M. D. Conway. 
Cloth, $1.50 net. (6s.) 

COPE, E. D. 

219. THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION. E. 

D. Cope, Ph. D. 2d ed. Illustrated. Cloth, $2.00 net. (los.) 

CORNILL, CARL HEINRICH. 

220. THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL, Popular Sketches from Old 

Testament History. C. H. Cornill. Transl. by S. F. Corkran. 
$1.00 net. (5s.) 

259. THE HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL, From the 
Earliest Times to the Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. 
C.H. Cornill. Transl. by W. H. Corrufft. Cloth, $1.50 {7s. 6d.) 

262. GESCHICHTE DES VOLKES ISRAEL. C. H. Cornill. Ge- 
bunden $2.00. (8 Mark.) 

251. THE RISE OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. C. H. Cornill in 
Epitomes of Thkee Sciences: Comparative Philology, Psy- 
chology AND Old Testament History. H. H. Oldenberg, J. 
Jastrow, C. H. Cornill. Colth, soc net, (2s. 6d.) 

CUMONT, FRANZ. 

319. THE MYSTERIES OF MITHRA. Prof. Franz Cumont. >Ti3.nA. 
by T.J.McCormack. lUus. Cloth, $1.50 net. (6s. 6d. net.) 

DEDEKIND, RICHARD. 
287. ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF NUMBERS. I. Continuity 
AND Irrational Numbers. II. The Nature and Meaning of 
Numbers. R. Dedekind. Transl. by W. W. Beman. Cloth, 
75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

DELITZSCH, DR. FRIEDRICH. 

293. BABEL AND BIBLE, A Lecture on the Significance of Assyrio- 
logical Research for Religion. Prof, F. Delitssch. Translated 
by T. J. McCormack. Illustrated, soc net. 

293a. BABEL AND BIBLE. Two Lectures on the Significance of 
Assyriological Research for Religion, Embodying the most im- 
portant Criticisms and the Author's Replies. Prof. F. Delitssch. 
Translated by T. J. McCormack and (y. H. Carruth. 7Sc net. 

DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS. 

264. ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. 
Augustus DeMorgan. Cloth, $1.25 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

271. ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL 
AND INTEGRAL CALCULUS. Augustus DeMorgan. Cloth, 
$1.00 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 


t^Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.^t 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 


DESCARTES, RENE. 

301. DISCOURSE ON THE METHOD OF RIGHTLY CONDUCT 
ING THE REASON AND SEEKING TRUTH IN THE SCI 
ENCES. Rene Descartes. Transl. by John Veitch. Cloth, 60c 
net. (3s. net.) 

310. THE MEDITATIONS AND SELECTIONS FROM THE PRIN- 
CIPLES of Rene Descartes. Transl. byJohn Veitch. Cloth, 
750 net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

346. THE PRINCIPLES OF DESCARTES' PHILOSOPHY by Bene- 

dictus de Spinoza. Introduction by Halhert Mains Britan, Ph. 
D. Cloth, 75c net, mailed 85c. 

DE VRIES, HUGO. 

332. SPECIES AND VARIETIES, THEIR ORIGIN BY MUTA- 
TION. Prof. Hugo de Vries. Edited by D. T. MacDougal. 
$5.00 net. (21S. net.) 

EDMUNDS, ALBERT J. 

218. HYMNS OF THE FAITH (DHAMMAPADA), being an Ancient 
Anthology Preserved in the Sacred Scriptures of the Buddhists. 
Transl. by Albert J. Edmunds. Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

345. BUDDHIST AND CHRISTIAN GOSPELS, Being Gospel Paral- 
lels from Pali Texts. Now first compared from the originals 
by Albert J. Edmunds. Edited with parallels and notes from 
the Chinese Buddhist Triptaka by M. Anesaki $1.50 net. 

EVANS, HENRY RIDGELY. 

330. THE NAPOLEON MYTH. H. R. Evans. With "The Grand 
Erratum," by /. B. Piris, and Introduction by Paul Carus. 
Illustrated. Boards, 75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

347. THE OLD AND THE NEW MAGIC. Henry R. Evans. lUustr. 

Cloth, gilt top. $1.50 net, mailed $1.70. 

FECHNER, GUSTAV THEODOR. 

349. ON LIFE AFTER DEATH. Gustav Theodor Fechner. Tr. from 
the German by Hugo Wernekke. Bds. 75c. 

FINK, DR. CARL. 

272. A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. Dr. Karl Fink. 
Transl. from the German by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. 
Cloth, $1.50 net. (5s. fid. net.) 

FREYTAG, GUSTAV. 

248. MARTIN LUTHER. Gustav Freytag. Transl. by H. E. O. Heine- 
mann. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.00 net. (5s.) 

221. THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel. Gustav Freytag. Two 

vols. Cloth, $4.00. (2 IS.) 
22ia. THE SAME. One vol. $1.00. (5s.) 
GARBE, RICHARD. 

223. THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. Prof. R. Garbe. 
Cloth, soc net. (2s. fid. net.) 

222. THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A novel. Richard 

Garbe. Cloth, 75c. (3s. fid.) 


iS'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'^k 


TITLE LIST 


GOODWIN, REV. T. A. 

225. LOVERS THREE THOUSAND YEARS AGO, as indicated by 
The Song of Solomon. Rev. T. A. Goodwin. 50c net. (as. 6d.) 

GUNKEL, HERMANN. 

227. THE LEGENDS OF GENESIS. Prof. H. Gunkel. Transl. by 

Prof. W. H. Carruth. Cloth, $j.oo net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

HAUPT, PAUL. 
292. BIBLICAL LOVE - DITTIES, A CRITICAL INTERPRETA- 
TION AND TRANSLATION OF THE SONG OF SOLO- 
MON. Prof. Paul Haupt. Paper, 5c. (3d.) 

HERING, PROF. EWALD. 

298. ON MEMORY AND THE SPECIFIC ENERGIES OF THE 
NERVOUS SYSTEM. E. Hering. CI. 50c net. (2s. 6d. net.) 

HILBERT, DAVID. 
289. THE FOUNDATIONS OF GEOMETRY. Prof. David Hilbert. 
Transl. by E. J. Townsend. Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

HOLYOAKE, GEORGE JACOB. . 

228. ENGLISH SECULARISM, A Confession of Belief. G. J. Holy- 

oake. Cloth, 50c net. 

HUC, M. 

244. TRAVELS IN TARTARY, THIBET AND CHINA, During the 
Years 1844-5-6. M. Hue. Transl. by W. Hazlitt. Illustrated. 
One volume. $1.25 net. (5s. net.) 

260. THE SAME. Two volumes. $2.00. (los net.) 

HUEPPE, DR. FERDINAND. 

257. THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY. Ferdinand Hueppe. 
Transl. by Dr. E. O. Jordan. $1.75 net. (9s.) 

HUME, DAVID. 

305. AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. 

David Hume. Cloth, 6oc net. (3s. net.) 

306. AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF MOR- 

ALS. David Hume. Cloth, 60c net. (3s, net.) 

HUTCHINSON, WOODS. 

256. THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. Woods Hutchinson. 
Cloth, $1.50. (6s.) 

HYLAN, JOHN P. 

309. PUBLIC WORSHIP, A STUDY IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
RELIGION. /. P. Hylan. Cloth, 60c net. (3s. net.) 

INGRAHAM, ANDREW. 

322. SWAIN SCHOOL LECTURES. Andrew Ingraham. $1.00 net. 

KHEIRALLA, GEORGE IBRAHIM. 

326. BEHA 'U'LLAH (THE GLORY OF GOD). Ibrahim George 

Kheiralla, assisted by Howard MacNutt. $3.00. 


^^Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'^ 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 


LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS. 

258. LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. /. L. La- 
grange. Transl. by T. J. McCormack. Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. 
6d. net.) 

LEIBNIZ, G. W 
311. LEIBNIZ: DISCOURSE ON METAPHYSICS, CORRESPOND- 
ENCE WITH ARNAULD and MONADOLOGY. Dr. George R. 
Montgomery. Cloth, 750 net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

LEVY-BRUHL, LUCIEN. 

273. HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE. LucUn 
Livy-Bruhl. With portraits. $3.00 net. (12s. net.) 

LOYSON, EMILIE HYACINTHE. 

338. TO JERUSALEM THROUGH THE LANDS OF ISLAM. Emilie 

Hyacinthe Loyson. Illustrated. Cloth, $2.30. 

MACH, ERNST. 

229- THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS, A Critical and Historical Ac- 
count of its Development. Prof. Ernst Mach. Transl. by T. J. 
McCormack. Illustrated. $2.00 net. (9s. 6d. net.) 

230. POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. Professor Ernst Mach. 

Transl. by T. J. McCormack. lUust. $1.50 net. (73. 6d. net.) 

250. CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSA- 
TIONS. Prof. Ernst Mach. Transl. by C. M. IVilliams. $1.25 
net. (6s. 6d.) 

MILLS, LAWRENCE H. 

318. ZARATHUSHTRIAN GATHAS, in Meter and Rhythm. Prof. 
Lawrence H. Mills. Cloth, $2.00. 

339. ZARATHUSHTRA AND THE GREEKS, a Treatise upon the 

Antiquities of the Avesta with Special Reference to the Logos- 
Conception. Prof. Lawrence H. Mills. Cloth, $2.00 net. 

MUELLER, F. MAX. 

231. THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE 

OF THOUGHT. F. Max MUller. With a correspondence on 
Thought without words between F. Max MuUer and Francis 
Galton, the Duke of Argyll, G. J. Romanes and Others. Cloth, 
75c. (3s. 6d.) 

232. THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE. 

With a supplement, My Predecessors. F. Max MUller. Cloth, 
75c. (3s. 6d.) 

NAEGELI, CARL VON. 

300. A MECHANICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL THEORY OF ORGANIC 
EVOLUTION. Carl von Nixgeli. Cloth, 50c net. (2s. 6d. net) 

NOIRE, LUDWIG. 

297. ON THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE, and THE LOGOS THE- 
ORY. Ludwig Noire. Cloth, soc net. (2s. 6d. net.) 


tS'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'Sii 


TITLE LIST 


OLDENBERG, PROF. H. 

233. ANCIENT INDIA, Its Language and Religions. Prof. H. Olden- 

berg. Cloth, 50c net. (2s. 6d.) 

POWELL, J. W. 

265. TRUTH AND ERROR, or the Science of Intellection. /. W. 

Powell. $1.75. (7s. 6d.) 

315. JOHN WESLEY POWELL: A Memorial to an American Ex- 
plorer and Scholar. Mrs. M. D. Lincoln, G. K. Gilbert, M. 
Baker and Paul Carus. Edited by G. K. Gilbert. Paper, soc net 

RADAU, DR. HUGO. 

294. THE CREATION STORY OF GENESIS I. A Sumerian Theog- 
ony and Cosmogony. H. Radau. Bds., 75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

RIBOT, TH. 

234. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION. Th. Ribot. Cloth, 7Sc. 

(33. 6d.) 
23s. THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. Th. Ribot. Cloth, 750. 
(3S. 6d.) 

236. THE DISEASES OF THE WILL. Th. Ribot. Transl. by Mer- 

win-Marie Snell. Cloth, 75c. (3s. 6d.) 
279. THE EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS. Th. Ribot. Transl. 
by Frances A. Welby. Cloth, $1.25. (5s.) 

ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN. 

237. DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN, An Exposition of the Dar- 

winian Theory and a Discussion of Post-Darwinian Questions. 
ijeorge John Romanes. Three volumes. $4.00 net. 

238. Part I. The Darwinian Theory. Cloth, $2.00. 

239. Part II. Post-Darwinian Questions: Heredity and 
Utility. Cloth, $1.50. 

252. Part III. Post-Darwinian Questions: Isolation and 
Physiological Selection. Cloth, $1.00. 

240. AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. George John Ro- 
manes. Cloth, $1.00 net. 

214. A CANDID EXAMINATION OF THEISM. Physicus (the 
late G. J. Romanes). Cloth, $2.00. 

242. THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. The late G. I. Romanes. Edited 
by Charles Gore. Cloth, $1.25 net. 

ROW, T. SUNDARA. 

284. GEOMETRIC EXERCISES IN PAPER FOLDING. T. Sundara 
Row. Edited by W. W. Beman, and D. E. Smith. Illustrated. 
Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

RUTH, J. A. 

329. WHAT IS THE BIBLE? /. A. Ruth. 75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 
SCHUBERT, HERMANN. 

266. MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. Prof. Her- 

mann Schubert. Transl. by T. J. McCormack. Cloth, 75c net. 
(3s. 6d. net.) 


letrSend for Complete Illustrated Catalogue."^^ 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 


SHUTE, D. KERFOOT. 

276. A FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION. D. Kerfool 
Shute. Cloth, $2.00 net. (7s. 6d. net.) 

STANLEY, HIRAM M. 

274- PSYCHOLOGY FOR BEGINNERS. An Outline Sketch. Hiram 
M. Stanley. Boards, 40c net. (2s.) 

ST. ANSELM. 

324. ST. ANSELM: PROSLOGIUM; MONOLOGIUM; AN APPEN- 
DIX IN BEHALF OF THE FOOL, by Gaunihn; and CUR 
DEUS HOMO. Transl. by 5. N. Deane. Cloth, $1.00 net. 

STARR. FREDERICK. 

327. READINGS FROM MODERN MEXICAN AUTHORS. Fred- 

erick Starr. $1.25 net. (5s. 6d. net.) 

328. THE AINU GROUP AT THE SAINT LOUIS EXPOSITION. 

Frederick Starr. Illustrated. Boards, 75c net. (3s. 6d. net.) 

STRODE, MURIEL. 

333. MY LITTLE BOOK OF PRAYER. Muriel Strode. Boards, 50c 

net. (2s. 6d. net.) 
333a. THE SAME. Cloth, $1.00 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

SUZUKI, TEITARO. 

283. ACVAGHOSHA'S DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF 
FAITH IN THE MAHAYANA. Transfated by Teitaro Su- 
zuki. Cloth, $1.25 net. (ss. net.) 

TOLSTOY, COUNT LEO. 

348. CHRISTIANITY AND PATRIOTISM with Pertinent Extracts 
from other Essays. Count Leo Tolstoy. Trans, by Paul Borget 
and others. Paper, 35c net, mailed 40c. 

TOPINARD, PAUL. 

260. SCIENCE AND FAITH, OR MAN AS AN ANIMAL, AND 
MAN AS A MEMBER OF SOCIETY, with a DISCUSSION 
OF ANIMAL SOCIETIES, by Paul Topinard. Transl. by T. 
J. McCormack. $1.50 net. (6s. 6d. net.) 

TRUMBULL, M. M. 

243. WHEELBARROW, Articles and Discussions on the Laror 
Question, including the Controversy with Mr. Lyman J. Oage 
on the Ethics of the Board of Trade; and also the Controversy 
with Hugh O. Pentecost and Others, on the Single Tax Ques- 
tion. Cloth, $1.00. (5s.) 

345 THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. M. M. Trum- 
bull. Cloth, 7SC. (3s. 6d.) 

WAGNER, RICHARD. 

249. A PILGRIMAGE TO BEETHOVEN. A Novel by Richard Wag- 
ner. Transl. by O. W. Weyer. Boards, soc net. (2s. 6d.) 

WEISMANN, AUGUST. 

200. ON GERMINAL SELECTION, as a Source of definite Variation. 
August Weismann. Transl. by T. J. McCormack. Cloth, 60c 
net. (3s. net.) 


tWSend for Complete Illustrated Catalogue. 


.-^k 


10 TITLE IvIST 


WITHERS, JOHN WILLIAM. 

335. EUCLID'S PARALLEL POSTULATE; Its Nattjre, Validity 
AND Place in Geometrical Systems. /. IV. Withers, Ph. D., 
Cloth, $1.25 net. (4s. 6d. net.) 

YAMADA, KEICHYU. 

265. SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF BUDDHA- Reproduced from 
paintings by Prof. Keichyu Yamada.. $2.50 net. (15s.) 

316. THE TEMPLES OF THE ORIENT AND THEIR MESSAGE 
IN THE LIGHT OF HOLY SCRIPTURE, Dante's Vision, and 
Bunyan's Allegory. By the author of "Clear Round!" "Things 
Touching the King," etc. .$4.00 ■ ' ' ' 


PORTRAITS AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

332a. FRAMING PORTRAIT OF HUGO DE VRIES. Platino finish. 
10X12", unmounted. Postpaid, $1.00. (4s. 6d. net.) 

336- PORTFOLIO OF BUDDHIST ART. A collection of illustra- 
tions of Buddhism, Historical and Modern in portfolio. 50c net. 
(2s. 6d. net.) 

202. PHILOSOPHICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL PORTRAIT SE- 
RIES. 68 portraits on plate paper, $7.50 (3Ss.) per Set. 

202a. PHILOSOPHICAL PORTRAIT SERIES. 43 portraits on plate 
paper, $6.25 (30s.) Single portraits, on plate paper, 25c. (is. 
6d.) 

202b. PSYCHOLOGICAL PORTRAIT SERIES. 25 portraits on Japa- 
nese paper, $5.00 (24s.) per set; plate paper, $3.75 (i8s.)^ per 
set. Single portraits, Japanese paper, soc (2s. 6d.); single 
portraits, on plate paper, 25c (is. 6d.) 

SMITH, PROF. DAVID EUGENE. 
202c. PORTRAITS OF MATHEMATICIANS. Edited by Prof. D, E. 
Smith. 12 portraits on Imp. Jap. Vellum, $5.00; 12 portraits 
on Am. plate paper, $3.00. 


THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE LIBRARY 

J. THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE. Paul Carus. 25c, mailed 30c. 
(is. 6d.) 

2. THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE 

OF THOUGHT. F. Max Miiller. With a correspondence on 
"Thought Without Words" between F. Max Miiller and Francis 
Gallon, the Duke of Argyll, George J. Romanes and others. 
25c, mailed 29c.. (is. 6d.) 

3. THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE. 

With My Predecessors. F. Max Muller. 25c, mailed 29c. 
(is. 6d.) 

4. THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. Prof. Th. Ribot. 25c, 

mailed 290. (is. 6d.) 


SS^Send for , Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'\ 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 


5. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION. Prof. Th. Ribot. 2Sc, 

mailed 29c. (is. 6d.) 

6. THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. A Study in 

Experimental Psychology. Alfred Binet. 25c, mailed 29c. (is. 
6d.) 

7. THE NATURE OF THE STATE. Paul Carus. isc mailed i8c. 

(9d.) ■ 

8. ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS. Experimental Psychological 

Studies. Alfred Binet. 15c, mailed i8c. (gd.) 

9. FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS. The Method of Philosophy as 

a Systematic Arrangement of Knowledge. Paul Carus. 50c, 
mailed 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

10. DISEASES OF THE WILL. Prof. Th. Ribot. Transl. by Mer- 

win-Marie Snell. 25c, mailed 29c. (is. 6d.) 

11. ON THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE and the Logos Theory. L. 

Noiri. 15c, mailed i8c. (is. 6d.) 

12. THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. M. U. Trum- 

bull, zsc, mailed 31c. (is. 6d.) 

13. WHEELBARROW, ARTICLES AND DISCUSSIONS ON THE 

LABOR QUESTION, including the Controversy with Mr. Ly- 
man J. Gage on the Ethics of the Board of Trade; and also 
the Controversy with Mr. Hugh O. Pentecost, and others, on 
the Single Tax Question. 35c, mailed 43c. (2s.) 

14. THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA, According to Old Records told by 

Paul Carus. 35c, mailed 42c. (2s.) 

15. PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY. Paul Carus. 250, mailed 32c. 

(is. 6d.) 

16. ON MEMORY AND THE SPECIFIC ENERGIES OF THE 

NERVOUS SYSTEM. Prof. E. Hering. 15c, mailed i8c. (gd.) 

17. THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Novel. Richard 

Garbe. 25c, mailed 28c.> (is. 6d.) 

18. AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. G. /. Romanes. 

35c, mailed 41c. (2s.) 

19. ON GERMINAL SELECTION AS A SOURCE OF DEFINITE 

VARIATION. August Weismann. Transl. by T. J. McCor- 
mack. 25c, mailed 28c. (is. 6d.) 
20 LOVERS THREE THOUSAND YEARS AGO as Indicated by 
The Song of Solomon. Rev. T. A. Goodwin. 15c, mailed i^c. 
(9d.) 

21. POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. Professor Ernst Mach. 

Transl. by T. J. McCormack. 50c, mailed 6oc. (2s. ba.) 

22. ANCIENT INDIA, ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS. Prof. 

H. Oldenberg. 2Sc, mailed 28c. (is. 6d.) 
21. THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL. Popular Sketches from Old 
^ Testament History. Prof. C. H. Corntll. Transl. by S. F. 

Corkran. 25c, mailed 30c. (is. 6d.) 


m'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue."^ 


12 TITLE LIST 


24. HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. Paul Carus. 35c, mailed 43c. (2s.) 

25. THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. The late G. /. Romanes. Edited 

by Charles Gore. 50c, mailed 55c. (2s. 6d.) 

26. THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. Prof. R. Garbe. 

25c, mailed 28c. (is. 6d.) 

27. MARTIN LUTHER. Gustav Freytag. Transl. by H. E. 0. 

Heincmann. 25c, mailed 30c. (is. 6d.) 

28. ENGLISH SECULARISM. A Confession of Belief. George J. 

Holyoake. 2Sc, mailed 30c. (is. 6d.) 

20. ON ORTHOGENESIS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF NATU- 
RAL SELECTION IN SPECIES-FORMATION. Prof. Th. 
Eimer. Transl. by T. J. McCormack. 25c, mailed 30. (is. 6d.) 

30. CHINESE PHILOSOPHY. An Exposition of the Main Char- 

acteristic Features of Chinese Thought. Dr. Paul Carus. 25c, 
mailed 3ac. (is. 6d.) 

31. THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel. Gustav Freytag. One 

volume. 60c, mailed 8oc. (3s.) 

32. A MECHANICO-PHYSIOLOGICAL THEORY OF ORGANIC 

EVOLUTION. Carl von Nageli. 15c, mailed i8c. (jd.) 

33. CHINESE FICTION. Rev. G. T. Candlin. Illustrated, isc, 

mailed i8c. (gd.) 

34. MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. Prof. H. 

Schubert. Tr. by T.J. McCormack. 25c, mailed 30c. (is. 6d.) 

35. THE ETHICAL PROBLEM. Three Lectures on Ethics as a 

Science. Paul Carus. 50c, mailed 6oc. (2s. 6d.) 

36. BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. Paul Carus. 

Soc, mailed 58c. (2s. 6d.) 

37. PSYCHOLOGY FOR BEGINNERS. An Outline Sketch. Hiram 

M. Stanley. 20c, mailed 23c. (is.) 

38. DISCOURSE ON THE METHOD OF RIGHTLY CONDUCT- 

ING THE REASON, AND SEEKING TRUTH IN THE 
SCIENCES. Reni Descartes. Transl. by Prof. John Veitch. 
25c» mailed 29c. (is. 6d.) 

39. THE DAWN OF A NEW RELIGIOUS ERA and other Essays. 

Paul Carus. 15c, mailed i8c. (9d.) 

40. KANT AND SPENCER, a Study of the Fallacies of Agnosti- 

cism. Paul Carus. 20c, mailed 250. (is.) 

41. THE SOUL OF MAN, an Investigation of the Facts of Physio 

logical and Experimental Psychology. Paul Carus. 75c, mailed 
85c. (3s. 6d.) 

42. WORLD'S CONGRESS ADDRESSES, Delivered by the Presi- 

dent, the Hon. C. C. Bonney. isc, mailed 20c. (gd.) 

43- THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. Woods Hutchinson. 
50c, mailed S7c. (2s. 6d.) 

44. WHENCE AND WHITHER. The Nature of the Soul, Its 
Origin and Destiny. Paul Carus. 25c, mailed 32c. (is. 6d.) 


S^Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'^ 


OPEN COURT PUBLICATIONS 13 


45- AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. 
David Hume. 25c, mailed 31c. (is. 6d.) 

46. AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF MOR 
ALS. David Hume. 25c, mailed 31c. .(is. 6d.) 

47- THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING, Based on Experimental 
Researches in Hypnotism. Alfred Binet. Transl. by Adam 
Gowans Whyte. 25c, mailed 31c. (is. 6d.) 

48. A TREATISE CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN 
KNOWLEDGE. George Berkeley. 250, mailed 31c. (is. 6d.) 

49- THREE DIALOGUES BETWEEN HYLAS AND PHILONOUS. 
George Berkeley. 25c, mailed 30c. (is. 6d.) 

50. PUBLIC WORSHIP, A STUDY IN THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 

RELIGION. John P. Hylan. 25c, mailed 29c. (is. 6d.) 

51. THE MEDITATIONS AND SELECTIONS FROM THE PRIN- 

CIPLES of Rene Descartes. Transl. by Prof. John Veitch. 
35c, mailed 42c. (2s.) 

52. LEIBNIZ: DISCOURSE ON METAPHYSICS, CORRESPOND- 

ENCE WITH ARNAULD and MONADOLOGY, with an In- 
troduction by Paul Janet. Transl. by Dr. G. R. Montgomery. 
50c, mailed 58c. (2s. 6d.) 

53. KANT'S PROLEGOMENA to any Future Metaphysics. Edited 

by Dr. Paul Cams. 50c, mailed 59c. (2s. 6d.) 

54 ST. ANSELM: PROSLOGIUM; MONOLOGIUM; AN APPEN- 
DIX ON BEHALF OF THE FOOL, by Gaunilon; and CUR 
DEUS HOMO. Tr. by 5. N. Deane. 50c, mailed 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

55. THE CANON OF REASON AND VIRTUE (Lao-Tze's Tag Teh 

King). Translated from the Chinese by Paul Carus. 25c, 
mailed 28c. (is. 6d.) 

56. ANTS AND SOME OTHER INSECTS, an Inquiry into the 

Psychic Powers of these Animals, with an Appendix on the 
Peculiarities of Their Olfactory Sense. Dr. August Forel. 
Transl. by Prof. W. M. Wheeler. 50c, mailed 53c. (2s. 6d.) 

57. THE METAPHYSICAL SYSTEM OF HOBBES, as contained 

in twelve chapters from his "Elements of Philosophy Concern- 
ing Body," and in briefer Extracts from his "Human Nature" 
and "Leviathan," selected by Mary Whiton Calkins. 40c, 
mailed 47c. (2s.) 

58. LOCKE'S ESSAYS CONCERNING HUMAN UNDERSTAND- 

ING. Books II and IV (with omissions). Selected by Mary 
Whiton Calkins, soc, mailed 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

59. THE PRINCIPLES OF DESCARTES' PHILOSOPHY. Bene- 

dictus de Spinoza. Introduction by Halbert Hams Britan, Ph. 
D. Paper, 35c net, mailed 42c. 


THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO. 
1322 Wabash Avenue, Chicago 

London : Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd. 


tS'Send for Complete Illustrated Catalogue.'mt 


THE OPEN court; 


rsii H PN HU.?- 


An Illustrated Monthly Magazine 

Devoted to the Science of Religion, The 
Religion of Science and the Extension 
of The Religious Parliament Idea 


THE OPEN COURT is a popular 
magazine discussing the deepest 
questions of life. It offers the 
maturest thought in the domains of 
Religion, Philosophy, Psychology, Evo- 
lution and kindred subjects. 

THE OPEN COURT contains articles 
on the recent discoveries of Babylonian 
and Egyptian excavations, on Old 
Testament Research, the Religion of 
the American Indians, Chinese culture, 
Brahmanism, Buddhism, Mithraism — 
in short anything that wiir throw light 
on the development of religion and 
especially on Christianity. 

THE OPEN COURT investigates the 
problems of God and Soul, of life and: 
death and immortality, of conscience, 
duty, and the nature of morals, the 
ethics of political and social life — 
briefly all that will explain the bottom 
facts of Religion and their practical 
significance. The illustrations though 
artistic are instructive and frequently 
reproduce rare historical pictures. 


^^ TH[ MONIST S 

A Quarterly Magazine 

Devoted to the Philosophy of Science. 
Each copy contains 160 pages; original 
articles, correspondence from foreign 
countries, discussions, and book reviews 


The Monist Advocates the 
Philosophy of Science 

Which is an application of the scientific method to 
philosophy. The old philosophical systems were 
mere air-castles (constructions of abstract theories), 
built in the realm of pure thought. The Philosophy 
of Science is a systematization of positive facts; it 
takes experience as its foundation, and uses the 
systematized formal relations of experience (mathe- 
matics, logic, etc.) as its method. It is opposed on 
the one hand to the dogmatism of groundless a priori 
assumptions, and on the other hand, to the scepticism 
of negation which finds expression in the agnostic 
tendencies of to-day. 

Monism Means a Unitary 
World-Conception 

There may be different aspects and even contrasts, 
diverse views and opposite standpoints, but there can 
never be contradiction in truth. Monism is not a 
one-substance theory, be it materialistic or spiritual- 
istic or agnostic; it means simply and solely con- 
sistency. All truths form one consistent system, and 
any dualism -of irreconcilable statements indicates 
that there is a problem to be solved; there must be 
fault somewhere either in our reasoning or in our 
knowledge of facts. Science always implies Monism, 
i. e., a unitary world-conception. 

Illustrated Catalogue and Sample Copies Free. 

The Open Court Publishing Co. 

1322-1328 Wabash Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 


! 1 


,!!i ii;'i' 


:lll!l
