Testimonies of the Life, Character, Revelations and Doctrines of Mother Ann Lee
United Society of Believers (Shakers) (1816)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 1888 reprint of the Testimonies first written and published in 1816; the text states the record "was first written in 1816." Public domain.

========================================================================

TESTIMONIES

DF  THE

Life, Character, Revelatians and Enctrines

DF.

MDTHER  ANN LEE,

AND

THE ELEERS WITH HER,

Through,  wham  thB  Wnrd  nf  Eternal  Life  was  npBnBd

in  this  day,

nr
CHRIST'S SECDND APPEARING-,

CDllBctBd  frnm  Living  Witnesses,

IN UNION  WITH THE CHURCH.


THE' LORD HATH CREATED A NEW THING IN THE EARTH. A WOMAN SHALL  COM-
PASS A man.  — Jeremiah.


SECOND EDITION.


ALBANY, N.  Y.:

WEED, PARSONS & CO., PRINTERS.
1888.


PREFACE.


That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you,  that  ye  also  may
have  fellowship  with  us. —  \st  John,  xst,  3rd.

Having  been  eye  and  ear  witnesses  of  all  that  our
blessed  Mother  and  the  first  Elders  have  done  and  taught
among  us,  from  the  time  they  first  opened  the  Gospel  in
America,  till  they  left  this  world,  it  seems  good  to  us,
in  answer  to  the  request  of  our  beloved  Brethren  and
Sisters,  who  have  never  seen  those  blessed  Ministers  of
Christ,  in  the  body,  to  make  a  faithful  record  of  those
precepts  and  examples,  and  other  cotemporary  events,
which  most  eminently  manifest  their  real  characters.

The  work  of  God,  in  the  dispensations  of  His  grace  to
a  lost  world,  being  contrary  to  all  the  desires  and  inclina-
tions of  an  evil  nature,  is,  of  course,  always  manifested  in
a  way  contrary  to  all  the  calculations  and  expectations
of  the  natural  man.

In  consequence  of  these  miscalculations  and  erroneous
anticipations  natural  men  always  overlook  the  work  of
God ;  and,  while  it  appears  in  the  world,  and  is  seen,  felt
and  known,  of  those  who  are  in  it,  it  is  quite  out  of  sight  of
those  who  presumptuously  undertake  to  lay  out  the  way  of
God  according  to  their  own  corrupt  inclinations. Hence


iv  Preface.

it  is  that  so  much  has  been,  and  still  continues  to  be  said,
and  reported  abroad  in  the  world,  to  vilify  and  calum-
niate the  characters  of  the  First  Witnesses^  and  especially
that  of  Mother  Ann  Lee,  notwithstanding  the  incontesti-
ble  evidences  in  their  favor,  so  clearly  manifested  in  the
good  fruits  which  they  have  brought  forth.  And,  1  hough
knowledge  increases  in  the  land,  yet,  those  who  continue
to  do  wickedly, do  not,  will not  understand  !

Therefore,  it  is  not  for  such  that  we  record  these  things  ;
for,  like  pearls  of  inestimable  value,  they  ought  not,  and
must  not,  be  trampled  under  feet  ;  but,  for  the  benefit  of
those  who  have  honestly  and  faithfully  confessed  and  for-
saken their  sins,  and  have  set  out,  once  for  all,  to  follow
Christ  in  the  regeneration,  for  their  sakes,  we  feel  a  pecu-
liar satisfaction  and  blessing,  in  recording  some  of  those
precious  gifts  of  God  through  which  we  are  taught  and
led  in  the  way  of  life  and  salvation.

Every  honest  upright  soul,  in  perusing  these  testimonies,
will  readily  perceive  they  are  no  cunningly  devised  fables;
but,  that  the  spirit  of  eternal  truth  is  clearly  manifested
in  them,  and  that  they  witness,  beyond  all  controversy,  the
reality  of  those  things  in  which  they,  themselves,  have
already  been  instructed,  and,  by  experience,  found  reliable.

These  testimonies  have  been  given  by  those  who  were
eye  and  ear  witnesses  of  what  they  contain.  By  a  suitable
arrangement  of  the  testimonies  of  many  individuals,  we
have  been  enabled  to  give  short  sketches  of  the  lives,
characters,  and  manners  of  Mother  Ann  Lee,  and  the
two  principal  Elders  with  her,  viz.:  Father  William  Lee,
and Father  James Whittaker ; with some  of their  expe-


Preface.  v

rience  and  sufferings  in  England,  as  related  by  themselves,
and  those  who  came  with  them  ;  the  plainness  and  clear-
ness of  their  testimony,  and  the  mighty  power  of  God
which  attended  it  ;  their  principal  struggles  and  persevering
fortitude  through  many  sufferings,  and  much  opposition  to
plant  the  Gospel,  and  establish  the  foundation  of  Christ's
Kingdom  in  this  land  ;  their  great  manifestation  of  God ;
their  prophecies,  visions  and  revelations ;  their  labors  in
word  and  doctrine,  together  with  the  remarkable  power
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  revealed  among  the  people,
through  their  ministration.

It  is  now  many  years  since  Mother  Ann,  and  those  who
came  from  England  with  her,  left  the  body ;  and  those
who  were  eye  and  ear  witnesses  of  these  things,  have  also
followed  them  to  the  land  of  souls.

We,  therefore,  feel  it  a  duty  to  record  these  things,
being  fully  persuaded  that  God  requires  it  of  us,  that  those
who  come  after  us  may  know  and  understand  more  fully,
concerning  the  truth  of  those  things  wherein  they  may
be  instructed.

All  who,  at  this  day,  have  seen  the  branches  flourish,
may  thereby  be  assured  that  the  root  is  holy ;  but  this
assurance  will  doubtless  be  greatly  strengthened  by  a  care-
ful perusal  of  these  testimonies.

Herein  may  be  seen,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  lives,  examples
and  sufferings,  the  precepts,  doctrines  and  spiritual  gifts,
and  Divine  manifestations  of  our  ever  blessed  Parents  in
the  Gospel,  by  which  it  will  readily  be  perceived  that  we
have  received  the  Gospel,  not  by  precept  only,  but  by
example  also.


vi  Preface.

It  cannot  be  expected  that  every  transaction  of  the  lives
and  ministry  of  the  First  Witnesses  should  be  particularly
stated;  nor  is  it  necessary;  but,  enough  is  herein  written,
to  prove  to  all  faithful  Believers,  that  Christ  did,  verily,
make  a  Second  Appearance  in  Ann  Lee ;  that  she  was
chosen,  a  Witness  of  God,  to  usher  in  a  new  dispensation  of
the  Gospel ;  to  rend  the  veil  of  the  flesh,  which  separates
the  soul  from  God  ;  to  enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and
become  the  first  spiritual  Mother,  of  all  the  Children  of  the
Resurrection.  That  the  Elders  with  her  were  true  and
faithful  Ministers  of  the  Gospel ;  and,  that,  through  their
labors  and  sufferings  with  Mother  Ann,  the  testimony
of  eternal  life  has  been  revealed  and  confirmed  unto  us  ;
that  a  foundation  has  thereby  been  laid  for  the  salvation
and  redemption  of  lost  man;  that  the  spiritual  Zion  now
established  on  the  Earth,  with  all  its  order,  harmony  and
beauty,  first  originated  from  these  faithful  Witnesses ;  and
that  this  will  prove  a  decisive  work,  which,  in  its  progress,
in  this,  and  in  the  spirit  world,  will  eventuate  in  a  final  set-
tlement with  all  the  souls  of  men,  as  it  is  written:

"  Behold  I  come  quickly,  and  My  reward  is  with  Me,
to  give  to  every  man  according  as  his"  (own)  "works
shall  be."

The  names  of  individuals  who  have  given  particular  tes-
timonies, are  generally  inserted  at  the  end  of  the  article
given;  or,  where  their  names  are  particularly  mentioned,  at
the  beginning  of  such  articles,  then,  their  initials  only  are
placed  at  the  end;  but,  where  the  article  given  relates  par-
ticularly to  the  person  who  gave  it,  then  the  name,  being
given  in  the  beginning  of  the  article,  is  omitted  at  the  end.


CONTENTS.


PAGE.

Chapter  I.  Introduction,  birth,  parentage,  religious  exercises
and  sufferings  of  Ann  Lee;  her  revelation  and  testimony;
voyage  to  America i

Chapter  II. Mother's  experience  and  sufferings  in America,

previous  to  the  opening  of  the  Gospel 8

Chapter  III.  First  interview  of  the  people  in  this  country
with  Mother  and  the  Elders,  with  some  questions  and
answers  that  passed  between  them 12

Chapter  IV. First interview of different individuals with

Mother  and  the  Elders 16

Chapter  V. The  subject  continued 23

Chapter  VI. The  subject  continued 28

Chapter  VII. Sketches  of  Mother's  experience  and  sufferings

in  England,  as  related  by  herself,  at  different  times 34

Chapter  VIII. Mother's  persecution  in  England,  as  related  by

herself,  and  those  who  came  with  her  to  this  country 39

Chapter  IX.  Mother  converses  with  Eleazer  Grant  and  others.
Some  further  particulars  of  her  persecution  in  England  —
Mission  and  voyage  to  America,  &c 49

Chapter  X.  The  wicked  alarmed  at  the  spreading  of  the  Gos-
pel—  Mother  and  the  Elders  imprisoned  at  Albany  —  Many
stirred  up  to  inquiry,  and  the  work  still  increases  —  Mother
sent  to  Poughkeepsie  jail,  &c 54

Chapter  XI.  The  Church  visited  at  Watervliet  —  The  Gospel
increases —  Mother  sets  out  on  a  journey  to  the  eastward  —
Visits  Tucconock,  Enfield,  and  Grafton,  and  arrives  at  Har-
vard. The  inhabitants  alarmed  by  false  reports,  &c 64


viii  Contents.

PAGE.

CHAPTER  XII.  Mother  and  the  Elders  visit  Petersham.  Meet-
ing at  David  Hammond's  disturbed  by  a  mob  —  Mother
shamefully  and  cruelly  abused 72

Chapter  XIII.  Mother  and  the  Elders  return  to  Harvard.
They  are  threatened,  and  ordered  to  leave  the  place.  After
much  affliction,  they  leave  Harvard,  and  go  to  Enfield,  from
whence  they  are  driven  by  a  mob  —  They  go  to  Ashfield,
afterward  return  to  Harvard,  &c 78

Chapter  XIV. The  Believers  driven  from  Harvard,  and  cruelly

abused  by  a  riotous  mob 88

Chapter  XV.  Mother  visits  Norton,  Rehoboth  and  Stoning-
ton  —  thence  through  Preston  and  Windham  to  Stafford  —
thence  to  Enfield,  Cheshire,  and  Ashfield. 100

Chapter  XVI.  At  Ashfield  Mother  is  visited  by  great  multi-
tudes of  people  —  Great  manifestations  of  the  power  of
God,  and  great  purging  among  the  people  —  A  mob  excited
by  Daniel  Bacon 106

Chapter  XVII.  Mother  and  the  Elders  return  to  Harvard  —
By  the  complaints  of  a  deaf  and  dumb  man  a  mob  is  raised,
and  assembled  at  Shirley.  The  Elders  taken  from  Shirley
to  Harvard  and  whipped 114

Chapter  XVIII.  Mother  and  the  Elders  leave  Harvard,  and
visit  Petersham  —  A  mob  assembles,  the  Believers  abused,
and  Aaron  Wood  knocked  down  —  Mother  and  the  Elders
go to  Joseph  Bennet's  in  Cheshire  —  thence  to  Richmond.. 122

Chapter  XIX.  Great  opposition  from  the  wicked  instigated  by
Senior  Valentine  Rathbun,  Mother  and  the  Elders  taken  with  a
warrant,  and  tried  by  a  Court  of  Justices.  Samuel  Fitch  and
Brethren  committed  to  jail.  Opposition  continues  — Mother
visits  the  prisoners  —  Returns  through  West  Stockbridge,  &c. 125

CHAPTER  XX.  Mother  arrives  at  New  Lebanon;  Meeting  at
lohn  Bishop's  —  Mother  visits  a  number  of  families  in  and
around  New  Lebanon  —  goes  to  Jabez  Spencer's  in  Stephen-
town;  and  returns  again  to  New  Lebanon 134

Chapter  XXI.  A  persecuting  mob  is  raised  —  Mother  carried
before  Eleazer  Grant;  cruelly  abused,  and  driven  out  of
New  Lebanon *44


Contents.  ix

PAGE.

Chapter  XXII.  Mother  and  the  Elders  return  to  Nathan  Far-
rington's  —  A  mob  surrounds  the  house  at  night  — Mother
proceeds  on  her  journey —  stops  at  E.  Kapp's,  and  is  driven
off  by  a  mob,  arrives  at  Niskayuna,  &c 152

Chapter  XXIII. Great manifestations of God in Mother;

Christ  her  head,  Lord  and  Husband 160

Chapter  XXIV. Prophecies,  visions  and  revelations 168

Chapter  XXV. The  subject  continued 174

Chapter  XXVI. The  subject  continued 1S0

Chapter  XXVII. The  Gospel  preached  to  departed  spirits.  . . .  1S5

Chapter  XXVIII. The  confession  of  sin.  ... 192

Chapter  XXIX. Miraculous  gifts 200

Chapter  XXX:  Counsel  in  temporal  things  — Industry,  clean-
liness, prudence,  economy,  giving  of  alms  and  charity  to  the
poor 207

Chapter  XXXI.  Promises  to  the  faithful  —  Counsel  and  in-
struction to  young  people.  Concerning  children  —  Concern-
ing beasts 214

Chapter  XXXII. Reproof  and  instruction 220

Chapter  XXXIII.  Public  teaching,  doctrinal  speeches;  ex-
hortations, &c 230

Chapter  XXXIV. The  subject  continued 238

CHAPTER  XXXV.  Speeches  to  individuals,  on  various  occa-
sions  242

Chapter  XXXVI. The  subject  continued 249

Chapter  XXXVII. The  subject  continued 254

Chapter  XXXVIII. Sketches of the life and character of

Elder  William  Lee 260

Chapter  XXX  IX.  Some  further  Sketches  of  the  life  and  char-
acter of  Mother  Ann  Lee 268

Chapter  XL. Sketches  of  the  life,  character  and ministry  of

Father  James  Whittaker 276

Chapter  XLI. The  subject  continued 287

Chapter  XLII. Of the  judgments  of  God 297

B


TESTIMONIES


OK


MOTHER ANN LEE,


AND  THE  ELDERS  WITH  HER.


CHAPTER  I.


INTRODUCTION,  BIRTH,  PARENTAGE,  RELIGIOUS  EXERCISES
AND  SUFFERINGS  OF  ANN  LEE  ;  HER  REVELATION  AND
TESTIMONY, VOYAGE TO AMERICA, &C.

God,  in  His  all  wise  providence,  had  laid  the  foundation
of  man's  redemption  in  Judea,  among  the  Jews,  who  were
called  his  Chosen  People.  It  was  there  the  First  Born  in
the  New  Creation,  who  was  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world,
was  first  revealed.  There  he  fulfilled  his  ministry  in  his
earthly  tabernacle,  and  drank  the  full  cup  of  his  sufferings
on  earth  ;  and  from  thence  he  ascended  to  His  Father,  that
the  way  might  be  prepared  for  his  Second  Coming,  in  the
female  part  of  his  manhood,  for  the  travel  of  souls  in  the
regeneration.  And  when  the  time  was  fully  come,  according
to  the  appointment  of  God,  Christ  was  again  revealed,  not
in  Judea,  to  the  Jews,  nor  in  the  person  of  a  male?  but  in
England,  to  a  Gentile  nation,  and  in  the  person  of  a  female.


2  Testimonies  of

This  extraordinary  female,  whom,  her  followers  believe
God  had  chosen,  and  in  whom  Christ  did  visibly  make  his
second  appearance,  was  Ann  Lee.*  She  was  born  in  the
year  1736,  in  the  town  of  Manchester,  in  England.  Her
father's  name  was  John  Lee  ;  by  trade  a  blacksmith ;  she
had  five  brothers,  viz. —  Joseph,  James,  Daniel,  William  and
George,  and  two  sisters,  Mary  and  Nancy.  Her  father,
though  poor,  was  respectable  in  character,  moral  in  principle,
honest  and  punctual  in  his  dealings,  and  industrious  in  busi-
ness. Her  mother  was  counted  a  strictly  religious,  and  very
pious  woman.

3.  Their  children,  as  was  then  common  with  poor  people,
in  manufacturing  towns,  were  taught  to  work,  instead  of
being  sent  to  school.  By  this  means  Ann  acquired  a  habit
of  industry,  but  was  very  illiterate,  so  that  she  could  neither
read,  nor  write.  She  was  employed,  during  her  childhood
and  youth  in  a  cotton  factory,  in  preparing  cotton  for  the
looms,  and  in  cutting  velvet.  It  has  been  said  that  she  was
also  employed  as  a  cutter  of  hatter's  fur,  but  this  was  proba-
bly afterward.

4.  From  her  childhood  she  was  the  subject  of  religious
impressions  and  divine  manifestations.  She  had  great  light
and  conviction  concerning  the  sinfulness  and  depravity  of
human  nature,  and  especially  concerning  the  lusts  of  the
flesh,  which  she  often  made  known  to  her  parents,  entreating
them  for  that  counsel  and  protection  by  which  she  might  be
kept  from  sin.

5.  It  is  remarkable,  that,  in  early  youth,  she  had  a  great
abhorrence  of  the  fleshly  cohabitation  of  the  sexes,  and  so
great  was  her  sense  of  its  impurity,  that  she  often  admon-
ished her  mother  against  it,  which,  coming  to  her  father's
ears,  he  threatened,  and  actually  attempted  to  whip  her;
upon  which  she threw  herself  into  her  mother's arms,  and

*  It  was  the  Christ,  not  Jesus,  who  should  make  a  Second  Appearance.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  3

clung  around  her  to  escape  his  strokes.  In  this  we  may  see
an  early  and  significant  manifestation  of  the  testimony  she
was  destined  to  bear,  and  the  sufferings  she  was  destined  to
pass  through  in  consequence  of  her  testimony.

6.  But  not  having  then  attained  to  that  knowledge  of  God
which  she  so  early  desired,  nor  having  any  one  to  strengthen
and  assist  her  in  withstanding  the  powerful  examples  and
practices  of  a  lost  world,  and  the  ensnaring  temptations  of  a
fallen  nature,  she  grew  up  in  the  same  fallen  nature,  and
was  married  to  Abraham  Stanley,  who  was  a  blacksmith  by
trade,  and  lived  with  her,  at  her  father's  house,  while  she  re-
mained in  England; — by  him  she  had  four  children,  who  all
died  in  infancy.

7.  During  this  period  of  her  cohabitation  with  her  hus-
band she  fell  under  great  exercise  of  mind,  and,  for  a  sea-
son, passed  through  excessive  tribulation  and  sufferings  of
soul;  without  any  mortal  guide  to  instruct  and  lead  her
in  the  way  of  truth,  till  she  became  acquainted  with  James
and  Jane  Wardley.  She  became  a  subject  of  the  work  of
God  under  their  ministration,  and  united  herself  to  that  so-
ciety in  the  month  of  September,  1758,  being  then  about
twenty-two  years  of  age.

8.  As  these  people  had  been  favored  with  a  greater  de-
gree of  divine  light,  and  a  more  clear  and  pointed  testimony
against  sin  than  had  hitherto  been  made  manifest,  Ann
readily  embraced  their  testimony.  And,  as  their  light  had
led  them  to  the  open  confession  of  every  known  sin,  and  to
the  taking  up  of  a  full  and  final  cross  against  all  evil  in  their
knowledge,  they  were  thereby  endowed  with  great  power  of
God  over  sin,  by  which  means  Ann  found  a  good  degree  of
that  protection  which  she  had  so  long  desired,  and  so  earn-
estly sought  after.  And,  by  her  faithful  obedience  to  the  in-
struction of  her  Leaders,  she  attained  to  the  full  knowledge
and  experience  in  spiritual  things  which  they  had  found.


4  Testimonies  of

9.  But  Ann  was  destined  to  still  deeper  sufferings,  in  or-
der to  prepare  her  for  a  far  greater  work,  and  therefore
could  not  rest  satisfied  with  what  she  had  already  attained.
In  watchings,  fastings,  tears  and  incessant  cries  to  God,  she
labored,  day  and  night,  for  deliverance  from  the  very  nature
of  sin.  And  under  the  most  severe  tribulation  of  mind,  and
the  most  violent  temptations  and  buffetings  of  the  enemy,
she  was  often  in  such  extreme  agony  of  soul  as  caused  the
blood  to  perspire  through  the  pores  of  her  skin.  Well  might
her  sufferings  and  trials  be  compared  to  those  of  the  Lord  ..
Jesus,  when  he  was  in  the  wilderness,  tempted  of  the  devil.  J

10.  As  she  was  ordained  of  God,  as  her  followers  believe,
to  be  the  first  Mother  of  all  souls  in  the  regeneration,  she
had,  not  only  to  labor  and  travel  for  her  own  redemption,
through  scenes  of  tribulation,  and  to  set  the  example  of
righteousness,  and  mark  out  the  line  of  self-denial  and  the
cross  for  her  followers,  but  also  to  see  and  feel  the  full
depth  of  man's  loss,  and  the  pain  and  judgment  which  even-
description  of  lost  souls  were  under.

n.  Hence  she  was  destined  to  pass  through  inexpressible
sufferings  for  their  redemption.  Sometimes  for  whole  nights
together,  her  cries,  screeches  and  groans  were  such  as  to  fill
every  soul  around  her  with  fear  and  trembling,  and  could
be  compared  to  nothing  but  the  horrors  and  agonies  of  souls
under  sufferings  for  the  violation  of  the  laws  of  God,  whose
awful  states  were  laid  upon  her,  and  whose  various  agonies
she  was,  by  turns,  made  to  feel.

12.  By  such  deep  mortification  and  sufferings,  her  flesh
wasted  away  till  she  became  like  a  mere  skeleton.  Elder
John  Hocknell,  who  had  been  a  member  of  the  society  under
James  and  Jane  Wardley,  and  was  well  acquainted  with
Mother  Ann  through  all  her  sufferings,  testified  that  he  had
known  her  to  be  under  such  power  and  operations  of  God,
attended  with  such  severe  sufferings,  for  six  weeks  together,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  5

that  her  earthly  tabernacle  was  so  reduced  that  she  was  as
weak  as  an  infant;  and  was  fed  and  supported  by  others,
but  utterly  incapable  of  helping  herself ;  though  naturally  ot
a  sound  and  strong  constitution,  and  invincible  fortitude  of
mind.

13.  Though  Ann  was  wrought  upon  in  this  manner,  more
or  less,  for  the  space  of  nine  years,  yet  she  had  intervals  of
releasement,  and  was,  at  times,  filled  with  visions  and  reve-
lations of  God.  By  this  means  the  way  of  God,  and  the
nature  of  His  work,  gradually  opened  upon  her  mind,  with
increasing  light  and  understanding.  At  length,  about  the
year  1770,  after  a  scene  of  deep  tribulation,  and  the  most
excessive  sufferings  and  cries  to  God,  she  received  a  full
revelation  of  the  root  and  foundation  of  human  depravity,
and  of  the  very  transgression  of  the  first  man  and  woman
in  the  garden  of  Eden.  Then,  she  clearly  saw  whence  and
wherein  all  mankind  were  lost  and  separated  from  God,  and
the  only  possible  way  of  recovery.

14.  By  the  immediate  revelation  of  God,  she  henceforth
bore  an  open  testimony  against  the  lustful  gratifications  of
the  flesh,  as  the  source  and  foundation  of  human  corrup-
tion. Her  testimony  was  delivered  with  such  power  of  God
and  accompanied  with  the  word  of  prophecy  in  such  a
marvelous  and  searching  manner,  that  it  entered  into  the
very  secrets  of  the  heart ;  by  which  means  the  most  hidden
abominations  were  brought  to  light !  She  testified  in  the
most  plain  and  pointed  manner,  that  no  soul  could  follow
Christ  in  the  regeneration,  while  living  in  the  works  of
natural  generation,  and  wallowing  in  their  lusts.

15.  The  light  and  power  of  God  revealed  in  Ann,  and
through  her  revealed  to  those  who  received  her  testimony,
had  such  sensible  effect  in  giving  them  power  over  all  sin,
and  filling  them  with  visions,  revelations,  and  gifts  of  God,
that  she  was  received  and  acknowledged  as  the  first  spiritual


6  Testimonies  of

Mother  in  Christ,  and  the  second  heir  of  the  Covenant  of
Life  in  the  New  Creation.  Hence  she  received  the  title  of
Mother;  and  hence  those  who  received  and  obeyed  her
testimony  found  a  great  increase  in  the  power  and  gifts  of
God ;  while  those  who  rejected  it  lost  all  their  former  light
and  power,  and  fell  back  into  a  state  of  darkness,  and  into
the  common  course  of  the  world.

16.  The  piercing  and  heart  searching  power  of  Mother's
testimony  against  sin,  together  with  the  powerful  operations
of  the  spirit  of  God  which  prevailed  in  the  meetings  of  her
little  family  through  her  ministration,  stirred  up  the  rage
and  enmity  of  professor  and  profane,  of  almost  every  class
and  description,  to  such  a  degree,  that,  by  formal  opposition
and  tumultuous  mobs,  open  persecution  and  secret  malice,
her  very  life  and  existence  seemed  in  continual  jeopardy.
She  was  often  shamefully  and  cruelly  abused,  and  a  number
of  times  imprisoned.  But,  her  testimony  continued  to  grow
and  increase  in  the  hearts  of  Believers  in  England,  till,  by
the  special  revelation  of  God,  she  embarked  for  America.

17.  On  the  19th  of  May,  1774,  she  sailed  from  Liverpool,
in  company  with  her  husband  (who  then  professed  the  same
faith),  her  brother, —  William  Lee,  James  Whittaker,  John
Hocknell,  Richard  Hocknell, —  son  of  John  Hocknell,  James
Shepherd,  Mary  Partington,  and  Nancy  Lee  —  a  niece  of
Mother  Ann.  After  enduring  the  storms  and  dangers  of
the  sea,  in  an  old  leaky  vessel,  in  which  they  came  very  near
being  shipwrecked,  they  all  arrived  safely  in  New  York,  on
the  6th  of  August  following.

18.  After  their  arrival  in  New  York,  Mother  Ann  obtained
lodgings  at  the  house  of  one  "  Smith  "  in  Queen  street,  by
whom  Abraham  —  her  husband,  was  employed  as  a  journey-
man, in  the  blacksmith  business.  Mother  employed  herself
in  washing  and  ironing,  for  her  living,  and,  by  her  meek-
ness, humility  and  amiable  deportment,  she  gained  the  love


Mother  Ann  Lee.  7

and  esteem  of  the  woman  of  the  house,  by  whom  she  was
treated  with  great  kindness.  From  this  woman  Mother
afterward  received  offers,  which,  considered  in  a  temporal
view,  were  both  honorable  and  advantageous,  but  which  she
declined,  as  being  incompatible  with  the  gift  and  calling  of
God  to  her;  and  chose  rather  to  endure  poverty  and  suffer-
ings, than  to  turn  aside  from  her  duty  to  God,  for  the  sake
of  any  temporal  advantages.

19.  John  Hocknell,  soon  after  their  arrival,  went  up  the
river,  and  purchased  a  place  at  Niskayuna,  near  Albany,  for
their  future  residence.  He  then  returned  to  New  York,  and
soon  after,  sailed  for  England,  in  order  to  settle  his  affairs,
and  bring  out  his  family.  The  remainder  of  the  company
were  scattered,  seeking  their  livelihood,  by  their  hand
labor,  wherever  they  could  find  employment.  Most  of
them  went  up  the  river,  and  remained  in,  and  about  Albany.
William  Lee,  being  a  blacksmith  by  trade,  was  employed  in
that  business  at  Albany,  by  one  Fairchild.  James  Whitta-
ker  was,  by  occupation,  a  weaver,  and  found  employment
in  that  business.

20.  During  John  Hocknell's  absence  to  England,  Mother
Ann  went  several  times  up  the  river,  and  visited  the  Be-
lievers in  and  about  Albany,  and  was  occasionally  visited
by  some  of  them,  but  still  continued  her  residence  in  New
York.  On  the  25th  of  December,  1775,  John,  and  his
family,  arrived  at  Philadelphia,  and  proceeded  to  New  York
by  land,  where  they  found  Mother  Ann,  and  soon  after
moved  up  to  Niskayuna, —  now  Watervliet.  In  the  spring
following,  Mother  left  New  York,  and  came  up  the  river,
and  joined  the  rest  of  the  society


8  Tl  SI  [MONIES OF

CHAPTER II.

MOTHER  ANN'S  EXPERIENCE  AND  SUFFERINGS  IN  AMERICA
PREVIOUS  TO  THE  OPENING  OF  HER  GOSPEL  TESTI-
MONY.

After  Mother  Ann  and  her  little  family  arrived  in  this
country,  they  passed  through  many  scenes  of  difficulty  of  a
temporal  nature.  Being  in  a  strange  land,  without  any
means  of  subsistence,  excepting  the  daily  labor  of  their
own  hands;  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  being  utter  strangers
to  them,  and  their  religion,  their  faith  forbade  their  court-
ing the  friendship  of  the  world;  and  Mother  chose  rather
to  rely  upon  the  mercy  of  God,  than  to  solicit  their  charity,
or  even  to  accept  the  offers  of  those  worldly  advantages
which  were  several  times  made  to  her.  Thus  their  poverty,
and  privation  of  worldly  comforts,  for  several  years,  occa-
sioned them  many  severe  trials.

2.  During  Mother  Ann's  residence  in  New  York,  Abra-
ham —  her  husband,  was  visited  with  severe  sickness;  to
nurse  and  take  care  of  him  in  this  sickness,  required  her
whole  time  and  labor.  This  duty  Mother  performed  with
the  utmost  care  and  attention.  Their  earnings  now  ceased,
and  they  were  reduced  to  extreme  poverty.

3.  Abraham  at  length  recovered,  so  as  to  be  able  to  walk
the  streets,  and,  by  associating  with  the  wicked,  he  soon
lost  all  sense  of  the  gospel,  and  began,  in  a  very  ungodly
manner,  to  oppose  Mother's  faith,  and  finally  refused  to  do
any  thing  for  her,  unless  she  would  live  in  the  flesh  with
him,  and  bear  children.  This  proposition  Mother  utterly
and  positively  rejected,  which  caused  a  final  separation  be-
tween her  and  Abraham  Stanley.

4.  Mother  Ann  was  evidently  destined  to  drink  deeply  of
the cup  of affliction and sufferings,  before her testimonv


Mother  Ann  Lee.  9

could  be  opened  and  received  in  America.  Her  labor  and
travel  of  soul  for  the  opening  of  the  gospel  was  often  so
great  as  to  banish  all  other  concerns.  Hence,  poverty,  pri-
vation and  hunger,  were  her  frequent  companions;  and
hence,  she  was  often  left  destitute  of  all  earthly  friends.

5.  At  one  particular  time  she  was  reduced  to  such  neces-
sity, that  her  only  shelter  from  the  inclemency  of  the  winter
was  a  small  uncomfortable  room,  without  bed  or  bedding,  or
any  other  furniture  than  a  cold  stone  for  a  seat,  and  her
only  morsel  was  a  cruise  of  vinegar,  and,  as  she  herself  af-
terward testified,  she  sat  down  upon  the  stone,  without  any
fire,  sipped  her  vinegar  and  wept.

6.  But  these  things  felt  very  small  to  Mother  Ann,  in
comparison  to  the  vast  weight  of  sufferings  which  she  had
to  bear,  in  her  spiritual  travel,  for  the  opening  of  the  gospel
to  a  lost  world,  which  she  knew  could  not  possibly  be  saved,
but  through  those  very  sufferings  which  she  endured.

7.  After  passing  through  many  trying  scenes,  Mother
Ann,  and  those  who  stood  faithful  with  her,  were  finally
gathered  and  settled  at  Niskayuna,  where  they  began  to  pre-
pare the  way,  through  additional  sufferings  and  difficulties,
for  the  opening  of  the  gospel.  But,  so  boundless  was
Mother's  love  for  the  work  of  God,  and  so  great  her  feeling
for  the  salvation  of  man,  that  her  soul  never  flinched  from
sufferings,  at  any  time;  yet,  in  her  extreme  agony  she  would
often  cry  out,  "  O  that  all  things  would  cry  to  God  for  me  !"

8.  At  other  times,  and  especially  after  a  scene  of  deep
sorrow  of  soul,  she  was  surrounded  with  visions  of  angels
and  heavenly  hosts;  and  the  revelations  of  God,  concerning
the  opening  of  the  gospel,  which  was  near  at  hand,  filled  her
soul  with  joy  and  comfort,  and  her  mouth  with  songs.

9.  In  one  of  those  scenes  of  sufferings  which  came  upon
her  after  she  had  taken  up  her  residence  at  Watervliet,  she
was  standing  by  a  small  creek,  which  ran  near  the  house

2


io  Testimonies  of

where  she  then  lived,  she  cried  out,  in  her  anguish,  and  said,
"O  that  the  fishes  of  the  sea  and  fowls  of  the  air,  and  all
things  that  have  life  and  breath,  yea,  all  the  trees  of  the  for-
est, and  grass  of  the  fields,  would  pray  to  God  for  me  !"
These  words  were  accompanied  with  such  a  flow  of  tears,
and  heartfelt  agony,  as  melted  the  hearts  of  those  with  her.

io.  Soon  after  this,  Mother  Ann  received  a  great  gift  of
rejoicing,  attended  with  much  trembling  and  shaking,  and
great  prophecies  of  God,  and  said,  "  God  is  about  to  raise  up
a  people  here  in  America,  who  will  serve  Him  and  honor  the
gospel."

ii.  Those  who  came  to  America  with  Mother  Ann,  had
great  expectations  that  the  gospel  would  soon  open  in  this
country,  and  that  many  would  soon  believe  and  obey  her
testimony.  But,  after  waiting  several  years,  without  the  ad-
dition of  a  single  soul  to  the  faith,  they  were  all,  excepting
Mother,  brought  into  great  trials  and  doubts  respecting  the
opening  of  the  gospel.

12.  But  Mother  Ann  always  maintained  her  confidence  in
the  promise  of  God:  and  often  spoke  to  strengthen  and  en-
courage them  to  have  patience,  and  wait  till  the  time  ap-
pointed. She  would  often  say,  "  O  my  dear  children,  hold  fast,
and  be  not  discouraged.  God  has  not  sent  us  into  this  land
in  vain,  but  He  has  sent  us  to  bring  the  gospel  to  this  nation,
who  are  deeply  lost  in  sin;  and  there  are  great  numbers  who
will  embrace  it,  and  the  time  draws  nigh."

13.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  which  happened  in  the
year  1779,  the  family  was  in  great  tribulation;  feeling  them-
selves, as  it  were,  alone  in  the  world,  they  were  ready  to
conclude  that  they  must  keep  the  way  of  God  for  them-
selves, and  end  their  days  without  any  further  opening  of  the
gospel  to  other  souls.  While  they  were  laboring  under  these
feelings,  Mother  Ann  came  out  and  led  them  into  the  forest
west  of  their  dwelling,  where,  by  the ministration  of the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  ii

power and  gifts  of God,  through  Mother,  they  had  a  very
joyful  meeting,  and  praised  God  in  songs  and  dances.

14.  Elder  William  Lee  then  asked  Mother,  ''  Do  you  be-
lieve the  gospel  will  ever  open  to  the  world  ?  "  Mother  re-
plied, "  Yea,  brother  William,  I  certainly  know  it  will,  and
the  time  is  near  at  hand  when  they  will  come  like  doves."
William  replied,  "  Mother,  you  have  often  told  us  so,  but  it
does  not  come  yet."  Mother  said,  "Be  patient,  be  patient,
O  my  dear  children,  for  I  can  see  great  numbers  coming  now,
and  you  will  soon  see  them  coming  in  great  numbers."

15.  The  family  having  by  this  time,  through  their  inde-
fatigable zeal  and  industry,  improved  their  lands,  and  in-
creased their  temporal  circumstances,  so  as  to  enjoy  a  com-
fortable living,  Mother  gave  orders  to  lay  up  stores  of
provisions,  which  they  did  in  great  plenty.  Some  of  the
family  inquired  what  was  to  be  done  with  all  this  provis-
ion, seeing  they  were  so  retired,  and  shut  out  from  the  world,
and  had  so  little  prospect  of  any  company  to  help  consume
it  ?  "  Mother  replied,  "  We  shall  have  company  enough  be-
fore another  year  comes  about,  to  consume  it  all."

16.  The  winter  following,  among  many  other  similar  vis-
ions and  revelations  which  Mother  occasionally  opened  to
her  little  family,  she  said,  "  I  see  great  numbers  of  people
come  and  believe  the  gospel;  I  see  great  men  come  and  bow
down  their  heads  and  confess  their  sins."  Thus,  by  visions,
revelations,  and  other  gifts  of  God,  through  Mother,  they
were  strengthened  and  encouraged  from  time  to  time,  to
wait,  with  patience,  God's  appointed  time.

17.  Early  in  the  following  spring,  1780,  the  way  being  fully-
prepared,  all  those  visions  and  revelations  began  to  be  fulfilled ;
the  trumpet  of  the  everlasting  gospel  began  to  sound,  and
many  flocked  to  Niskayuna,  from  various  quarters,  to  inquire
what  they  should  do  to  be  saved  ;  and  thus  the  long  expecta-
tions of  Mother's  little  Church,  were  fully  realized.


is  Testimonies  of


CHAPTER  III.

FIRST  INTERVIEWS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  IN  AMERICA  WITH
MOTHER  ANN  AND  THE  ELDERS  WITH  HER;  SOME  OF
THE  QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS  THAT  PASSED  BETWEEN
THEM.

While  Mother  Ann  and  her  little  family  were  laboring  in
the  wilderness  of  Niskayuna,  and  preparing  themselves  for
the  opening  of  the  gospel,  they  were  little  noticed  or  known,
even  by  the  neighboring  inhabitants.  But,  in  the  spring  of
the  year  1780,  God,  in  His  providence,  opened  the  way  for
that  great  and  mighty  work  which  they  had  long  been  wait-
ing to  see,  and  which,  shortly  after,  filled  the  whole  neigh-
boring country  with  anxiety  and  alarm.

2.  The  first  intelligence  concerning  this  little  Church  of
Christ  was  received  by  the  inhabitants  of  New  Lebanon,
and  its  vicinity,  in  the  month  of  March.  Inquiries  were
soon  after  made,  and  people  began  to  visit  this  little
Church  from  different  places,  particularly  from  New  Leba-
non. When  they  came  to  see  Mother,  and  the  Elders  with
her,  they  were  filled  with  wonder  and  admiration,  at  the
great  power,  and  operations  of  the  spirit  which  they  were
under,  and  the  clear  and  pointed  plainness  of  their  testimony
against  all  sin,  and  every  evil  work.

3.  The  gifts  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were
evident  among  them.  Shaking,  trembling,  speaking  in  un-
known tongues,  prophesying  and  singing  melodious  songs,
were  gifts  with  which  they  seemed  continually  to  be  filled  ;
with  many  other  signs  and  operations  which  showed  the
mighty  power  of  God,  and  pointed  out  the  particular  sins
and  abominations  which  those  who  came  to  see  them  had
committed.  Even  the  very  thoughts  of  the  heart  were
plainly  and particularly  pointed  out,  insomuch  that  many


Mother  Ann  Lee.  13

feared  and  trembled  in  their  presence,  while  others  ran  to
get  out  of  the  way,  lest  their  sins  should  be  told  them.

4.  Many  inquiries  were  made  concerning  their  religion
and  doctrines,  of  which  the  following  is  a  short  specimen.
The  people  inquired  of  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  the
cause  of  their  maintaining  such  a  singular  faith  and  manner
of  life  ?  They  replied  that  they  had  been  laboring,  for  years,
in  the  work  of  the  regeneration,  and  had  actually  risen  with
Christ,  and  did  travel  with  him  in  the  resurrection ;  and  re-
lated considerable  of  their  experience.

5.  The  people  then  said,  "  If  you  have  attained  to  that  of
God  which  we  have  not,  we  should  be  glad  to  share  with
you,  for  we  want  to  find  the  best  way  to  be  saved."  They
answered,  "  If  you  are  ever  saved  by  Christ,  it  must  be  by
walking  as  he  walked.  And  if  you  have  committed  sins  you
must  confess  them  to  those  witnesses  in  whom  Christ  has
taken  up  his  abode."

6.  To  the  married  people  Mother  said,  "  You  must  forsake
the  marriage  of  the  flesh,  or  you  cannot  be  married  to  the
Lamb,  nor  have  any  share  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;
for  those  who  are  counted  worthy  to  have  part  in  the  resur-
rection of  Christ,  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage,
but  are  like  unto  the  angels. "

7.  But,  said  the  inquirers,  "We  have  had  the  power  of
God  upon  us,  and  received  light  and  conviction,  and  have
felt  great  tribulation  for  our  sins ;  after  which  we  have  felt
great  love  and  releasement,  and  thought  ourselves  converted,
and  born  of  God. Is  not  this  of  Christ  ?  "

8.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  replied,  "The  gifts  and
calling  of  God  are  given  to  souls  in  nature's  darkness,  not
because  they  have  repented,  but  they  are  intended  to  lead
souls  to  repentance."

9.  The  people  then  inquired,  "  What  is  repentance  ?  "  and
were answered,  "  To  leave  off  committing  sin  is  the only


14  Testimonies  of

repentance  which  God  accepts  ;  and  this,  said  Mother,  can
no  one  do,  short  of  making  an  honest  and  faithful  confession
of  all  the  sins  ever  committed  in  his  whole  life,  to  the  faith-
ful witnesses  of  Christ."

10.  But,  said  the  inquirers,  "  It  is  God  alone  that  can  for-
give sins  ;  where,  then,  is  the  necessity  of  confessing  them
to  man  ?  "

ii.  The  Elders  answered,  "God  has  established  that
order  for  all  souls  who  have  committed  sins,  that  they  must
confess  their  sins  before  His  chosen  witnesses ;  and  then  re-
ferred them  to  the  scriptures,  particularly  to  the  law  of
Moses,  to  the  case  of  Achan  and  Joshua,  and  to  the  days  of
John,  the  Baptist,  where  they  came  and  confessed  their  sins
and  shewed  their  deeds.  Said  they,  "  All  souls  who  commit
sin  are  lost  from  God  and  therefore  do  not  know  God.  For
they  who  know  God  as  He  is,  do  not  commit  sin:  for  it  is
eternal  life,  to  know  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  He  hath
sent."

12.  But  those  who  commit  sin  are  bound  in  death,  and
are  not  able  to  come  to  God  without  help ;  and  when  they
come  to  Christ's  witnesses,  and  honestly  confess  their  sins
to  them,  they  find  some  relation  to  these  witnesses,  and  that
gives  them  some  relation  to  Christ ;  and  in  this  sense,  these
witnesses  become  Mediators  between  Christ  and  lost  souls.
They  also  take  the  burden  and  loss  that  the  soul  is  under,
and  bear  it  till  the  soul  has  had  a  season  to  gain  strength,
and  becomes  able  to  bear  its  own  burden."

13.  Inquirers  asked  the  Elders,  "Are  you  perfect?  Do
you  live  without  sin  ?  "  The  Elders  answered,  "  The  power
of  God,  revealed  in  this  day,  does  enable  souls  to  cease  from
sin ;  and  we  have  received  that  power  ;  we  have  actually
left  off  committing  sin,  and  we  live  in  daily  obedience  to
the  will  of  God."

14.  They  replied,  "  Solomon  was  called  a  wise  man  ;  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  15

he  said  there  was  not  a  man  upon  earth  that  lived  without
sin.

15.  The  Elders  answered,  "Solomon  was  under  the  law
of  sin,  and  it  is  evident  enough  that  he  committed  sin.  He
did  not  know  Christ;  for  Christ  had  not  then  been  revealed.
Whatsoever  the  Law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the

Lata. But, when Christ came, those who believed and
obeyed  him,  ceased  from  sin."

16.  "Those  who  are  in  Christ,  are  not  under  the  law  of
sin,  because  they  do  not  commit  sin;  therefore  there  is  no
law  that  can  either  justify  or  condemn  them,  but  the  law  of
Christ.  For  Christ  has  delivered  them  from  the  law  of  sin,
and  given  them  the  law  of  righteousness,  and  made  them
able  to  walk  in  it."

17.  "But,  those  who  commit  sin  are  always  in  danger  of
the  judgment  of  God.  If  we  should  be  overcome  and  com-
mit sin,  our  case  would  be  deplorable;  because  we  have
tasted  of  the  good  word  of  God,  and  received  of  the  powers
of  the  world  to  come;  therefore,  if  we  should  fall  away,  to
us  it  would  seem  impossible  to  be  renewed  again  to  repent-
ance; and  we  should  have  nothing  to  expect  but  the  reproof
of  God."

18.  These,  and  many  other  things  passed  in  conversation
between  these  strange  foreigners,  and  the  people  who  first
visited  them  to  search  out  their  religion.  For  the  extraordi-
nary report  of  a  wonderful  people  had  reached  their  ears,
and  many  were  anxious  to  see,  and  learn  for  themselves.
And  every  candid  and  honest  inquirer  was  fully  convinced
that  they  were  the  chosen  witnesses  of  God ;  for  it  was
manifest  to  all  who  heard  them,  that  they  spoke  by  the
mighty  power  of  God.


16  Testimonies  of

CHAPTER  IV.

FIRST INTERVIEWS OF DIFFERENT INDIVIDUALS WITH
MOTHER ANN AND THE ELDERS WITH HER.

In  the  time  of  the  first  opening  of  the  testimony  in  this
country,  the  extraordinary  information  which  was  circulated
abroad,  concerning  this  new  and  strange  religion,  and  the
mighty  power  which  attended  the  subjects  of  it,  drew  many
inquiring  and  discerning  minds  to  search  into  the  truth  of
these  things.  Many  inquiries  were  made  from  time  to  time,
by  different  individuals,  during  their  first  interviews  with
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  with  her,  concerning  many
particular  things  which  appeared  new,  and  strange  to  the
inquirers.

2.  Joseph  Meacham  and  Calvin  Harlow  were  among  the
first  who  visited  this  little  Church,  for  the  purpose  of  search-
ing out  the  truth  of  their  religion.  After  much  conversa-
tion, and  many  critical  inquiries,  in  all  of  which  they
received  plain  and  satisfactory  answers,  Joseph  Meacham
sent  Calvin  Harlow  to  Mother  Ann  with  the  following  ob-
servation and  query,  namely:  Saint  Paul  says,  "Let  your
women  keep  silent  in  the  Churches;  for  it  is  not  permitted
unto  them  to  speak;  but  they  are  commanded  to  be  under
obedience,  as  also  saith  the  law.  And  if  they  will  learn  any-
thing let  them  ask  their  husbands,  at  home;  for  it  is  a  shame
to  a  woman  to  speak  in  the  church.  But  you  not  only
speak,  but  seem  to  be  an  Elder  in  your  church.  How  do
you  reconcile  this  with  the  Apostle's  doctrine  "  ?

3.  Mother  Ann  answered,  "  The  order  of  man  in  the
natural  creation  is  a  figure  of  the  order  of  God,  for  man  in
the  spiritual  creation.  As  the  order  of  nature  requires  a  man
and  a  woman  to  produce  offspring,  so,  where  they  both  stand
in  their  proper  order,  the man  is  the  first,  and  the  woman


Mother  Ann  Lee.  17

the  second,  in  the  government  of  the  family.  He  is  the
father,  and  she  the  mother,  and  all  the  children,  both  male
and  female,  must  be  subject  to  their  parents  ;  and  the  woman,
being  second,  must  be  subject  to  her  husband,  who  is  the
first;  but  when  the  man  is  gone,  the  right  of  government
belongs  to  the  woman  ;  so  is  the  family  of  Christ."

4.  This  answer  opened  a  vast  field  of  contemplation  to
Joseph,  and  filled  his  mind  with  great  light  and  understand-
ing concerning  the  spiritual  work  of  God  He  clearly  saw
that  the  New  Creation  could  not  be  perfect  in  its  order,
without  a  father,  and  a  mother.  That,  as  the  natural
creation  was  the  offspring  of  a  natural  father  and  mother,  so
the  spiritual  creation  must  be  the  offspring  of  a  spiritual
father  and  mother.

5.  He  saw  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  Father  of  the  Spiritual
Creation,  who  was  now  absent  ;  and  he  saw  Ann  Lee  to  be
the  Mother  of  all  who  were  now  begotten  in  the  regenera-
tion ;  and  she,  being  present  in  the  body,  the  power  and
authority  of  Christ  on  earth,  was  committed  to  her;  and  to
her  appertained  the  right  of  leading  and  governing  all  her
spiritual  children.  Jethro  Turner.

6.  Joseph  Meacham  having  now  received  from  Mother
Ann,  an  established  and  well  founded  faith,  set  out,  with  all
his  heart,  to  obey  her  testimony.  After  the  decease  of
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  with  her,  Joseph  became  a
foundation  pillar  in  the  house  of  God  ;  and,  by  his  unwearied
and  faithful  labors,  he  gathered  the  Believers,  and  estab-
lished them  in  the  Gospel  Order  of  a  Church  relation  ;  in
which  they  have  been  increasing  and  growing  to  this  day.

7.  David  Meacham,  of  Enfield,  Connecticut,  visited
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  in  the  fore  part  of  January,
1 78 1.  He  had,  for  some  time,  been  under  great  tribulation
concerning  his  loss  from  God,  especially  in  the  actual  grati-
fication of  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. The  rumor  concerning  a

3


1 8  Testimonies  of

strange  people  who  lived  near  Albany,  had  reached  his  ears,
and  the  intelligence  of  their  profession  and  doctrines,  to-
gether with  the  information  that  his  brother,  Joseph,  had
embraced  their  faith,  had  brought  him  into  a  great  labor  of
mind  arising  from  an  inward  impression  that  they  were  the
people  of  God.

8.  When  he  arrived  among  them,  and  beheld,  in  their
worship,  the  extraordinary  operations  of  the  invisible  power
of  God,  he  was  fully  convinced  that  Christ  had  made  his
Second  Appearance  in  these  people.  After  the  meeting  was
ended,  Mother  Ann  inquired  the  cause  of  his  coming  to
see  them.  After  he  had  informed  her  of  the  cause  she
spoke  as  follows  :  "  God  has  called  you  to  take  up  your
cross,  and  obey  the  gospel ;  and  you  must  confess  all  your
sins,  and  forsake  them;  and,  in  obedience,  God  will  have
mercy  on  your  soul."  He  confessed  his  sins  the  same  night,
and  received  the  power  of  God.

9.  The  next  day,  Mother  came  to  him  and  said,  "  I  really
feel  a  gift  of  God  in  your  coming  to  see  us ;  and  if  you  are
faithful  to  take  up  a  full  cross  against  the  flesh,  and  all
sin,  God  will  make  you  able  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the
world  of  mankind.  You  will  meet  with  great  opposition
from  your  father,  and  many  others.  Professor  and  profane
will  unite  together  to  overcome  your  faith.  But  you  must
not  be  ashamed  to  own  and  testify  your  faith  before  all
men.  God  has  called  you  in  relation  to  the  people  where
you  live,  and  if  you  are  faithful,  God  will  have  a  people  in
that  place  ;  and  God  will  give  you  strength  to  overcome  the
world."

10.  He  told  Mother  Ann  that  he  never  could  preach.  She
answered,  "  Believe  what  I  say,  and  God  will  give  you  a
gift  to  preach  the  gospel."  Elder  William  Lee  said,  "God
will  give  you  an  understanding  of  what  has  now  been
spoken  to  you,  and  make  you  a  '  fisher  of  men.' '


Mother  Ann  Lee.  19

11.  After  these  prophecies  and  encouragements  David
took  his  journey  homeward,  feeling  full  of  the  power  of
God,  and  great  boldness  in  behalf  of  the  testimony.  Soon
after  he  arrived  home,  his  father,  who  was  then  a  Baptist
Elder,  inquired  of  him  what  he  thought  of  the  people  whom
he  had  been' to  see.  He  answered  that  he  believed  them  to
be  the  people  of  God,  and  the  only  true  Church  of  Christ
on  earth.

12.  His  father  appeared  to  be  struck  with  astonishment,
and  said,  "  You  are  deceived,  you  are  deluded. "  And,  after
opposing  his  son  in  a  very  vehement  manner,  the  old  man
gathered  in  three  ministers,  whom  he,  himself,  had  before
called  anti-Christians;  and,  with  the  assistance  of  these  he
endeavored,  but  in  vain,  to  overthrow  David's  faith.

13.  After  struggling  with  priests  and  people,  professor
and  profane,  for  several  months,  David  had  the  satisfaction
to  see  the  fruits  of  his  labors;  for  the  gospel  found  a  perma-
nent foundation  in  the  hearts  of  many  in  and  about  Enfield ;
and  the  old  heavens  and  earth  began  to  pass  away  with  a
great  noise  ;  but  Mother's  words  did  not  fail.

14.  David,  though  a  wealthy,  and  an  honorable  man  in
the  world,  became  a  faithful  and  bold  soldier  in  the  gospel,
and  was  afterward,  for  many  years,  the  first  Deacon  in  the
church,  and  was  greatly  instrumental  in  establishing  order
in  temporal  things,  throughout  all  the  churches.

15.  John  Farrington,  who,  for  many  years,  was  a  faithful
Elder  in  the  Church  at  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  visited  Mother
Ann  and  the  Elders  at  Watervliet,  in  May,  1780;  being  then
about  twenty  years  of  age.  He  was  received  and  treated
with  great  kindness.  Mother  Ann  taught  him  the  necessity
of  confessing  every  secret  sin,  and  showed  him  the  pro-
priety, according  to  scripture,  of  bringing  his  deeds  to  the
light,  and  of  being  joined  to  the  Lord  in  one  spirit.  He
saw  and  acknowledged  that  it  was  right.


20  Testimonies  of

i 6.  John  tarried  several  days,  viewing,  with  admiration,
the  wonderful  works  of  God  that  were  among  the  people.
When  he  was  about  to  take  his  leave  of  them,  Mother  told  him
that  he  might  open  his  mind,  and  confess  his  sins,  if  he  was
so  minded,  before  he  returned  home.  He  answered  that  he
believed  it  to  be  right  to  confess  his  sins;  but  he  had  thought
to  return  home,  and  labor  to  get  a  deeper  sense  of  sin,  and  try
to  amend  his  life  a  little.

17.  Mother  Ann  replied,  "  That  is  very  good;  but  you  can
gain  a  deeper  sense  of  sin  after  you  have  opened  you  mind
as  well  as  before,  and  be  better  able  to  amend  your  life."
She  then  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  out  into  the
door  yard,  where  they  both  sat  down.

18.  After  some  conversation,  John  began  to  confess  his
sins;  and  though  not  feeling  himself  very  well  prepared,  he
proceeded  as  far  as  he  was  able  at  that  time.  Mother
Ann  asked  him  if  he  had  got  through.  He  answered  that
he  had  confessed  all  that  was  on  his  mind.  She  replied,
"You  have  done  very  well  so  far."

19.  Mother  Ann  then  told-  him  many  secret  things  that
he  had  done,  which  he  knew  that  she  could  not  have  known
otherwise  than  by  the  revelation  of  God,  and  asked  him
whether  these  things  were  not  so?  He  answered,  "  Yea,
Mother,  you  have  told  me  the  truth."  She  then  asked  him,
"  Can  you  now  go  home  to  Lebanon  and  testify  that  you
have  found  a  woman  that  told  you  all  things  that  you  have
ever  done?  "  "and  is  not  this  the  Christ?  "  He  answered,
"Yea,  truly,  I  can." He  went and  testified  accordingly.

20.  Ebenezer  Cooley,  before  he  found  the  Church,  testified
that  he  saw,  in  vision,  a  woman  whose  appearance  was  very
glorious,  and  her  face  shone  bright  as  the  sun.  In  the  be-
ginning of  the  year  1781,  he  visited  the  Church  at  Water-
vliet;  and  when  he  saw  Mother,  he  knew  her  to  be  the  same
woman  whom  he  saw  in  vision. She  said  to  him,  "  I  have


Mother  Ann  Lee.  21

seen  you  before,  in  vision.  You  must  go  forth  and  preach
the  gospel  You  ought  to  have  been  prepared  before  this
time."

21.  These  words  of  Mother  Ann  greatly  strengthened  his
faith  After  Ebenezer  had  confessed  his  sins,  and  been
taught  what  to  do  to  be  saved,  he  was  filled  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  became  a  powerful  preacher  of  the  gospel,  and
was  instrumental,  in  the  gift  of  God,  of  converting  many
souls  to  the  faith,  and  of  instructing  and  building  them  up
in  the  way  of  God.

22.  When  Hezekiah  Hammond,  of  New  Lebanon,  first
heard  the  testimony  of  the  gospel,  he  felt  much  opposed  to
it;  and  was  not  willing  that  any  of  his  family  should  go  to
see  the  Church,  and  kept  them  from  it.  But  he  was,  at
length,  awakened  by  a  remarkable  dream,  which  so  affected
his  mind  that  he  resolved  to  go  and  see  the  Church  himself.

23.  Accordingly,  he  went  to  Watervliet,  in  June,  1780,  and
stayed  over  the  Sabbath,  but  still  felt  strongly  opposed.  On
Monday  he  was  preparing  to  go  home,  and  had  sent  for  his
horse,  when  Father  William  Lee  came  into  the  room,  and
began  to  reprove  him  for  his  unbelief.  Hezekiah  braced
himself  with  all  his  feelings,  against  receiving  his  testimony.
Having  his  horsewhip  in  his  hand,  he  sat,  twirling  the  lash
upon  the  floor,  and  strove  to  fix  his  sense  upon  that,  rather
than  upon  Father  William's  discourse.

24  Mother  Ann  soon  came  into  the  room,  and  perceiving
Hezekiah's  feelings,  she  said  to  him,  "  Put  down  that  whip,
and  hear  the  word  of  God,  you  idle  old  man!  It  is  the  devil
that  makes  you  do  that,  to  shut  out  the  word  of  God."
These  words  were  spoken  with  such  irresistible  power,  that
Hezekiah  immediately  threw  down  his  whip  and  gave
attention.

25.  Father  William  Lee  again  resumed  his  discourse,  and
soon  the  power  of  God  fell  mightily  upon  Hezekiah; his


22  Testimonies  of

arms  were  instantly  brought  back  up  to  his  sides,  and  fixed,
like  a  criminal  pinioned  for  execution;  his  head  was  braced
back,  and  his  whole  body  bound  in  such  a  manner  that  he
could  neither  move,  nor  speak.

26.  After  remaining  a  while  in  this  position  he  was  so  far
released  as  to  be  able  to  speak.  He  then  said  to  one  who
came  with  him,  "  The  hand  of  God  is  upon  me ;  I  cannot
go  home ;  I  shall  have  to  stay  here.  I  wish  you  would  go
home,  and  tell  my  family  how  it  is  with  me,  for  the  hand  of
God  is  upon  me,  and  I  cannot  go."

27.  "Now,"  (said  Mother  Ann)  "you  may  confess  your
sins."  Hezekiah  consented,  confessed  his  sins,  and  was  re-
leased. He  was  at  that  time  in  a  low  state  of  health,  had  a
violent  cough,  and  was  supposed  to  be  in  a  consumption;
being  in  a  room  with  Mother  Ann  and  Father  William  Lee,
Elder  Hocknell  came  in,  under  signs  and  operations  of  the
power  of  God,  and  administered  a  gift  of  healing  to  him,  so
that  his  cough  left  him;  and  he  returned  home.

28.  Soon  after  this,  his  hands  broke  out  with  sores,  and,
on  seeing  Elder  Hocknell  again,  he  told  him  that  his  cough
was  healed,  but  he  believed  the  disorder  that  caused  it,  had
broken  out  in  his  hands.  Elder  Hocknell  was  again  taken
under  the  operations  of  the  power  of  God,  and  said,  "  It  is
so.  Your  cough  is  healed  by  the  gift  of  God,  and  has  come
out  on  your  hands.  God  has  a  work  for  you  to  do,  and
when  you  have  done  your  work,  then  the  same  cough  will
return  to  you  again,  and  take  you  out  of  this  world."

29.  Hezekiah  having  received  an  established  faith,  gath-
ered all  his  family  to  the  gospel,  and  was  a  faithful  and  very
useful  laborer  for  a  number  of  years.  He  enjoyed  his
health  until  the  gathering  of  the  Church,  when  his  work
among  the  people  ceased.  He  was  then  taken  with  a  con-
sumptive cough,  and  deceased  in  the  second  year  after  the
Church  was  gathered.  Prudence  Hammond.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  23

CHAPTER  V.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

Soon  after  the  gospel  began  to  open,  Israel  Chauncy,  of
New  Lebanon,  went  to  visit  the  Church,  at  Watervliet.
While  he  was  gone,  (his  wife)  Elizabeth,  had  a  remarkable
vision,  in  which  she  saw  herself  at  the  Church,  and  saw
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  and  Israel  with  them,  in  the
worship  of  God,  and  under  great  operations  of  the  power  of
God.  Israel  appeared  to  be  in  great  distress  of  soul  and
body,  and  his  flesh  was  turned  to  a  purple  color.

2.  In  this  situation  she  saw  him  put  his  hands  upon
Mother  Ann's  shoulders,  and  heard  him  say,  "  Pray,  Mother,
forgive  me,  for  thou  knowest  all  the  sins  that  I  have  com-
mitted from  my  youth,  up  to  this  day."  Mother  answered,
in  these  words:  "Thy  sins  are  gone,  open,  before  hand,  to
judgment,"  and  immediately  he  was  released  from  his  suf-
ferings, and  his  flesh  returned  to  its  former  color.  Mother
then  took  Elizabeth  by  the  hand,  and  led  her  into  another
room,  and  immediately  her  vision  ceased,  and  she  found
herself  at  home,  in  her  own  house.

3.  After  Israel  returned,  Elizabeth  opened  the  vision  to
him.  He  said,  "  It  was  a  true  vision  of  God  ;  these  things
were  shown  to  you  as  plainly  as  if  you  had  been  there,  and
seen  them  with  your  bodily  eyes."  On  hearing  these  things
the  whole  family  were  filled  with  the  power  of  God,  and
with  great  joy  went  forth  and  labored,  under  the  beautiful
operations  of  the  power  of  God,  in  which  they  continued,  all
the  night,  without  sleep.

4.  A  few  days  after  this,  Israel  and  Elizabeth' both  went
to  see  the  Church,  and  when  they  arrived,  Mother  Ann  came
to  the  carriage,  and  Elizabeth  knew  her  to  be  the  same
woman  she  had  seen  in  vision  ;  and  Mother  took  her  by  the


24  Testimonies  of

hand  and  led  her  into  the  house.  After  supper  Mother  Ann
led  her  into  the  meeting  and  said,  "  Love  the  mighty  power
of  God.''  The  second  night  after  their  arrival,  they  had
a  very  joyful  meeting,  in  singing,  dancing,  shouting,  leaping
and  clapping  hands.

5  The  following  morning  Mother  Ann  led  Israel  and
Elizabeth  out  of  the  house,  and  spoke  to  them  as  follows:
"  Last  night,  when  we  were  in  the  worship  of  God,  I  saw  a
number  of  souls  rise  from  the  dead,  and  come  into  the  resur-
rection of  life.  And  when  you,  Israel,  was  here  before,  I
saw  your  mother,*  and  when  you  was  released,  and  your
flesh  turned  to  its  natural  color  again,  she  was  released  also,
and  came  into  the  resurrection.  And  now  you  must  confess
all  the  sins  you  have  ever  committed,  one  by  one."  They
immediately  complied  and  confessed  their  sins  in  the  pres-
ence of  each  other.

6.  After  they  had  confessed  their  sins,  Mother  Ann  said,
"  Now  you  must  go  home,  and  set  your  house  in  order,  for
there  will  be  great  numbers  of  people  there  to  visit  you
soon."  Then,  addressing  herself  to  Israel  she  said,  "  Israel,
you  have  begun  to  bear  for  other  souls,  and  you  must  never
give  out  till  the  last  soul  is  gathered  in.  When  you  get
home,  tell  your  father  and  stepmother,  that  your  mother  is
risen  from  the  dead."

7.  They  then  returned  home,  and  shortly  after  were  vis-
ited by  great  numbers  of  people,  according  to  Mother's
words.  Israel  gave  himself  wholly  to  the  work  of  God,  and
was  a  faithful  minister  of  the  gospel.

8.  Nathan  and  Hannah  Goodrich  also  came  to  see  the
Church  in  the  early  part  of  the  opening  of  the  gospel,  in
June,  18S0;  and  arriving  just  in  the  time  of  a  sharp  testi-
mony against  sin,  and  much  company  there,  the  first  words
they  heard  were  the following: "  Strip  off  your  pride  and

*His  mother  had  been  dead  thirty  years.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  25

abominations!  We  know  you,  but  you  do  not  know  us!  We
have  men  here  that  are  not  defiled  with  women,  and  women
that  are  not  defiled  with  men!"  These  words  were  from
Mary  Partington.

9.  The  next  day  Hannah  went  to  see  Mother  Ann;  and,
on  inquiring  after  her  husband,  Mother  said,  "  Let  your
husband  alone  —  fastening  your  lust  upon  him!  "  Upon  this
she  sat  down  in  a  room  where  Elder  Hocknell  was  under
the  operation  of  the  power  of  God.  As  it  appeared  strange
to  her,  she  prayed  that  God  would  make  it  known  to  her,
whether  this  was  His  work,  or  not,  and  if  not,  to  keep  her
from  delusion.  Immediately  upon  this,  one  of  the  Elders
came  and  told  her  her  thoughts,  just  as  they  passed  through
her  mind.

10.  These,  and  many  other  things  which  they  heard  and
saw,  soon  convinced  Nathan  and  Hannah  that  this  was  the
work  of  God,  and  that  these  people  were  His  witnesses,
and  according  to  their  faith  and  conviction,  they  both  con-
fessed their  sins.  When  they  had  done  that,  Mother  Ann
showed  them  great  charity;  to  Hannah,  in  a  special  manner,
she  told  her  the  manner  of  her  own  travel  in  the  way  of
God  from  the  beginning.*  Hannah  Goodrich.

11.  Esther  Bracket  made  her  first  visit  to  Mother  Ann
and  the  Elders  while  they  were  in  prison,  in  Albany.  After
some  conversation  about  the  way  of  God,  Mother  spoke  to
her  as  follows:  "You  must  be  born  again,  or  not  be  saved
from  sin;  for  he  that  is  born  of  God,  cannot  sin.  You  must
become  as  a  little  child  —  yea,  you  must  be  as  dependent  as
a  little  infant  —  A  little  infant  has  no  lust."

12.  She  said,  "  The  signs  that  Christ  spake  of,  follow  them
that  believe.  They  speak  with  new  tongues;  the  sick  are
healed;  and  the  wonderful  power  of  God  is  made  known  by

*  See  Chap.  V,  v.  12.


26  Testimonies  of

divers  operations.  Search  the  scriptures,  and  labor  to  get
an  understanding.  God  is  merciful,  and  will  give  to  those
who  ask."  She  further  said,  "  I  have  taken  up  my  cross
against  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil;  I  have  suffered
many  things  for  my  faith;  and  you  must  do  so  too,  if  you
mean  to  be  saved."

13.  Mary  Knapp,  who  had  already  set  out  to  obey  the
gospel,  came  also  to  see  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  in
prison,  and  brought  her  daughter  Hannah  with  her,  who
was  then  in  obstinate  unbelief.  Mother  said  to  Hannah,
"  Kneel  down,  you  haughty  creature,  and  confess  your  sins."
Then,  addressing  Mary,  she  said,  "Why  did  you  bring  your
daughter  here?  Take  her  away,  and  make  her  confess  her
sins."  And  as  they  turned  to  go  to  another  apartment,
Mother  said  to  Hannah,  "  You  shall  confess  your  sins,  and
be  a  believer."

14.  Notwithstanding  the  labors  that  were  made  with
Hannah,  she  continued  obstinate,  for  some  time,  and  told
her  mother  that  if  there  was  no  other  way  to  be  saved,  she
was  sure  of  going  to  hell;  for  she  never  could  join  them.
Soon  after  this,  on  hearing  some  persons  speak  of  Mother,
she  became  much  enraged.

15.  On  this  occasion  she  fell  under  immediate  judgment,
and  continued  so  till  she  was  convicted  of  her  sins  and  was
willing  to  confess  and  forsake  them,  and  obey  the  gospel.
Soon  after  that  she  went  to  see  Mother  Ann  again.  She
confessed  her  sins  to  Elder  Hocknell,  but  did  not  get  re-
leased from  the  judgment  she  felt  for  speaking  against
Mother.

16.  In  the  evening  they  were  all  called  to  kneel  down,
and  Hannah  among  the  rest.  While  on  her  knees  her  words
against  Mother  came  into  her  mind  with  such  weight  that
she  was  compelled  to  cry  out,  as  if  it  had  been  for  her  life,
and pray  that Mother  would forgive her. Upon which


Mother  Ann  Lee.  27

Mother  came  and  took  her  into  her  arms,  and  said,  "  God
forgive  you,  child!"  Instantly  her  judgment  was  taken
away  and  she  has  never  had  a  doubt  concerning  the  way  of
God  since.  Hannah  Knapp.

17.  Zadock  Wright,  of  Canterbury,  was,  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  revolution,  a  royalist,  and  conscientiously
refused  to  take  up  arms  against  the  King,  to  whom  he  had
sworn  allegiance.  He  accordingly  fled  to  Canada,  to  avoid
the  danger  to  which  his  political  principles  had  exposed  him;
but  was  afterward  taken  by  the  Americans,  while  attempting
to  move  his  family  to  Canada,  and  sent,  a  prisoner,  to
Albany.  After  being  retained  as  a  prisoner  at  large,  for
several  years,  his  situation  became  very  critical  and  alarm-
ing. His  estate  was  confiscated,  and  himself  thrown  into
prison,  at  Albany.

18.  This  happened  at  the  time  Mother  Ann  was  im-
prisoned in  the  same  place.  He  was,  at  that  time,  under
great  exercise  of  mind  concerning  the  work  of  God,  which
had  then  taken  place  at  New  Lebanon,  among  the  people  of
his  acquaintance.  This,  together  with  his  present  situation
and  temporal  difficulties,  brought  him  into  great  tribulation,
and  he  felt  very  anxious  to  see  Mother  Ann,  through  the
grates  of  the  prison,  which  she  perceived,  and  obtained  ad-
mittance for  him  into  her  apartment  of  the  prison.

19.  On  being  questioned,  he  informed  Mother  and  the
Elders  of  his  embarrassments.  Mother  looked  on  him  and
said,  "You  will  be  delivered."  Again  she  said,  "God  will
deliver  you."  Though,  at  that  time,  this  appeared  to
Zadock  impossible;  yet,  the  declaration  from  Mother  made
a  forcible  impression  upon  his  feelings.

20.  He  had  been,  from  principle,  much  opposed  to  the
American  Revolution.  But  Mother  Ann  taught  him  to  view
the  subject  in  a  different  light  from  what  he  had  done,  and
convinced  him  that  it  was  the  providential  work  of  God,  to


28  Testimonies  of

open  the  way  for  the  gospel.  He  then  clearly  saw  that  it
would  be  impossible  for  England  to  prevail  —  that  the  hand
of  God  was  in  the  revolution,  and  America  must  be  sepa-
rated from  the  British  Government,  and  become  a  land  of
liberty  for  the  gospel's  sake.

21.  Soon  after  this  he  parted  with  Mother,  and  after
struggling  through  many  difficulties,  for  more  than  a  year,
without  seeing  or  hearing  any  more  from  Mother  and  the
Elders,  he  was  at  length,  through  the  interposition  of  Divine
Providence,  released  from  his  embarrassments,  according  to
Mother's  words.

22.  Having  returned  to  his  family  in  the  State  of  Ver-
mont, in  peace,  he  was,  shortly  afterward,  visited  by  Israel
Chauncy  and  Ebenezer  Cooley,  and  embraced  the  testimony
of  the  gospel,  in  which  he  continued  faithful  to  the  end  of
his  days.


CHAPTER  VI.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

John  Deming,  Senior,  of  Hancock,  visited  the  Church  at
Watervliet  in  1780,  received  faith,  confessed  his  sins,  and
set  out  to  obey  the  gospel.  While  there  he  informed  Mother
Ann  that  he  was  poor,  and  in  debt,  and  knew  of  no  way  to
pay  his  creditors,  —  that  his  wife  had  been  sick  a  long
time,  —  that  it  had  cost  him  much  to  pay  the  physicians,
and  that  one  of  his  children,  then  five  years  old,  had,  some
months  previous,  swallowed  a  large  metal  button,  which
lodged  in  his  throat  and  had  baffled  all  the  skill  of  the  phy-
sician to  remove  it,  and  that  no  one  expected  the  child  to
live.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  29

2.  Mother  Ann  answered,  "  If  you  are  faithful  to  obey
the  gospel  God  will  bless  you  and  make  you  prosperous.
When  you  return  home,  put  your  hands  to  work  and  your
heart  to  God,  and  keep  your  family  to  work,  and  you  will  be
able  to  pay  your  debts,  and  none  of  your  creditors  shall
distress  you;  and,  instead  of  applying  to  physicians,  take
faith  in  the  power  of  God,  and  your  woman  shall  be  made
whole." But  she  said  nothing  about  his  child,  at  that  time.

3.  Again  she  said  to  him,  "  You  must  never  cut  your
nails,  nor  scour  your  buckles,  nor  trim  your  beard,  nor  do
any  such  thing  on  the  Sabbath,  unless  in  case  of  great  neces-
sity." After  tarrying  a  number  of  days,  Mother  came  to
him  with  a  smile,  and  said,  "  Now  you  must  go  home  and
take  care  of  your  sick  child."  By  this  John  perceived  that
Mother  had  not  forgotten  what  he  had  said  about  the  child.
He  returned  home  and  found  the  child  well ;  and  learned
that  the  button  was  discharged  from  his  throat  about  the
time  that  Mother  spoke  to  him.

4.  Having  now  full  faith  in  Mother's  words,  John  went
forth  in  obedience,  and  found  her  promises  fulfilled  in  a
most  remarkable  manner.  In  a  short  time  he  was  able  to
pay  all  his  debts,  and  Sarah,  his  woman,  soon  recovered  her
health  beyond  expectation.  His  children  were  mostly
gathered  to  the  faith,  and  became  faithful  and  eminently
useful  members  in  the  Church  at  Hancock,  Berkshire  Co.,
Mass.

5.  Hannah  Shapley,  from  New  Lebanon,  visited  the
Church  in  June,  1780,  and  through  the  operation  of  the
mighty  power  of  God  which  she  saw  there,  she  was  con-
vinced of  sin,  and  received  full  faith  in  the  testimony  of
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders.  She  confessed,  to  Mother,
that  she  had  not  lived  up  to  the  light  that  she  had  received.

6.  Upon  hearing  this,  one  of  her  companions  said  to  her,
"I  believe  you  are  a  child  of  God." Mother  replied,  "  Do


jo  Testimonies  of

not  daub  her  with  untempered  mortar;  she  has  the  right
work  upon  her."  Then,  turning  to  Hannah,  she  said,  "  You
must  begin  at  the  top  twigs,  and  crop  them  off,  and  continue
cropping  until  you  come  at  the  root,  and  then  you  must  dig
that  up,  that  it  may  never  grow  again."

7.  In  obedience  to  Mother's  words  she  began,  by  honestly
confessing  her  sins,  Hannah,  being  at  that  time  in  a  weakly
state  of  body,  Mother  said  to  her,  "  If  you  are  faithful  to
take  up  your  cross  against  the  flesh,  you  will  be  healed,  both
soul  and  body."  Accordingly  Hannah  was  faithful,  and
Mother's  words  came  to  pass.

8.  Thankful  Barce  visited  the  Church  about  the  same
time.  Mother  Ann  asked  her  if  she  was  sick  of  sin  ?  She
answered,  that  she  thought  she  was.  Said  Mother,  "  Tell
me  what  you  call  sin,  that  you  may  be  instructed;  for  the
way  to  Heaven  is  to  leave  the  flesh  behind,  and  be  married
to  Christ."

9.  Asa  Allen,  having  heard  many  strange  reports  of
Mother  and  the  Elders,  (for  common  defamation  had  already
branded  them  with  witchcraft  and  all  manner  of  evil,)  he
was  determined  to  go  and  see,  hear,  and  judge  for  himself.
Accordingly,  while  they  were  at  Stafford,  in  October,  1782,
he  went  to  see  them,  and  had  some  conversation  with  them,
and  then  returned  home.  But  not  feeling  satisfied,  he  went
again,  the  next  day.  When  he  arrived,  the  door  was  stand-
ing open  and  he  saw  them  arise  from  the  table,  and  kneel
down  with  thankfulness  to  God  for  His  mercies.

10.  After  they  arose  from  their  knees,  Mother  Ann  turned
to  Asa,  and  said,  "  Man,  thy  heart  feels  as  hard  to  me  as  the
nether  millstone  ;  we  are  of  that  Community  who  worship
God  in  the  spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no
confidence  in  the  flesh.  And  we  can  truly  testify  to  all
souls,  that  God  has  laid  a  sure  foundation  of  an  everlasting
kingdom  of righteousness  and  peace  which  never  can  be


Mother  Ann  Lee.  31

moved,  nor  shaken;  and  he  that  is  to  rule  is  Christ  ;  and  of
the  increase  of  his  government  and  kingdom  there  shall  be
no  end."

11.  By  this  time  Asa  was  fully  convinced  that  what  he
had  heard  was  the  word  of  God  to  him,  and  was  desirous
to  know  how  he  could  find  his  relation  to  the  kingdom  of
Christ  now  made  manifest.  He  was  answered  in  these  words  :
"  The  first  offering  that  God  will  accept  of  a  sinner  is,  to
make  a  full  confession  of  all  his  sins,  and  forsake  them  for-
ever." Asa  readily  complied,  and  confessed  his  sins,  and  set
out  to  obey  the  gospel.

12.  Mother  Ann  again  said  to  Asa,  "Those  who  through
faith  and  obedience  find  a  just  relation  to  Christ,  thus  re-
vealed, will,  of  all  souls,  be  the  most  blest.  I  see  it,  I  know
it  ;  and  God  will  pour  His  blessings  upon  them  like  showers
of  rain  from  Heaven."

13.  Abel  Allen  first  saw  Mother  Ann  at  Harvard.  She
inquired  of  him  concerning  his  relations,  and  afterward
spoke  to  him  as  follows  :  ''  Go  home,  cry  to  God,  and  put
your  things  in  order,  and  then  visit  your  relations;  for  you
may  be  the  instrument  of  bringing  them  all  into  the  faith.'
Just  as  he  was  taking  his  leave  of  her  there  came  three  men
who  informed  the  Church  that  they  were  sent  by  a  mob  of
three  thousand  men,  to  warn  them  to  leave  the  town  im-
mediately ;  otherwise  they  would  come  and  drive  them  out.

14.  It  was  then  evening,  Abel,  however,  started  for  home,
and  proceeded  three  miles  to  a  Believer's  house  where  he
put  up  for  the  night.  Here  his  mind  was  filled  with  doubts
concerning  the  way  of  God.  Soon  after,  Mother  Ann  and
the  Elders  came  in,  having  fled  from  their  persecutors.
Joseph  Meacham,  having  been  a  journey,  was  at  this  time
returning  to  Harvard  ;  but  feeling  a  particular  impression
on  his  mind,  he  turned  directly  out  of  his  road  and  came  to
the  house  where  they  had  retreated.


$2  Testimonies  of

15.  Abel's  doubts  and  darkness  still  increasing  upon  him
Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room  with  a  lighted  candle  in  her
hand,  and  walked  around  the  room.  At  which  Abel  drew
back  into  the  dark,  to  keep  out  of  sight.  Just  at  this  time
Joseph  came  into  the  room,  and  Mother  asked  him,  "  Joseph,
how  came  you  here  to-night?"  "  I  had  a  gift  to  come,"  said
Joseph. "So  you  had,"  said  Mother.

16.  But,  as  Mother  continued  walking  the  floor,  Abel  was
watching  and  judging,  through  a  spirit  of  unbelief.  At
length,  she  turned  to  the  Elders,  and  asked,  "  Did  you  ever
see  any  uncleanness  in  me?"  They  answered,  "Nay."
Mother  then  turned  to  Abel  and  said,  "  I  would  not  give
way  to  unbelief;  it  is  a  damning  sin."

17.  These  words  were  spoken  with  such  power  of  God
that  all  Abel's  darkness,  doubts  and  unbelief,  were  instantly
banished  from  his  mind;  and  from  that  day,  he  testified  he
never  had  the  smallest  doubt  concerning  the  way  of  God.
He  returned  home,  as  Mother  directed  him,  and  visited  his
relations  in  Tyringham,  who  all  received  faith  in  the  gospel,
and  all  continued  in  the  faith  to  the  end  of  their  days.

18.  Lot  Pease  made  his  first  visit  to  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders,  in  the  autumn  of  1781,  while  they  were  at  Harvard.
The  morning  after  his  arrival,  Mother  questioned  him  con-
cerning his  kindred.  He  told  her  that  his  oldest  brother —
Peter,  went  to  sea,  came  home  sick,  and  died  in  the  year
1755.  Not  then  recollecting  that  he  had  a  brother  older
than  Peter,  named  Samuel,  who  died  in  the  twenty-second
year  of  his  age,  he  did  not  mention  him  to  Mother.

19.  The  next  morning  Mother  came  to  him  and  said.
"  You  did  not  tell  me  right  about  your  brothers.  I  saw
your  brother  Samuel  come  to  judgment  last  night."  As
Mother  spoke,  he  instantly  recollected  his  brother  Samuel.
"  Now,"  said  Mother,  "you  must  go  home  and  tell  your
father  that  Samuel  has  come  to  judgment  with  you;  and  tell


Mother  Ann  Lee.  33

him  that  it  will  go  ill  with  him  if  he  does  not  repent."  Lot
went  home,  and  delivered  the  message  as  Mother  directed,
which  filled  the  old  man  with  great  consternation.

20.  Samuel  Fitch  was  among  the  first  who  visited  Mother
Ann  and  the  Elders  at  Water vliet.  He  arrived  in  the  even-
ing, and  tarried  over  night.  In  the  morning  Mother  came
into  the  room  and  sat  down  with  him,  and  related  to  him  the
manner  in  which  the  spirit  of  God  wrought  upon  her,  in  the
first  of  her  faith.  She  continued  her  discourse  several  hours
and  related  many  remarkable  dealings  and  manifestations  of
God  to  her  from  time  to  time.

21.  Among  many  other  visions  which  she  related,  she  said,
"  I  saw,  by  revelation,  the  loss  of  all  mankind,  not  only  the
present  generation,  but  the  generations  of  past  ages;  and  I
saw  them,  as  it  were,  clothed  with  blackness  and  darkness,
many  of  whom  I  knew.  I  saw  my  own  natural  mother  in
the  same  condition,  and  when  I  saw  her,  I  cried  to  God;  for
I  had  thought  that  my  mother  was  a  good  woman,  if  there
were  any  good  upon  earth.

22.  She  also  said,  "I  have  seen  souls  in  the  world  of
spirits  who  had  wandered  in  the  regions  of  darkness,  in  such
agony  and  distress,  that,  to  my  vision,  they  had  worn  gutters
in  their  cheeks  with  their  tears  in  mourning  and  weeping;
and  when  the  gospel  was  offered  to  them  they  were  so  hun-
gry for  it,  they  came,  as  it  were,  with  wide-open  mouths  to
receive  it.  I  have  seen  vast  numbers  of  the  dead  rise  and
come  to  judgment,  and  receive  the  gospel,  and  begin  their
travel  in  the  regeneration."

23.  She  mentioned  the  names  of  some  whom  she  had  seen
rise  from  the  dead,  and  among  others,  a  number  of  Samuel's
relations  and  acquaintances,  who  had  been  dead,  some  of
them,  many  years.  She  further  said,  "  I  have  seen  the  poor
negroes,  who  are  so  much  despised,  redeemed  from  their  loss,
with  crowns  on  their  heads."

5


34  Testimonies  of

24.  These,  and  many  other  things  which  Samuel  heard
and  saw,  convinced  him,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  Mother  Ann,
and  those  with  her,  had  the  power  and  revelation  of  God.
He  confessed  his  sins,  and  received  great  power  and  gifts  of
God,  was  much  with  Mother  and  the  Elders,  and  was  a
faithful  and  powerful  laborer  in  the  vineyard  of  Christ,  for
many  years.


CHAPTER  VII.


SKETCHES  OF  MOTHER  ANN  S  EXPERIENCE  AND  SUFFER-
INGS IN  ENGLAND,  AS  RELATED,  AT  DIFFERENT  TIMES,
BY HERSELF.

i.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  in  the  course  of  their  labors
with  the  Believers,  occasionally  related  some  of  their  own
experience  and  sufferings  in  the  early  seasons  of  their  faith.
Mother's  experience  in  particular  as  it  evinced  her  indefati-
gable zeal,  and  invincible  fortitude  of  soul,  was  not  only
very  interesting  but  very  instructive  to  those  who  had  but
just  set  out  in  the  same  faith,  and  had  a  great  effect  in  in-
citing them  to  zeal  and  faithfulness  in  the  way  of  God.

2.  Soon  after  the  gospel  opened  at  Watervliet  in  17S0,  in
the  presence  of  a  number  of  the  young  Believers,  Mother
related  some  of  her  experience  as  follows:  "  I  love  the  day
when  I  first  received  the  gospel ;  I  call  it  my  birthday.  I
cried  to  God  three  days  and  nights  without  intermission,  J
that  He  would  give  me  true  desires."

3.  "  I  was  sometimes  under  such  sufferings  and  tribulation
that  I  could  not  rest  in  my  bed  anights;  but  had  to  get  up
and  walk  the  floor.  I  feared  to  go  to  sleep,  lest  I  should
awaken  to  find  myself  suffering  the  just  consequences  of
violation  of  God's  laws. When  I  felt  my  eyes  closing  with


Mother  Ann  Lee.  35

sleep  I  used  to  pull  them  open  with  my  fingers,  and  say
within  myself,  I  had  better  open  my  eyes  here  than  in  hell."

4.  "  I  labored  to  feel  a  sense  of  the  sufferings  and  tor-
ments of  hell,  that  I  might  keep  my  soul  continually  awake
to  God.  I  felt  such  a  sense  of  my  sins  that  I  was  willing  to
confess  them  before  the  whole  world.  I  confessed  my  sins
to  my  Elders,  one  by  one,  and  repented  of  them  in  the
same  manner.  When  my  Elders  reproved  me,  I  felt  de-
termined not  to  be  reproved  twice  for  one  thing,  but  to  la-
bor to  overcome  the  evil  for  myself."

5.  "  I  had  not  been  in  the  Church  more  than  six  months
before  it  was  made  known  to  me,  by  the  revelation  of  God,
that  He  would  support  me  through  all  my  trials,  and  estab-
lish me  an  Elder  in  the  Church.  The  man  to  whom  I  was
married,  was  very  kind,  according  to  nature;  he  would  have
been  willing  to  pass  through  a  flaming  fire  for  my  sake,  if  I
would  but  live  in  the  flesh  with  him,  which  I  refused  to  do."

Hannah  Cogswell.

6.  Just  before  Mother  Ann  was  imprisoned  in  Albany,
many  of  the  Believers  being  assembled  together  at  Water-
vliet,  were  under  considerable  tribulation,  because  it  was
expected  that  Mother  and  the  Elders  would  soon  be  driven
away  from  that  place  by  the  wicked.  Mother  came  into  the
room,  and,  with  tears  running  from  her  eyes,  said,  "  The
wicked  are  plotting  against  us;  they  mean  to  drive  us  away
from  this  place,  and  it  is  unknown  to  me  whether  I  shall
ever  see  you  again  in  this  world."

7.  When  I  set  out  to  serve  God,  I  served  Him  day  and
night,  and  cried  to  God,  day  and  night,  for  deliverance  from  \
all  sin.  I  did  not  receive  a  gift  of  God  and  then  go  away
and  think  it  was  sufficient,  without  traveling  any  further;
but  I  stood  faithful,  day  and  night,  warring  against  all  sin,
and  crying  to  God  for  deliverance  from  the  very  nature  of
sin. And  can  you  expect  to  find  power  over  sin  without


36  Testimonies  of

the  same  labor  and  travel  of  soul  ?  "  The  people  were  all
filled  with  the  gift  of  God  from  Mother,  and  were  sent  away
with  a  blessing.  Mehetable  Farrington.

8.  At  Harvard,  in  1781,  in  conversation  with  Sarah
Barker,  of  New  Lebanon,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  Soon  after  I
sat  out  in  the  way  of  God,  I  labored  anights,  in  the  works  of
God.  Sometimes  I  labored  all  night  crying  to  God  for  my
own  redemption.  Sometimes  I  went  to  bed  and  slept,  but,
in  the  morning  I  could  not  feel  that  sense  of  the  work  of
God  that  I  did  before  I  slept. "

9.  This  brought  me  into  great  tribulation,  then  I  cried  to'
God,  and  promised  Him  that  if  He  would  give  me  the  same
sense  I  had  before  I  slept,  I  would  labor  all  night.  This  I
did  many  nights,  and,  in  the  day  time  I  put  my  hands  to
work,  and  my  heart  to  God;  and  when  I  felt  weary,  and
need  of  rest,  I  labored  for  the  power  of  God,  and  the  re-  i
freshing  operations  of  the  power  of  God  would  release  me,
so  that  I  would  feel  able  to  go  again  to  my  work."

10.  "Many  times  when  I  was  about  my  work  I  felt  great
gifts  of  sorrow;  and  I  used  to  work  as  long  as  I  could  keep
it  concealed,  and  then  run  to  get  out  of  sight,  lest  some  one
should  pity  me  with  that  pity  which  God  did  not."

11.  Soon  after  the  gospel  began  to  open  at  New  Leba-
non, Hannah  Goodrich,  with  her  husband  —  Nathan  Good-
rich, went  to  Niskayuna,  received  faith  and  confessed  their
sins;  after  which  Mother  related  to  them  some  of  her  experi-
ence, as  follows:  "  When  I  set  out  to  obey  the  gospel,  I  cried
to  God  to  bring  my  sins  to  remembrance;  and  I  confessed
them,  one  by  one,  as  I  committed  them;  and  I  denied  my-
self of  every  gratification  of  a  carnal  nature;  of  every  thing
which  my  appetite  craved,  and  ate  and  drank  that  which
was  mean  and  poor,  that  my  soul  might  hunger  for  nothing
but  God."

12.  "I  often  rose  from  my  bed  in  the  night,  and  walked


Mother  Ann  Lee.  37

the  floor  in  my  stocking-feet,  for  fear  of  waking  up  the  peo-
ple. I  did  not  let  my  husband  know  my  troubles,  lest  I
should  stir  up  his  affections-;  and  I  was  careful  not  to  lay
any  temptations  before  him.  I  also  prayed  to  God,  that  no
man  might  suffer  in  hell  on  my  account."  v

13.  "Thus  I  labored  in  strong  cries  and  groans  to  God,;
day  and  night,  till  my  flesh  wasted  away  and  I  became  like:
a  skeleton,  and  a  kind  of  down  came  upon  my  skin,  and  my/
soul  broke  forth  to  God,  which  I  realized  with  the  greatest
precision.  Then  I  felt  unspeakable  joy  in  God,  and  my,-
flesh  came  upon  me  like  the  flesh  of  an  infant."

Hannah  Goodrich.

14.  At  Enfield,  to  Mary  Tiffany  and  others,  Mother  Ann
related  some  of  her  experience  as  follows:  "After  I  opened
my  mind,  and  set  out  in  my  travel,  I  received  great  power
of  God,  and  in  my  travel,  it  was  revealed  to  me  what  the  loss
of  man  was,  —  that  it  was  the  lusts  of  the  flesh."

15.  "  My  husband  was  opposed  to  me,  and  went  and  com-
plained of  me  to  the  Church  ;  the  Church  opposed  my  tes-
timony and  tried  to  persuade  me  to  give  it  up  ;  but  I  had
to  stand  the  test  against  my  husband,  my  relations,  and  the
Church;  and  I  soon  received  such  power  of  God  that  my
bed  would  rock  under  me;  and  my  husband  was  glad  to
leave  it."

16.  "In  my  travel  and  tribulation  my  sufferings  were  \
so  great  that  my  flesh  consumed  upon  my  bones,  and  bloody
sweat  pressed  through  the  pores  of  my  skin,  and  I  became
as  helpless  as  an  infant.  And  when  I  was  brought  through,  V
and  born  into  the  spiritual  kingdom,  I  was  like  an  infant
just  born  into  the  world  ;  they  see  colors  and  objects,  but
they  know  not  what  they  see  ;  and  so  it  was  with  me,
when  I  was  born  into  the  spiritual  world;  but,  before  I  was
twenty-four  hours  old,  I  saw,  and  knew  what  I  saw.  "

Mary  Tiffany.


38  Testimonies  of

17.  When  Nathan  Tiffany,  (then  a  young  Believer)  first
went  to  see  Mother  Ann,  she  spoke  to  him  concerning  her
manner  of  travel  in  the  first  of  her  faith.  She  said,  "  I
traveled  in  such  tribulation,  wringing  my  hands  and  crying
to  God,  that  the  blood  gushed  out  from  under  my  nails,  and
with  tears  flowing  down  my  cheeks  until  the  skin  cleaved
off;  and  you  are  not  going  to  find  redemption  any  cheaper
than  I,  according  to  your  place.''  Nathan  Tiffany.

18.  The  first  time  that  Daniel  Wood  went  to  see  Mother
Ann,  soon  after  she  was  released  from  prison,  he  related  to
her  the  conviction  he  had  been  under  for  fifteen  years  past,
respecting  the  flesh,  that  the  works  thereof  were  evil;  but
confessed  that  he  had  not  fully  lived  up  to  his  faith;  Mother
replied,  "  You  could  not  live  up  to  that  faith,  because  you
had  not  confessed  your  sins."

19.  She  then  related  some  of  her  own  experience,  as  fol-
lows :  "  Some  time  after  I  set  out  to  live  up  to  the  light  of
God  manifested  to  me,  through  James  and  Jane  Wardley,  I
fell  under  heavy  trials  and  tribulation  on  account  of  lodg-
ing with  my  husband  ;  and  as  I  looked  to  them  for  help
and  counsel,  I  opened  my  trials  to  Jane."  She  said,  "James
and  I  lodge  together;  but  we  do  not  touch  each  other  any
more  than  two  babes.  You  may  return  home  and  do  like-
wise."

20.  "  In  obedience  to  Jane,  I  went  to  bed  with  my  hus-
band ;  but  could  not  sleep  seemingly  any  more  than  if  I  had
been  in  a  bed  of  embers.  I  quitted  the  bed  in  great  tribu-
lation and  continued  laboring,  and  crying  to  God  for  the
space  of  twelve  days  and  nights,  to  know  how  the  creation
was  fallen,  and  how  the  restoration  should  take  place."

21.  "While  I  was  in  this  labor,  I  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  in
his  kingdom  and  glory.  He  revealed  to  me  the  depth  of
man's  loss,  what  it  was,  and  the  way  of  redemption.  Then
I  was  made  able  to  bear  an  open testimony  against  that  sin


Mother  Ann  Lee.  39

which  is  the  root  of  all  evil;  and  I  felt  the  power  of  God
flow  into  my  soul  like  a  fountain  of  living  water.  From
that  day  to  this,  I  have  taken  up  a  full  cross  against  the  dole-
ful works  of  the  flesh."  Daniel  Wood.


CHAPTER  VIII.


MOTHER  ANN  S  PERSECUTION  IN  ENGLAND,  AS  RELATED
BV  HERSELF,  AND  THOSE  WHO  CAME  WITH  HER  TO
AMERICA.

The  severe  persecutions  and  cruel  abuses  which  Mother
Ann  suffered  in  England,  in  consequence  of  her  faith  and
testimony,  were  occasionally  related  to  some  of  the  Believers
in  this  country,  during  their  intercourse  with  her  and  the
Elders,  and  others  who  came  with  her  from  England.  They
are  striking  evidences,  not  only  of  the  inveterate  hatred  and
malice  of  a  lost  world  against  every  increasing  manifestation
of  Divine  light,  but  also  of  Mother  Ann's  unexampled  con-
fidence and  resolution,  in  maintaining  her  testimony  against
all  opposition,  and  of  the  wonderful  interposition  of  Divine
Power  in  protecting  and  preserving  a  life,  which,  next  to  that
of  Jesus  Christ,  her  followers  believe,  was  the  most  valuable
and  important  of  any  that  ever  was  born  into  the  world.

2.  Soon  after  Mehetabel  Farrington  believed  the  gospel,
as  she  was  one  day  sitting  in  the  piazza  with  Mother  Ann
and  Mary  Hocknell,  and  several  others,  Mother  related  many
trials  and  persecutions  which  she  had  suffered  at  the  hands
of  the  wicked,  on  account  of  her  testimony.  Among  others
was  the  following  remarkable  account  of  her  imprisonment,
in  some  particular  apartment  of  the  stone  prison.

3.  "  They  put  me  into  the  stone  prison,  and  there  kept
me  fourteen  days,  where  I  could  not  straighten  myself. The


40  Testimonies  of

door  was  never  opened,  through  the  whole  time,  I  stayed
there  two  weeks,  and  had  nothing  to  eat  nor  drink,  except
what  I  sucked  through  a  pipestem,  that  was  put  through  the
keyhole  of  the  door  once  in  twenty-four  hours."

4.  After  I  had  been  there  awhile,  one  of  the  Believers
came  and  whispered  to  me  through  the  keyhole,  (for  he
durst  not  speak  a  loud  word  for  fear  of  being  heard,)  and
said,  "  Put  your  mouth  to  the  keyhole  and  I  will  give  you
drink.'"  "  I  did  so,  but  the  pipestem  was  so  big  that  he
could  not  get  it  through  the  keyhole,  so  I  got  no  drink  that
night.  The  next  night  he  came  again,  and  put  the  stem  of
a  pipe  through,  so  that  I  could  just  take  it  into  my  lips;  and
I  sucked  through  the  pipestem  till  I  felt  refreshed."

5.  Mehetabel  asked,  "What  could  they  give  Mother  that
would  have  much  nourishment?"  She  answered,  "It  was
wine  and  milk,  poured  into  the  bowl  of  the  pipe.  This  I
received  as  a  favor  of  God.  I  had  no  one  to  look  to  but
God,  for  help.  I  bore  testimony  against  their  sins,  and  told
them  of  their  wicked  lives,  which  was  the  reason  of  their
hating  me  so.  You  must  be  faithful,  and  they  will  hate  you
too;  for  wicked  men  will  always  hate  those  souls  who  take
up  their  cross  against. sin."

6.  "  But  I  was  released  in  God's  time.  When  their  ap-
pointed time  came,  they  let  me  out,  and  I  found  I  could
walk  off  spry  and  nimble,  and  felt  as  well  as  I  did  before.
So  they  did  not  get  their  design  accomplished;  for  they
meant  to  kill  me.  They  kept  me  there  four  days  longer  than
they  could  reasonably  expect  that  any  one  could  live  with-
out food."

7.  Mehetabel  asked  Mother  how  she  could  live  so?
Mother  answered,  "  When  my  joints  ached,  and  I  was  in  pain
all  over,  the  power  of  God  would  flow  upon  me  all  over,
from  head  to  foot,  and  make  me  feel  comfortable."

8.  A short time before Mother Ann set out on her


Mother  Ann  Lee. .  41

journey  through  some  of  the  eastern  states,  she  related  the
particulars  of  the  above-mentioned  imprisonment  to  some
others  of  the  Believers,  in  the  presence  of  Elder  James  and
Elder  Hocknell.  After  she  had  told  them  how  she  came
out  of  the  prison,  and  could  walk  spry  and  nimble,  Elder
Hocknell  testified  to  the  truth  of  what  Mother  had  related,
and  said  he  was  present,  adding  "  The  world  were  astonished
at  it,  and  said  it  must  be  a  supernatural  power  that  attended
her  ;  and  they  did  not  believe  it  was  right  to  confine  or
oppress  her."

9.  Elder  James  said,  "  I  was  young,  at  that  time,  and  had
but  little  acquaintance  with  Mother  Ann,  but  I  had  a  re-
markable feeling  for  her,  and  could  not  rest,  day  nor  night.
I  labored  to  know  if  I  had  not  a  duty  to  do.  At  length  I
thought  what  I  could  do.  So  I  went  and  bought  a  pint
flask  bottle,  which  I  could  carry  in  my  pocket ;  and  at  the
same  store  I  bought  some  wine,  and  carried  it  home.  About
milking  time  I  went  and  bought  a  half  pint  of  milk,  and  put
it  in  my  bottle.  I  then  considered  how  I  could  convey
the  wine  and  milk  to  Mother.  At  length  I  thought  of  a
pipe,  so  I  bought  one  and  put  it  into  my  hat."

10.  "  At  night,  after  the  people  were  asleep,  having  mixed
wine  with  the  milk,  I  went  to  the  prison  alone,  and  put  my
mouth  to  the  keyhole  and  whispered  to  Mother,  and  told  her
to  put  her  mouth  to  the  keyhole,  and  I  would  give  her  drink  ;
which  she  did  ;  but  the  pipestem  was  so  large  that  I  could
not  get  it  through.  I  durst  not  pare  my  pipestem  there,  for
fear  of  being  discovered,  so  I  returned  home,  very  heavy."

n.  "  The  next  day  I  went  to  a  store  and  bought  another
pipe,  which  was  a  yard  long  and  carried  it  home  in  the  but-
ton-holes of  my  coat.  The  next  night  I  went  to  bed,  and
waited  till  all  were  asleep  ;  I  then  arose,  and  went  to  the
prison  and  accomplished  my  design.  This  I  did  as  often  as
I  thought  I  could,  and  not  be  discovered  ;  and  I  know  that  I
6


42  Testimonies  of

received  a  blessing  of  God  in  so  doing.  But  no  one  knew  that
I  ever  went  to  the  prison."  Mehetabel  Partington.

12.  Shortly  after  Mother  Ann  was  released  from  Pough-
keepsie  jail,  Mehetabel  Farrington,  and  a  number  of  others
being  at  Watervliet,  Mother  related  to  them  some  of  her
sufferings,  through  persecution,  as  follows :  "  I  suffered
great  persecution  in  England  on  account  of  my  faith.  Some-
times the  power  of  God  operated  so  mightily  upon  me,  that
numbers  would  try  to  hold  me  still  ;  but,  the  more  they
tried  to  withstand  the  power  of  God,  the  more  I  was
operated  upon."

13.  "  One  of  my  brothers,  being  greatly  enraged,  said  he
was  determined  to  overcome  me.  So  he  brought  a  staff,
about  the  size  of  a  large  broom  handle  ;  and  came  to  me
while  I  was  sitting  in  my  chair,  and  singing  by  the  power  of
God.  He  spoke  to  me,  but  I  felt  no  liberty  to  answer.
'  Will  you  not  answer  me,'  said  he."

14.  "  He  then  beat  me  over  my  face  and  nose  with  his  staff
till  one  end  of  it  was  very  much  splintered.  But  I  sensibly
felt,  and  saw,  the  bright  rays  of  the  glory  of  God  pass  be-
tween my  face  and  his  staff,  which  shielded  off  the  blows,  so
that  I  did  but  just  feel  them.  He  continued  beating  till  he
was  so  far  spent  that  he  had  to  stop,  and  call  for  drink."

15.  "While  he  was  refreshing  himself  I  cried  to  God  for
His  healing  power.  He  then  turned  the  other  end  of  his
staff  and  began  to  beat  me  again.  While  he  continued
striking,  I  felt  my  breath  like  healing  balsam,  streaming
from  my  mouth  and  nose,  which  healed  me,  so  that  I  felt  no
harm  from  his  strokes  ;  but  he  was  out  of  breath,  like  one
who  had  been  running  a  race."*

16.  Elder  Hocknell  being  present,  said  "What  Mother
has  related,  is  the  truth. Her  brother,  in  beating  her,  wore

*  While  Mother  was  at  Stonington,  she  related  this  same  occurrence,  to  Phebe
Spencer  and  others.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  43

his  staff  until  it  was  not  more  than  so  long,''  extending  his
arm,  and  measuring  from  the  ends  of  his  fingers  to  his
elbow.

17.  At  another  time  Mehetabel  Farrington  being  at
Watervliet,  Mother  gave  her  the  following  information :
"  When  I  lived  in  England,  there  arose  a  great  mob  against
me,  and  determined  to  put  an  end  to  my  existence.  They
took  me  into  the  high  road,  and  ordered  me  to  advance.  In
submission  to  their  order  I  made  the  attempt;  but  was  soon
knocked  down  with  clubs;  and  after  I  got  up  and  began  to
walk,  I  was  kicked  every  few  steps,  nearly  two  miles.  I
then  felt  as  if  I  should  faint  with  thirst,  and  was  almost
ready  to  give  up  the  ghost,  by  reason  of  the  cruel  abuses
which  I  received  from  my  riotous  enemies. "

18.  "  While  I  was  suffering  by  the  merciless  mob,  not  one
friend  was  allowed  to  follow  me.  But  God  in  mercy  remem-
bered me,  and  sent  a  man  who  was  instrumental  in  my
deliverance.  A  certain  nobleman,  living  at  some  distance,
who  knew  nothing  of  what  was  passing,  was  remarkably
wrought  upon  in  his  mind,  and  urged  by  his  feelings  to  go ;
but  where,  or  for  what  cause,  he  did  not  know.  But  he
ordered  his  servant  to  fetch  his  horse,  immediately.  The
servant  went  in  haste,  but  the  anxiety  of  the  nobleman  was
so  great,  that  he  sent  a  messenger  after  his  servant,  to  hasten
him."

19.  "  He  then  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  as  hastily  as  if
it  had  been  to  save  his  own  life,  as  he  afterward  told  me;
but,  for  what  cause,  or  where  he  should  stop,  was  unknown
to  him,  till  he  came  to  a  large  concourse  of  people.  He
then  inquired  what  their  business  was.  On  being  informed,
he  rode  up  to  the  place  where  I  was,  and  commanded  the
mob  to  desist  their  abuse,  and  sharply  reproved  them  for
their  cruel  conduct,  and  ordered  them  to  disperse,  imme-
diately."


>


44  Testimonies  of

20.  "  He  then  inquired  if  I  had  any  friends  present;  and
told  me  if  I  had  not,  he  was  determined  to  take  care  of  me
himself.  Elder  Hocknell  appeared,  and  said  he  was  my
friend.  The  nobleman  gave  him  a  strict  charge  to  take  care
of  me.  Thus  God  made  use  of  this  nobleman,  though  out
of  his  sight,  to  do  God's  will."  "And  the  earth  opened  her
mouth  and  helped  the  woman."'

21.  Elder  Hocknell  was  present,  and  testified  to  the  truth
of  what  Mother  had  related  ;  and  also  said,  "  I  followed
Mother,  feeling  determined  to  follow  her,  amidst  the  crowd.
I  had  not  proceeded  far,  before  I  was  taken  and  thrown  into
a  bulge  place*  as  they  call  it.  With  much  difficulty  I  got
out,  and  went  to  a  fountain  of  water,  and  washed  myself ;
then  went  and  changed  my  garments,  and  pursued  after
Mother.  When  I  overtook  the  mob  they  beat  and  abused
me  very  much,  and  then  rolled  me  in  a  mud  slough  ;  and,
although  I  was  wounded,  and  my  head  in  a  gore  of  blood,
I  did  not  suffer  anger  to  rise  in  the  least  degree.  After  they
left  me,  a  poor  widow  came  and  bound  up  my  head  with  a
handkerchief.  I  washed  myself,  and  went  and  changed  my
garments  again,  and  went  again  in  search  after  Mother.
When  I  came  to  the  place  where  she  was,  the  nobleman  was
reproving  and  dispersing  the  mob.  According  to  the  noble-
man's orders,  I  took  good  care  of  Mother.  We  went  and
refreshed  ourselves,  and  returned  home  in  peace. "

22.  The  first  time  Abigail  Babbet  went  to  see  Mother
Ann,  she  was  at  David  Hammond's  in  Petersham,  Father
William  Lee,  and  Father  James  Whittaker  being  present,
Mother  related  to  her  some  of  her  sufferings  in  England  as
follows,  "  One  night  I  was  told,  by  a  friend,  that  there  was
a  mob  after  me.  As  the  inhabitants  were  very  thick,  I
knew  no  better  way  to  make  my  escape  than  to  run  to  a  man
whom  I  knew  to  be  my  friend,  and  who lived  but  a  few

*A  deep  vault  of  human  excrements.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  45

doors  from  me."  "So  I  disguised  myself,  by  putting  an
apron  over  my  head,  and  ran  to  his  house  as  quickly  as  I
could,  and  asked  him  if  he  could  hide  me  from  the  mob.
He  took  a  candle,  and  bade  me  follow  him.  I  followed
him  to  the  upper  loft  of  the  house  where  was  a  large  quan-
tity of  wool,  lying  under  the  roof.  He  pulled  out  several
fleeces,  and  bade  me  lie  down,  and  he  covered  me  with  the
wool,  and  I  lay  safe  and  comfortable."

22.  "  Soon  after  I  heard  the  mob  come  into  the  house,
and  inquire  for  me,  and  asked  to  search  the  house.  The
man  gave  them  liberty ;  and  they  came  into  the  loft  where
I  was,  and  looking  round  said,"  '  She  is  not  here,  there  is  noth-
ing here  hut  wool.'  "So  they  departed.  Soon  after,  my
friend  came  up,  and  told  me  that  my  enemies  were  gone.  I
then  went  down  and  rested  in  peace  that  night."

23.  At  another  time  I  was  accused  of  blasphemy.  My
accusers  told  me  that  my  tongue  must  be  bored  through
with  a  hot  iron ;  and  that  I  must  be  branded  on  the  cheek.
I  was  led  before  four  of  the  most  learned  ministers  of  those
parts.  They  asked  me  to  speak  in  other  tongues.  I  told
them  that  they  must  wait  for  God's  power  to  move  me;  for
it  was  by  the  operation  of  the  power  of  God  that  I  spoke  1
in  other  tongues."  "  Soon  after,  the  power  of  God  came
upon  me,  and  I  spoke  to  them  in  many  different  tongues,  of
the  wonderful  works  of  God.  These  men,  being  convinced
that  I  spoke  by  the  power  of  God,  told  the  people  not  to
hurt  me;  but  the  mob  were  not  satisfied;  their  rage  increased,
and  they  said  we  must  be  stoned  to  death."  "So  they  led
me,  Elder  William  Lee,  Elder  James  Whittaker,  Daniel
Whittaker,  and  James  Shepherd,  down  into  a  valley,  and  the
mob  brought  as  many  stones  as  two  men  could  carry,  and
placed  them  down  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  then  began  to
cast  them  at  us;  but  they  could  not  hit  any  of  us;  (except
Daniel,  who  received  a  slight  wound  on  one  of  his  temples;)


46  Testimonies  of

upon  which  they  fell  into  contention  among  themselves."
"  While  they  were  throwing  their  stones  I  felt  surrounded
by  the  presence  of  God,  and  my  soul  was  filled  with  love.  I
knew  they  could  not  kill  me,  because  my  work  was  not  done;
therefore  I  felt  joyful  and  comfortable,  while  my  enemies
felt  distress  and  confusion."

24.  "At  another  time  I  was  put  into  a  stone  prison  that  was
built  over  the  water.  In  this  prison  I  could  not  stretch  my-
self any  way."  "  At  another  time,  in  the  evening,  I  was  in-
formed, by  a  friend,  that  there  was  a  mob  after  me.  I  soon
ran  out  to  the  back  side  of  a  little  hill,  where  there  was  a
pond  covered  with  ice;  and  I  laid  myself  down  upon  the  ice,
and  remained  there  all  night,  in  great  peace  and  consolation,
and  did  not  take  cold."

25.  "  At  another  time  there  came  a  mob,  by  night,  and
dragged  me  out  of  the  house  by  my  feet,  till  they  tore  the
skin  off  my  face." (She  showed  the  scars.)

Abigail  Babbit.

26.  Mother  also  related  to  some  of  the  Believers  at  Har-
vard, that  she  was  once  taken  by  four  men,  one  of  whom
was  her  natural  brother ;  that  they  bound  her,  hand  and  foot,
and  tried  to  throw  her  out  of  a  high  loft  window,  but  the
power  of  God  protected  her  so  that  they  were  unable  to  ac-
complish their  designs."  Lydia  Kilbourn.

27.  At  Nathan  Kendall's,  in  Woburn,  in  the  spring  of
1783,  Eliphalet  Comstock  and  others  being  present,  Mother
Ann  said,  "  When  I  was  in  England,  there  was  a  great  mob
gathered  against  me  to  the  amount  of  several  hundreds.
They  brought  a  rope  to  bind  me,  but  the  power  of  God  was
so  great  upon  me  that  they  could  not  bind  me.  So  they
dragged  me  out,  and  put  me  into  a  cart,  and  drove  through  I
the  streets."  "  The  streets  and  lots  were  full  of  people,  who  \
threw  mud,  horse  dung,  and  all  manner  of  filthy  stuff  which
they  could  get,  into  my  face ; and  then carried  me  to  the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  47

court-house.  The  court  was  then  sitting,  and  they  brought  me
before  the  judges,  who  gave  me  liberty  to  speak  my  faith
without  being  molested  ;  and  I  did  not  spare  them."

Eliphalet  Comstock.

28.  In  addition  to  the  foregoing  particulars  of  Mother
Ann's  persecution,  Mary  Hocknell,  daughter  of  John  Hock-
nell,  who  lived  with  Mother  in  Manchester,  relates  that  they
were  frequently  disturbed  in  their  worship,  by  the  mob,  who
used  to  throw  stones  in  at  the  windows  fronting  the  street,
and  sometimes  break  nearly  every  pane  of  glass,  which  often
put  the  family  to  much  cost  and  trouble ;  yet,  through  the
protecting  power  of  God,  the  Believers  always  escaped
unhurt.

29.  Nathan  and  Eliphalet  Slosson  and  others  have  fre-
quently heard  Mother  and  the  Elders  with  her  speak  of  these
abuses  of  the  mob,  both  at  John  Lee's  and  John  Townley's;
and  that,  at  one  time,  when  Mother  was  at  John  Townley's
the  house  was  surrounded  by  a  mob  who  threw  stones  till
they  broke  every  pane  of  glass  in  the  house,  and  beat  in
many  of  the  casements;  yet  none  of  the  Believers  were  hurt.
The  next  morning  they  gathered  up  the  stones  which  had
been  thrown  into  the  house,  and  filled  a  cart  body  full.

30.  Mary  Hocknell  also  relates  the  following  particulars,
concerning  the  last  imprisonment  which  Mother  suffered  in
England.  It  seemed  that  the  wicked  had  forecast  their  de-
vices with  a  view  to  seize  Mother  Ann,  and  the  principal
members  of  the  society,  upon  the  Sabbath,  while  they  were
in  the  worship  of  God,  that  they  might  have  a  lawful  pre-
tense to  punish  them  for  a  breach  of  the  Sabbath.  For  this
purpose  a  number  of  Church  officers  and  spies  had  been
previously  placed  in  the  streets  as  watchmen  under  a  pre-
tense of  preventing  people  from  violating  the  Sabbath.
Mother,  being  forewarned  of  God,  had  sent  her  brother,
William,  out  of  town,  early  in  the  morning. The  Believers


48  Testimonies  of

assembled  and  began  their  worship,  which  was  attended  with
great  power  of  God,  and  much  shouting.  The  report  was
heard,  the  rumor  spread,  and  the  spirit  of  Anti-christ  was
aroused;  for  it  was  the  time  of  their  morning  service.  Several
of  these  Church  officers  came,  with  a  strong  party,  to  seize
the  offenders.

31.  Mother  Ann  and  her  little  family  were  worshiping
God  in  the  garret,  or  third  loft  of  the  house.  The  mob  sur-
rounded the  house,  burst  open  the  doors,  ascended  the
stairs  and  seized  all  in  the  house,  but  were  greatly  disap-
pointed at  not  finding  William  Lee.  Great  search  was  made
for  him,  but  in  vain.  Mary,  being  young,  was  closely  in-
terrogated and  threatened,  by  the  mob.  to  make  her  tell
where  Bill  Lee  was,  as  they  called  him;  but  she  refused  to
answer,  or  even  to  speak.  After  being  shamefully  abused
by  the  mob,  she  was  carried  before  the  Church  officers.
Here  she  was  again  closely  examined,  threatened,  coaxed,
flattered,  and  had  money  offered  to  her,  but  all  in  vain.  At
length  she  escaped  from  her  persecutors,  and  fled  to  John
Townley's  in  Canon  street.

32.  In  the  mean  time,  Mother  Ann  and  those  with  her,  |
were  conveyed  to  the  stone  prison,  where  they  continued
under  great  power  of  God,  to  sing  and  shout,  and  glorify
God  in  the  prison,  so  as  to  be  heard  at  a  great  distance.  In
the  night  Elder  James  Whittaker  visited  them,  and  carried
them  drink,  which  he  conveyed  to  them  through  the
keyhole.

^^.  The  next  morning  they  were  all  released,  excepting
Mother  Ann  and  John  Lee,  who  were  conveyed  from  thence
to  the  house  of  correction,  where  they  were  kept  imprisoned
several  weeks.  During  this  imprisonment  Mary  was  fre-
quently sent  to  carry  provisions  and  other  things  to  them.

34.  In  this  prison,  and  at  this  time,  Mother  Ann  received
great  revelations  of  God;  many  deep  and  important  myste-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  49

ries  were  there  revealed  to  her;  and  by  the  power  and  au-
thority of  the  Holy  Ghost,  she  was  there  commissioned  to
take  the  lead  of  the  society,  which,  until  then,  had  rested
with  James  and  Jane  Wardley.  Though  she  had  before  re-
ceived great  manifestations  of  God,  had  discovered  the  root
of  human  depravity,  had  taken  up  a  full  cross  against  the
carnal  gratifications  of  the  flesh,  and  testified  these  things  to
the  society,  many  of  whom,  through  her  testimony  and  influ-
ence, had  walked  in  the  same  faith;  yet  she  had  continued
to  yield  obedience  to  James  and  Jane  Wardley,  as  her  supe-
riors, and  was  eminently  useful  to  them  in  leading,  teaching,
strengthening  and  protecting  the  society.

36.  But  when  she  was  released  from  this  last  imprisonment,
she  took  Mary  Hockr^ell  with  her,  went  to  John  Townley's,
collected  the  society  together,  and  opened  her  revelations
with  the  most  astonishing  power  of  God.  Here  it  was  seen,
at  once,  that  the  candle  of  the  Lord  was  in  her  hand,  and
that  she  was  able,  by  the  light  thereof,  to  search  every  heart,
and  try  every  soul  among  them  From  this  time,  Mother
Ann  took  the  lead  of  the  society,  and  was  received  and  ac-
knowledged, by  her  followers,  as  the  first  pillar  of  God  upon
earth.


CHAPTER  IX.

MOTHER  ANN  CONVERSES  WITH  ELEAZER  GRANT  AND
OTHERS. —  SOME  FURTHER  PARTICULARS  OF  HER  PER-
SECUTION IN ENGLAND. MISSION AND VOVAGE TO

AMERICA, &C, &C.

When  Mother  Ann  was  at  John  Spiers'  at  New  Lebanon,
Eleazer  Grant,  and  Elisha  Gilbert,  Esqrs.,  and  Dr.  Averill,
came,  in  a  friendly  manner,  to  see  her. Mother  and  Elder
7


50  Testimonies  of

James  Whittaker  treated  them  with  great  kindness,  and  con-
versed with  them  several  hours.  They  told  Mother  that
they  had  understood  she  was  banished  from  England,  on
account  of  her  testimony.  Mother  and  Elder  James  made
answer  that  they  were  not  banished;  but  that  they  were
persecuted,  and  suffered  many  things  for  their  testimony,
both  by  mobs  and  imprisonments,  while  they  were  in  Eng-
land; but  that  for  more  than  two  years  before  they  left
England,  they  lived  in  almost  entire  peace.  They  also  said,
that  in  the  time  of  their  persecution,  some,  who  were
friendly,  advised  them  to  take  protection  under  the  King.
But  they  were  not  willing  to  do  that,  for  if  they  had,  they
should  have  lost  the  power  of  God,  as  George  Whitfield  did
by  so  doing.

3.  Mother  said,  "  When  Whitfield  first  set  out,  he  had
great  power  and  gifts  of  God.  I  was  one  of  his  hearers  in
England,  but  after  he  came  to  America  he  was  persecuted
for  his  testimony.  He  then  returned  to  England,  and  took
protection  under  the  King;  by  which  means  he  lost  the
power  of  God,  and  became  formal,  like  other  professors."

4.  Mother  and  the  Elders  also  said  that  there  were  a
number  of  great  men  who  were  foremost  in  persecuting
them,  who  fell  under  the  judgments  of  God  and  died,  sud-
denly. One  of  them  set  out  to  go  to  the  King,  in  order  to
get  a  license  to  banish  them  out  of  the  country;  but  he  died
on  his  way,  by  the  judgment  of  God,  and  fear  fell  upon  the
rest,  and  persecution  ceased  in  England.

5.  "After  these  things,"  said  Mother  Ann,  "we  left  our
native  land,  by  the  special  gift  of  God,  and  came  to  America
to  bring  the  gospel.  But  while  I  was  in  England,  I  knew,
by  the  revelation  of  God,  that  God  had  a  chosen  people  in
America;  and  I  saw  some  of  them  in  vision  while  I  was  in
England;  and  when  I  saw  them  in  America,  I  knew  them."
But  no  one  came  with  me  into  this  land  except  such  as  felt


Mother  Ann  Lee.  51

a  special  gift  in  their  own  souls;  for  they  were  greatly
wrought  upon  by  the  power  of  God,  and  spake  with  new
tongues  and  prophesied.  Some  could  not  speak  in  their  own
tongue,  for  a  number  of  days;  but  when  they  spoke,  they
spake  in  unknown  tongues,  and  prophesied."

6.  Mother  Ann  also  said,  "  Once,  while  I  was  in  England,
I  was  brought  before  four  of  the  greatest  ministers  in  those
parts.  They  professed  to  understand  the  languages  as  well
as  any  in  the  Kingdom,  and  I  was  moved  upon,  by  the  power
of  God,  to  speak  to  them  in  unknown  tongues  for  nearly  the
space  of  four  hours  They  said  that  I  spake  in  seventy-
two  different  tongues,  and  that  I  spoke  them  more  perfectly
than  any  in  their  knowledge,  were  able  to  do.  After  this
they  tried  to  persuade  me  to  teach  the  languages;  but  I  did
not  regard  their  flatteries."  Hannah  Cogswell.

7.  In  the  course  of  the  conversation,  among  other  things,
these  men  disputed  concerning  Mother  Ann's  having  any
knowledge  of  another  world.  To  which  she  replied,  "  I  see
the  heavenly  hosts;  I  hear  the  angels  sing,  and  converse  with
them  daily."  Sarah  Loo  mis.

8.  After  speaking  to  these  men  for  some  time,  in  great
kindness  and  charity,  Mother  took  Eleazer  Grant  by  the
hand,  and  said,  "  I  was  once  as  you  are  ;  I  had  feet,  but  they
walked  in  forbidden  paths  ;  I  had  hands,  but  they  handled
unclean  things ;  I  had  eyes,  but  they  saw  nothing  of  God
aright.  But  now  my  eyes  see,  my  ears  hear,  and  my  hands
handle  the  word  of  life."  These  men  went  away  apparently
greatly  satisfied  with  what  they  had  heard.

Hannah Goodrich

9.  At  Harvard,  in  conversation  with  some  of  the  Be-
lievers, Mother  Ann  said,  "  Before  I  came  from  England,
there  was  a  great  lord  came  to  see  me.  He  had  been  ac-
quainted with  me  from  my  childhood,  and  knew  that  I  was
poor  and  had  no  letter  learning. He  watched  me  in  every


52  Testimonies  of

movement,  for  1  had  the  power  of  God  upon  me,  and  spoke
with  other  tongues;  and  being  a  learned  man  he  understood
what  I  said,  and  was  thereby  convicted  that  I  had  the  power
of  God. '  Mary  Munroe.

10.  At  Nathan  Kendall's  in  Woburn,  Elder  James  related
the  following  vision  which  he  had  in  England  :  "  When  we
were  in  England,"  said  he,  "  some  of  us  had  to  go  twenty
miles,  to  meeting  ;  and  we  traveled  anights,  on  account  of
persecution.  One  Saturday  night,  while  on  our  journey,  we
sat  down  on  the  side  of  the  road  to  eat  some  victuals."
"  While  I  was  sitting  there  I  saw  a  vision  of  America,  and  I
saw  a  large  tree,  and  every  leaf  thereof  shone  with  such
brightness  as  made  it  appear  like  a  burning  torch,  represent-
ing the  Church  of  Christ  which  will  yet  be  established  in
this  land.  After  my  company  had  refreshed  themselves  they
traveled  on  and  led  me  a  considerable  distance  before  my
vision  ceased."  ElipJialet  Comstock.

1 1  In  Abigail  Babbit's  first  interview  with  Mother  Ann
she  related  the  following  particulars  :  "  It  was  revealed  to
me  that  I  must  come  over  to  New  England,  and  there  was  a
meeting  appointed  on  the  occasion  ;  and  there  were  so  many
gifts  in  confirmation  of  our  coming,  (such  as  prophecies,
revelations,  visions  and  dreams,)  that  some  could  hardly  wait
for  others  to  tell  their  gifts  ;  and  we  had  a  joyful  meeting
and  danced  till  morning."

12.  "  Then  I  sent  John  Hocknell  to  search  for  a  vessel  to
embark  in.  He  found  one  that  they  said  was  condemned.
I  told  him  that  '  God  would  not  condemn  it  when  we  were*^
in  it.'  When  we  were  on  the  water,  coming  over  to  this
country,  I  was  constrained  to  testify  against  the  wickedness
of  the  seamen,  for  which  they  threatened  to  throw  me  over-y
board  ;  but  I  did  not  fear  them,  for  my  trust  was  in  God,
therefore  they  were  not  suffered  to  touch  me  during  my
passage. "  Abigail  Babbit.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  53

13.  When  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Harvard,
some  time  in  the  month  of  September,  1781,  Abigail  Bishop
and  many  others  went  to  see  them.  While  they  were  there,
Mother  told  them  that  she  was  sent  to  this  country  by  the
revelation  of  God,  to  open  the  gospel  to  this  nation.  Then
turning  to  Father  James  Whittaker,  she  told  him  to  inform
the  people  about  their  passage  from  England  to  America.
Father  James  gave  them  the  following  information  :

14.  "  Before  we  embarked,  Mother  told  the  Captain  that  he
should  not  have  whereof  to  accuse  us,  except  it  were  con-
cerning the  law  of  our  God.  So  we  embarked,  and  while
we  were  on  our  passage,  we  went  forth  and  praised  God  in
songs  and  dances.  This  offended  the  Captain  to  such  a
degree  that  he  threatened  to  throw  us  overboard  if  we
attempted  to  go  forth  in  this  manner  again."  But  Mother
believed  that  it  was  better  to  hearken  to  God  rather  than
man.  "So  when  we  felt  a  gift  of  God,  we  went  forth  in  the
same  manner,  not  fearing  man,  but  trusting  in  God.  This
greatly  enraged  the  Captain,  and  he  attempted  to  put  his
threats  in  execution.  But  that  God  who  had  sent  us,  had
power  to  protect  those  who  had  trusted  in  Him,  and  this  He
did,  in  a  marvelous  manner.  It  was  in  the  time  of  a  storm.
The  vessel  sprung  aleak,  occasioned  by  the  starting  of  a
plank,  and  the  water  flowed  in  so  rapidly,  though  all  the
pumps  were  employed,  the  water  gained  upon  us  so  fast  that
the  Captain  was  greatly  alarmed,  and  turned  as  pale  as  a
corpse."

15.  "But  Mother  Ann  maintained  her  confidence  in
God,  and  said,  '  Captain,  be  of  good  cheer ;  there  shall  not
a  hair  of  our  heads  perish  ;  we  shall  all  arrive  safely  in
America.  I  was  just  now  sitting  by  the  mast,  and  I  saw  a
bright  angel  of  God  through  whom  I  received  this  promise.'
Soon  after  Mother  had  spoken  these  words,  there  came  a
great  wave  of  the  sea  and  struck the  vessel,  and the  plank


54  Testimonies  of

suddenly  closed to its  place,  and  we  were soon,  in  a  great
measure,  released  from  the  pumps."*

16.  "After  this  the  Captain  gave  us  liberty  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  our  own  consciences,  and  prom-
ised that  he  would  never  molest  us  again.  Ke  was  faith-
ful to  his  promise,  and  treated  us  with  kindness  and  respect,
during  the  remainder  of  our  passage."

17.  "We  have  since  been  informed  that  the  Captain  said
that  if  it  had  not  been  for  us,  he  should  have  been  sunk  in
the  sea,  and  never  reached  America  again ;  and  that  he
should  not  be  afraid  to  sail  through  Hell  Gate  with  us,  at
any  time."  Abigail  Bishop.


CHAPTER  X.

THE WICKED ALARMED AT THE SPREADING OF THE GOS-
PEL  MOTHER ANN AND THE ELDERS  IMPRISONED AT

ALBANY  —  MANY STIRRED UP TO INQUIRY, AND THE

WORK STILL INCREASES MOTHER SENT TO POUGH-

KEEPSIE JAIL, &C.

The  opening  of  the  gospel  in  America,  and  the  mighty
power  of  God  which  attended  the  subjects  of  it,  excited
great  alarm  among  the  enemies  of  the  cross.  The  spirit  of
Anti-christ  could  not  but  view,  with  fearful  apprehensions,
this  new  and  strange  religion,  attended  as  it  was,  with  such
extraordinary  and  unaccountable  operations,  and  embraced
with  such  enthusiastic  zeal,  by  so  many  who  had  been
anxiously  waiting  for  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Every
effort  that  Satan  could  devise  was  made  to  overthrow  the
work  in  its  infancy,  in  which  the  enmity  of  the  wicked  was
often  displayed  in  its  utmost  extent.

*  This  mav  appear  strange,  to  some, but  it was  viewed,  by  all  on  board,  as  a
miraculous  interposition  of  Divine  Providence.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  55

2.  As  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  was  a  testimony  of
peace,  it  gave  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ
to  take  advantage  of  the  state  of  war  in  which  the  country  was
then  involved,  and  to  represent  the  Believers  as  enemies  to
the  country.  This  charge,  through  the  instigation  of  design-
ing men,  was  made  a  pretext  for  many  abuses  which  the  Be-
lievers suffered.  But  the  real  ground  of  enmity  was  in  the
cross,  which  had  become  a  stumbling  stone  and  rock  of
offense  to  a  licentious  world.

3.  The  first  act  of  open  persecution  that  took  place,  after
the  testimony  was  received  in  America,  was  in  the  month  of
July,  1780.  As  many  people  from  New  Lebanon,  Hancock
and  other  places  resorted  to  Niskayuna  to  hear  the  testi-
mony, those  Believers  who  were  able,  found  it  necessary  to
take  provisions  for  their  support.  This  served  as  an  occa-
sion for  some  evil-minded  men  in  and  about  New  Lebanon,
to  accuse  these  innocent  people  of  being  enemies  to  the
country,  and  to  stir  up  those  in  authority  to  persecute
them.

4.  David  Darrow,  of  New  Lebanon,  became  the  first  vic-
tim of  their  enmity.  In  attempting  to  drive  a  number  of
sheep  to  Niskayuna  for  the  above-mentioned  purpose,  he
was  followed,  and  seized  by  Samuel  Jones,  Selah  Abbot,
Senior,  and  Jeremiah  Hubbard,  who  took  his  sheep  from
him,  and  carried  him  before  Matthew  Adgate,  who  had  been
a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  under  the  Royal  Government.

5.  Here  the  charge  of  treason  was  alleged  against  him  by
his  accusers;  but,  it  appears  that  Adgate  had  no  authority
to  try  such  causes,  and  therefore  David  was  sent  under
guard  to  Albany,  and  delivered  up  to  the  Committee  of
Safety,  to  be  tried  by  them.  Joseph  Meacham,  of  his  own
choice,  accompanied  David  to  Albany,  and  went  on  to  Nis-
kayuna and  informed  Mother  Ann  of  these  things.  Mother
sent  Elder  Hocknell,  with  Joseph,  back  to  Albany,  to  see  the


56  Testimonies  of

issue  of  this  trial; but  when  they  arrived,  they  were  also
called  to  an  examination  before  the  Committee.

6.  As  their  accusers  well  knew  it  to  be  contrary  to  the
faith  of  the  Believers  to  bear  arms  and  shed  human  blood,
they  flattered  themselves  with  the  hope  of  confirming  the
charge  of  treason,  by  taking  the  advantage  of  this  circum-
stance, and  the  minds  of  the  Committee  being  previously  im-
pressed, they  were  ready  to  exert  their  authority  according
to  their  discretion.  After  some  examination  the  Committee
required  them  to  promise  obedience  to  their  laws,  without
informing  them  what  those  laws  should  be.

7.  The  result  was  what  might  be  expected,  the  prisoners,
whose  faith  and  conscience  bound  them  to  obey  every  just
and  righteous  law,  without  any  external  observation,  could
not  promise  obedience  to  laws  which  were  yet  unknown,
and  which,  in  all  probability,  would  be  unjust,  and  oppres-
sive; consequently,  they  could  not  comply  with  the  de-
mand of  the  Committee;  they  were,  therefore,  committed  to
prison.

8.  But  the  imprisonment  of  David  Darrow,  Joseph
Meacham,  and  John  Hocknell  was  not  considered,  by  their
persecutors,  as  sufficient  to  put  a  stop  to  the  progress  of  the
testimony.  They  therefore  seized  next  upon  Hezekiah
Hammond,  and  Joel  Pratt,  both  of  whom  were  laborers  in
the  gospel,  and  whose  influence  in  circulating  the  testimony
was  dreaded;  these  men  were  also  imprisoned  with  the
others.

9.  But  this  was  not  enough,  an  officer  was  sent  to  take
Mother  Ann,  Elder  William  and  Elder  James,  and  convey
them  to  Albany.  Calvin  Harlow,  being  then  at  Watervliet,
obtained  Mother  Ann's  consent  to  go  to  prison  with  her.
She  also  took  Mary  Partington  with  her,  as  a  female  com-
panion. After  a  short  examination,  in  which  they  were
charged  of being  enemies  to  the  country,  and  yet,  without


Mother  Ann  Lee.  57

the  smallest  degree  of  evidence,  they  were  also  committed
to  prison.

10.  They  were  first  put  into  the  jail  of  the  Old  City  Hall,
but  after  a  few  days,  they  were  removed  to  a  prison  in  the
Old  Fort,  just  above  the  town,  where  those  who  were  called
tories,  and  other  prisoners  of  war  were  generally  confined.
Thus  were  all  the  le?ding  characters  of  the  work  imprisoned,
at  the  instigation  of  evil-minded  men  whose  enmity  against
the  testimony  of  the  gospel  led  to  the  wicked  design  of  sup-
pressing it  by  persecution.

11.  But  the  progress  of  the  gospel  was  not  to  be  arrested
by  these,  nor  any  other  means  which  its  enemies  could  de-
vise. The  Believers  were  still  zealous  in  assembling  to-
gether, and  supporting  the  testimony  at  all  hazards;  for  no
outward  opposition  could  dampen  the  zeal  of  a  people  who
had  been  awakened  by  the  resurrection  power  of  Christ,
and  who,  by  their  obedience  to  the  testimony,  had  been
made  partakers  of  the  power  of  salvation  from  all  sin.

12.  Their  enemies  were,  however,  still  determined  to  sup-
press the  growing  testimony.  Not  long  after  Mother  Ann
and  the  Elders  were  imprisoned,  Samuel  Johnson,  of  New
Lebanon,  was  seized,  at  Isaac  Harlow's,  in  public  meeting,
on  the  Sabbath  day,  while  on  his  knees  in  prayer,  and  was
dragged  out  of  meeting  by  the  forementioned  Samuel  Jones,
and  others,  and  after  a  mock  trial  before  Matthew  Adgate,
he  was  carried  to  Albany,  and  delivered  up  to  the  Commis-
sioners for  further  trial.

13.  Samuel  had  formerly  been  a  Presbyterian  preacher,
but  had  now  embraced  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  of
"  Christ' s  Second  Appearing. "  The  crime  with  which  he
was  charged,  was  saying  that  "  people  cannot  follow  Christ,
and  live  in  wars  and  fightings."  The  Commissioners  en-
deavored to  represent  to  him  the  danger  of  preaching  such
doctrines  among  the  people,  when the  country  was  in  such

8


58  Testimonies  of

imminent  danger  from  the  enemy.  Samuel  replied,  "  I  shall
speak  what  God  gives  me  to  speak,  and  I  have  spoken  no
more."

14.  They  then  said,  "  The  Elect  Lady  is  going  to  be  sent
to  the  British  army,  at  New  York,"  and  intimated  that  the
people  would  all  be  broken  up.  "  The  Elect  Lady  she  is,
indeed  and  in  truth,"  replied  Samuel,  "  but,  whether  she
sinks  or  swims  I  know  that  the  work  of  God,  and  this  tes-
timony, is  the  testimony  of  truth."

15.  He  then  informed  them  that  he  did  not  receive  his  testi-
mony against  war  from  the  "  Elect  Lady/'  nor  from  the
Church,  but,  in  a  night  vision,  which  wrought  so  powerfully
upon  his  mind,  as  to  convict  him,  fully,  that  people  cannot
follow  Christ,  and  live  in  wars  and  fightings.  He  also  in-
formed them  that  he  had  been  very  zealous  in  the  cause  of
the  country,  before  he  received  this  conviction,  but  knowing
the  truth  of  the  testimony,  he  could  proceed  no  further.

16.  They  then  said  they  would  not  suffer  such  doctrine
to  be  preached  among  the  people,  and  forbade  his  preach-
ing it.  Samuel  replied,  "  I  shall  speak  what  God  gives  me
to  speak,  for  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  obey  God  rather  than
mar,."  This  so  offended  them  that  they  appeared  almost
upon  the  point  of  condemning  him  to  be  executed,  as  a
traitor,  and  an  enemy  to  the  country,  when  Dr.  Stringer,  one
of  the  Committee,  declared  him  to  be  insane.  He  was
therefore  imprisoned  in  the  jail  of  the  Old  City  Hall.

17.  But  many  sensible  and  candid  men  expressed  their
displeasure  at  the  injustice  of  such  proceedings.  The  public
imprisonment  of  an  innocent  people,  for  no  other  cause,  in
reality,  than  their  religious  faith,  and  the  piercing  truth  of
their  testimony,  could  not  but  have  an  effect  most  power-
fully, upon  the  minds  of  honest  and  impartial  people,  and,
of  course,  drew  many  inquiring  minds  to  search  into  the
truth  of  these  things.


Mother  Ann  Lee,  59

18.  The  rumor  concerning  this  new  and  strange  religion,
was,  therefore,  far  more  rapid  and  extensive  in  its  circula-
tion than  it  probably  would  have  been,  had  their  persecutors
been  content  to  let  them  alone.  Man)-  came  to  see  the
prisoners,  and  after  having  heard  their  testimony  and  seen
the  wonderful  operations  of  the  power  of  God  among  them,
were  so  powerfully  wrought  upon  that  they  could  not  go
away  without  confessing  their  sins.

19.  By  these  means,  the  truth  prevailed  against  all  oppo-
sition, and  many  were  added  to  the  faith  in  a  short  time  ;
for  the  word  of  God,  which  could  not  be  bound,  was  often
preached  to  large  assemblies,  through  the  gates  of  the  pris-
ons; and  so  powerful  was  its  operation  upon  the  hearts  of
the  hearers,  that  open  confessions  of  sin  were  often  made,  in
presence  of  the  multitude.  Many  faithful  souls  dated  their
beginning  of  faith,  at  this  prison.

20.  Many  precious  gifts  of  God,  and  divine  lessons  of  in-
struction, and  numerous  heavenly  visions  were  seen,  felt,
and  received  in  this  prison.  The  Believers  without  were
also  allowed  the  privilege  of  communication  with  those  in
prison,  and  of  administering,  freely,  to  their  necessities;
so  that  in  the  midst  of  their  afflictions  they  were  blessed  of
God,  and  had  comfort  and  consolation  in  the  gospel.

21.  These  things  greatly  increased  the  rage  of  Mother
Ann's  persecutors;  for  they  viewed  her  as  the  grand  actress
in  these  movements,  therefore  it  was  against  her  their  malice
was  principally  directed.  Hence  they  were  very  urgent  to
banish  her  to  the  British  army,  which  then  lay  at  New  York.
The  committee,  however,  decided  on  sending  her  to  Pough-
keepsie,  accordingly,  about  the  middle  of  August,  she  was
taken  from  the  prison,  conveyed  on  board  of  a  sloop,  and  sent
down  to  Poughkeepsie,  and  imprisoned  in  the  jail  of  that
town.  Mary  Partington,  at  her  own  request,  was  permitted
to  accompany  her.


60  Testimonies  of

22.  During  Mother  Ann's  confinement  in  Poughkeepsie
jail,  she  was  generally  treated  with  kindness;  and  Mary,  who
was  not  considered  as  a  prisoner,  had  full  liberty  to  procure
necessaries  for  her  at  the  groceries.  But,  for  the  most  of
the  time,  she  was  under  great  sufferings  of  soul;  being
deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  work  before
her,  and  feeling  that  her  infant  spiritual  children  had  great
need  of  her  presence  and  protection,  her  soul  was  in  contin-
ual cries  to  God.

25.  Mother  Ann  was  visited  by  Elizur  Goodrich,  Samuel
Fitch,  and  a  number  of  others,  while  in  this  prison;  but,  as
it  was  a  time  of  much  tribulation,  she  did  not  feel  it  expedi-
ent for  many  to  visit  her  at  this  place,  nor  for  those  who  did
go,  to  make  much  tarry,  lest  the  presence  of  many  strangers
might  excite  alarm  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and
bring  on  further  persecution.  This  she  chose  to  avoid,
knowing  that  it  would  be  attended  with  no  honor  to  the  tes-
timony nor  be  any  benefit  to  the  people,  who,  at  that  time,
were  not  in  a  situation  to  bear  it.

24.  Elizur  Goodrich  visited  Mother  twice,  and,  by  him,
Lucy  Wright,  subsequently  called  "Mother  Lucy,"  sent  her,
as  a  present,  some  things  for  her  comfort  and  convenience.
Mother  Ann  gave  Elizur  much  good  instruction,  and  sent
him  away,  saying,  "  Go  home,  Elizur,  and  love  Lucy  as
Christ  loved  the  Church."  She  also  sent,  by  him,  some
counsel,  together  with  good  and  encouraging  words,  to  the
Elders,  in  prison  at  Albany.

25.  Elizur  returned  home,  and  then  went,  in  company  with
Lucy  Wright,  to  see  the  Elders.  When  he  delivered  his
message,  the  Elders  were  so  overpowered  with  joy  that  they
exclaimed,  "  How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  bring
glad  tidings  of  good  things  and  publish  peace!"  And  so
thankful  were  they  to  receive  a  message  from  Mother  Ann,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  6i

that  they  fell  on  their  knees,  and  even  bowed  down  with
their  faces  at  his  feet.

26.  Mother  Ann  was  also  visited  by  James  Boyd,  of
Poughkeepsie,  who,  by  his  repeated  visits  and  conversation
with  her,  gained  a  measure  of  faith  in  her  testimony,  and
was  solicitous  to  obtain  her  releasement  from  prison.  At
length,  by  the  assistance  of  Joseph  Ellis,  a  young  Believer
from  Dover,  who  became  responsible  for  her  appearance,
Mother  Ann  was  removed  from  jail  to  Boyd's  house,  after
having  been  confined  a  number  of  weeks.

27.  Here  she  was  treated  with  great  kindness,  and  fre-
quently testified  her  faith  to  those  who  came  to  see  her.
Mary  Hocknell,  who  had  been  left  at  Watervliet,  and  had
often  visited  Mother  Ann,  while  in  the  prison  at  Albany,
and  carried  provisions  and  other  necessaries  to  her  and  the
Elders,  now  went  down  to  Poughkeepsie  and  tarried  at
Boyd's  with  Mother  Ann,  during  the  remainder  of  her  im-
prisonment. James  Boyd,  and  Nancy  —  his  wife,  having
received  a  measure  of  faith,  confessed  their  sins  and  united
with  Mother  Ann,  who,  with  her  two  female  companions,
were  often  engaged  in  the  worship  of  God,  under  great
power,  and  operations  of  the  spirit.

28.  This  began  to  excite  opposition  among  some  of  the
lower  class  of  people  in  the  town  of  Poughkeepsie  —  for  the
devil  never  could  endure  the  worship  of  God  —  and  Mother
Ann's  power  and  testimony  always  offended  his  emissaries.
One  night,  in  particular,  a  number  of  the  baser  sort,  painted
and  habited  after  the  manner  of  Indians,  came  and  sur-
rounded the  house,  while  the  people  were  in  the  worship  of
God,  and  attempted  to  throw  papers  of  gunpowder,  through
the  windows  into  the  fire,  but,  failing  in  their  attempt,  and
being  discovered,  and  sharply  reproved  by  Mother  Ann  and
James  Boyd,  they  withdrew  for  that  time.  The  attempt  was
secretly  renewed  some  time  in  the  night,  and  a  large  paper


62  Testimonies  of

of  powder  thrown  in  at  the  top  of  the  chimney,  but,  fortu-
nately, it  bounded  from  the  hearth,  and  did  not  take  fire.
This  was  the  principal  opposition  that  was  manifested  against
Mother  Ann  while  she  was  in  Poughkeepsie.  But  none  in
the  town  embraced  the  testimony  except  James  Boyd  and
his  wife.

29.  Samuel  Johnson,  who  was  in  prison  at  the  Old  City
Hall,  in  Albany,  at  the  time  Mother  Ann  was  sent  down  the
river,  was  soon  after  released,  at  the  solicitation  of  his
brother — John  Johnson,  who,  being  in  unbelief,  pleaded  that
his  brother  Samuel  was  not  in  his  right  mind,  that  he  had
formerly  been  firmly  devoted  to  the  cause  of  his  country,
and  had  been  zealous  to  defend  her  liberties  by  force  of
arms,  and,  that  the  doctrine  he  had  since  preached,  and  for
which  he  was  imprisoned,  was  the  effect  of  his  insanity.
He  was  therefore  discharged,  after  ten  days'  imprisonment,
upon  his  brother's  becoming  responsible  that  he  should  leave
the  state.

30.  The  Elders,  and  those  who  were  left  in  prison  at  the
Old  Fort  in  Albany,  after  Mother  Ann's  departure,  suffered
considerably,  partly  from  the  persecuting  spirit  of  their
enemies,  who  endeavored  to  keep  the  Believers  from  visiting
them,  and  in  part  from  the  arrival  of  a  division  of  soldiers
to  be  quartered  in  the  Fort,  which  included  the  prison,  and
by  which  means  they  were  confined  to  very  limited  quarters.
By  these  means  access  to  the  prisoners  was  rendered  more
difficult,  and  their  situation  became  more  uncomfortable.

31.  Sometime  in  November  following,  David  Darrow  was
released  on  parole,  at  the  intercession  of  his  father-in-law,*
and  permitted  to  return  to  his  family  for  a  limited  time.
At  the  expiration  of  the  time  appointed  he  returned  to
Albany,  and  appeared  before  the  Commissioners  to  deliver
himself  up;  but  they  refused  to  receive  him  again  as  a  pris-

*  Jarvis  Mudge.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  63

oner,  or  to  have  any  thing  more  to  do  with  him.  He,  there-
fore, went  and  visited  the  prisoners,  and  then  returned  again
to  his  family.

32.  Prayers  were  now  incessantly  made  for  the  release-
ment  of  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders.  The  Commissioners
were  earnestly  entreated,  even  as  they  walked  the  streets,  to
grant  them  their  liberty.  Being  at  length  overcome  with
entreaties,  they  discharged  the  Elders,  and  those  imprisoned
with  them  in  Albany,  about  the  20th  of  December,  1780,
Avithout  any  formal  trial.  The  next  object  was  to  obtain
Mother  Ann's  discharge;  with  this  view  the  Elders  took  a
carriage,  and  went  down  to  Poughkeepsie,  to  see  Mother.
Elder  James  presented  himself  before  Governor  Clinton,
who,  at  that  time,  resided  in  Poughkeepsie,  and  on  his  knees,
besought  the  Governor's  assistance.  The  Governor  replied
that  he  would  assist  him  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power.  Elder
James  Whittaker  then  informed  him  of  their  imprisonment,
and  related,  circumstantially,  the  pretense  of  accusation,  and
manner  of  their  treatment  and  sufferings.  The  Governor
said  it  was  the  first  knowledge  he  had  received  of  the  matter;
that  he  did  not  know  there  was  such  a  woman  in  prison;
that  if  he  had  known  it  she  should  have  been  released  before,
and  immediately  gave  orders  for  her  releasement.  Having
obtained  Mother  Ann's  releasement,  the  Elders,  and  Breth-
ren who  accompanied  them,  took  her  and  her  two  compan-
ions,* and  returned  to  Watervliet,  about  the  last  of  Decem-
ber, 1780,  where  she  was  joyfully  received  by  all  her  faithful
children,  in  spiritual  relation,  after  an  absence  of  nearly  five
months.

33.  Thus  ended  the  only  imprisonment  that  ever  Mother
Ann  suffered  in  America  ;  an  imprisonment,  which,  though
intended  to  suppress  the  work  of  God  in  this  country,  was,
by  the  overruling  hand  of  Divine  Providence,  made  the  oc-

*  Mary  Partington  and  Marv  Hocknell.


64  Testimonies  of

casion  of  the  most  extensive  circulation  of  the  truth,  and  laid
a  foundation  for  the  greatest  ingathering  of  souls,  of  any
event  that  had  ever  yet  taken  place.  By  means  of  this  event,
the  sound  of  the  Gospel  trumpet,  and  the  fame  of  "  Christ's
Second  Appearing  "  extended  far  and  wide  in  this  country.


CHAPTER  XL

THE CHURCH VISITED AT WATERVLIET. THE GOSPEL  IN-
CREASES.  MOTHER ANN SETS OUT ON A  JOURNEY TO

THE EASTERN STATES. VISITS TUCCONOCK, ENFIELD

AND GRAFTON, AND ARRIVES AT HARVARD. THE  IN-
HABITANTS ALARMED  BY FALSE  REPORTS,  &C.

After  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  released  from
prison,  and  collected  again  at  Watervliet,  they  were  visited
by  great  numbers  of  people  from  various  parts  of  the  states
of  New  York,  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut.  Some  of
these  had  received  faith  at  the  prison  in  Albany,  and  others,
in  consequence  of  that  event,  came  to  see,  and  hear  the  tes-
timony of  a  people  who  had  been  persecuted  and  imprisoned,
for  Christ's  sake,  and  the  gospel;  and,  by  seeing  and  hearing
for  themselves,  they  received  faith  and  embraced  the
testimony.

2.  Great  labors  were  now  made,  and  great  power  of  God
manifested  in  planting,  nourishing,  and  building  up  the  faith
of  the  gospel,  in  purging  out  and  destroying  sin,  root  and
branch,  and  preparing  souls  for  the  kingdom  of  Heaven.  In
this  labor  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  now  greatly  as-
sisted by  a  number  of  leading  characters  who  had  embraced
the  testimony  and  been  faithful  from  the  beginning;  among
whom  were  Joseph  Meacham,  Calvin  Harlow,  Elizur  Good-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  65

rich,  Samuel  Fitch,  Israel  Chauncy,  Josiah  Cogswell, Heze-
kiah  Hammond,  and  others.

3.  Their  labors  continued  at  Watervliet  through  the  winter
and  spring  following  till  May.  During  this  time  the  increase
of  the  work  was  great  and  rapid.  The  Believers  continually
increased  in  light  and  zeal,  in  power  and  understanding,  signs
and  operations  of  the  spirit  in  various  manners  upon  the  mortal
body,  prophecies,  visions,  and  revelations  of  God  greatly
abounded ;  the  purifying  fire  of  the  gospel  searched  every
heart;  the  increasing  power  of  salvation,  and  the  enduring
substance  of  eternal  life,  daily  evinced,  in  every  faithful  souh
the  reality  of  the  latter  day  of  glory.

4.  In  May,  1781,  Mother  Ann  set  out  on  a  journey  to  visit
the  Believers  in  the  east;  this  journey  had  been  upon  her
mind  for  some  time.  She  had  seen  in  vision,  while  in  Eng-
land, a  place  in  this  country,  which  she  had  not  yet  found,
and  often  spoke  of  it.  Daniel  Wood,  of  Upton,  Massachu-
setts, had  believed,  the  preceding  winter,  and  had  opened
the  testimony  to  his  friends  and  neighbors,  some  of  whom
had  received  faith,  and  being  at  Watervliet,  in  the  spring,
with  his  sister  —  Margaret  Leland,  Mother  Ann  sent  him
home  to  prepare  people  for  her  reception,  for  her  feelings
were  drawn  that  way.

5.  Mother  Ann  left  Watervliet  about  the  middle  of  May,
1781,  accompanied  by  Elder  William  Lee,  (Ann  Lee's
natural  brother)  Elder  James  Whittaker,  Samuel  Fitch,
Mary  Partington,  and  Margaret  Leland.  She  had,  the  week
before,  sent  Jonathan  Slosson  to  Benjamin  Osborn's,  Tuc-
conock  mountain*  with  orders  to  be  faithful,  and  wait  a
further  gift  of  God.  She  had  previously  determined  to
visit  that  place  in  her  journey,  but  did  not  inform  Jonathan
of  her  determination.  She,  however,  went  directly  there,
and  her  visit,  though  quite  unexpected,  was  joyfully  received.

*  Now  called  Mt.  Washington,  Berkshire  Co.,  Mass.


66  Testimonies  of

6.  Benjamin,  and  several  of  his  sons,  with  their  wives,
and  some  others  in  that  place,  and  its  vicinity,  had  already-
embraced  the  testimony.  On  hearing  of  Mother  Ann's  ar-
rival, the  Believers  in  the  neighborhood,  also  from  Living-
ston's Manor,  and  other  places  around,  gathered  here  to
hear  the  word  of  God.  Great  labors  were  made;  those  who
had  already  believed  were  greatly  strengthened  in  the  way
of  God,  and  a  number  of  others  added  to  the  faith.  On
the  Sabbath  following  a  large  concourse  of  the  world,  be-
sides many  Believers  attended.  Great  power  of  God,  with
much  manifestations  of  the  power  of  the  spirit  upon  the
physical  body  attended  the  testimony,  as  was  usual  where-
ever  Mother  Ann  ministered;  this  was  also  followed  by
much  opposition.  One  Doctor  Hollebert  attempted  to  dis-
pute with  the  Elders,  but  being  confounded  and  put  to  the
blush  by  Elder  James  Whittaker,  he  went  and  advised  the  mob
to  let  them  alone;  so  no  acts  of  violence  were  committed.

7.  After  tarrying  about  ten  days,  in  continual  labors  with
the  people,  Mother  Ann  and  her  company  took  their  leave,
and  proceeded  to  Enfield,  Connecticut,  and  arrived  at  the
home  of  David  Meacham*  about  the  first  of  June.  The
news  of  their  arrival  greatly  alarmed  the  inhabitants  of  the
town,  and  the  Believers  were  threatened  with  a  mob,  to  pre-
vent which  the  Selectmen  of  the  town  came  and  advised  the
Elders  to  leave  the  place.  Many,  however,  came  for  in-
formation, and  a  number  believed  and  confessed  their  sins;
this  greatly  enraged  their  ungodly  neighbors  around,  whose
darkness  and  unbelief,  and  consequent  opposition  to  the
cross,  led  them  to  brand  the  sacred  testimony  with  the  stigma
of  witchcraft,  and  delusion.  After  continuing  in  the  place
about  a  week  ministering  the  gospel,  and  strengthening  and
encouraging  those  by  whom  it  was  received,  Mother  Ann
and  the  Elders  proceeded  on  their  journey  unmolested.

*  Sixty-seven  miles  from  Tucconock.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  67

8.  The  next  place  they  visited  was  John  Maynor's,  in
Grafton.*  They  arrived  about  the  middle  of  the  week,  and
tarried  till  Saturday,  ministering  the  gospel  to  some  who
had  embraced  the  testimony  in  that  neighborhood;  on  Sat-
urday they  proceeded  to  Daniel  Wood's  in  Upton,  nearly
eight  miles  from  Grafton,  and  tarried  over  the  Sabbath.
On  Tuesday,  they  pursued  their  journey  toward  Harvard;
arrived  that  night  at  Zaccheus  Stephen's,  in  Still  River,
within  the  bounds  of  Harvard.  On  Wednesday  they  went
to  Isaac  Willard's  in  Harvard,  where  they  tarried  about  a
week.

9.  The  house  of  Isaac  Willard  was  in  sight  of,  and  not
more  than  half  a  mile  distant  from  the  Square  House,  so
called,  in  Harvard,  where  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  after-
ward took  up  their  residence,  While  at  Isaac  Willard's
Mother  Ann  saw  a  large  mob,  in  black,  which  filled  the  road
leading  to  the  Square  House,  and  which  seemed  opposed  to
her  going  there.  She  then  saw  two  angels,  who  made  their
way  through  the  mob,  by  which  she  perceived  that  God
would  open  the  way  for  her  to  go.

10.  After  preparations  were  made  for  the  reception  of
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  at  the  Square  House,  they  pro-
ceeded thither  and  took  up  their  residence.  Here  they  were
visited  from  almost  every  quarter  where  the  sound  of  the
testimony  had  extended,  and  continued  to  preach  the  gospel,
and  minister  the  power  of  eternal  life  and  salvation  to  all
who  were  willing  to  receive  it.  Here  Mother  found  the
place  and  the  people  which  had  been  shown  to  her  in  vision
while  in  England,  and  during  her  residence  in  this  place,  the
gospel  had  a  rapid  and  extensive  circulation.  She  visited
many  places  in  this  quarter  where  the  sound  of  the  gospel
had awakened serious inquiry,  and where numbers had

*  County  of  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  about  sixty  miles  from  Enfield  and  forty
south-west  from  Boston.


68  Testimonies  of

already  embraced  the  testimony,  particularly  Shirley,  Woburn,
Littleton  and  Petersham.

ii.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  passed  through  many
scenes  of  suffering  and  tribulation  in  their  labors  to  plant
the  gospel  and  nourish  and  strengthen  the  faith  of  Believers
in  these  places.  They  spared  no  pains  by  day  nor  night,
and  frequently  spent  whole  nights  in  continued  labors  teach-
ing and  instructing  the  people,  and  ministering  the  power  of
the  resurrection  to  lost  souls.  Great  power  of  God  attended
their  labors  wherever  they  went,  and  great  multitudes  fol-
lowed them  from  place  to  place,  to  hear  the  word  of  God
and  partake  of  the  power  of  the  resurrection  which  accom-
panied their  ministration.  These  things  greatly  alarmed  the
spirit  of  evil,  and  roused  the  anti-christian  world  around
them,  by  which  means  they  frequently  suffered  great  per-
secution and  were  sometimes  shamefully  and  cruelly  abused
in  their  persons.

12.  Though  the  spirit  of  opposition  did  not  suddenly  rise
to  so  high  a  pitch  of  malignity  as  was  afterward  manifest,
yet  it  began  to  discover  itself  immediately  after  Mother  Ann
arrived  in  Harvard.  As  many  continued  to  come,  through
honest  intentions  to  seek  after  the  truth,  so  many  came  also,
from  time  to  time  with  a  caviling  spirit,  to  search  after  evil,
and,  if  possible,  to  overthrow  that  which  was  good.  But
such  persons  often  went  away  greatly  abashed,  and  con-
founded. Small  parties  of  the  above  description  of  people
frequently  came,  but  were  often  greatly  confounded  at  the
mighty  operations  of  the  power  of  God  among  the  people.
At  one  time,  shortly  after  Mother  Ann's  arrival,  a  large  col-
lection of  people  assembled,  with  a  persecuting  spirit,  and  it
was  reported  that  some  of  them  brought  clubs,  but  they  did
not  show  them.  Their  pretense  was  to  attend  meeting,  and
hear  what  these  strange  people  had  to  say.

13.  Being  unwilling  to  admit  people  of  such  a  spirit  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  69

character  into  the  house,  (and  there  was  not  room  in  the
house  for  so  many)  Elder  James  Whittaker  desired  them  to
assemble  themselves  in  the  door  yard,  which  they  accord-
ingly did.  He  then  took  the  Bible  and  read  a  passage  of
scripture  to  them,  after  which  he  delivered  a  solemn  dis-
course, and  then  dismissed  the  assembly.  This  discourse,
and  manner  of  dismission  so  bound  their  feelings,  they  re-
tired without  offering  any  abuse.

14.  Sometime  in  the  latter  part  of  July  of  this  year  a  re-
port was  circulated  in  Harvard,  that  the  Shakers  had  come
there  with  seventy  wagons,  and  six  hundred  stand  of  arms  ;
that  they  were  enemies  to  the  country,  and  had  come  to  aid
the  British  in  the  war  against  America.  It  was  also  asserted
by  David  Whitney,  a  bitter  persecutor,  in  the  presence  of  a
number  of  people,  that  a  certain  man  had  told  him  that  he  had
seen  a  curious  chest  of  firearms  at  the  Square  House.  These
reports,  while  they  alarmed  the  weak  and  ignorant,  served  as
a  pretext  for  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  by  whom  they  were
fabricated,  to  vent  their  malignant  spleen,  and  urge  that  the
people  should  be  forcibly  driven  off  ;  while  those  of  more
candor  and  consideration  were  willing,  first,  to  inquire  into
the  matter,  and  ascertain  the  truth  of  such  vague  and  doubt-
ful reports,  before  they  proceeded  to  violent  measures.

15.  Ephraim  Davis,  of  Harvard,  Captain  of  militia,  hav-
ing collected  his  company,  informed  them  that  he  had  heard
such  and  such  reports  concerning  the  Shakers,  and  he  in-
tended to  go  and  see  whether  they  were  true  or  not,  and  if
they  were  true,  they  should  be  seen  to,  but,  if  false,  he
should  not  molest  them.  Accordingly  a  committee  was  ap-
pointed, with  Asa  Houghton  at  their  head,  to  go  and  search
into  these  matters.  Davis,  and  his  company,  with  a  number
of  others,  collected  from  different  towns,  attended  the  com-
mittee to  the  Square  House.  The  committee  requested  to
see  the  Elders,  and  stated  to  them  the  reports  that  were  in


70  Testimonies  of

circulation;  after  hearing  these  reports.  Elder  James  Whit-
taker  came  forward,  and  desired  to  speak  to  the  assembly,
to  which  they  consented.  Elder  James  said",  "  I  understand
that  you  have  heard  that  we  have  weapons  of  war  here,  and
are  apprehensive  that  we  are  enemies  to  the  country;  we  are
a  harmless,  inoffensive  people;  we  do  not  want  to  injure  any
man  either  in  person  or  property;  we  want  no  man's  silver
nor  gold,  but  only  their  souls  to  God;  this  is  all  we  want  of
any  one;  but  if  you  believe  those  reports,  you  may  have
free  liberty  to  search  the  house,  or  barn,  or  any  of  these
surrounding  buildings.

16.  This  speech  had  a  great  effect  on  the  candid  part  of
the  assembly;  but  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  after  finding  no
firearms,  nor  any  thing  else  to  warrant  such  reports,  were
still  unwilling  to  relinquish  their  design;  and  seeing  the
truth  afforded  no  pretext  to  arrest  the  people,  they  were
determined  to  proceed  upon  any  pretext  which  their  own
enmity  might  suggest,  or  even  without  any.  Accordingly,
Asa  Houghton,  in  the  name  of  the  committee,  ordered  them
to  be  gone  from  the  place  by  such  a  stated  day.  Elder
James  Whittaker  replied,  "  We  came  here  peaceably,  and
we  can  say,  as  was  said  of  St.  Paul,  we  dwell  in  our  own
hired  house."  After  considerable  parley,  about  sunset,  they
began  to  depart,  having  been  there  most  of  the  afternoon;
but,  through  the  gift  of  wisdom  exercised  toward  them,  they
had  not  power  to  commit  any  act  of  violence.

17.  But,  a  part  of  the  company  stayed  until  evening,  and
desired  to  hear  the  Elders  speak  their  faith.  Accordingly
Elder  James  spoke  to  them;  but,  in  the  midst  of  his  dis-
course, an  ungodly  ruffian  broke  in  upon  him;  but  he  was
soon  rebuked  by  Father  William  Lee,  who  said,  "  You  are
not  fair  to  break  in  upon  Brother  James;  you  ought  to  be
silent,  and  hear,  or  peaceably  withdraw."  This  put  the  man
to  silence,  and  Elder  James  continued  to  speak  of  the  neces-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  71

sity  of  confessing  and  leaving  off  sin,  and  closed  his  dis-
course with  these  words,  "  If  you  believe  and  obey  these
words  which  you  have  now  heard,  it  will  be  well  for  you;
but  if  you  disobey  them,  it  will  be  like  mountains  of  lead  to
sink  your  souls  into  misery."  Some  of  the  company  were
pricked  to  the  heart,  and  afterward  opened  their  minds,  and
embraced  the  testimony,  and  were  able  to  testify  concerning
these  things.

18.  Thus  the  work  of  God  prevailed  and  the  gospel  spread
against  all  opposition;  so  that  notwithstanding  all  the
mighty  exertions  of  the  beastly  power  of  Antichrist,  it  found
a  permanent  residence  in  the  hearts  of  many.  So  mighty  was
the  shaking  among  the  "  dry  bones  "  to  bring  bone  to  its  bone,
that  every  awakened  soul  felt  and  acknowledged  that  the
day  of  judgment  was  come.

19.  The  people  in  Harvard  were  mostly  poor,  and,  at  the
Square  House,  where  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  had  their
residence,  there  had  been  no  stores  of  provisions  laid  up,
and,  though  vast  numbers  of  people  came  from  various  parts
to  visit  them,  and  great  crowds  were  almost  daily  fed  there,
yet,  through  the  abounding  goodness  of  God,  they  were
never  known  to  lack  a  meal  of  victuals,  but  always  found
enough  to  satisfy  the  multitude,  which,  at  times,  seemed  al-
most miraculous.  But  Mother  Ann  felt  that  it  was  the  duty
of  Believers  to  provide  for  their  temporal  support  and  not
always  be  seemingly  idle  dependents  on  the  bountiful,  and,
apparently  miraculous  hand  of  Providence.  She  therefore
called  Jonathan  Slosson  to  her  room  one  day,  and  spoke  to
him  concerning  these  things;  and  reminded  him  of  the  small
quantity  of  provisions  they  had  possessed  to  entertain  so
many  people.  "We  are  fed  here,"  said  Mother  Ann,  "ap-
parently by  the  miracles  of  God;  a  great  many  people  come,
bringing  little  or  nothing  with  them  but  their  sins;  yet  they
are  fed,  and  have  a  plenty. I  know  it  is  by  the  miracles  of


72  Testimonies  of

God,  as  when  Christ  fed  the  multitude  with  a  few  loaves  and
little  fishes;  so  it  is  now,  but,  it  cannot  always  be  so."  She
then  asked  him  if  he  could  not  assist  them  in  devising  some
means  to  procure  bread  for  the  multitude.

20.  As  grain  was  scarce  in,  and  about  Harvard,  and  Jona-
than knew  it  to  be  plenty  in  Lebanon,  Hancock  and  Rich-
mond, he  offered  to  make  a  journey  thither,  to  which
Mother  Ann  agreed,  and  sent  him,  and  Reuben  Harrison,  as
messengers,  to  their  Brethren  in  the  west,  to  make  known  the
circumstances  of  the  little  flock  of  Christ  in  Harvard.  They
went,  and,  by  the  kindness  and  liberality  of  their  faithful
Brethren,  they  soon  obtained  a  good  supply  of  flour  and
cheese.  When  they  returned  to  Harvard  with  their  provis-
ions, Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  wept,  and  knelt  down  in
thankfulness  to  God,  for  such  a  manifestation  of  faith  and
liberality  in  His  people.  Mother  then  called  upon  the
young  Believers  to  see  what  kindness  and  liberality  had
been  displayed  by  the  western  Believers,  and  to  witness  the
faith  and  zeal  of  the  two  young  men  who  had  been  such  a
journey  for  their  sakes;  she  said  it  was  an  example  worthy
of  their  imitation  and  ought  to  awaken  them  to  thankfulness
and  gratitude.


CHAPTER  XII.

MOTHER ANN AND THE ELDERS  VISIT PETERSHAM. MEET-
ING at david Hammond's disturbed by a mob. —

MOTHER SHAMEFULLY AND CRUELLY ABUSED.

In  December,  1781,  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  made  a
journey  to  Petersham;*  they  arrived  at  Thomas  Shattuck's
late  in the  evening,  and  found  the  family  waiting  their  ar-

*  About  furty  miles  west,  from  Harvard.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  73

rival, —  Mother  said,  "It  is  good  to  watch,  and  you  should
always  watch."  Father  William  Lee  said,  "Ye  watched  for
ye  knew  not  the  hour  we  would  come."  They,  however,
proceeded  to  David  Hammond's  that  night.

2.  The  next  day,  being  Sabbath,  many  people  of  the
world,  came  in  to  attend  meeting.  Elder  James  Whittaker
preached  the  gospel  from  these  words,  "Cleanse  your  hands
ye  sinners,  and  purify  your  hearts  ye  double  minded;  be  af-
flicted, and  mourn  and  weep."*  He  spoke  with  great
power  and  energy  of  the  spirit,  and  urged  the  necessity  of
confessing  and  forsaking  their  sins.  "  What  is  cleansing
the  hands,"  said  he,  "but  confessing  sins  ?  "  "And  what  is
purifying  the  heart,  but  forsaking  them?  and  what  is  being
afflicted  and  mourning  and  weeping,  but  repenting  of  sin  ?"
He  continued  his  discourse  about  two  hours.

3.  This  being  the  first  visit  that  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders  made  in  Petersham  the  inhabitants  generally  mani-
fested a  desire  to  see  and  hear  for  themselves,  and  as  they
pretended  civility,  they  had  full  liberty.  Accordingly,  on
Monday  evening  there  came  a  considerable  number  of  civil
people,  also  a  company  of  lewd  fellows  from  the  middle
of  the  town,  who  styled  themselves  the  blackguard  com-
mittee.

4.  Being  all  assembled  together  Elder  James  Whittaker
came  and  gave  notice  that  all  who  had  come  with  an  honest
desire  to  get  information  might  walk  into  the  other  room.
Accordingly  the  more  civil  part  of  the  assembly  went  in,
leaving  the  forementioned  company  who  had  evidently  come
with  no  good  intentions.  Elder  James  took  a  Bible  and
read  to  the  assembly,  then  began  to  speak.  In  the  time  of
speaking  the  company  that  had  stayed  back  in  the  other
room,  began  to  crowd  in,  and  stretched  themselves  through
the  room,  from the door to the bed,  where  Mother  Ann

*.Tames  IV,  8th  and  9th.
IO


74  Testimonies  of

and  Elizabeth  Shattuck  were  sitting  together,  on the bed-
side, with  a  number  of  other  sisters  sitting  near  them.

5.  As  people  were  occasionally  coming  in,  and  the
assembly  generally  engaged  in  hearing  the  preacher,  this
mob  had  opportunity  to  arrange  themselves  through  the
assembly  without  being  much  noticed.  Instantly  a  cry  was
heard,  "  knock  out  the  lights."  The  lights  were  all  sud-
denly extinguished,  except  the  one  in  Elder  James'  hand  ;
and  immediately  a  passage  was  made  by  the  mob,  from  the
door  to  the  bed,  where  Mother  Ann  was  sitting.  At  this
instant  entered  three  ruffians  painted  black,  and  rushing
forward,  the  foremost  one  seized  hold  of  Mother,  and,  with
the  assistance  of  his  comrades,  attempted  to  drag  her  out,  but
Elizabeth  Shattuck  and  several  other  sisters  instantly
clinched  hold  of  her,  and  held  her,  and  Elizabeth  being  a
large,  heavy  woman,  and  the  passage  narrow,  the  ruffians
were  not  able  to  accomplish  their  purpose  ;  and  quitting
their  hold  they  suddenly  fled  out  of  the  house.

6.  In  this  struggle,  though  it  was  but  momentary,  they
tore  a  breadth  out  of  a  new  gown  which  Mother  had  on.
Their  wicked  design  being  now  fully  known,  Elder  James
advised  to  have  the  remainder  of  the  assembly  withdraw,  as
it  was  growing  late.  On  being  spoken  to,  they  left,  appa-
rently, in  a  peaceable  manner,  but  Mother,  in  the  spirit  of
prophecy,  said  the  wicked  would  come  again,  which  caused
some  labor  among  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  to  secure  her
from  their  cruel  hands.  However,  as  the  mob  had  with-
drawn and  all  danger  apparently  at  an  end,  the  neighboring
Believers  returned  home,  and  some  of  the  Brethren  who
accompanied  the  Elders,  went  with  them.  Those  who  re-
mained were  about  retiring  to  rest  when  Mother  discovered,
from  the  window,  that  her  cruel  persecutors  were  near,  and
made  some  attempts  to  conceal  herself.  The  house  was
again  assaulted  by  about  thirty  creatures  in human shape;


Mother  Ann  Lee.  75

the  doors  being  fastened,  were  burst open and  broke,  and
these  ruffians  entered.

7.  David  Hammond  was  immediately  knocked  down  and
cruelly  beaten;  Mary,  his  woman,  who  had  a  young  child  in
her  arms,  was  knocked  down,  and  received  several  severe
strokes  on  her  head  by  one  Thomas  Carter.  Elder  James
Whittaker  was  clinched  by  the  collar,  knocked  down  and
left  for  dead;  and  several  others  were  knocked  down.
Father  William  Lee  was  also  hurt,  and  all  who  stood  in
their  way  were  beaten  and  bruised  more  or  less.

8.  As  their  object  was  to  seize  Mother  Ann,  the  candles
had  been  previously  concealed  to  prevent  their  finding  her.
But  this  did  not  hinder  them,  they  seized  fire  brands,  and
searched  the  house,  and  at  length,  found  her  in  a  bedroom  ;
they  immediately  seized  her  by  the  feet,  and  inhumanly
dragged  her,  feet  foremost,  out  of  the  house,  and  threw  her
into  a  sleigh  with  as  little  ceremony  as  they  would  the  dead
carcase  of  a  beast,  and  drove  off,  committing,  at  the  same
time,  acts  of  inhumanity  and  indecency  which  even  savages
would  be  ashamed  of.

9.  In  the  struggle  with  these  inhuman  wretches,  she  lost
her  cap  and  handkerchief,  and  otherwise  had  her  clothes  torn
in  a  shameful  manner.  Their  pretense  was  to  find  out
whether  she  was  a  woman  or  not.  In  this  situation,  in  a  cold
winter's  night,  they  drove  nearly  three  miles  to  Samuel  Peck-
ham's  tavern,  near  Petersham  Meeting-house.  Father  Wil-
liam Lee  feeling  great  concern  for  Mother's  safety,  he  and
David  Hammond  followed  the  sleigh.  He  told  the  ruffians
that  she  was  his  sister  and  he  would  follow  her  ;  and,  attempt-
ing to  hold  on  to  the  hind  part  of  the  sleigh,  they  gave  him
many  blows  with  the  butts  of  their  sleigh  whips.  He  and
David  however  followed  them  to  the  forementioned  tavern.
Elder  James  Whittaker,  being  badly  wounded,  was  not  able
to  follow  them.


76  Testimonies  of  .

10.  It  appeared  that  Samuel  Peckham  was  a  Captain  of
militia,  and  had  previously  agreed  with  the  ruffians  who  seized
Mother,  to  give  them  as  much  rum  as  they  would  drink,  on
condition  that  they  would  bring  her  to  his  house.  After  they
arrived  Father  William  Lee  and  David  Hammond  remon-
strated against  the  ungodliness  and  brutality  of  their  be-
havior. David  presented  to  them  the  unlawfulness  of  such
conduct,  and  how  they  had  exposed  themselves  to  the  pen-
alties of  the  law.  Being  by  this  time  ashamed  of  their  con-
duct, and  fearful  of  the  consequences,  they  promised  to  re-
lease Mother  Ann  upon  condition  that  David  would  sign  an
obligation  not  to  prosecute  them  for  what  they  had  done.
Being  impelled  by  a  feeling  for  Mother's  safety,  he  re-
luctantly yielded  to  their  demands,  and  left  them  to  answer
at  the  bar  of  Divine  justice  concerning  a  species  of  conduct
for  which  they  were  unwilling  to  appear  before  an  earthly
tribunal.

n.  This  being  done,  they  released  Mother  Ann,  and  some
time  in  the  night  some  of  them  brought  her  and  those  with
her  back  to  David  Hammond's.  She  came  in  singing  for  joy
that  she  was  again  restored  to  her  children,  (meaning  her
spiritual  followers).  The  men  who  brought  her  back  ap-
peared to  be  greatly  ashamed  of  their  wicked  conduct,  and
confessed  that  they  had  abused  her  shamefully,  said  they
were  sorry  for  it,  and  desired  her  forgiveness.  Mother  Ann
replied,  "  I  can  freely  forgive  you,  I  hold  nothing  against
you,  and  I  pray  God  to  forgive  you  ;"  so  they  departed
peaceably.  After  their  departure  Mother  related  the  shame-
ful abuse  that  she  had  suffered  from  these  merciless  wretches,
and  said,  "  It  really  seemed  as  if  my  life  must  go  from  me,
when  they  dragged  me  out  of  my  room,  and  threw  me  into
the  sleigh  ;  besides  they  tore  my  handkerchief  from  my
neck,  my  cap  and  fillet  from  my  head,  and  even  tore  some
of  the  hair  out  of  my  head.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  77

12.  But  I  was  treated  kindly  at  the  tavern  where  they  car-
ried me.  The  tavern-keeper's  wife  kindly  nursed  and  helped
me  One  of  the  men  that  took  me  away  gave  me  his  hand-
kerchief to  wear  on  my  head,  and  another  gave  me  his  sur-
tout  to  wear  home.*  Elder  James  Whittaker,  who  had  been
prevented  from  following  Mother  by  reason  of  the  severe
wound  which  he  had  received,  informed  her  of  his  abuses.
His  face  was  greatly  swollen,  and  his  jaw  very  painful,  and
he  was  apprehensive  that  it  was  broken  ;  but,  said  he;  "  I  can
pray  for  them,''  and  kneeling  down,  he  cried,  "  Father,  for-
give them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."

13.  But  so  insidious  were  the  inhabitants  of  Petersham,
both  priests  and  people,  professors  and  profane,  that  it
seemed  as  if  nothing  was  too  bad  for  them  to  say  or  do
against  the  Believers  in  general,  but  more  especially  against
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  against  whom  the  most  vile  and
vicious  accusations  that  could  be  conceived,  were  uttered.
Witchcraft  and  delusion  was  the  general  cry;  even  in  their
solemn  assemblies  of  worship,  the  preachers  would  vent
their  malicious  spleen,  and  mock  and  mimic  the  operations
of  the  power  of  God,  which  they  had  seen  or  heard  of  among
the  people.  This  has  reference  to  those  exercises  of  the  physi-
cal body  produced  by  great  spiritual  emotion,  and  experience
which  has  been  manifest  in  all  ages  of  the  world  among  a
people  very  deeply  and  spiritually  exercised.

*  By  this  it  appeared  Mother  was  willing  to  acknowledge  kindness,  even  in  her
worst  enemies.


78  Testimonies  of  •

CHAPTER  XIII.

MOTHER  ANN  AND  THE  ELDERS  RETURN  TO  HARVARD. —
THEY  ARE  THREATENED  AND  ORDERED  TO  LEAVE  THE

PLACE. AFTER  MUCH  AFFLICTION  THEY  LEAVE  HAR-

*■  VARD  AND  GO  TO  ENFIELD,  FROM  WHENCE  THEY  ARE

DRIVEN  BY  A  MOB. —  THEY  GO  TO  ASHFIELD. —  AFTER-
WARD RETURN  TO  HARVARD.

i.  Soon  after  these  incidents  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders
returned  to  Harvard,  and  continued  their  labors  through  the
winter,  visiting  the  Believers  in  Shirley,  Woburn,  and  other
places  in  the  vicinity,  purging  out  sin,  and  strengthening  and
confirming  the  Believers  in  their  most  holy  faith.  Many
Believers  also  continued  to  visit  them,  during  the  winter,
from  various  other  parts.  The  spirit  of  opposition  also  con-
tinued to  manifest  itself,  which  frequently  brought  great  suf-
ferings upon  the  Believers,  particularly  upon  Mother  Ann
and  the  Elders.

2.  The  opposition  of  the  wicked,  in  and  about  Harvard,
had  been  more  or  less  manifest,  even  before  the  opening  of
the  testimony  in  these  parts.  Many  threats  were  made,  and
the  people  were  all  apprised  of  having  many  secret,  as  well
as  open  enemies;  and,  though  many  individuals  suffered
abuses,  from  time  to  time,  from  their  particular  acquaint-
ances who  were  opposed  to  the  testimonies,  such  as  slander-
ing, mocking,  scoffing,  stoning,  pilfering,  cheating,  defraud-
ing, and  the  like,  yet,  no  general  persecution  had  been
experienced.

3.  But  during  this  season,  as  the  gospel  increased,  and  the
testimony  against  the  flesh  prevailed,  the  fears  of  Antichrist
began  to  be  more  and  more  alarmed.  He  could  no  longer
endure  religion  which  threatened  the  foundation  of  his  king-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  79

dom,  by  turning  so  many  of  his  subjects  from  darkness  to
light,  and  converting  them  from  the  error  of  their  ways.

4.  Much  had  been  said,  and  many  fears  excited  among
the  multitude,  concerning  the  Believers  being  enemies  to  the
country,  and  having  firearms  secreted  among  them;  and,
though  public  search  had  been  made  and  no  trace  of  evi-
dence could  be  found  to  authorize  such  a  suspicion,  yet,  as
the  Believers  were,  from  principle,  averse  to  war,  and  as
this  principle  had  been  inculcated  by  Mother  Ann,  and  the
Elders,  it  was  still  held  up  as  a  suspicious  evidence  of  their
hostile  feelings  to  the  country.

5.  This,  through  pretense,  being  made  the  ground  of  alarm,
measures  must,  of  course,  be  taken  to  prevent  the  appre-
hended danger;  Mother  and  the  Elders  must  be  driven  out
of  Harvard.  Accordingly,  about  the  latter  part  of  January,
1782,  Phineas  Farnsworth, —  Captain  of  militia,  came,  with  a
large  company  of  men,  to  drive  them  off,  unless  they  would
promise  to  be  gone  by  such  a  time.  Many  Believers  were
assembled  in  the  Square  House,  and  engaged  in  the  worship
of  God.  The  company  surrounded  the  house  with  clubs,
which  they  poised  and  shouldered,  after  the  manner  of  mus-
kets, apparently  with  a  view  to  alarm  the  Believers.  The
Captain  obtained  admittance  into  the  chamber  where  Mother
Ann  was,  and  stated  his  business,  requiring  her  to  leave  the
town.  Mother  replied  that  she  expected  to  go  away  to-mor-
row, if  it  was  God's  will.  "Very  well,"  said  the  Captain,
''if  you  are  going  so  soon  I  shall  let  you  alone."  After
some  conversation  he  took  his  leave  of  Mother,  promising
not  to  molest  her,  seeing  she  was  going  away  to-morrow.
"Yea,"  said  Mother,  "I  expect  to  go  to-morrow,  if  it  is
God's  will ;  but  I  will  return  again  the  next  day  if  it  is  God's
will,  for  all  you."  The  Captain,  feeling  himself  bound,  said
no  more,  but  went  down  stairs.

6.  During the Captain's  interview  with  Mother  Ann,  a


8o  Testimonies  of

number  of  his  men  had  entered  the  room  where  the  Breth-
ren were  in  their  worship,  Daniel  Wood,  by  order  of  Father
William  Lee,  was  stationed  at  the  partition  door,  to  keep  the
mob  from  entering  the  Sisters'  apartment;  several  attempted
to  enter,  but  were  kept  back  by  Daniel.  At  length  a  violent-
spirited  stout  man  came  up  with  a  determination  to  enter,
and  clinching  Daniel,  with  sudden  violence,  forced  him
through  the  door.  Instantly  the  blood  gushed  forth,  and
ran  down  Daniel's  face  and  bosom.  Soon  after  this,  the
Captain  came  down  stairs,  and  seeing  Daniel  bloody,  in-
quired, who  had  done  that  ?  "One  of  your  men,"  replied
Daniel.  He  then  ordered  his  men  to  go  immediately  out  of
the  house.  They  obeyed  his  order,  and  all  departed,  with-
out offering  any  further  abuse,  at  that  time.  The  next  day,
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  went  away,  were  gone  a  short
time,  and  then  returned.

7.  Having  been,  for  some  time,  continually  threatened  and
harassed  by  mobs,  and  feeling  the  way  of  their  usefulness
in  Harvard  nearly  hedged  up,  and  knowing  that  their  young
disciples  were  not  able  to  keep  the  way  of  God  without  help,
they  were  brought  under  great  sufferings  and  labor;  and  be-
ing warned  of  God,  to  leave  the  place,  in  order  to  avoid  a
mob,  which  was  coming,  the  next  day,  to  drive  them  off  by
force,  they  assembled  the  Believers  together,  in  the  evening,
and  spoke  much  to  them,  to  strengthen  and  encourage  them
to  stand  faithful  in  the  way  of  God,  come  life  or  death.

8.  Mother  Ann,  in  taking  leave  of  her  children,  knelt
down  and  spoke  to  them  in  a  very  feeling  and  affecting  man-
ner; manifesting  the  great  concern  she  felt  for  their  welfare;
that  she  could  freely  lay  down  her  life  for  them,  if  it  could
be  any  gain  to  them;  but  that  she  was  called  of  God  to  pre-
serve her  life,  and  take  care  of  herself  for  their  sakes;  and
added,  "  I  should  be  willing  to  die,  and  go  to  Christ,  if  you
could  do  without  me,  but  you  cannot." This  was  a  very  af-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  8i

fecting  season  to  her  spiritual  children,  and  caused  their
tears  to  flow  in  abundance.  Mother,  with  Mary  Partington
and  the  Elders,  departed,  the  same  night,  from  the  Square
House,  and  went  to  Zaccheus  Stevens'.  Early  the  next  morn-
ing, the  mob  came,  in  great  multitudes,  to  the  Square  House
but  not  finding  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  they  placed  an
empty  barrel  before  the  door  as  a  stage,  on  which  they
placed  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  one  after  another,  and  ex-
amined them,  but  were  still  unable  to  gain  any  intelligence
concerning  Mother  and  the  Elders.

9.  They  then  proceeded  to  Isaac  Wi Hard's  where  Elizur
Goodrich  and  Lucy  Wright,  (subsequently  called  Mother
Lucy)  had  retreated,  and  began  to  search  his  house;  but,  on
attempting  to  open  a  door  of  an  upper  room,  where  Lucy
and  Elizur  had  retired,  Isaac  forbade  them,  and  told  them
that  if  they  opened  another  door  in  his  house,  they  should
suffer  the  penalty  of  the  law  ;  upon  which  they  all  dispersed.

10.  Mother  and  the  Elders  departed  from  Zaccheus  Ste-
vens' the  same  morning,  and  proceeded  on  their  journey  to
Enfield,  Connecticut,  where  they  arrived,  about  the  beginning
of  March.  Here  they  had  new  scenes  of  sufferings  to  pass
through.  Many  Believers  gathered  to  see  them;  the  world,
also,  from  the  surrounding  country,  were  very  pressing  for
information.  They  tarried  a  week,  or  ten  days,  ministering
the  gifts  of  God,  and  strengthening  and  encouraging  the
Believers.

11.  These  things,  while  they  excited  great  joy  and  zeal
among  the  Believers,  did  not  fail  to  alarm  the  jealous  fears,
and  stir  up  the  persecuting  spirit  of  Antichrist.  A  mob  of
about  two  hundred  men  was  raised,  and  assembled  before
the  house  of  David  Meacham,  where  Mother  Ann  then  was;
this  mob  was  led  on  by  Jonathan  Bush,  Captain  of  militia,
Eli  Bush,  Lieutenant,  and  Isaac  Terry.  They  ordered  Mother
Ann  and  the  Elders  to  leave  the  town  within  one  hour,  and

11


82  Testimonies  of

threatened,  in  case  of  disobedience,  to  carry  them  off  by
force.  As  their  orders  were  peremptory,  and  a  refusal  likely
to  be  attended  with  dangerous  consequences,  Mother  felt  it
most  prudent  to  leave  the  place.  Elder  James  Whittaker
addressed  the  mob,  and  said,  "  We  came  to  this  place  peace-
ably, to  visit  our  Brethren,  but,  since  you  have  judged  your-
selves unworthy  to  receive  the  gospel,  we  will  go  to  some
other  place."  They  accordingly  withdrew  and  the  mob  fol-
lowed them  to  the  ferry  which  was  about  eight  miles
distant.  On  their  way  from  Brother  David's  to  the  river,
Mother  Ann  and  her  companions  saw  and  felt  themselves
surrounded  by  hosts  of  angels,  which  so  strengthened  and
encouraged  them  that  they  broke  forth  in  heavenly  songs,
and,  in  union  with  the  angelic  hosts,  sung  with  great  power
of  God,  while  their  wicked  persecutors,  who  understood
none  of  these  things,  followed  on  in  gloomy  silence.

12.  In  passing  through  the  town,  near  the  river,  a  noisy
rabble  gathered  and  followed  after  them  with  threatening  and
abusive  language.  At  this  instant,  a  young  American  officer
who  was  passing  through  the  main  street,  observed  the  mob,
and,  being  attracted  by  curiosity,  he  rode  up  to  them,  and,
on  inquiry,  was  informed  that  they  were  driving  the  Elect
Lady  and  her  followers,  out  of  the  town.  Being  well
mounted  and  armed,  and  perceiving  that  the  woman  and  her
friends,  though  entire  strangers  to  him,  were  very  peaceable,
and  inoffensive,  and  patiently  bore  the  insulting  language  of
the  mob,  without  making  any  reply,  he  took  his  station  near
Mother  Ann's  carriage,  and  followed  her  to  the  ferry,  with
the  determination,  if  possible,  to  prevent  abuse.

13.  Having  arrived  at  the  ferry,  the  young  man,  altogether
undaunted  at  the  threatening  appearance  of  the  mob,  led
Mother  into  the  boat,  and  assured  Mother  that  she  had  noth-
ing to  fear.  As  the  boat  was  about  to  start  from  the  shore,
one  of  the  mob  made  proclamation,  forbidding  Mother  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  83

the  Elders  ever  entering  the  town  of  Enfield  again, —  de-
clared that  they  were  very  fortunate  in  escaping  punishment
at  this  time;  and  that,  if  in  future  they  should  ever  come
again,  they  might  expect  tarring,  feathering,  ducking,  &c.

14.  Being  prevented  from  using  any  further  violence,  by
the  presence  and  determined  resolution  of  the  officer,  the
mob  withdrew,  and  Mother  Ann  and  her  companions  crossed
the  river  in  safety.  After  landing,  they  returned  their  grate-
ful acknowledgments  to  the  young  man  who  had  manifested
such  kindness  to  them,  though  strangers,  and  who  had  so
generously  interfered  in  their  behalf,  as  to  protect  them  from
the  abuse  of  their  enemies.  They  then  separated,  and  the
young  man  went  his  way.*

15.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  proceeded  up  to  West
Springfield;  they  then  re-crossed  the  river,  and  went  to
Kingston,  while  Brother  David  Meacham,  who  had  accom-
panied them  from  Enfield,  returned  home  to  get  a  carriage
to  assist  them  on  their  journey.  They  tarried  at  Scott's  tav-
ern in  Kingston,  from  Saturday,  until  Monday.  Brother
David  having  returned  with  his  carriage,  they  all  proceeded
to  Amaziah  Clark's,  in  Granby;  thence  they  visited  Jona-
than Bridges',  and  some  other  Believers  in  Belcher;  thence
up  the  river,  to  Peter  Bishop's,  in  Montague.

16.  Peter  and  his  family  had  embraced  the  testimony  the
preceding  summer,  and  being  the  only  Believers  in  the  town,
they  had  many  difficulties,  and  much  opposition  to  en-
counter. Their  unbelieving  neighbors  were  greatly  enraged

*  Elijah  Jones,  subsequently  a  merchant,  in  Lansingburgh,  N.  Y.,  was  the  young
officer  mentioned  above.  He  was,  at  that  time,  a  Lieutenant  in  Col.  Sheldon's
Regiment  of  Dragoons,  in  the  Revolutionary  War  ;  and,  being  then  on  business
that  way,  he  was  providentially  led  through  the  town  just  at  the  time  of  the  above-
mentioned  occurrence;  and  was  thus  made  instrumental  in  protecting  Mother  Ann
from  the  abuses  of  a  cruel  mob.  Mother  several  times  mentioned  her  remarkable
deliverance  at  that  time,  with  great  thankfulness,  and  said,  "  God  sent  that  voung
man  there  for  my  protection."  "  And  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed
up  the  flood."


84  Testimonies  of

against  them  on  account  of  their  faith;  and  as  they  lived  re-
mote from  Believers,  and  supported  themselves  by  their  oc-
cupation, they  were  considerably  exposed  to  the  injustice
and  abuse  of  their  wicked  neighbors,  who  threatened  to
starve  them  by  withholding  their  custom.*

17.  After  Mother  Ann  arrived  at  the  house,  she  inquired
(it  Abigail  Bishop  concerning  their  temporal  circumstances,
and  whether  they  had  provisions.  Abigail  replied  they  had
but  little,  and  informed  Mother  of  their  circumstances,  and
how  they  were  threatened  by  their  unbelieving  neighbors,
and  she  took  all  the  flour  she  had  to  make  a  cake  for
Mother's  supper.  Mother  then  said,  "  I  pray  that  thy  mor-
sel of  meat  may  be  like  the  widow's  barrel,  and  the  cruise  of
oil,  that  did  not  fail  in  the  time  of  famine.  Trust  in  God,
and  you  will  never  want  for  bread.  The  world  will  feed
you;  they  will  make  good  measure,  pressed  down,  heaped
up,  and  running  over,  will  men  measure  unto  you."  Mother
and  the  Elders  tarried  at  Peter's  over  night,  had  a  com-
fortable meeting  with  the  family,  and  then  departed.

1 8.  A  few  days  after  this  there  came  a  man  to  the  house
that  owed  them,  and  brought  grain,  to  pay  the  debt;  he
measured  the  grain  in  Abigail's  sight,  and  she  observed  that
he  heaped  every  measure,  and  pressed  it  down  till  it  ran
over.  Thus  were  Mother's  words  fulfilled,  ■  and,  through
God's  abounding  goodness,  Abigail  and  her  family  never
came  to  want;  but,  notwithstanding  the  enmity  of  their
wicked  neighbors,  they  always  had  a  plenty.

19.  After  leaving  Peter's,  Mother  Ann  and  her  company
returned  down  the  river,  five  miles,  to  Sunderland,  crossed
the  river,  and  proceeded  on  their  journey  to  Asa  Bacon's  to
Ashfield,  where  they  arrived  the  latter  part  of  March,  1782.
Here  they  found  a  place  of  retirement  from  the  clamor  ot
riotous  mobs;  and  here  they  continued about  two  months,

♦Their  occupation  was  weaving,  coloring  and  pressing  cloth.


Mother  Ann Lee.  85

without  permitting  the  Believers  to  visit  them  very  openly.
As  there  were  but  few  Believers  in  the  neighborhood  of
Ashfield,  Mother  Ann  seldom  had  occasion  to  visit  while
she  remained  in  that  place.  But,  a  little  "before  her  return
to  Harvard,  she  went  to  Shelburne,  about  five  miles  distant,  to
visit  the  family  of  Jonathan  and  Aaron  Wood.  She  had  fre-
quently been  requested  by  the  family,  and  particularly  by
Aaron,  to  come  and  see  them,  and  had  given  them  some  en-
couragement of  coming.  She  accordingly  set  off,  accompa-
nied by  Mary  Partington,  and  some  of  the  Elders,  and
walked  there  on  foot.  She  came  smiling  into  the  house.
This  was  a  welcome  and  joyful  visit  to  the  family,  and  es-
pecially to  good  Brother  Aaron,  who  loved  Mother  with  all
his  heart;  for  she  had  often  filled  him,  soul  and  body,  with
many  powerful  gifts  of  God,  and  he  did  not  lose  the  remem-
brance of  them.  She  tarried  some  days,  and  blest  the  fam-
ily, and  then  returned  to  Ashfield.

20.  About  the  20th  of  May,  1782,  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders  left  Ashfield  and  returned  to  Harvard,  and  continued
their  labors  in  Harvard.  Shirley  and  Woburn,  nearly  through
the  summer,  teaching,  strengthening  and  encouraging  the
Believers  in  these  places,  as  well  as  those  who  visited  them
from  places  more  distant.  But,  the  spirit  of  opposition  was
still  restless  ;  the  enemies  of  the  cross  still  thirsted  for  per-
secution. The  stale  charge  of  enemies  to  the  country,  fire-
arms, ami  implements  of  war,  was  again  renewed  as  a  pre-
text ;  nor  could  they  be  satisfied  short  of  expelling  the  testi-
mony, with  all  its  witnesses,  from  the  country.

21.  About  the  latter  part  of  July,  1782,  a  number  of  men
met,  and  appointed  a  committee  to  set  up  advertisements  in
the  several  towns  around,  to  notify  the  people  to  meet,  on
Harvard  Commons,  and  drive  off  the  Shakers.  The  adver-
tisements were  accordingly  put  up,  and  on  the  appointed
day,  the  people  met. On  the  morning  of  that  day,  Phineas


86  Testimonies  of

Fairbanks,  the  first  deacon  in  the  Presbyterian  Church,  at
Harvard,  and  accounted  the  greatest  Christian  in  town,  sent
two  barrels  of  cider  on  to  the  Commons,  for  the  mob  to  drink,
in  order  to  stimulate  their  zeal.  But,  it  being  the  time  of  the
meeting  of  the  Clergy,  commonly  called  Ministers'  meeting,
the  ministers  requested  the  mob  to  wait  until  they  had  first
seen,  and  conversed  with  the  Shakers,  themselves.  Accord-
ingly, four  of  them  came  over  to  the  Square  House,  and  de-
sired to  converse  with  the  Elders.  The  Elders  came  into
the  room,  and  Labdiel  Adams,  minister  of  Lunenburg,  who
appeared  to  be  their  chief  speaker,  desired  to  know  if  there
was  liberty  to  ask  a  few  questions.  "  Yea,"  replied  Elder
James  Whittaker,  "any  civil  questions."

22.  Adams  then  observed  that  the  people  were  apprehen-
sive that  there  were  warlike  stores  laid  up  in  this  house,  and
manifested  much  concern  about  it  ;  Elder  James,  who  knew
that  they  did  not  believe  this  charge  themselves,  and  that  it
was  made  merely  as  a  pretext,  replied,  "  There  is  liberty  to
search  the  house,  if  you  can  do  it  and  not  wrong  your  con-
sciences ;  I  say,  there  is  liberty  to  search  the  house  all  over,
if  you  can  do  it,  and  not  wrong  your  consciences  ;  but  don't
you  wrong  your  consciences."

23.  Adams  then  asked,  "  Are  you  willing  to  take  up  arms
against  Britain  ?"  Father  William  replied,  "  I  never  killed  a
creature  with  a  gun  in  my  life."  "  But,"  asked  Adams,  "  Are
you  friends  to  America?"  "Yea,"  replied  Elder  James
Whittaker,  "We  are  friends  to  all  the  souls  of  men."  "But
supposing,"  said  Adams,  "  one  of  your  people  should  go
into  the  war,  and  should  live  to  return  home  again,  would
he  not  have  to  confess  it  as  a  sin  ?"  "  Yea,  surely,"  replied
Elder  James,  "  if  he,  himself,  believes  it  to  be  sin,"  "  but,
we  do  not  bind  men's  consciences."  Adams  then  turned  to
Aaron  Jewett,  who  was  present,  and  asked  him,  "  When  you
confessed  your  sins,  did  you  not  confess  your  going  into  the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  87

army,  as  a  sin  ?"  To  which  Aaron  replied,  "  I  was  so  far
from  confessing  it  as  a  sin,  that  I  never  once  thought  of  it."
Many  other  inquiries  were  made  on  this  subject,  which  were
all  promptly  and  judiciously  answered  by  Elder  James  and
others.

24.  The  principal  object  of  their  inquiries  seemed  to  be,
to  find  out  the  opinion  of  the  Elders  concerning  the  war,  in
order  to  satisfy  themselves  concerning  the  general  rumor,
that  the  people  were  enemies  to  the  country.  But,  Elder
James  answered  them  plainly  and  pointedly,  concerning  that
matter ;  that  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  war,  one  way,
nor  the  other.  "But,"  said  he,  "We  will  fight  your  enemy,
and  the  enemy  of  all  mankind,  that  is,  the  devil."

25.  After  a  good  deal  of  conversation  on  these,  and  other
subjects,  Elder  James  began  to  sing,  and  there  being  many
of  the  Brethren  present,  they  all  united,  and  sang  with  him,
for  some  time.  After  this  Elder  James  invited  these  minis-
ters to  stay  and  dine;  but  they  declined,  and  took  their  leave.
Having  returned  to  the  mob,  who  were  still  waiting,  they  ad-
vised them  to  relinquish  their  design,  and  let  the  people
alone.  One  of  the  ministers,  by  the  name  of  Parker,  inquired
of  Adams,  what  he  thought  of  the  Shakers  ?  Adams  replied,
"I  think  the  people  better  let  them  alone;  that  Whittaker
is  a  sharp  man."

26.  This  advice  occasioned  considerable  confusion  among
the  mob;  some  were  still  very  urgent  to  proceed;  but,  on
some  of  the  town  officers  inquiring  for  paper  and  ink,  it  was
rumored,  among  the  mob,  that  they  were  going  to  take  down
their  names.  This  gave  them  a  start,  and  they  immediately
began  to  disperse.  Several  scattering  parties  came  to  the
Square  House,  but  offered  no  abuse.  Thus  were  the  evil
designs  of  the  wicked  again  frustrated.


88  Testimonies  of

CHAPTER  XIV.

THE BELIEVERS DRIVEN- PROM HARVARD AND CRUELLY
ABUSED BY A RIOTOUS  MOB.

i.  The  wicked  having  hitherto  failed  in  their  attempts  to
expel  the  witnesses  of  the  truth  from  Harvard,  or  to  stop  the
progress  of  the  testimony,  and  "  still  breathing  out  threaten-
ings  and  slaughter,"  were  determined  to  renew  their  attempts,
and,  by  a  powerful  mob,  to  drive  them  out  of  the  town.
With  this  view,  it  seemed  they  were  determined  to  exert  all
their  influence  to  strengthen  their  party,  and  to  seize  upon
the  most  favorable  opportunity  for  putting  their  designs  into
execution.

2.  The  Believers,  having  harvested  their  grain,  began  to
collect,  from  New  Lebanon,  Hancock,  and  other  distant
places  where  the  gospel  had  been  planted,  to  visit  the  Church
at  Harvard.  Large  numbers  having  already  collected,  great
power,  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  great  zeal,  on
the  part  of  the  Believers,  all  conspired  to  increase  the  rage
and  enmity  of  the  wicked,  and  to  hasten  the  execution  of  their
cruel  designs.

3.  It  appears,  that,  in  this  last  attempt,  they  had  designed
to  keep  the  time  and  plan  of  their  intended  proceedings  en-
tirely secret  from  the  Believers.  But  Mother  Ann  saw,  in
vision,  a  mob  coming,  and  seeking  her  life;  and  being  warned
of  God  to  withdraw  herself,  because  the  wicked  were  plot-
ting measures  of  violence,  she  and  the  Elders  prepared  to
leave  the  place  for  a  season.  But  before  they  departed,  the
Brethren  and  Sisters  assembled  together,  to  take  their  leave
of  them,  and  to  renew  the  bonds  of  filial  love,  to  their  blessed
Parents  in  the  gospel.

4.  Being  assembled  together,  they  all  knelt  down  and
wept,  bitterly,  and  prayed  for  the  safe protection  of  their


Mother  Ann  Lee.  89

blessed  Mother  and  Elders.  She  said  to  them,  "Brethren
and  Sisters,  be  comforted,  my  spirit  shall  be  with  you."
Many  other  good  words  were  spoken  to  them  by  Mother  and
the  Elders,  for  their  strength  and  consolation.

5.  After  the  Elders  had  mounted  their  horses  to  go,  there
came  some  Believers  from  a  distance;  Mother  and  the  Elders
stopped  awhile  with  them,  and  the  two  Elders — (Father
William  Lee,  and  Father  James  Whittaker)  alighted  from
their  horses,  kneeled  upon  the  ground,  and  cried  to  God  in
a  very  powerful  and  affecting  manner.  Then,  mounting
their  horses  again,  they  set  off,  on  Friday,  the  16th  of  Au-
gust, 17S2,  leaving  Elder  Hocknell  to  take  care  of  the  peo-
ple, and  went  to  Abel  Jewett's  in  Littleton.  The  next  day
they  proceeded  to  Nathan  Kendal's  in  Woburn,  and  thus
escaped  the  cruel  rage  of  their  persecutors.

6.  After  the  departure  of  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  the
Believers  attended  to  their  duties  with  great  joy.  The  Sab-
bath following,  the  Believers  in  general,  from  Harvard,  and
the  neighboring  towns,  assembled  at  the  Square  House,  to
hold  their  public  worship.  These,  together  with  the  distant
Believers,  formed  a  large  assembly,  who  all  went  forth  with
great  zeal,  and  worshipped  God  with  singing,  dancing,  leap-
ing, shouting,  clapping  of  hands,  and  such  other  exercises  as
they  were  led  into  by  the  spirit.

7.  The  power  of  God  manifested  in  this  meeting,  in  visible
operations,  was  so  mighty  that  it  shook,  not  the  Believers
only,  but  the  spectators  who  attended  meeting  with  them,
so  that  when  the  Believers  kneeled,  they  kneeled  also.  But,
the  sound  of  this  meeting,  though  joyful  to  the  Believers,
was  terrible  to  the  wicked  ;  for  the  sound  thereof  was  heaid
at  the  distance  of  several  miles.

8.  The  wicked  had  been  so  embittered  against  the  testi-
mony, that  they  were  hardly  able  to  keep  themselves  within
bounds,  and  only  waited  for  a  suitable  occasion,  to  vent  their

12


90  Testimonies  of

malignant  rage.  This  meeting  furnished  the  occasion,  and
roused  their  persecuting  spirits  to  the  highest  pitch  of
enmity  ;  so  that  while  the  Believers  were  yet  engaged  in  de-
voting their  time  and  strength  to  the  service  of  God,  their
enemies  were  busily  employed  in  collecting  their  forces,  to
make  war  with  the  woman  and  her  righteous  seed.

9.  The  Believers  having  spent  the  day,  and  the  evening,
to  a  very  late  hour,  in  various  exercises  of  the  spirit,  the
meeting  was  dismissed.  Those  who  belonged  in  the  neighbor-
hood, returned  to  their  homes,  and  a  number  of  the  distant
Believers  went  with  them,  for  the  convenience  of  lodging.
Early  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  August,  1782,  while  it
was  yet  dark,  the  mob  began  to  assemble  around  the  Square
House;  their  noise  alarmed  the  people  within,  some  of  whom
supposed  them  to  be  a  company  of  Indians.  An  aged  Brother
soon  opened  the  door,  and  some  of  them  came  in,  and,  in  a
very  rough  manner,  manifested  their  determination.  Two  of
them  went  up  stairs  in  search  of  Mother  and  the  Elders,  and
were  vexed  at  not  finding  them.  Lucy  Wright,  who  had
slept  in  another  chamber,  went  and  spoke  to  them,  and
endeavored  to  calm  their  ferocious  spirits;  but  they  refused
to  hear  her,  and  threatened  to  pitch  her,  headlong,  down
stairs.  Mother  Lucy  understanding  their  object,  and  con-
sidering her  horse  was  at  Shirley,  and  being  unable  to  take
her  journey  on  foot,  she  went  down  with  Mary  Partington,
and  each  took  a  milk  pail,  as  though  they  were  going  to
milking,  passed  through  the  mob,  and  went  to  the  barn,
where  they  left  their  pails,  and  passed  through  the  barn,  took
their  flight  across  the  fields,  to  Solomon  Cooper's,  and  so
escaped  the  mob.

10.  Messengers  were  immediately  dispatched  to  acquaint
the  neighboring  Believers,  who  soon  repaired  to  the  scene  of
action.  When  they  arrived,  they  found  a  large  company  of
men  in  front  of  the  house,  armed  with  whips,  cudgels,  &c,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  91

and  their  numbers  rapidly  increasing.  As  the  Brethren  and
Sisters  collected,  they  went  into  the  house.  When  they  had
chiefly  assembled,  it  was  judged  there  were  about  four  hun-
dred of  the  mob. All  was  yet  silent  between  the  parties.

11.  Elder  Hocknell  now  gave  orders  for  all  the  Believers
to  assemble  in  one  large  room,  fronting  the  mob.  When  as-
sembled, the  room  was  full,  from  end  to  end,  excepting  a
narrow  alley  between  the  Brethren  and  Sisters.  He  then  de-
sired them  all  to  kneel  down,  and  pray  to  God  for  His  pro-
tection, in  such  a  trying  time  as  this.  Accordingly,  they  all
fell  upon  their  knees,  and  cried  earnestly  to  God.

12.  The  mob  no  sooner  discovered  that  the  Believers  were
on  their  knees,  than  they  rushed  upon  the  doors  which  were
shut  and  barred,  burst  them  open,  and  began  to  seize  upon
the  Brethren  and  Sisters  as  they  stood  upon  their  knees.
Richard  Treat,  being  next  to  the  door,  was  the  first  who  fell
into  their  hands.  They  seized  him  by  the  collar  with  such
rage  and  fury  that  they  nearly  severed  it  from  his  shirt.
Thus  they  seized  one  after  another,  some  by  their  collars,
some  by  their  throats,  and  some  by  the  hair  of  their  heads,
and  wherever  they  clinched,  they  kept  hold,  until  they
dragged  the  person  out  of  the  room,  through  an  entry,  and
out  at  the  outer  door,  on  to  the  doorsteps,  then  they  were
delivered  up  to  the  party  without.

13.  In  this  manner  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  were  seized,
indiscriminately,  without  any  resistance  and  dragged  out,
with  as  little  humanity  as  ravenous  wolves  would  drag  out
harmless  sheep  from  the  fold.  None  but  devils  incarnate
could  be  so  far  divested  of  the  feelings  of  common  humanity,
as  to  engage  in  such  a  horrid  transaction.

13.  In  the  mean  time  Elder  Hocknell  passed  out,  undis-
covered, through  the  midst  of  the  mob,  and  leaped  over  the
fence  into  the  garden,  where  he  kneeled  down,  under  some
peach  trees,  and  cried  to  God  to  know  what  he  should  do.


(j 2  Testimonies  of

Suddenly  the  power  of  God  fell  upon  him,  and  stretched  out
his  hand  toward  the  east.  He  immediately  followed  its  di-
rection, which  led  him  to  Mother  Ann  and  he  informed  her
of  these  things.

14.  The  Believers  being  all  embodied,  and  surrounded  by
the  mob,  orders  were  given  that  all  who  lived  in  the  vicinity
should  return  immediately  home;  and  that  the  distant  Be-
lievers should  leave  the  town,  and  never  be  seen  there  again;
and  one  hour  was  allowed  them  to  prepare,  and  eat  their
breakfast,  and  make  ready  for  their  journey.  If  any  of  the
Believers  attempted  to  address  the  mob,  with  a  view  to  cool
their  rage,  they  were  immediately  answered  by  a  stroke  over
the  head,  with  a  whip,  or  cudgel.

15.  During  the  hour  of  preparation  to  which  they  were
limited,  all  were  busily  employed.  The  time  indeed  was
short,  considering  there  were  more  than  one  hundred  peo-
ple, and  many  of  them  more  than  an  hundred  miles  from
home.  They,  however,  made  what  expedition  they  could,
and  prepared  according  to  their  restricted  circumstances.
At  the  expiration  of  the  hour,  they  were  ordered  to  march.
The  Sisters  were  permitted  to  ride,  but  the  Brethren  were
forbidden,  though  many  of  them  had  horses  with  them.
About  one-half  of  the  mob  formed  the  advance  guard;  the
Believers,  in  a  body,  were  placed  next,  and  the  remainder  of
the  mob  brought  up  the  rear.  The  Brethren  who  belonged
in  and  about  Harvard  were  determined  to  follow  their  dis-
tant Brethren  and  Sisters,  notwithstanding  the  orders  of  the
mob  to  the  contrary.

16.  The  leaders  of  the  mob  were  Phineas  Famsworth,
Captain  of  militia,  Jonathan  Pollard,  Lieutenant,  Isaiah  Whit-
ney, Jonathan  Houghton,  Asa  Houghton  and  others.  The
mob,  being  nearly  all  on  horseback,  compelled  the  Believers
to  advance  with  speed.  If  any  who  were  aged  and  infirm
did  not  travel  so  fast  as  their  drivers  thought  proper,  their


Mother  Ann  Lee.  93

pace  was  soon  quickened  by  a  severe  stroke  of  a  whip,  or
cudgel.  If  any  one  attempted  to  admonish  them  for  their
cruelty,  the  lash,  or  cudgel  over  his  head,  face  and  eyes  soon
convinced  him  of  the  danger  of  admonishing  an  unprincipled
mob,  whose  loving  kindness  is  bitter,  and  whose  tender  mer-
cies are  cruel.  Numbers  of  the  Brethren  found,  by  sad  ex-
perience, in  the  course  of  that  day,  that  it  was  in  vain  to
attempt  to  moderate  the  fierceness  of  their  cruelty,  or  soothe
their  savage  hearts.

17.  Soon  after  the  procession  began,  one  of  the  Brethren  —
Dyer  Fitch,  for  praying  to  God,  was  cruelly  beaten  over  his
head  and  face,  by  Isaiah  Whitney,  who  commanded  him  to
hold  his  tongue.  Dyer  replied,  "  I  will  not,  I  will  cry  to
God,  if  you  kill  me."  Whitney  continued  beating  and  re-
peating his  command,  and  Dyer  continued  to  make  the
same  reply,  for  some  time.  Thus  they  proceeded.  As  they
were  crossing  Jeremiah  Willard's  pasture,  Abijah  Wooster,
and  another  Brother  came  up,  and  Abijah,  seeing  James
Shepherd,  immediately  clasped  him  in  his  arms,  at  which
Asa  Houghton  rode  up  and  struck  Abijah  over  his  head,
with  a  good  staff.  Abijah  was  then  put  under  a  guard,  who
was  ordered  to  keep  him  safe  and  take  him  along  with  the
rest.

18.  They  drove  on  about  three  miles  till  they  came  to  a
level  open  plain  near  Still  River,  where  they  were  ordered
to  halt.  "  Now,"  said  the  leaders  of  the  mob,  "  we  will
have  a  little  diversion,"  and  orders  were  given  for  James
Shepherd  to  be  soundly  whipped.  James  was  the  only  per-
son whom  they  had  taken  of  those  who  came  from  England,
and  against  whom  their  enmity  was  the  most  pointedly
leveled ;  and,  as  they  had  been  disappointed  of  taking
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  they  resolved  to  wreak  their
vengeance  on  his  back,  and  whip  him  for  all  the  rest.  They
accordingly  formed  a  ring,  and  sent  one  of  the  mob  into  the


94  Testimonies  of

bushes  to  cut  sticks  for  the  purpose.  He  soon  returned
with  his  arms  full,  and  distributed  them  among  the  company
appointed  to  whip  him,  and  each  one  was  appointed  to  give
him  a  certain  number  of  strokes.  James  was  then  ordered
to  strip,  and,  accordingly,  pulled  off  his  coat  and  jacket,  and
kneeling  down  he  said,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  Brethren ;  for
it  is  your  Heavenly  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the
kingdom."

19.  On  hearing  these  words,  one  of  the  ruffians  —  Isaiah
Whitney,  without  waiting  for  orders,  gave  him  a  number  of
severe  strokes  with  his  horse-whip.  Just  at  this  instant
Eleazer  Rand  and  Jonathan  Slosson  arrived ;  and  Eleazer,
seeing  these  strokes,  suddenly  leaped  on  to  James'  back.
This  increased  the  rage  of  the  mob  to  such  a  degree  that
they  beat  on  with  their  clubs,  canes  and  whips,  and  then  laid
hold  of  him  to  pull  him  off;  but  he  held  so  fast  that  they
drew  him  and  James  some  distance  before  they  broke  his
hold ;  others  of  the  Brethren  followed  Eleazer's  example,  to
cover  James  and  each  other  from  the  blows,  till  they  were
all  in  a  huddle.

20.  Eleazer  often  repeating  the  words  "O  Lord"  was
seized  by  the  collar,  by  one  Priest,  from  Bolton,  who  shook
him  severely,  and  commanded  him  to  hold  his  tongue.
Eleazer  replied,  "I  wont  hold  my  tongue,  I  will  pray."
Upon  this,  Priest  shook  him,  and  drove  his  fist  against  his
neck,  till  he  drove  him  several  rods,  repeating  the  same  com-
mand, and  receiving  the  same  answer.  He  then  hurled  him
against  a  stone  wall  and  returned  to  the  mob.  Jonathan
Houghton  asked,  did  you  stop  the  little  dog  from  praying?

'  No,"  replied  Priest,  "nor  I  could  not  unless  I  had  killed
him."

21.  William  Morey,  of  Norton,  at  that  time  a  zealous  Be-
liever, testified,  with  great  boldness,  against  such  acts  of
cruelty, and  sharply  reproved Farnsworth, the  Captain  of


Mother  Ann  Lee.  95

the  mob,  for  their  abusive  conduct;  declaring  that  the  judg-
ments of  God  would  follow  them  for  these  things.  Farns-
worth,  enraged  at  this  report,  came  at  him,  and,  with  his
clenched  fist,  struck  him  on  the  side  of  the  face  with  such
violence,  that  he  knocked  out  several  of  his  teeth,  and
wounded  him  in  his  cheek  and  jaw,  in  such  a  manner  that
he  bled  excessively.  But  William  still  continued  to  bear
testimony  against  their  wickedness;  though,  in  consequence
of  his  severe  wound,  he  was  not  able  to  speak  plainly.

22.  The  malicious  Farnsworth  now  gave  orders  to  march,
and  the  Believers  were  again  arranged  according  to  the  or-
ders of  the  mob,  and  driven  on  with  greater  vehemence  than
before,  being  continually  abused  by  their  merciless  drivers,
all  the  way  till  they  came  to  the  division  line  which  separates
Harvard  from  Bolton,  and  which  is  about  six  miles  from  the
Square  House.  Some  of  the  Harvard  Brethren  who  had  been
kept  back,  by  the  mob,  made  a  little  halt  in  the  road,  before
the  house  of  Zaccheus  Stevens,  which  was  near  the  line.  A
number  of  Sisters  being  at  Zaccheus'  in  much  tribulation,
one  of  them  —  Hannah  Prescot,  came  to  the  door  weeping,
and  said,  "Brethren,  don't  go  back."  The  Brethren  replied
they  were  determined  to  go  with  their  distant  Brethren  as
far  as  the  mob  went.  "Do,"  said  Hannah,  "  I  would  die
with  them,  rather  than  leave  them  with  that  wicked  mob."
They  accordingly  followed  on  till  they  came  to  the  division
line.

23.  Here  the  mob  placed  a  strong  guard  to  prevent  the
Brethren  of  Harvard  from  going  any  further,  and  sternly
forbade  their  passing  the  line.  But,  the  Brethren  being  de-
termined still  to  go  on,  cried  out,  "  Are  you  highway  rob-
bers ?  We  have  as  good  a  right  to  the  highway  as  you  have,
and  we  will  not  trust  our  distant  Brethren  with  you,  we  will
go  as  far  with  them  as  you  do."  "  If  you  attempt  it,"  said
the  Captain,  "we  will  spill  your  blood  in  the  sand."  Notwith-


96  Testimonies  of

standing  these  threats,  the  Brethren  proceeded;  but  were  in-
humanly beaten  with  clubs,  by  the  Captain  and  his  guard.
Eleazer  Rand  had  the  bone  of  his  arm  split,  and  a  number
of  the  Brethren  received  very  severe  bruises.  The  club,  at
length,  flew  backwards,  out  of  the  Captain's  hands;  and  the
guard,  apparently  terrified,  fled  before  the  Brethren,  with  the
utmost  precipitation;  so  that  the  Brethren  went  on  and
joined  the  rest  of  the  Believers.

24.  From  the  place  where  the  mob  halted  to  whip  James
Shepherd,  to  Lancaster,  a  distance  of  seven  miles,  was  one
continued  scene  of  cruelty  and  abuse  ;  whipping,  with  horse-
whips, pounding,  beating,  and  bruising  with  clubs,  collaring,
pushing  off  from  bridges,  into  the  water  and  mud,  scaring
the  Sisters'  horses,  with  a  view  to  frighten  the  riders,  and
every  kind  of  abuse  they  could  invent  without  taking  lives;
indeed  it  seemed  almost  miraculous  that  none  lost  their  lives
from  such  cruel  and  inhuman  abuses.

25.  One  of  the  Brethren  in  the  rear  —  Jonathan  Bridges,
for  not  going  as  fast  as  they  chose,  was  cruelly  whipped,  al-
most every  step,  nearly  the  distance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile.
The  Brethren,  at  length,  became  weary,  and  out  of  breath.
Some  of  the  aged  and  infirm  ventured  to  mount  their  horses
for  relief;  but,  they  were  not  brought  before  a  judge,  or  jury,
to  be  tried  for  such  offenses  as  these;  some  one  of  this  persecut-
ing rabble  would  immediately  ride  up  to  them,  and,  with  the
butt  of  a  whip-stalk,  or  large  cudgel,  soon  hurry  them  down
from  their  horses.  William  Morey,  after  being  so  severely
wounded,  mounted  his  horse  to  ride,  but  was  soon  pulled  off ;
he  again  renewed  the  attempt,  a  number  of  times;  but  was
pulled,  or  beaten  off  every  time.  One  aged  man  mounted
his  horse,  and  rode  some  distance,  before  the  mob  could  at-
tend to  him.  This  enraged  them  so  that  they  could  not  be
satisfied  to  punish  him  with  the  weapons  they  had  in  posses-
sion; therefore,  one  of  them  took  a  rail  from  the  fence,  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  97

beat  him  off  his  horse,  by  which  means  the  old  man  narrowly
escaped  being  killed.

26.  When  they  arrived  at  Lancaster,  the  leaders  of  the
mob,  after  consulting  together,  dismissed  the  distant  Believers,
with  this  injunction,  namely,  "  that  they  should  never  be  seen
again  in  Harvard;  and  if  any  of  them  should  be  seen  there
again,  any  of  the  party,  then  present,  should  have  full  power
to  tie  them  up,  and  whip  them  without  judge  or  jury."
"But,"  added  they,  "we  have  a  further  work  to  do  with  the
Harvard  Shakers."

27.  After  this  dismission,  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  feeling
the  need  of  some  refreshment,  gathered  under  a  large  shady
elm  to  eat  some  bread  and  cheese,  which  some  of  the
Brethren  from  Harvard  had  provided  for  them.  Here  they
all  kneeled  down  and  gave  thanks  to  God  that  they  were
accounted  worthy  to  suffer  persecution  for  the  testimony  of
the  gospel.  This  so  provoked  the  mob  that  they  again
rushed  in  among  them,  some  on  horseback  and  some  on
foot,  and  again  began  the  horrid  scene  of  beating.  Here
they  vented  their  malignity  without  regard  to  age  or  sex;
lashing  and  beating  both  Brethren  and  Sisters,  over  their
heads  and  faces,  seemingly  with  as  little  feeling  as  though
they  had  been  a  herd  of  swine  in  some  mischief.  Some
were  beaten  and  bruised;  others  were  pushed  over,  as  they
stood  on  their  knees.  One  of  the  Sisters  had  her  head
pulled  back  in  such  a  manner,  that  she  was  nearly  strangled,
her  face  turned  black,  and  it  was  with  much  difficulty  that
she  recovered  her  breath  again.  When  the  mob  had  suffi-
ciently exercised  their  cruelty  in  this  manner,  they  left  them.

28.  After  taking  an  affectionate  leave  of  their  Harvard
Brethren,  the  company  of  distant  Believers  went on  their
journey. They  had  not  advanced  more  than  twenty  rods,,
when  they  were  met  by  a  large,  rough-looking  man  who  had
placed  himself  in  the  road  with  a  long  horse-whip,  to  give

*3


9$  Testimonies  of

them  the  last  stroke.  With  this,  he  lashed,  severely,  every
one  that  he  could  get  at  till  they  were  out  of  his  reach.
Richard  Treat,  who  relates  this  circumstance,  says  these
strokes  felt  more  painful  to  his  back,  than  any  he  received
in  the  course  of  the  day.

29.  Passing  this  man,  they  proceeded  on  their  journey,  and
the  Brethren  who  belonged  in  and  about  Harvard,  returned,
with  the  mob,  and  some  of  them  were  much  abused  on  their
way  back.  Jonathan  Houghton  —  one  of  the  leaders  of  the
mob,  and  a  violent  persecutor,  with  the  butt  of  a  large  loaded
whip-stalk,  having  the  lash  wound  round  his  hand,  beat  sev-
eral of  the  Brethren  with  all  his  strength,  particularly  Jona-
than Clark,  an  aged  Brother  from  Harvard.  After  the  mob
entered  Harvard,  on  their  return,  still  having  Abijah  YVooster
under  guard,  they  stopped  at  Captain  Pollard's  near  Zaccheus
Stevens',  and  formed  a  ring.  Then  charging  Abijah  with
going  about  and  breaking  up  churches,  and  families,  they
declared  he  should  be  whipped;  and,  by  the  vote  of  the  mob,
appointed  Jonathan  Houghton  and  Elijah  Priest  to  be  the
whippers.

30.  The  next  object  was,  to  decide  upon  the  number  of
stripes  to  be  given;  and,  after  several  nominations,  it  was
settled,  by  vote,  that  twenty  should  be  the  number.  Then,
stripping  him,  and  tying  him  to  a  tree,  Jonathan  Houghton
laid  on  his  number  first.  At  this  time,  James  Haskell  —  a
respectable  man  of  the  world,  rode  up,  and  seeing  what  was
going  on,  dismounted  his  horse,  and  stripping  off  his  coat,
cried  out,  "  Here,  here,  if  there  are  any  more  stripes  to  be
given  let  me  take  the  rest."  On  hearing  these  words  from
Haskell,  the  mob  seemed  struck  with  fear,  and  immediately
released  Abijah,  and  let  him  go.  Having  put  on  his  gar-
ments, he  began  to  sing,  and  went  on  singing,  all  the  way  to
Zaccheus  Stevens'.  But,  some  who  made  no  profession  of
faith,  were,  nevertheless,  so  affected  with  Abijah's  sufferings,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  99

that  they  went  home  weeping.  The  mob  having  spent  the
day,  and  with  it  their  strength,  in  doing  evil,  now  returned
to  town.

31.  But,  some  of  the  town's  people  who  had  not  been
engaged  in  this  persecuting  business,  were  much  displeased
with  these  proceedings.  Solomon  Sanderson,  speaking  to
Jonathan  Pollard  against  their  conduct,  Pollard  undertook
to  justify  it,  but,  in  the  dispute  he  got  angry,  and  struck
Sanderson  with  his  horse-whip;  Sanderson,  who  was  on  foot,
instantly  seized  hold  of  Pollard  and  brought  him  from  his
horse  flat  upon  the  ground,  and  would  have  given  him  a
severe  bruising,  had  not  the  rest  of  the  company  interfered.

32.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  not  only  in  Harvard,  but
through  the  whole  course  of  ten  miles,  through  which  the
Believers  were  driven,  there  were  many  people  who  were
greatly  dissatisfied  with  the  abusive  conduct  of  the  mob.
Many  on  the  road  remonstrated  against  their  cruelty  ;  but
were  generally  answered  with  curses  and  threats  from  the
mob,  to  serve  them  in  the  same  manner.

^^.  It  ought  also  to  be  remarked,  that  the  conduct  and
testimony  of  the  Believers,  while  on  the  road,  had  a  tendency
to  exasperate  the  devil,  and  excite  his  emissaries  to  greater
acts  of  cruelty  than  they  probably  would  have  committed,
had  the  Believers  remained  silent.  But  most  of  the  Believers
were  very  young  in  the  faith  ;  many  of  them  had  believed
but  a  few  months,  and  were  full  of  zeal  and  power,  and  being
divested  of  all  fear  of  man,  they  would  sing,  and  praise  God
on  the  road,  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  per-
secution for  the  gospel's  sake.

34.  And  again,  when  the  mob  attempted  to  whip  and  beat
one,  others  would  cry  out,  "  Don't  whip  him,  if  you  must
whip  anybody,  whip  me,"  and  immediately  throw  themselves
in  the  way  to  take  the  blows.  Such  genuine  marks  of
Christianity  were  too  much  for  the  seed  of  Cain  to  endure.


ioo  Testimonies  of

Others  again  would  reprove,  and  admonish  them  for  their
cruelty,  telling  them  that  the  judgments  of  God  would  cer-
tainly follow  them  for  these  things.  This  was  only  answered
by  a  repetition  of  profane  curses,  and  greater  abuse.

35.  But  these  predictions  were  evidently  fulfilled ;  the
judgments  of  God  did  follow  those  persecutors  in  a  remark-
able manner.  Many  of  them,  who  were  men  of  respectable
standing  in  the  town  of  Harvard,  and  in  affluent  circum-
stances, fell  under  judgments,  run  out  their  estates,  and  came
to  poverty  and  beggary  ;  and  a  blast  among  those  persecutors
was  so  general,  and  so  manifest,  that  men  of  candor  and
observation  said,  "  Those  Shaker  drivers  are  all  coming  to

nothing."

Abijah Wooster,

Richard  Treat,

Isaac  Crouch,  and  others.


CHAPTER  XV.

MOTHER  ANN  VISITS  NORTON,  REHOBOTH  AND  STONING-
TON  ;  THENCE  THROUGH  PRESTON  AND  WINDHAM  TO
STAFFORD  ;  THENCE  TO  ENFIELD,  CHESHIRE  AND  ASH-
FIELD.

Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  who  were  at  Woburn,  during
the  transactions  of  the  mob  at  Harvard,  soon  after  went
from  thence  to  William  Morey's  in  Norton,  where  they
stayed  about  a  week,  and  then  went  to  Morrell  Baker's  in
Rehoboth,  tarried  eight  or  ten  days,  and  spent  one  Sabbath  ;
after  which  they  returned  again  to  Norton.  As  there  were  a
few  scattering  families  in  these  two  places,  Mother  and  the
Elders  tarried  about  three  weeks,  visiting  and  strengthening
the  Believers,  and  bearing  testimony  to  the  world.


Mother  Ann Lee.  ioi

2.  From  Norton  they  went  to  Stonington  in  Connecticut,
where  they  tarried  between  three  and  four  weeks,  at  Joshua
Birch's ;  but  occasionally  visited  the  family  of  Joseph  Cole,
and  other  families  of  Believers  in  that  neighborhood,  as  there
were  several  that  professed  faith.  They  also  held  several
public  meetings,  in  which  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  was
opened,  showing  that  the  present  manifestation  of  God  re-
quired souls  to  confess  and  forsake  all  sin ;  to  deny  the
carnal  gratifications  of  the  flesh  ;  to  take  up  a  full  cross,  and
follow  Christ  in  the  regeneration,  as  the  only  way  of  accept-
ance with  God.

3.  But,  this  doctrine  of  the  cross  was  very  displeasing  to
carnal  men,  and  false  professors,  who  wished  to  be  Christians
without  the  cross.  The  Baptists  were  the  most  predominant
sect  in  this  place,  and  the  most  opposed  to  the  testimony  of
the  gospel.  Bound  down  by  their  old  traditions,  they  could
not  endure  to  have  their  false  foundation  uncovered,  nor  see
the  guilt  of  their  sins  exposed  before  the  burning  and  shining
light  of  the  gospel  Mother  Ann  preached  ;  they,  therefore,
maliciously  stirred  up  persecution  against  these  witnesses  of
the  truth.

4.  One  Simeon  Brown  —  son  of  an  Elder  of  the  Baptist
society  in  this  place,  was  very  active  in  aiding  persecution,
and  doing  mischief  to  the  Believers;  while  the  old  man
showed  himself  well  pleased  with  his  son's  conduct.  Several
times,  while  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  tarried  in  this  place,
they  were  beset  by  unlawful  assemblies  of  the  wicked,  who
threatened  and  reviled  them,  and  personally  beat  and  abused
some  of  the  Believers.  A  little  before  they  departed,  they
were  ordered,  by  one  Henry  Minor, —  a  bitter  opposer,  to
leave  the  place  within  twenty-four  hours,  threatening  them,
in  the  name  of  the  people,  that  a  refusal  should  be  attended
with  severe  consequences.  As  they  had  already  labored
with  the  people  till  they  had  felt  their  gift  out,  and  the  in-


102  Testimonies  of

habitants  of  the  town,  generally,  seemed  determined  to  reject
the  counsel  of  God  against  themselves,  Mother  Ann  soon
felt  a  gift  to  depart.

5.  They  left  Stonington  on  Friday,  near  the  latter  part  of
October,  1782,  and  tarried  that  night  at  Elias  Brown's,  in
Preston,  where  they  were  civilly  used.  Mother  Ann  had,
before,  been  informed  by  one  of  the  Believers,  that  a  certain
man  by  the  name  of  Abbey,  in  Windham,  desired  to  have
her  and  the  Elders  come  to  his  house;  said  his  house  should
be  open  to  them  and  they  should  be  welcome.  She  now
felt  a  gift  to  go  there,  and  leaving  Preston  on  Saturday,  she
proceeded  directly  to  Windham,  tarried  at  Abbey's  over  the
Sabbath,  and  was  kindly  treated.

6.  On  the  Sabbath,  they  held  public  meeting  ;  many  of  the
world  attended;  the  gospel  was  preached,  by  the  Elders,
with  great  plainness;  the  necessity  of  confessing  and  forsak-
ing all  sin  was  clearly  opened;  and  the  impossibility  of  fol-
lowing Christ,  without  a  full  and  final  cross  against  the  flesh,
was  declared  with  such  plainness,  that  the  assembly  was
greatly  struck,  and  every  tongue  was  silent.*  A  few  were
convicted  and  opened  their  minds.

7.  On  Monday,  Mother  Ann  felt  a  gift  to  dismiss  most  of
the  Believers  who  had  followed  her  to  this  place  from  vari-
ous parts,  and  they  returned  to  their  homes.  She,  with  the
Elders,  and  some  of  the  laborers,  then  proceeded  to  Ezekiel
Slate's,  in  Stafford,  who,  with  his  family,  had  embraced  the
testimony;  here  she  tarried  a  few  days,  and  made  labors  with
the  family,  and  with  those  who  resorted  there  to  see  her ;
but  found  no  appearance  of  any  increase  of  the  gospel  in
this  place.

8.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  in  the  town  of
Stafford,  the  wicked  in  the  town  of  Somers,  got  information
of  it,  and  formed  a  combination  to  take  them  by  force,  while

*  There  were  some  in  this  place  who  held  the  doctrine  of  a  community  of  wives.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  103

passing  through  that  town  to  David  Meacham's,  in  Enfield.
Brother  David,  being  informed  of  their  designs,  went  and
notified  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders.'  Mother,  however,
determined  on  passing  through  the  town,  and  taking  Mary
Partington  into  the  carriage  with  her,  she  set  off,  accom-
panied only  by  Brothers  David  and  Calvin  Harlow,  on  horse-
back; Calvin  in  advance,  and  David  in  the  rear,  each  riding
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  carriage.

9.  Coming  to  the  town  of  Somers,  they  drove  very  sud-
denly through  it,  which  caused  great  confusion  among  those
who  had  conspired  to  apprehend  them.  The  conspirators,
however,  hastily  collected  a  band,  consisting  of  between
twenty  and  thirty  men,  pursued,  on  horseback,  and  arrived
at  Brother  David's  soon  after  Mother.  Charles  Kibbee,
Captain  of  militia  of  Somers,  was  the  leader  of  this  band.
On  their  arrival,  they  immediately  broke  into  the  house,  and
a  spirit  of  savage  violence  marked  all  their  actions  after
they  entered.

10.  They  first  demanded  Mother  Ann,  who  was  then  in  a
back  room;  but,  as  the  family,  in  order  to  keep  them  back,
gathered  around  the  stairs,  in  the  entry,  they  supposed  her
to  be  up  stairs,  and  endeavored  to  force  their  way  up  by
violence,  beating  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  and  dragging
them  out  of  the  house;  some  of  the  Sisters  were  dragged  out
in  a  manner  too  shameful  to  mention,  and  too  abusive  for
even  savages  to  be  guilty  of.

n.  In  the  midst  of  the  hubbub,  Mother  came  out  of  her
room,  passed  through  the  crowd,  and  went  up  stairs,  unper-
ceived  by  the  mob.  The  Captain  of  the  mob  finally  forced
his  way  through,  and  went  up  to  the  head  of  the  stairs,  but
feared  to  venture  further.  At  this  instant  the  Brethren  and
Sisters,  in  one  united  voice,  raised  their  cries  to  God  for
help;  at  which  the  ruffians  were  struck  with  terror,  and  im-
mediately left  the  house. But  Mary  Partington  was  dragged


104  Testimonies  of

out  by  them,  and  put  upon  a  horse  before  one  of  them,  who
attempted  to  carry  her  off.  Brother  David,  in  attempting
to  rescue  her  from  their  merciless  hands,  was  knocked  down
and  wounded.

12.  At  this  instant — John  Booth,  the  Constable  of  the
town,  came  up  and  commanded  the  peace,  and  threatened
the  mob  with  the  severity  of  the  law  for  their  riotous  con-
duct. But  they  rose  against  him,  and  swore  that  they  would
burn  the  house  down  before  morning.  This  so  offended  the
Constable,  that  he  came  the  next  morning,  with  two  magis-
trates, who  requested  information  of  their  violence,  which
was,  accordingly,  given  them  in  writing,  together  with  the
names  of  the  rioters.

13.  They  were  summoned  before  the  County  Court  in
Hartford,  and  required  to  settle  the  matter  with  David
Meacham,  or  stand  their  trial,  and  suffer  the  penalty  of  the
law.  David  replied  that  he  did  not  want  their  money;  but,
if  they  would  make  a  public  confession  of  their  conduct,  in
their  own  church,  according  to  the  requirement  of  their  own
religion,  he  would  be  satisfied.  Although  the  leading  part
of  the  rioters  were  professors  of  religion,  these  terms  were
too  humiliating  to  their  pride.  They  therefore  stood  their
trial,  and  were  fined,  by  the  Court,  in  a  penal  sum,  propor-
tioned, as  the  Judges  supposed,  to  the  enormity  of  the  crime
in  such  cases.  This  put  a  final  stop  to  all  mobs  and  riots
against  the  Believers  in  the  state  of  Connecticut.*

14.  The  Elders,  and  others  who  followed  Mother  Ann
from  Stafford,  arrived  at  Brother  David's  just  as  the  mob

*  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  leaders  of  these  mobs,  who,  at  several  different
limes,  mse  against  the  Believers  in  Enfield,  although  they  were  men  of  affluence,
and  in  honorable  standing,  in  their  own  order;  yet  they  all  soon  lost  their  reputation
as  citizens.  In  the  town  of  Enfield  there  were  three  of  them,  who  were  men  of
note,  who  soon  lost  their  character,  and  left  the  town,  as  men  under  the  judgments
of  God.  In  the  town  of  Somers,  there  were  two  leaders  of  this  last  mob,  who  evi-
dentlv  appeared  to  die  under  judgment.  One  of  them,  by  the  name  of  Hambleton.
came,  before  his  death,  and  confessed  his  wrong,  and  asked  forgiveness.

David  Meacham.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  105

dispersed.  They  tarried  a  few  days,  strengthened  and  en-
couraged the  Believers,  and  then  all  proceeded,  together,  on
their  journey  westward,  crossed  the  Connecticut  River,  and
went  to  Joseph  Bennett's,  in  New  Providence,  (now,  Chesh-
ire,) where  they  tarried  about  four  days.  As  they  were
here  on  the  Sabbath,  many  of  the  world  attended  their  meet-
ing. Calvin  Harlow  had  a  very  clear  and  striking  gift,  to
open  the  gospel  to  them;  some  of  them  were  very  much
broken  down,  and  wept,  and  the  assembly,  generally,  behaved
with  civility.

15.  After  meeting,  an  old  Baptist  Deacon,  who  had  been
much  opposed  to  the  testimony,  called  in,  as  he  was  return-
ing from  his  own  meeting,  to  see  and  converse  with  Mother
Ann.  He  seemed,  at  first,  well  pleased  with  her  conversa-
tion, and  said,  "Your  children  don't  talk  as  you  do."
"Why  don't  they  talk  so  ?  "  Mother  replied,  "  You  must  not
expect  children  to  be  parents."  But,  Mother  soon  after
felt  a  gift  to  search  out  the  old  deacon,  and  bring  some  of
his  hidden  works  of  darkness  to  the  light,  which  so  offended
him  that  he  soon  made  his  escape.

16.  One  evening,  afterward,  two  men  came  to  dispute  with
Mother,  one  of  whom  was  called  Colonel  Smith.  They  went
into  the  room  where  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were,  with
a  number  of  the  Believers,  but  did  not  know  Mother.  Smith
asked,  "  Is  there  not  a  woman  here  that  is  the  head  of  the
Church  ?  "  "  Nay,  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  Church,"  replied
Mother.  Elder  William  Lee  said,  "  We  do  not  allow  man
nor  woman  to  be  the  head  of  the  Church,  for  Christ  is  the
head  of  the  Church."  "But,"  said  Smith,  "  there  is  a  woman
here  that  teaches,  is  there  not?"  'We  must  not  suffer  a
woman  to  teach."  Father  William  Lee  replied,  "We  do
not  suffer  man  nor  woman  to  teach  except  they  have  the
spirit  of  Christ  in  them,  and  Christ  teaches  through  them,
and  then  either  man  or  woman  may  teach." This  answer  so

14


106  Testimonies  of

confounded  the  Colonel  that  he  had  no  more  to  say,  but  soon
went  away.

17.  The  same  evening,  as  one  of  the  Sisters,  who  lived  a
few  miles  distant,  was  returning  home,  she  gained  intelligence
that  the  wicked  were  preparing  to  raise  a  mob  to  drive
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  out  of  the  place.  On  hearing
this  she  immediately  turned  back,  and  informed  Mother.  As
this  was  a  providential  discovery,  Mother  soon  felt  a  gift  to
depart ;  and  no  personal  violence  was  committed  while  they
stayed  in  this  place.  From  Cheshire,  they  went  to  Asa  Bacon's
in  Ashfield,  where  Mother  and  the  Elders  took  up  their  resi-
dence and  continued  their  labors  till  the  following  spring.


CHAPTER  XVI.

AT ASHFIELD MOTHER ANN IS VISITED BY  GREAT MULTI-
TUDES OF PEOPLE. GREAT MANIFESTATIONS OF THE

POWER  OF  GOD, AND  GREAT PURGING AMONG THE  PEO-
PLE.  A MOB  EXCITED  BY  DANIEL  BACON, &C.

Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  arrived  at  Ashfield,  Massachu-
setts, about  the  1st  of  November,  1782.  As  this  was  a  cen-
tral place,  and  convenient  for  the  resort  of  the  Believers
from  different  quarters,  and  less  liable  to  be  disturbed  by
mobs  and  riots,  Mother  felt  a  gift  to  take  up  her  residence
here  during  the  approaching  winter;  and  to  give  a  general
liberty  for  the  Believers  to  come  and  see  her.  Accordingly,
great  numbers  resorted  here  during  the  winter,  from  all
parts  where  the  gospel  had  been  planted.  More  than  sixty
sleighs,  and  six  hundred  people,  were  there  at  one  time.*

2.  During  this  season  the  power  of  God  was  manifested  in
a  marvelous  manner;  extraordinary  operations  of  the  power

*  They  were  counted  by  John  Farrington,  by  Mother's  order.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  107

and  gifts  of  God,  and  violent  wars  of  the  spirit  against  the
flesh  were  ministered,  through  Mother,  to  the  people.  The
voice  of  Mother  and  the  Elders,  against  the  filthy,  fallen
nature  of  the  flesh,  was  like  the  roaring  of  thunder.  Every
heart  was  searched,  and  every  rein  tried,  which  caused  great
purging  and  purifying  among  the  people.

3.  Here,  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon
and  his  angels ;  and  so  mighty  was  the  noise  of  the  battle
that  many,  coming  from  abroad,  were  often  seized  with  fear
and  trembling  at  a  great  distance ;  *  for  the  sound  thereof
was  like  the  roaring  of  many  waters,  driven  by  mighty  winds;
and  so  great  and  powerful  were  the  operations  that  it  seemed
as  though  Heaven  and  Hell  had  each  engaged  their  forces
to  contend  for  mastery.

4.  These  mighty  operations  were  attended  with  wonder-
ful effects;  the  combustible  materials  of  a  fallen  nature,  the
lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,
were  burnt  as  in  a  furnace;  for  nothing  could  feel  more  like
a  furnace  than  the  scorching  flames  of  truth  against  sin,
which  issued  from  the  mouths  of  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders,  and  which  flamed  around  among  the  assembly
scorching,  burning,  and  consuming,  every  thing  which  was
not  of  God.

5.  The  blessed  effects  of  this  purifying  fire  were  soon
seen  and  felt.  When  the  poisonous  influence  of  the  nature
of  evil  was  purged  away,  the  good  fruit  had  room  to  grow.
By  these  things  did  Mother's  children  learn  meekness,  and
humility;  peace  and  harmony  now  flowed  in  among  them,
and  love,  pure  heavenly  love,  and  gospel  union,  unmixed
with  lust  and  fleshly  affection  now  gained  the  pre-eminence
and  was  greatly  cherished  by  every  faithful  Believer.

6.  Spiritual  light  now  began  to  shine  more  effectually
upon  them; wisdom  and understanding now began,  in  a

*  The  sound  was  said  to  have  been  heard  at  a  distance  of  seven  miles.


108  Testimonies  of

more  extraordinary  manner,  to  guide  and  influence  them  in
all  their  actions.  As  the  rubbish  of  the  Old  Heavens  and
earth  was  purged  out,  and  burnt  up,  they  began  to  see  and
understand  more  clearly,  that  which  belonged  to  the  new;
and  in  all  these  things  they  saw  that  it  was,  indeed,  a  great
thing  to  learn  the  way  of  God,  and  that  they  had,  as  it  were,
but  just  begun  to  understand  it.  In  short,  these  things  pro-
duced a  remarkable  increase  of  the  gospel  among  the
people.

7.  As  no  previous  preparation  had  been  made  for  the  en-
tertainment of  the  Believers  in  Ashfield,  consequently  there
were  no  stores  of  provisions  laid  up  for  the  multitude;  and,
though  the  quantity  on  hand  was  sometimes  very  small,  and
great  numbers  of  people  were  continually  coming  and  going;
yet,  being  constantly  attended  with  the  blessing  of  God,  they
found  no  lack;  but  always  had  enough.

8.  Sometimes  Mother  ordered  the  people  to  sit  down
upon  the  floor,  or  on  the  ground,  and  a  small  quantity  of
bread  and  cheese,  or  some  other  kind  of  provision,  was  served
round  to  the  multitude,  much  in  the  same  manner  as  Christ
fed  the  multitude,  with  a  few  loaves  and  fishes;  and  the
power  and  blessing  of  God  evidently  attended  them,  so  that
a  small  portion  sufficed  for  a  large  number,  and  all  were
satisfied.

9.  One  particular  instance  of  this  kind  which  took  place
in  the  winter,  is  well  recollected,  by  many.  There  being  a
very  large  collection  of  people  from  various  parts,  and
scarcely  any  thing  to  eat,  Mother  called  on  the  family  to
give  the  people  something  to  eat.  They  answered,  "  There
is  no  victuals  to  give  so  many  people."  Mother  again  said,
"Give  them  to  eat."  The  people  were  then  ordered  to  sit
down,  and  a  very  small  quantity  of  bread  and  cheese,  cut
into  small  pieces,  was  served  around  to  the  multitude,  of
which  they  all  partook,  and  had  a  plenty. After  they  had


Mother  Ann  Lee.  109

eaten,  Mother  said,  "  It  is  by  the  miracles  of  God  that  you
have  been  fed,  as  when  Christ  fed  the  multitude,  O!  ye  of
little  faith."

10.  The  opposition  to  the  work  of  God  in  Ashfield  was
never  so  great,  as  it  had  been  in  most  other  places;  yet  the
Believers  were  sometimes  disturbed  by  "  lewd  fellows,  of  the
baser  sort,"  who  gathered  there  for  carnal  and  mischievous
services.  The  greatest  disturbance  that  Mother  Ann  and
the  Elders  met  with  while  they  continued  in  Ashfield,  was
excited  by  Daniel  Bacon,  brother  to  Asa,  and  Moses  Bacon.

11.  Daniel  and  his  wife  had  both  received  faith  and  em-
braced the  testimony;  but  he  afterward  fell  away,  and  be-
came very  bitter,  and  moved  off  into  Shelburne;  but  his
wife  still  desired  to  obey  her  faith.  Sometime  in  March,
Daniel  came  to  the  Church  in  a  sleigh,  and  brought  his  wife
and  young  child,  and  without  going  into  the  house,  he  put
them  out  of  the  sleigh,  in  a  very  rough  and  churlish  manner,
into  the  mud  before  the  house,  and  immediately  drove  off
and  left  them.  When  Mother  was  informed  of  this  circum-
stance, she  said,  "This  is  a  snare;  he  has  done  this  to  get
occasion;  she  is  his  wife,  and  I  will  not  keep  her  here  so."
She  therefore  sent  one  of  the  Brethren  to  carry  the  woman
back.  Daniel  failing  of  his  purpose  to  get  occasion  in  this
manner,  now  openly  came  forth,  and  showed  plainly  what  he
was  after;  and,  by  spreading  slanderous  reports,  he  gave  the
enemies  of  the  cross  a  pretext  to  persecute.

12.  Though  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Ashfield  were,
generally  speaking,  very  friendly ;  yet,  in  the  neighboring
towns  there  were  many  calumniators  and  busybodies,  who
were  industrious  in  circulating  slanderous  reports,  and  seized
every  occasion  to  scandalize  Mother  Ann's  character,  and
bring  reproach  upon  her  testimony.  This  furnished  the
wicked  with  a  pretext  to  come,  in  a  riotous  manner,  to  in-
quire into  the  truth  of  these  reports.


no  Testimonies  of

13.  A  few  days  after  Daniel's  wife  was  sent  home,  a  mob
of  about  fifty  or  sixty  men  was  collected  in  Shelburne,  and
its  vicinity  by  Daniel's  instigation.  The  inhabitants  of  the
town  of  Ashfield  being  informed  of  it,  were  desirous  to  pre-
vent any  riotous  proceedings;  with  this  view  they  appointed
a  committee  to  confer  with  the  mob,  and  inquire  into  the
cause  of  their  coming;  and  to  take  suitable  measures  to  pre-
vent them  from  using  any  violence  in  the  town.  The  com-
mittee, consisting  of  Thomas  Stocking — Captain  of  militia,
and  two  other  respectable  men,  came  to  Asa  Bacon's  and
desired  to  see  Mother  Ann.  She  went  to  the  door  to  see
them,  and  said,  "  I  am  a  poor,  weak  woman,  and  I  have  suf-
fered so  much  by  mobs,  that  it  seems  to  me  as  though  I  could
not  endure  any  more."  Stocking  replied,  "You  need  not  be
afraid  Maam,  we  have  not  come  to  hurt  you,  but  to  defend
you."  He  then  informed  her  that  there  was  a  mob  coming
from  Shelburne,  to  disturb  her  and  her  people;  that  they  were
not  willing  to  have  any  mobs  in  Ashfield ;  that  if  she  and  the
Elders  would  go  to  Philip  Philip's  in  the  center  of  the  town,
they  should  be  protected.  Mother  paused  a  little,  and  con-
sidering herself  under  the  protection  of  God,  she  did  not
choose  to  put  herself  under  the  protection  of  man,  and  de-
clined their  offer;  but,  at  the  same  time,  invited  them  in
to  dinner,  and  treated  them  kindly.

14.  After  dinner,  the  committee  went  up  to  Smith's  tavern,
about  a  half  a  mile  distant,  and  met  the  mob.  Here  they
held  a  conference  with  their  leaders,  and  found  that  their
pretended  object  was  to  search  into  the  truth  of  some  pre-
vailing rumors  respecting  Mother  Ann's  character,  and  the
character  and  conduct  of  the  people  with  her.  They  had
heard  many  base  and  infamous  reports,  and  concluded  that
Mother's  pretensions  were  an  imposition  upon  the  people,
and  strongly  suspected  her  to  be  a  British  emissary,  dressed
in  woman's  habit,  for  seditious  purposes. Though  the  com-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  hi

mittee  bore  testimony  to  the  peaceable  deportment  and
harmless  conduct  of  the  people,  still  the  mob  could  not  be
satisfied  without  a  full  examination  of  the  people  themselves,
and  particularly  of  the  woman.  Accordingly  the  committee
agreed,  that  if  the  mob  would  proceed  no  further,  Mother
should  go  to  Smith's,  and  answer  for  herself,  upon  condition
that  she  should  not  be  abused.

15.  This  appeared  to  satisfy  the  leaders  of  the  mob,  but,
a  part  of  the  company  being  determined  to  go  to  Asa
Bacon's,  separated  from  the  rest,  and  went.  When  they
came  to  the  house,  they  called  to  Ephraim  Welch,  who  was
standing  in  the  door,  asking  '*  Where  is  that  woman  you  call
Mother?"  "  I  suppose  she  is  in  the  house,"  said  Ephraim;
"What  do  you  want  of  her  ?  "  "  We  hear,"  said  they,  "  that
she  ran  away  from  her  own  country,  that  she  has  been  crop-
ped, and  branded,  and  had  her  tongue  bored  through  for
blasphemy;  and  we  want  to  see  for  ourselves."  Ephraim
went  in  and  informed  Mother,  and  she  came  out.  "  What
do  you  want  of  me,"  said  Mother.  They  replied  by  repeat-
ing the  same  reports,  which  they  had  mentioned  to  Ephraim,
and  said  they  had  come  to  see  for  themselves.  "  Will  you
believe  your  own  eyes  ?  "  said  Mother.  "  We  shall  be  obliged
to,"  said  their  leader.  "  Then  come  near,"  said  Mother,
"and  see  for  yourselves."  She  then  turned  up  her  cap  and
showed  her  ears,  and  said,  "  see  if  my  ears  have  been  cropped,
and  see  if  my  forehead  has  been  branded."  Then,  showing
her  tongue,  she  said,  "  see  if  my  tongue  has  been  bored  ?  "

16.  After  they  had  seen,  and  examined  for  themselves,
Mother  asked,  "What  do  you  think  now?"  Their  leader
replied,  "  I  think  they  tell  damned  lies  about  you."  Mother
then  shamed  them  for  giving  credit  to  such  foolish  and  in-
consistent reports,  and  coming,  in  such  a  mob-like  manner,
to  inquire  about  them;  and  they  went  off,  apparently  much
chagrined  at  their  own  folly.


ii2  Testimonies  of

17.  About  this  time  the  fore-mentioned  committee  came
and  informed  Mother  and  the  Elders,  of  their  conference
and  agreement  with  the  leaders  of  the  mob;  and  urged  the
necessity  of  their  going  to  Smith's  in  order  to  prevent  the
mob  from  coming  any  further.  Mother  and  the  Elders  felt
it  most  prudent  to  comply,  and  immediately  had  a  sleigh  and
horses  prepared,  and  went,  accompanied  by  Calvin  Harlow,
Aaron  Wood,  Ephraim  Welch  and  several  others  of  the
Believers.  Having  arrived  at  Smith's,  the  leaders  of  the
mob,  of  whom  Col.  David  Wells,  of  Shelburne  was  chief,
entered  upon  theii  examination;  and  finding  their  charges
against  Mother  fully  refuted  in  all  other  points,  they  wished
to  know  whether  she  was  a  woman  or  not.  Accordingly
Smith's  wife,  and  another  woman  were  appointed  as  a  jury
to  examine  her,  who  reported  that  she  was  a  woman.

18.  Several  other  accusations  were  brought  against  the
people,  the  principal  of  which  was,  that  the  Shakers  had
bought  up  the  hay  in  the  town,  so  that  a  poor  man  could  not
get  a  hundred  of  hay  to  keep  his  cow  from  starving;  that
they  had  likewise  bought  up  the  grain;  so  that  the  poor  were
left  destitute  of  bread  to  eat.  To  the  first  the  committee
replied  that  the  inhabitants  had  a  surplus  of  hay,  and  had
found  a  great  advantage  in  selling  it  to  the  Shakers;  because
they  paid  the  money  for  it,  which  enabled  them  to  procure
salt  from  Boston;  an  article  which  could  not  be  had,  without
money.  That  they  knew  of  no  such  poor  man  in  the  town,
and  if  any  such  one  could  be  produced,  he  should  be  pro-
vided with  hay.  The  Believers  also  made  similar  offers;
but  no  such  poor  man  was  found.

19.  Respecting  the  second  charge,  it  was  proved  that  the
Shakers  had  not  bought  any  grain  in  the  place;  but,  on  the
contrary,  they  had  sold  some  to  the  inhabitants,  which  they
had  brought  into  the  place.  The  committee  further  bore
testimony  to  the  honesty  and  integrity  of  the  people  in  all


Mother  Ann  Lee.  113

their  dealings  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  town ;  and  ex-
pressed their  unwillingness  to  have  them  molested,  or  to  have
the  town  disturbed  on  their  account.

20.  Having  gone  through  with  their  examinations,  Mother
addressed  herself  to  Col.  Wells,  and  reproved  him,  saying,
"  Is  it  not  a  shame  for  you,  who  profess  to  be  a  gentleman,
and  an  officer,  to  give  heed  to  such  scandalous  and  incon-
sistent reports;  and  to  come  here,  at  the  head  of  a  mob,  out
of  your  own  town,  to  persecute  an  innocent  people  ?  Is  not
the  authority  of  the  town  able  to  see  to  the  affairs  of  their
own  town  ? "

21.  The  Colonel,  stung  with  this  reproof,  replied,  in  a  pet,
''  If  you  don't  hold  your  tongue,  I'll  cane  you."  "  Do  you
pretend  to  be  a  gentleman,"  said  Mother,  "  and  are  going  to
cane  a  poor  weak  woman  ?  What  a  shame  it  is  !  "  Abashed
at  this  reply,  the  Colonel  attempted  no  further  opposition.
Elder  James  Whittaker  also  spake  to  the  assembly,  and  to
the  family,  and  closed  his  speech  in  these  words,  "  I  am
called  to  stand  in  defense  of  the  gospel,  and  that  I  will  do
to  the  losing  of  my  life."  The  assembly  was  silenced,  and
put  to  shame,  and  went  off  confounded,  without  committing
any  act  of  violence.  And  Smith's  family,  who  had  before
been  unfriendly,  were  now  so  far  overcome,  that  they  ap-
peared very  friendly,  and  spoke  no  more  against  the  people,
so  long  as  the  Church  continued  in  Ashfield.

22.  Thus  did  the  earth  open  her  mouth  and  swallow  up
the  flood  of  malicious  lies  and  slanderous  reports  which  the
dragon  had  cast  out  of  his  mouth  against  the  woman  ;  and  thus
did  God  protect  His  Anointed  from  the  snares  of  the  wicked,
and  no  man,  on  this  occasion,  was  suffered  to  hurt  her,  or
destroy  her  faithful  seed.

23.  But  this  Daniel  Bacon,  having  failed  in  his  purposes,
still  determined  on  venting  his  rage  against  the  innocent
people  of  God. About  a  fortnight  after  this,  he  came  again,

15


ii4  Testimonies  of

with  twelve  or  fourteen  enemies  of  the  cross,  and  beset  the
house,  railing  and  threatening  the  people.  Elder  John
Hocknell  attempted  to  reason  with  him  ;  but  Daniel,  refusing
to  hear  reason,  struck  him  two  or  three  severe  strokes  across
the  shoulders,  with  the  butt  end  of  a  whip,  having  the  lash
wound  around  his  hand.  But  some  of  his  company  refused
to  join  with  him  in  acts  of  violence ;  so  they  all  departed.


CHAPTER  XVII.

MOTHER  AND  THE  ELDERS  RETURN TO HARVARD BY THE

COMPLAINTS  OF  A  DEAF  AND  DUMB  MAN  A  MOB  IS  RAISED

AND ASSEMBLED AT SHIRLEY THE ELDERS TAKEN

FROM  SHIRLEY  TO  HARVARD  AND  WHIPPED.

On  the  last  day  of  April,  1783,  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders  left  Ashfield,  and  passed  through  Petersham,  where
they  tarried  one  night,  returned  again  to  Harvard ;  visited,
strengthened  and  encouraged  the  Believers  in  Harvard,  Shir-
ley, Woburn,  and  other  places  in  the  vicinity.  Being  con-
tinually destined  to  suffer  persecution  in  these  parts,  they
soon  had  to  prepare  for  a  new  and  trying  scene,  which  over-
took them  about  the  first  of  June.

2.  Of  this  Mother  was  warned  in  a  vision  a  few  days
previous.  Being  with  the  Elders  at  Jeremiah  Willard's  and
under  great  sufferings,  Lucy  Prescott  went  up  into  the
chamber  to  see  her.  While  there  Mother  said  to  Elder
James,  "  There  is  going  to  be  a  great  persecution  ;  for  I  saw
a  man  come  and  look  in  at  the  window,  and  he  was  as  black
as  a  negro."

3.  The  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  these  new  acts
of  persecution,  were  as  follows: Sarah  Turner, —  sister  of


Mother  Ann  Lee.  115

Nathaniel  and  Joseph  Turner,  had  married  a  deaf  and  dumb
man  of  Leominster,  by  the  name  of  Jude  Carter.  Sarah  had
embraced  the  testimony  of  the  gospel,  and  her  husband,  ap-
pearing friendly  and  pliable,  she  had  labored  to  gain  his
feelings  to  the  way  of  God,  and  had  induced  him,  by  signs,
to  make  some  confession  of  his  sins.

4.  Being  at  Elijah  Wild's,  in  Shirley,  in  company  with  her
husband,  and  wishing  to  have  him  conform  to  the  faith  and
practice  of  Believers,  she  endeavored  to  prevail  with  him  to
have  his  hair  cut,  and  to  sell  his  silver  buckles,  to  buy  things
more  necessary.  He  replied,  by  signs,  that  if  he  should
have  his  hair  cut,  people  would  laugh  at  him,  and,  as  to  his
buckles,  other  people  wore  buckles,  as  well  as  he.*

5.  The  next  day  they  went  together  to  Boston  market,  for
the  purpose  of  getting  some  family  necessaries;  and  Sarah
prevailed  with  her  husband  to  sell  his  buckles,  and  buy
something  more  necessary.  On  their  return  they  came  to
Nathan  Kendal's,  in  Woburn,  where  she  also  prevailed  with
him  to  have  his  hair  cut;  but,  Jude  not  being  willing  to  have
it  cut  so  short  as  some,  and  seeing  a  man  the  cut  of  whose
hair  suited  him,  he  consented  to  have  it  cut  like  that  man's,
which  was  accordingly  done.

6.  Jude  appeared  much  pleased  with  his  new  friends,  and
passed  the  time  #in  much  harmony  till  bed  time,  when  he
strenuously  insisted  on  lying  with  his  wife.  This  being  ut-
terly inadmissible  in  a  family  of  Believers,  was  as  strenu-
ously opposed.  Being  highly  offended  with  this  treatment,
he  set  off  early  the  next  morning,  for  home,  and  left  his  wife,
who,  afterward,  followed  on,  with  some  other  company.  In
passing  through  Harvard,  Jude  made  a  grievous  complaint,
by  signs,  that  the  Shakers  had  robbed  him  of  his  silver
buckles,  cut  off  his  hair,  and  got  away  his  wife.

7.  The  motions  and  gestures  of  this  deaf  and  dumb  man

*  It  was  then  customary  for  men  to  wear  long  hair,  and  large  silver  shoe  buckles.


n6  Testimonies  of

furnished  a  sufficient  occasion,  for  those  who  were  always
watching  for  occasion,  to  persecute,  without  inquiring  into
the  true  state  of  the  matter.  Secret  measures  were  now
taken  to  raise  a  mob,  of  which  the  Believers  had  no  knowl-
edge, till  the  mob  appeared.  This  tumultuous  assembly
from  Harvard,  came  to  Elijah  Wild's,  in  Shirley,  on  Sab-
bath evening,  June  ist,  17S3,  and  beset  the  house  at  every
door  and  window,  and  forbade  any  person  going  in  or  out.

8.  Mother  and  the  Elders,  having  very  early  that  morning
gone  from  Harvard  to  Shirley,  were  at  this  time  in  the
house,  with  many  other  Believers,  who  had  assembled  there,
and  who  were,  at  this  time,  in  the  worship  of  God.  The
leaders  of  the  mob  were  Phineas  Farnsworth,  James  Pollard,
Elisha  Fullam,  and  Asa  Houghton,  all  of  Harvard,  with  a
considerable  company  of  the  baser  sort  from  Harvard,  Rox-
bury,  and  Bolton.  Like  the  men  of  Sodom,  they  attempted
to  enter  the  house  by  pressing  hard  against  the  door;  but
were  prevented,  by  the  Brethren  within.

9.  Brother  David  Meacham  was,  at  this  time,  in  labors,
with  some  of  the  Brethren,  in  a  shop,  at  a  distance  from  the
house;  but,  on  discovering  the  mob,  he  left  the  shop,  and
attempted  to  force  his  way  through  the  mob  into  the  house,
but  was  not  able.  He  then  drew  back  from  them  and  in-
quired the  cause  of  their  coming  together  in  such  a  manner;
and  began  to  lecture  them  on  the  impropriety  and  unlawful-
ness of  such  proceedings;  urging  the  testimony  of  truth,  the
liberty  of  conscience,  and  the  duty  of  Christians.  At  this
time  a  large  number  of  the  mob  gathered  around  him,  and
gave  good  attention  to  what  he  said,  which  caused  a  dis-
union among  themselves.  The  leaders  of  the  mob,  on  see-
ing the  effect  of  Brother  David's  lecture  upon  the  feelings  of
the  people,  came  and  took  hold  of  him,  and,  with  violence,
thrust  him  into  the  house,  saying,  "  You  shall  not  preach  any
more  to  the  people."


Mother  Ann  Lee.  117

10.  One  of  the  Sisters  —  Moily  Randall,  notwithstanding
the  previous  orders  of  the  mob  to  the  contrary,  obtained  lib-
erty to  return  home  to  her  young  child.  Having  got  home,
she  immediately  dispatched  a  messenger  to  acquaint  the
Grand  Juryman  of  the  town,  of  their  situation.  The  mob
continued  to  surround  the  house  all  night,  with  much  rail-
ing and  savage  behavior;  but  committed  no  personal  in-
jury till  next  morning.  In  the  morning,  the  leaders  of  the
mob  required  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  to  come  out,
which  they  refused  to  do;  but  consented  that  they  four,
might  come  into  the  house,  and  they  accordingly  came  in.
Mother  ordered  Eunice  Wilds  to  prepare  some  breakfast  for
them,  saying,  "  We  must  feed  our  enemies,  and  so  heap
coals  of  fire  upon  their  heads."  Eunice  prepared  breakfast,
and  they  sat  down  and  ate.  Elijah,  by  Mother's  advice,
carried  bread  and  cheese  to  the  mob,  without,  and  the  chief
part  of  them  ate  freely.

11.  After  this  Elder  James  said,  "I  must  go  and  speak
the  word  of  the  Lord  to  them,"  and  accordingly  went  out,
with  some  of  the  Brethren,  and  spake  to  them.  He  ques-
tioned them,  very  solemnly,  concerning  such  riotous  proceed-
ings, and  said,  "  Why  have  you  come  here  to  abuse  us  ?
What  have  we  done  ?  Have  we  hurt  or  injured  your  persons
or  property?  If  we  have,  make  us  sensible  of  it,  and  we  will
make  you  satisfaction."

1  i.  After  these  words,  the  mob  broke  forth  in  a  rage,  and
seized  Elder  James  by  the  collar  and  arms ;  at  which  the
Brethren  instantly  stepped  forth  to  rescue  him  from  their
merciless  hands;  and  in  the  struggle  he  cried  out,  "  Father,
Lord  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not
what  they  do!"  It  appeared  as  though  he  would  have  been
choked  to  death,  had  not  one  of  the  Brethren  *  unclinched
the  ruffian's  hands.


*  Nathan  Kendal,  Jr


n8  Testimonies  of

13.  About  this  time,  Thomas  Buckmour, —  the  Grand
Juryman  of  the  town,  and  James  Parker, —  a  Peace  Officer,
arrived,  who  immediately  commanded  the  peace,  and  ordered
the  mob  to  desist  from  troubling  the  people.  This  seemed
to  strike  a  damp  upon  them;  but  still  the  tumult  continued,
and  the  mob  continued  to  increase  from  Harvard.  A  num-
ber of  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  being  at  this  time  in  the
street,  kneeled  down  to  pray,  at  which  some  of  these  ungodly
ruffians,  who  were  on  horseback,  attempted  to  ride  over
them,  but  were  not  able.

14.  After  several  hours'  contest  with  the  Believers,  and
with  the  peace  officers,  the  leaders  of  the  mob,  whose  object
was  to  carry  off  Mother  and  the  Elders,  consented  to  give
up  their  unlawful  demands,  upon  the  following  conditions;
namely,  that  if  the  two  Elders, —  "William  Lee,  and  James
Whittaker,  would  go  with  them  to  Harvard,  they  would  leave
Mother  Ann,  and  withdraw  in  a  peaceable  manner;  that  they
would  treat  the  Elders  with  kindness  and  civility,  and  that
they  should  not  be  hurt.  This  they  promised  upon  their
honor ;  and,  upon  these  conditions,  the  Elders  consented  to
go  with  them.  They  set  off,  accompanied  by  Brothers  David
Meacham,  Calvin  Harlow,  and  a  number  of  other  Believers,
from  different  parts.  Soon  after  they  entered  Harvard,  the
mob  broke  forth  in  a  violent  and  savage  manner,  and  com-
manded Brothers  David,  and  Calvin,  and  all  the  rest  of  the
Believers  who  accompanied  them,  to  return  back  to  Shirley.
They  all  obeyed  this  tyrannical  order  except  Brothers  David
and  Calvin,  who  resolutely  withstood  them,  and  refused  to
return.

15.  Upon  this  they  seized  Brother  David's  horse  by  the
bridle,  and  held  him;  he  instantly  leaped  from  his  horse,  told
them  he  had  a  right  to  the  highway,  and  if  they  attempted  to
stop  him,  they  should,  every  soul  of  them,  suffer  the  penalty  of


Mother  Ann  Lee.  119

the  law,*  that  Brother  Calvin  was  his  companion,  and  he
should  go  too  Thus  they  broke  through  the  mob,  and  fol-
lowed after  the  Elders.  The  Elders,  being  mounted  on
good  horses,  outrode  the  mob,  and  arrived  at  Jeremiah
Willard's  before  them.  Jeremiah,  who  then  professed  faith,
sat  in  the  door  of  his  house  to  keep  the  mob  from  entering.
But,  instead  of  regarding  his  order,  as  the  ruler  of  his  own
house,  or  respecting  the  laws  of  civil  society,  they  violently
drew  him,  feet  foremost,  out  of  the  house,  with  -his  head
thumping  against  the  steps  that  led  up  to  the  door.  They
then  broke  into  the  chamber,  and  furiously  dragged  the
Elders  out,  and  carried  them  back  about  half  a  mile,  where
they  met  the  main  body  of  the  mob.

16.  Here  they  made  a  stand  to  execute  their  savage  de-
signs, and  said  "  James  Whittaker,  and  William  Lee,  should
be  tied  to  a  tree,  and  whipped."  But,  before  they  began
their  scourging,  they  laid  violent  hands  upon  David  Meacham,
and  Calvin  Harlow,  threw  them  upon  the  ground,  and  held
them  fast,  until  their  barbarous  deed  was  accomplished.
They  then  seized  Elder  James,  tied  him  to  the  limb  of  a
tree,  near  the  road,  cut  some  sticks,  from  the  bushes,  and
Isaac  Whitney,  being  chosen  for  one  of  the  whippers,  began
the  cruel  work,  and  continued  beating  and  scourging  till  his
back  was  all  in  a  gore  of  blood,  and  the  flesh  bruised  to  a
jelly.  They  then  untied  him,  and  seized  Father  William
Lee;  but  he  chose  to  kneel  down  and  be  whipped,  therefore
they  did  not  tie  him;  but  began  to  whip  him  as  he  stood  on
his  knees.  Notwithstanding  the  severity  of  the  scourging
which  Elder  James  had  already  received,  he  immediately
leaped  upon  Father  William's  back,  Bethiah  Willard,  who
had  followed  from  Jeremiah's,  leaped  upon  Elder  James'
back;  others,  who  came  with  Bethiah,  followed  the  same
example. But, such marks of genuine Christianity only

*  He  did  not  tell  them  what  law.


120  Testimonies  of

tended  the  more  to  enrage  these  savage  persecutors,  and
those  who  attempted  to  manifest  their  love  and  charity  in
this  manner,  were  inhumanly  beaten  without  mercy.

17.  Bethiah  Willard  was  so  cruelly  beaten,  she  carried  the
scars  until  death.  She  received  one  stroke  over  her  head
and  face,  which,  in  a  few  minutes,  caused  one  of  her  eyes  to
turn  entirely  black.  Calvin  Harlow,  on  seeing  Bethiah,  said
to  the  mob,  "  See  how  you  have  abused  that  woman;  you
have  exposed  yourselves  to  the  law."  On  hearing  this  they
began  to  disperse,  and  were  soon  gone,  leaving  the  suffering
objects  of  their  cruelty  to  take  care  of  themselves.

18.  During  these  inhuman  transactions,  Mother  Ann  and
Hannah  Kendal  were  standing  together  in  Elijah  Wild's
garden,  at  Shirley,  nearly  seven  miles  distant,  and  Mother
said  to  Hannah,  "  The  Elders  are  in  great  tribulation,  for  I
hear  Elder  William's  soul  cry  to  Heaven."  After  the  mob
left  the  ground,  the  Elders,  and  those  few  Believers  who
were  with  them,  retired  a  few  rods,  and  all  kneeled  down;
and  Elder  James  had  a  new  song  of  praise  put  into  his
mouth,  which  he  sung  on  the  spot,'  as  he  was  kneeling.  They
then  went  back  to  Jeremiah  Willard's,  took  their  horses,  and
returned  to  Shirley  the  same  evening,  and  were  received  by
Mother  and  the  Elders,  with  great  joy.

19.  "  Did  they  abuse  you,  James?"  said  Mother.  "  I  will
show  you.  Mother,"  said  James,  and  kneeling  before  her,  he
stripped  up  his  shirt,  and  showed  his  wounded  back,  which
was  covered  with  blood.  This  was  a  shocking  sight,  and
caused  an  affecting  scene  of  sorrow  and  weeping.  When
they  came  to  wash,  and  dress  it,  they  found  his  flesh  black
and  blue  from  his  shoulders  to  his  waistband,  and,  in  many
places,  bruised  to  a  jelly,  as  though  it  had  been  beaten  with
a  club.

20.  Elder  James,  addressing  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  said,
"I  have  been  abused,  but  it  is  not  for  any  wrong  I  have  ever


Mother  Ann  Lee.  121

done  to  them;  it  is  for  your  sakes."  "  I  have  nothing  against
them  for  any  thing  that  they  have  done  to  me;  for  they  were
ignorant,  and  knew  not  what  manner  of  spirit  they  were  of."
Then  turning  to  Ivory  Wilds,  he  said,  "  Ivory,  I  could  take
as  many  more  for  you  if  it  would  do  you  any  good."

21.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  with  all  the  Brethren  and
Sisters,  then  kneeled  down  and  prayed  to  God,  to  forgive
their  bloody  persecutors;  Elder  James  cried,  "  Father  for-
give them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  "  James,  this
is  the  life  of  the  gospel,"  said  Mother.  After  this,  Mother
and  the  Elders  were  very  joyful,  and  thankful  that  they
were  worthy  to  suffer  persecution  for  Christ's  sake.

22.  It  was  not  known  that  any  person  belonging  to  Shir-
ley took  an  active  part  in  this  mob;  but  the  inhabitants,  gen-
erally, appeared  much  displeased  with  these  transactions.
A  neighboring  young  man,  by  the  name  of  Ezekiel  Longley,
whose  feelings  were  friendly  to  the  Believers,  received  a  se-
vere blow  upon  his  head,  from  one  of  this  mob,  for  testify-
ing against  their  unlawful  proceedings.  Such  were  the
transactions  of  a  malicious  and  cruel  mob,  raised  under  the
pretense  of  avenging  the  alleged  abuses  to  a  deaf  and  dumb
man.  But,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  circumstance  was  made
use  of  merely  as  a  pretext  to  persecute  and  abuse  the
chosen  witnesses  of  God.

16


122  Testimonies  of

CHAPTER  XVIII.

MOTHER  ANN  AND  THE  ELDERS  LEAVE  HARVARD  AND
VISIT  PETERSHAM.  A  MOB  ASSEMBLES;  THE  BELIEV-
ERS ABUSED;  AARON  WOOD  KNOCKED  DOWN. — MOTHER
AND  THE  ELDERS  GO  TO  JOSEPH  BENNET'S  IN  CHESH-
IRE; THENCE TO RICHMOND.

After  these  transactions,  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  con-
tinued their  labors,  and  visited  the  Believers  in  Woburn,
Harvard,  and  Shirley,  until  about  the  beginning  of  July,
1783,  then  set  off,  on  Saturday  morning,  for  Petersham,  and
went  as  far  as  Templeton,  where  they  put  up  for  the  night,
and,  early  next  morning,  proceeded  to  David  Hammond's
in  Petersham.  They  were  accompanied  by  a  considerable
number  of  Believers,  from  Harvard,  and  other  places.
About  the  third  day  after  their  arrival,  in  the  afternoon,  a
considerable  collection  of  people,  who  were  returning  from
a  funeral,  came  and  gathered  around  the  house,  in  a  tumult-
uous manner,  and  seemed  determined  to  enter;  but  were
kept  out,  by  David  Hammond,  and  others,  who  stood  in
the  hall.

2.  Elder  James,  observing  their  riotous  and  persecuting
spirit  and  conduct,  read,  with  his  usual  calmness,  an  article
in  the  Bill  of  Rights,  which  grants  to  Christians,  of  every
denomination,  equal  rights  and  privileges,  in  the  exercise
and  enjoyment  of  their  religious  profession  and  worship.
He  then  reasoned  with  them,  for  some  time,  and  endeavored
to  show  them  that  such  proceedings  as  theirs,  were  unchrist-
ian, unlawful,  unmanly,  and  abusive.  Mother  Ann  also
came  down  stairs,  went  to  the  door,  and  boldly  reproved  the
mob  for  their  wickedness,  and  reminded  them  of  the  abuse
which  she  and  the  Elders  suffered  before  in  this  place. Sev-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  123

eral  of  the  company  were  then  admitted  into  the  house,
and  Mother  conducted  them  to  a  back  apartment,  and
showed  them  a  narrow  passage,  back  of  the  chimney,  say-
ing, "They  thrust  me  through  there;  it  seemed  as  though
they  would  press  my  soul  out  of  my  body;  I  was  never  so
abused,  in  all  my  life."

3.  Soon  after  this  the  mob  withdrew,  but,  to  their  dis-
honor, they  returned  again,  about  dusk,  with  redoubled  rage,
determined  on  mischief ;  however,  not  many  of  them  were
suffered  to  enter  the  house.  Mother  Ann  did  not  conceal
herself,  but  appeared  openly,  before  the  mob.  She  was  ex-
ceedingly powerful,  and  it  seemed  she  intended  they  should
understand  that  she  did  not  stand  in  fear  of  them;  for  she
spake  boldly,  of  their  brutal  and  ungodly  behavior,  and  re-
lated what  she  and  the  Elders  had  suffered  before  in  this
place,  by  their  wicked  hands.

4.  Some  of  the  Brethren  went  out  to  reprove  and  admonish
the  mob,  for  their  ungodly  and  abusive  behavior;  but,  it
seemed  in  vain  to  parley  with  a  people  bent  on  wickedness.
Stones  were  thrown  in  at  the  windows,  which  hit  and
wounded  several  persons,  in  their  heads,  and  a  number  of
the  Brethren  and  Sisters  were  abused,  and  hurt.  But,  in  the
midst  of  the  hubbub,  Mother  ordered  the  Believers  to  sing;
they  instantly  sang  with  great  power.  When  the  singing
ended,  the  chief  portion  of  the  Brethren  went  out  among  the
rabble,  and  were  very  bold  and  powerful  in  supporting  the
testimony  of  the  gospel,  and  reproving  them  for  their  abusive
and  wicked  behavior;  but  this  seemed  only  the  more  to  ex-
asperate them,  they  reviled  and  abused  the  Brethren,  and
struck  a  number  of  them.  At  length,  a  man  by  the  name  of
Benjamin  Witt,  with  a  large  club,  struck  Aaron  Wood  on  the
head  with  such  violence  that  he  fell  prostrate  upon  the
ground,  apparently  dead.

5.  Some one  of  the  people  cried  out,  "You  have  killed


124  Testimonies  of

him."  Elder  James  cried  out,  "Mark  the  man  that  killed
that  man."  Instantly  the  whole  mob  began  to  disperse;
some  ran  one  way,  and  some  another,  clambering  over  fences
and  stone  walls,  the  falling  of  which,  in  the  confusion,  made
a  great  clattering,  which  was  succeeded  by  three  shouts  from
the  Believers  that  made  the  woods  echo.  Aaron  was  carried
into  the  house,  and  his  wound  dressed.

6.  The  following  evening,  while  the  Believers  were  zeal-
ously engaged  in  the  worship  of  God,  the  house  was  again  sur-
rounded by  a  noisy  rabble,  mocking,  hooting  and  yelling  like
savages;  but  they  were  not  suffered  to  enter.  During  the
worship,  a  pistol  was  discharged  in  at  the  window,  apparently
with  a  view  to  disconcert  and  terrify  the  Believers;  but,  so
little  was  it  regarded,  that,  although  the  fire  passed  close  by
the  principal  singer,  who  stood  beside  the  window,  it  did
not  break  the  song,  nor  stop  the  exercise  of  the  people.

7.  Thus  the  wicked  continued  their  savage  and  heathen-
ish behavior,  night  after  night,  during  the  principal  part  of
the  time  that  Mother  Ann  continued  in  Petersham,  which
was  about  twelve  days.  But,  while  these  children  of  confu-
sion contented  themselves  with  noisy  clamor,  without  pro-
ceeding to  personal  abuse,  and  acts  of  mischief,  they  were
but  little  regarded  by  the  Believers,  who  were  engaged  in  far
different  employment.

8.  Shortly  before  Mother  and  the  Elders  left  Petersham,
they  went  to  Thomas  Shattuck's,  about  three-fourths  of  a
mile  from  David  Hammond's,  where,  being  followed  by
nearly  all  the  Believers,  they  had  a  very  joyful  meeting,  at-
tended also  with  sharp  war  against  the  flesh  and  all  sin.
Mother  afterward  spake  very  comforting  to  the  Believers,
counseled  them  to  forget  their  troubles,  and  remember  their
sorrows  no  more.

9.  Soon  after  this  Mother  and  the  Elders  proceeded  on
their  journey  to  the  westward,  crossed  Connecticut  river  at


Mother  Ann  Lee.  125

Sunderland,  and  went  directly  to  Joseph  Bennett's,  in  Chesh-
ire, where  they  arrived  on  Friday,  July  18th,  17S3.  Here
they  tarried  over  the  Sabbath;  held  a  public  meeting,  and
many  of  the  world  attended.  The  Elders  all  •  spoke,  and
opened  the  gospel  with  great  clearness,  so  that  unbelievers
were  confounded.

10.  After  meeting,  some  of  the  young  people  of  the  town
came  to  the  house,  and  began  to  rail,  in  the  most  vehement
manner,  against  Mother  Ann.  At  this  one  of  the  young  Sisters,
feeling  greatly  pressed  upon  by  the  power  of  God,  cried  out,
"She  is  my  Mother;  She  is  my  Mother."  Father  William
Lee  immediately  added,  "  and  She  is  my  Mother;  She  is  my
Mother."  This  put  them  to  silence.  Mother  laid  open
some  of  their  sins  before  their  faces,  so  they  went  off  greatly
ashamed.

11.  After  tarrying  at  Joseph's  nearly  a  week,  strengthen-
ing the  Believers,  and  building  them  up  in  their  most  holy
faith,  Mother  and  the  Elders  pursued  their  journey  to  Rich-
mond, with  the  view  of  visiting  the  Believers  in  Richmond
and  Hancock,  and  arrived  at  Samuel  Fitch's,  in  Richmond,
on  July  24,  1783.


CHAPTER  XIX.

GREAT OPPOSITION FROM THE WICKED, INSTIGATED BY

VALENTINE RATHBUN MOTHER AND THE ELDERS

TAKEN WITH A WARRANT AND TRIED BY A COURT

OF (SO-CALLED) JUSTICES SAMUEL FITCH AND

BRETHREN  COMMITTED  TO  JAIL OPPOSITION  CON-
TINUES  MOTHER  ANN  VISITS  THE  PRISONERS  —  RE-
TURNS THROUGH WEST STOCKBRIDGE.

The  Believers  in  Richmond  and  Hancock gathered,  with
great joy,  to see Mother  Ann and the Elders,  after  their


126  Testimonies  of

arrival.  Many  of  the  world  also  came,  and  desired'informa-
tion.  At  first,  they  behaved  with  civility  ;  but,  when  the
Brethren  went  forth  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  the  power
of  God  was  manifested  among  them,  the  subjects  of  Anti-
christ's kingdom  were  disturbed,  and  the  spirit  of  opposi-
tion began  to  show  itself  in  a  violent  manner.

2.  In  the  evening  of  the  second  day  after  their  arrival,
there  came  a  number  of  the  unbelievers,  and  behaved  very
roughly,  but  were  kept  out  of  the  house  by  Samuel  and  the
Brethren.  On  the  Sabbath,  many  of  the  Believers  gathered
and  exercised  in  the  worship  of  God,  with  great  power,  re-
joicing, shouting,  and  praising  God.  This  alarmed  the
unbelievers,  many  of  whom  were  present,  and  manifested
their  opposition  in  various  ways  ;  but  no  serious  act  of  per-
sonal violence  was  committed.

3.  About  the  middle  of  this  week,  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders  went  to  Daniel  Goodrich's  in  Hancock.  Here  the
opposers  also  gathered,  and  increased  in  their  opposition.
The  following  Sabbath,  August  3,  1783,  many  of  the  world
gathered,  under  the  pretense  of  seeing  the  meeting;  and,
although  some  appeared  civil,  and  doubtless  came  with
honest  intentions;  yet,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  day,  many
being  offended  with  the  worship,  and  gifts  of  God,  showed
much  opposition,  and  behaved  in  a  riotous  manner,  scoffing
at  the  work,  and  threatening,  beating  and  abusing  some  of
the  Believers.

4.  On  Monday,  the  rage  of  the  wicked  still  increasing,
they  gathered,  in  great  numbers,  in  the  morning,  and  con-
ducted themselves  in  a  very  rough  and  malicious  manner,
venting  out  the  most  false  and  scandalous  accusations  against
Mother  and  the  Elders,  that  they  could  invent,  or  hear  of
from  anybody,  or  nobody,  and  their  invention  was  very  pro-
lific.

5.  Valentine Rathbun was the  principal instigator  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  127

leader  of  this  mob.*  He  had  received  faith  in  the  first  open-
ing of  the  testimony  at  Watervliet,  and  set  out  to  take  up
his  cross  ;  but,  after  a  few  months  he  fell  away,  and  became
a  very  bitter  enemy,  and  published  a  small  pamphlet  against
the  people  and  their  testimony.  Several  of  his  brothers,  and
their  families  were  in  the  faith,  also  his  son,  Valentine
Rathbun,  Jr.

6.  He,  with  a  part  of  his  company,  came  into  the  house,
and  began  to  revile  Mother  and  the  Elders  to  their  faces,
calling  them  deceivers,  false  prophets,  and  the  like.  His
son  Valentine,  coming  in  just  at  this  time,  and  hearing  his
father  use  such  reproachful  and  abusive  language,  began  to
reprove  the  old  man,  saying  "I  think  it  is  a  shame,  for  a
man  of  God,  and  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  as  you  profess  to
be,  to  come  here,  at  the  head  of  a  mob  to  abuse  the  inno-
cent people  of  God."

7.  This  reproof,  from  his  son,  roused  the  old  man's  anger;
but,  not  having  power  to  vent  his  passion  in  presence  of
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  and  being  surrounded,  as  he
was,  by  so  many  people,  he  drew  back,  out  of  the  door  ;  his
son  still  following  with  his  reproof.  The  old  man  mounted
some  steps,  and  taking  an  advantageous  position,  with  a  large
hickory  staff,  he  leveled  several  strokes  at  his  son's  head,
with  such  violence  that  his  skull  was  laid  bare  nearly  three
inches  in  length.

8.  The  young  man  bled  profusely,  was  not  knocked  down,
but  still  stood  his  ground,  and,  seizing  hold  of  the  staff,
wrested  it  from  the  old  man's  hands,  and  committed  it  to
the  flames.  The  mob  continued  their  abusive  and  clamorous
behavior,  for  a  considerable  time,  and  seemed  determined,  if
possible,  by  their  false  accusations,  and  hard  speeches,  to
destroy  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  out  of  the  land.

*  He  was  an  Elder  in  the  Baptist  Church,  and  called  a  great  preacher in that
Order; was  a  man  of  considerable  talents,  and  of  a  very  violent  spirit.


i28  Testimonies  of

9.  At  length,  Mother  Ann  went  out  at  a  door  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  house,  and  stepped  into  a  carriage
which  had  been  prepared  for  her,  and  returned  back  to
Samuel  Fitch's,  unperceived  by  the  mob.  The  Elders  tarried
behind  till  Mother  was  out  of  the  way,  and  then  walked  on,
in  presence  of  the  mob,  to  follow  her.

10.  But,  as  they  were  taking  their  leave  of  the  Believers,
one  Titus  Wright,  who  had  been  very  busy  in  circulating  the
most  shameful  and  scandalous  reports  respecting  Father
William  Lee,  now  came  up,  and  openly  vented  these  lying
accusations  to  his  face.  Father  William,  without  paying
any  regard  to  him,  continued  his  attention  to  the  Believers,
and  sung,  rejoiced,  and  shouted,  in  a  very  powerful  manner.
This  so  enraged  his  malicious  accuser  that  he  ran  and  took
a  stake  out  of  the  fence,  and  came  up  to  Father  William  and
swore  that  if  he  was  not  gone  in  fifteen  minutes,  he  would
spill  his  brains  out.  Father  William,  although  undaunted
by  his  threats,  gave  him  a  look  of  stern  reproof.  "You
walking  devil,"  said  Father  William,  and  again  turned  his
attention  to  the  Believers,  and  continued  his  gift.  Wright
continued  to  repeat  his  threats,  and  often  reminded  Father
William  of  what  he  might  expect  at  the  end  of  fifteen  min-
utes; till,  at  length,  by  Father  William's  powerful  gift  of  God
to  the  Believers,  without  any  further  notice  of  him,  the  man
was  so  confounded,  that  he  threw  down  his  weapon,  sneaked
off,  and  was  never  known  to  molest  the  Believers  afterward.

n.  The  Elders  followed  Mother  Ann  to  Samuel  Fitch's;
and  when  the  mob  discovered  that  they  were  gone  from  Daniel
Goodrich's,  they  soon  dispersed.  But,  the  same  evening,
having  heard  that  they  were  gone  to  Samuel's,  this  perse-
cuting rabble  again  collected  their  forces,  and  followed  them
there,  and  were  very  boisterous,  and  abusive.  Elizur  Good-
rich, and  others  of  the  Brethren,  rebuked  them,  for  their
ungodly  conduct;  but  all  in  vain. In  this  mob  several  of


Mother  Ann  Lee.  129

the  Believers  were  roughly  handled,  and  some  of  them
knocked  down.  John  Demming,  Senior,  received  a  severe
stroke  upon  his  head,  by  which  he  was  knocked  down,  badly
hurt,  and  the  blood  flowed  freely.  The  rioters  were,  how-
ever, kept  out  of  the  house,  by  Samuel  Fitch,  and  others.

These  things  brought  great  tribulation  upon  Mother
Ann,  and  she  said,  "  If  God  does  not  work  for  me,  it  seems
as  though  the  wicked  would  destroy  me."  Soon  after
these  words,  she  said,  "  I  see  a  white  hand  stretched  out
toward  me,  which  is  a  sign,  and  a  promise  of  my  protec-
tion."

12.  Valentine  Rathbun,  Sen.,  and  his  coadjutants  had  so
far  influenced  the  civil  authorities  of  Richmond,  as  to  obtain
a  warrant  to  apprehend  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  with
some  others  of  the  Brethren.  The  warrant  was  issued  by
Samuel  Brown,  Esq.,  of  Stockbridge,  and  delivered  to  Philip
Cook,  who,  as  a  Constable,  served  it  upon  Mother  and  the
Elders,  Elizur  Goodrich,  Samuel  and  Dyer  Fitch.  All  these
being  taken  by  the  warrant,  the  mob  dispersed.  The  Con-
stable, however,  consented  to  leave  them,  on  receiving  their
word,  that  they  would  appear  the  next  day.  Accordingly,
the  next  day,  they  all  appeared  before  the  Board  of  Justices
of  the  Peace,  held  in  Richmond  meeting  house.  This
Board  consisted  of  Samuel  Brown  and  J.  Woodbridge,  of
Stockbridge,  and  James  Gates  of  Richmond.  These  were
the  Judges  who  were  to  try  Mother  and  her  little  company,
upon  a  charge  of  blasphemy  and  disorderly  conduct,  brought
against  them  by  their  wicked  persecutors.

13.  Many  testimonies  were  produced  against  them,  which
were  readily  heard  ;  but,  the  few  that  were  brought  forward
in  their  defense  could  scarcely  obtain  any  hearing  at  all.
The  riotous  and  abusive  conduct  of  the  mob,  from  which
ajl  the  disorder  originated,  was,  by  a  strange  perversion  of
evidence,  charged  upon  the  Believers  ;  a  clear  manifestation

17


130  Testimonies  of

of  the  spirit  and  principles  which  governed  this  court.  To
prove  the  charge  of  blasphemy,  it  was  testified  that  Samuel
Fitch  had  declared  that  "  in  Mother  Ann,  dwells  the  full-
ness of  the  Godhead,  bodily."  To  this  charge,  Samuel,  by
Elder  James'  direction,  replied,  in  his  own  defense,  "  We
read,  in  the  scriptures,  that  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead
dwelt  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  bodily."  And  again,  "  ex-
cept Christ  be  in  you,  ye  are  reprobates."  The  inference
was  at  once  perceived,  by  the  Judges,  who  found  themselves
unable  to  proceed  with  a  charge  which  must,  in  the  issue,
prove  themselves  reprobates.

14.  But  Samuel,  feeling  great  boldness,  stood  up  and
warned  the  Judges  in  these  words,  "  Take  heed  what  you
do  to  these  people — Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders — for  they
are  God's  Anointed  Ones  whom  he  hath  sent  to  America."
This  admonition  was  highly  offensive  to  those  Judges,  and
the  persecutors;  and  they  consulted,  among  themselves,  to
know  what  they  should  do  with  these  Shakers;  for,  although
they  appeared  to  be  conscientious,  and  acted  upon  religious
principles,  yet  they  deluded  the  people,  and  disturbed  the
inhabitants,  and  they  must  be  taken  care  of,  or,  they  would
turn  the  world  upside  down.

15.  After  considerable  labor  among  themselves,  it  was
decided  that  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  should  be  fined
the  sum  of  twenty  dollars,  as  disturbers  of  the  peace,  and
then  leave  the  state.  The  money  was  immediately  advanced
by  the  Brethren,  so  that  they  might  be  set  at  liberty  ;  but,
as  to  leaving  the  state,  they  chose  to  obey  God,  rather  than
man,  and  accordingly  continued  their  labors  among  the
people  in  these  parts.

16.  Samuel  and  Dyer  Fitch,  and  Elizur  Goodrich,  being
inhabitants  of  the  town,  were  required  to  give  bonds  for
their  good  behavior,  and  for  their  appearance  at  the  County
Court  in  Barrington. But,  these  Brethren  insisted  that  they


Mother  Ann  Lee.  131

had  a  right  to  worship  God  in  their  own  houses  without  mo-
lestation, therefore,  they  could  not  consent  to  give  bonds,  as
they  might  be  charged,  by  their  adversaries,  with  breaking
the  peace,  whenever  they  attempted  to  worship  God  in  their
own  habitations.  They  were,  therefore,  committed  to  Bar-
rington  jail,  to  be  tried  by  the  County  Court.

17.  After  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  released  they
returned  to  Samuel  Fitch's,  and  from  thence  to  Nathan
Goodrich's,  in  Hancock,  where  they  tarried  over  the  Sab-
bath, and  continued  their  labors  in  searching  out,  and  purg-
ing away  sin,  and  teaching  and  building  up  the  Believers
in  the  most  holy  faith.

18.  But,  so  great  was  the  collection  of  the  people,  on  the
Sabbath,  that  they  collected  in  three  different  houses  to
worship,  viz.:  at  Nathan,  Daniel,  and  Ezekiel  Goodrich's  ;
many  of  the  world  attended,  and  the  gospel  was  preached,  by
the  Elders,  and  the  Elder  Brethren  with  them.  The  meet-
ings were  attended  with  great  power,  and  operations  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  wicked  vented  their  rage  in  words  ;
but  no  essential  acts  of  violence  were  committed.  Mother
tarried  at  Nathan  Goodrich's,  and  some  of  the  Elders
attended  the  other  meetings.

19.  About  the  middle  of  this  week  Mother  felt  a  gift  to
go  and  visit  the  Brethren  in  Barrington  jail.  She  accord-
ingly went,  accompanied  by  the  Elders,  and  a  number  of
the  Believers.  When  they  came  into  the  prison,  Mother
said,  "We  have  come  to  see  Christ,  in  prison."  After  tar-
rying with  them  a  day  or  two,  and  comforting  them  under
their  afflictions,  Mother  and  her  company,  returned,  by  the
way  of  West  Stockbridge,  and  visited  the  family  of  Elijah
Slosson,  who  lived  in  that  place.  Elijah  and  his  family  had
embraced  the  testimony  of  the  gospel,  and  his  son  Jonathan,
who  accompanied  Mother,  had,  previous  to  her  leaving  Han-
cock, to  visit  the  prisoners,  kneeled  down before  her  and


132  Testimonies  of

prayed  her  to  visit  his  father's  family,  and  bless  it.  She
arrived  there  on  Saturday,  and  tarried  until  Monday  ;  and
the  blessing  of  God  seemed  to  attend  this  visit  in  a  remark-
able manner.

20.  Many  Believers  gathered  at  Elijah's  on  Saturday,  from
New  Lebanon,  Hancock,  and  other  places;  and,  on  the
Sabbath,  there  was,  also,  a  large  concourse  of  the  world.
The  house  being  insufficient  to  hold  them,  they  all  assembled
on  the  green,  before  the  door,  and  the  gospel  was  preached
to  them,  by  the  Elders  and  leading  Brethren  with  them.
The  meeting  was  attended  with  great  power,  and  the  multi-
tude of  the  world,  generally,  behaved  with  civility

21.  This  day  there  were  upwards  of  two  hundred  people
in  Elijah's  family ;  and  such  was  the  blessing  of  God  that
rested  upon  the  family,  and  all  they  possessed,  that  it  may
be  truly  said,  The  Lord  blessed  the  family  of  Elijah,  and  all
that  pertained  to  him.*  Mother  Ann  appeared  greatly  satis-
fied with  her  visit  at Elijah's;  and,  after  helping  the  family,

*  The  blessing  of  God  which  attended  this  visit  was  truly  remarkable  ;  in  conse-
quence of  the  vast  concourse  of  people  who  followed  Mother,  there  were  upward
of  one  hundred  horses  turned  into  Elijahs'  cow-pasture,  of  between  six  and  seven
acres  of  grass,  where  they  remained  from  Saturday  till  Monday,  and  fed  the  pas-
ture bare.  When  they  were  gone,  Elijah's  neighbors  laughed  at  him,  and  asked
him  what  he  would  do  now,  for  the  Shakers'  horses  had  eaten  up  all  his  pasture?
'  Trust  in  God,"  replied  Elijah.  The  Saturday  following,  his  pasture,  which  was
of  white  clover,  was  fresh  grown,  and  in  blossom,  and  so  abundant,  that  Elijah
took  in  cattle  and  horses  to  pasture,  for  his  neighbors,  who  were  short  of  pasture.
The  quantity  of  butter  and  cheese  made  by  the  family,  from  four  cows,  was  con-
sidered as  almost  miraculous.  They  were  also  enabled  to  entertain  many  Believers
while  on  their  journey  to  and  from  the  Church,  and  as  most  of  them  were  poor,
they  not  only  found  entertainment  in  this  hospitable  mansion,  but  were  also  fur-
nished with  provisions  for  their  journey.  Vet,  so  great  was  the  blessing  of  God
upon  the  family,  that  they  always  had  a  plenty;  and  so  evident  did  the  blessing
appear,  that  the  unbelieving  neighbors  were  forced  to  confess  that  it  was  marvelous.

J.  H ,  a  tavern  keeper,  who  lived  next  neighbor  to  Elijah,  had,  before  this,  been

violently  opposed  to  the  people ;  but,  on  observing  these  things,  he  was  struck
with  astonishment,  and  exclaimed,  "How  is  it,  I  keep  tavern,  and  have  pay  for  all
I  dispose  of,  and  yet  I  can  but  just  get  along  ;  you  have  much  more  company  than'
I  do,  and  entertain  them  upon  free  cost,  and  yet  you  always  have  a  fullness."  From
this  time  he  became  very  friendly,  and  remained  so  until  death.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  133

she  departed,  about  ten  o'clock,  on  Monday,  and  returned  to
Samuel  Fitch's,  from  thence  to  Nathan  Goodrich's,  where
she  tarried  till  Saturday,  and  continued  her  labors  with  the
people.

22.  One  evening,  while  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were
at  Nathan  Goodrich's,  and  a  large  collection  of  Believers
assembled,  in  the  worship  of  God,  there  came  a  company  of
unruly  men  rushing  up  on  horseback.  Mother,  on  hearing
their  noise,  went  to  the  door  and  bade  them  "draw  back."
But,  the  men  refusing  to  obey,  she  raised  her  hand,  and,
with  great  power  and  authority,  cried  aloud,  "  Draw  back,
I  say,  or  I  will  smite  the  horse  and  his  rider."  These  words
were  spoken,  not  of  herself  ,  but  of  the  power  and  gift  of  God.

23.  On  uttering  these  words,  all  the  power  of  resistance
seemed  instantly  to  be  taken  from  the  men,  and  their  horses
immediately  ran  backward,  from  the  house,  down  to  the
road,  which  was  about  ten  rods  distant;  nor,  to  those  who
saw  it,  did  it  appear  to  be  in  the  power  of  their  riders  to  gov-
ern them,  till  they  got  quite  into  the  road;  then  they  peace-
ably turned  their  horses,  and  departed.

24.  During  the  time  that  Mother  and  the  Elders  con-
tinued in  Richmond  and  Hancock,  they  were  visited  by
many  Believers  from  New  Lebanon,  and  other  places,  who
were  fed  and  nourished  by  the  power  and  gift  of  God,  from
these  Parents  in  the  gospel;  and  they  were  almost  so  con-
tinually, more  or  less  in  meeting,  that,  as  it  was  expressed
by  some  of  the  Believers  in  Hancock,  "  We  could  hardly
distinguish  the  days  of  the  week,  for  every  day  felt  like  Sab-
bath."

25.  And  while  the  Believers  were  rejoicing,  in  the  power
of  the  resurrection,  the  spirit  of  opposition  was  not  asleep,
but  continued  to  rise,  as  the  gifts  of  God  continued  to  flow.
And,  seeing  that  Mother  and  the  Elders  did  not  obey  their
assumed authority  over  conscience,  but  still  continued  in


i34  Testimonies  of

the  place,  to  the  great  disturbance  of  their  kingdom  of  dark-
ness, they  determined  to  redouble  their  efforts,  and  drive
them  out  of  the  place  by  violence.

26.  On  Friday,  a  large  mob  collected,  headed  by  one
Aaron  Baker,  of  Pittsfield,  who  was  a  near  neighbor  to  the
Believers.  The  company  came  on  like  drunken  madmen,
and,  on  arriving  before  the  house,  Baker  called  out,  "  Fetch
out  those  Europeans."  Among  the  mob  was  the  persecut-
ing Valentine  Rathbun,  Sen'r,  whose  malice  was  not  yet  suf-
ficiently glutted.  He  railed  and  blasphemed,  and  Mother
and  the  Elders  were  ordered  off,  with  great  threatenings,
and  much  abusive  language.

27.  Mother  and  Father  William  Lee  feeling  their  gift  at
an  end  in  this  place,  informed  the  mob  that  they  should  go
the  next  day,  before  ten  o'clock.  Some  of  the  mob  were
for  using  violence,  others  were  against  it;  so  there  was  a
division  among  them.  Elder  James  went  out  to  speak  to
them,  and  was  seized,  by  one  Absalom  Ford,  who  attempted
to  draw  him  into  the  street,  but,  some  others  of  the  mob  in-
terfered, and  insisted  that  there  should  be  no  violence  used,
seeing  they  were  going  away  the  next  day.  They  then  dis-
persed, and  the  Believers  enjoyed  the  night  in  peace.


CHAPTER  XX.

MOTHER  ANN  ARRIVES  AT  NEW  LEBANON. —  MEETING  AT
JOHN  BISHOP'S. —  MOTHER  VISITS  A  NUMBER  OF  FAMI-
LIES IN AND ABOUT NEW LEBANON. SHE GOES TO

JABEZ SPENCER'S IN STEPHENTOWN  ; AND RETURNS
TO NEW LEBANON.

i.  On  Saturday  morning,  August  23d,  1783,  Mother  Ann
and  the  Elders,  with  a  large  company  of  Believers,  set  off


Mother  Ann  Lee.  135

from  Nathan  Goodrich's  to  visit  New  Lebanon.  They  ar-
rived at  Israel  Talcot's,  on  the  mountain,  between  New
Lebanon  and  Hancock,  a  little  before  noon.  Abigail  Tal-
cot  had  her  small  pot  of  meat  and  vegetables  over  the  fire,
cooking,  for  the  dinner  of  her  little  family.  Mother  said  to
Abigail,  "  You  must  get  dinner  for  us,  and  all  who  are  with
ns."  'Then  I  must  boil  more  meat,  and  sauce,"  said  Abi-
gail. "Nay,"  said  Mother,  "There  is  aplenty."  Accord-
ingly, Abigail  took  up  her  dinner,  and  all  the  company,  con-
sisting of  nearly  forty  people,  sat  down  and  ate,  and  were
satisfied.  Abigail  was  greatly  astonished  that  so  many  peo-
ple were  fed  on  so  small  a  quantity  of  victuals.

2.  After  dinner  they  proceeded  to  David  Shapley's,  where
they  made  a  short  tarry,  then  went  on  to  John  Bishop's,  in
New  Lebanon.  And  here  was  fulfilled  Mother's  prophecy
to  John,  while  she  was  in  prison,  at  Albany,  more  than  three
years  before;  and  this  was  a  joyful  day  to  John.  When
Mother  came  in,  she  walked  through  the  house,  from  one
room  to  another,  and  singing,  "  Now  Mother  is  come!
Mother  is  come  now!"  Then  turning  to  the  Elders,  "So
John's  soul  sings,"  she  said.

3.  The  next  morning  Mother  asked  John  if  he  had  any
suitable  place  on his lot to  hold  meeting  ;  for,  said  she,

'  There  will  be  more  than  twice  as  many  people  here  to-day
as  can  get  into  your  house."  "Yea,"  replied  John,  and
pointed  out  his  orchard,  near  the  house.  Accordingly  they
assembled  in  the  orchard;  and  it  was  judged  there  was  not
less  than  four  hundred  people  there  on  that  day.  After  the
assembly  was  collected  in  the  orchard,  Father  William  began
to  sing,  and  the  power  of  God  was  manifested,  in  a  marvel-
ous manner  among  the  Believers  in  this  assembly;  not  with
great  noise,  nor  external  operations,  but  with  a  mighty  in-
ward power  and  trembling.

4.  Amos  Rathbun  expressed  that  he  felt  such  an  extraor-


I  ?6  TES1  [MONIES OF


dinary  outpouring  of  the  power  of  God,  that  it  filled  him
full,  from  head  to  foot,  in  so  much  that  it  seemed  as  though
he  should  burst,  if  he  did  not  speak.  He  saw,  with  great
clearness,  the  great  loss,  and  awful  state  of  fallen  man,  and
the  great  salvation  and  glory  now  offered,  and  to  be  attained
by  the  gospel.  As  soon  as  Father  William  had  done  sing-
ing, Amos  was  constrained  to  cry  out,  and  warn  the  world
of  their  state,  —  of  the  great  salvation  offered  by  the  gospel,
and  of  the  awful  consequences  of  losing  the  day  of  their  vis-
itation.

5.  After  this  Elder  James  came  forward,  and  said,  "  My
name  is  James  Whittaker;  I  have  prayed  to  God  for  you,  as
earnestly  as  I  ever  prayed  for  my  own  soul."  He  then
spoke  of  the  great  loss  and  fallen  state  of  man;  and  of  the
necessity  of  a  restoration  through  Christ,  in  order  to  find
salvation  and  redemption  now  offered  through  the  medium
of  the  gospel.  "  The  time  is  fully  come,"  said  he,  "  according
to  ancient  prophecy,  for  Christ  to  make  his  second  appear-
ing, for  the  redemption  of  lost  man.  This  is  the  Second
Appearance  of  Christ,  and  we  are  God's  true  witnesses,
through  whom  Christ  has  manifested  himself,  in  this  day  of
his  second  appearing;  and  the  only  means  of  salvation  that
will  ever  be  offered  to  a  lost  world,  is  to  confess  and  forsake
their  sins,  take  up  their  cross,  and  follow  Christ  in  the  re-
generation."

6.  He  spoke  of  the  necessity  of  souls'  believing  in  the
messengers  whom  God  had  sent ;  and  declared  the  only  way
they  could  find  the  will  of  God,  was,  to  find  it  in  those  mes-
sengers whom  He  had  sent;  that  this  was  the  way,  accord-
ing to  the  Scriptures,  that  God  manifested  himself  to  the
ancients,  and,  that  it  was  as  much  so  now,  as  in  ancient
days.  Father  James  wept  much,  and  spoke  much  of  humil-
ity and  self-abasement,  and  said,  "  You  cannot  blame  me  for
abasing myself." He declared the great riches he had


Mother  Ann  Lee.  137

found  by  the  gospel,  and  spoke  of  the  awful  consequences
of  rejecting  the  day  of  their  visitation.  After  this,  Elder
Joseph  Meacham  and  Calvin  Harlow  spoke,  in  confirmation
of  what  had  been  spoken,  —  declared  this  to  be  the  Second
Appearing  of  Christ,  and  that  these  were  his  true  witnesses.

7.  So  great  was  the  power  of  God,  and  so  clear  the  evi-
dences of  the  testimony  that  every  mouth  was  stopped  and
every  tongue  became  dumb;  all  opposition  was  put  down
and  the  world  appeared  like  souls  arraigned  before  the  bar
of  judgment.  The  Believers  went  forth  in  the  worship  of
God  with  great  power,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The
world  had  not  power  to  molest  them,  and  no  disturbance
was  made.

8.  After  meeting,  a  large  number  of  the  Brethren  and  Sis-
ters were  fed.  After  the  Believers  had  finished  their  repast,
Mother  Ann  asked  John  if  he  was  willing  to  invite  the
world  in  to  eat,  to  which  he  consented,  and  went  out  and
told  them,  if  they  were  needy,  they  should  be  welcome  to
come  in  and  eat.  Accordingly  all  who  chose,  came  in  and
ate,  to  the  number  of  fifty  or  sixty.  And,  so  great  was  the
blessing  of  God,  that,  although  no  victuals  were  cooked  that
day  yet,  it  seemed  as  though  there  was  more  left,  after  feed-
ing more  than  two  hundred  people,  than  when  they  began
to  eat.

9.  Concerning  this  visit  of  Mother  Ann's  to  John  Bishop's,

John  himself  gave  the  following  account : "  I  evidently  felt

the  blessing  of  God  rest  upon  my  house,  and  all  that  I  had;

and though temporal  blessings  are  the  lesser,  and  were,  at

that  time,  the  least  in  my  esteem,  yet,  as  they  were  evidences

of  the  good  fountain  whence  they  flowed,  I  shall  here  insert

some  of  them  in  particular. I  took Mother  Ann's  horse,

and  the  horses  of  those  who  came  with  her,  nearly  forty  in

number,  and  put  them  into  my  cow  pasture,  which  contained

eight  or  ten  acres  of  land  ;  at  first,  I  thought  my  feed  would
iS


i$$  Testimonies  of

soon  be  gone,  but,  concluded  I  should  not  care  for  that,
since  Mother  had  come  to  my  house.  Here  those  horses,
with  my  four  cows,  continued  from  Saturday,  in  the  after-
noon, until  near  noon  of  the  Monday  following."

10.  ''The  same  day,  after  they  were  taken  out,  I  went  to
see  my  pasture,  and  strange  as  it  may  seem,  it  was  more
fresh  and  green  than  I  should  have  expected,  had  there  not
been  a  hoof  of  a  creature  in  it  for  a  whole  week.  And,
though  a  number  of  pails  of  milk  were  carried  out  for  the
multitude  to  drink,  my  family  made  more  butter  during  that
week,  than  any  week  during  the  season.  These  things,
which,  in  the  natural  tide  of  events  appeared  impossible,  I
felt  confident  were  effected  by  the  same  power  that  fed  the
five  thousand,  with  five  barley  loaves,  and  a  few  small  fishes."

ii.  Mother  Ann  left  John  Bishop's  on  Monday,  about
noon,  and  went  to  Hezekiah  Hammond's,  where  she  stayed
until  evening,  and  then  went  to  George  Darrow's,  and  tarried
all  night.  The  next  day  she  visited  the  family  of  Reuben
Wight.  Here  Elder  James  had  a  gift  to  sing  with  remark-
able power  of  God,  and  the  Believers  went  forth,  with  great
zeal,  and  worshipped  God  in  the  dance.  Mother  Ann  stayed
and  dined ;  after  dinner,  as  she  was  about  to  depart,  and
had  advanced  to  the  door,  she  turned  herself  round,  and
kneeling  down  spake  as  follows:

12.  "  God  created  my  soul  in  innocence,  but,  by  sinning
against  His  holy  commandments,  I  was  defiled,  and  abomi-
nable in  His  sight.  While  I  was  in  this  wretched  state,  God
was  pleased  to  call  my  soul  by  the  gospel  ;  I  was  wrought
upon  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  see  and  feel  the
depth  of  my  loss  ;  and,  by  the  same  power,  I  was  helped  to
travel  out  of  it.  When  I  was  despised  and  afflicted  by  mine
enemies,  thou,  O  God,  didst  comfort  me.  When  cruel  per-
secutors rose  against  me,  and  put  me  into  prisons  and  dun-
geons, thou  didst  stretch  forth  thine  hand  for  my  deliverance.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  139

I  thank  thee,  O  Father  —  Lord  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  for
the  revelation  of  Christ,  which  showed  me  the  depth  of
man's  loss,  and  the  way  of  recovery  by  the  gospel.

"  When  I  was  in  my  native  land  I  received  a  special  revela-
tion of  God,  to  come  to  America,  to  bring  the  gospel  to
this  nation,  and  when  the  time  was  fully  come,  I  crossed  the
great  waters,  through  many  dangers  and  perils,  and,  by  the
miraculous  power  of  God,  I  arrived  safe  to  this  land.  Ever
since  I  have  been  here,  God  has  supported  me,  by  His
special  grace,  under  all  trials  and  afflictions;  and  has  given
me  strength  and  fortitude  to  stand  in  defense  of  the  truth."

13.  "I  thank  Thee,  O  God,  for  raising  up  so  great  a  peo-
ple in  this  land.  Thou  hast  made  me  able  to  plant  the  gos-
pel in  the  hearts  of  many,  who  are  now  able  to  glorify  Thy
name.  I  pray  God,  protect  and  strengthen  Thy  chosen  peo-
ple, and  keep  them  from  all  evil."

14.  After  Mother  arose  from  her  knees,  she  went  directly
to  Joseph  Meacham's,  and  tarried  an  hour  or  two;  and  from
thence  to  Isaac  Harlow's,  where  she  tarried  till  near  night;
she  then  went  to  Josiah  Skinner's,  where  she  took  supper,
and  held  meetings;  the  Believers  went  forth  in  the  worship
of  God  in  singing  and  dancing,  with  great  joy.  The  same
evening,  she  proceeded  from  thence  to  John  Spier's.*  Many
people  followed  her  through  New  Lebanon  to  this  place,
singing  and  shouting  with  great  joy.

15.  But,  the  wicked  could  not  be  contented  to  let  Mother
rest;  they  gathered  in  considerable  numbers,  beset  the  house,
and  demanded  to  see  the  old  woman.  Mother  felt  no  liberty
to  see  them,  knowing  that  they  were  upon  mischief.  They
used  much  threatening  and  abusive  language,  and,  at  length,
burst  open  the  door,  and  crowded  into  the  entry  that  led  to
the  room  where  the  Believers  were  assembled.

16.  Mother  was,  at  this  time,  standing  in  the  midst  of  the

*  About  six  miles  from  John  Bishop's  the  way  she  went.


140  Testimonies  of

assembly,  with  a  young  child  of  Nathan  Farrington's  in  her
arms;  but,  feeling  to  go  into  another  room,  which  she  could
not  do  without  passing  through  the  mob  in  the  hall,  she,
therefore,  with  the  child  in  her  arms,  took  hold  of  young
Mehetabel  Farrington,  and  bade  her  go  forward,  and  stop
for  nobody,  and  thus  they  passed  through  the  mob,  into  a
more  retired  room.  "  We  have  got  through,  and  God  has
protected  us,"  said  Mother  to  Mehetabel.  Late  at  night  the
mob  departed,  and  the  Believers  retired  to  rest.

17.  The  next  day,  Eleazer  Grant,  and  Elisha  Gilberts,
Esq'rs,  and  Dr.  Averill  came  there,  and  had  a  long  conver-
sation with  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders.  The  day  following,
several  Indians  came,  and  Father  William  Lee  was  moved,
by  the  power  of  God,  to  speak  to  them  in  their  own  native
language,  although  he  had  no  knowledge  of  it,  but  by  the
gift  of  God;  but  the  Indians  understood,  and  answered  him.

18.  The  family  of  Nathan  Farrington  had,  very  early,  de-
sired Mother  to  come  to  their  house,  and  though  she  had
not  given  any  encouragement  of  coming,  yet,  on  Friday
morning,  she  went  there.  Nathan  had  just  been  building  a
new  house,  which  was  then  unfinished.  When  Mother  came
into  the  house,  she  said,  "  Now  Mother  has  come,  and  you
are  welcome;  you  have  been  faithful  to  ask,  and  now  you
have  got  a  blessing."

19.  Mother  then  looked  around  the  house,  and  said,  "I
feel  a  gift  and  blessing,  in  the  building  of  this  house;  you
must  serve  God  in  it."  Then  turning  to  a  young  woman, —
daughter  of  old  Daniel  Rathbun,  said,  "  I  have  been  all
around  your  father's  house,  on  every  side  of  it,  and  yet  have
never  been  invited  to  come  into  it;  but  here  is  a  family  that
was  so  urgent,  that  it  seemed  as  though  I  could  not  get  away
from  thetn ;  you  know  not  what  a  blessing  you  have  lost.*

*  This  family  of  Rathbuns  all  professed  faith,  at  that  time,  but.  afterward,  all
fell  away  to  the  world;  while  Farrington's  family,  with  but  one  exception,  all  con-
tinued  to  flourish  in  the  way  of  God .


Mother  Ann  Lee.  141

20.  Many  Believers  being  collected  here,  Father  William
said,  "  The  house  is  not  large  enough  for  all  the  people  to
assemble  and  serve  God  in;  we  had  better  go  out  on  the
grass  and  serve  God."  Accordingly  they  all  assembled  in
the  meadows  near  the  house.  Father  William  sang  for  them
and  they  all  went  forth  with  great  power,  in  the  worship  of
God,  and  danced  till  they  trod  the  grass  into  the  earth,  and
even  trod  down  the  earth,  so  that  it  was  like  an  earthen
threshing  floor,  with  scarcely  the  appearance  of  any  grass
upon  it.  Some  of  the  world  were  there,  and  seeing  the  sit-
uation of  the  ground,  cried  out,  "  Farrington,  you  are  a  fool,
to  let  the  Shakers  tread  down  your  meadow  so;  there  will
not  be  any  grass  there ;  "  Nathan  replied,  "  You  will  see
there  will  be  more  grass  here  than  in  any  other  part  of  the
meadow."

21.  Nathan's  words  came  to  pass,  for,  in  a  short  time,  the
grass  grew,  and  flourished  in  the  circle  where  the  meeting
was  held,  so  that  it  was  much  larger,  and  higher,  than  in
any  other  part  of  the  meadow;  and  could  easily  be  distin-
guished from  the  other  grass,  as  far  as  the  meadow  could  be
seen;  and  yielded  far  more  abundantly,  than  any  other  part
of  the  meadow,  to  the  great  astonishment  and  disappoint-
ment of  those  unbelieving  neighbors.

22.  The  same  evening,  Mother  went  from  Nathan  Far-
rington's  to  Jabez  Spencer's,  in  Stephentown.  On  the  Sab-
bath morning  following,  Capt.  Ichabod  Turner,  and  — —
Birch,  Esqr.,  came,  in  a  friendly  manner,  and  informed  the
Elders  that  there  was  a  mob  about  to  arise,  but  said  they
thought  it  would  take  two  or  three  days  for  them  to  collect.
The  Elders  informed  them  that  they  expected  to  leave  the
place  on  Monday.  The  men  replied  that  if  they  would  leave
the  place  by  that  time,  they  believed  they  should  be  able  to
keep  the  mob  back.  The  same  day  some  ruffians  came  and
maliciously  struck  and  collared  some  of  the  Brethren;  but


142  Testimonies  of

Jabez  interfered  and  sent  the  rioters  out  of  the  house;  be,
being  a  man  of  note,  they  were  under  fear,  and  desisted
from  further  violence.

23.  A  large  assembly  of  the  world,  besides  many  Believ-
ers, collected  to  attend  meeting.  There  were  some  of  the
assembly  who  had  manifested  a  great  spirit  of  opposition;
had  charged  Mother  and  the  Elders  with  being  deceivers,
and  false  prophets,  and  vented  many  evil  reports  which
arose  from  prejudice,  unbelief,  and  malicious  and  wilful
opposition.  Elder  James  preached,  and  introduced  his  dis-
course with  these  words  :  "  O  full  of  all  subtilty,  and  all
mischief,  thou  child  of  the  devil,  thou  enemy  of  all  righteous-
ness ?  Wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the
Lord  ?  "  *

24.  Afterward,  as  the  Believers  were  engaged  in  the  wor-
ship of  God,  some  carnal  young  men,  with  their  female  com-
panions, drew  near,  and,  in  a  scoffing  manner,  said,  to  some
of  the  Brethren.  "What,  are  you  dancing  to  worship  God?  "
"Yea,"  replied  the  Brethren,  "And  you  may  worship  God
too,  if  you  will."  They  then  stepped  in,  and  went  to  danc-
ing ;  their  young  women  soon  followed  their  example  and
began  to  dance  among  the  Sisters.  They  were  soon  sur-
rounded by  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  and  so  great  was  the
strength  and  power  of  God  in  the  assembly,  that  they  were
unable  to  make  any  resistance,  but  were  compelled  to  dance
under  the  operation  of  the  power  of  God,  with  the  head
dresses  and  hair  of  the  young  women  flying  in  every  direc-
tion until  they  were  brought  down  to  feel  very  low  and  sim-
ple, and  went  off  peaceably,  and  well  mortified.  The  Believers
continued  their  exercises  through  the  whole  night  following.

25.  On  Monday  evening,  September  1st,  1783,  Mother
and  the  Elders  with  a  considerable  number  of  the  Brethren
and  Sisters,  left  Jabez  Spencer's,  to  return  to  New  Lebanon.

♦Acts  XIII,  10th.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  143

They  had  proceeded  about  half  a  mile,  when  they  were  met
by  Eliab  Harlow,  on  horseback,  Mother,  being  in  a  chair,
with  Hannah  Kendall,  told  Eliab,  that  he  might  let  one  of
the  people  take  his  beast,  and  he  might  help  her  along,  as  it
was  dark,  and  very  rough  for  a  carriage.  Eliab  readily  gave
up  his  beast  and  led  Mother's  on  one  side,  while  another
Brother  led  on  the  other  side;  and  Childs  Hamlin  held  the
carriage  behind.  The  Elders  and  the  rest  of  the  company
followed  on  horseback.  Thus  they  proceeded  in  a  very
joyful  manner.  Mother  would  often  say,  "  Brethren,  be
comfortable —  Brethren,  be  joyful."  The  Brethren  as  often
replied,  "We  will,  Mother."  Thus  they  went  on,  singing
very  joyfully  till  they  arrived  at  Daniel  Green's,  about  five
miles  from  Spencer's.  Here  they  stopped,  and  Mother
alighted  from  her  carriage  and  went  in,  with  the  chief  part
of  her  company,  and  tarried  a  short  time.  Daniel's  wife
was  a  Believer,  and  Daniel  was  a  friendly  man,  but  did  not
profess  faith.  From  thence  they  proceeded  about  one  mile
further,  to  the  house  of  Joshua  Greene.  Here  they  made
another  halt  and  went  in;  and  those  who  had  need  took
some  refreshment  of  bread  and  cheese.

26.  After  cheering  and  strengthening  them  in  their  faith
Mother  came  out  and  went  on,  exhorting  the  Elders  and
Brethren,  to  be  joyful,  and  serve  God.  Thus  they  proceeded,
singing,  in  a  very  joyful  manner,  and  shouting  so  loudly
they  made  the  whole  forest  ring,  which  greatly  disturbed
unbelievers.  At  length  they  arrived  at  Isaac  Harlow's,  in
New  Lebanon,  eight  miles  from  Spencer's.  Here  they
stopped  for  the  night,  and  put  out  their  horses.  After
gathering  into  the  house  they  again  went  forth  in  the  worship
of  God,  with  great  zeal,  and  powerful  operations  of  various
kinds.  Some  of  the  Brethren  were  led  by  these  operations,
in  among  the  Sisters,  and  pulled  them  about,  with  apparent
violence. The  two  Daniel  Rathbuns,  father  and  son,  were


144  TeSTIMONII  - 01

peculiarly  exercised  in  this  manner.  This,  Mother  Ann
said,  was  a  sign  that  they  were  going  to  have  persecution,
and  that  a  mob  was  near  at  hand.*

27.  This  journey  from  Stephentown,  and  the  labors  and
exercises  at  Isaac  Harlow's,  took  up  the  greater  part  of  the
night.  Toward  daylight,  the  people  retired  to  rest ;  but
Mother  Ann,  and  two  young  Sisters  —  (Hannah  Kendall  and
Lucy  Wood,)  with  the  Elders,  went  on  about  one  mile  fur-
ther, to  George  Darrow's,  the  place  where  the  meeting-
house in  New  Lebanon  now  stands.


CHAPTER  XXI.

A PERSECUTING MOB IS RAISED. MOTHER  ANN  IS  CARRIED

BEFORE  ELEAZER  GRANT,  CRUELLY  ABUSED,  AND  DRIVEN
OUT  OF  NEW  LEBANON.

Scarcely  had  the  day  began  to  dawn  when  a  mob  began
to  collect,  and  soon  after,  surrounded  the  house  where
Mother  was,  and  a  terrible  scene  of  persecution  ensued.
It  was  supposed,  by  many,  that  Eleazer  Grant,  Esqr.,  was
the  instigator  of  this  mob;  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  it  was
evidently  planned,  and  matured  in  connection  with  him.
There  were  many  very  malicious  enemies  in  and  about  New
Lebanon,  who  knew  where  Mother  Ann  was,  and  who  were
watching  the  first  opportunity  of  her  return  into  the  place,
to  vent  their  malicious  rage  on  her  and  the  Elders.  The
mob  was  undoubtedly  raised  and  pushed  on  by  some  who
acted under  cover. It consisted  of two  companies;  that

*  That  the  two  Rathbuns  were  peculiarly  operated  upon  at  that  time  appears  very
significant  of  their  own  subsequent  conduct;  for  though  they  were  remarkably
zealous,  at  that  time,  they  afterward  turned  their  back  to  the  way  of  God,  and
became  very  bitter  persecutors.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  145

from  the  south  was  headed  by  Nehemiah  Fitch,  Captain  of
militia;  that  from  the  north,  and  west,  by  Thomas  Tanner,
who  had  formerly  been  a  Captain  of  militia.  But  there
were  many  others  who  distinguished  themselves,  and  ap-
peared much  more  open  in  their  abuse  than  the  real  leaders
of  the  mob.  Among  these  were  Thomas  Law,  Selah  Abbot,
Senr.,  Selah  Abbot,  Junr.,  Ephraim  Bowman,  Zadock  Lee,
and  Enos  Meacham.

2.  Their  first  act  was  to  seize  George  Darrow  and  David
Meacham,  with  a  warrant,  under  pretense  of  their  having
abused  a  young  woman,  —  the  daughter  of  David  Meacham.
But,  this  act  was  evidently  intended  to  cover  their  real  ob-
ject, which  was,  to  get  these  two  men  from  the  house  where
Mother  and  the  Elders  were,  knowing  that  the  mob  would
have  much  more  power  to  act  in  their  absence,  as  David  was
a  man  of  great  fortitude  and  influence,  and  George,  the
owner  of  the  house.  They  were,  accordingly,  taken  before
Grant  for  trial.  George  left  the  care  of  his  house  with  his
brother,  David  Darrow,  and  Richard  Spier.  These  men
informed  the  mob  of  the  authority  they  had  to  protect  the
house,  and  expostulated  with  them  upon  the  unlawfulness
of  their  assembling  and  conducting  in  such  a  manner.  But
the  mob  felt  no  disposition  to  parley  about  the  matter;  for
they  were  determined  on  violence,  without  any  regard  to
law,  or  justice.

3.  The  Believers  collected  as  fast  as  the  mob  did,  and
went  into  the  house,  which  was  soon  nearly  filled  up.
There  were  three  outside  doors  to  the  house,  which  were  all
guarded  by  the  Believers.  The  mob  commenced  their  acts
of  violence  by  attempting  to  force  a  passage  into  all  the
doors  at  once.  The  Brethren,  who  had  charge  of  the  house,
forbade  their  entrance,  and  again  urged  the  unlawfulness  of
such  proceedings;  but,  in  vain;  their  conduct  was  like  that
of  ravenous  wolves  among  harmless  sheep.

19


146  Testimonies  of

4.  They  seized  the  Brethren,  one  after  another,  and
dragged  them  out  with  the  most  savage  violence.  Richard
Spier  was  three  times  thrown  out  at  a  back  door,  which  was
very  high  from  the  ground.  Some  were  drawn  out  by  the
hair  of  their  heads;  some  were  taken  by  four  or  five  men,
one  at  each  arm  and  leg,  and  pitched,  headforemost,  with
great  violence,  into  a  mud  puddle  near  the  door;  some  had
their  clothes  badly  torn.  After  a  conflict  of  fifteen  or  twenty
minutes,  the  mob  succeeded  in  getting  into  the  house.
Mother,  at  this  time,  was  in  a  back  bedroom,  separated  from
the  rest  of  the  people,  by  a  ceiled  partition.  The  ruffians
strove  to  enter  the  room  where  she  was,  but  were  kept  back
by  the  Brethren  who  guarded  the  door;  after  a  considerable
struggle,  they  succeeded  in  tearing  down  the  ceiling  of  the
room,  seized  Mother  Ann  by  her  feet,  and  dragged  her  in  a
shameful  manner,  through  the  parlor  and  kitchen,  to  the
door.

5.  Eliab  Harlow  had  made  ready  Mother's  carriage,  be-
fore the  action  commenced,  and  sat  in  it,  before  the  door,
where  he  had  a  fair  view  of  the  scene.  Mother  was  pitched,
headlong,  into  her  carriage;  Hannah  Kendall  and  Lucy  Wood
followed,  through  the  crowd,  and  got  into  the  carriage  with
her.  Eliab  then  gave  them  the  reins,  and  as  they  were  about
to  start,  Mother  spoke  to  Prudence  Hammond,  who  brought
out  her  budget,  and  said,  "Prudence,  keep  along  with  us."
They  had  not  proceeded  more  than  three  or  four  rods,  when
the  ruffians  cut  off  both  the  reins  of  the  bridle.  Eliab  then
attempted  to  lead  the  beast,  and  proceeded  six  or  eight  rods
further,  when  the  mob  surrounded  the  carriage,  and  beat
him  off,  with  many  severe  strokes,  and  undertook  to  lead
the  beast  themselves,  and  drove  on,  very  furiously,  toward
Grant's.

6.  Prudence  Hammond,  according  to  Mother's  orders,
kept  close  by  the  side  of  the  carriage. A  certain  young  man


Mother  Ann  Lee.  147

of  the  mob,  observing  her,  exerted  himself,  very  much,  to
beat  her  off,  and  ride  over  her,  but  was  not  able ;  for  Mother
often  repeated  her  order,  "  Prudence,  keep  along  with  us,
don't  let  your  faith  fail,"  which  gave  Prudence  a  degree  of
power  which  the  world  were  not  able  to  resist.  At  length,
another  young  man  said  to  his  companions,  "  These  people
have  got  a  power  that  we  know  nothing  about;  it  is  the
power  of  God  that  carries  that  woman  along  in  such  a  man-
ner." He  then  politely  offered  to  take  Prudence  on  behind  him
and  carry  her  civilly.  But,  Mother  cautioned  her,  saying,
"  Prudence,  don't  be  enticed  by  them ;  don't  let  your  faith
fail,  and  you  will  hold  out  to  the  end."  So  Prudence  ran
along  on  foot,  still  keeping  close  by  the  side  of  the  carriage.

7.  In  this  manner  they  proceeded  about  sixty  rods
further,  when  they  came  to  a  narrow  bridge,  across  a  small
rivulet,  upon  the  side  of  a  steep  hill,  which  formed  a  dan-
gerous precipice.  Here  the  inhuman  wretches  attempted  to
overset  the  carriage,  but,  were  prevented  by  Medad  Curtiss,
who,  at  that  instant,  saved  the  chair,  but,  in  the  struggle,
Thomas  Law,  who  was  the  most  active  in  the  business,  fell
down  the  precipice.  Law  was  afterward  heard  to  say,  "  I
should  have  finished  the  old  woman,  if  it  had  not  been  for
that  devil  of  a  Medad."

8.  When  they  had  proceeded  about  half  a  mile  further,
Law  violently  seized  hold  of  Elder  James,  and  pulled  him
from  his  horse,  evidently  intending  to  precipitate  him,  head-
foremost, upon  a  rock;  but,  one  of  the  Brethren  instantly
caught  him  upon  the  shoulders,  and,  by  that  means,  saved  his
head ;  but  he  fell  with  his  side  upon  the  rock  with  such  vio-
lence, that  three  of  his  ribs  were  fractured  by  the  fall.  By
the  assistance  of  some  of  the  Brethren,  he  mounted  his  horse
again,  and  rode  on  to  Grant's.  In  driving  from  George
Darrow's  to  Eleazer  Grant's,  which  was  about  one  and  a  half
miles,  the  mob  continually  strove  to  keep  the  Believers  back,


148  Testimonies  of

by  beating  and  abusing  them,  and  trying  to  ride  over  them  ;
but  were  not  able  to  effect  their  purpose.  Prudence  Ham-
mond kept  close  by  the  side  of  the  carriage,  the  whole  dis-
tance, and,  though  the  mob  drove  furiously,  she  was  not  in
the  least  fatigued,  nor  out  of  breath.

9.  When  Mother  alighted  from  her  carriage,  the  mob  were
very  numerous  around  her;  she  desired  them  to  stand  off,  for
she  wanted  to  go  aside;  but  they  refused,  and  one  young
man — Jehiel  Wright,  persisted  in  keeping  close  to  her.  Han-
nah Kendall  bade  him  go  off,  for,  said  she,  "  You  are  a  thief
and  a  robber."  This  charge  offended  the  young  man,  and
he  swore  she  should  prove  it.  ''Where  is  that  Hammond
girl,"  said  Mother.  Prudence  immediately  stepped  forward,
and  Mother  addressed  her,  saying,  "  Hannah  has  told  this
man  he  is  a  thief,  and  a  robber,  and  he  says  she  shall  prove
it."  Prudence  replied,  "It  is  the  truth  of  God,  Mother;  for
he  broke  into  my  father's  house  and  stole  twenty-nine  dollars."

10.  This  charge,  made  by  Hannah  Kendall,  and  supported
by  Prudence  Hammond,  was  done  by  a  special  gift  of  God;
for  neither  of  the  Sisters  knew  the  young  man.  He  was,
however,  highly  offended,  and  struck  Prudence,  with  a  staff;
but  his  comrades,  who  knew  the  truth  of  the  charge,  laughed
at  him  heartily;  and  the  guilty  culprit  sneaked  off,  and  was
soon  missing.

11.  Mother  Ann  was  dragged  into  Grant's  in  such  a  man-
ner that  her  cap  and  apron  were  torn  off.  Elder  James
informed  her  that  Thomas  Law  had  pulled  him  from  his
horse,  and  broken  his  ribs,  and  requested  liberty  to  enter  a
complaint  against  him.  But  Mother,  feeling  no  liberty  for
him  to  do  it,  counselled  him  to  let  it  pass,  and  labor  to  be
comfortable  and  peaceable.  Shortly  after  this,  Elder  James
received  a  healing  gift  of  God,  which  restored  him  to  his
former  soundness;  so  that,  on  the  same  evening,  he  rode  a
number  of  miles,  on  a  full  gallop.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  149

12.  At  the  time  of  Mother's  arrival  at  Grant's,  he  was  sit-
ting in  Court,  and  pretending  to  try  a  cause  of  complaint
against  David  Meacham  and  George  Darrow,  which  lasted
some  time.  This  complaint,  which  originated  in  maiice,  and
was  prosecuted  through  envy,  ended  in  a  mere  mock  trial,
evidently  designed  to  cover  deeds  of  greater  persecution
and  abuse.

13.  When  Grant  had  disposed  of  this  case,  he  had  Mother
Ann  brought  before  him,  and  called  upon  her  to  hear  her
indictment.  But,  instead  of  attending  to  the  false  accusa-
tions brought  against  her  by  her  enemies,  and  which  it  was
in  vain  to  counterplead,  before  a  mob  tribunal,  headed  by
an  unjust  judge,  whose  sole  object  was  to  overthrow  the
work  of  God,  she  reproved  him  for  sitting  as  a  magistrate,
and  suffering  such  riotous  mobs  to  abuse  innocent  people
contrary  to  law,  without  attempting  to  suppress  them.*

14.  Grant,  unable  to  endure  this  reproof,  ordered  his  con-
stable to  take  her  to  a  new  house,  which  he  was  then  build-
ing, and  put  her  under  keepers.  The  constable  and  two
other  ruffians,  —  Ephraim  Bowman  and  Enos  Meacham,  took
her,  and  in  a  very  abusive  manner,  dragged  her  out  of  the
house,  and  along  the  street,  about  fifteen  or  twenty  rods,  to
the  new  house.  Mother  felt  extreme  anguish,  from  the  cruel
abuses  of  these  men,  who  vented  their  enmity  by  beating,
griping  and  pinching  her,  as  they  dragged  her  along.  She
cried  out,  saying,  "Must  I  give  up  my  life  in  your  hands?  "
But  regardless  of  her  cries,  they  dragged  her  along  into  the
house,  and  up  stairs,  as  though  she  had  been  a  dead  beast,
and  then  thrust  her  into  a  room,  where  she  sat  down  and
cried  like  a  child.

*  John  Noyes —  the  constable,  had  greatly  abused  Mother,  and  struck  her  several
times,  with  his  staff,  before  Grant's  face  ;  particularly  one  severe  stroke  across  her
breast,  the  mark  of  which  she  carried  for  sometime  afterward.  In  reproving  Grant,
she  said,  "  It  is  your  day  now  ;  but,  it  will  be  mine,  by  and  by  ;  Eleazer  Grant,  I'll
put  you  into  a  cockleshell  yet."


150  Testimonies  of

15.  The  mob  immediately  surrounded  the  doors,  and
refused  to  let  any  of  the  Believers  enter  ;  though  many  of
the  Brethren  and  Sisters  strove  hard  to  get  in.  But  Father
William  boldly  insisted  on  going  in,  declaring  that  she  was
his  sister,  therefore  he  had  a  right,  and  would  go  in  to  her.
The  mob  still  obstinately  opposed  it;  but,  at  length,  he,  and
two  of  the  Sisters,  found  their  way  in,  and  went  up  stairs
to  Mother.  Soon  after  this,  Mother  Ann  and  Father  Wil-
liam put  their  heads  out  at  the  window,  and  sung  to  the
Believers  without,  who  danced  with  great  power.

16.  In  the  mean  time,  Grant,  and  his  wicked  court,  con-
sulted among  themselves,  to  know  in  what  manner  they
should  proceed,  and  having  settled  the  point,  Mother  was
brought  back  again.  Elder  James,  during  the  whole  time
of  trial  had  been  kept  under  guard,  in  a  room,  in  a  house
where  Grant's  Court  was  sitting;  he  was  also  called  in,  and
a  suit  was  now  entered  against  them  for  a  breach  of  the
peace.  They  were  accused  of  making  disturbance,  and
breaking  people  of  their  rest,  by  singing  and  shouting  along
the  road,  at  a  late  hour  of  the  night.

17.  Grant  inquired  of  them  if  they  did  not  pass  by  such
a  man's  house;  (naming  the  man)  to  which  Elder  James
replied,  "I  never  saw  that  man  in  my  life,  that  I  know  of;
but  I  sung  and  served  God  a  great  deal."  Grant  again
asked  if  they  did  not  pass  by  such  a  man's  house;  (naming
another  man;)  and  received  the  same  answer.  Thus  he
inquired,  concerning  one  house  and  another;  but  received
invariably  the  same  answer.

18.  Grant  then  made  a  pretense  of  binding  them  over  to
the  County  Court,  and  said  they  must  be  taken  to  jail,  or  get
bondsmen  for  their  appearance.  David  and  George  imme-
diately offered  themselves  as  bondsmen,  and  were  accepted.
The  bondsmen  then  said,  "  The  prisoners  are  ours,  and  we
have  a  right  to  take  them  where  we  please. "


Mother  Ann  Lee.  151

19.  It  appears,  however,  that  Grant  did  not  give  them  up
to  their  bondsmen;  but  they  all  went  out,  and  Mother  and
Hannah  Kendall  and  Lucy  Wood  got  into  their  carriage.
The  Brethren,  who  were  the  bondsmen,  considering  them-
selves as  having  the  right,  attempted  to  lead  the  carriage,
but  were  prevented  by  the  mob,  who  had  determined  on
taking  the  carriage  themselves.

20.  Grant  came  to  the  door  and  addressed  them  thus,  "As
a  magistrate  of  the  state  of  New  York,  I  desire  that  there  be
no  mobs,  nor  riots,"  and  then  added,  "  Lay  hands  suddenly
on  no  man."  These  words  he  repeated  several  times,  laying
a  peculiar  emphasis  on  the  last  words,  no  man.  He  then
went  back  into  the  house,  and  was  seen  no  more  that  day.
This  speech  was  evidently  intended  as  a  cloak,  to  cover  his
own  hypocrisy,  while  it  held  out  a  license  to  the  mob,  to
abuse  Mother  at  their  pleasure,  seeing  she  was  a  woman.

21.  This  was  evidently  well  understood  by  the  mob;  for
they  took  hold  with  increased  zeal,  and  separated  Mother
from  the  body  of  the  Believers,  and  would  not  suffer  them  to
come  near  her ;  but  drove  on,  with  great  violence,  toward
Albany;  still  keeping  the  Believers  back,  and  threatening
and  abusing  every  one  who  attempted  to  go  forward.  Many
of  them  were  inhumanly  beaten,  some  of  those  on  horseback,
besides  being  beaten  themselves,  had  their  horses  beaten
with  such  violence  that  they  several  times  nearly  fell  down.
Thus  they  drove  on  about  seven  miles,  over  a  rough  and
muddy  road,  over  stones  and  stumps,  seeking  the  roughest
places  in  the  road  for  Mother's  carriage;  which,  together
with  many  severe  strokes,  which  she  received  from  her  dri-
vers, greatly  increased  the  fatigue  and  sufferings  she  had
already  endured.  And,  though  several  families  of  the  Believ-
ers lived  on  the  road,  the  mob  would  not  suffer  Mother  to
stop  for  any  refreshments,  although  it  was  near  sunset,  and
she  had  eaten  nothing  that day,  except  a  few  mouthfuls


152  Testimonies  of

which  she  nad  obtained  of  Grant's  wife,  at  the  intercession
of  some  of  the  Sisters.

22.  At  length,  about  dusk,  they  arrived  against  a  tavern
on  the  road,  and  the  Landlord,  whose  name  was  Ranny,
hearing  the  tumult,  and  understanding  the  cause,  came  out,
and  with  great  authority  of  spirit,  and  keen  severity  of  lan-
guage, reprimanded  the  mob  for  such  shameful  abuse,
toward  an  innocent  and  civil  people;  and  boldly  threatened
them  with  the  utmost  rigor  of  the  law,  if  they  did  not  imme-
diately disperse.  This  severe  rebuke  and  bold  threat  from
Ranny,  greatly  embarrassed  the  mob,  and  concluding  they
were  near  the  boundary  line  of  the  town,  and  night  coming
on,  they  said  that  all  who  belonged  to  Niskayuna,  might
pass  on,  but  those  who  belonged  to  New  Lebanon,  should
go  back.  The  Brethren,  however,  would  not  consent  to
this,  but  determined  to  cleave  to  Mother.  After  much
wrangling,  and  some  blows  from  the  mob,  they  left  the  Be-
lievers, a  few  rods  west  of  Ranny's,  and  near  to  Charles  Mc-
Carthy's—  a  poor  man,  who  lived  in  a  little  log-house,
where  the  most  of  them  retired,  and  took  shelter  for  the
night;  Mother  was  very  much  exhausted,  and  passed  the
night  under  great  distress  and  sufferings.


CHAPTER  XXII.

MOTHER ANN AND THE ELDERS RETURN TO NATHAN FAR-

RINGTON'S —  A  MOB  SURROUNDS  THE  HOUSE  AT  NIGHT

MOTHER  PROCEEDS  ON  HER  JOURNEY — STOPS  AT  E.
KNAPP'S,  AND  IS  DRIVEN  OFF  BV  A  MOB — ARRIVES  AT
NISKAYUNA, &C.

i. When  daylight  appeared,  the  Believers  who  had  taken
their  lodgings  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  in  an  old  log


Mother  Ann  Lee.  153

barn,  arose  from  their  cold  berths,  wet  and  muddy,  just  in
the  situation  the  mob  had  left  them.  However,  the  young
Brethren  soon  cleared  away  the  brush,  in  the  door-yard,  and
prepared  for  meeting.  The  people  assembled,  and  kneel-
ing down,  wept,  with  great  sorrow.  Elder  James  said,  "  If
these  should  hold  their  peace,  I  believe  the  very  stones
would  cry  out  to  God."  They  then  went  forth  in  worship,
with  great  power  of  God.

2.  Soon  after  meeting,  some  of  the  Brethren  came  from
New  Lebanon,  and  brought  them  plenty  of  provisions,
which  came  in  a  time  of  need,  and  was  thankfully  received;
for  very  few  of  those  who  had  followed  Mother,  had  eaten
any  thing  the  preceding  day.

3.  After  they  had  eaten  their  breakfast,  Mother  showed
them  the  bruises  she  had  received  from  their  cruel  persecu-
tors. Her  stomach  and  arms  were  beaten  and  bruised  black
and  blue;  and  she,  and  the  Sisters  with  her  affirmed  that  she
was  black  and  blue  all  over  her  body;  and  indeed  it  was
not  to  be  wondered  at,  considering  how  much  she  had  been
beaten  and  dragged  about;  she  wept,  and  said,  "  So  it  has
been  with  me  almost  continually,  ever  since  I  left  Niskayuna;
day  and  night,  day  and  night,  I  have  been  like  a  dying
creature."

4.  Mother  and  her  persecuted  little  flock,  passed  the  fore
part  of  the  day  in  serving  God  and  comforting  one  another.
In  the  afternoon  they  returned  back  to  Nathan  Farrington's,
where  they  spent  the  remainder  of  the  day,  and  the  follow-
ing night.  After  they  arrived  there,  Mother  said,  "  I  feel
now  as  though  I  could  take  some  rest,"  and  appeared  in  a
measure,  comfortable,  considering  the  shocking  scene  of  suf-
fering and  abuse  which  she  had  passed  through  the  preced-
ing day.

5.  But,  the  enemies  of  the  work  could  never  be  at  rest
while  Mother  was  within  their  reach. In  the  dusk  of  the

20


154  Testimonies  of

evening,  about  thirty  or  forty  heathenish  creatures  of  the
baser  sort,  collected  around  the  house,  in  a  mobbish  manner.
This  collection  consisted  chiefly  of  a  company  of  fellows
from  the  town  of  Chatham,  who,  from  the  savageness  of
their  manners,  were  styled  the  "Indian  Club."

6.  These  ruffians  demanded,  in  very  rough  and  abusive  lan-
guage, "to  see  that  old  woman."  Nathan  inquired  what
they  wanted  of  her  ?  They  answered,  "  She  is  an  old  witch,
and  she  shall  not  stay  here."  Nathan  replied,  "  She  is  a  wo-
man of  God,  and  you  shall  not  see  her  in  such  a  manner."
On  hearing  the  tumult,  and  perceiving  that  a  mob  had  gath-
ered, Mother  wept,  and  said,  "  This  comes  suddenly  upon  me,
what  shall  I  do  ?  I  do  not  feel  as  though  I  could  endure
any  more  !  "

7.  The  mob  threw  clubs  and  stones  at  the  house,  and
threatened  to  break  down  the  doors.  Nathan  boldly  com-
manded them  to  desist,  and  threatened  them  with  the  pen-
alty of  the  law  if  they  attempted  to  break  into  the  house.
This,  for  a  moment,  seemed  to  check  their  rage;  Nathan  ex-
postulated with  them,  and  endeavored  to  show  them  the
wickedness  and  folly  of  such  conduct,  and  said,  "  I  have
lived,  as  a  neighbor  with  you  a  number  of  years,  in  peace;
but  now,  because  I  have  joined  the  people  of  God,  accord-
ing to  my  faith,  and  confessed  my  sins,  as  you  ought  to  do,
you  come  here  to  break  into  my  house,  and  abuse  my
family."

8.  But  the  mob,  being  determined  to  break  into  the  house,
set  reason  and  humanity  at  defiance,  and  with  horrid  oaths
and  blasphemies,  continued  to  throw  stones  and  clubs.
The  house  being  new,  and  unfinished,  and  one  of  the  pas-
sages fastened  up  with  loose  boards,  they,  at  length,  suc-
ceeded in  forcing  the  boards  down,  and  carried  them  into
the  street,  but  were  still  prevented  from  entering  the  house,
by  Brethren,  who  stood  in  the  passage.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  155

9.  Mother,  who  was  at  this  time  in  the  upper  part  of  the
house,  sent  for  John  Farrington,*  and  said  to  him,  "  John,
can't  you  go  and  send  these  creatures  off  ?  "  :<  Yea,  Mother,"
replied  John.  "  Go,"  said  she,  "  and  shame  them,  tell
them  it  is  a  shame  for  men  to  be  around  after  a  woman  in
the  night;  but,  if  they  will  go  off,  and  come  peaceably,  to-
morrow, in  the  day-time,  I  will  see  them."

10.  Accordingly,  John  went  down  in  Mother's  gift,  and
slipped  out  at  another  door,  and  was  instantly  seized,  by
two  lusty  ruffians.  "  Love,"  said  John.  "  Love,"  replied  the
men,  in  a  sneering  tone  of  voice;  and  immediately  gripped
him  between  them  with  such  violence  that  it  seemed  as
though  they  intended  to  squeeze  the  breath  out  of  his  body.

11.  John  held  his  breath,  and,  as  they  slackened  their
arms,  he  cried  "More  love,"  at  which  they  renewed  their
hug,  gripping  him  with  all  their  strength.  This  was  repeated
a  number  of  times  till  the  men  had  wearied  themselves  in
hugging  and  squeezing  John,  who  received  no  hurt.
"  Now,"  said  John,  "  If  you  have  got  through,  I  want  to
reason  with  you,  as  you  are  reasonable  men,  or  ought  to  be.
Why  do  you  come  here,  in  such  a  manner,  in  the  night,  af-
ter a  woman  ?  It  is  a  shame;  I  am  ashamed  of  you,  that  men
should  behave  so  !  Do,  for  the  honor  of  man,  withdraw,
peaceably,  and  if  you  will  come  again,  in  the  morning,
peaceably,  when  it  is  day-time,  the  woman  is  willing  to  see
you."  These  words,  spoken  in  the  power  and  gift  of  God,
completely  vanquished  their  rage,  and  quelled  their  savage
spirits;  they  immediately  began  to  withdraw,  and  were  soon
all  gone,  so  that  Mother  enjoyed  the  remainder  of  the  night
in  peace.

12.  The  next  morning,  only  six  or  eight  of  them  made
their  appearance.  Mother,  with  John,  and  two  or  three
of  the  Sisters,  went  out  to  see  them. "  This  is  the  woman

*  Eldest  son  of  Nathan  Farrington.


156  Testimonies  of

that  you  pressed  so  hard  to  see  last  night,"  said  John.
"  What  do  you  want  of  me  ?  "  said  Mother,  '  I  am  a  poor,
weak  woman,  I  do  not  hurt  any  body."

13.  The  guilty  wretches  had  no  confidence  to  speak  to
her,  nor  to  look  her  in  the  face,  but  hung  down  their  heads,
and  began  to  sheer  off.  John  then  invited  them  to  stay  and
take  breakfast,  but  they  declined,  and  soon  went  off.  Thus
did  God  frustrate  the  designs  of  the  wicked,  at  this  time.

14.  About  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Mother  took  her
leave  of  the  Believers  at  Nathan  Farrington's,  and  said  she
did  not  feel  it  to  be  best  for  any  to  follow  her,  excepting
the  Elders,  and  Richard  Spier,  because  it  would  only  tend
to  increase  the  enmity  of  the  world.  She  then  departed  for
Niskayuna.

15.  After  proceeding  a  few  miles  on  the  road,  one  of  the
shoes  of  Mother's  beast  came  off,  and  they  made  a  stop  on
White's  hill,  opposite  to  a  blacksmith  shop,  to  get  the  shoe
set.  Father  William  stepped  up  to  the  shop  and  asked  the
blacksmith,  whose  name  was  Johnson,  to  set  the  shoe,  and
offered  to  pay  him  the  money  for  it.  But  the  man  in  a  very
rough  and  passionate  manner,  refused,  and  seizing  a  pair  of
his  tongs,  threw  them  at  him  with  great  violence;  but,  miss-
ing his  aim,  they  struck  the  ground  between  Father  William's
feet,  and  pierced  a  hole,  nearly  six  inches  deep,  in  the  hard,
solid  earth.

16.  Richard  Spier  picked  up  the  tongs,  and  asked  John-
son what  he  meant  by  such  conduct  ?  He  replied,  with  an
oath,  that  he  would  immediately  kill  them  all,  if  they  did
not  depart.  They  left  him,  and  went  on  about  a  mile,
and  stopped  at  Ebenezer  Knapp's ;  Mary  Knapp,  and  her
daughter  Hannah,  were  Believers,  and  the  old  man  was
friendly.  Hannah  had  been  sent  home  from  Nathan  Far-
rington's by  Mother,  in  the  morning,  with  information  that
she  was  coming  along  soon,  and  would  stop  there. The


Mother  Ann  Lee.  157

family  had  also  made  preparations  to  receive  her;  but  she
had  not  been  in  the  house  but  a  few  minutes,  when  this
wicked  Johnson,  with  about  twenty  ruffians,  in  his  own  like-
ness, came  and  beset  the  house,  and  ordered  Mother  and
the  Elders  to  be  gone  in  half  an  hour,  or  they  should  suffer
the  consequences.

17.  These  cruel  wretches  were  chiefly  armed  with  cudgels,
and  large  whips,  with  the  lashes  wound  around  their  hands.
George  White,  Esqr.,  was  one  of  the  crew.  Mother  and  the
Elders  were  so  oppressed  by  these  ruffians  that  they  did  not
even  sit  down  to  eat  the  victuals  which  was  provided  for
them;  though  some  of  them  took  a  few  mouthfuls  into  their
hands  and  ate  while  they  tarried.

18.  Hannah,  who  had  returned  from  Nathan  Farrington's
with  the  joyful  expectation  of  seeing  Mother  and  the  Elders
at  her  father's  house,  was  greatly  grieved  to  think  that  they
could  not  eat  their  victuals  in  peace;  and,  though  young
and  bashful,  she  was  constrained,  by  the  power  of  God,  to
break  forth  in  the  following  words,  "  If  there  was  a  company
of  drunkards,  whoremongers,  and  whores  gathered  here  to
serve  the  devil,  you  would  not  come  to  drive  them  away."
Father  William  Lee  replied,  "  It  is  the  truth  of  God,  Child."

19.  Though  Ebenezer  Knapp  did  not  pretend  to  be  a  Be-
liever, he  appeared  to  be  very  sorry  that  Mother  and  the
Elders  were  so  interrupted  ;  that  they  could  not  refresh
themselves  in  peace,  especially,  as  it  was  the  first  time  they
had  been  at  his  house.  He  said  they  came  peaceably,  and
were  welcome  to  stay  as  long  as  they  chose.  Father  William
went  out  into  the  piazza  and  spoke  to  the  mob  with  his  usual
boldness,  saying,  "We  came  here  peaceably  to  refresh  our-
selves, and  we  will  stay  as  long  as  we  have  a  mind  to,  and  do
you  resist  us,  if  you  dare."  Mother  and  the  Elders  soon
took  their  leave,  and  no  further  resistance  was  offered.  One
of  the  mob,  however,  attempted  to  lead  Mother's  carriage,


158  Testimonies  of

but  Hannah  Kendall,  who  was  in  the  carriage  with  Mother,
forbade  it,  saying,  "  Let  the  horse  alone,  I  am  able  to  drive
him  myself."  He  then  let  the  beast  go,  and  they  then  pro-
ceeded on  their  journey,  and  met  with  no  further  opposition.

20.  When  they  arrived  at  the  ferry,  opposite  Albany,  a
number  of  native  Indians  were  at  the  ferry;  and  on  discov-
ering Mother  Ann,  they  cried  out,  "The  good  woman  is
come  ;  the  good  woman  is  come,"  and  manifested  great  joy
and  satisfaction  on  seeing  her  and  the  Elders.  Mother  soon
crossed  the  river,  and  proceeded  on  till  they  entered  the
forest,  north-west  of  the  town,  where  they  made  a  little
stop,  and  rested  themselves  in  peace.  After  this  they  pur-
sued their  journey,  and  arrived  at  Niskayuna  about  eleven
o'clock  at  night,  September  4th,  17S3.

21.  During  the  period  of  two  years  and  four  months, —
the  time  of  their  absence  from  Niskayuna,  Mother  and  the
Elders  traveled  many  hundred  miles,  and  suffered  indescrib-
able hardships,  afflictions  and  persecutions,  to  establish  the
gospel  in  this  land,  and  lay  the  foundation  of  Christ's  King-
dom on  earth.  Most  of  the  Believers  in  America  had  a
privilege  to  see  her,  either  by  being  visited  in  their  own
habitations,  or  by  visiting  her  where  she  tarried,  and  all  had
a  privilege  to  be  taught  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.
During  this  period  of  time  Mother  and  the  the  Elders  had
many  precious  and  powerful  gifts  of  God,  to  search  out  and
reprove  sin,  to  strengthen  the  weak,  instruct  the  ignorant,
and  comfort  the  afflicted  ;  and  all  who  were  honest-hearted,
found  a  great  increase  of  power  over  evil,  of  love  and  union,
light  and  understanding;  while  those  who  were  rotten-
hearted,  and  insincere,  began  to  wither  away,  more  and
more,  till  they  fell  off,  as  withered  branches.

Note. —  It  is  proper  here  to  give  some  further  account  of
the  prisoners  who  were  left  in  Barrington  Jail.  Mother,
whose  care  and  tender  feelings  extended  to  all  her  children,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  159

and  especially  to  those  who  were  under  afflictions  and  suffer-
ings, had  been  careful  to  send  messengers  from  time  to  time,  to
look  after  their  situation,  and  minister  to  their  necessities.
Jonathan  Slosson, —  who  had  been  charged  by  Mother  Ann  to
see  to  them,  returned  to  Niskayuna  the  day  after  Mother's  ar-
rival, and  gave  her  some  comforting  intelligence  about  them.

While  in  prison  they  were  visited  by  many  of  the  world,
to  whom  they  held  a  bold  testimony.  Some  were  convicted,
confessed  their  sins,  and  set  out  in  the  wray  of  God.  The
prisoners,  though  they  were  sometimes  abused  by  the  jailer,
were  generally  treated  with  kindness  ;  and,  though  they
were,  sometimes,  closely  confined,  yet  they  were  at  other
times,  treated  with  great  confidence,  and  let  them  have  lib-
erty to  walk  abroad,  saying  he  was  not  in  the  least  concerned
about  their  running  away.

After  they  had  been  there  a  while,  the  authority  at  Bar-
rington  wrote  to  the  Judges  who  had  imprisoned  them,  to
know  for  what  purpose  they  were  imprisoned  in  such  a  man-
ner, and  received  for  answer,  "  they  were  obliged  to  do  it  to
satisfy  the  people."  Pitiful  excuse,  an  innocent  people,
without  having  as  much  as  a  crime  alleged  against  them,
must  be  imprisoned  To  Satisfy  the  People  !  They  did
not  reflect  that  those  wicked  people  could  not  save  them
from  the  judgments  of  God.

After  six  or  seven  weeks'  imprisonment,  they  were,  at
length,  brought  to  trial;  their  Judges  applied  to  Theodore
Sedgewick,  the  District  Attorney,  to  know  whether  they  could
support  the  charge  of  blasphemy  against  them,  on  account
of  what  Samuel  Fitch  had  said,  and  were  informed  that  it
would  not  bear  an  action,  because  what  they  had  said  was
agreeable  to  their  faith,  to  which  they  had  a  constitutional
right,  neither  could  they  prove  a  breach  of  peace,  because
the  Shakers,  as  well  as  other  people,  had  a  right  to  worship
God  as  they  pleased.


160  Testimonies  of

Hence  they  were  under  the  necessity  to  try  another  scheme
to  carry  their  point,  and  throw  the  cost  of  prosecution  upon
the  innocent  prisoners.  Old  Valentine  Rathbun  brought
forward  a  charge,  supported  by  oath,  of  assault  and  battery;
and  though  it  was  evidently  proved  to  be  false,  and  his  abuse
to  his  own  son  was  a  clear  evidence,  that  he,  for  one,  was
guilty  of  assault  and  battery;  yet,  these  unjust  Judges,  who
confessed  that  they  had  committed  them  to  prison  to  satisfy
the  people,  completed  this  disgraceful  scene  by  sentencing
those  who  had  been  proved  innocent,  to  pay  a  fine  of  one
dollar  with  the  costs  of  Court,  which  amounted  to  twenty
pounds,  lawful.  As  the  prisoners  had  not  the  money  pres-
ent, they  informed  the  Sheriff  that  they  did  not  want  to  lie
in  jail  for  money,  and  they  would  pay  it  as  soon  as  they
could.  The  Sheriff  therefore  released  them,  with  no  other
security  than  their  word,  for  the  money;  a  striking  proof  of
the  confidence  which  he  placed  in  these  persecuted  people.
The  money  was  paid,  before  the  time  had  expired.

Thus  ended  this  imprisonment,  to  the  disgrace  of  this  per-
secuting generation,  but  to  the  honor  and  increase  of  the
testimony.


CHAPTER XXIII.

GREAT MANIFESTATIONS OF GOD IN MOTHER, CHRIST HER
HEAD, LORD AND HUSBAND.

i.  The  manifestations  of  God,  in,  and  through  Mother  Ann
were  exceedingly  great,  and  marvelous.  That  she  was  an
eminent  witness  of  God,  no  one  could  doubt  who  ever  heard
and  felt  the  power  of  her  testimony,  or  experienced  the
heart-searching  power  of  her  spirit;  and  that  she  was  that
distinguished  person  whom  she  declared herself  to  be,  was


Mother  Ann  Lee.  161

beyond  all  dispute  in  the  minds  of  her  faithful followers;
for  her  works  plainly  testified  it.

2.  In  the  early  part  of  the  year  17S1,  a  large  assembly  of
the  Believers  were  gathered  at  Watervliet,  among  whom
were  Joseph  M  each  am,  Calvin  Harlow,  Nathan,  Ezekiel,
and  Eunice  Goodrich;  Mother  was  at  that  time,  under  great
sufferings  of  soul.  She  came  forth  with  a  very  powerful  gift
of  God  and  reproved  the  people  for  their  hardness  of  heart,
and  unbelief  in  the  Second  Appearance  of  Christ.  "  Espe-
cially ye  men  and  brethren,  I  upbraid  you  for  your  unbelief
and  hardness  of  heart,"  said  she.  She  spake  of  the  unbe-
lieving Jews,  in  Christ's  first  appearance,  and,  added  she,
"  Even  his  own  disciples,  after  he  arose  from  the  dead,  though
he  had  often  told  them  that  he  should  rise,  the  third  day,
believed  it  not."  "  They  would  not  believe  that  he  had  risen
because  he  appeared,  first,  to  a  woman!  So  great  was  their
unbelief  that  the  words  of  Mary  seemed  to  them  like  idle
tales!  His  appearing  first,  to  a  woman,  showed  that  his
Second  Appearing  would  be  in  a  woman."

3.  So  great  was  the  manifestation  of  the  power  of  God  in
Mother  at  this  time,  that  many  were  unable  to  abide  in  her
presence,  her  words  were  like  flames  of  fire,  and  her  voice
like  peals  of  thunder.  Well  said  the  prophet,  "  Who  shall
abide  the  day  of  his  coming,  for  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire  and
like  fuller's  soap."  After  this  Mother  Ann  was  released
from  her  sufferings,  and  began  to  sing  with  great  joy  and
love,  and  gathered  the  people  around  her,  and  her  counte-
nance was  very  beautiful  and  glorious. Eunice  Goodrich.

4.  At  Joseph  Bennett's,  in  Cheshire,  many  people  were
gathered  to  see  Mother.  She  kneeled,  wept,  and  groaned  in
spirit,  saying,  "  They  do  not  know  who  I  am,  nor  my  calling."
She  repeated  these  words  three  times.  Elizabeth,  Phebe,
and  Rhoda  Chase,  Eunice  Bennett,  and  many  others  were
present.  Elizabeth  Chase.

21


i


162  Testimonies  of

5.  The  first  time  Rhoda  Hammond  visited  the  Church,  at
Watervliet,  in  1780,  she  had  considerable  conversation
with  Mother,  in  private.  Mother  informed  her  of  wonder-
ful manifestations  of  God  to  her,  and  said  she  spake  with
God,  (to  her  sense,)  face  to  face,  as  Moses  did,  and  saw  the
glory  of  God,  and  had  seen  wonderful  visions.  She  also
said,  "  It  is  through  great  labor  and  sufferings,  that  the
gifts  of  God  come  to  me."  Rhoda  Hammond.

6.  When  Mother  was  at  Benjamin  Osborn's,  on  Mount
Washington,  in  conversation  with  Elizabeth  Hill,  she  said,
"  I  am  the  first  Elder  in  the  Church,  I  have  seen  God,  and
spoken  with  him,  face  to  face,  as  we  speak  one  to  another.*
Elizabeth,  being  young  in  the  faith,  these  words  of  Mother
Ann  had  a  powerful  effect  in  confirming  and  establishing
her  in  the  faith.  Elizabeth  Hill .

7.  Again,  at  the  same  place,  Mother  was  under  great  suf-
ferings, and  travail  of  soul,  after  which  she  said,  "The
Lord,  who  brought  me  over  the  great  waters,  has  redeemed
my  soul.  I  hear  the  angels  sing ;  I  see  the  glory  of  God  as
bright  as  the  sun  ;  I  see  multitudes  of  the  dead,  who  were
slain  in  battle,  arise  and  come  into  the  first  resurrection;
I  see  Christ  put  crowns  on  their  heads  of  bright,  glorious,
and  changeable  colors. —  I  converse  with  Christ;  I  feel  Him  ^
present  with  me,  as  sensibly  as  I  feel  my  hands  together.
My  soul  is  married  to  him  in  the  spirit;  —  he  is  my  hus-
band; it  is  not  I  that  speaks  ;  it  is  Christ  who  dwells  in  me.

Jonathan  Slosson.

8.  Nathan  Farrington,  who  lived  in  the  western  part  of
New  Lebanon,  having,  with  all  his  family,  embraced  the
gospel,  was  one  day  taken  in  the  visions  of  God  while  in  the
field,  gathering  his  Indian  corn,  and  carried,  in  the  spirit,  to
the  spot where  the  meeting-house  in Lebanon  now  stands.

*  Powerful  angels,  clothed  with  God's  spirit  and  power,  appear  to  human  souls
as  God  Himself. God,  to  mortals  is  known  through  vicegerents.  —  Editor.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  163

Casting  his  eyes  eastward,  he  saw  the  mountain  chiefly  di-
vested of  its  trees,  from  the  place  where  he  stood,  even  to
its  summit.  Near  the  summit,  he  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  Mother  Ann  by  his  side,  with  their  faces  toward  the
west,  and  they  walked  side  by  side,  down  the  mountain,
until  they  came  within  a  few  rods  of  where  he  stood,  and
then  disappeared.  The  vision  then  ceased,  and  Nathan
found  himself  in  his  cornfield  again.  Mother  Ann  was,  at
that  time,  in  Harvard,  and  Nathan,  soon  after,  went  to  see
her.  Mother  said,  "  I  own  your  vision;  it  is  so,  it  really  is;
and  it  is  a  great  vision  of  God."  Nathan  told  Mother  that
he  knew  what  the  vision  meant,  that  it  was  given  to  him  for
an  anchor  to  his  soul.  "  Ah,  truly  it  is,''  said  Mother,  "And
it  will  hold  you  when  all  things  else  fail."

Nathan  Harrington,  Senr.

9.  Hannah  Goodrich,  1st,  being  at  Watervliet,  with  others,
saw  Mother  very  full  of  power,  and  her  face  shone  with  the
glory  of  God.  It  reminded  Hannah  of  Moses,  when  he
came  down  from  the  Mount.  Mother  then  took  hold  of
Hannah's  hand,  and  raised  it  to  her  head,  and  said,  "Han-
nah, I  see  your  face  shine  with  the  glory  of  God."

10.  Sometimes  Mother  Ann  used  to  be  taken  under  great
sufferings,  so  that  it  would  seem  as  though  her  life  must  go
from  her;  at  other  times  she  was  filled  with  unspeakable  joy
and  triumph,  and  would  say,  "  I  feel  as  terrible  as  an  army
with  banners  !  "  Hannah  Goodrich.

11.  At  Harvard,  in  presence  of  Ebenezer  Cooley,  and
others,  Mother  spoke  many  things  relating  to  her  own  ex-
perience; she  said,  "When  I  first  gained  the  victory  over  a
carnal  nature,  I  was  brought  into  great  clearness  of  sight,  I
saw  the  Lord  Jesus,  met  with  him,  and  walked  with  him
side  by  side.  Ebenezer  Cooiey.

12.  Timothy  Hubbard  was  one  of  the  first  who  visited
Mother  and  the  Elders  at  Watervliet. While  there,  he  saw


164  Testimonies  of

Mother  sit  in  her  chair  from  early  in  the  morning  until  after-
noon, under  great  operations  and  power  of  God ;  she  sung
in  unknown  tongues,  the  whole  of  the  time,  and  seemed
to  be  wholly  divested  of  any  attraction  to  material  things;
all  her  sensations  appeared  to  be  engaged  in  the  spiritual
world.  After  she  was  released  from  these  operations  she
spoke  to  the  people  present,  saying,  "  The  way  of  God  will
grow  straighter  and  straighter;  so  straight  that  if  you  go  one
hair's  breadth  out  of  the  way,  you  will  be  lost. —  I  felt  my
soul  walking  with  Christ  in  groves  and  valleys,  as  really  as
if  he  had  been  here  on  earth. —  It  is  good  for  a  man  not  to
touch  a  woman."  Timothy  Hubbard.

13.  At  another  time,  in  the  presence  of  Timothy  Hubbard,
and  others,  Mother  Ann  was  overshadowed  with  the  power
of  God.  She  stood  erect,  on  the  floor,  for  the  space  of  an  L
hour;  her  countenance  was  angelic,  and  she  seemed  to  notice  )
nothing  of  the  things  of  time.  She  sang,  chiefly  in  unknown
tongues ;  though,  sometimes,  she  uttered  expressions  in  her
own  language.  Among  other  expressions  she  made  the  fol-
lowing: "Thou  wilt  keep  them  in  perfect  peace  whose  minds
are  staid  on  Thee."  When  her  gift  was  out  she  said,  "  I  saw
Jesus  Christ,  and  conversed  with  him  face  to  face,  as  a  man
converseth  with  his  friend."  Timothy  Hubbard.

14.  In  the  spring  of  17CS4,  Sarah  Barker,  of  New  Lebanon,
saw  Mother  in  vision.  She  saw  a  bright  spot  on  the  top  of
her  head,  which  gradually  spread  all  over  her,  till,  to  Sarah's
sensation,  she  seemed  entirely  covered  with  glory,  and  it
seemed  as  though  God,  who  created  all  things,  dwelt  in  her.
Sarah,  afterward,  related  the  vision  to  Mother  Ann,  and
Mother  said,  "  It  is  a  great  gift  of  God,  I  have  nothing  in  me
to  my  knowledge,  but  what  is  of  God.  If  I  have,  I  do  not
know  it."  Sarah  Barker.

15.  About  two  months  after  Samuel  Fitch  believed  the
gospel,  being  at  Watervliet,  and  having  received  a  great  mani-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  165

festation  of  light  and  understanding,  he  said  to  Mother  Ann,
"  Christ  is  called  the  Second  Adam,  and  thou  art  the  Second
Eve."  She  answered,  "Flesh  and  blood  has  not  revealed  it
unto  thee,  Samuel;  but  God  has."  Samuel  Fitch.

16.  Job  Bishop,  being  with  Mother  Ann  at  Watervliet,
opened  some  visions  he  had  seen  of  some  of  the  Apostles.
Mother  turning  to  Elder  James,  who  was  present,  exclaimed,
"Ah!  James,  these  are  great  gifts  of  God;  they  are  minister-
ing spirits.  I  have  often  seen  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and^
conversed  with  them,  and  with  all  the  Apostles ;  and  with  J
Christ  Jesus, —  my  Lord  and  Head;  for  no  man  is  my  head,
but  Christ  Jesus;  he  is  my  Lord  and  Head."  Mother  wept,
and,  turning  to  Job,  said,  "  Job,  though  you  are  a  young  man,
you  are  now  called  to  go  and  preach  a  greater  and  purer
gospel  than  St.  Paul  preached;  for  this  day,  requires  a  con-
fession of  every  known  sin  ;  and  a  full  cross  against  the  flesh,
with  all  its  affections  and  lusts."  Job  Bishop.

17.  Morell  Baker,  Senr.,  visited  the  Church  at  Watervliet
in  1784.  After  their  return  from  the  eastern  states,  and
being  under  great  impressions  of  mind  concerning  Mother's
calling,  he  said  to  her,  "  Thou  art  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  !  "
She  answered,  "  Thou  hast  rightly  said,  for  so  I  am.  Christ
is  my  husband.  I  now  see  many  souls  who  have  left  the  body,
and  have  come  to  hear  the  gospel  !  I  now  hear  the  hosts  of
heaven  singing  praises  to  God."  Morell  Baker,  Senr.

18.  The  same  year,  David  Slosson  and  many  others,  being
at  WatervKet,  N.  Y.,  were  present  with  Mother  Ann  and  the
Elders  who  came  from  England  with  her,  when  Mother
appeared  clothed  in  majesty,  and  her  visage  was  exceedingly
glorious.  She  spake  with  great  power,  saying,  "  I  am  mar-
ried to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  !  He  is  my  head  and  my  hus-
band, and  I  have  no  other  !  I  have  walked  hand  in  hand
with  him  in  Heaven  !  I  have  seen  the  Patriarchs,  Prophets
and  Apostles;  I  have  conversed  with  them,  and  I  know  them,


166  Testimonies  of

I  have  seen  King  David,  with  his  robes  on,  which  were  of
vast  extent,  and  inexpressibly  glorious  ! I  have  seen  Job
St.  Paul,  and  others."  ,  She  also  described  their  statures,  and
their  glory  and  majesty.  David  Slosson.

19.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Nathan
Kendall's  in  Woburn,  Sarah  Kendall,  and  some  other  young
Sisters,  being  with  Mother  in  the  chamber,  one  day,  and
after  she  had  been  walking  the  floor  for  a  considerable  time,
the  Elders  came  in,  and  Mother,  addressing  them,  said,  "  I
have  been  walking  in  fine  valleys  with  Christ,  in  heavenly
union."  Sara//  Kendall.

20.  At  Watervliet,  in  17S4,  in  presence  of  a  large  number
of  people,  Mother  spake  as  follows,  "  Christ  is  ever  with  me,
both  in  sitting  down  and  rising  up;  in  going  out  and  coming
in.  If  I  walk  in  groves  and  valleys,  there  he  is,  with  me;
and  I  converse  with  him  as  one  friend  converses  with  another,
face  to  face."  Elizabeth  Chase.

21.  The  first  time  that  Mother  Ann  visited  Enfield,  Conn.,
in  June,  1781,  many  people  being  present,  many  people,  in
conversation  with  Mother,  asked  her  when  she  was  con-
verted? "Converted  "  !  said  Mother,  I  converse  with  God
face  to  face,  every  day."  *  Joseph  Markham,  Senr.

22.  One  evening,  at  Watervliet,  when  a  number  of  the
Believers  were  assembled  together,  Mother  came  into  the
room  and  said  "  Silence  "  !  "  There  is  silence  in  Heaven  for
the  space  of  half  an  hour."  The  people  then  all  sat  down,
and  Mother  retired.  After  about  half  an  hour  she  returned
and  said,  "I  have  been  with  God  and  with  Christ;  and  I
saw  the  holy  angels,  and  heard  them  sing;  and  they  sang
'Glory  to  God  and  the  Lambd  "  Eliphalet  Slosson.

23.  Mother  often  said,  "I  feel  the  blood  of  Christ  running
through  my  soul  and  washing  me;  him  do  I  acknowledge
as  my  head,  and  Lord."  Eliphalet  Slosson.

A  mediatorial  Ansel,  representing  God  to  the  finite  human  perception. — Editor.


:>


Mother  Ann  Lee.  167

24.  When  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Nathan
Goodrich's,  in  Hancock,  Joseph  Meacham,  Hannah  Ken-
dall and  others  being  present,  Mother  was  under  great  power
of  God,  her  soul  seemed  filled  with  joy,  and  her  countenance
shone  with  beauty,  and  she  spake  these  words,  "  I  know  that
the  mysteries  of  God  are  revealed  unto  me;  and  there  is  no
one  who  can  see  through  me,  or  comprehend  me,  until  born
of  God."  Thankful Barce.

25.  One  morning  Mother  raised  her  window,  and  looking
out,  said,  "  I  have  had  new  fruit  to  eat  this  morning,  such
as  I  never  had  before.  I  am  full.  Like  a  vessel  that  is
ready  to  burst,  my  soul  is  running  over !  O  that  souls
would  come  and  partake !  I  feel  the  blood  (life)  of  Christ,
running  all  over  me,  and  washing  me." Daniel  Cogswell.

26.  One  day,  at  Ashfield,  Mother  was  under  great  opera-
tions and  prophecies  of  God,  concerning  the  future  opening
of  the  gospel  to  a  lost  world.  She  walked  out  a  little  dis-
tance from  the  house  under  great  operations,  and  cried  with
a  loud  voice,  "  Come!  Come!  Come!  Come!  All  the  world,
Come!  "  Mary  Rabbins.

27.  At  another  time,  being  in  the  same  place,  she  stood
in  the  door  and  stretched  forth  her  hands,  and  with  great
power,  called  upon  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth,  saying,
"Come  away!  Come  away! All  the  world,  Come  away!  "

Hannah  Goodrich.
2S.  At  Watervliet,  in  the  presence  of  Anna  Mathewson,
Mother  Lucy  Wright  and  others,  a  short  time  before  her  de-
cease, Mother  Ann  expressed  her  great  love  to  Christ,  say-
ing, "  He  is  my  Lord.  I  feel  great  union  with  him,  and
walk  with  him  in  union.  I  see  the  opening  of  the  heavens,
and  I  see  the  heaven  of  heavens,  as  it  were,  glory  beyond
glory;  and  still  see  that  which  does  excel  in  glory."

Anna  Mathewson.


i68  Testimonies  of

CHAPTER  XXIV.

PROPHECIES, VISION'S AND REVELATIONS.

i.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  abounded  in  visions,
prophecies  and  revelations;  these,  and  many  other  gift:
were  administered  in  abundance  through  them,  to  those  who
embraced  their  testimony;  they  were  given  to  strengthen,
confirm,  and  establish  the  faith  which  the  people  had  re-
ceived; and  were  also  preparatory  to,  and  evidences  of  the
real  substance  which  was  to  follow.

2.  Though  these  gifts  were  very  numerous  and  common,
and,  in  that  day,  very  important,  yet  those  which  were
merely  outward  signs  and  operations  were  considered  as
matters  of  less  importance,  because  they  could  not,  of  them-
selves, accomplish  the  real  work  of  redemption;  and,  in  pro-
portion as  the  body  of  the  people  traveled  into  the  more  en-
during substance  of  the  gospel,  these  outward  gifts  became
less  necessary  among  them.

3.  Soon  after  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  reached  New
Lebanon,  Nathan  Farrington,  Senr.,  and  his  daughter,  Me-
hetabel,  with  many  others,  went  to  Watervliet,  to  see  the
Church.  Mehetabel  soon  received  faith  in  the  testimony,
and  confessed  her  sins.  Nathan  returned  home  with  the
rest  of  his  company,  and  left  his  daughter  there.  After
they  had  been  gone  a  while  Mother  said  to  Mehetabel,  "  I
see  your  father  and  those  with  him  in  open  vision;  and  your
father  has  received  a  gift  since  he  went  from  here.  He  says,
if  he  was  here  now,  he  would  confess  his  sins."  While  Me-
hetabel was  at  the  Church,  Mother  said  to  her,  "  Your  natu-
ral mother  believes  that  we  are  the  people  of  God,  who  con-
fess and  forsake  our  sins."  She  also  added,  "All  your
father's  family  will  believe  the  gospel."  This  prophecy,
shortly  after,  came  to  pass.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  169

4.  After  some  days,  Mehetabel  returned  home;  when  she
arrived,  her  father  informed  her  that  when  he  was  on  the
road,  returning  from  the  Church,  he  received  light  and  un-
derstanding, and  said  that  if  he  had  then  been  at  the  Church,
he  would  have  confessed  his  sins;  this  he  told  his  daughter,
without  having  any  knowledge  of  what  Mother  had  said  to
her,  respecting  the  matter.

5.  About  four  weeks  after  this  Mehetabel  again  visited  the
Church.  While  she  was  there,  Mother  Ann  again  spoke  to
her,  saying,  Mehetabel,  your  Elder  is  coming;  she  then
spake  to  some  Sisters,  and  bade  them  prepare  victuals  for
six  people.  They  did  so,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  ready,  Jo-
seph Meacham  and  five  others  came  in.  Mother  said  to  Jo-
seph, "  I  saw  you  before  you  crossed  the  river."  *  At  another
time  while  Mehetabel  was  there,  Mother  said  she  felt  that
there  was  a  number  of  people  coming,  and  bade  the  Sisters
prepare  food  for  them;  as  soon  as  the  meal  was  prepared,  a
number  of  needy  people  came  in,  and  were  made  welcome  ;
not  only  to  the  victuals,  but  to  the  gospel.

6.  Again,  after  Mother  Ann  returned  from  Poughkeepsie
Jail,  Mehetabel  was  at  Watervliet,  and  a  number  of  Believers
being  present,  Mother  addressed  them  as  follows,  "  You  are
called  in  relation  to  all  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  through
your  faith  and  obedience  they  must  receive  the  gospel.
Pain  and  sufferings  will  never  cease  in  the  Church  until  all
souls  have  heard  the  gospel  of  salvation.  This  gospel  will
be  freely  offered  to  all  souls;  and  will  be  a  savor  of  life  unto
life,  or  of  death  unto  death."  She  also  said,  "The  increase
of  the  gospel  in  the  first  opening,  will  be  small;  after  that,
souls  will  embrace  it  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands;  for
this  testimony  will  overcome  all  nations;  it  will  increase  till
the  covering  is  taken  off;  then  mankind  will  see  the  rotten-
ness of  Antichrist's  foundation ;  then  souls  who  are  bound

*They  crossed  below  Albany,  nearly  nine  miles  distant  from  Watervliet.
22


170  Testimonies  of

in  their  sins  will  call  to  the  rocks  and  to  the  mountains  to
cover  them.  But  the  Saints  will  never  be  overcome  again
by  the  beastly  power  of  Antichrist."

7.  She  further  said,  "  The  work  of  God  in  this  day  is  not
so  great,  in  outward  appearance,  as  it  was  in  past  dispensa-
tions; therefore,  souls  must  be  very  cautious  how  they  treat
this  gospel;  for  such  as  finally  reject  this  testimony  will  not
have  another  day."  Mehetabel  Farrington.

8.  After  Mother  Ann  returned  from  her  missionary  tour
in  the  eastern  states,  there  was  a  time  of  much  tribulation
among  the  Believers,  occasioned  by  the  great  opposition  of
the  wicked,  which  brought  deep  sufferings  upon  Mother.
As  she  was  walking  the  floor,  and  laboring  under  the  power
of  God,  she  prophesied,  saying,  "  The  time  will  come  when
God  will  draw  the  line  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,
and  the  wicked  cannot  pass  over  it,  —  Yea,  the  time  will
come  when  God  will  give  that  power  to  His  people,  so  that
they  will  be  able  to  draw  the  line,  and  the  wicked  cannot
step  one  step  over  it.  Fear  not  their  fears,  neither  be  afraid,
for  God  will  deliver  His  people."  After  this  Mother  Ann
was  released,  and  sang  with  great  joy  and  triumph.

David  Slosson,

9.  At  a  certain  time  Mother  Ann  addressed  a  number  of
Believers  as  follows,  "  You  think  that  you  will  yet  subdue
and  overcome  the  nations  of  the  earth  ;  but  you  are  mis-
taken; they  have  that  work  to  do  for  themselves.  They  will
fight,  and  devour,  and  dash  each  other  in  pieces,  until  they
become  so  humble  as  to  be  willing  to  receive  the  gospel."

John  Barnes.

10.  At  'Watervliet,  while  a  number  of  the  Brethren  were
in  a  room  together,  in  conversation  about  the  Antichristian
world,  Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room  and  inquired  what
they  had  been  saying  about  the  Antichristian  world.  After
they  had  informed  her  she  spake  with  great  power,  saying,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  171

"  They  will  build  up,  but  God  will  pull  down ;  they  will  build
up,  but  God  will  pull  down,  until  they  can  build  no  more!
But  you  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it."  Abel  Allen.

11.  Mother  Ann  prophesied  to  Samuel  Fitch,  at  the  time
of  his  first  interview  with  her,  saying,  "  After  I  have  done
my  work  in  this  world,  there  will  be  a  great  increase  of  the
gospel.  It  will  be  like  a  man's  beginning  in  the  world  and
raising  up  a  family  of  children,  gathering  an  interest,  then
dying,  and  leaving  his  interest  with  his  children,  who  will
improve  thereon  and  gather  more."  Samuel  Fitch.

12.  At  Watervliet,  after  Mother  Ann's  return  from  her
journey  to  the  east,  she  was  one  day  in  great  tribulation  and
weeping,  with  fervent  cries  to  God,  in  consideration  of  the
scattered  state  of  Believers.  "  But,"  said  she,  "  the  time
will  come  when  the  Church  will  be  gathered  into  order;  but
not  till  after  my  decease."  She  also  said,  "  After  my  depar-
ture there  will  come  grievous  wolves,  who  will  destroy  many
of  the  flock."  Morell  Baker.

13.  At  Watervliet,  in  the  former  part  of  the  year  1781,
Elder  James  Whittaker  took  Amos  Rathbun  by  the  hand,
and  prophesied,  saying,  "  In  eleven  years,  the  Church  will  be
established  in  her  order."  This  prophecy  has  been  exactly
fulfilled;  for  in  the  year  1792,  the  Church  was  established  in
its  present  order  and  spirit  of  government.

Amos  Rathbun.

14.  After  Joseph  Meacham  and  Calvin  Harlow  had  em-
braced the  gospel,  Mother  prophesied,  saying,  "  Joseph
Meacham  is  the  wisest  man  that  has  been  born  of  a  woman
for  six  hundred  years.  God  has  called  and  anointed  him
to  be  a  Father  to  all  His  people  in  America.  Calvin  Harlow
will  be  a  minister  of  the  gospel  to  other  souls.  The  wisdom,
knowledge,  and  light  of  God  will  increase  in  the  Church  till
Zion  travels  to  her  full  glory."  Elizur  Goodrich.

15.  At  another  time,  at  Watervliet,  after  Mother's  return


1 72  Testimonies  of

from  the  east,  she  said,  "  Calvin  Harlow  is  an  Elder!  O  the
bright  glories  I  see  for  Calvin!  I  see  him  stand  with  his
people  like  a  Bishop,  ministering  the  gifts  of  God.  O  the
beautiful  gifts  of  God  I  see  for  souls  who  stand  fast !  I  see
the  increase  of  the  gospel  like  an  impassable  river."  Again
she  spoke  to  Elder  James,  saying,  "  James,  how  does  the
scriptures  say  ?  Shall  a  man  eat  his  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his
brow? "  "  Yea,  Mother,"  answered  Elder  James.  Mother
said,  "  I  feel  that  gift  for  the  people  of  God,  James.  Go  and
tell  Calvin  that  he  must  gain  a  gift  in  hand  labor,  before  he
can  find  his  lot,  and  order  of  his  people."*

Jonathan  Slosson.

16.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  Ann,  being  under  great  suffer-
ings, said,  "  It  will  not  be  my  lot,  nor  the  lot  of  any  who
came  with  me  from  England,  to  gather  and  build  up  the
Church  ;  but,  it  will  be  the  lot  of  Joseph  Meacham,  and
others,  to  gather  and  build  up  the  Church."  She  also  said,
"  It  will  not  be  my  nation,  nor  any  of  those  that  came  with
me  from  England  who  will  lead  this  people,  but  the  lead  will
be  given  to  Joseph  Meacham."  Sarah  Bennett.

17.  Again  at  Ashfield,  Mother  Ann  said,  "Joseph
Meacham  is  my  first  born  son  in  America.  He  will  gather
the  Church  in  order,  but  I  shall  not  live  to  see  it."

Hannah  Kendall.

18.  Mother  Ann  testified,  "  When  order  comes  to  be  es-
tablished, it  will  then  be  seen  and  known,  who  are  true  Be-
lievers." Mother  Lucy  Wright.

19.  One  day,  at  Watervliet,  not  long  before  her  decease,

*  This  prophecy  was  completely  fulfilled.  Calvin  Harlow  continued  his  resi-
dence in  New  Lebanon,  and  improved  his  time  in  hand  labor,  (except  when  called
to  travel  with  the  Elders,)  till  after  the  gathering  of  the  Church  at  New  Lebanon;
but,  at  length,  was  called,  by  a  special  gift  of  God,  while  reaping  in  the  field,  and
was  sent  to  take  charge  of  the  people  in  Hancock  and  Pittsfield,  and  having  gath-
ered them  into  the  order  of  a  church,  called  the  "  Chirch  of  Han-cock"  he  became
their  first  Elder  and  Father,  and  continued  to  stand  as  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ,
till  his  decease.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  173

Mother  Ann  took  Joseph  Meacham  by  the  hand,  and  walk-
ing the  floor,  said,  "  I  see  the  glories  of  God,  in  visions  and
revelations  of  things  to  come.  Joseph  is  my  first  Bishop  ;
he  is  my  Apostle  in  the  Ministry  ;  my  first  Bishop  ;  what  he
does,  I  do.  I  see  the  glories  of  God  shine  in  his  face !
Joseph,  my  son  Joseph  !  I  feel  my  time  short !  I  speak,
that  you  may  understand  !  "  Jonathan  Slosson.

20.  In  conversation  with  Elizabeth  Chase,  a  little  before
her  decease,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  A  ministration  to  this  people
will  cease,  and  then  you  will  see  peaceable  times  ;  then  you
may  worship  God  under  your  own  vines  and  fig  trees,  and
none  of  the  wicked  will  make  you  afraid.  You  will  not
need,  then,  to  teach  one  another  to  know  the  Lord  ;  for  all
the  faithful  will  know  Him."  Elizabeth  Chase.

21.  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  about  eight  years  after-
ward; a  ministration  ceased,  and  persecution  ceased,  also;
and  the  Believers  worshipped  God  in  their  appointed  habi-
tations, unmolested  by  the  wicked,  and  under  that  measure
of  the  gospel  which  each  one  had  treasured  up  in  his  own
soul,  and  which  became  therein  an  abiding  substance.

22.  While  Morell  Baker,  Senr.,  was  at  Watervliet,  after
Mother  Ann  returned  from  her  journey  among  the  eastern
Believers,  he  had  a  vision,  one  night,  in  which  he  saw
Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  in  the  south-western  states,  under
the  power  of  God,  holding  forth  the  same  testimony  which
they  had  borne  at  Watervliet;  and  great  multitudes  of  people
were  gathering  to  them  to  hear  the  gospel.  The  next  morn-
ing, he  related  his  vision  to  Mother;  she  replied,  "Your
vision  is  of  God,  and  what  you  saw  will  surely  come  to
pass."*  Morell  Baker,  Senr.

23.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  Ann  testified  to  Samuel  Fitch,
that,  by  revelation,  she saw  a people  in  the south-western

*  Morell  did  not  understand  that  Mother  and  the  Elders  were,  as  instruments  in
the  body,  to  preach  the  gospel,  but  spiritually,  and,  literally  through  messengers,
clothed  with  their  spirit.


i;4  Testimonies  of

parts  of  this  country,  who  would  believe  and  obey  the  gos-
pel. She  also  testified  the  same  to  Ebenezer  Cooley.  At
Watervliet,  in  1784,  in  presence  of  David  Slosson  and  many
others,  Mother  Ann  lifted  up  her  hand,  and,  pointing  to  the
south-west,  said,  "  There  is  a  great  level  country  in  the  south-
west, in  which  God  will  raise  up  a  great  people,  who  will  be
His  people."  David  Slosson.

24.  One  day,  as  Mother  Ann  was  walking  the  floor,  and
singing  the  melodious  songs  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  she
turned  to  the  people,  and  said,  "  I  feel  a  special  gift  of  God;
I  feel  the  power  of  God  running  all  over  me. "  And,  stretch-
ing forth  her  hand  toward  the  south-west,  she  said,  "  The
next  opening  of  the  gospel  will  be  in  the  south-west;  it  will
be  at  a  great  distance ;  and  there  will  be  a  great  work  of
God."  And,  looking  upon  Eliphalet  Slosson,  she  said,
"You  may  live  to  see  it,  but  I  shall  not."

Eliphalet  Slosson.

25.  Eliphalet  recollects  of  hearing  Mother  Ann  speak,
three  different  times,  by  prophecy,  concerning  a  wonderful
work  of  God  which  she  said  would  take  place  in  the  south-
western part  of  this  country.  There  were  also  many  others
who  remembered  to  have  heard  Mother  Ann  prophesy  con-
cerning a  great  work  of  God  in  the  western  country;  and
her  prophecies  verily  came  to  pass.


CHAPTER  XXV.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.


After  Elizur  Goodrich  had  embraced  the  testimony  of  the
gospel,  he  opened  his  feelings  to  Mother  Ann  concerning
Lucy  Wright,  to  whom  he  had  lately  been  married.  He  said
her  relations  were  a  lofty,  high-minded  people; and  it  was


Mother  Ann  Lee.  175

very  doubtful,  to  him,  whether  she  would  believe  and  obey
the  gospel.  To  this,  Mother  Ann  made  no  reply  at  the
time;  but  soon  after,  the  Elders,  William  Lee,  and  James
Whittaker,  took  him,  by  his  arms,  and  led  him  to  Mother.
He  observed  that  her  visage  was  solemn  and  heavenly.  She
said  to  him,  "  Take  faith,  Lucy  may  be  gained  to  the  gospel
and,  if  you  gain  her,  it  will  be  equal  to  gaining  a  nation."

Elizur  Goodrich.

2.  Again,  after  Lucy  came  to  Watervliet  to  see  the  Church,
and  had  received  faith,  a  number  of  the  Brethren  and  Sis-
ters being  there,  Mother  Ann  passed  through  the  room,
and,  with  a  smile,  said,  "  We  must  save  Lucy,  if  we  can,  for,
if  we  save  her,  it  will  be  equal  to  saving  a  nation."

Joseph  Markham,  Senr.

3.  After  the  gathering  of  the  Church  Elizur  spoke  to
Father  Joseph  of  Mother  Ann's  prophecy  concerning  Lucy
Wright,  which  had,  till  then,  remained  a  mysterious  saying
to  him.  Father  Joseph  replied,  "  Mother's  prophecy  re-
lated to  Lucy's  present  lot  in  the  Church.  She,  being
called,  and  anointed  of  God  to  stand  in  her  lot,  as  the  first
Mother  in  Church  relation,  the  consequence  of  her  labor,  in
the  final  event,  will  be  equal  to  saving  a  nation."  He  fur-
ther added,  "  Mother  Ann  travelled  so  deeply  in  the  regen-
eration, and  her  soul  stood  in  such  near  relation  to  Christ,
that  not  one  of  her  prophecies  will  fail;  but  every  one  of
them  will  be  fulfilled  in  due  time."  Elizur  Goodrich.

4.  When  Mother  Ann  first  arrived  at  Harvard,  many  of
the  Believers  went  to  see  her.  She  came  into  the  room  and
sat  down  where  a  number  were  present,  and  said,  "I  have
seen  a  mob,  in  vision,  and  I  saw  two  female  angels  standing
by  them,  by  which  I  know  that  we  shall  continue  here  a
while,  in  peace."  Joseph  Markham,  Senr.

5.  Again,  after  Mother  arrived  at  Harvard,  she  took  Esther
Lambson  by  the  hand,  saying, "  I  saw  this  woman  in  the


176  Testimonies  of

visions  of  God,  when  I  was  in  my  own  country."  Then,
looking  round  upon  the  assembly,  she  said,  "  So  I  did  see
you  all,  before  I  came  to  this  land." Hannah  Prescott,

6.  Mother  Ann  also  testified  to  Jonathan  Slosson,  and
others,  that  she  saw  in  vision,  while  in  England,  the  place,
in  Harvard,  where  the  Church  is  now  established,  together
with  the  people  who  afterward  embraced  the  gospel  there;
and,  that  when  she  came  in  sight  of  the  place,  she  knew  it,
and  knew  the  people  who  came  to  see  her.

7.  Soon  after  Mother  Ann's  arrival  in  Harvard,  she  spoke
to  some  who  came  to  see  her,  saying,  "  God  has  a  people  in
this  place;  He  has  heard  their  cries;  they  have  had  great
light.  Their  Leader*  got  overcome;  God  has  taken  him
away  and  sent  me  here.  The  wicked  seek  my  life;  as  they
did  in  England,  so  do  they  here;  but  heed  it  not;  for  God
will  establish  His  work  here,  and  the  wicked  cannot  over-
throw it.  Jonathan  Slosson.

8.  After  this,  in  the  presence  of  Elder  William  Lee,  and
others,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  Shadrach  Ireland  has  been  to  see
me;  and  I  made  labors  with  him,  but  he  would  not  believe;
therefore  he  was  left  to  feel  hell;  and  souls  in  that  state
were  frightened  at  him,  because  his  sufferings  were  so  much
greater  than  theirs.  But,  he  will  never  be  released,  until
some  of  his  people  find  their  redemption."

Joseph  jV/arhham,  Senr.

9.  Phebe  Spencer,  with  her  husband  and  family,  em-
braced the  gospel  in  the  fall  of  1781,  while  Mother  Ann  and
the  Elders  were  at  Harvard;  awhile  afterward,  she  went  to
Harvard,  to  see  Mother. After  she  arrived  there,  one  of

*  Shadrach  Ireland  was  their  Leader;  he  was  a  man  who  had  formerly  received
great  light,  took  up  his  cross  against  the  flesh,  drew  after  him  many  followers,
formed  a  considerable  society,  suffered  much  persecution,  and  built  a  large  house,
about  three  miles  out  of  the  town  of  Harvard,  well  known  by  the  name  of  the
"Square  House'"  where  the  Church  at  Harvard  is  now  established.  Before  his
decease,  he  fell  from  his  light,  and  died  at  Harvard,  not  long  before  the  gospel
opened. Many  of  his  followers  embraced  the  gospel.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  177

the  Elders  took  her  by  the  hand  and  led  her  to  Mother,  say-
ing, "You  never  saw  Mother  before,  did  you?"  She  an-
swered, "Nay."  Mother  said,  "I  have  seen  you  before;
and  I  knew  that  you,  and  your  family,  would  come  and  em-
brace the  gospel  with  us.  Poor  woman,  you  little  know
what  you  have  lived  amongst!  I  saw  the  lost  condition  of
the  people  in  America,  before  I  came  from  England;  how
deeply  they  were  all  sunk  in  their  pollutions;  and  so  did
Brother  William."  Phebe  Spencer.

10.  Amos  Sexton  went  to  see  Mother  in  1780;  he  was  then
in  the  seventy-third  year  of  his  age;  Mother  prophesied  to
him  thus,  "  You  shall  live  to  see  the  beginning  of  another  cen-
tury, and  will  be  seen  walking  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  and
leaning  upon  your  staff  for  very  age."  He  confessed  his
sins  and  was  very  zealous;  and,  though  greatly  advanced  in
years,  he  took  great  delight  in  beholding  the  increase  of
Christ's  Kingdom  on  earth;  and,  after  having  about  twenty
years'  privilege  in  the  gospel,  he  departed  this  life  the  17th
of  May,  1802,  in  the  ninety-fourth  year  of  his  age.

Mary  Spencer.

11.  When  Mother  Ann  visited  Joshua  Birch's,  at  Ston-
ington,  there  was  a  young  woman  then  living  in  the  family,
who  was  thought  to  be  very  honest,  and  chaste.  Lois  Birch
manifested  her  feelings  to  Mother  in  favor  of  the  girl's  char-
acter; to  which  Mother  replied,  "Are  you  a  Christian,  and
think  that  girl  is  chaste  and  honest?  You  are  deceived;
she  lives  in  whoredom  with  married  men,  young  men,  black
men,  and  boys."  This  declaration  almost  staggered  Lois'
confidence  in  Mother,  believing  that  she  knew  the  girl's
character.  But,  soon  after,  Mother's  charges  against  the
girl  were  proved  to  a  demonstration;  by  which  Lois'  faith
in  Mother  was  strengthened,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  Mother
had  the  revelation  of  God,  and  was  able  to  see  what  crea-
tures had  in  them.

23


y


178  Testimonies  of

12.  While  Mother  Ann  was  at  Enfield  there  came  a  wo-
man to  see  her  by  the  name  of  Tryphena  Perkins,  who  made
a  great  profession  of  Christianity.  But,  in  the  hearing  of  a
number  of  people,  Mother  Ann  reproved  her  for  her  wick-
edness, and  said,  "  You  are  a  filthy  whore. "  This  greatly
offended  her,  and  she  went  away  and  complained  that  she
had  been  abused,  which  furnished  Mother's  enemies,  as  they
supposed,  with  sufficient  cause  to  prosecute  her.  They  now
began  to  flatter  themselves  that  they  were  able  to  prove
Mother  a  false  prophetess,  and  determined  to  prosecute  her
for  defamation.  They  said  they  could  prove  to  a  certainty,
that  Tryphena's  organization  was  such  that  she  could  not,
possibly,  be  guilty  of  the  charge  of  whoredom;  she  was
called  a  great  Christian,  and,  of  necessity,  a  pure  virgin.
But,  behold,  she  was  soon  found  to  be  with  child,  by  a  mar-
ried man!  This  was  well  known  throughout  the  town  of
Enfield,  and  Mother's  enemies  were  greatly  abashed  and
confounded.

13.  While  Mother  Ann  was  at  Ashfield,  Anna  Goodrich
went  to  see  her,  in  company  with  her  husband,  (Daniel
Goodrich).  After  she  had  been  there  some  days,  Mother
came  to  her  with  a  very  solemn  look,  and  said,  "  Poor  chil-
dren; your  children  are  in  trouble,  and  you  must  go  home."
Anna  went  immediately  to  find  Daniel,  and  while  she  was
speaking  with  him,  Mother  came  to  hasten  him,  saying,
"You  must  go  home,  for  your  children  are  in  trouble."  So
they  immediately  started  for  home,  which  was  upwards  of
forty  miles  distant.  When  they  arrived,  they  found,  as
Mother  said,  the  children  were  in  great  trouble,  for  one  of
them  was  very  sick.  Anna  Goodrich.

14.  Zeruah  Clark  went  to  see  Mother  while  she  was  at
Samuel  Fitch's  in  Richmond,  about  five  miles  distant.
After  she  had  been  there  about  an  hour,  Mother  spoke  to
her,  in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  people,  saying,  "You


Mother  Ann  Lee.  179

must  not  stay  here,  you  must  go  home,  as  soon  as  possible,
for  you  are  needed  there."  Zeruah  set  off  in  great  haste,
and  when  she  had  got  about  half  way  home,  she  met  a  mes-
senger, who  informed  her  that  her  oldest  son  was  very  sick,
and  they  had  but  very  little  hope  of  his  life.  When  she
arrived,  it  appeared  that  he  would  not  have  continued  long
without  assistance.  Zeruah  Clark.

15.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Asa  Bacon's,
in  Ashfield,  a  number  of  the  Believers  were  there  one  even-
ing, and  there  appeared  very  extraordinary  Northern  Lights.
One  said,  "  It  is  the  sign  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man
in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  Mother  replied,  "Those  signs
which  appear  in  the  sky  are  not  the  sign  of  his  coming;  but
the  Second  Appearing  of  Christ  is  in  his  Church;  and  Christ
is  come  to  put  away  sin  from  his  people,  and  this  is  the
Cloud"  (of  witnesses)  "alluded  to." Anna  Matheivson.

16.  While  Elder  Hocknell  had  the  care  of  the  people  at
Watervliet,  in  the  summer  of  17S1,  while  Mother  Ann  was
at  Harvard,  he  came  into  meeting  one  evening,  under  great
operations  of  the  power  of  God,  and,  with  his  hand  stretched
toward  the  fire,  he  spake  in  an  unknown  tongue,  seemingly,
in  great  wrath.  When  his  gift  ceased,  he  said,  "  I  saw  the
souls  of  three  men,  whom  I  knew  while  I  was  in  England.
They  came  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  but,  they  had  not  fin-
ished their  sufferings,  and  therefore  were  returned  again  to
their  suffering  state."  He  also  said,  "If  you  could  see  the
glory  of  God  that  shines  around  you  as  I  do,  and  the  angels
that  minister  the  power  of  God  to  you,  your  hair  would  rise
on  your  heads,  and  flesh  would  crawl  on  your  bones."

Hannah  Cogswell.

17.  One  Sabbath  day,  at  Harvard,  in  February,  1782,  Elder
James  spoke  to  a  large  assembly,  both  of  Believers  and  the
world,  and  being  under  great  impressions  of  the  power  of
God,  he  spoke  with such  solemnity,  concerning  the  judg-


i8o  Testimonies  of

ments  of  God  that  would  follow  the  wicked,  and,  in  the  spirit
of  prophecy,  uttered  the  following  prediction  :  "  The  judg-
ments of  God  will  follow  them  that  reject  this  gospel;  their
flesh  shall  consume  away  while  they  stand  upon  their  feet;
their  eyes  shall  consume  away  in  their  holes;  and  their
tongues  shall  consume  away  in  their  mouths;  and  some  of
this  generation  shall  yet  live  to  see  it."  He  also  said,
"  There  are  three  things  that  no  man  can  pass  by,  namely,
Death,  Judgment,  and  Eternity."  Hannah  Cogswell.


CHAPTER XXVI.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

At  Watervliet,  in  1780,  Hannah  Cogswell  and  others  being
present,  Mother  Ann  related  some  visions  which  she  had
seen,  and  at  the  same  time  said,  "  I  see  an  angel,  with  a  glori-
ous trumpet,  and  he  is  sounding  it."  Again  she  said,  "I  see
another  angel  sounding  a  trumpet.  Hannah,  do  you  believe
that  I  see  these  things  ?  "  Hannah  answered,  "  Yea."  Mother
said,  "Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  believe."

2.  Again  Elder  William  Lee  said,  "  I  know  the  condition
of  souls  who  have  left  the  body,  and  where  I  see  one  soul  in
the  body,  I  see  a  thousand  in  the  world  of  spirits."  Mother  J
Ann  and  Elder  James  Whittaker  often  spoke  in  the  same
manner,  concerning  their  intercourse  with  the  world  of
spirits.  Hannah  Cogswell.

3.  The  winter  after  the  gospel  opened  Mary  Moseley  was
at  Watervliet  in  the  room  with  Mother  Ann,  and  Mother
said,  "  I  see  the  room  full  of  angels,  and  they  are  female
angels."'  Then  turning  to  Mary,  she  said,  "  You  must  leave
off  sinning,  and  serve  the  living  and  true  God."

Mary  Moseley.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  181

4.  At  another  time,  while  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  were
worshipping  God  in  the  dance,  Mother  came  into  the  room
and  sung  awhile. After  they  stopped  dancing,  Mother  said,

'  The  room  over  your  heads  is  full  of  the  angels  of  God.  I
see  them,  and  you  could  see  them  too,  if  you  was  redeemed
from  the  nature  of  the  flesh."  Lucy  Prescott.

5.  The  first  time  Mother  Ann  visited  Enfield,  Mary  Tif-
fany went,  one  evening,  to  see  her,  and  Mother  said,  "  I  see
your  deceased  kindred  all  around  you."  Mary  asked  if  it
was  her  mother,  or  her  child  ?  She  said,  "  It  is  all  your
kindred,  both  upon  your  father's  and  mother's  side  ;  they  are
nearer  to  you  than  I  am."

6.  The  next  day,  Mary,  with  a  number  of  other  sisters
went  to  see  Mother,  and  asked  her  how  she  did  ?  She  an-
swered, "  I  have  been  under  great  sufferings  for  the  dead,
last  night,  and  I  saw  your  souls  in  vision,  as  plainly  as  I  can
see  your  bodies,  standing  shoulder  to  shoulder,  clothed  in
white;  do  you  hear  me,  Molly?"  "Yea,  Mother,"  answered
Mary.  "  I  saw  your  soul  clothed  with  a  long  white  robe  down
to  your  feet,"  said  Mother.

7.  At  another  time  Mother  Ann  said  to  Mary,  "  I  saw  the
travail  of  your  soul  written  upon  you  in  great  capital  letters,
and  I  can  read  them  as  fast  as  I  can  speak."  Again  she
said,  "  I  look  into  the  windows  of  Heaven,  and  see  what
there  is  in  the  invisible  world."  As  one  of  the  Sisters  was
speaking  concerning  Dr.  Watts,  Mother  said,  "  Dr.  Watts  is
now  in  Heaven."  Mary  Tiffany.

8.  At  Watervliet,  in  presence  of  Cornelius  Thayer,  Wil-
liam Scales,  and  others,  Mother  said,  '  I  saw  William
Scales  in  vision,  writing  that  which  was  not  according  to  the
simplicity  of  the  gospel,  and  the  evil  spirits  hovered  around
him,  and  administered  evil  to  him.  They  looked  like  crows."
And Mother  reproved  William sharply.

Cornelius  Thayer.


182  Testimonies  of

9.  Again  Mother  said,  "  I  have  seen  Michael  and  his  an-
gels fight  with  the  Dragon  and  his  angels,  and  the  Dragon
was  cast  down  and  there  was  no  place  found  for  him ;  I  saw
it  as  plain  before my  eyes  as  ever  I  saw  any  natural  thing."

Lydia  Mathewson,  Senr.

10.  In  the  presence  of  Sarah  Kendall  and  others,  Mother
Ann  said  to  a  certain  Brother,  "  I  see  two  golden  candle-
sticks, and  they  stand  by  each  of  your  legs,  and  they  reach
up  to  your  knees."  Again  she  said  to  a  Sister,  "I  see  your
mouth  set  open  with  a  wheel  of  glory." Sarah  Ken  Jail.

11.  At  another  time  Mother  said,  "  I  see  souls  in  the  world
of  spirits  who  have  lately  set  out  to  embrace  the  gospel,
and  I  see  them  under  the  beautiful  operations  of  the  power
of  God."  Mother  often  said,  "I  see  the  angels  of  God,
and  hear  them  sing."  "  And  I  see  the  glory  of  God."

Sarah  Kendall.

12.  At  Nathan  Goodrich's,  in  Hancock,  Mother  said,  "I
see  Ezekiel  Goodrich*  flying  from  one  heaven  to  another,"
and,  turning  to  the  Believers,  she  said,  "  Go  in,  and  join  his
resurrection."  She  then  began  to  sing,  and  they  went
forth  and  praised  the  Lord  in  the  dance.

13.  At  Ashfield,  Elder  James  Whittaker  came  into  meet-
ing one  evening  and  said,  "  Since  last  night  this  time,  I  was
in  the  visions  of  God  in  the  world  of  spirits,  and  I  heard  the
song  of  angels,  as  of  an  host ;  and  after  singing  some  time,
they  stopped.  Then  I  heard  it  proclaimed  three  times,  dis-
tinctly, with  a  loud  voice  that  roared  like  thunder  :  'This
is  the  day  of  your  visitation.'  Then  they  began  again  to
sing,  as  an  innumberable  multitude,  and  the  sound  seemed
to  go  off  at  a  distance,  and  the  further  it. went,  the  louder  it
grew;  and  I  heard  it,  till  it  seemed,  to  my  sensation,  to  be  a
million  miles  off."  Abijah  Wooster.

*  Ezekiel  was  a  beloved Brother  who  deceased  the  third  year  after  the  gospel
opened.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  183

14.  Mother  Ann  said  to  Lydia  Matthewson,  "The  Apos-
tles, in  their  day,  saw  darkly,  as  through  a  glass;  but  now  we
see  clearly,  face  to  face,  and  see  things  as  they  are,  and  con-
verse with  departed  spirits,  and  see  their  states."

15.  After  Mother  returned  from  the  eastward,  Joseph
Meacham,  Joseph  Markham,  and  a  number  of  others  being
present,  Mother  said,  "  I  now  see  faces,  I  will  not  say,  as  the
stars  of  Heaven,  but  as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore."  Mother
often  spoke  when  the  Believers  were  assembled  in  meeting,
of  seeing  angels  in  the  room;  sometimes  she  spoke  of  seeing
male  angels  and  female  angels. Joseph  Markham,  Senr.

16.  One  morning  Mother  came  into  the  room  and  in-
formed Eunice  Bennet  that  she  had  been  under  great  suffer-
ings the  night  past ;  but  was  supported  and  comforted  in
her  sufferings,  by  the  visions  of  God.  She  said  she  saw  the
glories  of  God  round  about  her  head  and  pillow,  like  the
colors  of  the  rainbow,  and  she  saw  twelve  angels  come  into
the  room  placed  in  the  form  of  a  heart,  six  males  on  one
side,  and  six  females  on  the  other;  these,  she  said,  comforted
her.  Eunice  Bennet.

17.  After  Mother  returned  from  the  eastward,  while  a
number  of  the  Brethren  were  sitting  in  the  new  meeting-
room,  and  conversing  about  Mother  Ann's  gifts,  Mother,
being  present,  said,  "  I  will  tell  you  a  vision  I  saw  of  myself.
I  saw  a  great  gulf  fixed  between  God  and  the  world  of  man-
kind; and  I  had  two  great  wings  given  to  me,  and  my  work
was,  to  go  up  that  gulf,  and  fan  it  away."  And,  speaking  in
a  very  joyful  manner,  she  said,  "  I  did  go  up  the  gulf,  with
my  two  wings,  and  did  fan  it  away  ;  I  did  fan  it  away  with
my  two  great  wings,  so  that  poor  lost  souls  could  come  to
God."  Isaac  Cranch.

18.  The  winter  after  Mother  returned  from  the  eastward,
Phebe  Spencer  went  to  see  her, —  Phebe,  and  several  other
Sisters  slept  in  the  room with  Mother. One  morning,  as


184  Testimonies  of

they  arose  from  their  beds,  Mother  said,  "  The  other  night
I  saw  a  female  angel  with  a  bright  sword  of  God  in  her  hand,
and  this  night  it  was  revealed  to  me  who  it  was, —  It  was
Lucy  Wright."  Phebe  Spencer.

19.  One  Christmas  evening,  before  the  opening  of  the
gospel  in  America,  Mother  Ann  and  those  with  her,  had
some  conversation  concerning  the  right  day  to  be  observed
in  commemoration  of  the  birth  of  Christ,  querying  whether
the  twenty-fifth  day  of  December,  according  to  the  old  or
new  style,  ought  to  be  kept.  Soon  after,  it  was  revealed  to
Mother  that  the  twenty-fifth  day  according  to  the  new  style
was  the  day  to  be  kept  for  Christmas.  Mary  Hocknell.

20.  When  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  in  prison,  at
Albany,  John  Bishop  went  to  see  them.  While  there  he  was
informed  that  she  was  to  be  taken  down  the  river,  the  next
day,  for  the  purpose  of  banishing  her  to  the  British  Army,
which  was  then  in  New  York.  On  receiving  this  informa-
tion John  was  much  troubled,  and,  as  he  was  walking  the
prison  yard,  in  great  tribulation,  Mother  Ann  came  to  him,
and  inquired  the  cause  of  his  trouble.  He  answered,  that
they  were  about  to  take  her  away,  and  he  did  not  know  that
he  should  ever  se*e  her  again  in  this  world.  She  replied,
"  You  shall  see  me  at  your  house,  in  New  Lebanon,  for  I
know  it  of  God."  She  also  said,  "When  I  first  arrived  at
Albany,  Mary  Partington  and  I  lodged  in  the  vessel,  the  first
night;  and,  in  the  night,  I  was  led  by  the  power  of  God,  to
go  out  of  the  vessel,  and  came  to  this  prison;  and  it  was  then
revealed  to  me  that  I  should  be  imprisoned  here."  Mother's
prophecy  to  John  greatly  relieved  his  mind,  and  he  returned
home  in  full  assurance  that  she  had  the  revelation  of  God,
and  therefore  he  had  not  the  least  doubt  of  seeing  her  at  his
house  in  New  Lebanon,  which  came  to  pass  about  three
years  after.  John  Bishop.

21.  Job  Bishop  was  at  Watervliet  about  three  days  before


Mother  Ann  Lee.  185

Mother  Ann's  decease,  and  felt  an  earnest  desire  to  see  her
once  more  in  the  body,  but  did  not  ask  the  privilege.
Mother,  however,  soon  sent  for  him,  and  he  went  to  her
room.  She  was  sitting  in  her  chair,  her  bodily  strength  was
almost  exhausted,  but  her  mind  was  sound,  and  her  spirit
firm  and  serene ;  Lucy  Wright  was  with  her;  and  Job,  being
filled  with  sorrow,  kneeled  down  by  her.  She  said,  "  I  shall
soon  be  taken  out  of  this  body;  but  the  gospel  never  will  be
taken  from  you  if  you  are  faithful.  Be  not  discouraged,  nor
cast  down,  for  God  will  not  leave  His  people  without  a  Lead.
Elder  James  Whittaker,  and  Elder  Joseph  Meacham  will  be
left,  and  there  will  be  a  great  increase  of  the  gifts  of  God,  to
all  who  are  faithful  and  obedient.  Now  you  are  a  young
man,  and  have  received  many  blessed  gifts  of  God.  Go,  be
faithful  and  zealous,  and  when  you  travel  to  your  lot  in  the
Church,  all  these  beautiful  gifts  will  be  yours."  Job  then
expressed  some  of  his  sorrowful  feelings  in  parting  with
Mother.  She  replied,  "  Be  of  good  comfort;  cleave  to  Elder
Joseph,  for  he  will  be  your  father,  and  will  take  care  of  you."

Job  Bishop.


CHAPTER  XXVII.

THE  GOSPEL  PREACHED  TO  DEPARTED  SPIRITS.

i.  Mother  Ann,  and  the  Elders  with  her,  uniformly  taught
the  doctrine  of  a  free  offer  of  the  gospel  to  all  souls,  whether
in  this  world,  or  in  the  world  of  spirits.  That  none  could
be  deprived  of  the  offer  of  salvation  because  they  had  left
the  world  before  Christ  made  his  appearance;  or  because
they  had  lived  in  some  remote  part  of  the  earth,  where  the
sound  of  the  gospel  had  never  reached  their  ears.  Their
labors  in  the  work  of  regeneration  were  not  confined  to  this
world,  but  extended  to  the  world  of  spirits,  and  their  travail
24


1 86  Testimonies  of

and  sufferings  for  the  salvation  of  departed  souls,  were  often
distressing,  beyond  description.

2.  Cornelius  Thayer,  of  Patridgefield,  came  to  see  the
Church,  soon  after  the  opening  of  the  gospel,  and  embraced
the  testimony.  After  he  had  confessed  his  sins,  and  received
the  promise  of  eternal  life,  Mother  Ann  told  him  to  read  a
chapter  in  the  Revelations,  concerning  the  woman  clothed
with  the  sun.  Elder  James  read,  in  the  Epistle  of  Peter,
concerning  the  gospel  being  preached  to  those  who  were
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the
flesh,  and  live  according  to  God,  in  the  spirit.  He  said,
"  The  gospel  is  preached  to  souls  who  have  left  the  body."
And  Mother  said,  "  I  see  thousands  of  the  dead  rising  and
coming  to  judgment  now,  in  this  present  time."

Cornelius  Thayer.

3.  Not  long  after  the  opening  of  the  gospel  at  Watervliet,
Mother  Ann  was  speaking  to  a  large  number  of  the  Believers,
concerning  those  who  were  called  by  the  gospel,  and  of  their
bearing  and  travailing  for  other  souls,  and  she  said,  "  If  there
is  but  one  called  out  of  a  generation,  and  that  soul  is  faith-
ful, it  will  have  to  travail  and  bear  for  all  its  generation;  for
the  world  will  be  redeemed  by  generations."  Elder  William
Lee,  and  Elder  James  Whittaker  often  spoke  in  the  .same
manner,  concerning  the  redemption  of  souls.

Hannah  Cogswell.

4.  Mother  spoke,  oftentimes,  when  under  great  sufferings,
of  seeing  the  spirits  in  prison,  and  often  spoke  to  them.
Sometimes  she  used  to  speak  to  them  in  a  very  powerful
manner,  and  sharply  reprove  them,  and  bade  them  shake
off  their  bonds.  At  other  times  she  would  tell  of  seeing
unbodied  souls,  laboring  for  the  power  of  God;  and  say
that  such  were  in  a  travel  —  Then  she  would  smile,  and
speak  to  them;  but  often  spoke  in  an  unknown  tongue.

Hannah  Kendall.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  187

5.  One  particular  time,  at  Ashfield,  Mother  was  under
great  sufferings;  and  after  she  was  released,  she  said  that
she  saw  an  angel  go  out  of  heaven,  and  release  souls  who
had  been  confined  in  prison  along  time. Hannah  Kendall.

6.  One  morning,  at  Watervliet,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  Last
night  I  was  under  great  sufferings,  and  a  great  number  of
the  dead  came  to  me,  and  some  of  them  embraced  the  gos-
pel; but  others  chose  rather  to  go  to  hell  than  to  confess
their  sins."  Lucy  Prescott.

7.  At  Ashfield,*  in  the  presence  of  many  Believers  who
were  there,  Mother  said,  "  I  have  seen  a  vision;  I  saw  myself
flying  up  a  great  gulf  —  I  had  great  wings;  and,  with  the
ends  of  my  wings  I  uncovered  the  dead,  who  lay  on  the  banks
of  the  gulf."  Again  she  said,  "I  have  seen  a  great  number
(who  had  been  dead)  laboring  in  the  worship  of  God.  They
had  come  out  of  great  tribulation;  there  is  no  danger  of
these,  for  they  have  had  hell  enough;  but  man  in  the  flesh,
is  always  in  danger."  Joseph  Afarkham,  Senr.

8.  Again  Mother  Ann  said,  "I  have  seen,  in  vision,  beau-
tiful souls  of  men,  arrayed  in  white,  all  in  the  resurrection,
there  is  no  fear  of  their  going  back.  As  for  hell,  they  have
had  enough  of  it;  and,  to  come  back  into  this  world  they
cannot;  but,  poor  man  in  the  flesh  is  always  in  danger."

Hannah  Goodrich.

9.  At  Harvard,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  I  have  been  under
great  sufferings  to-day,  and  have  seen  many  of  the  dead
arise,  and  they  were  dressed  in  white  robes,  and  received
palms.  These  will  never  fall;  but  poor  man  in  the  flesh  is
always  exposed."  Anna  Cogswell,  1st.

10.  Soon  after  Jane  Kendall  departed  this  life,  Mother
Ann  spoke  to  Sarah  Kendall,  hei  sister,  and  said,  "  I  have
seen  Jane  in  the  world  of  spirits,  and  she  was  praising  God
in  the  dance." She  also  said,  "  I  have  seen  young  Jonathan

*  In  January,  1783.


iS8  Testimonies  of

Wood  among  the  dead,  and  he  was  like  claps  of  thunder
among  them,  waking  them  up."*  Sarah  Kendall.

ii.  At  Nathan  Goodrich's,  in  Hancock,  Mother  Ann  rose
one  morning  and  said,  "  I  have  been  all  night  with  the  dead,
and  I  heard  the  archangel  sound  the  trumpet ;  and  I  heard
Ezekiel's  voice  roar  from  one  prison  to  another,  preaching
to  the  dead."  This  was  not  long  after  Ezekiel  Goodrich
deceased.  Thankful  Barce.

12.  At  Watervliet,  in  1784,  while  a  large  number  of  Believ-
ers were  assembled  together,  Father  William  Lee  came  into
the  room,  and  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  said,  "  O
Brethren  and  Sisters,  labor  to  make  a  good  use  of  your  day
and  privilege,  and  be  thankful  for  the  visitation  of  God  to
you. I  have  seen  Ezekiel  Goodrich  in  the  world  of  spirits,!
whose  voice  roared  like  thunder  among  the  dead;  they  gather  T
to  him,  and  are  thankful  to  hear  the  word  of  God. And  if  )
you  do  not  receive  the  word  of  God  which  is  spoken  to  you,
the  dead  will;  for  there  is  not  one  word  of  God  lost  that
ever  was  spoken."  David  Slosson.

13.  David  Slosson,  having  visited  the  Church  at  Ashfield,
and  being  about  to  return  home,  went  into  Mother  Ann's
room,  and  was  placed  in  a  chair  before  her ;  the  Elders  also
being  present.  David  felt  himself  as  in  the  presence  of  God,
and  under  great  weight  of  body  and  spirit;  but  knew  not  the
cause.  Mother  looked  him  full  in  the  face,  and  then  turned
and  looked  on  the  Elders  without  speaking.  After  a  short
pause,  she  said,  "  David  you  know  not  what  you  feel.  I  see
the  dead  around  you,  whose  visages  are  ghastly  and  very
awful.  Their  faces  almost  touch  thine.  If  you  did  but  see
what  I  see  you  would  be  surprised."  She  then  labored  in
the  gift  of  God,  and  again  looked  David  full  in  the  face,  and
with  an  air  of  joy  and  love,  said,  "  Child,  be  not  discouraged,
for  I  see  the  glory  of  God  in  thy  right  eye,  as  bright  as  the

*  Jonathan  had  then  lately  deceased.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  189

sun;  its  form  is  like  the  new  moon.  Be  of  good  comfort,
and  be  not  cast  down;  for  the  dead  gather  to  thee  for  the
gospel  which  thou  hast  received."  David  Slosson.

14.  One  day,  while  Father  \\ 'illiam  Lee  was  lying  on  his
bed,  under  great  sufferings,  Abijah  Wooster  went  and  kneeled
down  by  his  bed  side,  and,  while  on  his  knees,  he  was  exer-
cised with  peculiar  operations.  Mother  Ann  and  Elder
James  being  present,  Abijah  made  mention  of  the  sensations
he  felt.  ''Yea,  Yea,"  said  Mother,  "  I  understand  you;"
then  turning  to  Elder  James,  she  said,  "Abijah  feels  many
lifeless  states,  and  he  don't  know  what  is  the  matter  with
him."  Then  turning  to  Abijah,  she  said,  "You  are  not
going  into  the  kingdom  without  the  progeny  from  which
you  sprung;  and  when  you  labor,  and  obtain  gifts  of  God,
they  obtain  gifts  of  God;  and  when  you  find  mortification
they  find  it  too;  they  travel  as  you  do." Abijah  Wooster.

15.  One  day  Hannah  Kendall,  being  very  unwell,  went
into  the  room  where  Mother  Ann  was  ;  Mother  said,  "  I  do
not  wonder  that  you  feel  as  you  do,  for  you  have  been  bear-
ing for  the  dead. I  see  a  tall  soul  right  behind  you  now."

Hannah  Kendall.

16.  When  Mother  Ann  was  at  William  and  Hezekialv
Morey's,  in  Norton,  she  said  to  them,  "  I  saw  your  father,*
about  a  week  ago,  in  blackness  and  darkness,  and  before  we
left  the  house,  he  desired  the  prayers  of  the  Church  ;  and  I
saw  your  natural  mother,  with  her  mouth  wide  open,  in
prayer  to  God  for  him.f  Since  that  time,  he  has  appeared
to  me  again,  and  has  risen  from  the  dead,  and  come  into
the  first  heavens ;  and  is  traveling  on  to  the  second  and1-
third  heavens."  Ezekiel  Morey.

17.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Ashfield,
Lydia  Mathewson  went  to  see  them,  in  company  with  her

*  He  died  before  the  gospel  opened  in  America.
+  She  died  in  the  faith.


190  Testimonies  of

husband,  —  Philip  Mathewson.  Lydia,  in  conversation  with
Mother,  spoke  concerning  Thomas  Mathewson,  her  hus-
band's father,  who  had  been  dead  a  number  of  years.  She
told  Mother  that  he  was  a  very  senseless  man  as  to  the  things
of  God,  and  appeared  to  have  little  or  no  sense  about  his
soul,  which  formerly  caused  her  great  tribulation.

18.  Soon  after  this,  Mother  spoke  to  Lydia,  as  follows;
"  When  you  spoke  to  me  concerning  Thomas  Mathewson,  I
felt  his  lost  state,  and  labored  for  him  as  faithfully  as  if  it
had  been  for  my  own  soul.  And  one  evening,  when  the  peo-
ple assembled  at  the  meeting-house,  I  stayed  in  the  dwelling-
house  ;  and  I  felt  the  power  of  God  come  upon  me,  which
moved  my  hand  up  and  down  like  the  motion  of  wings;  and
soon. I  felt  as  if  I  had  wings  on  both  hands;  and  I  saw  them,
and  they  appeared  as  bright  as  gold.  And  I  let  my  hands
go  as  the  power  directed  them,  and  these  wings  parted  the
darkness  to  where  souls  lay,  in  the  ditch  of  hell,  and  I  saw
their  lost  state."

19.  "Elder  James  was  at  the  same  time  preaching  to  a
number  of  the  world,  in  the  meeting-house ;  and  I  saw  a
number  of  the  dead  who  were  willing  to  hear  ;  and  they  arose
at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  of  the  gospel,  through  the
preaching  of  Elder  James.  And  Thomas  Mathewson  arose,
and  went  into  the  meeting-house.  After  this  I  felt  a  gift  to
go  into  the  meeting-house  without  any  knowledge  of  what  I
was  going  for  ;  but,  being  led  by  the  power  of  God,  I  went
through  the  assembly  and  found  Philip  Mathewson  lying  on
the  floor,  apparently  like  a  dying  man.  His  father's  state
had  fallen  upon  him.  I  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  told  him
to  rise  up,  and  he  obeyed;  but  it  was  some  time  before  he  was
fully  released  from  that  state  which  had  fallen  upon  him.
But  his  father  united  with  the  testimony  of  the  gospel."

Lydia  Mathewson.

20.  The  case  of  Philip  Mathewson  was  well  known,  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  191

was  fresh  in  the  memories  of  those  who  were  there  when  this
record  was  first  written  in  1816.  He  assembled  with  the  rest
of  the  Believers  in  the  meeting-house  at  Ashfield,  while  in
meeting  he  was  taken  under  great  distress  of  body  and  soul,
so  that  he  appeared  like  a  person  suffering  the  pangs  of
death.  Mother  came  into  the  meeting-house  and  looked  at
him  and  said,  "  He  is  bearing  the  last  pains  of  death  and
hell  for  his  father,  who  has  been  hanging  about  me  the  past
two  weeks,  he  is  now  released."  And  as  she  went  out  of  the
room,  she  continued  saying,  "  He  is  released !  He  is  released !  "

Elizabeth  Davis.

21.  Soon  after  the  gospel  opened,  W.  C,  of  Richmond,  died,
having  previously  heard  the  testimony  of  the  gospel,  but  did
not  obey  it,  though  his  wife  and  part  of  his  family  did.  Mother,
afterward,  speaking  of  W.  said,  "I  saw  him  in  the  same  hell
with  murderers,  as  hot  as  a  glowing  oven,  for  defiling  his  own
body,  and  going  to  dumb  beasts.  " Hannah  Goodrich,  \st.

22.  Some  time  in  December,  17 S3,  after  Mother  Ann  and
the  Elders  returned  from  the  eastward,  a  large  number  of
the  Believers  were  at  Watervliet,  and  they  took  their  lodg-
ings on  the  floor.  Some  time  in  the  latter  part  of  the  night
some  of  them  awoke,  and  heard  Mother  laboring  with  the
dead.  Sometimes  she  spoke  in  her  own  tongue,  and  some-
times in  other  tongues.  Then  she  sung  out  in  these  words,
"  Come,  O  ye  dead;  Come,  O  ye  dead!  "  She  then  spoke  to
some  of  the  Elders,  and  said,  "  I  feel  the  jaws  of  death
grasping  upon  the  people, —  they  do  not  know  what  we  have
to  go  through,  I  believe  you  had  better  call  them  up,  and
have  them  go  into  labors."  Nathan  Tiffany.

23.  The  winter  after  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  returned
to  Watervliet  from  their  eastern  journey,  they  were  in  great
and  incessant  labors,  made  to  purge  out  sin,  and  overcome
all  evil.  One  evening  the  people  were  assembled  at  the
meeting-house,  among  whom  were Asa  Patten  and  Joshua


■


192  Testimonies  of

Allen,  of  Tyringham,  John 'Patten  and  many  others.  The
Elders  came  forth  with  a  sharp  testimony  against  sin,  show-
ing the  necessity  of  every  soul's  waking  up,  and  laboring  to
feel  their  union  to  God.  The  same  night  Elder  James  was
taken  under  excessive  sufferings,  which  continued  through
the  night.  The  following  evening  he  came  into  meeting  and
addressed  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  in  the  following  words  :
"  I  would  be  glad  to  speak  a  few  words;  though  I  would  not
speak  any  thing  that  is  too  hard  for  you  to  understand.  I
believe  that  I  was  six  hours,  last  night,  in  the  belly  of  hell !
Indeed,  I  know  that  I  was,  and  did  preach  to  the  spirits  in
prison,  and  I  never  knew,  until  then,  what  that  passage  in
Scripture  signified  which  saith  that,  '  One  day  with  the  Lord
is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.'  But
now  I  can  testify,  by  what  I  have  seen  and  felt,  that  a  soul
that  has  been  in  hell  but  one  day,  it  appears  to  him  like  a
thousand  years;  for  the  horror  of  souls  in  hell  is  so  extreme,
and  their  banishment  from  God  so  great,  that  they  cannot
measure  time."  "  It  is  called  the  '  bottomless  pit,' '  and  souls
in  it  feel  themselves  continually  sinking,  further  and  further
from  God;  and  what  still  increases  their  torment,  they  can
see  no  way  out.  If  a  man  should  live  to  the  age  of  Methu-
selah, and  go  through  all  the  miseries  of  this  life,  it  could
not  be  compared  with  his  suffering  one  day  in  hell  ! '  When
I  saw  the  state  of  the  damned,  I  shuddered  at  the  awful
prospect."  Asa  Patten.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

CONFESSION  OF  SIN.


The  doctrine  of  confessing  every  secret  sin,  one  by  one,
to  the  witnesses  of  God,  was  continually  taught  by  Mother


Mother  Ann  Lee.  193

Ann  and  the  Elders,  from  the  beginning  of  their  ministry.
Their  labors  in  this  particular  were  often  attended  with  such
mighty  power,  and  such  sharp  and  piercing  testimony  that
those  who  heard  it  were  unable  to  resist  the  powerful  con-
viction that  attended  it.

2.  Many  were  so  powerfully  wrought  upon,  that  they  could
not  refrain  from  crying  out  and  confessing  their  sins  on  the
spot,  before  large  assemblies  of  people.  Others,  who  were
more  bound  in  their  feelings,  could  find  no  rest,  day  nor
night,  from  the  tormenting  weight  of  their  sins,  till  they  had
honestly  confessed  them  to  some  of  these  witnesses  of  God.

3.  Some,  who  obstinately  opposed  their  own  conviction,
were  bowed  down  by  an  invisible  power,  in  such  a  manner
that  they  were  unable  to  move  hand  or  foot,  and  under  such
extreme  sufferings  that  their  flesh  sometimes  turned  almost
black.  In  this  situation,  they  have  continued  several  hours,
before  they  would  yield  to  conviction  and  be  willing  to  con-
fess their  sins.

4.  If  any,  through  deceit  or  hypocrisy,  attempted  to  con-
fess a  part,  and  keep  back  such  things  as  were  more  shame-
ful, and  more  crossing  to  their  feelings  to  confess,  the  Elders
were  sure  to  uncover  them  and  bring  all  their  secret  abomi-
nations to  the  light.  This  was  done,  in  many  instances,  to
the  honor  of  the  testimony,  and  the  shame  of  hypocrites.

5.  But,  the  far  greater  part,  who  were  the  subjects  of  this
powerful  and  heart-searching  testimony,  could  not  but  feel
as  though  all  the  sins  they  had  ever  committed  in  their  lives,
lay  open  and  naked  before  Mother  and  the  Elders,  and
were  as  plainly  seen  as  their  faces;  which,  indeed,  was  a  real
truth,  as  was  abundantly  proved,  in  many  instances.

6.  Much  was  said  and  done,  from  time  to  time,  both  in
public  and  private,  to  show  the  absolute  necessity  of  bring-
ing the  hidden  works  of  darkness  to  light,  by  a  full,  free,  and
honest  confession,  in  order  to  find  the  mercy  and  forgiveness


194  Testimonies  of

of  God.  To  write  the  whole  would  not  be  possible,  nor
even  necessary;  yet,  we  think  proper  to  record  a  few  partic-
ulars.

7.  After  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  arrived  at  Harvard,
in  the  summer  of  1781,  Ivory  Wilds,  and  many  others,  went
to  see  them,  and  after  hearing  Christ  preached,  and  the  loss
of  man  clearly  laid  open,  they  were  convinced  that  Christ
had  come,  in  very  deed,  without  sin  unto  salvation.  Mother
then  addressed  them  in  the  following  manner:  "  The  first
step  of  obedience  that  any  soul  can  take  is,  to  confess  all
sins  to  God,  before  His  witnesses.  Herein  Christ  is  to  be
found  as  a  Savior  and  a  forgiver  of  sins,  and  nowhere  else;
for  herein  is  contained  the  promise  of  God;  but  not  in  any
other  way."

8.  Mother  Ann  also  said,  "  It  was  by  the  revelation  of
God  that  I  came  to  America,  to  bring  glad  tidings  of  peace
and  salvation  to  all  who  are  willing  to  confess  and  forsake
their  sins.  I  know  by  the  spirit  and  power  of  Christ,  that
what  I  have  said  is  the  truth,"  and  then  added,  "  It  is  the
heart  which  God  looks  at.  The  heart,  with  its  hidden
abominations  covered  and  concealed  from  the  witnesses  of
Christ,  becomes  like  a  cage  of  unclean  birds,  and  never  can
be  cleansed,  short  of  a  full  and  free  confession."

9.  "  Those  who  honestly  confess  all  their  sins,  with  a  full
determination  to  forsake  them  forever,  will  find  strength  of
God  to  forsake  them;  and  in  taking  up  their  cross  against
every  known  sin,  and  following  Christ  in  the  regeneration,
in  that  life  of  obedience,  they  will  be  clothed  with  the  right-
eousness of  Christ,  and  become  the  sons  and  daughters  of
God,  being  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ."
Father  William  Lee,  and  Father  James  Whittaker,  often
spake  to  the  same  purpose.  Irory  Wilds.

10.  Again,  to  Abigail  Stanhope,  and  others  who  were
present,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  When  I  confessed  my  sins  I  la-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  195

bored  to  remember  the  time  when,  and  the  place  where,  I
committed  them;  and  when  I  had  confessed  them  I  cried  to
God,  to  know  if  my  confession  was  accepted;  and  by  crying
to  God  continually,  I  traveled  out  of  my  loss. "

Abigail  Stanhope.

11.  After  the  decease  of  Job  Bishop,  Senr.,  who  died  in
the  faith,  Mother  asked  his  widow  —  Mercy  Bishop,  if  she
confessed  her  sins  to  her  husband  before  his  decease.
Mercy  answered,  "Nay."  'You  should  have  done  it,"
said  Mother,  "  For  if  you  had  done  it,  he  would  now  be  a
ministering  spirit  to  you."  Mercy  Bishop,  1st.

12.  In  a  public  assembly  at  David  Hammond's,  in  Peters-
ham, Father  William,  in  reproving  sin,  and  admonishing
the  people  to  a  faithful  and  honest  confession,  said,  "  Al-
though we  rebuke  sin,  yet  we  have  nothing  against  the  soul;
it  is  only  against  the  devil  that  soweth  tares  among  the
wheat.  One  sin,  willfully  covered,  will  be  like  mountains
of  lead  upon  the  soul  to  sink  it  from  the  presence  of  God."

John  Robinson.

13.  On  a- similar  occasion  Father  James  Whittaker  said,
"  If  there  were  as  many  men  present,  as  there  are  stars  in  the
sky,  I  would  confess  my  sins  before  them  all,  rather  than
cover  them.*'  Mother  said,  "If  you  keep  one  sin  covered,
it  will  shut  you  out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven."

Ruth  Robbins.

14.  Soon  after  Mother  Ann  returned  from  Poughkeepsie
Jail,  Rufus  and  Zeruah  Clark,  having  previously  received
faith  in  the  testimony,  went  to  see  the  Church,  at  Watervliet,
with  an  intention  of  confessing  their  sins.  Zeruah  had  de-
signed, in  her  heart,  to  confess  her  sins  to  Mother,  in  pri-
vate, in  order  to  avoid  the  cross  of  confessing  before  the
Elders.  With  this  view  Zeruah  sought  an  opportunity  to
see  Mother  alone,  which  she  soon  obtained.  But,  as  she
had  laid  out  her  own  way,  in  order  to  avoid  the  cross  of


196  Testimonies  of

confessing  her  sins  before  the  Elders,  when  she  came  where
Mother  was,  her  feelings  were  so  bound,  that  she  was  unable
to  open  her  mind  even  to  her  own  satisfaction.  Mother,
perceiving  her  feelings,  mentioned  a  particular  sin  which  she
had  committed,  which  was  then  out  of  her  mind,  and  which
she  knew  that  no  soul,  excepting  herself,  could  have  known,
but  by  the  revelation  of  God.  She  acknowledged  that
Mother  had  told  her  the  truth;  Mother  then  left  her,  and
she  sat  down  in  great  tribulation,  because  she  had  not  an-
swered her  own  mind,  nor  given  Mother  satisfaction.

15.  Father  William  Lee  soon  after  came  into  the  room,
and  Mother  came  and  spake  a  few  words  to  him  in  an  un-
known tongue;  he  then  turned  to  Zeruah,  and  spoke  with
great  power  and  authority,  saying,  "  You  need  not  think  to
come  here  and  cover  your  sins  from  us;  for  we  can  see  all
the  sins  that  you  have  ever  committed,  as  plainly  as  though
they  were  written  in  your  forehead."

16.  Soon  after  this  he  spoke  to  her  in  a  very  mild  man-
ner, and  asked,  "Are  you  willing  to  confess  your  sins?"
She  answered,  "Yea."  "Are  you  willing  to  confess  them
before  your  husband  ?  "  She  answered,  "  Yea."  "  Remem-
ber this,  if  you  confess  your  sins,  you  confess  them  to  God  and
His  holy  angels,  and  we  are  His  witnesses."  He  then  took
her  into  a  room  to  her  husband,  and,  in  the  presence  of
Father  William,  Father  James,  and  Elder  Hocknell,  she  and
her  husband  both  confessed  their  sins.  After  they  had  done,
Elder  William  warned  them,  in  a  very  solemn  manner,  never
to  upbraid  each  other  of  the  sins  which  they  had  confessed  to
God,  before  His  witnesses."

17.  After  this,  Mother  spoke  to  Zeruah,  and  asked,  "Are
you  not  able  to  go  now,  and  testify  as  the  woman  of  Samaria
did,  that  you  have  found  those  that  are  able  to  tell  you  all
things  that  ever  you  have  done?"  "And  is  not  this  the
very  Christ  ?  " She  answered,  "  Yea,  Mother,  I  am."


Mother  Ann  Lee.  197

18.  Elder  William  then  said  to  them,  "  Now  you  must  go
home,  and  bring  up  your  children  in  the  nurture  and  admo-
nition of  the  Lord."  Mother  said,  "  If  you  will  be  obe-
dient to  what  we  have  taught  you,  the  promise  of  God  is  to
you  and  your  children."  This  promise  has  been  fulfilled;
their  children  all  obeyed  the  gospel,  and  all  kept  the  faith  to
the  end  of  their  days.  Zeruah  Clark.

19.  About  a  year  after  the  opening  of  the  gospel,  Joseph
Bennet,  of  Cheshire,  whose  family  was  in  the  faith,  was
visited  by  a  very  singular  plague  among  his  cattle,  so  that
fifteen  or  twenty  of  the  cattle  died  in  a  short  time.  At  this
time,  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  at  Ashfield,  about  twenty
miles  distant.  Mother,  not  having  heard  from  the  family  for
some  time,  and  being  then  under  great  sufferings,  called  upon
one  of  the  Elders  and  bade  him  go  quickly  to  Joseph  Ben-
net's  and  neither  eat  nor  sleep  till  he  got  there,  "for,"  said
she,  "  There  is  sin  in  the  family."  He  immediately  set  off,
and  arrived  there  late  in  the  evening.  After  a  considerable
labor  with  the  family,  who  all  cleared  themselves,  a  young
man  of  the  family  was  singled  out  by  the  man  of  God  and
found  guilty  of  defiling  himself  with  the  cattle.  He  con-
fessed his  sin,  and  the  plague  ceased.  Joanna  Bennet.

20.  In  an  assembly  of  Believers  at  Watervliet,  Father
James  was  in  great  tribulation,  and  cried  out,  "  There  is  sin
in  this  assembly."  And  turning  himself  to  a  young  woman,
who  immediately  fell  upon  her  knees,  he  said,  "  I  see  the
spirit  of  a  young  man  looking  over  your  shoulder,"  and
asked  her  if  there  was  not  something  between  her  and  the
young  man,  which  she  had  not  confessed.  The  young  woman
confessed,  that,  about  two  years  before,  she  had  promised
herself  to  the  young  man  in  marriage;  and  that,  though  she
had  intended  to  marry  him,  yet  she  took  delight  in  vexing
him,  and  for  that  purpose  had,  on  a  particular  occasion,  re-
jected and  greatly  disappointed  him;  which  so  affected  the


198  . Testimonies  of

young  man  that  he  rode  into  a  mill  pond  and  drowned  him-
self. That  she  had  never  confessed  it  before,  and  that  she
had  been  strongly  tempted  to  drown  herself.  After  this  con-
fession, the  young  woman  was  released  from  her  temptations.
Father  James  testified  that  the  young  man  had  come  to  hear
the  gospel.  Eliphalet  Slosson.

2i.  At  Watervliet,  in  presence  of  Morel  Baker,  and  a  num-
ber of  others.  Mother,  in  her  reproving  a  hardened  sinner,
told  him  of  some  of  his  secret  sins.  He  was,  at  first,  obsti-
nate, and  refused  to  acknowledge  his  guilt,  but  soon  after,
was  so  condemned,  in  his  conscience,  that  he  was  constrained,
by  the  force  of  truth,  to  come  forward  and  confess  the  very
sins  which  Mother  had  laid  to  his  charge.

Morel  Baker,  Senr.

22.  When  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Nathan  Ken-
dall's in  Woburn,  there  came  in  a  man  of  the  world  who  was
very  high  minded  and  talkative,  and  disputed  Mother's  tes-
timony to  her  face.  After  bearing  with  him  awhile,  she  re-
buked him,  and  told  him  of  his  sins,  in  presence  of  the
assembly.  The  man  was  immediately  struck  speechless,  his
countenance  fell,  and  he  appeared  like  a  guilty  criminal  ar-
raigned at  the  bar  of  justice.  Mother  Ann  then  spoke  to
Father  William,  saying,  "  Brother  William,  take  this  man
into  another  room,  and  labor  with  him,  and  take  Amos  with
you."  They  accordingly  went,  and  Father  William  labored
with  the  man,  and  put  the  things  that  Mother  had  told  him
of  so  close  to  his  conscience,  that  after  considerable  labor,
in  which  the  man  seemed  almost  speechless,  he  at  length
confessed  that  Mother  had  told  him  the  truth.

Amos  Rathbun.

23.  At  Harvard,  in  the  Autumn  of  1781,  there  came  a
man  who  professed  faith,  and  opened  his  mind  to  one  of  the
Elders;  but  Mother,  not  feeling  satisfied  with  him,  called
Amos  Rathbun,  and  told  him  to  go  and  labor  with  the  man;


Mother  Ann  Lee.  199

"  for  he  has  pretended  to  open  his  mind,  but  he  has  not  done
it  honestly,"  said  she.  "  He  has  defiled  himself;  do  you  go,
Amos,  and  make  him  confess  it,"  said  Mother.  Accordingly,
Amos  went  and  labored  with  the  man,  who  pretended  to
make  full  confession  of  the  matter;  but  he  did  not  tell  it
truthfully  and  honestly,  as  it  was.  Mother  still  feeling  and
knowing  the  man's  hypocrisy  to  Amos,  also  went  into  the
room  herself,  and  spoke  to  the  man  with  great  sharpness  and
severity,  saying,  "  You  cover  your  sin,  and  do  not  confess  it
honestly;  you  have  defiled  yourself."

24.  These  words  were  spoken  with  such  power  of  God
that  the  man  was  struck  down,  and  fell,  with  his  whole
length,  upon  the  floor,  groaned  out,  and  said,  "It  is  true,"
and  appeared  to  be  in  desperate  agony,  and,  for  some  time,
was  unable  to  rise  up.  While  he  lay  in  that  situation,
Mother  sharply  reproved  him,  for  such  filthy  and  abominable
conduct,  and  for  not  confessing  it  to  Amos,  when  he  was
called  upon,  and  declared  to  him  the  impossibility  of  ever
keeping  the  way  of  God  with  sin  covered.  Amos  Rathbun.

25.  Again,  at  Harvard,  Mother  called  upon  Amos  Rath-
bun  one  evening,  and  informed  him  that  a  certain  man  in
the  neighborhood  had  been  there  to  open  his  mind  ;  "  but/'
said  she,  "he  has  not  been  honest;  he  has  kept  his  doleful
sins  covered."  It  being  then  late  in  the  evening,  Mother
bade  Amos  go  to  the  man's  house,  and,  if  he  was  in  bed,
make  him  get  up  and  confess  his  sins/'  In  obedience  to
Mother,  Amos  went,  feeling,  at  the  same  time,  a  great  weight
of  tribulation,  and  praying,  all  the  way,  that  he  might  answer
the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and  see  Mother's  face  in  peace  at
his  return.  He  found  the  man  in  bed,  and  desired  him  to
get  up,  for  he  wanted  to  talk  with  him,  and  he  could  not
answer  his  mind  by  talking  with  him  in  bed.  The  man
arose  from  his  bed,  and,  according  to  Mother's  directions,
Amos  told  him  of  those  sins  which  he  had  kept  covered,  and


200  Testimonies  of

had  not  honestly  brought  to  the  light,  as  he  ought  to  have
done.  The  man  was  greatly  struck,  acknowledged  the  truth
of  Amos'  words,  and  appeared  to  be  much  broken  down.
The  next  day  he  came  to  the  Square  House,  and  said,
"  There  was  a  man  came  to  my  house  last  night,  and  told
me  the  very  truth."  Amos  Rathbun.


CHAPTER  XXIX.

MIRACULOUS GIFTS.

i.  Divine  miracles  have  generally  attended  the  ushering
in  of  new  and  extraordinary  dispensations  of  God,  to  a  dark
and  benighted  world;  because  they  carry  to  the  minds  of  the
lost  children  of  men,  the  strongest  evidence  of  the  sacred
messenger's  Divine  authority.  But,  when  the  Divine  au-
thority is  once  established  in  the  hearts  of  honest  Believers,
a  continuance  of  outward  miracles,  for  that  purpose,  is  no
longer  necessary.

2.  Many  miraculous  gifts,  of  various  kinds,  attended
Mother  Ann's  ministry,  some  of  which  have  already  been
published,  in  "The  Testimony  of  Christ's  Second  Ap-
pearing," and,  therefore,  need  not  be  repeated  here.  Many
others  might  be  recorded,  were  they  essential  to  support  the
truth  of  these  testimonies;  but  the  blessed  fruits  ,of  Mother
Ann's  gospel  are  the  most  powerful  evidences  in  its  favor,
and  honest,  upright  souls  will  not  be  anxious  to  seek  for
further  evidence.

3.  For  the  satisfaction  of  young  Believers,  however,  we
have  thought  proper  to  add  a  few,  to  the  number  already
published,  reminding  them,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  work
of regeneration and  redemption must  be effected  by  the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  201

miraculous  operation  of  the  spirit  of  Christ,  upon  the  willing
and  obedient  soul.

4.  Sarah  Jewett,  of  Littleton,  in  consequence  of  taking  a
sudden  cold,  lost  her  health,  and  for  some  time,  was  greatly
afflicted  with  pain  and  distress,  and  much  troubled  with
vomiting,  so  that  she  was  scarcely  able  to  keep  either  food
or  drink  upon  her  stomach.  About  this  time,  Mother  and
the  Elders  came  to  Littleton,  and  visited  the  Believers.
Sarah  being  much  crowded  with  business,  was  not  very  care-
ful of  her  health.  Father  William  Lee,  on  taking  his  leave  of
her,  admonished  her,  saying,  "  You  do  not  do  as  well  as  you
know."  She  confessed  to  him  what  she  had  done.  He  said,
"  Go,  and  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  upon  you."
From  that  time,  Sarah  began  to  regain  her  health,  and  in  a
short  time,  was  in  a  better  state  of  health  than  she  had  ever
been  before.  Sarah  Jciuett.

5.  Mother  Lucy  was  for  some  time,  in  the  early  part  of
her  faith,  afflicted  with*  a  weakness  of  the  stomach  to  such  a
degree  that  whenever  she  took  her  food,  it  occasioned  such
a  distress  it  extended  to  her  finger  ends.  Being  at  Harvard,
while  the  Church  was  there,  and  finding  her  weakness  in-
creasing upon  her,  she  concluded  that  she  must  quit  her  food
entirely,  and  eat  no  more.  Having  drawn  this  conclusion,
she  resolved  to  open  the  matter  to  the  Elders,  which,  as  yet,
she  had  not  done.  Accordingly  she  spoke  to  Father  William,
and  told  him  of  her  complaint ;  upon  which  he  immediately
burst  into  tears,  and  weeping  aloud,  said,  "  I  am  just  so  my-
self." From  that  moment,  Mother  Lucy  was  released  from
her  complaint,  and  has  not  been  troubled  with  it  since.

6.  In  the  spring  of  the  year  1783,  Abiathur  Babbit  was
taken  with  the  mumps,  and  by  reason  of  a  sudden  and  severe
cold,  his  disease  was  increased  to  such  a  degree  that  his  life
was  despaired  of.  Mother  Ann,  being  at  that  time  at  Ash-
field,  sent  Elder  John  Hocknell  to  Petersham,  where  Abia-

26


202  Testimonies  of

thur  then  lived,  but,  for  what  reason,  was  unknown  to  him,
till  he  came  where  Abiathur  was.  He  then  perceived  the
reason  why  he  was  sent;  and  under  the  signs  and  operations  of
the  power  of  God,  he  took  the  muffler  from  Abiathur's  face,
and,  with  seeming  resentment,  cast  it  from  him,  and  bade  him
leap,  which,  with  much  difficulty,  lie  did,  several  times.
Elder  Hocknell  then  bade  him  take  faith,  and  go  to  work,
and  from  that  time,  he  was  healed  of  his  disease.

7.  Elizabeth  Robinson,  of  Harvard,  having  her  throat
sore,  and  badly  swelled,  Mother  Ann  laid  her  hand  on  it,
and  the  swelling  went  away,  and  her  throat  was  healed.
Mother  said,  "  When  you  are  bitten  by  the  flying  serpent,
you  must  look  upon  the  brazen  serpent  to  be  healed;  and
let  your  words  be  few,  and  seasoned  with  grace. "

Elizabeth  Robbins.

8.  Lucy  Prescott  was  once  with  Mother  Ann,  and
having  been  afflicted  with  an  exceedingly  bad  cough,  by
which  she  was  reduced  to  a  very  weak  and  low  state  of
health,  she  opened  her  situation  to  Mother.  Mother  asked,
"  Are  you  not  willing  to  suffer  with  me  ?  I  have  to  suffer,  al-
most all  my  time."  These  words  produced  complete  recon-
ciliation in  Lucy's  feelings,  and  she  answered,  "  Yea,  Mother,
I  am  willing."  Mother  then  offered  her  a  little  wine  and
water  in  a  cup,  Lucy  declined  it,  saying,  "  My  stomach  is  so
sore  that  I  do  not  know  how  to  drink  it."  Mother  said,
"  Drink  it,  for  it  will  not  hurt  you."  Lucy  obeyed,  and  was
well  from  that  time.  Lucy  Prescott.

9.  A  few  months  before  Moses  Mixer  believed  the  gospel,
he  had  all  his  ankle  bones  dislocated;  and,  though  they  had
been  set  by  a  skillful  surgeon,  yet  his  ankle  remained  very
weak;  being  prevailed  upon  by  his  friends,  to  visit  the
Church,  at  Watervliet,  he  set  off,  and  traveled  from  Peters-
ham to  Watervliet,  on  foot, —  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles,
which  so  affected  his  ankle,  that  it  was  very  sore  and  pain-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  203

ful ;  he  arrived  in  the  evening,  and  after  taking  some  re-
freshment, went  into  meeting,  and  being  invited  to  go  into
the  dance,  he  complied,  but  in  consequence  of  the  pain  and
distress  of  his  ankle,  he  was  soon  obliged  to  go  and  sit  down.
Elder  Hocknell  went  to  him  and  asked  him  why  he  did  not
labor?  He  replied  that  his  ankle  pained  him  so  he  was  not
able.

10.  Elder  Hocknell,  being  under  the  power  and  opera-
tions of  God,  bade  him  take  faith  in  the  gifts  of  God,  and
asked,  "Where  is  the  sorest  place?"  Moses  was  then  sit-
ting, with  his  ankle  across  .his  knee,  and  putting  his  hand
upon  it,  showed  Elder  Hocknell  the  sorest  place,  with  full
faith,  that  if  he  should  but  touch  it,  his  ankle  would  be
healed.  Elder  Hocknell  then  placed  his  hand  upon  the
ankle,  and  instantly,  Moses  felt  the  power  of  God  run  down
into  his  foot,  and  up  his  leg,  back  and  forth;  and  the  pain
and  swelling  immediately  left  it.  Elder  Hocknell  then  led
him  into  the  dance,  saying,  "  Now  you  can  labor."  Moses
then  went  forth  in  the  power  and  gift  of  God,  with  his  ankle
well  and  sound  ;  and  testified  until  his  death,  he  had  no  pain
nor  weakness  in  it  thereafter.

11.  While  the  Church  was  at  Ashfield,  in  the  winter  of
1783,  there  came  a  woman  with  her  little  girl,  about  nine  or
ten  years  of  age,  and  desired  that  the  evil  spirit  might  be
cast  out  of  the  child.  Some  victuals  being  prepared  for
them,  the  woman  spoke  to  her  child  and  bade  her  kneel
down  before  she  ate,  but  the  child  refused ;  and  at  the
same  time  screamed,  and  tore  the  hair  out  of  her  head.
Those  who  were  present,  went  and  informed  Mother
Ann  of  the  circumstance.  Mother  came  into  the  room  and
cast  her  eyes  upon  the  child,  then,  calling  Elder  Hocknell,
she  said,  "  You  must  labor  for  a  gift  of  God  to  cast  the  evil
spirit  out  of  this  child."  Immediately  the  power  of  God
came  mightily  upon  him,  and  he  spake  in  an  unknown  tongue,


204  Testimonies  of

and  laid  his  hand  upon  the  child's  head.  The  child  imme-
diately gushed  into  tears.  He  then  spoke  to  the  child,  and
she  kneeled  down  with  him  and  appeared  very  loving  and
pleasant.  Mother  then  said,  "  We  have  power  to  bind  and
to  loose,  and  to  cast  out  evil  spirits."  Phcbc  Spencer.

12.  Daniel  Goodrich,  Senr.,  in  the  early  part  of  his  faith.
went  to  Watervliet  to  see  Mother  Ann,  and  took  some  of  his
children  along  with  him;  his  family  at  that  time  had  not  got
hold  of  much  faith;  some  of  them  were  still  in  opposition,
and  one  of  his  little  girls,  which  he  then  carried  with  him,
having,  by  a  fall,  had  her  hip  put  out,  was  bowed  together,
and  her  leg  began  to  perish,  so  that  it  was  feared  she  would
be  a  cripple.  These  things,  together  with  a  lack  of  that
visible  power  and  operation  of  the  spirit  which  was  perceiv-
able among  other  Believers,  occasioned  Daniel  much  tribu-
lation. He  opened  his  trials  and  difficulties  to  Mother.  She
soon  after  assembled  his  children  into  the  room  with  him,
and  spoke  to  him  as  follows  :

13.  "  O  Daniel,  God  has  given  you  a  special  gift  of  faith.
Signs  and  operations  will  fail,  but  faith  and  obedience  will
carry  you  through.  Bear  your  testimony,  purge  your  house
and  your  family  from  sin,  and  you  will  gather  your  whole
family.  I  saw  your  family  last  night,  in  the  visions  of  God,
stand  on  Mount  Zion  with  the  harps  of  God  in  their  hands."

14.  Mother  then  took  the  lame  girl  into  her  lap,  and  when
she  sat  her  down  upon  her  feet,  she  stroked  her  down  upon
her  sides,  and  said,  "  Go  home  Daniel,  and  be  faithful,  this,
your  child,  will  become  well."  So  they  departed,  and  the
child  became  well,  as  before,  and  the  family  were  all  gath-
ered to  the  faith.  Mother  Hannah  Goodrich.

15  Zaccheus  Stevens,  in  the  early  part  of  his  faith,  vis-
ited the  Church  at  Watervliet,  in  company  with  Eleazer
Rand.  While  there  he  was  taken  very  sick,  so  that  his  life
was  despaired  of. He  informed  Mother  that  he  had  consid-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  205

erable  business  at  home  which  was  unsettled.  Mother  asked
him  where  his  horse  was?  "At  John  Partington's,  about
three  miles  distant,"  replied  Zaccheus.  "  Send  Eleazer  Rand
after  him,"  said  Mother,  "for  you  must  take  faith  and  set
out  for  home  to-morrow  morning,  and  you  will  recover."
This  command  was  strange,  and  unexpected,  to  Zaccheus,
and  all  who  saw  him,  (Mother  Ann  excepted,)  so  that  when
he  spoke  to  Eleazer  to  fetch  his  horse,  he  was  struck  with
astonishment  to  hear  of  Zaccheus'  setting  out  to  go  a  jour-
ney of  an  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  when  he  was  thought  to
be  so  near  his  end.  But,  in  obedience  to  Mother,  Zaccheus
set  off  the  next  morning,  and  traveled  over  thirty  miles  the
first  day,  and  felt  much  better  at  night,  than  he  did  before
he  left  Watervliet.  And  through  his  whole  journey  he  con-
tinued to  increase  in  strength,  and  arrived  at  his  own  house
in  Harvard,  in  tolerable  good  health. Zaccheus  Stevens.

16.  John  Bishop,  of  New  Lebanon,  having  a  desire  to
visit  the  Church  at  Ashfield,  in  October,  1782,  but  under-
standing that  many  people  resorted  there  to  bear  the  word
of  God,  he  concluded  that  horse  keeping  must  be  very  scarce,
and  for  that  reason,  set  off  on  foot,  a  little  before  night,  and
proceeded  ten  miles.  The  next  day  he  traveled  thirty  miles,
and  arrived  at  Asa  Bacon's  just  as  the  people  were  sitting
down  to  supper,  and  sat  down  with  them.  Immediately
after  supper  John  went  into  the  dance  with  the  rest  of  the
people;  but  as  he  was  unaccustomed  to  traveling,  and  the
roads  extremely  muddy,  he  felt  scarcely  able  to  stand  on  his
feet.  At  this  time,  Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room,  and
without  saying  a  word,  took  him  by  the  hand.  The  effect
was  like  the  sudden  operation  of  an  electric  shock;  he  was
instantly  relieved  from  his  weariness.  John  then  felt  as
though  he  could  have  willingly  danced  all  night.  He  danced
till  twelve  o'clock,  at  which  time  meeting  was  dismissed.
He  then  walked  half  a  mile,  to  Moses  Bacon's,  wrapped  him-


2o6  Testimonies  of

self  up  in  his  great  coat,  laid  himself  down  upon  the  floor,
and  slept  comfortably  as  though  he  had  been  on  a  feather
bed,  and  felt  no  more  of  his  weariness  afterward.

John  Bishop.

17.  Zadock  Wright,  having  embraced  the  testimony  of  the
gospel,  visited  the  Church  at  Harvard,  and  being  in  the
worship  of  God  under  great  tribulation,  he  felt  himself,  as  it
were,  upon  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,  and  thought  that
he  had  not  much  in  him  but  what  must  be  burned  up,  and
he  must  perish.  At  this  time  Mother  Ann  passed  through
the  assembly,  and  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  instantly  his
burden  left  him.  Zadock  Wright.

18.  Afterward,  Zadock  visited  the  Church  at  Ashfield,
where  the  fire  of  the  gospel  searched  every  heart,  and  he,
like  many  others,  felt  such  a  sense  of  his  lost  state,  that  his
disease  seemed  to  him  incurable.  Mother  passing  through
the  assembly  at  this  time,  touched  him  on  his  arm,  saying
"Repent."  He  was  again  instantly  released  from  his  bur-
den. Zadock  Wright.

19.  Instances  similar  to  the  foregoing  were  very  numerous
in  Mother's  day.  There  were  but  few  persons  who  had  much
opportunity  with  her,  who  were  not  able  to  relate  something
of  the  kind.  Brethren  and  Sisters  who  visited  the  Church
under  tribulation  and  sufferings,  whether  of  body  or  mind,
were  often  instantly  released,  by  a  mere  touch  of  the  hand
from  Mother ;  even  the  touch  of  her  finger,  or  the  sound  of
her  voice,  has  frequently  had  the  same  effect.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  207

CHAPTER  XXX.

COUNSEL  IN TEMPORAL THINGS. INDUSTRY, CLEANLINESS,

PRUDENCE, ECONOMY, GIVING OF ALMS, CHARITY TO
THE POOR.

i.  Great  pains  were  taken  by  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders
to  instruct  the  Believers  in  the  care  and  management  of
temporal  things.  They  were  often  taught  to  be  industrious,
to  put  their  hands  to  work,  and  their  hearts  to  God,  to  be
neat  and  cleanly,  and  observe  good  economy  ;  to  use  the
things  of  this  world  as  not  abusing  them;  to  be  prudent  and
saving,  and  let  nothing  be  lost,  or  wasted  through  carelessness,
or  neglect;  to  avoid  equally,  covetousness,  and  prodigality;  to
behind  and  charitable  to  the  poor,  and  to  keep  clear  of  debt.

2.  These  things  were  strictly  enjoined  upon  the  Believers
from  time  to  time,  as  matters  of  importance,  in  order  to  se-
cure a  spiritual  blessing.  For  it  was  always  held  up  as  a
doctrine  of  truth,  and  which  was  abundantly  proved  by
experience,  that  those  who  were  unfaithful  in  temporal
things,  could  not  find  the  blessing  and  protection  of  God  in
their  spiritual  travel;  hence,  a  faithful  and  wise  improve-
ment of  their  time  and  talents  in  the  things  of  time  was
essentially  necessary  in  order  to  inherit  the  true  riches.

3.  On  a  particular  occasion,  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  Zeruah
Clark  as  follows,  "  Be  faithful  to  keep  the  gospel;  be  neat
and  industrious;  keep  your  family's  clothes  clean  and  de-
cent; see  that  your  house  is  kept  clean,  and  your  victuals
is  prepared  in  good  order,  that  when  the  Brethren  come  in
from  their  hard  work  they  can  bless  you,  and  eat  their  food
with  thankfulness,  without  murmuring,  and  be  able  to  wor-
ship God  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Watch,  and  be  careful,
don't  speak  harsh,  nor  cast  reflections  upon  them;  but  let
your  words  be  few,  and  seasoned  with  grace."


2oS  Testimonies  of

4.  At  a  certain  time,  on  taking  leave  of  some  who  had
been  at  the  Church,  and  were  about  to  return  home,  Mother
addressed  them  as  follows  :  "  Go  home  and  put  your  hands
to  work,  and  your  hearts  to  God;  for  if  you  are  not  faithful
in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  how  can  you  expect  the  true
riches?  Mankind  have  fallen  below  the  order  of  nature;
even  the  beasts  of  the  field  might  teach  them  knowledge.
Many  will  come  to  the  Church  and  receive  the  gifts  of  God,
then  go  away,  be  careless  and  idle,  and  lose  them.  This  is
not  right,  you  ought  to  be  faithful,  that  when  you  come
again,  you  may  bring  strength  and  not  weakness."

5.  In  the  time  of  harvest,  while  some  of  the  Brethren  were
reaping  their  wheat,  Mother  Ann  sent  Elder  James  into  the
field  to  teach  them.  He  went,  and  spoke  to  them  as  fol-
lows: "  Cut  your  grain  clean;  God  has  caused  it  to  grow,
and  you  ought  to  be  careful  to  save  it;  for  you  cannot  make
one  kernel  grow,  if  you  know  you  must  starve  for  the  want
of  it.  In  this  country  you  abound  in  good  things,  therefore
you  are  lavish  and  wasteful."

6.  Lucy  Bishop  was  once  scrubbing  a  room,  and  Mother
Ann  came  in  and  said,  "Clean  your  room  well;  for  good
spirits  will  not  live  where  there  is  dirt.  There  is  no  dirt  in
heaven."  At  another  time  she  spoke  to  some  Sisters  who
had  been  washing  the  floor,  saying,  ;<  You  ought  to  be  neat,
and  clean;  for  there  is  no  slovens  nor  sluts  in  heaven."

Lucy  Pre  scoff.

7.  Phebe  Spencer,  being  on  a  visit  to  the  Church,  at  Water-
vliet,  asked  Mother's  counsel  concerning  some  superfluities
which  she  and  her  family  had  gathered,  such  as  gold  beads,
jewels,  silver  buckles,  and  other  ornaments  of  the  kind.
Mother  Ann  answered,  "  You  may  let  the  moles  and  bats
have  them;  that  is,  the  children  of  this  world;  for  they  set
their  hearts  upon  such  things;  but,  the  people  of  God  do
not  want  them."


Mother  Ann  Lee.  209

8.  She  also  said,  "  You  ought  to  dress  yourself  in  modest
apparel,  as  becomes  the  people  of  God,  and  teach  your
family  to  do  likewise.  You  ought  to  be  industrious  and  pru-
dent, and  not  live  a  sumptuous  and  gluttonous  life;  but  labor
for  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  and  see  that  your  family  is  kept
decent,  and  regular,  in  all  their  going  forth,  that  others  may
see  your  good  works."

9.  Addressing  Phebe  Spencer  and  a  number  of  others,
Mother  said,  "  You  must  remember  the  poor  and  needy,  the
widow  and  the  fatherless;  and  deal  out  your  bread  to  the
hungry,  and  your  clothes  to  the  naked.  Your  natures  will
say,  '  They  may  work  and  get  these  things  for  themselves.'
But  Christ  said,  '  Give  to  him  that  asketh,  and  of  him  that
would  borrow  of  thee,  turn  not  thou  away.'  If  I  had  but
two  mouthfuls  of  bread,  I  would  give  to  him  that  needed ;
and,  if  I  had  but  two  coats,  I  would  give  to  him  who  had
none.  You  must  put  away  your  covetousness,  your  lust,  and
your  filth,  and  be  prepared  for  the  increase  of  the  gospel;
for  the  time  will  come  when  this  gospel  will  be  preached  to
all  nations,  and  many  will  flock  to  Zion  to  hear  the  word  of
the  Lord."

10.  Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  gospel  at  Enfield,  N.  H.,
some  of  the  Believers  in  that  place,  having  more  zeal  than
wisdom  and  understanding,  imbibed  a  notion  that  they  were
not  to  continue  in  this  world  but  a  few  years,  and  concluded
that  they  need  not  make  any  further  provisions  for  a  living,
in  consequence  of  which  they  made  a  very  undue  use  of
their  property,  by  squandering  it  away  in  a  profuse  manner,
which  brought  great  trials  upon  some  others  of  their  Breth-
ren, particularly  upon  Jacob  Heath.  Jacob,  soon  after,  in
company  with  Cornelius  Goodale,  went  to  see  the  Church,
which  was  then  at  Ashfield,  and  opened  his  trials  to  some  of
the  Elders  respecting  the  matter.  On  Mother  hearing  of  it,
she  called  Jacob  and Cornelius,  and  after  instructing  them

27


210  Testimonies  of

concerning  these  things,  she  bade  them  go  home  and  set  out
apple  trees,  and  raise  calves,  and  make  provisions  as  though
they  were  to  live  a  thousand  years,  and  gather  something  to
do  good  with.  Jacob  Heath.

ii.  Soon  after  this,  Jacob  Hunt,  Ezekiel  Stephens,  and  a
number  of  other  Believers,  visited  the  Church  at  Ashfield.
Just  before  their  departure,  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  them,  and
gave  them  instructions  concerning  their  temporal  economy,
saying,  "  Go  home,  and  take  good  care  of  what  you  have.
Provide  places  for  your  things,  so  that  you  may  know  where
to  find  them,  at  any  time,  by  day  or  by  night;  and  learn  to
be  neat  and  clean,  prudent  and  saving,  and  see  that  nothing
is  lost;  and  be  kind  to  the  poor  and  needy."  To  the  Sisters
she  said,  "  Do  not  omit  your  washing  till  the  latter  end  of
the  week ;  but  do  it  on  Monday ;  and  set  a  good  example
before  the  world."  Jacob  Hunt.

12.  While  Jacob  Heath,  and  a  number  of  others  were  eat-
ing their  dinner,  Mother  Ann  came  to  the  table,  and  taking
a  bone  from  the  platter,  gave  it  to  one  who  sat  near  her,  say-
ing, "  Take  this  bone  and  pick  it  clean,  and  learn  to  be  pru-
dent." Jacob  Heath.

13.  Cornelius  Goodale,  being  at  the  Church  at  Watervliet,
in  January,  17S4,  and  being,  at  that  time,  under  some  em-
barrassments, in  his  temporal  circumstances,  asked  Mother
Ann  if  it  would  not  be  better  for  him  to  sell  his  farm,  and
buy  a  less  one,  and  so  pay  his  debts.  Mother  Ann  answered,
"  You  better  not.  The  people  of  God  do  not  sell  their  farms
to  pay  their  debts;  but  they  put  their  hands  to  work,  and
gather  something  by  their  industry,  to  pay  their  debts  with,
and  keep  their  farms."  Cornelius  Goodale.

14.  While  Mother  Ann  was  at  Petersham,  in  the  summer  of
1 7 S3,  she  took  an  opportunity  to  instruct  some  of  the  heads
of  families,  who  were  there,  concerning  their  temporal  econ-
omy; and  admonished  them  against  some  of  their  costly  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  211

extravagant  furniture,  saying,  "  Never  put  on  silver  spoons,
nor  table  cloths  for  me;  but  let  your  tables  be  clean  enough
to  eat  from  without  cloths,  and  if  you  do  not  know  what  to
do  with  them,  give  them  to  the  poor." John  Robinson.

15.  In  the  last  year  of  Mother's  ministry,  a  number  of
Brethren  and  Sisters  being  assembled  together  at  Watervliet,
Mother  spoke  very  largely  concerning  the  great  loss  of  the
American  people  in  many  things,  and  particularly,  concern-
ing their  involving  themselves  in  debt.  She  directed  her
discourse  on  this  subject  mostly,  to  one  who  was  very  deeply
involved  and  not  able  to  clear  himself.  She  said,  "  You
will  go  and  run  into  debt,  and  not  only  bring  yourself  into
bondage,  but  your  family  also,  and  bring  distress  on  your
creditors;  such  evil  management  will  forever  be  a  loss  to  the
soul  till  the  creditors  are  paid,  and  the  soul  finds  repentance."

16.  After  instructing  and  reproving  the  people  a  long  time,
she  sat  in  silence  a  while,  and  then  spoke  in  a  very  gentle
and  solemn  manner,  which  caused  great  fear  of  God,  and
said,  "  Kneel  ye  down  and  pray  to  God,  that  He  will  con-
tinue you  in  this  world  till  you  have  repented  of  all  your
sins."  Mother  kneeled  down  with  them  and  prayed  for
them,  which  caused  their  hearts  to  flow  with  sorrow  and
repentance.  Eliab  Harlow.

17.  Anna  Cogswell,  being  at  Watervliet,  after  Mother's  re-
turn from  the  eastward,  spoke  to  her  concerning  a  poor  woman
who  had  applied  to  her  for  help.  Mother  answered,  "  Re-
member the  cries  of  those  who  are  in  need  and  trouble,
that  when  you  are  in  trouble,  God  may  hear  your. cries."

Anna  Cogswell.

18.  At  Watervliet,  Mother  spoke  to  a  number  of  Believers
as  follows,  "  You  ought  to  fear  God,  in  all  you  do,  for  God's
eyes  are  upon  you.  You  ought  to  go  in  and  out  in  the  fear
of  God,  and  open  and  shut  doors  carefully,  and  make  no
unnecessary  noise. You  must  be  faithful  with  your  hands,


212  Testimonies  of

that  you  may  have  something  to  give  to  the  poor;  and  walk
ye  uprightly  like  men  of  God."  Cornelius  Thayer.

19.  To  some  women  who  were  rich,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  As
soon  as  some  who  are  rich  get  their  wool  sheared  off  the
sheep,  they  will  lay  out  so  much  for  such  a  piece  of  cloth;
and  so  much  for  such  a  piece,  but  will  not  lay  out  one  lock
to  give  the  poor!  Nay,  they  would  be  as  much  afraid  of
seeing  a  poor  person  come  to  their  houses,  as  they  would  a
thief."  Cornelius  Thayer.

20.  Sometime  in  February,  17S2,  while  Mother  Ann  was  at
Harvard,  there  was  a  great  collection  of  people  from  differ-
ent parts,  some  of  whom  were  greatly  bound  to  their  tem-
poral interests,  and  were  very  covetous.  Mother  came  forth
with  a  powerful  gift  of  God,  and  spoke,  particularly,  of  giv-
ing alms  to  the  poor,  and  doing  good  to  all  people,  but  es-
pecially to  the  household  of  faith.  She  said  that  if  she  had
but  one  loaf  of  bread,  she  would  freely  impart  one-half  to
the  needy,  trusting  in  God.  Phebe  Chase.

21.  Again,  in  teaching  the  people  concerning  prudence  and
economy,  Mother  said,  "  I  am  as  prudent  and  saving  of
every  temporal  blessing  which  I  receive,  as  though  I  had
labored  for  it  with  my  own  hands;  and  you  ought  to  be  so
too."  Lydia  Mathewson.-

22.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Elijah  Wild's,
in  Shirley,  in  June,  1783,  and  many  people  being  assembled
from  various  parts,  and  the  weather  very  warm,  Mother
warned  the  people  to  be  temperate  and  careful  in  drinking
cold  water,  and  keep  their  health  and  strength  to  serve  God
with.  Chase  Wiggins.

23.  At  Nathan  Goodrich's,  in  Hancock,  Mother  Ann
spoke  to  the  people  concerning  charity  to  the  poor,  and  said,
"If  I  owned  the  whole  world  I  would  turn  it  all  into  joyfulness;
I  would  not  say  to  the  poor,  '  Be  ye warmed,  and  be  ye  clothed*
without  giving  them  wherewithal  to  do  it."

Hannah  Goodrich,  \st.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  21


j


24.  In  the  early  part  of  the  year  1784,  a  number  of  the
Believers,  among  whom  was  a  widow  (Mercy  Bishop),  with  a
number  of  her  small  children,  had  been  on  a  visit  to  the
Church  at  Watervliet,  and  being  about  to  return  home,
Mother  Ann,  in  a  farewell  address,  commended  the  widow
for  the  zeal  which  she  had  manifested  in  bringing  her  family  to
the  Church  ;  then,  directing  her  discourse  to  those  who  were
heads  of  families,  and  people  of  property,  among  whom  were
Jabez  Spencer,  Senr.,  Jabez  Spencer,  Junr.,  David  Shapley,
Senr.,  and  others,  she  spoke  much  to  them  of  their  duty  in
giving  alms,  and  being  kind  and  charitable  to  the  poor,  par-
ticularly to  such  widows  and  fatherless  children  who  were
among  them.  After  speaking  lengthily,  and  very  feelingly
on  this  subject,  she  requested  Elder  James  to  read  a  passage
of  Scripture  in  the  Epistle  of  James,  1st  Chap.,  2 2d  v.  El-
der James  took  the  Bible  and  read  as  follows :

"  Be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiv-
ing your  own  selves.  For,  if  any  man  be  a  hearer  of  the
word,  and  not  a  doer,  he  is  like  a  man  beholding  his  nat-
ural face  in  a  glass;  for  he  behuldeth  himself  and  goeth  his
way,  and  straitway  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  was.
But  whoso  looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  con-
tinueth  therein,  he,  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer
of  the  word,  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed.  If  any
man  among  you  seems  to  be  religious  and  bridleth  not  his
tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  this  man's  religion  is
vain.  Pure  religion,  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the
Father  is  this,  to  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  af-
fliction, and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world."

25.  The  solemn  gift  of  God  which  accompanied  Mother's
previous  discourse,  together  with  the  impressive  feeling  with
which  Elder  James  read  this  passage,  had  a  powerful  effect
on  the  minds  of  the  hearers.  Mary  Spencer


2i4  Testimonies  of

0

CHAPTER  XXXI.

PROMISES  TO  THE  FAITHFUL  —  COUNSEL  AND  INSTRUCTION
TO  YOUNG  PEOPLE  —  CONCERNING  CHILDREN  —  CON-
CERNING  BEASTS.

Mother  Ann  often  renewed  the  promises  of  God  and  of
the  Lord  Jesus,  to  those  who  were  faithful  to  take  up  their
crosses  against  all  sin,  and  to  keep  the  way  of  God,  come  life
or  death;  and  often  said,  "  Fear  not,  little  flock,  for  it  is
your  Heavenly  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  king-
dom.*' Not  long  after  her  return  from  Poughkeepsie  Jail
in  speaking  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  she  renewed  the
promise  of  Christ  in  the  following  words  :  ''  If  you  are  faith-
ful to  take  up  your  crosses  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and
all  evil,  and  follow  Christ  in  the  regeneration,  you  shall  re-
ceive an  hundred  fold,  now,  in  this  time,  houses,  and  Breth-
ren and  Sisters,  and  mothers  and  children,  and  lands,  and
in  the  world  to  come,  eternal  life.  You  shall  be  blessed  in
your  going  out,  and  in  your  coming  in ;  in  your  basket,  and
in  your  store."  Mother  Lucy  Wright.

3.  AVhile  Mother  Ann  was  at  the  house  of  Nathan  Ken-
dall, Senr.,  at  YVoburn,  in  laboring  with  the  people,  she
said,  "  If  you  will  be  faithful,  you  will  be  helps  to  your  nat-
ural generations;  yea,  you  may  be  helps  to  an  hundred  gen-
erations." Mother  Hannah  Kendall-

4.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  spoke  to  some  Believers  from  En-
field, N.  H.,  who  were  about  to  depart,  saying,  "If  you  are
faithful,  you  will  go  out  and  come  in  with  the  power  of  God,
and  your  souls  will  be  as  a  watered  garden  ;  but,  if  you  turn
back,  your  souls  will  sink  deep  into  hell."

5.  At  Watervliet,  before  Mother  Ann  went  her  eastern
journey,  she  spoke  to  Hannah  Cogswell,  Joanna  Hamlin,
and  some  other  young  Sisters  who  had  been  living  with  her,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  215

saying,  "  You  ought  to  love  one  another,  and  never  have  one
hard  feeling  toward  each  other,  but  live  together  every  day
as  though  it  was  the  last  day  you  had  to  live  in  this  world ;
and  never  forget  one  another ;  and  never  forget  the  privilege
you  have  had  in  living  together  with  me."

Hannah  Cogs well,

6.  Shortly  after  Mehetabel  Farrington  embraced  the  gos-
pel, she  visited  the  Church  in  company  with  some  other
young  people,  and  tarried  several  days.  Before  they  took
their  leave,  Mother  Ann  addressed  them  as  follows,  "  When
you  return  home,  you  must  be  diligent  with  youi  hands;  for
godliness  does  not  lead  to  idleness.  The  devil  tempts  others,
but,  an  idle  person  tempts  the  devil.  When  you  are  at  work,
doing  your  duty  in  the  gift  of  God,  the  devil  can  have  no
power  over  you,  because  then  there  is  no  room  for  tempta-
tions." She  also  said,  "  You  must  obey  your  parents;  chil-
dren should  obey  their  parents,  for  this  is  right;  and  the
younger  should  submit  to  the  elder.  You  must  come  up  to
the  requirement  of  the  law.  Christ  did  not  come  to  destroy
the  law,  but  to  fulfill  it;  and  you  must  do  the  same.  Arm
yourselves  with  meekness  and  patience.  If  you  improve  in
one  talent,  God  will  give  you  more.  Go  home,  and  be
obedient,  this  is  the  way  I  have  found  salvation,  by  being
obedient."  Mehetabel  Farrington.

7.  Near  the  close  of  Mother's  labors,  Mehetabel  Farring-
ton and  a  number  of  others  being  at  Watervliet,  Mother  ad-
dressed them  as  follows,  "  I  have  taught  you  the  way  of  God,
you  must  keep  it,  I  am  but  one ;  I  do  my  work,  you  must  do
yours.  When  I  have  done  my  work,  I  can  help  you  no
more.  I  wish  you  knew  your  day  and  your  privilege;  you
have  a  privilege  that  many  souls  have  desired,  and  could  not
obtain.  You  are  young,  and  you  have  a  privilege  to  take  up
your  crosses  in  the  prime  of  your  activity."  "  If  you  take
up  your  cross  against  the  lust  of  the  flesh  while  you  have


216  Testimonies  of

power  to  please  yourselves,  you  offer  to  God  the  first  fruits;
and  there  is  a  glorious  crown  for  all  who  take  up  their  cross
against  the  flesh  in  this  world;  such  souls  will  receive  that
honor  and  crown  of  glory,  which  no  other  souls  can  ever  ob-
tain. But  all  souls  will  have  a  privilege  in  this  gospel,  either
in  this  world,  or  in  the  world  of  spirits ;  but  those  who  have
the  offer  of  the  gospel  in  this  world,  if  they  finally  reject  it,
they  will  never  have  another  day."

8.  "You  have  your  day  now;  you  can  travel  out  of  your
loss  by  obedience  —  by  taking  up  the  same  cross  that  Christ
did;  but  souls  in  the  world  of  spirits  have  to  travel  by  suf-
ferings, passing  from  prison  to  prison,  until  they  find  the
mercy  of  God;  and  may  travel  to  such  a  degree  of  purity  as
to  be  clothed  in  white  robes.  But  those  who  voluntarily
take  up  their  cross  in  this  world,  and  faithfully  endure  to
the  end,  will  be  more  bright  and  glorious  than  the  angels;
they  will  be  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  Mother  spoke  much
on  this  subject,  showing  the  great  difference  between  volun-
tary cross-bearers,  or  those  who  take  up  their  crosses  in  this
world,  while  they  possess  freedom,  and  power  to  please  them-
selves, in  every  gratification,  and  those  who  are  deprived  of
this  power  to  act,  being  bound  down  in  prisons  of  darkness,
in  a  world  of  spirits.

9.  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  always  manifested  great
care  and  feeling  for  youth  and  children,  and  oftentimes
counseled  and  instructed  their  parents  concerning  children;
and  frequently  took  great  delight  in  speaking  to  the  children
of  Believers  and  teaching  them  how  to  be  good  children  and
to  be  obedient  to  their  parents.

10.  In  the  spring  of  the  year  17S1,  a  large  number  of
people  being  at  Watervliet,  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  them  con-
cerning children,  saying,  "  Little  children  are  nearer  the
kingdom  of  heaven  than  those  who  have  grown  to  riper  age.
Christ  took  little  children  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  them,  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  217

said,  '  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid
them  not;  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'  Little
children  are  simple  and  innocent;  they  should  be  brought
up  so;  and  they  never  ought  to  be  brought  out  of  it.  If
they  were  brought  up  in  simplicity  they  would  receive  good,
as  easily  as  they  would  evil.  God,  at  first,  created  the  soul
pure  and  innocent,  and  when  souls  shall  have  been  redeemed
from  their  loss,  they  will  again  be  pure  and  innocent."

Hannah  Cogswell.

1 1.  Father  James  Whittakef  said  "  Blessed  are  the  children
of  those  who  believe  the  gospel,  and  those  of  the  rising  gene-
ration who  touch  no  unclean  thing;  they  shall  suck  at  every
flower,  and  smell  at  every  lily."  Anna  Northrup.

Again,  on  taking  leave  of  the  people  at  Shirley,  he
addressed  himself  to  the  youth,  and  children  in  particular,
and  said,  "  If  you  are  faithful,  you  shall  feed  on  every  lily,
and  suck  at  every  flower."  Eunice  Wilds,  2nd.

12.  When  Mother  Ann  was  at  John  Spier's  in  New  Leb-
anon, Nathan  Farrington's  family  all  being  present,  she  took
Nathan's  youngest  daughter  —  Esther,  into  her  arms,  kissed
her,  and  said,  "  Child,  I  bless  you,  as  Christ  blessed  little
children,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  child
is  a  Believer,  she  is  my  child;  "  and  again  kissed  her.  The
child,  at  that  time,  gathered  great  love  to  Mother,  grew  up
in  the  faith  and  love  of  the  gospel,  and  deceased  in  the
twenty-third  year  of  her  age.  Mehetabel  Farrington.

13.  At  a  certain  time  Mother  spoke  to  some  little  children,
and  instructed  them  how  to  pray,  and.  taught  them  that  when
they  knelt  down,  before  they  ate,  they  should  say,  "  I  pray
God  bless  me,  and  give  me  grace,  and  make  me  a  good  child,"
and  after  eating  to  say,  "  I  thank  God  for  giving  me  victuals;
I  pray  God  give  me  grace,  and  make  me  a  good  child."

Hannah  Cogswell.

14.  Phebe Spencer,  being  in  conversation  with Mother

28


2i8  Testimonies  of

Ann  at  Watervliet,  spoke  to  her  concerning  her  youngest
daughter,  who  saw  beautiful  visions.  Mother  said,  "  She
may  open  her  visions  to  you;  but  do  not  let  her  know  that
you  take  much  notice  of  them;  if  you  do  it  will  lift  her  up;
but  you  may  notice  them  yourself."  She  also  said,  "  Do  not
examine  your  small  children  very  closely  in  respect  to  wick-
edness; for  if  you  do  they  will  want  to  act  it,  to  get  the
knowledge  of  it.  But  you  may  watch  over  them  closely."
She  further  said,  "  When  children  are  put  to  bed,  they  ought
to  be  made  to  lie  straight,  to  prevent  them  from  growing
crooked."

15.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  spoke  to  some  who  were  parents,
as  follows,  "  You  ought  to  keep  your  children  neat,  and
clean;  keep  their  faces  clean,  and  clean  their  heads  from
lice,  and  scabs;  and  see  that  their  clothes  are  mended,  and
kept  decent.  If  children  are  nasty,  they  will  not  have  the
gifts  of  God;  but,  if  they  are  kept  clean,  and  decent,  as  they
ought  to  be,  they  will  have  the  gifts  of  God  as  well  as  grown
people.''  You  ought  never  to  call  children  bad  names,  as
some  people  of  the  world  do;  but  call  them  by  their  proper
names,  and  set  a  godly  example  before  them,  as  becomes  the
gospel.  And  you  must  keep  them  to  work;  not  allow  them
to  be  idle;  for  if  you  do  they  will  grow  up  just  like  the  world's
children.  Let  your  conversation  before  your  children  be  that
which  becomes  godliness.  Do  not  talk  about  that  which  will
excite  their  minds  to  evil;  you  ought  not  to  talk  about  the
flesh  before  them,  lest  it  corrupt  their  minds,  and  make  them
want  to  act  in  these  things."  Lydia  Mathewson.

16.  Again,  at  YVatervliet,  Mother  addressed  herself  to
some  of  the  Believers  who  were  parents,  saying,  "You  have
been  cunning  to  serve  the  devil,  and  now  you  must  be  cun-
ning to  serve  God.  You  must  not  lose  one  moment  of  time,
for  you  have  none  to  spare.  If  you  are  faithful,  the  world
will  be  dependent  on  you;  and  the  dead  will  be  released,  by


Mother  Ann  Lee.  219

your  labors."  "  You  must  bring  up  your  children  in  the
fear  of  God,  and  never  give  them  playthings;  but  let  them
look  at  their  hands  and  fingers,  and  see  the  work  of  God  in
their  creation.  And  be  ye  faithful  in  all  things;  for  God
will  have  a  people  who  are  zealous  of  good  works;  and,  if
you  are  not  faithful,  God  will  turn  to  another  people,  who
will  serve  him."  Hannah  Goodrich,  1st.

17.  Anna  Cogswell,  1st,  being  on  a  visit  to  Watervliet,
after  Mother  Ann's  return  from  the  eastward,  among  other
counsels  and  instructions,  Mother  warned  her  to  keep  her
children  out  of  sin;  for,  said  she,  "  A  child  four  years  old,  in-
dulged in  sin,  will  bring  the  judgment  of  God  upon  a  family."

18.  Again,  Mother  Ann  warned  parents  against  allowing
dogs  to  be  in  their  houses;  for,  without  are  dogs  and  sorcer-
ers. Do  not  let  your  children  play  with  them;  if  they  do
they  will  catch  evil  spirits,  and  be  stubborn  and  wicked.
This  is  often  the  case  with  children,  and  parents  do  not
know  the  cause.  You  should  examine  your  children  and
bring  them  to  confession,  and  teach  them  to  fear  God,  or,
they  will  bring  you  to  great  trouble. Jonathan  Slosson.

19.  At  Shirley,  Mother  Ann  reproved  the  people  for
allowing,  and  the  children  for  having  and  playing  with  toys,
and  playthings,  and  said,  "  When  I  was  a  child,  my  mind
was  taken  up  in  the  things  of  God,  so  that  I  saw  heavenly
visions,  instead  of  trifling  toys."  Jemima  BlancharJ.

20.  On  a  particular  occasion  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  the
people  concerning  the  order  and  use  of  beasts.  She  said,
"  Man,  in  his  fallen  state,  has  rebelled  against  God.  The
beasts  have  partaken  of  the  same  fallen  nature  and  are  per-
mitted to  rebel  against  man  for  his  punishment;  therefore
mankind  ought  to  bear  with  them,  and  not  cruelize  them.
Man  must  first  be  redeemed  from  his  fall,  and  find  his  own
order,  before  the  beasts  can  be  fully  subject  to  him."

Hannah  Cogs:^uii.


220  Testimonies  of

21.  Again,  in  the  presence  of  a  large  assembly  of  people
at  Watervliet,  Mother  Ann  spoke  very  powerfully  by  way  of
reproof,  concerning  the  ungodly  use  that  was  made  of  beasts.
She  said,  "  You  ought  not  to  give  your  feelings  to  beasts
more  than  is  necessary  to  make  a  good  use  of  them.  You
must  not  allow  dogs,  nor  cats,  to  come  into  the  house  of
worship,  nor  dogs  into  dwelling-houses;  for  it  is  contrary  to
good  order."  "Remember  what  I  say,  Dogs  and  cats  are
unclean  beasts,  and  full  of  evil  spirits;  therefore,  if  any  of
you,  old  or  young,  unite  and  play  with  them,  you  will  be
defiled.  I  cannot  hold  my  peace,  I  am  constrained  to  roar
out  of  Zion  against  the  sins  of  man  with  beasts.  The  people
of  this  land  are  more  corrupt  than  the  Sodomites  were  when
they  were  destroyed  by  the  judgments  of  God.  The  earth
is  almost  ready  to  spew  out  its  inhabitants."

Jonathan  Slosson.


CHAPTER  XXXII.

REPROOF AND INSTRUCTION.

i.  In  reproving  and  condemning  sin  and  all  manner  of
evil,  in  feelings,  words,  and  actions,  Mother  Ann's  power
was  beyond  description.  Though  she  would  often  bear  with
lost,  dark  souls,  who  were  blinded  and  corrupted  with  sin,
till  her  life  seemed  almost  spent  through  sufferings;  yet,  at
times,  when  she  felt  a  gift  of  God  to  reprove  their  wicked-
ness, the  power  of  her  spirit  seemed  like  flames  of  fire,  and
the  words  of  her  mouth  more  dreadful  than  peals  of  thunder,
so  that  the  most  stubborn  and  stouthearted  would  shake  and
tremble  in  her  presence,  like  a  leaf  shaken  with  a  mighty
wind.

2.  Sometime  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  1783,  many  of  the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  221

Believers  being  assembled  at  Watervliet,  Mother  Ann  came
into  the  room,  and  after  looking  round  upon  the  assembly,
she  spoke  with  great  power  and  authority,  saying,  "  Hear  ye
my  words,  you  that  have  hard  feelings  one  against  another,
and  yet  think  to  keep  the  way  of  God  !  You  are  awfully
mistaken  ;  you  cannot  prosper.  Though  you  may  hang  on
for  a  while,  yet  you  will  certainly  fall  off  like  withered
branches  ;  and  when  you  drop  into  hell  these  hard  feelings
will  be  like  devouring  worms  to  torment  you.  Remember
my  words,  you  can  never  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  with
hardness  against  any  one,  for  God  is  love,  and  if  you  love
God  you  will  love  one  another." Mother  Lucy  Wright.

3.  After  Mother  Ann  came  to  New  Lebanon  from  the
eastward  she  visited  the  family  of  Jabez  Spencer,  in  Stephen-
town,  and  being  about  to  depart,  she  came  forth  with  a
sharp  gift  of  reproof,  for  their  idleness,  nastiness,  covetous-
ness,  and  pride.  Soon  after  she  had  done  speaking  Elder
Hocknell  arrived  there,  from  Watervliet,  and  they  asked  him
if  he  would  tarry  over  night.  He  replied,  "  If  Mother  is
willing."  Phebe  went  and  asked  Mother  whether  she  was
willing.  Mother  answered,  "  Nay,  he  must  not  stay.  You
want  him  to  stay  to  take  off  the  reproof."  She  then  turned
to  the  Elders,  and  said,  "  They  want  him  to  stay,  to  build
up  that  which  we  have  been  pulling  down,  but  he  must  not."

4.  After  a  few  weeks  Phebe  went  to  see  Mother  at  Water-
vliet. Mother  met  her  at  the  door,  and  said,  "  I  am  glad  to
see  you.  I  have  been  thinking  of  you;  why  it  was  you
stayed  away  so  long.  You  may  always  remember  that  the
reproof  of  a  friend,  is  better  than  the  kiss  of  an  enemy."

Phebe  Spencer.

5.  While  the  Church  was  at  Ashfield,  Samuel  Ellis  and
Samuel  Fitch,  John  Deming,  Calvin  Cogswell,  and  many
others  being  there,  in  the  autumn  of  1782,  Mother  Ann
came  into  the  room  and  sung  awhile,  with  great  power  of


222  Testimonies  of

God.  She  then  said,  "Love  God;  love  the  way  of  God;
love  the  gospel.  But,  instead  of  this  you  love  your  lust,
your  ease,  and  your  sloth!  Why  are  you  so  empty  and  dead  ?
God  feeds  the  hungry  with  good  things;  but  the  rich  he
sends  empty  away.  It  is  wherein  you  do  not  hunger  and
thirst  after  righteousness,  for  those  who  do  shall  be  filled."
"  But,  the  devil  deceives  you  just  as  he  has  done  heretofore,
and  just  as  he  does  all  the  rest  of  the  professors  in  this
world.  They  think  they  have  enough,  and  so  do  you  ;  and
at  the  same  time  no  victory  over  the  nature  of  sin.  You  are
a  lazy,  idle  people;  you  have  set  out  in  the  way  of  God  and
think  you  have  traveled  far  enough."  Mother's  word  was
weighty  and  powerful;  and  the  people  all  received  from  her
a  great  gift  of  sorrow  and  repentance,  and  were  sent  away
with  a  blessing.  Samuel  Ellis.

6.  The  following  winter,  Samuel  Ellis  and  many  others
were  at  Ashfield,  and  being  assembled  together,  Elder  James
Whittaker  spoke  to  them  as  follows,  "  The  time  is  come  for
you  to  give  up  yourselves,  and  your  all,  to  God  —  Your  sub-
stance, your  temporal  property  —  to  possess  as  though  you
possessed  not  —  The  time  has  been  that  you  have  been  fed
with  milk,  but  the  time  is  now  come  to  be  fed  with  meat.
Methinks  this  is  meat  for  some  of  you."

7.  Joseph  Bennet,  Senr.,  being  present,  Mother  Ann  called
him  by  name,  saying,  "  Come,  Joseph,  come  forth.  You
design  to  put  your  estate  out  of  your  hands,  because  the
world  are  about  to  fine  the  Believers  for  dancing  on  the
Sabbath.  If  I  had  been  as  great  a  man  among  them  as  you
have,*  I  would  now  be  like  a  king  to  pull  down  their  arbi-
trary power.  I  would  not  shrink  before  them,  I  would  speak
the  truth  to  them,  and  tell  them  what  they  are,  and  labor  to
bring  them  to  justice."

S. Morel  Baker,  Senr.,  and  many  others,  being  at  Water-

*  Joseph  had  been  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  was  a  rich  man.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  223

vliet,  in  the  autumn  of  1783,  there  came  two  women  who
were  at  strife  with  each  other,  each  one  venting,  with  bitter
words,  her  hard  feelings  against  the  other,  and  each  one  jus-
tifying her  own  cause,  and  condemning  the  other.  Mother
Ann  said  to  them,  "You  are  wicked  women,  —  you  are  both
in  the  wrong.  Humble  yourselves  before  God,  and  put
away  your  wrongs  or  you  cannot  be  saved ;  and  instead  of
your  hard  feelings,  make  confession  to  each  other ;  for  God
vvill  not  accept  you  in  any  other  way!  —  He  will  not  love
you  except  you  love  one  another."

9.  These  words  were  spoken  with  such  power  of  God,  that
the  women  were  struck  with  amazement,  and  fell  upon  their
knees,  and  both  confessed  themselves  in  the  wrong.  They
then  took  each  other  by  the  hand,  and  embraced  one  another
with  such  marks  of  genuine  love  and  friendship,  as  was  very
striking  to  the  spectators.  Morel  Baker,  Senr.

10.  Jonathan  Slosson  received  a  measure  of  faith  and
confessed  his  sins,  while  Mother  Ann  was  at  Poughkeepsie,
but  was  bound,  in  his  affections,  to  a  young  woman,  who
was  in  a  similar  condition,  for  which  reason  neither  of  them
was  able  to  gain  any  gospel  strength ;  but  were  hindrances
to  each  other.  In  this  situation,  Jonathan,  having  never
seen  Mother,  went  to  Watervliet  to  see  her,  just  after  she
returned  from  Poughkeepsie.  Shortly  after  he  entered  the
house,  Mother  came  into  the  room.  Mother  then  spoke  to
him  as  follows,  "  God  will  bring  down  the  haughtiness  of
man,  and  stain  the  pride  of  all  flesh.  Jonathan,  do  you  let
that  woman  alone;  you  have  no  business  with  her.  God
will  break  in  pieces  the  man  and  maid.  If  you  want  to
marry,  you  may  marry  the  Lord  Christ;  he  is  my  husband,
and  in  him  I  trust."  After  a  little  pause,  she  said,  "I  see
the  glory  of  God,  both  in  visions  and  revelations!  I  hear  the
angels  sing!  I  see  the  dead  arise  and  come  to  judgment."
Turning  again  to Jonathan,  she said,  "  Jonathan Slosson,


224  Testimonies  of

forsake  your  lust  and  that  woman,  and  you  shall  be  my  son.
The  marriage  of  the  flesh  is  a  covenant  with  death,  and  an
agreement  with  hell;  forsake  it,  and  be  my  son.  I  have
seen  you,  and  your  father's  family  in  the  visions  of  God."

Jonathan  Slosson.

ii.  Two  of  the  Brethren  having  had  some  dealings  with
a  merchant,  in  Albany,  were  unjustly  accused,  wronged,  and
abused  by  him.  One  of  them  made  his  complaint  to  Mother
Ann,  and  said,  "  That  man  has  abused  us;  the  law  is  open,  1
will  prosecute  him."  Mother  replied,  "You  shall  not  touch
the  law.  He  that  takes  the  sword  shall  die  by  the  sword.
If  you  take  the  law  you  will  lose  the  blessed  power  of  God.
I  forbid  you;  trust  in  God.  What,  build  the  things  that  God
will  destroy  ?  Woe  unto  the  lawyers,  they  take  away  the  key
of  knowledge, —  I  say,  trust  in  God.  He  will  deliver  His
people — Go  in  faith,  and  God  will  deliver  you  !  Their  envy  is
all  against  me.  I  feel  that  law  that  shall  go  forth  out  of  Zion,
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  !  Trust  in  that
law,  and  God  will  deliver  you  !  I  forbid  all  other  law  in  my
family."  Jonathan  Slosson.

12.  One  evening,  when  Mother  Ann  was  at  Zaccheus
Stevens',  in  Harvard,  there  came  a  mob  of  ungodly  people,
a  number  of  whom  entered  the  house  and  disturbed  the  Be-
lievers. Mother  Ann,  being  in  another  room,  sent  Eleazer
Rand  to  speak  to  them,  but  the  men,  being  some  of  his  ac-
quaintances, viewed  him  as  a  contemptible  stripling,  and
began  to  revile  him  with  their  ungodly  speeches.  On  hearing
this,  Mother  came  to  the  door  and  spoke  with  great  power  of
God,  saying,  "  You  wicked  generation  of  adulterers,  take  care
what  you  say  to  a  child  of  God  !  Touch  not  the  anointed  of
God  !  He  will  have  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  for  the  people
in  this  place.*  He  will  be  able  to  bind  and  to  loose. —  He
will  be  able  to  shut  you  out,  yet."  Jonathan  Slosson.

*  Eleazer  afterward  became  the  lirst Elder  and  Father  of  the  Church  at  Harvard.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  225

13.  Sarah  Barker,  being  at  the  Church  at  Harvard,  in  the
winter  season,  when  a  number  of  the  Sisters  were  gathered
around  the  fire,  and  others  sitting  back  in  the  cold,  Mother
Ann  came  into  the  room  and  admonished  them,  saying,
"  You  are  heating  yourselves  by  the  fire,  while  others  are
shivering  in  the  cold.  This  is  not  right.  A  temperate  use
of  fire  is  comfortable ;  but,  if  I  should  depend  wholly  upon
fire  to  keep  me  warm,  it  would  be  sin.  I  labor  for  the  power
of  God  to  warm  me."  Sarah  Barker.

14.  Again,  Sarah  being  at  Ashfield,  to  see  Mother  Ann,
was  brought  under  some  reproof,  after  which,  Mother  said,
"  When  I  reprove  you,  it  is  to  bring  your  soul  nearer  to
God."  Sarah  Barker.

15.  Lot  Pease,  being  at  Ashfield,  February,  1783,  Elder
James  Whittaker  chastised  him  for  his  old-fashioned  religion.
The  next  morning  he  attempted  to  excuse  himself  to  Elder
James,  by  saying  that  it  was  but  a  short  time  that  he  had
made  any  profession  of  religion.  "  No  matter  for  that,"
said  Elder  James.  "  Your  natural  relations  are  very  much
sunk  in  an  old,  rotten  profession,  and  if  you  do  not  separate
yourself  from  them,  their  sins  will  become  your  sins."  '  That
is  the  truth,"  said  Mother.  Lot  Pease.

16.  In  January,  1783,  while  the  Church  was  at  Ashfield,  a
large  collection  of  people  being  assembled  together,  Elder
James  was  speaking  to  them,  when  Mother  Ann  came  into
the  room  and  reproved  them,  saying,  "  When  the  word  of
God  is  spoken  to  you,  some  of  you  are  hawking  and  spitting
and  some  of  you  are  shuffling  about.  It  is  the  devil  in  you,
to  keep  you  from  hearing  the  word  of  God.  You  need  the
fallow  ground  of  the  heart  broken  up,  that  you  may  receive
the  word.  When  the  word  of  God  is  spoken  to  me,  I  stand
as  still  as  though  my  body  were  dead." Amaziah  Wright.

17.  In  January,  17S4,  at  Water vliet,  while  one  of  the
Elders  was speaking  to  an assembly  of  people,  there  was

29


226  Testimonies  of

considerable  coughing  in  the  room,  and  Mother  Ann  spoke
with  authority,  saying,  "  Away  with  your  coughing,  it  is
nothing  but  the  devil  in  you,  to  keep  the  word  of  God  out
of  your  souls."  Upon  uttering  these  words  the  coughing
ceased.  Nelly  Goodale.

1 8.  Again  at  Watervliet,  the  Believers  were  attending  the
funeral  of  William  Bigsby,  a  Believer  from  Littleton,  and  a
number  of  the  world  were  present.  While  Elder  James
Whittaker  was  addressing  the  assembly  on  the  occasion,  there
was  a  man  of  the  world  who  made  considerable  appearance,
kept  continually  coughing.  Mother  Ann  advanced  toward
him  and  spoke  with  authority,  saying,  "  Stop  your  coughing,
it  is  the  devil  barking  through  you,  —  be  still,  and  hear  the
word  of  God !  "  The  man  ceased  coughing,  and  Elder
James  proceeded  without  any  further  interruption.  After
he  had  done,  Mother  said,  "  We  have  power  to  bind  and  to
loose."  Mercy  Bishop,  Jr.

19.  Rebecca  Slosson,  and  a  number  of  other  Sisters  being
at  Watervliet,  in  January,  1784,  and  being  one  day  employed
in  washing,  Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room,  and  reproved
them  sharply  for  their  wastefulness,  and  said,  "  It  is  a  sin  to
waste  soap,  or  any  thing  else  that  God  has  given  you.  If
you  knew  the  sufferings  for  sin,  you  would  fear  God  in  all
you  do  and  say."  Rebecca  Slosson

20.  In  the  spring  of  1784,  Jonathan  Lougee  visited  the
Church  at  Watervliet;  he  hailed  from  Canterbury,  N.  H.
While  there  Mother  Ann  reproved  him  for  not  coming  oftener.
She  said,  "  The  people  in  your  parts  are  wealthy,  but  covet-
ous. You  ought  to  hate  your  covetousness  and  your  lusts,
and  forsake  them,  and  be  joyful  and  cheerful,  and  take  up
your  crosses  and  serve  God."  Jonathan  Lougee.

21.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  the  Believers  as
follows:  "  You  all  have  the  nature  of  lust  in  you;  if  you  have
not  given  away  to  particular  actions,  yet  you  are  all  lost  in


Mother  Ann  Lee.  227

that  nature,  which  you  received  from  your  forefathers;  you
have  been  born  and  brought  up  in  it,  and  have  still  persisted
in  bringing  up  your  children  in  the  same  manner,  building
them  up  in  their  lust  and  pride,  fixing  and  adorning  them
from  their  infancy,  yea,  even  from  the  breast,  to  allure  the
eyes  of  the  opposite  sex.  And  your  teachers  never  taught
you  any  better;  for  they  never  did  any  better  themselves.
If  you  had  followed  the  dictates  of  your  own  consciences,
you  would  not  have  been  so  far  sunk  and  lost  in  these  things."
"  I  felt  the  lost  situation  of  the  people  in  America  while  I
was  in  my  own  land.  I  felt  that  there  were  souls  here  who
would  be  glad  to  receive  the  gospel  when  it  was  offered  to
them.  Now  the  gospel  is  opened  to  you  and  if  you  will
obey  it,  and  take  up  your  crosses  against  your  carnal  natures,
you  will  find  a  victory  over  them."  She  also  said,  "I  la-
bored in  tribulation  and  sorrow  and  sufferings,  to  gain  the
victory  over  my  carnal  nature,  and  had  no  one  to  help  me,
but  God  alone;  but  it  is  not  so  with  you;  for  you  can  have
help  when  ever  you  need. "  Phebe  Spencer.

22.  Soon  after  Phebe  Chase  received  the  gospel,  she  was
much  wrought  upon  in  outward  operations.  Feeling  some-
what ashamed  of  her  operations,  and  thinking  it  would  do
the  world  no  good  to  see  them,  she  strove  to  conceal  herself
at  such  times,  to  avoid  being  seen  by  the  world;  but  never
opened  her  feelings  to  any  one  about  the  matter.  About
this  time  she  was  at  Harvard,  and  saw  Mother  Ann,  whom
she  had  never  seen  before.  Mother  told  her  what  her
thoughts  and  feelings  had  been,  and  said,  "  You  ought  to
let  your  light  shine,  that  others  may  see  your  works,  your
faith,  and  repentance,  that  they  may  take  knowledge  of  the
way  of  God.  You  ought  to  stand  forth,  and  let  the  world
see  the  great  power  of  God  which  you  have  upon  you,  and
it  will  convict  them."  Phebe  Chase.

23.  At  David Hammond's,  in Petersham, Elder James


228  Testimonies  of

reproved  an  aged  man  for  disobedience  to  Mother.  She
had  told  him  to  go  to  J.  M.'s  to  dinner;  he  replied  that  he
had  given  D.  M.  a  fat  lamb,  and  he  would  take  dinner  there.
After  dinner  Elder  James  reproved  him,  saying,  "  All  the
lambs  of  your  flock  will  not  atone  for  one  act  of  disobedi-
ence. Samuel  said,  '  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to
hearken,  than  the  fat  of  rams; '  but  I  say,  to  obey  is  better
than  sacrifice;  and  to  hearken  than  all  your  fallings."

Joint  Robinson.

24.  At  Ashfield,  while  Elder  James  was  speaking,  one  even-
ing, to  an  assembly  of  people,  his  hand  was  stretched  out
by  the  power  of  God,  toward  the  men,  and  he  advanced  in
that  direction,  to  a  man  whom  he  led  forth  into  the  midst
of  the  assembly.  At  the  same  instant,  another  Elder's  hand
being  extended,  in  the  same  manner  toward  the  women,  he
advanced  and  led  forth  a  woman.  The  man  and  woman
being  brought  forth,  Mother  Ann  exclaimed  to  them,  "  I
know  what  you  have  been  about, —  you  have  been  clapping
hands  with  the  devil, —  you  have  been  into  your  lusts,—  you
need  not  think  to  come  here  to  cover  your  sins ;  for  the  gift
of  God  will  search  you  out."  They  both  kneeled  down,
owned  the  truth  of  the  testimony,  and  confessed  their  sin.

John  Wacttey.

25.  Some  of  the  Believers  at  Harvard,  being  bound  in
their  affections  to  their  children,  who  were  married,  and  liv-
ing after  the  course  of  the  world,  discovered  more  anxiety
to  provide  for  them,  than  for  their  Believer  children.  This
being  made  known  to  the  Elders,  labors  were  made  to  purge
out  that  fleshly  sense,  and  to  teach  those  who  had  set  out  to
follow  Christ  in  the  regeneration,  what  their  real  duty  was
in  such  cases.

26.  Afterward,  Father  James  Whittaker  addressed  the
Believers  in  public  assembly,  on  the  same  subject,  saying,
"If  you  are  after  your  worldly  children,  any  more  than  the


Mother  Ann  Lee.  229

rest  of  the  worldly,  you  are  in  the  flesh  effectually.  Christ
said,  '  Who  is  my  mother  ?  and  who  are  my  brethren  but  they
who  do  the  will  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.''  And  if  you
claim  any  other  relation,  the  present  ministration  does  not
claim  you.  Take  heed  lest  you  have  to  suffer  in  hell  while
your  wicked  children  are  making  an  ungodly  use  of  that
which  you  give  them."  Abijah  IVooster.

27.  At  Harvard,  in  a  time  of  great  mortification,  a  large
number  of  Believers  being  assembled  together,  Mother  came
into  the  room  with  a  gift  of  reproof,  saying,  "  You  are  lack-
ing of  faith  in  the  gifts  and  power  of  God.  When  I  was  in
England,  the  wicked  once  came  with  a  mob  to  take  me.
When  I  had  got  out  of  the  house,  I  felt  a  gift  to  sit  down  on
the  ground ;  and  the  power  of  God  came  upon  me,  and
stretched  out  my  arm  straight  from  my  body,  and  I  could
not  bring  it  back  again.  The  wicked  came  to  take  me  up,  but
they  had  not  power  to  move  me,  but  were  obliged  to  go  away
and  leave  me.  And  I  believe  that  God  is  able  to  preserve
me  through  persecution  and  sufferings,  until  my  work  is
done,  as  He  was  to  stretch  out  my  arm." Lucy  Prescott.

28.  At  Ashfield  there  was  once  a  great  collection  of  peo-
ple, of  all  sorts,  from  various  and  distant  places,  who  came
to  see  Mother  Ann,  many  of  them  full  of  unbelief.  She
came  forward  and  addressed  them  as  follows,  "  Why  do  you
come  from  such  a  distance,  spending  your  time  and  money
to  see  me,  while,  in  your  hearts,  you  judge  me  to  be  a
witch  ? " Then,  speaking with great authority, she  said,

'  You  that  are  guilty,  come  forward,  and  humble  yourselves
to  God  and  confess  it."  Three  of  the  multitude  came  for-
ward and  confessed  that  they  were  guilty  of  that  charge.

Duncan  Mc Arthur.


2.;o  Testimonies  of


-.•>


CHAPTER  XXXIII.

PUBLIC TEACHING, DOCTRINAL SPEECHES, EXHORTATIONS,

&C.

Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  with  her  took  unwearied
pains  to  instruct  and  enlighten  the  Believers  in  the  things  of
God,  and  in  the  path  of  their  duty.  They  were  continually
engaged  in  the  work  of  God,  and  spared  no  labors,  by  day
nor  by  night,  when  occasion  offered,  in  giving  counsel  and
instruction  where  it  was  needed,  whether  in  things  temporal
or  spiritual.  And  in  all  their  labors  they  were  careful  to  im-
press upon  the  people,  the  absolute  necessity  of  strict  and
perfect  obedience,  in  order  that  they  might  profit  by  their
privilege,  and  find  justification  before  God.

2.  At  Watervliet,  in  January,  17S1,  Calvin  Harlow,  and
some  others,  who  were  gifted  in  speaking  to  the  world,  be-
ing present,  Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room,  and  said,
"Hear  ye  my  words  and  understand.  It  is  but  a  light  thing
to  speak  the  word  to  the  souls  of  men,  to  what  it  is  really  to
help  them.  He  who  helps  souls  must  have  the  spirit  of
Christ  to  administer  to  them;  must  take  their  infirmities
upon  him,  and  be  able  to  suffer  for,  and  bear  with  them."
And  so  desirous  was  she  that  they  should  understand,  that
she  repeated  it  three  times.  Ephraim  Welch.

3.  Again  she  said,  "  Be  obedient  to  the  precepts  and  prin-
ciples of  Christ,  in  all  things,  both  spiritual  and  temporal.
When  a  soul  sets  out  in  the  way  of  God  the  devil  will  raise
all  his  forces  to  try  to  turn  them  aside;  but  if  you  are  faith-
ful you  will  have  strength  according  to  your  day.  Be  free,
and  not  be  a  stranger;  a  strange  feeling  never  came  from
heaven."  Deborah Williams.

4.  Father  William  Lee  once  said  to  some  one  who  came
to  see  the  Church,  "Do  as  Mother  tells  you  and  repent;  —


Mother  Ann  Lee.  231

Wash  your  face  in  tears;  —  Do  your  duty;  —  Be  faithful  with
your  hands;  —  Be  obedient,  and  never  give  offense  to  any,
nor  take  offense  at  any  one."  Deborah  Williams.

5.  Elder  James  YVhittaker  once  remarked,  "You  must
not  say  'this  is  a  great  cross; '  that  is  crying  '  the  burden  of
the  Lord. '  How  dare  you  say  of  that  which  is  the  will  of
the  Lord,  '  //  is  a  great  eross  !  '  You  ought  not  to  speak  in
this  manner;  but  obey  your  faith,  and  it  will  lead  to  the  sal-
vation of  your  soul !  You  never  will  take  any  comfort  only
in  God.  Be  faithful,  and  we  shall  have  one  meeting  to-
gether that  will  never  break  up."  Deborah  Williams.

6.  At  Harvard,  in  January,  1782,  when  a  number  of  Be-
lievers from  New  Lebanon,  and  other  places,  who  came  to
visit  the  Church  were  about  to  take  their  leave,  after  having
received  great  manifestations  of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  much
gospel  instruction,  Mother  Ann  addressed  them  with  great
power  of  God  as  follows,  "  What  a  privilege  you  have  of
coming  to  the  Church  to  be  taught  the  way  of  God  !  The
way  out  of  all  sin  !  There  never  was  a  people  on  earth  fa-
vored with  so  great  a  privilege  as  you  have  !  What  a  privi-
lege you  have  !  O,  what  a  privilege  you  have  !  "

Samuel  Ellis.

7.  Again,  Elder  James  said,  "  There  never  was  a  people
on  earth  that  had  so  great  reason  to  bless  God  for  the
gospel,  as  we  have;  for  there  never  was  so  great  an  opening
for  salvation  made  known  to  the  children  of  men."

Alary  Beckii'ith. .

8.  While  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Ezekiel
Slate's  in  Stafford,  Ct.,  many  of  the  Believers  gathered  there
to  see  them,  among  whom  were  a  number  of  Sisters  who  had
been  married,  and  whose  husbands  also  had  received  the
gospel.  Mother  instructed  and  exhorted  them  with  many
precious  words;  and  in  the  course  of  her  conversation  spoke
as  follows,  "  You  ought  to  be  thankful  to  God that  your


232  Testimonies  of

husbands  have  believed  the  gospel,  and  have  set  out  to  take
up  their  crosses  against  the  world,  the  flesh  and  all  evil,  and
to  follow  Christ  in  the  regeneration.  It  is  a  great  deal  easier
for  you  than  it  was  for  me.  Your  husbands  will  be  a  great  help
to  you.  I  had  no  husband  to  help  me  when  I  sat  out  to  obey
the  gospel,  but  I  had  to  stand  against  my  own  carnal  nature  and
my  wicked  husband's  too.  I  had,  as  it  were,  to  tread  the  wine
press  alone,  and  no  man  to  help  me."  Nathan  Slate-

9.  Mother  Ann  also  spoke  to  a  number  of  the  Brethren
and  Sisters  who  were  about  taking  their  leave  of  her,  to  re-
turn to  their  homes,  saying,  "  Go  and  tell  your  Brethren  those
things  which  ye  see  and  hear;  the  blind  receive  their  sight  >
the  lame  walk;  the  lepers  are  cleansed;  the  deaf  hear;  the
dead  are  raised  up;  and  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached
to  them;  and  blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended
in  me."  Nathan  Slate.

10.  At  Watervliet,  soon  after  the  gospel  opened,  some  of
the  young  Believers  who  had  been  overcome  with  a  spirit  of
jealousy,  and  false  judging  concerning  Mother  and  the  Elders,
came  and  confessed  the  matter.  Mother,  after  kindly  ad-
monishing them  to  beware  of  such  a  spirit,  said,  "  Persons
see  and  judge  according  to  the  state  they  are  in;  when  their
senses  are  darkened  by  the  flesh,  and  their  minds  under  the
influence  of  an  evil  spirit,  they  see  and  judge  according  to
the  dictate  of  that  evil  spirit;  but  when  that  fleshly  sense  is
purged  away,  and  they  are  under  the  influence  of  the  spirit
of  Christ,  then  they  can  see  and  judge  according  to  the
truth."  Jethro  Turner.

1 1 .  In  the  time  of  the  first  opening  of  the  gospel,  Susanna
Goodrich,  being  at  Watervliet,  was  sitting  at  supper  with
Mother  Ann,  and  a  number  of  others,  when  Mother  sud-
denly stopped  eating,  spoke  with  great  solemnity,  then  ex-
horted them  all  to  faithfulness,  adding,  "  If  you  will  take  up
your  crosses  against  the  works  of generation,  and  follow


Mother  Ann  Lee.  233

Christ  in  the  regeneration,  God  will  cleanse  you  from  all  un-
righteousness." Susanna  Goodrich.

21.  In  conversation  with  some  of  the  Believers  at  Water-
vliet,  in  the  first  opening  of  the  gospel,  Mother  Ann  said,
"  Those  who  choose  to  live  after  the  flesh,  can  do  so;  but  I
know,  by  the  revelation  of  God,  that  those  who  live  in  the
gratification  of  their  lusts  will  suffer  in  proportion  as  they
have  violated  the  law  of  God  in  nature."  She  also  said  to
Daniel  Moseley  and  others,  "  Do  not  go  away  and  report
that  we  forbid  to  marry;  for,  unless  you  are  able  to  take  up
a  full  cross,  and  part  with  every  gratification  of  the  flesh  for
the  kingdom  of  God,  I  would  counsel  you,  and  all  such,  to
take  wives  in  a  lawful  manner,  and  cleave  to  them  only,  and
raise  up  a  lawful  posterity,  and  be  perpetual  servants  to  your
families;  for,  of  all  lustful  gratifications,  that  is  the  least
sin."  Daniel  Moseley.

13.  When  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  at  Shirley,  Elder
James  Whittaker,  in  addressing  an  assembly  of  Believers,  said,
"  Brethren  and  Sisters,  keep  your  faith;  faith  is  a  firm  anchor
for  the  soul  to  rest  upon."  Then  turning  to  some  who  were
wavering,  he  said,  "  The  judgments  of  God  will  as  surely
follow  this  gospel,  as  winter  follows  summer.  The  founda-
tion of  God  stands  sure,  and  the  judgments  of  God  are
according  to  truth."  Susanna  Willis.

Again,  in  addressing  a  public  assembly,  Elder  James  said,
'The  foundation  of  God  stands  sure,  and  the  judgments  of
God  are  according  to  truth.  This  is  the  gospel,  and  see  ye
to  it,  what  kind  of  use  you  make  of  it;  for  the  time  will
come  when  ye  will  say,  '  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name
of  the  Lord'  Treasure  up  the  word,  for  the  time  will  come
when  there  will  be  a  famine,  not  of  bread,  nor  of  water,  but
of  the  word  of  the  Lord.  You  will  see  the  time  when  you
will  be  willing  to  crawl  on  your  hands  and  knees  to  hear  the
word  of  the  Lord."  Sarah  Safford.

3°


234  Testimonies  of

14.  Again,  Elder  James  said,  "  True  faith  is  a  saving  grace;
but  unbelief  is  a  damning  sin  True  faith  is  to  believe  a
thing  to  be  what  it  really  is ;  but  a  false  faith  is  to  believe
what  it  is  not ;  and  if  you  believe  a  thing  to  be  what  it  is
not,  you  are  deceived."  Nathan  Willard.

15.  And  again,  said  Elder  James,  "When  your  faces  are
turned  toward  Zion,  then  you  can  cry  to  God,  and  God  will
hear  the  cries  of  the  innocent."  And  he  kneeled  and  said,
"  The  door  of  God's  mercy  is  open  for  souls,  and  it  never
will  be  shut,  unless  they  shut  it  against  themselves."

Mehetabel  Grace.

16.  On  another  occasion,  Elder  James  said,  "Keep  your
faith,  and  see  the  event  of  things;  and  when  you  know  you
must  be  born  again,  then  you  will  cry  to  God."  "Do  not
find  fault  with  the  way  of  God,  till  you  prove  it;  none  ever
thought  hard  of  it  who  were  really  in  it.  You  will  have
what  you  earn,  that  is,  what  you  labor  for."

John  Wanier.

17.  At  Watervliet,  Elder  James  said,  "Endeavor  to  keep
the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace;  this  bond  was  made
by  the  Great  First  Cause,  and  cannot  be  altered,  but  by
virtue  of  the  same;  therefore,  labor  ye,  day  and  night,  to
get  your  names  written  in  that  bond." AMjah  Worster.

iS.  And  again,  said  Elder  James,  "Those  who  are  called
by  the  gospel,  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  if  these  turn  away,  there
remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  a  certain  fearful
looking  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  indignation,  which  will
come  like  mountains  of  lead  upon  the  soul."

Ephraim  Welch.

19.  In  an  assembly  of  Believers  at  Ashfield,  Elder  James
came  forth  with  a  powerful  testimony  against  sin,  which
made  every  feeling  soul  repent,  till  the  floor  was  wet  with
tears. After  this  he  directed  the  assembly  to  rest,  and  left


Mother  Ann  Lee.  235

the  room.  He  returned  soon  after  and  said,  "  I  cannot  go
to  bed.  The  manna  falls  from  heaven  like  sweet  smelling
myrrh,  which  is  the  fruit  of  repentance.  Blessed  are  the
children  of  those  who  believe,  and  the  rising  generations
who  do  no  unclean  thing !  We  have  a  blessed  altar,  and  it
is  placed  in  the  garden  of  Eden  !  No  one  has  a  right  to  eat
thereon  but  such  as  hate  lust."  Luther  Cogswell.

20.  At  another  time,  as  he  was  speaking  to  an  assembly,
he  turned  to  the  Sisters  and  said,  "  Blessed  are  the  daugh-
ters of  Zion  who  trust  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confi-
dence in  the  flesh,  and  have  happily  escaped  the  corrupted
men  of  this  generation."  Anna  Northrop.

21.  Again,  at  Watervliet,  he  said  to  a  number  of  young
Sisters,  "You  are  called  from  the  manifold  troubles  of  those
who  live  after  the  flesh,  and  do  not  sense  it ;  but  let  the
devil  once  put  his  paw  upon  you,  and  you  would  find  your-
selves under  the  power  of  the  flesh;  then  you  would  be  will-
ing to  give  all  created  things,  if  you  could  be  restored  to  as
happy  a  state  as  you  now  enjoy."  Rebecca  Slosson.

22.  At  David  Hammond's  in  Petersham,  in  speaking  to  a
public  assembly,  Elder  James  said,  "  This  blessed  Church  is
the  gate  of  heaven,  and  we  know  it.  Treasure  up  the  word
of  God,  for  it  is  now  harvest  time ;  for  those  who  sleep  in
harvest  will  surely  come  to  want.  The  time  will  come
when  you  will  need  to  gather  up  every  word.  This  is  God's
way,  and  not  man's  way;  therefore  man  cannot  alter  it.
Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away;  but  this  testimony  will
stand  forever.  This  gospel  will  prove  a  savor  of  life  unto
life,  to  all  who  obey  it;  and  of  death  unto  death  unto  all
who  disobey  it;  and  the  judgment  of  God  will  as  surely
follow  this  gospel,  as  the  flood  followed  the  preaching  of
Noah."  John  Robinson.

23.  One  day  Father  William  Lee  kneeled  down  with  a
number  of  the  Believers  and  said,  "  God  has  given  us  the


236  Testimonies  of

power  of  repentance,  and  remission  of  sins,  and  if  you  regard
the  gospel,  God  will  regard  you  for  salvation."  Father
James  said,  "  I  feel  such  fear  of  God  that  it  runs  through
my  whole  body,  even  to  my  fingers'  ends."  He  kneeled
down,  and  said,  "  I  desire  you  would  be  thankful  to  God  for
the  gift  of  repentance,  and  remission  of  sins."

Sarah  Burt.
24.  On  a  particular  occasion  at  Watervliet,  Elder  James
said,  "Let  no  man  deceive  you. —  We  never  build  those
things  we  once  destroyed. —  If  you  have  fallen  ever  so  low
it  is  never  too  late  to  cry  to  God."  On  another  occasion  he
said,  "  You  should  not  do  any  kind  of  business  while  others
are  kneeled  down  in  prayer  to  God;  but  leave  your  work
and  kneel  with  them."  Jemima  Blanchard.

24.  Again,  speaking  of  these  words  of  Christ,  "  When  I
am  lifted  up,  then  will  I  draw  all  men  unto  me"  Elder
James  said,  "  This  gospel  of  the  kingdom  will  be  preached
to  all  nations,  and  then  will  these  words  be  fulfilled ;  then
will  Christ  be  lifted  up,  and  will  draw  all  men  unto  him,  for
judgment,  either  for  life  or  death." Eliphalet  Comstock.

25.  Sometime  in  November,  1783,  Jabez  and  Phebe  Spen-
cer, their  daughter  Mary,  and  a  number  of  others  were  on  a
visit  to  Watervliet,  and  just  before  they  came  away,  they
went  into  Mother  Ann's  room  to  take  their  leave  of  her.
She  sat  up  in  her  bed  under  great  sufferings,  and  addressed
them  as  follows,  "Be  faithful  to  keep  the  way  of  God;  if  you
do  you  will  be  guarded  by  good  angels,  as  really  as  the
wicked  are  by  evil  spirits;  and  the  good  or  evil  spirits  gather
mostly  to  that  part  of  the  body  which  contains  the  most
sensations  and  faculties.  The  head  is  the  ruling  and  gov-
erning part  of  the  whole  body,  therefore  it  will  contain  the
most  good  or  evil  of  any  part  of  the  body;  and  as  the  whole
body  is  governed  thereby,  so  the  good  or  evil  spirits  gather
there,  and  rule  the  whole  body. The  head  of  a  wicked  man


Mother  Ann  Lee.  237

will  suck  in  evil  spirits  until  it  is  full  of  them,  like  a  sponge,
filled  with  water;  so  likewise  the  faithful,  who  are  laboring
to  resist  every  evil  temptation,  and  crying  to  God  for  pro-
tection, will  be  filled  with  good  spirits,  and  will  be  guarded
by  the  angels  of  God,  who  will  protect  them  day  by  day."

26.  After  Mother  had  ended  her  discourse,  Phebe  went
to  her  bedside,  and  expressed  her  thankfulness  for  the  privi-
lege that  she  and  her  family  had  enjoyed  with  her.  Mother
made  no  immediate  reply;  but,  soon  after  said,  "When  you
were  speaking,  I  saw  two  souls  standing  by  you,  one  at  your
right  hand,  and  the  other  at  your  left.  The  one  who  stood
at  your  right  hand,  was  a  bright,  active,  glorious  soul ;  but
the  one  on  your  left  was  a  dark,  black,  dismal  soul;  and  he
laid  his  head  on  your  left  shoulder."  Mary  Spencer.

27.  A  number  of  the  Believers  who  had  been  on  a  visit  to
the  Church,  at  Watervliet,  1784,  and  being  about  to  take  their
leave,  Mother  Ann  said  to  them,  "  Go,  testify  to  the  world
that  Christ  is  reigning  on  earth,  and  that  he  has  sons  and
daughters,  and  they  know  it  not,  because  they  do  not  con-
fess and  forsake  their  doleful  abominations."

Mercy  Bis/wp,  Jr.

28.  Some  of  the  Believers  complaining  to  Mother  Ann
that  victuals  did  not  satisfy  their  hunger,  she  replied,  "  It  is
not  your  bodies,  but  your  souls  that  are  hungry;  and  you
must  cry  to  God  for  the  bread  of  life. "  Sarah  J'ewitt.

29.  One  day  as  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  about  to
depart  from  Harvard,  many  of  the  Believers  were  full  of
tears;  and  Elder  James  said,  "  Every  soul  of  you  who  seeks
God  with  all  your  heart,  and  resists  the  devil,  is  sure  of
Heaven,  if  he  never  sees  us  again  in  this  world."

David  Melvin.

30.  The  last  time  that  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  at
Littleton,  she  informed  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  that  she
and  the Elders  had  great  sufferings  to pass  through,  and


238  Testimonies  of

said,  "  We  will  return  home  to  our  own  place,  and  suffer
there,  and  not  be  burdensome  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters
here."  She  then  added,  "If  you  should  be  so  persecuted
as  to  have  your  houses  torn  down  over  your  heads,  and  you
cast  out  into  the  fields,  you  must  not  neglect  meeting  to-
gether to  serve  God.  And  if  you  never  see  my  face  any
more,  nor  the  faces  of  any  who  are  with  me  from  England,
you  have  those  whom  God  has  raised  up  among  yourselves,
who  are  able  to  lead  you  in  the  way  of  God,  if  you  will  obey
them."  Ruth  Turner.


CHAPTER  XXXIV.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

At  Watervliet,  the  first  winter  after  the  opening  of  the
gospel,  Mother  came  into  the  meeting-room  where  many
young  Believers  were  assembled,  and  being  in  the  visions  of
God,  and  under  impressions  of  mind  concerning  the  power
of  God  against  sin,  she  addressed  them  as  follows,  "  If  you
commit  sin  with  beasts,  your  spirits  will  be  transformed
into  the  shape  of  beasts,  in  the  spirit  world;  I  now  behold
souls  under  sufferings  whose  form  is  shaped  like  dogs,  horses
and  swine;  they  appear  in  the  shape  of  such  beasts  as  they
committed  sin  with;  and  this  is  laid  upon  them  as  a  punish-
ment of  that  sin."

2.  "  Men  and  women  in  this  world  can  please  themselves,
by  gratifying  their  lusts,  and  if  they  do  not  overcome  their
passions  by  the  gospel,  they  carry  them  into  the  world  of
spirits  with  them.  Death  does  not  destroy  these  passions,
nor  make  them  less  powerful;  but  souls  in  hell  feel  their
lustful  passions  rise  intensely  stronger  than  in  this  world;
and yet  they  can  find  no  way  to  gratify  them;  therefore,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  239

their  lust  is  their  torment;  and  it  torments  them  in  propor-
tion to  its  rage."

3.  "  And  more  than  all  this,  they  have  to  feel  the  wrath
of  God  against  that  wicked  nature,  and  this  is  still  a  greater
torment  to  them,  than  the  torment  of  their  lusts.  The  more
people  give  way  to  the  gratification  of  their  lusts  in  this
world,  the  stronger  their  passions  will  grow  and  the  more
their  sufferings  will  increase  in  the  spirit  world."

4.  "  I  now  see,  in  open  vision,  souls  suffering  for  their
sins,  committed  through  lust,  enough  to  take  away  your  nat-
ural lives,  they  are  bound  in  the  prisons  of  hell."

5.  "  Again,"  Mother  Ann  said,  "  Souls  who  go  out  of  this
world  and  have  not  heard  the  gospel,  do  not  know  God,  nor
where  to  find  Him.  I  have  seen  them  wandering  about
weeping  and  crying,  trying  to  find  God.  But,  the  gospel
will  be  offered  to  them,  and  all  souls,  both  quick  and  dead,
will  be  eventually  judged  by  the  testimony  of  the  gospel
which  you  now  hear."

6.  In  the  time  of  a  great  gathering  at  Ashfield,  so  numer-
ous was  the  assembly  that  the  meeting-house  was  not  large
enough  to  contain  the  multitude;  therefore  they  assembled
in  that  and  the  dwelling-house,  and  between  the  two  houses,
which  were  near  to  each  other.  Elder  James  took  his  station
between  the  two  houses,  and  addressed  the  audience.  He
spake  with  great  solemnity  of  the  glory  and  happiness  of
those,  who,  through  faithfulness,  should  find  an  inheritance
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Such  souls,  said  Elder  James,
will  enjoy  inexpressible  flows  of  the  givings  and  blessings  of
God;  and,  though  they  will  joy  and  rejoice  in  this,  yet,  what
they  enjoy  in  the  present  tense  will  not  be  their  greatest  com-
fort, but  they  will  still  be  looking  forward  with  joyful  antici-
pations, for  a  greater  increase,  for  more  of  the  glory  and
givings  of  God,  continually,  and  forever;  and  this  will  con-
stitute their greatest  happiness. On  the  other  hand, the


240  Testimonies  of

torments  and  misery  of  the  lost,  though  they  may  be  under
never  so  much  now,  yet,  what  they  feel  in  the  present  tense,
will  not  be  their  greatest  torment ;  but  that  which  will  con-
stitute their  greatest  misery,  will  be  looking  forward,  with
awful  forebodings,  to  get  another  opening  of  the  judgments
of  God."

7.  At  another  time  in  addressing  a  public  assembly  of  Be-
lievers at  Ashfield,  Elder  James  said,  "  You  ought  to  fear
God  in  all  you  do;  when  you  are  about  your  work,  you  ought
to  fear  God;  and  even  in  the  gifts  of  God,  and  under  the
operations  of  the  power  of  God,  you  ought  to  keep  the  fear
of  God,  lest,  by  feeling  releasement  in  those  gifts,  you  run
into  lightness."  Daniel  Moseley.

8.  Again  Father  James  Whittaker  said,  "  Heaven  is  a  place
of  joy  and  tranquillity  to  those  who  find  it;  but  I  am  jealous,
and  with  a  godly  jealousy  too,  that  there  are  many  here  now
who  never  will  find  it.  I  fear  that  some,  who  now  profess
faith,  will  walk  the  streets,  howling  like  curst  Cains."

Daniel  Moseley.

9.  In  the  first  season,  after  the  opening  of  the  gospel  at
Watervliet,  Mother  Ann  came  into  the  room  where  there  was
a  number  of  married  men,  and  their  wives,  and  said,  "  I  see,
in  vision,  a  large  black  cloud  rising  as  black  as  a  thunder
cloud,  and  it  is  occasioned  by  the  men  sleeping  with  their
wives."  She  then  asked  them  if  they  had  not  rather  sleep
with  their  wives  than  with  anybody  else.  They  acknowl-
edged they  had  rather  sleep  with  them,  even  if  they  did  not
touch  them.  Mother  admonished  them  not  to  do  it  any
more.  Israel  Talcot,  Senr.

10.  Again  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  a  number  of  married  peo-
ple as  follows,  "  You  must  forsake  the  marriage  of  the  flesh,
and  travel  out  of  it,  in  order  to  be  married  to  the  Lamb,
which  is,  to  be  married  to  Christ,  or,  joined  to  the  Lord  in
one  spirit."  M,>t/i<-/ Lucy  Wright.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  241

11.  Sometimes,  when  the  Believers  were  assembled  to-
gether, Mother  Ann  used  to  come  into  the  room  and  kneel
down  with  them,  and  teach  them  that  when  they  knelt  down
to  pray,  they  should  ask  God  to  give  them  such  things  as
they  stood  in  need  of,  for,  said  she,  "  the  gift  of  prayer  is
with  the  gift  of  kneeling."

12.  Sometimes  Mother  Ann  used  to  pray  in  an  unknown
tongue,  for  some  time,  and  then  she  would  speak  in  her  own
language,  saying,  "  O  Lord  God  have  mercy;  Christ,  have
mercy;  O  Lord,  bless  and  strengthen  Thy  people,  and  com-
fort them  !  O  Lord  give  them  true  repentance  of  all  their
sins  !  "  Hannah  Cogswell.

13.  At  Watervliet,  in  the  summer  of  Mother's  ministry,  as
a  number  of  Brethren  and  Sisters  were  in  the  meeting-room,
some  of  them  singing,  some  walking  the  floor,  and  others
sitting  still,  Mother  came  into  the  room  and  said,  "  You  ought
not  to  be  idle  in  the  house  of  God.  If  you  do  not  know
what  to  do,  I  will  teach  you;  you  may  kneel  down  and  pray
to  God  for  what  you  need."  Mother  then  knelt  down  and
they  all  kneeled  with  her.  After  remaining  a  few  minutes  on
their  knees  in  silence,  Mother  said,  "  I  feel  that  there  is  con-
fusion. You  must  not  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain.  If
you  ask  for  a  thing  when  you  do  not  want,  or  need  it,  you
take  the  name  of  God  in  vain.  You  must  ask  for  that  which
you  feel  the  most  need  of,  and  be  fervent  in  spirit,  and  God
will  hear  you ;  for  God  hears  the  souls  who  cry  to  Him  in
need."  "  When  you  have  asked  for  what  you  need,  you
must  wait  upon  God  for  the  answer  of  your  prayer;  for  God
has  waited  upon  you  many  years.  But  when  you  have  re-
ceived the  answer,  and  are  in  possession  of  what  you  have
asked  for,  if  you  then  ask  for  the  same  thing,  as  though  you
had  not  enough,  God  will  be  angry  with  you,  for  God  knows
how  to  bestow  His  gifts  according  to  your  needs."

14.  Again,  at  Watervliet,  after  Mother's  return  from  the

3i


242  Testimonies  of

eastward,  as  some  of  the  Believers  were  expressing  their  faith
and  love  to  her,  she  said,  "You  see  me  and  my  works,  and
you  believe,  and  are  blessed;  but  I  say,  "Blessed  are  those
who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  believe.  There  will  yet  be  thou-
sands who  will  believe,  who  have  never  seen  my  face  in  the
flesh."

15.  At  Watervliet,  Elder  James  Whittaker  said  to  the  Be-
lievers, "  You  think  if  you  had  lived  in  the  days  when  Christ
was  here  on  earth,  you  would  have  followed  him.  You
have  the  same  privilege  to  follow  Christ  now,  as  they  had
then,  and  greater,  and  now  you  may  follow  him."

Mehctabel  Farrington.

16.  Mother  Ann,  in  expressing  her  love  to  the  Brethren
and  Sisters,  used,  sometimes,  to  address  them  in  these  words,
"Ye  are  my  epistles,  read  and  known  of  all  men;  ye  are  all
the  interest  I  have  in  this  world."  David  Slosson.


CHAPTER  XXXV.

SPEECHES  TO  INDIVIDUALS  ON  VARIOUS OCCASIONS.

i.  Though  our  blessed  Mother  Ann  was  a  woman  of  few
words,  yet  her  soul  was  filled  with  divine  wisdom,  and  when
she  spoke,  her  words  were  in  the  demonstration  of  the  spirit,
and  with  power,  and  always  adapted  to  the  occasion.  Many
precious  sentences  were  occasionally  spoken,  both  by  her,
and  the  Elders,  with  her,  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  in  an
individual  capacity,  which  had  a  powerful  effect,  and  left  a
lasting  impression  on  their  memories.

2.  A  certain  young  man  came  to  Mother  with  some  peach
and  plum  stones  in  his  hand,  and  asked  her  if  he  might  plant
them? "Yea," answered  Mother,  "  do  all your work as


Mother  Ann  Lee.  243

though  you  had  a  thousand  years  to  live,  and  as  you  would
if  you  knew  you  must  die  to-morrow."  Lucy  Wright.

3.  Mary  Chase  asked  Mother  if  she  might  come  and  live
with  her.  "  Live  with  me,  child  !  "  said  Mother.  "  The  foxes
have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  but  I  have
not  where  to  lay  my  head.  Go,  child,  and  I  will  go  with
you;  if  you  go  through  the  waters,  the  floods  shall  not  over-
flow you ;  and  if  you  go  through  the  fire,  it  shall  not  kindle
upon  you ;  and  if  you  go  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  I  will
never  leave  you  nor  forsake  you/'

4.  Hannah  Cogswell  went  to  see  Mother  Ann  while  she  was
at  Ashfield,  and  feeling  a  deep  sense  of  her  loss,  and  her  great
need  of  Mother's  union  and  protection,  she  asked  Mother,
on  the  eve  of  her  departure,  as  she  went  to  take  leave  of  her,
if  she  felt  any  promise  of  God  for  her.  "  Yea,"  answered
Mother;  "God's  blessing  be  with  you,  and  rest  upon  you;
and  God's  everlasting  grace  and  salvation  be  unto  your  soul
if  you  will  obey.  Go  home,  and  go  about  your  work  every
day  as  though  I  were  present  with  you."  Hannah  went
home,  and  in  obedience  to  Mother,  she  found  the  promise
of  God  fulfilled,  day  by  day.

5.  Ruth  Turner  visited  Mother  Ann  at  Harvard,  and  after
she  had  been  there  awhile,  Mother  said  to  her,  "  Ruth,  go
home,  and  set  your  house  in  order,  take  up  your  cross  against
the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  lay  no  temptations  before  Jo-
seph;* for  no  one  will  turn  from  the  way  of  God  but  for
their  lusts."  She  also  said,  "You  must  be  kind  to  strangers,
as  I  have  been  to  you,  for  that  is  the  only  way  that  you  can
reward  me."

6.  One  day  there  came  a  poor  man  to  Mother  Ann,  and
complained  of  his  brother,  who,  he  said,  was  rich,  and  able
to  help  him,  but  would  not.  Mother  replied,  "  That  is  the
way  of  the  world;  the  rich  are  covetous,  and  will  not  help

*  Her  husband.


244  Testimonies  of

the  poor,  and  the  poor,  instead  of  crying  to  God  to  open
their  hearts,  will  envy  them  for  it ;  therefore  they  are  both


wicked.  Nathan  Coh


7.  Phebe  Spencer,  being  in  conversation  with  Mother  Ann
at  Watervliet,  Mother  asked  her,  "  Do  you  believe  that  I  am
able  to  help  you?"  Phebe  answered,  "  Yea,  Mother,  I  have
no  other  faith."  Mother  said,  "I  own  your  faith;  faith  is
the  anchor  of  the  soul ;  it  is  like  an  anchor  tu  a  ship,
when  the  winds  blow,  and  the  waves  run  high,  so,  in  like
manner,  faith  will  keep  the  soul  in  trials,  temptations  and
bufferings."  Phebe  asked  Mother  for  a  resting  place  with
her.  Mother  answered,  "  Your  spirit  shall  find  a  resting
place  with  my  spirit."

8.  After  Daniel  Wood  had  confessed  his  sins  before  Mother
and  the  Elders,  Mother  said  to  him,  "  Daniel,  your  faith  is
like  the  faith  of  John  the  Baptist,  the  forerunner  of  Christ,
you  must  go  and  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord;  go  preach
the  gospel  to  the  ends  of  the  earth;  go  first  to  your  family,
and  labor  with  them,  and  let  them  confess  their  sins,  that
you  may  know  what  is  done  in  your  own  house;  what,  are
you  the  man  of  the  house  and  do  not  know  what  is  done  in
your  own  house  ?  "

9.  Again  she  said  to  Daniel,  "Go  and  testify  your  faith
to  those  whom  you  call  your  Brethren,  and  let  them  confess
their  sins,  and  let  them  know  that  men  in  old  times  waited
for  angels  to  tell  them  when  to  go  to  their  wives;  —  Tell
them  the}'  need  not  be  concerned  about  having  children;
for  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto
Abraham;  —  Tell  them  they  are  not  going  to  God  in  their
lusts."

10.  Mother  Ann  spoke  to  Elizabeth  Spier  as  follows,  "I
love  you,  Elizabeth,  you  shall  be  my  sister.  I  see  the  glory
of  God  shine  all  over  you  so  great  that  I  cannot  discern
your  body  with  my  natural  eyes. You  must  go  home,  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  245

take  care  of  your  little  children  and  bring  them  up  in  the
fear  of  God."

11.  Margaret  Leland  accompanied  Mother  Ann  in  her
journey  from  Watervliet  to  Harvard.  The  day  before  they
started,  Mother  said  to  her,  "  Margaret,  you  have  come  to
fall  upon  the  Rock,  but,  if  the  Rock  should  fall  upon  you,
it  would  grind  you  to  powder."  Again  she  said,  "  I  see  the
dead  all  around  you. Poor  dead,  how  I  pity  them  !  "

12.  Elizabeth  Johnson,  soon  after  she  believed,  ques-
tioned Mother  Ann  concerning  some  particular  gifts  and
operations  which  she  had  seen  among  the  Believers,  but  did
not  understand.  Mother  replied,  "  You  have  nothing  to  do
with  them;  you  must  labor  to  God  for  your  own  soul.  But,
there  will  be  great  things  manifest  in  the  Church  by  those
gifts."  Again  Mother  asked  Elizabeth,  "  Do  you  believe
that  all  souls  will  yet  believe  the  gospel?"  'Yea,  Mother,
I  do,"  answered  Elizabeth.  "Ah,  truly  they  will,"  replied
Mother,  "either  to  their  salvation  or  damnation."

13.  At  another  time  Mother  came  into  the  room  where
Elizabeth  was,  and  the  power  of  God  came  upon  Elizabeth,
with  a  mighty  shaking  and  trembling.  Mother  said,  "  Eliz-
abeth, love  that  power,  for  it  is  the  shaking  of  dry  bones  to
bring  bone  to  its  bone."

14.  After  Nathan  Cole  embraced  the  gospel,  his  wife,  Molly,
who  still  remained  in  unbelief,  went  to  see  Mother  Ann,  and
asked  liberty  to  continue  her  usual  custom  of  attending  the
Baptist  meeting,  which  was  contrary  to  Nathan's  feelings.
Mother  replied,  "You  must  confess  your  sins,  and  be  obedi-
ent to  your  husband.  I  cannot  counsel  you  otherwise;  if  I
do  your  children  will  be  lost;  for,  through  the  believing  hus-
band, the  children  will  be  sanctified."

15.  Molly  had  her  infant  with  her,  adorned  with  bows,
and  ribbons.  Mother  said,  "  You  had  better  take  these
things  off  your  child,  and  lay  aside  all  superfluity,  and  dress


246  Testimonies  of

in  modest  apparel.  The  more  you  indulge  your  children  in
such  things,  the  more  they  will  want,  and  if  you  bring  them
up  in  their  pride,  they  will  curse  you  to  your  face."

Molly  Cole.

16.  Beulah  Rude  went  to  see  Mother  while  she  was  at
Joseph  Bennett's,  in  Cheshire.  The  family  being  very  poor,
Mother  asked  Beulah  how  many  children  she  had.  She  an-
swered, "five."  "  Five  !  "  said  Mother,  "When  you  had  one,
why  did  you  not  wait,  and  see  if  you  was  able  to  bring  up
that  as  you  ought,  before  you  had  another  ?  And  when  you
had  two,  why  did  you  not  stop  then  ?  But  now  you  have
five  !  Are  you  not  ashamed  to  live  in  the  filthy  works  of  the
flesh?  You  must  go  and  take  up  your  cross,  and  put  your
hands  to  work,  and  be  faithful  in  your  business;  clothe  your
children,  and  keep  them  clean  and  decent;  and  clean  up
your  house,  and  keep  that  in  order."

17.  Sarah  Pease,  being  under  some  tribulation,  Mother
said  to  her,  "  Sarah,  you  must  not  be  discouraged,  for  Christ
has  every  thing  you  stand  in  need  of.  I  feel  the  blood  of
Christ  flowing  through  me  to  you,  not  in  small  quantities,
but  in  fountains."

18.  One  Sabbath  day  Lucy  Bishop  was  cutting  her  nails,
in  the  presence  of  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders,  at  Asa  Ba-
con's, in  Ashfield,  and  Mother  bade  her  come  and  kneel
down;  Lucy  came  and  kneeled  before  her.  Mother  said  to
her,  "  You  must  not  cut  your  nails  on  the  Sabbath,  it  is
wicked.  Walk  on  your  knees,  to  Elder  James,  and  ask  him
to  teach  you  to  pray."  Lucy  obeyed,  and  Elder  James
Whittaker  bade  her  to  say,  "  Pray  God  make  me  a  good
child ;  pray  God  make  me  obedient  to  my  parents;  pray
God  purify  and  purge  my  soul  from  sin/'  Lucy  repeated
each  of  these  supplications  after  Elder  James.

19.  Thankful  Barce  went  to  see  Mother  and  the  Elders
while  they  were  at  Ashfield. Mother  Ann  said  to  her,  "  You


Mother  Ann  Lee.  247

was  a  proud,  haughty  woman,  when  you  first  came  to  see
me;  but  you  are  a  deal  altered,  and  you  must  still  labor  and
repent ;  and  that  work  of  God  which  you  have  received,  will
carry  you  safely  through,  if  you  are  faithful/'

20.  Again,  Mother  said  to  a  sick  brother,  "  You  must  not
be  so  down  in  your  feelings,  you  must  walk  sharp;  and  if
you  think  you  do  as  well  as  you  can,  you  must  take  faith,
and  labor  to  do  better;  this  is  the  way  for  you  to  gain
strength."  Thankful  Bane.

21.  While  the  Church  was  at  Harvard,  General  James  Sul-
livan, with  two  other  men  of  note,  came  to  require  the  El-
ders to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  country.*  The
Elders  refused  to  take  the  oath,  and  Mother  Ann  said  to  the
General,  "  These  men  will  never  do  you  any  hurt,  for  they
are  well-wishers  to  the  country;  they  will  do  all  the  good  to
the  country  that  they  are  able  to  do."  The  General  replied,
"  I  want  men  to  go  and  fight  for  the  country."  Mother  an-
swered, "You  never  will  kill  the  devil  with  the  sword."

Samuel  Ellis.

22.  Samuel  Ellis,  being  in  conversation  with  Mother,
asked,  "  Why  some  who  were  weakly,  or  lame,  were  not
healed?"  Mother  answered,  "  We  can  do  nothing  of  our-
selves. It  is  God  that  heals  the  sick,  and  it  is  God  that
makes  whole.  We  cannot  do  miracles  any  more  than  others;
all  that  we  can  do,  is  to  be  workers  together  with  God.  But
I  will  tell  you  one  thing,  if  you  are  saved,  miracles  must  be
wrought  for  your  soul."  Samuel  testifies  that  he  has  since
found  Mother's  words  to  be  true  in  very  deed.

23.  At  Ashfield,  Mother  spoke  to  a  young  man  who  was  a
Believer,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  not  been  buffeted  about
eating.  He  answered,  "Yea,  I  have."  Mother  said,  "You
must  not  be  afraid  to  eat  what  victuals  you  need;  and  then
you  must  serve  God  by  the  strength  of  it. The  world  eat

*  In  the  month  of  January,  1782.


248  Testimonies  of

and  drink  and  consume  it  upon  their  lusts;  you  must  not  do
so;  but  eat  what  you  need,  and  then  do  the  will  of  God;  be
not  buffeted/'  The  young  man  was  comforted,  and  went
away  rejoicing.  Samuel  Ellis.

24.  Esther  Bracket  went  to  see  Mother  Ann,  at  Ashfield,
and  being  weak  in  faith  and  under  some  doubts  concerning
the  cross  against  the  flesh,  she  opened  her  feelings  to  Mother.
Mother  replied,  "  Christ  did  not  live  in  the  works  of  the  flesh ;
but  took  up  his  cross  against  that  nature,  and  did  the  will
of  his  Heavenly  Father;  and  you  must  take  up  your  cross
and  live  as  he  lived.  You  must  not  be  unbelieving,  but  be-
lieve, and  God  will  make  you  able/'

25.  Again  Esther  asked  Mother  to  pray  for  her.  Mother
replied,  "  I  hope  I  shall  not  be  neglectful  of  my  duty.  I
shall  not  forget  you,  if  you  do  not  forget  to  do  as  you  are
taught.  If  you  obey  what  you  are  taught,  God  will  send  His
holy  angels  to  guard  you."

26.  Esther  again  visited  Mother  at  Ashfield,  and  while
there,  she  felt  a  great  desire  to  receive  the  gift  of  vision,  and
believed  that  if  Mother  would  promise  it  to  her,  she  should
certainly  have  it.  Accordingly,  she  asked  Mother  for  the
gift  of  vision.  After  a  short  pause  of  solemn  silence,  Mother
replied, "If  you  will  labor  for  it,  you  shall  have  it."

27.  Esther  returned  home,  and  after  a  few  days,  as  she
was  on  her  knees,  at  the  breakfast  table,  she  felt  a  great  gift
of  sorrow,  and  wept  with  much  freedom.  In  this  situation
she  saw  Mother  kneeling  by  her  side,  but  she  did  not  speak
to  her.  After  breakfast  she  kneeled,  and  again  saw  Mother
by  her  side.  After  rising  from  her  knees,  Mother  appeared
before  her,  and  raising  her  hand,  she  stamped  upon  the  floor,
saying  "  Be  cheerful,  be  cheerful,  be  cheerful !  "

28.  Esther  was  then  moved  upon  to  laugh,  and  continued
laughing  all  that  day,  and  could  not  refrain  from  it.  From
that  time,  she  was  blest  with  the  gift  of  vision,  which  con-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  249

tinued  through  Mother's  day,  so  that  she  could  see  Mother,
and  converse  with  her,  at  any  time,  when  she  labored  for
it,  as  well  as  though  they  had  been  present  together  in  the
body.

29.  Ruth  Robbins,  of  Harvard,  being  under  great  tribula-
tion, and  feeling  herself  unworthy  of  any  mercy,  opened  her
feelings  to  Father  William  Lee.  He  answered,  "  The  eyes
of  God  are  upon  you,  and  He  sees  you  through  and  through.
There  shall  not  be  a  hair  of  your  head  fall  to  the  ground
without  the  notice  of  God.  Go,  and  be  sharp,  and  have
more  love."

30.  When  Mother  Ann  was  at  Peter  Bishop's  in  Montague,
as  the  Believers  were  in  meeting,  laboring  in  the  works  of
God,  there  came  in  a  young  man  of  the  world.  Mother
asked,  "  Have  you  come  to  see  the  people  of  God  ?  "  He
answered,  "  I  do  not  know  as  you  are  the  people  of  God."
Mother  replied,  "  We  are  the  only  people  of  God;  and  we
have  a  right  to  go  forth  in  the  dance;  but  the  wicked  have
no  right  to  dance."  She  also  added,  "The  gates  of  hell
shall  never  prevail  against  the  Church  of  Christ.  "*

Abigail  Bishop.


CHAPTER  XXXVI.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

i.  Soon  after  the  first  opening  of  the  gospel,  while  the  adja-
cent country  was  all  in  alarm  about  this  new  and  strange  re-
ligion, Talmadge  Bishop,  being  at  Watervliet,  and  about  to
return  home,  asked  Mother  Ann  what  he  should  tell  the  peo-

*  The  voung  man  went  away,  and  reported that Mother  was  the  most  beautiful
woman  he  ever  saw.

32


250  Testimonies  of

pie  concerning  them. "  Tell  them,"  said  Mother,  "  that  we
are  the  people  who  turn  the  world  up  side  down."

2.  When  Anna  Northrup  first  saw  Mother,  she  received
faith  in  the  Second  Appearing  of  Christ,  in  Mother  Ann,
confessed  her  sins,  and  received  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  But,  feeling  a  deep  sense  of  her  sinful  life,  she
kneeled  down  in  prayer  to  God,  that  she  might  be  forgiven.
Mother  said  to  her,  "  I  freely  forgive  you;  and  I  pray  that
God  would  forgive  you;  and  I  will  go  and  prepare  a  place
for  you,  that  where  I  am,  there  you  may  come  also."

3.  Jemima  Blanchard  went  to  see  Mother  while  she  was  at
the  Square  House,  at  Harvard;  having  never  seen  her  be-
fore, Mother  asked  her,  "  Will  you  be  a  daughter  of  Zion,
and  be  searched,  like  Jerusalem,  with  candles,  and  confess
and  forsake  your  sins,  and  put  away  all  wrong,  and  be  a
child  of  God?"

4.  Previous  to  receiving  faith  in  the  testimony,  Jemima
had  called  Mother  a  witch,  and  being  afterward  convicted
of  the  wrong,  she  confessed  the  matter  before  Mother  and
the  Elders.  Mother  replied,  "  I  forgive  you,  and  pray  God
to  forgive  you.  There  is  no  witchcraft  but  sin."  She  then
bade  Elder  William  and  Elder  James  kneel  down  and  pray
for  Jemima.  Accordingly,  they  both  kneeled,  and  prayed
for  her.

5.  Again,  at  the  Square  House,  as  Mother  and  the  Elders
were  about  to  leave  them,  Mother  took  Jemima  by  the  hand,
and  said,  "You  have  not  had  this  privilege  for  nothing;  you
are  required  to  go  and  keep  the  way  of  God,  and  not  to  re-
turn back  to  your  former  sins;  for  the  labors  of  the  people  of
God  will  not  be  lost;  but  will  be  a  savor  of  life  unto  life,  or
of  death  unto  death  to  all  souls."

6.  A  number  of  times  Mother  took  Mehetabel  Farrington
by  the  hand,  and  leading  her  back  and  forth,  often  asked
her  the question,  "  Mehetabel  will  you  stand  with  me  and


Mother  Ann  Lee.  251

be  a  witness  for  God?" Mehetabel as  often  answered,
"Yea,  Mother,  I  will.-"*

7.  Sarah  Hannum  first  saw  Mother  at  Enfield;  Mother
addressed  her,  saying,  "The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious
within."  "Let  the  word  of  God  take  deep  root  within  —
plow  up  the  fallow  ground  of  your  heart."

8.  Susanna  Wilds,  after  setting  out  to  obey  the  gospel,  fell
under  great  tribulation  of  soul,  and  almost  despaired  of  the
mercy  of  God,  in  consequence  of  having  before  spoken
against  the  testimony  of  the  gospel.  When  Mother  came  to
Shirley,  to  see  her,  she  opened  her  trial.  Mother  replied,
"  It  is  wicked  to  distrust  the  mercy  of  God,  for  He  has  called
you  to  be  saved,  and  not  to  be  lost."  On  hearing  these
words,  Susanna  was  instantly  released.

9.  Elizabeth  Chase,  being  a  faithful  young  Sister,  had
considerable  privilege  with  Mother,  in  the  first  of  her  faith,
and  being  with  Mother,  at  Watervliet,  gained  some  hope  that
Mother  would  feel  a  gift  to  let  her  stay  and  live  with  her.
Soon  after  this,  Mother  called  her  into  her  room,  and  said,
"  Elizabeth,  you  must  go  home,  for  they  need  you  there."

10.  On  hearing  this,  Elizabeth  fell  upon  her  knees  at
Mother's  feet,  and  wept,  and  told  Mother  that  she  felt  trou-
bled to  think  of  going  away  from  her.  "  But,"  said  Mother,
"  it  is  your  duty  to  go  to  the  family,  for  the  wicked  are  all
about  them  and  they  need  your  help.  Go,  and  hold  a  bold
testimony  before  the  wicked,  and  God  will  be  with  you.
You  must  not  be  discouraged,  for  I  see  your  mansion  in
heaven,  and  your  soul  shall  soon  be  released.  Go  in  peace,
and  take  love  with  thee.  You  can  do  greater  good  there,
than  you  can  here,  with  me."

*  It  is  worth}-  of  notice  that  Mehetabel  has  had  a  singular  gift,  to  state  with  pecu-
liar correctness,  the  testimonies,  speeches,  and  divine  manifestations  of  Mother  Ann,
and  the  Elders,  as  well  as  other  remarkable  transactions  which  came  within  her
knowledge  and  observation,  at  that  day  ;  by  which  it  appears  that  Mother's  ques-
tion to  her,  so  often  repeated,  was  very  significant.


252  Testimonies  of

11.  In  obedience  to  Mother,  Elizabeth  set  off  in  company
with  some  others  to  return  home.  But,  before  she  had  gone
far,  she  felt  the  greatest  releasement,  in  her  feelings,  that  she
had  ever  experienced,  and  such  a  flow  of  love  that  she  shouted
for  joy;  and  her  company  with  her,  shouted  also.

1 2.  When  she  arrived  at  home,  she  felt  Mother's  gift,  and
boldly  testified  to  the  wicked,  that  Christ  had  appeared  the
second  time,  and  she  often  had  strength  through  the  gift
that  she  had  received  from  Mother,  to  bind  the  rage  of  the
wicked,  who  came,  many  times,  to  abuse  the  family.  By
speaking  to  them,  they  seemed  to  lose  their  rage,  and  drop
their  weapons,  and  depart  without  doing  any  harm.

13.  Jennet  Davis  visited  the  Church  at  Ashfield,  at  a  time
when  there  were  great  spiritual  wars  in  the  Church,  and
sharp  testimonies  against  the  nature  of  the  flesh,  and  all
manner  of  sin,  which  brought  tribulation,  and  awful  fear  of
God  upon  her.  Soon  after  a  very  powerful  and  warring
meeting,  Mother,  looking  upon  Jennet,  said,  "  Jennet,  dost
thou  love  the  war?"  "Yea,  Mother,"  answered  Jennet.
"Well,"  said  Mother,  "Michael,  and  his  angels,  and  the
dragon  and  his  angels,  are  at  war,  and  those  who  have  part
in  this  war  shall  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection."

14.  At  another  time,  Jennet  went  to  see  Mother,  at  Ash-
field, and  one  of  the  Sisters  sent  a  pair  of  velvet  shoes  by
her,  as  a  present,  to  Mother.  Mother  took  them,  but,  on
the  day  that  Jennet  came  away,  she  handed  them  back  to
her,  and  bade  her  return  them  again,  to  the  forementioned
Sister,  and  said,  "  Tell  her  that  I  choose  to  have  my  feet
shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  and  not  with  velvet."

15.  Anna  Cogswell,  being  on  a  visit  to  the  Church,  at
Ashfield,  and  laboring  under  a  deep  sense  of  her  past  sins,
asked  Mother  to  forgive  her  sins.  Mother  asked,  "  Do  you
believe  that  I  can  forgive  sins?  "  Anna  answered,  "  I  believe
that  Christ  is  in  Mother,  and  I  have  nowhere  else  to  look


Mother  Ann  Lee.  253

for  forgiveness."  Mother  replied,  "  I  have  nothing  against
you,  and  if  you  are  faithful  and  obedient,  your  faith  will
save  you."

16.  Daniel  Cogswell,  being  at  Ashfield,  Mother  sent  a
messenger  to  him  one  morning,  saying,  "  Go,  tell  Daniel  to
labor,  and  be  prepared  to  receive  a  gift  of  God;  for  there
is  a  gift  for  him  to  receive  power  over  all  sin;  and  Brother
William  and  I  will  come  to  see  him."  Shortly  after  Mother
Ann  and  Father  William  Lee  came  and  made  labors  with
him,  concerning  which,  Daniel  himself  says,  "  I  can  truly
say,  that,  by  their  ministration,  I  received  that  power  over  all
sin  which  has  protected  me,  even  to  this  day.  And  when  I
was  about  to  come  away,  Mother  took  me  by  the  hand,  and
came  out  at  the  door,  and  without  regarding  the  snow,
kneeled  down,  and  prayed  to  God  for  my  protection.  And
when  she  arose,  she  blessed  me,  and  sent  me  away."

17.  One  day,  as  Mother  was  speaking  of  the  innocence
and  simplicity  of  children,  she  said  to  Hannah  Cogswell,
"  If  you  had  never  committed  sin,  your  soul  would  be  in  the
heavens,  changing  from  valley  to  valley,  and  from  one  glory
to  another."

18.  When  Mother  Ann  and  the  Elders  were  at  Woburn,
there  came  a  man  of  the  world  desiring  to  see  Mother  and
converse  with  her.  She  sent  Elder  James  to  talk  with  the
man  ;  but  this  did  not  satisfy  him,  therefore  Mother  went  into
the  room  and  sat  down  by  a  window  and  reproved  the  man
for  his  pride.  Elder  James  again  began  to  speak  to  him,
and  Mother  bade  the  man  hear  him.  The  man  replied,  "  I
do  not  want  to  hear  him,  I  want  to  hear  that  woman."
Mother  then  looked  out  at  the  window,  and  said,  "  I  see  the
heavens  open  and  I  see  the  glory  of  God."  The  man's  coun-
tenance changed,  and  he  said  no  more. Lucy  Prescott.

19.  At  another  time  there  came  a  priest  to  see  Mother  and
the  Elders;  and  he  said,  "  I  understand  that  you  say  you  are


^54  Testimonies  of

perfect ;  but  Job  said  '  If  I  should  say  I  am  perfect,  I  should
prove  myself  perverse.'"  Elder  James  replied,  "God  said
Job  was  a  perfect  man ;  I  will,  therefore,  believe  God  rather
than  you  or  Job." The  man  went  away  confounded.

Daniel  Cogswell.
20.  Mother  and  the  Elders,  being  at  Aaron  Jewet's  in
Littleton,  shortly  before  their  return  from  the  eastward,
there  came  two  wicked  men,  riding  up  to  the  house  on  horse-
back, and  strenuously  insisted  on  seeing  Mother.  She  came
forward,  with  several  elderly  Sisters,  and  inquired  what  they
wanted.  One  of  them,  whose  name  was  Smith,  said,  "  We
want  to  see  Mother."  "  These  are  all  mothers,"  said  she;
"which  of  them  do  you  want  to  see?"  "We  want  to  see
Mother,"  replied  Smith.  "  Why  do  you  keep  out  of  the  way,
if  you  are  the  people  of  God  ?  "  "  Christ  many  times  con-
veyed himself  away,"  replied  Mother,  "  and  Paul  was  let
down  in  a  basket,  to  avoid  his  persecutors."  She  then
addressed  them  with  great  boldness, saying,  "Before  I  found
Christ  I  found  I  had  a  deceitful  heart,  and  desperately
wicked;  so  that  I  could  not  trust  to  my  own  heart;  and  I
made  this  promise,  that  I  never  would  give  sleep  to  my  eyes,
nor  slumber  to  my  eyelids,  until  I  had  found  Christ.  And
now,  before  I  will  deny  this  to  be  the  work  of  God,  I  will
suffer  every  joint  of  my  body  to  be  unjointed."


CHAPTER  XXXVII.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

r.  Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  testimony  at  Harvard,
Elder  James  Whittaker  was  at  the  Square  House,  speaking  to
some  of  the  people  concerning  the  abominable  nature  of  lust,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  255

when  the  power  of  God  suddenly  fell  upon  Abijah  Wooster,
who  was  present,  and  swiftly  shook  his  right  hand.  Elder
James,  looking  upon  him,  said,  "O!  how  I  love  that  blessed
power.  Love  that  power,  Abijah,  and  be  obedient  to  it,  and
it  will  finally  redeem  your  soul."

2.  While  the  Church  was  at  Harvard,  Mother  sent  Abijah
to  the  town  of  Douglass,  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  labor
with  the  people  in  that  place,  and  spoke  to  him  thus,  "  Go,
labor  among  the  people,  and  teach  them  the  way  of  God;
and  let  them  open  their  minds  to  you;  and  feed  them  with
meat  as  strong  as  they  are  able  to  bear,  and  no  stronger.
And  when  you  feel  as  though  you  had  labored  through  your
gift,  ask,  of  God,  a  sign  to  return,  and  return  not,  till  God
gives  you  a  sign."

3.  At  another  time  she  instructed  him  in  the  following
manner.  "  Abijah,  labor  for  a  gift  of  God  to  know  the  cre-
ation of  souls,  and  deal  with  them  according  to  their  cre-
ation; some  are  of  such  a  hard  make  that  nothing  will  reach
them  but  severity;  others  are  more  easy  to  work  upon,  and,
if  you  go  and  deal  in  severity  with  them,  you  will  only  de-
stroy them.  He  who  wins  souls,  must  be  wise,  Abijah.
Some  must  be  saved  by  mercy  and  charity,  their  creation  is
such  they  cannot  be  saved  in  any  other  way;  and  some
must  be  saved  by  severity;  and  others  never  will  be  saved
only  by  judgments."

4.  At  another  time  Mother  said  to  Abijah,  "  Treasure  up
the  gospel,  treasure  up  the  gifts  of  God;  the  time  will  come
when  you  will  need  them;  and  if  you  are  faithful  to  treasure
up  the  gifts  of  God,  they  will  wake  up  in  your  soul  when
you  need  them."  At  another  time  she  said,  "  Labor  to  feel
the  life  of  God  in  your  soul ;  labor  to  make  the  way  of  God
your  own,  let  it  be  your  inheritance,  your  treasure,  your
occupation,  your  daily  calling.  Labor  to  God  for  your  own
soul  as  though  there  was  no  other  creature  on  earth." On


256  Testimonies  of

another  occasion  she  said,  "  Do  not  fight  creatures,  you  will
only  spoil  them.  Fight  the  devil,  Abijah;  fight  that  spirit
that  leads  mankind  into  sin."

5.  Abijah  visited  Mother  and  the  Elders  while  they  were
at  Ashfield.  On  taking  his  leave,  to  return  to  Harvard,
Elder  James  YVhittaker  said  to  him,  "  Remember  my  kind
love  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  they  are  my  treasure;  they
are  all  the  inheritance  I  have  in  this  world.  Go  and  be
faithful  among  them,  and  teach  them  the  way  of  God;  and
by  no  means  hurt  the  oil  and  the  wine;  I  mean  the  gifts  of
God.  Let  them  be  never  so  uncultivated  in  their  gifts,
don't  you  strike  at  those  things;  for,  if  you  do,  you  will  take
away  their  gifts,  and  then  they  will  be  lean  and  barren,  and
it  will  be  altogether  a  wonder,  if  they  do  not  go  back  to
their  lusts  and  are  lost.  But,  you  must  teach  them  how  to
improve  the  gifts  of  God,  and  let  the  power  of  God  work
inwardly  upon  their  souls.  You  know  how  we  have  borne
with  you,  in  tenderness,  in  mercy  and  charity,  and  go  you
and  do  likewise."

6.  Abijah  was  once  speaking  before  Elder  James  of  his
old  heavens'  religion,  and  said  that  he  then  thought  his
spirit  was  justified.  Elder  James  said,  "  If  you  was  justified,
it  was  the  devil  who  justified  you,  for  he  justified  you  in  sin.
Why,  Abijah  !  Could  you  think  that  Christ  would  justify
you  while  you  lived  in  sin?"  "I  did  not  know  any  thing
truly  about  Christ,"  answered  Abijah.  "That,"  said  Elder
James,  H  is  as  true  a  word  as  ever  you  spake."

7.  While  Mother  was  at  Shirley,  there  came  a  man  to  see
her  who  made  a  great  profession  of  Christian  love,  and
wished  to  have  his  love  acknowledged  by  Mother,  and  in  a
fondling  manner  attempted  to  put  his  head  to  her  bosom.
Instantly  the  power  of  God  came  upon  her,  and  she  arose,
and  led  him  into  another  room  to  Elder  James  Whittaker.
"  Here,"  said  she,  "  is  a  man  full  of  religious  devils,  such  as


Mother  Ann  Lee.  257

crucified  Christ,  the  worst  devils  to  be  cast  out,  that  are  to
be  found  in  the  world,  and  I  leave  him  to  be  undeceived,  if
he  will."

8.  Jonathan  Bridges,  having  been  unjustly  prosecuted,  in
a  suit  at  law,  by  the  enemies  of  the  cross,  went  to  Mother
for  advice.  She  told  him  to  apply  to  the  Selectmen,  and  to
the  Judge  of  Probates,  "and,  if  you  can  find  no  remedy  in
that  way,"  said  Mother,  "  then  defend  yourself  in  a  lawful
manner;  and  if  you  go  according  to  counsel,  you  will  gain
your  just  cause."

9.  John  Wadley,  of  Canterbury,  asked  Mother's  counsel
concerning  the  settlement  of  his  temporal  affairs.  Mother
asked  him  if  he  had  any  parents.  He  replied  he  had  a
father  only.  "Then  I  advise  you,"  said  Mother,  "to  go
and  confess  your  sins  to  your  father,  and  hold  your  testimony,
and  own  the  gospel  of  Christ  wherever  you  go;  and  that
will  be  your  strength  and  protection;  for  if  you  are  ashamed
to  own  Christ  before  men,  he  will  not  own  you  before  God
and  His  angels."

10.  When  Mother  Ann  first  went  to  Enfield,  Mary  Tif-
fany, who  had  never  seen  her  before,  came  into  the  room
where  she  was,  and  kneeled  down  before  her.  '  Don't  kneel
to  me,"  said  Mother,  "but  kneel  to  God;  for  I  am  but  your
fellow  servant;  I  do  not  kneel  to  you,  but  I  come  to  you
upon  the  bending  knees  of  my  soul."

11.  When  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  at  Elijah  Wild's,
Elder  James  rose  early  one  morning,  and  spoke  to  Elijah,
saying,  "Go,  Elijah,  tell  the  people  of  this  town,  that  the
Children  of  the  Most  High  God  are  at  your  house,  and  that
the  everlasting  gospel  will  be  preached,  the  day  after  to-
morrow." Elijah  went  and  delivered  his  message  faithfully;
a  large  concourse  of  people  assembled,  and  Elder  James
spoke  the  word  of  God  with  remarkable  power  and  authority.

12.  Mother  asked  young  Joseph  Bennet,  which  he  thought

33


258  Testimonies  of

had  the  greatest  gift,  of  the  two  Elders,  William,  or  James.
"I  think,"  answered  Joseph,  "that  Elder  William  has  the
greatest  gift  of  sorrow."  "So  he  has,"  replied  Mother,
"James  plants,  and  William  waters."  Amos  JewitU

13.  On  a  particular  occasion,  Mother  spoke  to  Gideon
Turner,  Senr.,  as  follows,  "You  must  labor  to  bless  God,
and  then  God  will  bless  you.  Wherever  you  are,  whatever
trials  you  meet  with,  or  whatever  you  may  suffer,  always  re-
member to  bless  God,  and  then  you  will  always  feel  a  bless-
ing." Gideon  testified  that  he  had  found  the  truth  of  this
by  experience.

14.  Elisha  Smith  visited  the  Church  at  Ashfield,  and  feel-
ing a  sense  of  his  own  evil  nature,  he  said  to  Mother  Ann,
"I  am  full  of  evil."  She  paused  a  moment,  and  replied,
"  Nay,  you  are  not  full  of  evil.  If  you  were  full  of  evil
there  would  be  no  room  in  you  to  receive  any  good.  You
have  a  great  deal  of  evil  in  you;  but  this  conviction  you  feel,
is  good."  Jethro  Turner.

15.  Zeruah  Clark,  being  in  a  situation  of  peculiar  embar-
rassment, on  account  of  the  various  dispositions  and  habits
of  those  who  resided  in  the  family  with  her,  and  being  much
straitened  to  know  her  duty,  Mother  spake  to  her  as  follows,
"  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  an-
other; and  the  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  it;  and  a  book
of  remembrance  was  written  before  Him,  for  them  that
feared  the  Lord  and  thought  upon  His  name;  and  they
shall  be  mine  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  in  that  day  when  I
make  up  my  jewels;  and  I  will  spare  them  as  a  man  spareth
his  own  son  that  serveth  him."*  This  passage  of  Scripture
rehearsed  by  Mother,  in  the  power  and  gift  of  God,  made  a
striking  impression  on  Zeruah's  mind;  she  had  read  it  be-
fore without  being  able  to  comprehend  it;  but  now  she  sen-
sibly felt  its  import,  and  clearly  perceived,  in  Mother's  sea-

*  Mai. Ill,  16  and  17.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  259

sonable  application  to  her,  that  she  had,  thereby,  marked  out
a  beautiful  path  for  her  feet,  and  instructed  her  how  to  walk
in  it.

16.  Again,  at  Watervliet,  Mother  said  to  Zeruah,  "  When
you  see  little  bright  lights,  like  stars,  be  thankful  to  God ;
for  they  are  specks  of  angel's  wings."  Zeruah  remarked  that
she  had  seen  these  before,  but  had  not  mentioned  it  to
Mother;  and  further  said,  "  I  have  many  times  seen  these
little  bright  lights,  especially  in  times  of  godly  conversation,
and  have  always  considered  them  as  the  notice  of  God;  and
they  have  been  a  confirmation  to  me  of  what  Mother  said,
concerning  those  who  feared  the  Lord."

17.  Hannah  Kendall  was  once  with  Mother,  on  her  jour-
ney from  Ashfield  to  Petersham,  and  they  came  to  an  apple
tree  in  full  blossom.  Mother  looked  at  it  and  said,  "  How
beautiful  this  tree  is  now  !  But  some  of  the  apples  will  soon
fall  off;  some  will  hold  on  longer;  some  will  hold  on  till  they
are  full  half  grown,  and  then  fall  off;  and  some  will  get  ripe.
So  it  is  with  souls  who  set  out  in  the  way  of  God.  Many
will  set  out  very  fair,  and  soon  fall  away;  some  will  go
further,  and  then  fall  off;  some  will  go  further  still,  and
then  fall;  and  some  will  go  through."

18.  Ephrainr  Welch,  being  at  Watervliet,  went  into
Mother's  room  to  see  her,  at  a  time  when  she  was  under
great  sufferings,  and  asked  her  if  he  could  do  any  thing  for
her  comfort.  She  answered,  "  If  you  keep  the  way  of  God,
it  is  all  I  desire,  and  the  greatest  comfort  I  can  have  in  this
world."

19.  Mother  Hannah  Goodrich,  being  at  Watervliet,  a  few
days  before  Mother's  decease,  did  not  expect  ever  to  see  her
out  of  her  room  again,  but,  one  morning,  as  she  was  sweep-
ing the  piazza  floor,  Mother  came  out  and  said,  "  Sweep
clean."  "  I  will,  Mother,"  replied  Hannah.  Again  she
said,  "Ah,  sweep  clean I say." "I will," said Hannah.


260  Testimonies  of

"But,  I  say,  sweep  clean,"  said  Mother  again.  By  this  time
Hannah  perceived  that  Mother  had  reference  to  the  floor  of
the  heart,  and  said  no  more.  Immediately  Lucy  Wright,
subsequently  called  "  Mother  Lucy,"  who  took  care  of  her
in  her  last  sufferings,  came  and  took  hold  of  her  hand,  and
asked  her  to  go  in.  Mother  answered,  "  I  will.  I  will  be
obedient  to  you,  Lucy,  for  I  am  married  to  you,  and  I  will
go  with  you."* And  they  went  in  together.

20.  As  Mary  Hocknell  was  watching  with  Mother  Ann,  a
little  before  her  decease,  she  said,  "  I  see  Brother  William
coming  in  a  golden  chariot,  to  take  me  home."  She  then
said  to  Mary,  "  Molly,  poor  child,  I  am  about  to  go  home,
and  after  I  am  gone  you  will  have  many  sorrows."  Mother's
words  came  to  pass,  for  Mary  passed  through  many  scenes
of  sorrow  and  sufferings,  after  the  decease  of  her  dearest
and  best  friend,  who  had  brought  her  up  from  childhood.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

SOME SKETCHES OF THE LIFE AND CHARACTER OF EIDER

WILLIAM LEE.

William  Lee  was  the  fourth  son  of  John  Lee,  and  was  the
natural  brother  of  Mother  Ann  Lee.  He  was  born  in  the
town  of  Manchester,  in  England,  in  or  about  the  year  of
1740,  and  was  brought  up  in  the  occupation  of  a  blacksmith,
by  his  father.  He  was  married,  and  had  one  son,  and  was,
afterward,  an  officer  of  horse,  in  the  king's  royal  guard,
belonging  to  a  regiment  called  "The  Oxford  Blues." In  his

*This  speech  seemed  to  be  strikingly  significant  of  the  lot  and  place  that  Mother
Lucy  was  destined  to  occupy  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  to  which  she  afterward
attained,  viz.,  its  first  visible  leader.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  ?6i

person  he  was  of  a  commanding  figure,  rather  above  middling
height,  thick  set,  strong  built,  and  large  limbs,  of  an  open
and  very  bold  countenance,  such  as  beholders  might  both
reverence  and  fear;  his  hair  was  of  a  light  chestnut  brown,
blue  eyes,  and  a  remarkably  strong,  sonorous  and  powerful
voice.

2.  As  a  man  in  nature  he  possessed  a  strong  and  robust
constitution,  remarkable  for  strength,  both  of  body  and  soul;
and  a  man  of  great  courage  and  fortitude.  He  was  power-
ful in  the  work  of  God,  and  feared  not  the  face  of  man.  In
times  of  mobs  and  persecutions  he  was  always  undaunted;
and  would  often  testify  against  the  wickedness  of  his  perse-
cutors with  a  boldness  which  plainly  evinced  that  he  was  a
stranger  to  the  fear  of  man.

3.  Concerning  his  first  embracing  the  testimony  of  the
gospel,  he  gave  the  following  account  of  himself :  that  he
was  a  proud,  haughty  young  man,  fond  of  gayety,  and  was
able  to  dress  himself  in  silks.  At  length  he  fell  under  great
concern  and  trouble  of  mind,  on  account  of  his  sins;  in  this
state  of  mind,  he  went  to  see  his  sister  Ann,  who  was  then  a
member  of  the  society  of  James  and  Jane  Wardley.  When
he  arrived  at  his  sister's,  being  very  gaily  dressed,  she  reproved
him  for  his  pride,  and  convinced  him  of  the  wickedness  of
his  life.  He  immediately  threw  off  his  ruffles  and  silks,  and
put  his  hands  to  work  and  his  heart  to  God,  and  labored
faithfully  to  find  forgiveness  for  his  sins,  and  acceptance  of
God.

4.  Concerning  some  of  his  religious  exercises  in  the  first
of  his  faith,  he  gives  the  following  account :  "  Before  I  con-
fessed my  sins,  I  felt  great  tribulation;  and  after  I  had  con-
fessed them,  I  cried  to  God  night  and  day,  till  I  heard  an
audible  voice  from  heaven  saying,  '  William,  thy  sins  are
forgiven.' '  '  This,"  said  Elder  William,  "  all  the  kings  and
nobles  must  come  to;  for  Mother  is  the  Lord's  Anointed."


262  Testimonies  of

5.  Again,  speaking  on  the  same  subject,  he  said,  "When
I  first  believed,  I  confessed  my  sins  all  over  the  town,  and
they  cannot  hurt  me  for  it  now;  for  God  has  cast  them  be-
hind His  back,  never  to  be  remembered  against  me  any
more.  It  is  a  shame  to  commit  sin,  but  no  shame  to  con-
fess it."

6.  According  to  his  own  account,  he  frequented  the  so-
ciety of  James  and  Jane  Wardley;  and  when  he  was  in  trib-
ulation he  sometimes  opened  his  trials  and  feelings  to  them;
they  encouraged  and  built  him  up,  so  that  he  felt  his  mind
released.  But  when  he  returned  to  his  sister  again  she
would  often  spoil  his  comfort,  overthrow  his  false  hopes,  and
again  plunge  him  deeper  into  tribulation  than  before,  which
compelled  him  to  cry  to  God  through  great  labor  and  tribu-
lation, till  he  gained  releasement  for  himself  through  obedi-
ence to  her  counsel.

7.  When  Mother  Ann  received  the  revelation  of  God
against  the  flesh,  William  united  with  her  and  stood  zeal-
ously for  her.  This  raised  the  enmity  of  his  neighbors  and
acquaintances,  who  opposed  and  persecuted  him.  At  one
time  there  came  a  mob  and  followed  him  into  his  father's
house,  and,  in  a  rage,  they  struck  him  over  his  head,  with  a
fire  hook,  and  fractured  his  skull.  He  fell  for  dead,  and  the
blood  ran  profusely,  but  he  soon  recovered,  and  continued,
boldly,  to  testify  against  their  wickedness.

8.  In  a  public  assembly  at  Ashfield,  he  related  some  of  his
experience,  as  follows,  "  In  the  first  of  my  faith  I  worked  in
a  large  blacksmith  shop,  where  the  people  were  continually
coming  and  going,  and  I  would  not  look  at  them,  but  chas-
tised every  turn  of  my  eyes  that  was  not  after  God.  I  feared
God  every  time  I  set  my  foot  down,  and  chastened  every
member  of  my  body  that  had  sinned  against  God."

9.  At  another  time,  speaking  to  Amos  Rathbun,  of  his
own experience after he embraced the gospel, he said,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  263

"  Mother's  testimony  was  so  awakening  to  my  soul  that
when  I  was  at  work  over  my  anvil,  I  felt  so  weary  that  I
thought  I  would  have  given  very  much,  if  I  could  have  set
down  one  minute,  but,  I  durst  not,  for  I  felt  my  soul,  as  it
were,  upon  a  needle's  point,  and  therefore  kept  my  hands  to
work,  and  my  soul  in  continual  labor  to  God.  And  often
when  I  went  to  my  meals,  I  felt  so  unworthy  to  put  any  of
the  creation  of  God  into  my  mouth,  that  I  could  not  eat,  but
wept,  and  went  back  to  my  work  again."

10.  Again,  speaking  of  a  certain  period  of  his  travel  in
the  regeneration,  he  was  brought  under  such  excessive  suf-
ferings that  he  was  unable  to  perform  his  duty  in  hand  labor,
he  prayed  to  God  that  He  would  remove  his  sufferings,  dur-
ing the  week,  and  let  him  bear  them  all  on  the  Sabbath,  that
he  might  be  able  to  perform  his  duty  in  hand  labor.  In
answer  to  his  prayer,  God  gave  him  releasement,  dur-
ing the  week,  so  that  he  was  able  to  work  eighteen  hours  in
every  twenty-four,  and  he  allowed  himself  the  remaining  six
hours  to  eat,  sleep,  and  serve  God,  and  when  Saturday  night
came  he  was  brought  under  such  severe  sufferings  that  he
was  unable  to  arise,  or  even  to  turn  himself  in  bed,  which
continued  till  Monday  morning,  when  he  would  be  suddenly
released,  and  be  able  to  go  to  his  work  again  in  good  health.

11.  It  appeared  to  be  Father  William's  special  gift  and
calling  to  bear  for  the  increase  of  the  gospel,  and  to  labor  in
sufferings  for  the  releasement  of  souls,  not  only  of  those  in
the  body,  but  also  of  those  in  the  world  of  spirits.  Mother
said,  concerning  him,  that  he  was  called  into  the  Ministry,
to  help  her,  in  bearing,  and  he,  himself,  often  spoke  of  his
being  under  sufferings  for  the  dead.

12.  Though  Father  William,  in  his  creation,  was  a  man  of
remarkable  strength  of  body,  as  well  as  of  the  most  extraor-
dinary fortitude  of  mind;  yet,  many  times,  such  was  the
great extremity  of  his sufferings,  as  to reduce  him  to  the


264  Testimonies  of

weakness  of  a  child  in  a  short  time,  and  cause  him  to  vomit
clear  fresh  blood.  Again  he  would  suddenly  be  released
from  sufferings,  and  be  filled  with  heavenly  songs  of  joy;
and,  in  power  and  strength,  would  seem  like  a  lion.

13.  Father  William  was  "  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted
with  grief."  He  was  truly  an  apostle  in  sufferings  ;  and  when
he  was  released,  it  seemed  as  if  his  soul  was  in  the  third
heavens.  In  reproving  he  was  terrible;  every  creature  that
had  a  sensitive  soul,  trembled  at  the  sound  of  his  voice,  and
none  dared  to  approach  him.  At  other  times  he  was  filled
with  heavenly  comforts,  and  the  charity  and  mercy  of  God,
in  him,  seemed  boundless.

14.  Father  William's  soul  was  greatly  enriched  by  the
gift  of  God  in  visions,  revelations,  and  heavenly  mani-
festations, and  he  abounded  in  mercy,  love,  and  charity,
and  a  violent  spirit  against  all  sin.  He  spoke  but  little
in  public,  indeed  he  did  not  appear  to  be  much  gifted
in  public  speaking;  yet  he  was  eminently  useful,  in  teaching,
instructing,  and  strengthening  the  Believers.  He  was  re-
markable for  tenderness  of  heart,  and  would  often  weep  like
a  child,  for  the  afflictions  and  distresses  of  God's  people.  In
tears  he  would  often  express  his  great  thankfulness  for  the
gospel,  and  for  the  gifts  and  blessings  of  God,  both  spiritual
and  temporal.

15.  Mother  Hannah  Kendall,  who  was  much  with  Mother
and  the  Elders,  and  often  traveled  with  them  in  their  jour-
neys from  place  to  place,  remarks  that  she  has  seen  Father
William,  when  going  to  wash  himself,  weep  and  say,  "  I  thank
heaven  for  this  water,  for  it  is  the  blessing  of  God."

16.  Eliab  Harlow  also  relates  the  following  circumstance,
(viz.)  "  I  was  once  at  Ashfield,  and  was  about  to  eat  with
Father  William,  Calvin  Harlow  and  a  number  of  others,  and
Father  William  spoke  before  eating,  saying,  "  I  feel  you  are
not  so  thankful  as  you  ought  to  be,  for  the  good  things  that


Mother  Ann  Lee.  265

God  provides  for  you;  but  you  will  eat  and  drink  of  these
precious  things,  and  not  consider  from  whence  they  come."
"  The  sin  of  ingratitude  is  a  great  sin;  see  that  you  are  not
guilty  of  it.  I  often  eat  my  food  with  thankfulness  and
tears  every  mouthful  I  eat."  We  sat  down  to  eat,  and  every
mouthful  that  Father  William  took,  the  tears  flowed  in
abundance;  and,  while  eating,  he  would  often  say,  "  O  thank
God,"  and  would  weep  aloud  and  heartily.

17.  Sometimes  he  used  to  reprove  the  Believers  for  walk-
ing about  in  a  careless  manner,  and  say,  "  You  ought  to  pass
by  each  other  like  angels;  but  you  appear,  to  me,  like  the
troubled  sea,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  dirt;  but  I  can
be  sorry  for  you,  and,  it  appears  to  me  that  there  is  no  sor-
row like  my  sorrow."  Again  he  would  encourage  the  Breth-
ren and  Sisters  to  press  forward,  and  say,  "  You  ought  never
to  lie  down  in  the  mud;  for  you  were  not  called  to  be  lost;
for  God  will  certainly  deliver  His  people."

18.  Sometimes  he  used  to  say,  "  We  are  poor,  but  able  to
make  many  rich."  "  Poor,  afflicted  people  of  God!  Once
I  served  God  out  of  fear,  but  now  I  serve  Him  out  of  pure
love."  Sometimes  he  would  say,  "  I  love  my  Mother, —
although  she  is  my  Sister,  yet  she  has  become  my  Mother,
and  the  Lord  God  has  made  me  to  love  her."

19.  He  often  expressed  his  great  love  for  the  Brethren
and  Sisters.  At  one  time,  in  Ashfield,  after  relating  his  ex-
perience to  the  assembly,  he  manifested  his  love  to  the
Brethren  and  Sisters,  in  the  following  words,  "  I  love  you  so
well  that  I  should  be  willing  to  give  you  every  gift  of  God
that  I  have,  and  then  set  out  anew,  to  labor  for  more."

20.  When  great  numbers  of  the  Believers  came  to  the
Church  to  see  them,  he  would  often  meet  them  at  the  door,
and  say,  "Come  in,  Brethren  and  Sisters,  come  in;  —  We
have  but  little  room  in  our  house,  but  we  have  a  great  deal
of  room  in  our  hearts."

34


266  Testimonies  of

21.  In  speaking  to  some  of  the  Believers  of  the  glory  of
those  who  traveled  out  of  their  loss  in  this  world,  he  said,
"There  will  be  very  few,  and  they  will  be  very  glorious.'
Again,  to  some  who  were  speaking  of  their  crosses,  he  said,
"  You  should  turn  great  crosses  into  little  ones,  and  little  ones
into  none  at  all."

22.  In  addressing  a  public  assembly  at  Thomas  Shattuck's,
in  Petersham,  Father  William  said,  "  Cry  to  God  for  faith;  —
Cry  to  God  to  strengthen  your  faith.  True  and  saving
faith  is  a  gift  of  God;  but  unbelief  is  a  damning  sin."
Again,  at  Shirley,  he  said,  "  You  can  never  say,  '  I  do  not
know  the  way  of  God;  '  but  if  you  are  lost,  you  will  cry  out,
'  O,  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  I  knew  the  way  of  God,  but
did  not  obey  it.'  "

23.  Ephraim  Welch  was  once  walking  with  Father  Wil-
liam, and  in  conversation  with  him  about  the  war  in  Amer-
ica, and  the  great  troubles  occasioned  thereby;  and  Father
William  said,  "  Wars  will  never  cease  until  God  has  finished
His  work  with  the  nations  of  the  earth;  although  they  may
be  buried,  like  fire,  for  a  season;  yet,  they  will  break  out
with  seven-fold  increase,  among  the  nations  of  the  earth."
Again  he  said,  to  Amos  Rathbun,  "  The  same  sword  that
persecutes  the  people  of  God,  will  be  turned  into  the  world
among  themselves,  and  never  will  be  sheathed,  until  it  has
done  its  work."

24.  Hannah  Kendall  once  presented  to  Father  William  a
posy,  of  divers  colors;  he  looked  on  it,  and  said,  "I  have
seen  all  manner  of  colors  in  heaven  much  more  beautiful
than  these."

25.  As  Father  William's  strength  and  gift  was  spent  in
sufferings  almost  continually,  he  had  not  so  much  labor  in
word  and  doctrine.  His  work  of  sufferings  continued  to  the
end  of  his  days;  nor  did  he  appear  to  die  by  any  natural
infirmity;  but  he  seemed  to  give  up  his  life  in  sufferings.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  267

In  his  last  sufferings,  he  discharged  an  abundance  of  blood,
and  died,  seemingly,  like  a  bleeding  martyr.  But  his  zeal
and  fortitude  continued  to  the  last.  A  short  time  before  his
decease,  Aaron  Wood,  being  in  the  room  with  him,  he  rose
from  his  bed,  and  asked  Aaron  to  sing  for  him.  Aaron
sang,  and  he  danced  with  great  zeal,  for  a  few  minutes,  and
then  laid  down,  and,  in  a  short  time  expired,  on  the  21st
of  July,  1784,  about  six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  in  the
forty-fifth  year  of  his  age.

26.  His  funeral  was  attended  on  the  23rd.  Many  of  the
Believers  attended,  and  the  neighboring  inhabitants  having
been  notified,  many  of  them  attended  also.  Father  James
Whittaker,  and  Elder  Calvin  Harlow  addressed  the  assem-
bly, and  spoke  of  his  faithfulness;  that  he  had  been  faith-
ful to  bear  and  suffer  for  the  increase  of  the  gospel,  and
that  he  had  finished  his  work,  and  given  up  his  life  in  suffer-
ings.

27.  In  the  procession  to  the  grave,  the  Brethren  walked
two  and  two,  at  the  right  hand,  and  the  Sisters  in  the  same
manner  on  the  left.  When  they  began  to  move  toward  the
grave,  Father  James  struck  up  a  funeral  song,  which  was
given  by  the  revelation  of  God  for  that  purpose,  and  in
which  the  Believers  all  united,  and  such  was  the  power,
harmony  and  symphony  with  which  it  was  sung  that  it
seemed  to  reach  the  very  heavens.  The  singing  continued
till  the  corpse  arrived  at  the  grave,  which  was  more  than
half  a  mile  distant.  After  the  interment  of  the  corpse,  the
same  song  was  again  stiuck  up,  and  continued  until  the  pro-
cession returned  again  from  the  grave.  This  remarkable
song  has  been  preserved  in  the  Church,  as  a  funeral  song,  to
this  day.

28.  After  the  funeral,  Father  James  spoke  to  the  Believ-
ers concerning  Father  William's  faithfulness  and  zeal  in  the
work  of  God,  and  said,  "  He  has  been  the  most  violent  man


268  Testimonies  of

against  sin,  that  ever  my  eyes  beheld,  and,  if  such  an  one  is
not  saved,  I  do  not  know  who  can  be."


CHAPTER  XXXIX.

SOME  FURTHER  SKETCHES  OF THE LIFE  AND  CHARACTER  OF

MOTHER ANN  LEE.

r.  Mother  Ann  Lee  was  a  woman  of  a  strong  constitution,
rather  exceeding  the  ordinary  size  of  women;  rather  thick,
but  very  straight  and  well  proportioned  in  form;  of  light  com-
plexion, and  blue  eyes;  her  hair  of  a  light  chestnut  brown.
In  appearance,  she  was  very  majestic,  and  her  countenance
was  such  as  inspired  confidence  and  respect;  and,  by  many
of  the  world,  who  saw  her,  without  prejudice,  she  was  called
beautiful.  To  her  faithful  children  {spoken  of  spiritually),
she  appeared  to  possess  a  degree  of  dignified  beauty  and
heavenly  love  transcending  that  of  mortals.

2.  She  possessed  remarkable  powers  and  faculties  of  mind,
which  were  greatly  enlarged  and  strengthened  by  the  gift  of
God.  At  times,  when  under  the  power  and  operation  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  her  countenance  shone  with  the  glory  of  God,
and  her  form  and  actions  were  divinely  beautiful,  and  very
angelic.  Her  power  and  influence,  at  such  times,  were  great,
beyond  description;  and  no  one  was  able  to  gainsay  or  re-
sist the  power  by  which  she  spoke.

3.  Though  Mother's  words  were  generally  few,  they  were
always  adapted  to  the  occasion;  and  it  did  not  appear  that
she  ever  spoke  in  vain.  Her  whole  soul  was  always  engaged
in  the  work  of  God,  and  the  spirit  of  God  seemed  to  breathe
in  all  her  words  and  actions.  So  great  and  godlike  was  the
power  of  her  spirit,  that,  with  a  few  words,  and  often  with  a


Mother  Ann  Lee.  269

single  word,  or  touch  of  her  hand,  she  would  instantly  raise
individuals,  and  sometimes  a  whole  assembly,  from  a  state
of  deepest  tribulation  and  distress  of  soul,  to  a  state  of  the
most  heavenly  joy  and  comfort.  '  Again,  she  has  often  min-
istered, in  a  few  words,  to  a  whole  assembly,  such  a  measure
of  the  power  of  conviction  and  repentance,  that,  in  a  few
minutes,  the  floor  has  been  wet  with  tears.  She  inspired  into
the  hearts  of  her  spiritual  children,  the  greatest  fear  of  God,
and  commanded  the  most  unbounded  love  and  respect  of
any  person  then  living.  Her  countenance  was  mild  and
lovely,  yet  grave  and  solemn.  In  reproof  she  was  terrible;
in  admonition  she  was  quick,  sharp,  and  powerful  as  light-
ning; yet  always  careful  not  to  hurt  the  oil  and  wine  (the
gift  of  God  in  the  soul);  but  labored  to  save  all  that  God
owned.

4.  She  possessed  a  degree  of  discernment  and  penetration
which  nothing  short  of  Divine  Power  and  Wisdom  could  in-
spire. In  her  labors  with  young  Believers,  she  seemed  to
penetrate  the  inmost  recesses  of  their  souls,  and  would  often
lay  open  before  them  the  state  of  their  minds  far  more
clearly  than  they  were  able  to  do  themselves.  It  seemed  that
nothing  could  be  hidden  from  her;  and,  in  whatever  she  as-
serted for  truth,  though  at  the  time,  ever  so  doubtful  to  others,
she  was  never  known  to  be  in  the  least  mistaken.  Her  mind
rose  superior  to  the  ordinary  passions  of  human  nature;  and
her  great  labor  was  to  subdue  those  passions  in  her  follow-
ers, and  to  inspire  their  souls  with  divine  and  heavenly  affec-
tions. She  was  never  known  to  be  in  the  least  degree  ruf-
fled, or  out  of  temper  with  any  one,  during  the  whole  period
of  her  ministry  among  us;  but,  even  in  the  severest  reproof,
she  appeared  to  feel  unbounded  charity  for  those  whom  she
reproved.  When  she  rejoiced,  her  joy  was  unspeakable,  and
it  seemed  as  if  her  whole  soul  was  with  the  angelic  host,  re-
joicing in  the  mansions  of  glory. When  she  wept,  it  seemed


270  Testimonies  of

enough  to  melt  a  heart  of  stone.  She  was  often  in  suppli-
cation before  God,  and  her  cries  and  weeping  were  such  as
we  had  never  heard  before ;  it  seemed  that  the  sound  of  her
voice  was  enough  to  cause  the  most  relentless  heart  to  break,
and  yield  before  God.

5.  In  times  of  tribulation  she  was  often  heard  to  say,
"  There  is  no  sorrow  like  my  sorrow."  And  surely  there  is
no  sorrow  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  sorrow  that  pro-
ceeds from  a  heart  that  is  pure  and  holy  before  God  as
Mother's  was.  It  appeared  that  every  feeling  and  faculty  of
her  soul  and  body  was  wholly  devoted  to  the  will  of  God  in
all  things.  She  was  frequently  heard  to  say  "once  I  served
God  through /<••(?/',  but  now  I  serve  Him  by  love."

6.  In  her  manners  and  daily  deportment,  she  was  meek,
harmless,  and  inoffensive.  Her  love  and  charity  seemed
boundless;  always  ready  to  succor  the  afflicted,  and  minister
to  the  wants  of  the  needy,  and  those  who  were  well  acquainted
with  her  during  the  whole  course  of  her  ministry  from  the  first
opening  of  the  gospel  in  America,  until  her  decease,  can  truly
say  that  they  never  saw  any  mortal  that  appeared  so  lovely,  so
godly,  and  so  heavenly.  For  meekness  and  simplicity  of
manners,  Mother  was  very  remarkable,  and  her  humility  was
very  great.  In  speaking  of  herself,  she  used  to  speak  in  the
same  heavenly  simplicity  and  truth  as  when  she  spoke  of  any
other  person.  When  any  of  the  Believers  expressed  their
love  to  her,  she  would  often  reply,  "  It  is  not  me  that  you
love,  but  it  is  God  in  me."  When  some  kneeled  down  to
her,  she  often  used  to  say,  "  Don't  kneel  to  me;  but  kneel  to
God  ;  I  am  but  your  fellow-servant."  She  frequently  kneeled,
when  any  one  kneeled  to  her.

7.  In  her  instructions  and  labors  for  the  increase  of  the
gospel  among  the  young  Believers,  Mother  spared  no  time
nor  pains.  She  often  used  to  say  to  those  who  came  to  see
her,  "  The  gospel  is  the  greatest  treasure  that  souls  can  pos-


Mother  Ann  Lee.  271

sess;  go  home  and  be  faithful;  put  your  hands  to  work,  and
give  your  hearts  to  God.  Beware  of  covetousness,  which  is
as  the  sin  of  witchcraft ;  if  you  have  any  thing  to  spare,  give
it  to  the  poor."

8.  Mother  Hannah  Kendall,  who  was  much  with  Mother
Ann,  and  often  accompanied  her  in  her  journeys,  remarks
that  she  often  used  to  say,  when  visited  by  poor  widows,
"  Hannah,  give  this  woman  a  piece  of  money ;  she  is  a  poor
woman,  and  has  children."  She  was  often  heard  to  say  to
Believers,  "  How  many  poor  creatures  there  are  who  suffer
with  hunger  and  cold,  and  here  you  have  enough  !  How
thankful  to  God  you  ought  to  be,  for  his  tender  mercies
toward  you."

9.  In  laboring  for  the  increase  of  the  gospel,  and  the  sal-
vation of  a  lost  world,  Mother  passed  through  inexpres-
sible sufferings;  in  this  she  was  second  to  none  but  Christ
Jesus,  her  Lord  and  head.  She  bore  her  sufferings  with
a  degree  of  fortitude,  patience,  and  resignation  worthy  of
the  lot  in  which  she  stood,  and  which,  many  times,  appeared
far  more  than  human.  Sometimes  she  would  endure  the
most  extreme  sufferings,  without  saying  any  thing  about
them ;  at  other  times  she  used  to  speak  of  them  in  the  sim-
plicity of  a  child.  Sometimes,  when  the  Brethren  and  Sis-
ters came  to  see  her  and  asked  how  she  did,  she  would
answer,  "Bonds  and  afflictions  abide  me."  She  was  often
heard  to  cry  out,  in  the  extremity  of  her  anguish,  "  O  that
every  thing  that  has  breath,  would  cry  to  God  for  me  !
Yea,  I  desire  that  the  very  grass  of  the  field,  would  cry  to
God  for  me."

10.  At  Watervliet,  N.  Y.,  in  the  presence  of  Eliphalet
Slosson  and  others,  Mother  Ann  said,  "  I  bear  daily,  in  my
soul  and  body  very  great  sufferings  for  the  sins  and  loss  of
souls,  in  so  much  that  my  flesh  seems  bruised  upon  my
bones,  and  the  blood  ceases,  in  a  great  degree,  its  circula-


272  Testimonies  of

tion.  But  I  often  feel  the  healing  power  of  God,  which
heals  me,  so  that  I  feel  perfectly  well  again,  both  soul  and
body."

ii.  Ezekiel  Stevens,  of  Canterbury,  related  the  following,
"As  I  had  much  opportunity  to  be  with  Mother  I  often
heard  her  speak  of  her  sufferings,  both  in  body  and  spirit.
She  would  often  foretell  that  Believers  were  coming  to  the
Church,  who  were  sorely  bruised,  and  wearied  with  their
journey,  that  she  felt  it  on  her  body,  so  that  her  flesh  felt
sore,  and  bruised;  and  she  sometimes  showed  to  her  Sisters
the  bruises  and  said,  "  I  feel  them  coming."  And  I  ob-
served they  would  always  come  when  she  said  so.  She
sometimes  said,  "  When  people  come  to  the  Church  under
the  condemnation  of  sin,  it  brings  such  sufferings  upon  me
as  almost  takes  my  life."

12.  Mother  often  manifested  in  her  deportment,  the  most
distinguishing  marks  of  humiliation.  She  would  frequently
wait  on  those  who  came  to  see  her  with  the  same  attention
and  assiduity  as  though  she  had  been  a  mere  servant  in  the
family.  When  people  came  who  were  fatigued  with  their
journey,  who  were  feeble,  wet,  or  cold,  she  would  often  use
her  utmost  endeavors,  with  her  own  hands,  to  wait  on  them,
and  make  them  comfortable.  Sometimes,  while  waiting
upon  them  she  would  say,  "  I  am  among  you  as  one  that
serveth."

13.  As  many  people  came,  from  time  to  time,  she  would,
sometimes,  in  providing  places  for  them  to  lodge,  according
to  circumstances,  give  up  her  own  bed,  and  take  her  lodging
on  the  bare  floor,  without  a  single  article  of  bed  clothes,
except  some  garment  folded  under  her  head  for  a  pillow.
This  she  was  known  to  do,  not  only  in  the  summer  season,
but  also  in  the  winter,  when  the  weather  was  cold.

14.  John  Farrington  says,  "  I  have  a  number  of  times  seen
Mother  wait  till  the  multitude  had  done  eating,  and  then  go


Mother  Ann  Lee.  273

to  the  table,  with  a  mild  and  pleasant  countenance,  and
there  make  her  whole  meal,  out  of  the  fragments.  I  have
seen  her  walk  from  end  to  end  of  the  table,  picking  the
bones  after  us,  and  eating  the  broken  bits  of  bread  which
the  multitude  had  left.  Again,  after  the  people  had  been
eating  spoon  victuals,  I  have  seen  her  gather  the  remaining
driblets  into  one  dish,  and  eat  them  with  singular  marks  of
thankfulness."  This  she  often  did,  not  only  at  home,  in  her
own  family,  but  also  abroad,  among  the  people  where  she
visited;  and  she  often  took  such  opportunities  to  teach  pru-
dence and  economy.  Sometimes  the  Elders,  or  some  others,
would  urge  her  to  have  something  better;  but  she  would
reply,  "  It  is  good  enough  for  me,  for  it  is  the  blessing  of
God,  and  must  not  be  lost.  You  must  be  prudent,  and  saving
of  every  good  thing  which  God  blesses  you  with,  so  that  you
may  have  wherewith  to  give  to  them  that  stand  in  need."
This  is  confirmed,  by  many  of  the  Believers  who  have  been
eye-witnesses  of  these  things.

15.  Mother's  industry,  prudence  and  economy,  were  equal
to  her  zeal  and  charity ;  so  that,  in  all  things,  she  was  a  pat-
tern of  godliness,  and  showed  herself  to  be  a  mother  indeed,
in  every  good  word  and  work.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  did  set
an  example  of  righteousness  to  all  men,  and  instructed  all
Believers  to  follow  his  footsteps,  in  order  to  find  acceptance
wjth  God,  so  Mother  Ann  set  an  example  of  righteousness
to  all  women,  and  instructed  all  her  followers  to  take  up  the
same  cross,  in  order  to  find  their  relation  to  Christ.

16.  David  Slosson  relates,  that,  at  one  particular  time
when  he  was  at  Mother's  home  in  Waterviiet,  she  had  been
much  exercised  in  labors  with  the  people,  and  had  sent  them
away ;  after  which  she  went  into  the  kitchen,  and  said  she
wanted  some  of  the  Sisters  to  go  and  help  her  clean  the
door  yard.  She  had  no  sooner  spoken,  than  all  readily-
offered  their  services; but  she  took  only  a  part,  and  went

35


274  Testimonies  of

with  them,  and  was  very  active,  with  her  own  hands,  in
cleaning  away  all  the  litter  and  rubbish,  and  putting  things
in  order.  Soon  after  they  had  finished,  there  came  such  a
number  of  people,  that  the  house  was  too  small  to  hold  them;
therefore  they  held  their  meeting  in  the  door  yard.

17.  Thus  was  manifested,  not  only  Mother's  neatness,
industry,  and  prudence,  but  also  her  gift  of  wisdom  and
foresight,  by  which  she  always  had  all  things  in  readiness.
It  appeared,  indeed,  that  nothing  was  ever  lacking,  on  her
part ;  but  she  seemed  to  be  always  ready,  waiting  on  the
gift  of  God;  and  to  be,  in  truth,  a  worker  together,  with
God,  in  all  her  undertakings.

18.  After  the  decease  of  Father  William,  Mother,  who  had
been  ably  supported  by  him,  in  the  vast  weight  of  care  and
burden  which  such  a  vast  weight  of  Believers  brought  upon
her,  now  began  to  decline  in  bodily  strength;  and  knowing
that  her  work  was  nearly  at  a  close,  she  accordingly  endeav-
ored to  prepare  the  minds  of  the.  Believers  for  it.  She  re-
peatedly warned  them  to  be  faithful ;  for  she  was  about  to
leave  them.

19.  Soon  after  Father  William  expired,  Mother  said,
"  Brother  William  is  gone,  and,  it  will  soon  be  said  of  me,
that  I  am  gone  too."  She  was  afterward  often  heard  to  say,
"  Well,  I  am  coming  soon."  She  would  then  say  to  those  who
were  present,  "  Brother  William  is  calling  me."  Sometimes
she  would  say,  "Yea,  Brother  William,  I  shall  come  soon."

20.  She  continually  grew  weaker  in  body,  without  any
visible  appearance  of  bodily  disease,  till  the  8th  of  Sep-
tember, 1784,  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, when  she  breathed  her  last  without  a  struggle,  or  a
groan.  Before  her  departure,  she  repeatedly  said  to  those
around  her,  that  she  was  going  home.  A  little  before  she
expired,  she  said,  "  I  see  Brother  William,  coming  in  a
golden  chariot,  to  take  me  home."


Mother  Ann  Lee.  275

21.  After  her  decease  messengers  were  immediately  sent  to
New  Lebanon  to  notify  the  Believers.  Notice  was  also  sent
to  Albany,  and  other  places  in  the  vicinity,  that  all  who  so
desired,  might  attend  her  funeral.  Accordingly  a  vast  con-
course gathered,  both  of  Believers  and  others.

22.  At  the  grave  Father  James  Whittaker  spake  as  follows,
"  Here  lie  my  two  friends ;  God  help  me ;  as  ever  a  man
desires  to  eat,  who  is  hungry,  I  desire  to  lie  here  with  them!
They  are  a  part  of  myself!  They  are  gone  to  that  treasure
which  is  my  only  interest.  It  is  the  gospel  of  Christ  which
is  all  my  interest;  and  I  should  desire  to  depart,  and  to  lie
here  with  them,  were  it  not  for  vour  sakes.  But  I  forbear  —
There  is  not  a  man  in  America  that  is  able  to  keep  the  gospel
without  help."  The  tears  flowed  down  his  face  abundantly;
it  seemed  as  though  his  heart  would  break  for  very  grief.
He  proceeded,  "I  say,  the  will  of  God  be  done;  I  desire  to
do  the  will  of  God.  This  is  the  greatest  gift  of  God  that
the  soul  can  obtain.  You  will  all  have  to  feel  so  too,  —  to
be  reconciled  to  do  God's  will,  and  to  feel  that  the  gospel  is
your  only  interest."

23.  He  then  addressed  himself  to  the  unbelievers,  saying,
;*  This  that  we  so  much  esteem,  and  so  much  adore,  is  a
treasure  worth  the  laboring  for;  it  is  the  gospel  of  Christ's
Second  Appearance;  it  is  the  only  means  of  salvation  that
will  ever  be  offered  to  sinners;  it  is  the  last  display  of  God's
grace  to  a  lost  world."  Mehetabel  Farrington.


276  Testimonies  of

CHAPTER XL.

SKETCHES OF THE LIFE, CHARACTER AND MINISTRY OF
FATHER JAMES WH1TTAKER.

James  Whittaker  was  the  son  of  Jonathan  Whittaker  of
Oldham,  near  Manchester,  in  England.  His  mother's  maiden
name  was  Ann  Lee.*  She  was  a  member  of  the  society  of
James  and  Jane  Wardley,  and  was  a  good  Believer.  His
father  stood  in  opposition  for  a  while,  but  was  afterward
convicted  and  embraced  the  gospel,  and  had  a  strong  feeling
to  come  to  America,  with  Mother  and  the  Elders,  but  was
not  able ; he  died  in  the  faith.

2.  James  was  born  February  28th,  1 75 1,  and  received  the
testimony  of  the  gospel  in  his  childhood,  used  to  accompany
his  mother  to  the  meetings  of  James  and  Jane  Wardley,  and
was  remarkably  faithful  and  obedient  to  the  instruction  of
his  teachers.  In  early  youth  he  was  placed  under  the  care
of  Mother  Ann,  and,  by  her,  was  carefully  instructed  in  the
way  of  God;  and  having  gained  a  great  measure  of  the  gos-
pel, he  afterward  became  very  useful  to  her  in  her  ministry.
Being  greatly  gifted  in  public  speaking,  he  was  instrumental
in  gathering  many  souls  to  the  gospel.

3.  Concerning  his  own  experience  in  the  way  of  God,  he
gave  the  following  particulars  :  "  I  was  brought  up  in  the
way  of  God,  by  my  mother,  and  knew  no  unclean  thing.
But,  when  my  soul  was  waked  up,  I  found  myself  a  child
needy  of  the  mercy  of  God;  then  I  cried  mightily  to  God;
I  do  not  think  that  I  spoke  more  than  five  words  in  a  day;
and  I  verily  thought  that  the  whole  earth  trembled  under  me
for  the  space  of  a  whole  year;  but,  I  suppose  that  it  was
my  body  that  trembled  that  caused  this  feeling."

4.  "At  this  time  I  saw,  in  vision,  my  own  soul  in  America,

*  Probably  some  distant  relation  of  Mother  Ann.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  277

with  Mother's  soul;  and  I  heard  my  soul  speak  to  Mother's
soul,  and  I  heard  Mother's  soul  answer  my  soul,  and  I  heard
all  the  conversation  that  passed  between  Mother  and  the
Elders,  and  those  men  who  put  us  into  the  prison  in  Albany;
and  during  the  whole  time  of  our  imprisonment,  I  never
once  thought  of  my  vision;  but  as  soon  as  we  were  set  at
liberty,  it  all  came  fresh  to  my  mind." Hannah  Goodrich.

5 .  Father  James  informed  Joseph  Maine  that  while  he  was
one  day  walking  with  Mother,  in  England,  he  felt  the  heavens
open,  and  the  manifestation  and  givings  of  God  fell  upon
him  in  so  marvelous  a  manner  that  his  soul  was  filled  with
inexpressible  glory;  and  he  felt  such  an  overflowing  of  love
to  Mother,  that  he  cried  out,  "As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  my
soul  liveth,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee,"  and
that  Mother  then  and  there  promised  him  the  Bishoprick.
He  also  related  that  when  crossing  the  sea  from  England  to
America,  he  saw  Mother  Ann  and  himself  in  vision  ;  he  was
standing  by  the  side  of  Mother,  with  his  arm  bound  fast  to
hers,  with  a  golden  chain  which  seemed  to  surround  both  of
their  arms;  this  he  received  as  a  sign,  to  him,  that  he  should
never  be  separated  from  Mother.

6.  Father  James  was  a  man  evidently  and  greatly  noticed
of  God,  in  all  his  goings  forth  ;  and  such  notice  as  was  often
openly  manifest,  and  very  striking  to  all  present.  One  Sab-
bath day,  when  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  at  Harvard,  and
the  Believers  all  assembled  together  for  worship,  as  they
were  all  sitting  in  profound  silence,  Father  James,  being  un-
der a  solemn  weight  of  the  power  of  God,  extended  both  his
hands  upward  and  exclaimed,  "  Heavens  !  Heavens!  Heav-
ens!" Instantly  the  house  was  shaken,  and  the  casements
clattered,  as  though  they  had  been  shaken  by  a  mighty
earthquake.

7.  When  Mother  lived  at  Ashfield,  Father  James  went
from  thence  to  Harvard  and  Shirley. At  Shirley  he  attended


27S  Testimonies  of

the  funeral  of  Joseph  Jewett.  On  his  way  home,  he  stayed
one  night  at  Joseph  Shattuck's,  in  Petersham;  in  the  even-
ing, as  he  was  walking  the  floor,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  and
exclaimed,  "  Peace  !  peace!  peace!  what  peace  I  feel !  The
peace  of  the  gospel  is  worth  more  than  all  tht  treasures  of
this  world."

John  Robinson.

8.  Father  James  Whittaker  was  evidently  called,  of  God,
to  be  Mother  Ann's  successor,  in  the  ministry.  After  attend-
ing her  funeral,  and  speaking  to  the  assembly  under  a  great
weight  of  grief  and  sorrow,  he  returned  home,  and  the  Be-
lievers being  assembled,  he  thus  addressed  them,  "  My  two
friends  and  Elders  are  gone  !  I  pray  God  to  help  me ! ';
He  then  called  upon  all  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  to  help  him
keep  the  way  of  God  ;  and  urged  the  necessity  of  their  being
more  faithful  and  watchful  than  they  had  been,  to  keep  the
way  of  God,  since  those  who  had  the  greatest  gift  for  their
protection,  were  gone.  The  tears  flowed  abundantly.  He
spoke  of  the  great  weight  that  fell  upon  him  with  respect  to
the  protection  of  the  Believers,  and  his  concern  and  labor
that  the  gospel  might  be  kept  and  honored.  So  solemn  and
impressive  were  his  words  at  this  time,  that  they  had  great
effect  upon  every  sensitive  and  true  Believer.  It  was  plainly
seen  and  felt  that  Mother's  mantle  had  fallen  upon  him,  and
that  God  had  anointed  him  to  lead  and  protect  His  people.
After  he  had  done  speaking,  Elder  Joseph  Meacham,  Elder
Calvin  Harlow,  Elder  John  Hocknell,  and  others,  came  for-
ward and  acknowledged  him  as  their  Elder,  and  that  the  gift
of  God  rested  upon  him  for  their  protection.

9.  Father  James  remained  in  great  sorrow  until  the  morn-
ing of  the  third  day  after  Mother's  decease.  He  then  as-
sembled the  people,  and  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
he  spake  as  follows,  "  I  feel  like  ten  thousand  mountains  of
righteousness ! Now  I  remember  the  promise  of  God,  by


Mother  Ann  Lee.  279

Mother,  that  I  should  never  be  without  an  host  of  angels  to
guard  me."  Hannah  Goodrich,  Senr.

10.  The  first  time  Father  James  was  at  Hancock,  after
the  lead  of  the  people  rested  in  him,  he  rejoiced,  saying,
''  You  are  my  interest ;  and  should  not  a  man  rejoice  when
he  comes  to  his  interest  ?  "  Again,  he  said,  "  You  are  my
interest;  I  have  begotten  you  in  the  gospel,  and  I  love  you
all."  And  again,  "I  could  willingly  lay  down  my  life  for
my  Brethren,  if  I  were  called  to  do  it ;  for  I  feel  that  degree
of  love  to  them,  that  they  feel  near  and  dear  to  me  like  my
own  soul."

11.  Father  James  often  said,  "I  love  my  Brethren  all  as
one.  There  is  one  Lord,  and  His  name  is  one;  and  there
is  but  one  head."  Soon  after  Mother's  decease,  he  addressed
the  Believers  at  Watervliet,  concerning  their  interest  in  the
gospel,  showing  that  the  treasure  of  a  true  and  faithful  Be-
liever, was  in  his  Brethren  and  Sisters  in  Christ ;  and  not  in
his  earthly  kindred;  and  spoke  by  the  way  of  admonition  to
those  who  were  bound  to  their  fleshly  relations,  who  lived
after  the  course  of  this  world,  and  chose  to  make  them  heirs
to  their  temporal  interest,  rather  than  their  Brethren  and
Sisters,  who  were  faithful  to  serve  God.  He  expressed  his
own  feelings,  saying  "  my  only  treasure  is  in  them  that
believe;  I  have  no  relation  but  in  the  people  of  God.  They
who  are  faithful  to  serve  God  are  my  relations;  they  are  my
interest,  and  my  treasure,  and  all  I  have  is  theirs.  I  am
willing  that  all  the  interest  I  have  in  this  world,  should  go
to  them  that  are  faithful  to  serve  God,  here  in  America.
There  are  those  in  America,  who  have  entered  into  the  sanc-
tuary of  strength,  where  Satan  cannot  cheat  them  out  of
their  souls,  and  I  thank  God  for  it;  yea  I  thank  God  for  it."

Lydia  Mathewson.

12.  As  Father  James  was  at  this  time  the  only  one  now
left,  of  those  who  came  from  England,  who  stood  in  the


280  Testimonies  of

Ministry,  his  burdens  and  labors  were  exceedingly  great.
Sometimes  his  sufferings  were  so  great  that  he  used  to  say
he  felt  such  a  weight  of  the  lost  state  of  man,  and  such  a
sense  of  the  deep  defilement  of  the  earth,  that  he  hardly
dared  to  step  his  foot  to  the  ground;  and  would  sometimes
desire  all  the  Believers  to  quit  their  work  and  kneel  down  to
pray  for  him.

13.  Shortly  after  Mother  Ann's  decease,  in  an  evening
meeting  at  Watervliet,  Father  James  spoke  of  the  struggle
that  souls  would  have  to  find  the  new  birth,  and  said,
"  When  souls  came  to  see  that  they  must  be  born  again,  or
never  enter  the  kingdom  of  God,  they  will  have  done  with
every  thing  but  the  way  of  God ;  they  will  have  done  with
all  their  own  wills  and  ways,  and  will  cry  to  God,  knowing
that  if  they  are  not  delivered,  they  must  die."

Hannah  Cogswell .

14.  At  Hancock,  he  said,  "Blessed  are  the  sons  of  Zion
who  can  look  upon  the  daughters  of  men,  and  not  lust  after
them;  and  blessed  are  the  daughters  of  Zion  who  can  look
upon  the  sons  of  men,  and  not  lust  after  them.  We  have  an
altar  whereof  no  one  shall  partake,  but  those  who  rejoice  in
Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh;  for  our
altar  is  God's  altar,  and  the  wicked  shall  not  eat  thereon
nor  therefrom."  Again  he  said,  "  The  drunkard  shall  not
eat  on  our  altar."  Hannah  Goodrich,  Scnr.

15.  Again  Father  James  said,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  to  build
up  your  faith  ;  your  faith  is  most  holy;  but  I  know  you  have
infirmities,  and  I  pray  that  the  forbearance  of  God  may  be
lengthened  out  to  you,  until  you  learn  to  do  right ;  for  you
must  have  an  exceeding  righteousness;  your  righteousness
must  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees;
therefore,  treasure  up,  in  your  hearts,  that  which  will  keep
you  in  the  time  of  trouble."  "  Keep  your  faith,  for  the  end
of  your  faith  will  be  the  salvation  of  your  souls ;  and  when  I


Mother  Ann  Lee.  281

am  gone,  and  you  see  the  branches  flourish,  then  know  ye
that  the  root  is  holy. —  I  have  ventured  my  life  and  soul
among  you,  and  you  have  received  the  gospel,  and  are  wel-
come to  it."  Hannah  Goodrich,  Senr.

16.  Father  James  often  abased  himself  and  said,  "I  am
more  mean  than  any  of  you,  my  parents  were  mean,  and
poor;  but,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am ;  and
blessed  be  God,  who  hath  chosen  me  to  be  a  minister  of  the
gospel."  Hannah  Goodrich,  Senr.

17.  One  day,  at  Watervliet,  Mother  Lucy  and  a  number
of  others,  of  respectable  families  being  present,  Father
James  spoke  to  them  by  way  of  exhortation.  His  words  were
very  solemn  and  weighty,  and  the  Believers  all  kneeled  with
him  and  he  said,  "  I  am  a  mean  man  !  I  am  a  very  mean  man  !
When  I  look  around  upon  you  all,  I  consider  your  parent-
ages to  be  more  honorable  than  my  own;  but  I  thank  God
that  He  has  blessed  me  with  the  gospel  of  salvation."

Hannah  Cogswell.

18.  One  Sabbath  day,  at  Harvard,*  while  Father  James
was  speaking  to  a  large  assemblage  of  people,  with  great
solemnity  and  power  of  God,  under  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
he  kneeled  down,  and  all  the  Believers,  and  a  number  of  the
world,  kneeled  with  him,  and  while  on  his  knees  he  said,  "  I
am  but  a  poor  worm  of  the  dust,  and  a  very  little  one  too;  I
feel,  many  times,  as  though  I  could  crumble  into  the  dust
before  God."  Hannah  Cogswell.

19.  Father  James  possessed  great  fear  of  God,  and  often
manifested  it  in  his  public  gifts  and  ministrations.  One  day,
in  public  meeting,  at  Shirley,  in  passing  across  the  meeting-
house floor,  he  walked  softly,  with  great  care,  and  said,  "  I
feel  such  fear  of  God  that  I  fear  to  set  my  feet  to  the  floor."

Susanna  Barrett.

20.  At  another time  he kneeled down and said,  "  The

*  The  latter  part  of  February,  1782.
3*


2S2  Testimonies  of

Lord  has  given  us  the  power  of  repentance  and  forgiveness
of  sins."  At  another  time  he  kneeled  before  he  ate,  and,
with  a  loud  voice,  said,  "  I  pray  that  God  would  make  us
thankful  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  above  all  things,  make
us  thankful  for  the  gospel."  After  he  had  done  eating,  he
kneeled  again  and  said,  "  I  pray  that  the  patience  of  God
may  be  lengthened  out,  till  the  redemption  of  man  is  finished."

Susanna  Barrett.

21.  Again  Father  James  kneeled  down  in  great  sorrow,
and  prayed  to  God,  that  when  he  had  done  with  time  on
earth,  God  would  accept  him  in  innocency.  Again  he  said,
"In  our  humiliation  our  judgment  will  be  taken  away."

Nathan  Tiffany.

22.  Father  James  being  at  Enfield,  the  next  year  after
Mother  Ann's  decease,  he  came  into  the  meeting-house  on
the  Sabbath,  and  kneeled  down,  and  all  the  Believers  kneeled
with  him,  and  he  said,  "  God  has  committed  the  gospel  to
my  trust."  The  tears  flowed  abundantly  down  his  cheeks.
He  proceeded,  "  I  pray  that  God  would  lay  nothing  to  my
charge  ! — Christ  is  revealed;  I  feel  his  power,  in  sorrow  and
in  love.  God  has  blessed  me  with  a  broken  heart  and  godly
sorrow  for  sin."  He  arose  from  his  knees,  and  there  being
a  great  number  of  unbelievers  present,  who  seemed  to  make
light  of  the  work  of  God,  he  turned  to  them  and  said, "  I  de-
sire that  you  would  behave  yourselves,  or  peaceably  with-
draw ;  for  we  have  an  order,  and  I  will  contend  for  it,
at  the  price  of  my  blood. —  I  say,  I  desire  that  you  would
behave  yourselves,  or  peaceably  withdraw."  His  words  were
spoken  with  such  power  of  God  that  the  most  haughty  coun-
tenances fell,  and  all  gave  the  strictest  attention.  He  then
preached  the  gospel  of  self-denial  and  the  cross,  and  the
necessity  of  confessing  and  forsaking  all  sin.  After  speak-
ing considerably  lengthy  on  this  subject,  he  closed  his
discourse  with  these  words,  "  As  you  treat  this  gospel,  so


Mother  Ann  Lee.  283

God  will  treat  you;  if  you  slight  it,  God  will  slight  you;  if
you  regard  it,  God  will  regard  you ;  for  as  the  testimony  of
Noah  condemned  the  old  world,  so  shall  this  present  testi-
mony condemn  the  present  generation."  Caleb  Pease.

23.  Also  at  Enfield,  in  a  public  assembly,  Father  James
lifted  up  his  hands,  and  they  shook  by  the  mighty  power  of
God;  and  he  testified,  saying,  "This  is  the  gospel  !  This  is
the  gospel !  And,  if  any  man  preach  any  other  gospel  let
him  be  converted  by  the  power  of  God,  to  see  and  know- the
truth."  He  also  spoke  to  the  Brethren  and  Sisters,  saying,
"  I  can  tell  you  how  you  may  know  the  way  of  God, —  the
way  of  God  is  right  against  a  carnal  nature ;  and  a  carnal
nature  is  right  against  the  way  of  God ;  and  Christ  has  come
to  destroy  a  carnal  nature."  Joseph  Markham,  Se/ir.

24.  Father  James  was  greatly  gifted  in  visions  and  prophe-
cies, and  often  warned  the  people,  under  the  gift  of  vision,
and  prophecy,  not  to  reject  the  word  of  God  and  the  testi-
mony of  the  gospel  through  His  witnesses.  At  one  time,
while  at  Enfield,  he  came  into  meeting  under  great  power  of
God,  and  in  great  tribulation,  wringing  his  hands  and  groan-
ing in  spirit,  and  said,  "  Thaddeus  Billing,  take  care !
Thaddeus  Billing,  I  say  take  care  !  for  I  saw  the  bright  glory
of  God  pass  by  thee,  and  I  would  rather  have  seen  it  light
on  thee."*  He  also  addressed  the  audience,  and  said,  "I
have  ministered  to  you  the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  washed
my  hands  in  innocence,  and  if  there  are  but  five  souls  among
you  who  abide  faithful,  this  testimony  will  overcome  all  na-
tions; and  God  will  destroy  all  nations  from  off  the  face  of
the  earth  if  they  do  not  repent  and  turn  to  Him."

25.  There  are  many  souls  who  would  be  thankful  for  this
gospel  if  they  could  but  have  it,  being  sick  of  the  flesh;  but

*  Thaddeus  appeared  much  affected,  at  that  time,  but,  soon  after,  began  to  grow
obstinate,  and  became  a  reprobate,  and  a  bold  opposer  of  the  gospel,  and  a  bitter
enemy  to  that  faith  which  he  had  before  zealously  embraced,  and  strove  to  build  up


2S4  Testimonies  of

can  see  no  way  to  escape  it;  many  poor  women,  bound  by
the  flesh,  crying  to  God  in  their  troubles;  and  God  is  not
deaf  to  such  cries.  But,  I  thank  God,  that  I  never  wronged
any  woman;  and  I  thank  God  that  I  never  had  carnal  knowl-
edge of  any  woman."  A  certain  woman  in  the  assembly,
on  hearing  these  words,  cried  out,  three  times,  with  a  loud
voice,  "  James  Whittaker  is  the  son  of  God. "  Father  James
replied,  "  There  is  a  certain  woman  in  this  assembly  who
says,  James  Whittaker  is  the  son  of  God;  and  I  do  not  choose
to  deny  it,  for,  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  spirit  of  God,  they
are  the  sons  of  God."  Hannah  Wood-

26.  Many  of  the  Believers  being  assembled  at  John  Par-
tington's in  Watervliet,  Father  James  took  a  Bible,  and  read
concerning  the  judgments  of  God,  spoken  of  by  the  prophet
Zechariah,  and  in  the  Revelations  of  John,  and  being  under
deep  impressions  of  mind,  and  great  sorrow  of  heart,  he
said,  "  These  judgments  will  certainly  come  upon  all  those
who  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreheads.  The  seal
of  God  is  repentance."  Rebecca  Slosson-

Again,  at  Watervliet,  Father  James  was  in  great  sorrow,
and  he  said",  "  I  feel  the  judgments  of  God  against  sin,  and
when  you  feel  the  judgments  of  God  against  sin,  you  will
leave  it  off."  Rebecca  Slosson.

27.  At  another  time  he  was  greatly  exercised  in  soul  and
body,  and  he  testified,  saying,  "  The  judgments  of  God  are
coming  and  they  are  nigh  at  hand."  It  was  then  about  the
middle  of  the  day,  and  very  clear;  about  two  hours  afterward
there  came  a  dreadful  hail-storm  that  broke  the  windows,
and  beat  down  the  grain  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Brethren
ploughed  it  in  the  next  day,  and  planted  the  ground  with
Indian  corn.  The  seed  onions  were  headed,  but,  out  of
many  bushels  that  were  planted,  but  one  head  escaped  this
dreadful  storm.  Father  James,  and  all  who  were  present,
kneeled  down  in  prayer  to  God;  after  this  he  said,  "  Although


Mother  Ann  Lee.  285

the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  fruit  be  found  on  the
vine ;  the  labor  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  yield  no
meat ;  the  flocks  should  be  cut  off  in  the  fold,  and  there  be
no  herd  in  the  stalls;  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord;  I  will
joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  Rebecca  Slosson.

28.  There  once  came  a  man  to  Water vliet  who  had  been
a  Believer,  and  who,  through  transgression,  had  lost  his
union;  but  still  desired  the  mercy  of  God  in  His  people.
Father  James  assembled  all  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  into  the
meeting-house;  this  poor  man  came  in  with  the  rest  and
kneeled  down  before  Father  James,  but  seemed  to  have  an  un-
relenting heart,  and  could  not  shed  a  tear.  Father  James
looked  on  him  with  compassion,  and  said,  "  Repeat  these
words  after  me,  'O  Lord,  is  thy  mercy  clean  gone  ?  '  As  the
man  repeated  the  words,  the  tears  gushed  from  his  eyes,  his
heart  was  broken,  and  Father  James  said,  "  I  thank  God
that  there  is  mercy  yet  in  Zion."  Hannah  Wood.

29.  At  Shirley,  Father  James  prophesied,  saying,  "  There
will  be  a  famine,  not  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water;  but,
of  the  word  of  God;  and  you  will  be  glad  to  pick  up  every
scrap,  and  every  crumb  that  ever  fell  from  our  mouths.
People  will  yet  see  the  time  when  they  will  be  willing  to
crawl  on  their  hands  and  knees,  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  to
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Again  he  said,  "  It  is  not
James  Whittaker's  way,  it  is  God's  way;  and  all  I  want  is
an  equal  share  with  my  Brethren."  David  Crouch.

30.  Being  at  David  Hammond's,  in  Petersham,  after  Moth-
er's decease,  and  speaking  in  public,  he  said,  "  Treasure  up
the  word  of  God;  the  time  will  come  when  you  will  need  to
gather  up  every  word  of  God;  and  now  is  the  time;  gather
up  all  the  fragments; see  that  nothing  is  lost."

John  Robinson.
Again Father  James  said  to  a  woman,  "  Now  is  the  time
to  turn  about and  repent;  for  the  day  is  coming  when  souls


2S6  Testimonies  of

will  cry  out,  '  Lord,  any  way  to  be  saved,'  and  the  time  is
near  at  hand."  At  another  time  he  said,  "  The  judgments
of  God  will  as  certainly  follow  the  preaching  of  this  gospel,
as  the  flood  followed  the  preaching  of  Noah,  and  the  same
sins  that  brought  the  judgments  of  God  upon  Sodom  and
Gomorrah,  will  bring  the  same  judgments  upon  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth;  for  the  sins  of  Sodom  are  already  in  the
earth."  Amos  Rathbun.

31.  In  a  public  assembly  at  Watervliet,  not  long  after
Mother's  decease,  Father  James  spoke  as  follows,  "  I  feel
a  special  gift  of  God;  I  see  people  in  the  visions  of  God,  as
numerous  as  the  trees  in  the  forest!  I  see  that  the  gospel
is  to  be  preached  to  them!  The  rising  generation,  you  who
are  now  young,  the  days  will  come  when  you  will  be  scat-
tered over  the  earth,  preaching  the  gospel;  and  you  will
have  great  gifts  of  God,  to  open  the  way  of  eternal  life  to  a
lost  world."

32.  At  Enfield,  speaking  of  his  visions  he  said,  "  I  saw  a
day  when  souls  would  wake  up  by  the  power  of  God,  even
ancient  people,  in  great  multitudes,  shaking  to  their  fingers'
ends."  He  also  said,  "After  my  decease,  there  will  be  a
great  increase;  but,  it  will  come  through  an  increase  of
union,  and  in  no  other  way."  Mother  Lucy  Wright.

33.  Again,  just  before  he  departed  this  life  Father  James
said,  "  I  saw  all  the  Believers  travel,  and  then  come  to  a
stop,  as  up  against  a  wall;  and  then  they  were  brought  into
order;  after  which  I  saw  the  old  men  and  women  traveling,
and  bearing  their  own  burdens."  He  also  said,  "  The  young
people,  who  are  faithful,  will  suck  of  every  flower,  and  be
full  of  the  gifts  of  God."  Samuel  Fitch.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  287

CHAPTER  XLI.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.

Father  James,  in  his  person,  was  a  man  of  rather  more
than  middling  stature;  in  form,  very  well  proportioned;  of
more  than  ordinary  strength,  of  his  size,  and  very  active.  He
had  a  fair  complexion,  black  eyes,  and  very  dark  brown,  straight
hair;  an  open  and  placid  countenance,  grave,  but  pleasant;  such
as  the  beholders  might  both  love,  and  fear.  His  voice  was
clear,  and  solid,  but  mild,  and  pleasant;  his  speech  was  such
as  inspired  confidence,  and  commanded  respect.  It  was  not
an  uncommon  expression  among  the  world,  on  hearing  him,
to  say,  "  I  love  to  hear  that  James  Whittaker  speak."

2.  In  his  disposition  he  was  mild,  gentle  and  forbearing,
yet  firm  and  undaunted,  and  inflexible  in  duty.  So  amiable
was  his  deportment,  and  so  winning  his  manners,  that  he  of-
ten disarmed  the  most  bitter  opposers  of  their  rage.  He
was  greatly  beloved  by  all  who  knew  him,  both  Believers
and  the  world;  and  none  were  his  enemies  but  those  whose
opposition  to  the  way  of  God,  rendered  every  subject  of  it,
an  object  of  hatred.  In  reproving  sin  he  was  sharp  and
powerful,  but  wise,  and  careful  not  to  hurt  the  soul.  In  la-
boring with  lost  souls,  in  admonishing  the  careless,  instruct-
ing the  ignorant,  strengthening  the  weak,  relieving  the  buf-
fetted,  and  binding  up  the  broken  hearted,  his  gift  of  wisdom
and  understanding  was  very  remarkable;  he  knew  how  to
come  to  lost  souls  in  every  situation,  and  to  administer  meat
in  due  season.  He  possessed  great  meekness,  humility  and
simplicity  of  soul,  was  remarkably  tender  hearted,  kind  and
charitable,  and  abounded  in  heavenly  love.  When  he  wept,
it  seemed  as  though  every  feeling  heart  must  weep  with  him;
and  when  he  rejoiced,  that  every  soul  who  was  alive  in  the
gospel,  must  rejoice  with  him.


288  Testimonies  of

3.  Eliphalet  Slosson  said,  "Father  James  was  a  man  of
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.  I  have  often  heard  him
with  tears  rolling  from  his  eyes,  express  his  love,  and  thank-
fulness for  the  way  of  God,  in  the  following  manner:  '  O,
how  precious  is  the  way  of  God  to  my  thirsty  soul  !  —  I  feel
the  love  of  God  continually  flowing  into  my  soul,  like  rivers
of  living  water;  —  it  is  sweeter  in  my  mouth  than  honey  in
the  honey-comb;  —  I  know  that  God  owns  me  as  His  son,
and  yet  I  will  pray  to  Him;  I  know  how  to  pray;  and  I
know  how  to  be  thankful  for  the  gospel;  even  my  breath  is
continual  prayer  to  God.'  "

4.  As  he  was  brought  up  in  the  gospel  from  his  childhood,
he  possessed  a  remarkable  degree  of  purity.  It  seemed  as
though  every  feeling  of  his  soul  continually  breathed  purity;
hence  his  spirit  was  in  continual  opposition  to  the  ties  of  a
carnal  nature,  and  all  natural  relation.  He  often  said,  "  I
hate  these  things  as  I  hate  the  smoke  of  the  bottomless  pit;
and  in  lieu  thereof  I  behold,  in  open  vision,  the  angelic  host,
and  join,  in  the  melodious  songs  of  the  New  Jerusalem."

5.  So  completely  did  he  overcome  a  carnal  nature,  that
before  he  left  this  world,  he  said,  "  I  have  no  more  lust  than
an  infant;  nay,  not  so  much:  I  have  no  more  than  a  child
unborn."  And  for  some  years  before  his  death,  he  never
once  felt  an  operation  of  that  nature,  neither  asleep  nor
awake.  He  used  to  say,  "  There  is  no  need  of  any  person
trying  the  flesh,  in  order  to  know  what  it  is.  If  you  are
faithful  in  the  way  of  God,  you  will  know  by  the  light  of  the
gospel,  what  the  flesh  is,  without  experiencing  it;  for  light
comprehends  darkness."

6.  He  often  said,  "  The  gospel  is  without  fault,  it  is
straight  as  straightness;  it  is  pure  as  the  heavens;  and  if  you
obey  it  not,  you  will  lose  your  souls.'  In  solemn  warnings
to  the  people,  and  for  their  encouragement,  he  would  say,
"Wherever  you  are; whatever  may  betide  you;  how  dark


Mother  Ann  Lee.  289

soever  things  may  appear;  how  unjustly  soever  you  may  suf-
fer, keep  your  faith;  for  the  time  will  come,  when  all  wrongs
will  be  righted."  And  again,  "What  I  say  to-day,  there  you
shall  find  me  to-morrow;  for  I  would  not  be  the  means
of  marring  one  soul  for  all  earthly  things."

Abijah  Wooster.

7.  In  warning  Believers  against  falsehood  and  deception,
Father  James  said,  "  You  ought  to  be  watchful  over  your
words  at  all  times,  and  be  careful  to  know  that  you  speak
the  truth  ;  not  tell  things  that  you  do  not  know  to  be  true
in  such  a  manner  as  to  deceive  others ;  but  you  ought  to  rep-
resent things  as  they  are  ;  and  not  deceive  one  another ;  it  is
lying;  it  is  wicked."  He  often  spoke  in  this  manner  during
his  ministry,  earnestly  pressing  it  upon  the  people,  as  a  mat-
ter of  great  importance.  He  also  said,  "  The  way  to  labor
for  the  gospel,  is  to  keep  your  mind  upon  the  things  of  God.
You  ought  to  let  your  minds  be  exercised  in  laboring  upon
the  things  that  belong  to  your  peace,  and  not  on  the  things
of  the  world  ;  for  if  you  give  your  minds  to  labor  upon  the
things  of  the  world,  they  will  become  corrupted."

Lydia  Mathetvson.

8.  Father  James  often  had  solemn  gifts  of  warning  the
Believers  not  to  suffer  their  souls  to  get  overshadowed  and
darkened  with  those  things  that  had  a  tendency  to  shut  the
gift  of  God  out  of  the  soul.  At  Hancock  he  spoke  in  a
solemn  manner,  to  the  Brethren,  saying,  "  I  warn  you  Breth-
ren, not  to  be  overcome  with  the  cares  of  this  world,  lest
your  souls  lose  the  power  of  God,  and  you  become  lean  and
barren."  Luther  Cogswell,

9.  He  would  often  say  to  the  Believers,  "  Be  what  you
seem  to  be;  and  seem  to  be  what  you  really  are;  don't  carry
two  faces."  And  again,  "  You  have  received  faith,  and  your
faith  will  be  tried;  faith  untried  is  uncertain."

Henry  Goddin.
37 'u


290  Testimonies  of

10.  In  reproving  the  Believers  for  their  wrongs,  Father
James  often  used  to  say,  "  If  you  do  not  love  to  hear  of
these  things,  then  leave  them  off;  put  away  the  cause  and
the  effect  will  cease."  And  again,  "  Ye  who  have  believed
in  God,  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  And  again,
"  I'll  know  no  man  by  his  speech,  but  by  the  fruits  he  brings
forth."  John  Warner.

11.  Having  been  at  Harvard,  after  Mother's  decease,  and
being  about  to  take  his  leave  of  the  place,  and  the  Brethren,
he  spoke  to  them  in  great  sorrow,  and  after  a  pause  of  sol-
emn silence  he  said,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place,  pull  off
your  shoes;  for  the  place  where  ye  stand  is  holy."*

Eunice  Wythe.

12.  At  Enfield  he  said  to  some  of  the  Believers,  "You
need  not  be  afraid  of  losing  your  lots,  unless  you  lose  them
by  transgression.  Every  one  of  you  must  labor  in  your  own
lots,  lest,  by  seeking  to  get  another's  lot,  you  lose  your  own."

Mary  Tiffany.

13.  In  the  time  of  Shay's  insurrection  in  Massachusetts,
some  of  the  Believers  in  that  state,  in  expressing  their  senti-
ments, manifested  some  party  feelings  concerning  that  event;
when  it  came  to  Father  James'  knowledge,  he  rebuked  that
spirit,  saying,  "  Those  who  give  way  to  a  party  spirit,  and
are  influenced  by  the  divisions  and  contentions  of  the  world,
so  as  to  feel  for  one  political  party  more  than  another,  have
no  part  with  me."  Again  he  said,  "The  spirit  of  party  is
the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  whoever  indulges  it,  and  unites
with  one  evil  spirit  against  another,  is  off  from  Christian
ground."  Jethro  Turner.

14.  Being  in  conversation  at  David  Dwinnel's,  in  Sutton,
with  some  men  of  the  world,  they  pleaded  very  strongly  for
the  great  command,  as  they  called  it,  to  "increase  and  mul-
tiply." Father  James  said,  "When  you  feel  to  gratify  that

*The  Church  was  subsequently  there  established.


Mother  Ann  Lee.  291

sordid  propensity  with  your  wives,  I  can  tell  you  what  is  best
for  you  to  do.  First,  kneel  down,  and  pray  to  God  to  know
His  mind  and  will,  respecting  what  you  are  about  to  do;
and,  I'll  warrant  you  will  feel  a  relaxation  of  that  nature,
before  you  find  an  answer  of  God."  John  Warner.

15.  In  addressing  an  assembly  of  Believers  at  Nathan
Farrington's  in  New  Lebanon,  Father  James  said,  "Sanctify
the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts;  God  will  remember  you  in
mercy;  but  if  ye  neglect  to  sanctify  God  in  your  hearts,  God
will  neglect  to  remember  you  in  mercy,  and  will  remember
you  in  judgment.  I  hate  and  abhor  your  neglect  of  the  gos-
pel, as  I  prize  the  salvation  of  your  souls."

Hannah  Cogswell.

16.  Near  the  same  time  he  addressed  an  assembly  at  John
Spier's,  and  said,  "  I  love  those  who  believe  ;  if  I  have  any
interest  on  earth,  it  is  in  those  who  believe  the  gospel.  Since
I  came  to  America,  I  have  seen  the  time  that  I  would  have
been  willing  to  creep  many  miles,  on  my  hands  and  knees,
to  see  the  face  of  one  who  believed  the  gospel,  but  I  could
not."  He  also  said,  "When  ye  see  the  branches  flourish,
and  bring  forth  fruit,  then  remember  that  the  root  is  holy."

Hannah  Cogswell.

17.  At  a  certain  time,  in  speaking  to  the  Believers,  Father
James  said,  "  If  any  of  you  commit  sin,  or  break  any  of  the
orders  of  God,  you  must  confess  it  before  you  sleep."  Again
he  said,  "  The  time  will  come  when  disobedience  to  a  single
order  of  God,  will  shut  the  soul  out  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven."  Mother  Lucy  Wright.

18.  The  first  time  that  the  Believers  assembled  in  the  new
meeting-house,  at  New  Lebanon,*  Father  James  thus  ad-
dressed the  assembly,  "  When  you  go  in  and  out,  at  these
doors,  remember  to  go  in  and  out  in  the  fear  of  God.  Re-
member that  this  house  was  built  to  repent  and  serve  God

*  Sabbath,  January  29,  17S6.


292  Testimonies  of

in ;  that  God  has  placed  the  foundation  in  Zion  for  all  souls
to  gather  to,  that  ever  find  salvation."  "  If  you  will  hearken
unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  your  God,  and  do  whatsoever
He  commandeth  you,  ye  shall  be  protected ;  the  blessing  of
God  shall  rest  upon  you;  ye  shall  be  blessed  in  your  goings
out  and  in  your  comings  in  ;  in  your  basket  and  in  your
store.  And  they  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the
west,  from  the  nortli  and  from  the  south,  from  all  nations,
and  hear  the  gospel  in  this  house.  But  if  ye  disobey  the
voice  of  the  Lord,  your  God,  you,  above  all  people  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  shall  be  under  the  judgment  of  God."

JoJin  Bruce.

19.  In  addressing  the  assembly  again  in  the  afternoon,  he
kneeled  down,  and  all  the  people  with  him,  and  on  his  knees
he  said,  "  I  desire  that  you  would  all  return  thanks  to  God,
that  the  purpose  intended,  in  the  building  of  this  house,  is
so  far  accomplished."  After  this  he  uttered  the  following
benedictions,  and  all  the  Believers  repeated  them  after  him.

20.  "  Blessed  are  all  those  who  come  to  the  tree  of  life
and  have  a  right  therein.  Blessed  are  all  those  who  hate  the
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh.  Blessed  are  all  those  who  are
not  defiled  by  women.  Blessed  are  all  those  young  virgins
who  were  never  defiled  by  men."  On  uttering  this  last  sen-
tence, the  young  Sisters  instantly,  and  with  one  voice,  shouted
their  approbation.  Salome  McClure.

21.  Shortly  after  this,  in  addressing  the  assembly  in  this
meeting-house,  he  said,  "  You  must  have  an  exceeding  right-
eousness, for  verily  I  say  unto  you,  except  your  righteous-
ness exceed  the  righteousness  of  all  other  men,  even  of  all
those  who  believe,  you  shall,  of  all  people,  be  the  most  put
to  shame  ;  for  the  fame  of  this  place  has  gone  to  the  ends  of
the  land,  if  not  to  other  nations."  Hannah  Cogswell.

22.  Again  he  said,  "  There  are  many  pious  men  in  this  world
who  live  up  to  the  best  light  they  know,  who  have  never


Mother  Ann  Lee.  293

heard  the  sound  of  this  gospel ;  but,  except  your  righteous-
ness exceed  theirs,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  king-
dom.'' And  again,  '  Those  who  are  called  by  the  gospel
when  they  are  children,  and  are  faithful  and  obedient,  and
keep  out  of  sin,  will  be  the  flower  of  heaven  and  the  glory
of  Paradise."  Mary  Spencer.

23.  At  another  time,  in  addressing  a  public  assembly  in
this  meeting-house,  he  said,  "  God  has  blessed  this  land  with
the  gospel,  and,  as  certain  as  the  gospel  has  been  preached  to
this  land,  so  certain  the  judgments  of  God  will  follow  the
gospel.  The  mercy  of  God  has  been  to  this  land,  and  the
mercy  of  God  has  been  welcome;  so  the  judgments  of  God
shall  be  as  welcome.  Come,  welcome  mercy !  Come,  wel-
come judgments  !  "

24.  About  the  middle  of  January,  1787,  Father  James
called  upon  the  Believers  to  assemble,  on  the  morning  of  a
week  day,  at  the  meeting-house  in  New  Lebanon.  They  ac-
cordingly assembled,  and  he  came  into  the  meeting-house
with  a  very  weighty  gift,  and  with  tears  flowing  from  his  eyes,
he  said,  "I  am  going  to  leave  you;  I  feel  that  my  work  is
done  here,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  shall  ever  see  you  again
in  this  world,  but  I  leave  them  with  you,  who  are  able  to
teach  you  the  way  of  God.  1  desire  that  you  would  treasure
up  the  gospel,  and  make  it  your  only  interest.  You  are  all
the  interest  I  have  in  this  world;  I  have  no  other  interest.
He  then  kneeled  down  and  wept  exceedingly,  and  all  the
Believers  kneeled  and  wept  with  him.  After  rising  from  his
knees,  he  warned  the  people,  in  a  very  solemn  manner,  to  be
faithful,  and  keep  the  way  of  God,  when  he  was  gone,  and
said,  "We  have  given  you  the  gospel;  see  to  it  that  you
make  a  good  use  of  it."

25.  He  then  addressed  the  Elders,  and  laborers  among  the
people,  and  gave  them  a  very  solemn  charge  to  be  faithful,
and watch  over  the  people  for  their  protection,  and  said,


294  Testimonies  of

'*'  Do  by  the  Brethren  and  Sisters  as  I  have  done  by  you."
He  also  warned  them,  in  a  special  manner,  concerning  the
youth  and  children,  and  said,  "  You  must  take  care,  and  pro-
te<  t  the  rising  generation,  for  if  they  are  protected,  the  time
will  come,  when  they  will  be  the  flower  of  the  people  of
God.  "  Ebenezer  Bishop  and  Jo  Jin  Bruce.

26.  The  same  evening,  he  came  into  meeting  again,  and
warned  the  Believers  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  to  keep
the  way  of  God ;  and  said  "  Do  be  faithful.  Those  of  you
who  abide  faithful,  will  be  like  a  bud  in  the  bloom  ;  but  those
who  do  not  abide  will  be  like  a  falling  leaf;  and  you  will  re-
member these  words  when  you  cannot  see  me."  The  next
morning,  he  took  his  leave  of  the  Believers  at  New  Lebanon,
and  set  off  for  Enfield,  from  whence  he  never  returned.

Mary  Spencer.

27.  He  tarried  a  short  time  at  Enfield,  and  then  made  a
visit  among  the  Believers  in  Harvard  and  Shirley,  Woburn,
&c,  and  returned  to  Enfield.  Conn.,  sometime  in  March,
where  he  remained  till  his  decease.  Here  he  was  continually
visited  by  the  Believers  from  other  places.  His  ministry  was
short,  but  very  laborious  and  active.  He  visited  all  the  dif-
ferent places  in  the  land  where  the  gospel  had  been  received,
and  some  of  them  several  times.  His  labors  were  continu-
ally employed  in  strengthening  the  weak,  comforting  the  af-
flicted, and  purging  out  sin.  It  was  the  peculiar  gift  of  his
ministry  to  wean  the  affections  of  the  Believers,  from  natural
and  earthly  things,  and  ties,  and  prepare  them  for  a  spiritual
relation  in  Church  Order  which  he  foretold  was  at  hand,  and
often  spoke  of  it.

28.  His  instructions  to  the  Elders  who  afterward  suc-
ceeded him,  relative  to  gathering,  building,  and  establishing
the  Church  in  gospel  order,  might,  with  great  propriety,  be
likened  to  the  instructions  of  David  to  Solomon,  concerning
the  building  of  the temple,  which  was an  eminent  type  of


Mother  Ann  Lee.  295

*

this  work.  Many  were  the  instructions,  exhortations  and
solemn  warnings  which  he  delivered,  in  the  last  days  of  his
ministry.  When  he  came  near  to  the  close  of  life,  he  said,
"  I  have  given  you  my  life  ;  all  I  have,  I  have  given  unto
you;  if  lever  had  any  thing,  you  possess  it  —  it  is  yours;
and  now,  see  that  you  make  a  good  use  of  it.''

29.  About  two  weeks  before  his  decease,  he  said,  "  My
body  is  under  great  sufferings;  but  I  feel  my  soul  at  peace
with  God  and  man.  I  have  given  you  the  gospel ;  now  see
to  it,  what  kind  of  use  you  make  of  it.  If  you  keep  the  gos-
pel, the  gospel  will  keep  you.  I  have  given  my  life  for  the
people;  and  after  I  am  gone,  there  will  be  a  great  increase."

Eunice  Wilds.

30.  A  little  before  Father  James'  decease,  a  number  of  the
Brethren  and  Sisters  went  from  New  Lebanon  to  Enfield,  to
see  him;  and  being  about  to  return  home,  they  went  to  his
room,  to  take  their  leave  of  him.  On  entering  the  room,
they  all  kneeled  down,  and  he  addressed  them  as  follows,
"  I  feel  thankful  to  see  you  all,  and  that  you  have  come  to  see
me  in  my  sickness,  once  more,  before  I  leave  this  world.  I
feel  weak  in  body,  but  comfortable  in  my  spirit  ;  and  whether
I  live  or  die,  the  gospel  will  increase.  I  have  had  a  great
desire  to  come  and  see  you  all,  but  I  have  not  been  able  ;
but  my  heart  has  been  with  you  ;  and  now  your  hearts  must
be  with  me,  to  labor  for  the  power  of  God,  for  one  union ;
and  if  ever  God  raises  me  up,  I  will  come  and  see  you."'

31.  "I  desire  you  would  give  my  love  to  the  people  where
you  go,  and  tell  them  that  I  am  alive;  and  that  I  never  ex-
pect to  die ;  for  the  sting  of  death  is  taken  from  me,  and  all
fear  and  terror;  yet  I  expect  to  put  off  this  earthly  taberna-
cle." When  they  came  away,  Mother  Lucy  "Wright,  who
was  there,  embraced  the  Sisters,  and  wept  with  them  in  thank-
fulness for  their  privilege.  Hannah  Cogswell.

32.  When  he  was  on  his  dying  bed,  he  said,  "  My  suffer-


296  Testimonies  of

*

ings  are  exceedingly  great;  but  that  peace  and  consolation

which  I  feel  in  my  soul,  overbalances  them  all. That  peace

and  comfort  which  I  feel  in  the  gospel,  I  would  not  exchange

for  a  thousand  such  worlds  as  this." He  then  exhorted  all

to  hold  on,  and  hold  out  to  the  end,  and  said,  "If  you  hold

out  to  the  end,  you  will  feel  that  peace  which  I  now  feel."

Nathan  Willard.

33.  Thus  he  continued  to  exhort,  encourage  and  strengthen
all  around  him,  till  he  expired,  on  the  20th  of  July,  1787.
His  funeral  was  attended  on  the  following  day;  and  the  sea-
son was  very  affecting  to  all  the  Believers,  who  viewed  him
as  their  Elder  and  Father,  and  the  last  of  those  faithful
ministers  of  Christ  who  had  brought  the  gospel  to  this  land,
and  had  been  called  to  stand  in  the  Ministry.

34.  Elder  Joseph  Meacham,  and  Elder  Calvin  Harlow,
addressed  the  assembly  on  the  occasion.  They  spoke  in  a
very  solemn  and  affecting  manner  of  his  faithfulness,  and
testified  that  he  had  been  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ,  in  the
important  charge  which  God  had  committed  to  him,  over
the  people,  in  teaching  and  instructing  them  in  the  way  of
God,  in  bearing  their  infirmities,  and  suffering  for  the  in-
crease of  the  gospel.

35.  They  spoke  with  great  strength  and  power  of  God,
concerning  the  future  increase  of  the  gospel;  and  with  great
boldness  and  confidence  assured  the  people  that  the  gospel
would  be  kept;  that  the  work  of  God  would  increase,  and
God's  people  would  be  protected.

36.  Many  of  the  world  attended,  whose  spirits  felt  so  ex-
ceedingly oppressive  *  to  Elder  Joseph, that,  while  at  the

*  The  nature  of  that  oppressive  spirit  which  Elder  Joseph  felt  from  the  world,  at
the  funeral,  maybe  understood  from  the  following  circumstance:  A  few  days
after  Elder  James'  decease,  one  of  the  leading  characters  of  the  town,  expressed
himself  as  follows:  "  Now  James  Whittaker  is  gone,  the  Shakers  would  return  to
their  former  way  again,  and  become  good  members  of  society,  if  it  were  not  for
Joseph  and  David  Meacham;  but  they  are  so  willful,  that  they  will  keep  up  the
delusion,  and  keep  the  people  together."


Mother  Ann  Lee.  297

grave  he  was  taken  under  operations  of  the  power  of  God  in
such  a  manner  that  he  shook  and  trembled,  all  over,  from
head  to  foot ;  and  he  spoke  with  such  power,  that  it  appeared
marvelous,  even  to  the  Believers  who  were  present.  He
declared  that  the  work  of  God  would  increase,  and  that  the
power  of  God  would  yet  overcome  all  things.


CHAPTER  XLII.

OF THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD.

That  there  is  a  secret  judgment  for  the  wicked,  is  beyond
all  dispute;  and  it  is  also  unquestionable,  that  both  the
righteous  and  the  wicked,  will  meet  their  ultimate  reward  in
the  world  of  spirits.  But  mankind  are  so  natural  in  their
understandings,  that  they  cannot  understand  spiritual  things,
without  a  manifestation  that  comes  to  their  natural  senses,
therefore,  God  often  dispenses  a  foretaste  of  the  rewards  of
the  eternal  world,  by  blessings  upon  the  righteous,  and  judg-
ments upon  the  wicked,  in  this  life.

2.  In  all  ages  of  the  world,  wherever  there  has  been  a
hew  dispensation  of  God's  grace  to  man,  or  any  extraordi-
nary display  of  His  power  and  work  among  mankind,  those
who  have  distinguished  themselves  by  their  faith  and  obedi-
ence, have  been  distinguished  by  blessings;  and  those  who
have  manifested  a  distinguished  opposition,  have  also  been
distinguished  by  judgments,  as  a  warning  to  others.  Hence
these  evidences  serve  to  show  where  the  work  of  God  is,
and  who  are  His  chosen  witnesses;  so  that  mankind  may  be
left  without  excuse.

3.  It  therefore  appears  proper  to  record  some  of  those
judgments  of  God  which  evidently  fell  upon  the  most  active

38


29S  Testimonies  of

opposers  and  persecutors  of  Mother  and  the  Elders;  and
also  some  extraordinary  fulfilments  of  the  prophecies  of
Mother  and  the  Elders  concerning  the  judgments  of  God
upon  reprobates  and  persecutors.

4.  There  has,  evidently,  been  a  general  blast  upon  those
who  have  persecuted  the  work  of  God  in  Mother  and  the
Elders;  also  upon  those  who  have  turned  their  backs  against
the  way  of  God,  after  once  embracing  it;  they  have  not
prospered,  like  the  rest  of  mankind;  and  though  some  have
appeared  to  flourish  for  a  little  season,  yet,  it  appeared  as
though  it  was  only  to  make  their  judgment  more  extraordi-
nary; and,  therefore,  the  more  evident  to  others.

5.  It  has  most  generally  happened,  that  reprobates,  and
persecutors  have  either  been  fugitives,  and  vagabonds  upon
the  earth,  or  have  died  some  extraordinary  or  untimely
death.  They  have  not  died  the  common  death  of  man,  nor
been  visited  with  the  incidents  common  to  other  men.  Out
of  the  many  extraordinary  instances  of  this  nature  we  record
the  following.

6.  Thomas  Law,  who  was  so  maliciously  abusive  in  the
mob  at  New  Lebanon,  afterward  lived  as  a  vagabond  upon
the  earth,  destitute  of  property,  and  universally  despised,  by
all  who  knew  him;  his  very  name  became  a  proverb  of  re-
proach and  detestation;  and  after  living  a  miserable  life,  he
died  without  any  warning  of  his  approaching  end.  He  was
apparently  well,  at  night,  but  before  morning  he  was  a
corpse.

7.  Selah  Abbot,  Junr.,  one  of  the  principal  actors  in  the
same  mob,  ever  afterward  appeared  under  judgment,  and
died,  not  long  afterward,  in  an  awful  manner,  with  his  eyes
wide  open,  nor  was  it  in  the  power  of  his  friends  to  close
them;  this  appeared  very  striking  to  beholders.

8.  Selah  Abbot,  Senr.,  was  also  very  active  in  the  same
mob,  and  struck  Eliab  Harlow,  several  times  on  his  throat,


Mother  Ann  Lee.  299

and  tore  him  from  Mother's  horse,  while  he  was  attempting
to  lead  the  carriage  from  George  Darrow's;  but,  ever  after,
he  appeared  to  be  under  judgment,  and,  at  last,  died  sud-
denly, and  very  unexpectedly  to  his  family.

9.  Ephraim  Bowman,  who  was  also  of  the  same  mob,  was
then  a  likely  young  man,  held  the  office  of  a  constable,  and
bade  fair  to  be  respectable  in  the  world,  but  he  never  pros-
pered in  his  undertakings,  and  came  to  nothing,  and  was
almost  ever  after,  a  vagabond  upon  the  earth;  a  drunken,
and  despised  wretch.  At  length,  after  about  thirty  years  of
judgment,  he  died  in  a  most  deplorable  state  ;  not  even  a
friend  to  close  his  eyes,  or  lay  him  out;  until  his  neighbors,
of  humanity,  came  and  buried  him.

10.  Eleazer  Grant,  Esqr.,  who  made  such  a  conspicuous
appearance  in  that  persecuting  mob,  appeared,  ever  after,  to
be  under  a  blast.  He  was,  at  that  time,  considered  a  man
of  property  and  respectability,  and  by  no  means  deficient
in  talents;  yet,  his  property  wasted  away  until  he  was  worth
little,  or  nothing ;  he  gradually  lost  his  reputation,  and  ruined
his  health,  by  strong  drink,  evidently  with  a  view  to  drown  his
horror  of  conscience.  At  length  he  was  taken  with  a  strange
disorder;  first  his  fingers,  then,  his  hands  and  arms  began  to
perish.  He  confessed,  to  some  of  the  Brethren,  that  he  did
not  know  but  Mother's  words  were  coming  to  pass  upon  him,
and  that  he  was  getting  into  the  "  cockleshell."  He  said  he
was  obliged  to  be  a  Shaker,  for  he  was  taken,  every  day,  with
an  irresistible  shaking,  in  the  manner  the  Believers  used  to
shake,  which  would  continue  an  hour  or  two;  that  his  head
would  shake  with  such  violence  as  to  cause  him  to  make  a
noise  with  his  mouth,  and  he  could  not  help  it.

11.  He  also  said  that  he  was  obliged  to  leave  off  sexual
indulgences;  for  it  seemed  as  though  it  would  take  his  life.
Thus  he  became  a  Shaker  in  judgment.  At  length  he  died,
under  great  horror  of  mind;  and  so  evident  was  his  judg-


300  Testimonies  of

merit,  that  it  was  acknowledged  by  his  Brethren  of  the  Pres-
byterian Church,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  who  were
also  opposed  to  the  testimony  of  the  gospel

12.  Phineas  Farnsworth,  who  headed  the  mobs  in  Har-
vard, was  a  man  in  affluent  circumstances;  but,  soon  after,
he  dwindled  away  his  interest,  until  he  was  forced  to  sell  his
inheritance  to  pay  his  debts.  After  which  he  removed  to
Shirley,  and  hired  a  little  old  house,  in  which  he  lived,  with
his  family,  till  he  came  to  beggary;  and  going  to  his  own
people  to  beg,  he  found  no  relief;  and  was  finally  obliged  to
go  to  the  people  whom  he  had  persecuted,  and  found  them
more  charitable  and  benevolent  than  his  own  people.

13.  Jonathan  Houghton  —  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  mob
in  Harvard,  afterward  found  himself  under  judgment,  and
coming  to  poverty,  he  began  to  confess  his  wrongs  to  all  the
Believers  he  could  see.  He  came  to  the  Deacon's  office,  and
desired  to  see  Abijah  Worster,  and  others,  to  whom  he  con-
fessed that  he  had  been  actuated  by  nothing  but  the  spirit
of  the  devil,  and  desired  to  know  if  they  could  forgive  him.
They  consented  to  forgive  him,  on  their  part,  for  the  injury
done  to  them.

14.  Asa  Houghton  —  another  active  persecutor  in  Har-
vard, soon  fell  under  judgment;  he  and  his  wife  fell  into
contention,  and  quarreled  to  such  a  degree  that  his  son  was
obliged  to  interpose,  to  keep  them from  killing  each  other.

15.  Elisha  Fullam  —  another  bitter  persecutor,  who  forged
the  most  abominable  falsehoods  against  Mother  and  the
Elders,  afterward  fell  under  judgment,  and  dropped  down
dead,  suddenly,  in  his  own  house.

16.  Before  Mother  and  the  Elders  left  Harvard,  Jacob
Whitney,  clerk  of  the  town,  exacted  military  fines  of  Father
William  Lee,  and  James  Whittaker,  although  they  had  never
before  been  called  upon  for  any  such  purpose,  while  in  the
place. Father  James, however, sent  Samuel  Cooper  with


Mother  Ann  Lee  301

the  money,  and  bade  him  tell  Whitney,  and  his  associate —
the  captain  of  the  company,  that  it  would  be  to  them  a
worm  that  would  eat  out  their  inheritance.  This  prophecy
came  fully  to  pass.

17.  After  Mother  and  the  Elders  were  driven  from  En-
field, by  a  mob,  they  went  to  Lovejoy's  ferry,  and  crossed
into  Suffield,  where  a  rabble  gathered  around  them  headed  by
one  Ebenezer  Burbanks.  This  man  hooted  and  sung,  to
mock  Father  William's  manner  of  singing.  But,  the  judg-
ment of  God  followed  him,  for,  though  he  was,  at  that  time,
a  man  of  considerable  property,  yet,  in  four  or  five  years
afterward,  he  was  reduced  to  complete  beggary,  and  wan-
dered, as  a  vagabond,  begging  for  his  living.

iS.  Of  those  who  persecuted  Mother  and  the  Elders,  in
Petersham,  we  will  remark  that  Samuel  Peckham,  Captain  of
militia,  to  whose  house  Mother  was  carried,  run  out  his  in-
terest, was  reduced  to  poverty,  and  obliged  to  leave  the
town.  His  brother,  Robert  Peckham,  then  a  Sheriff,  also
run  out  his  interest,  and  left  the  town.

19.  Doctor  Bridge,  undertook to  build  a large

house,  and  having  got  the  frame  up,  there  came  a  violent
whirlwind  and  rent  it  from  the  foundation,  and  broke  and
scattered  the  timber  in  such  a  manner,  that  scarcely  two
sticks  of  it  were  left  joined  together ;  and  no  attempt  was
ever  made  to  raise  it  again.  The  doctor,  soon  after,  became
a  drunkard,  and  died  in  poverty.  He  had  been  a  bold  per-
secutor.

20.  Jonathan  Hunter  had  his  house  consumed  by  fire,
and  came  to  poverty.  Thomas  Carter  also  came  to  poverty.
Several  of  the  Winslows,  who  were  as  flourishing  people  in
their  temporal  circumstances  as  any  in  the  town,  all  run  out,
and  came  to  nothing.  David  Sanders,  a  man  of  as  great
property  as  any  in  the  town,  came  to  nothing.  All  these
men  had  been  active  persecutors.


302  Testimonies  of  Mother  Ann  Lee.

21.  Aaron  Fisk  was  killed  by  the  falling  of  a  tree.  Jona-
than Grout  came  to  nothing,  and  many  others;  so  that,  as
we  are  informed,  none  in  Petersham  street,  except  a  few,
who  did  not  persecute,  were  able  to  keep  their  inheritance,
but  all  came  to  poverty.  There  appeared,  indeed,  to  be  a
blast,  and  a  curse  upon  the  town,  for  a  number  of  years,
some  hanging  and  drowning  themselves;  others,  in  various
ways,  suffering  great  misfortunes,  so  that  the  whole  town
seemed  to  be  in  continual  perplexity  and  vexation;  and,  it
has  never  appeared  to  be  in  a  flourishing  condition,  since.


I  rn
