Google
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.
Usage guidelines
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:
+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search
Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at |http: //books .google .com/I
■ '•'1
1
1^
V'
■«•»
>;
,*-■


y


.r-r-


■ ;* ■


::.-f>^


SUMMARY VIEW


OF THE


► MILLENNIAL CHURCH,


OR


UNITED SOCIETY OF BELIEVERS,

(COMMONLY CALLED SHAKERS.)

COMPRISING

THE RISE, PROGRESS AND PRACTICAL ORDER

OF THE SOCIETY;

TOGETHER WITH

THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THEIR FAITH

AND TESTIMONY.

PUBUSHEd'BT ORraiR OF THE^bfbnSTRT,
IN UNION WITH THE CHURCH^


In the days of these kings shall the God of Heaven set up a kingdom '
which shall nei^ he destroyed. Davxbl.


\

*


• ' , - * • •• •
• * • • - .•


ALBANY:

* - « « «

rRINTBD BT PACKAllD if VAN ^EI^HXTYSmf


. • *% .%

* • %


»


1823.


PREFACE.

The increasing attention which, within a few yean, has beeo
directed to the principles and practice of the people called Shaken^
I »by travellers and writers of various classes and descriptions, has
occasioned much enquiry among almost all classes of people.
Publications have been issued from the press in almost every form.
Historians of the various denominations of religion, writers of
travels, compilers of Geographies and Gazetteers, the editors of
periodical essays, Rj:id the publishers of common newspapers, have
all in their turns, thought proper to notice, in some way or other^
the people so much ^^ wondered at.'' But in consequence of the
various and contradictory accounts of many of these writers, and
the false and erroneous statements concerning the principles of
the people, which are so manifest in the generality of those accounts,
the Society has been earnestly solicited by many candid and in*
telllgent persons to publish a plain and correct statement of facts
leiative to the history of the Society, in a concise form, containii^
its origin, progress and present state; whh a fair view of the reli-
gious faith and practice of the Society, and the principles on whi^b
their peculiar tenets are founded.

In compliance with these repeated calls, and with a view to a^
ford the candid and unprejudiced of all classes a fair opportunity
•f examinii^rllr ^lemselves, and obtaining a correct knowledge
•f the truth ttwa the proper source, the following pages have been
written, and are now ofiered to the public in a form which may
easily be obtained and readily perused by every one who desires it.

We have not written merely with a view to multiply books, nor
to supersede the necessity of those already published by the Soci-
ety, and which have proved highly useful, and done much towards
affecting the important object for which they were intended ; es-
pecially that entitled, ^^ The TegHmony of Chrufs Second Ap'
pearingy^ which has had an extensive circulation.* And if its
Resistible truth, and the plainness of its doctrines have excited
a few sneering comments, and thus disclosed the rancor of one or
two ecclesiastical dignitaries \ yet no one Vib& ^n^x Vm^gl ^^^ v^

* We refer (be revitr <otbttbookt and loDwAtT^^s "VUndtilto^^w tui^^^T^nSstn^^^


^^^^" PREFACE.

svertbrow the principles contained in it; nor bas any petma
possessing the spirit of candor and discernment ever attempted it.

Nor liave we written with a view to excite controversy, nor pro-
voke the resentment of any class of people wliatever. Our only
object is to satisfy candid ei>quirers, and to give information conrv
ceruing our fiiith, principles and practice, in plain and intelligible
language, to all who are willing to receive it. And as for those
who care for none of these thhigi, and have no disposition to heai
Bur testimony, we are quite willing ihey should enjoy their own
opinions, and let ours alone : we do not wt.H to disturb them.
We live in a country which boasts highly of the freedom of its
religious institutions ; and religion is, or ought to be an object of
free choice with every one.

We are not ignorant that much has been written and published,
from time to time, from a spirit of enmity and detraction, by those
who would gladly renew against us, those scenes of religious intol-
erance which formerly deluged the eartli in blood, were it in their
power. However doubtful this may appear to those who know
not the enmity of such characters, experience has taught us that
Ae spirit of persecution is the same now that it was then, and
would display itself in the same manner, were it under no re-
straint. The spirit of persecution is not governed by truth and
right reason ; nor is the tongue of calumny guided by candor and
impartiality. And whatever pretences any of our caUimuiators
nay make to either, their writings sufficiently prove that they
were under tlie government of their malignant passions.

It has always been the fate of truth to be stigmalined and slan-
tkred by falsehood. Whenever the spirit of truth has, in any ^e,
been revealed to any people, the father of lies hag never failed to
itispense among his children, a sufficient portion of the spirit of
falsehood to combat the spirit of truth, and scandalize all w)io
Koaintun h. The great Captain of our salvation was subjected to
Ae scorn and ckrision of the children of the wicked one, and en-
dured the reproaches of the emissaries of Satan. He was charged
with gluttony atid dninkemiess, and reproached with associating
vjth/iublicans and sinners. He was also accused of casting out
devils by Beelzebub the prince of dev'tVs ■, auAXve tK^ftttii-j ^isoux-


PRfiFACE. T

«d his followers that they would sufier the same indignities and
reproaches. << If they have called the master of the house Beelse*
^ bub, how much more them of hb household ? If they have per-
^^ secuted me, they will also persecute you. If' ye were of tlie
^^ world, the world would love his own ; but because ye are not (A'
^ the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
** world hateth you."*

It is well known that die primitive christians were greatly slan-
dered and stigmatized by their heathen neighbors, and every false
report that scandal could bestow or malice dictate, was put in cir-
culation, and urged upon the public as positive facts*that could
easily be proved by eye and ear witnesses in abundance. And
when we take into consideration the remarkable similarity that
appears between the reports against the primitive christians, and
those that have been circulated against tlie believers in the present
testimony since it was first made known in this country, especially
in the earlier period of their faith, it seems as though the most
obstinate unbelievers could not but see and acknowledge the strik-
ing resemblance, and conclude that these reports must all have
originated from the same source, and that they are directed against
the same sort of people.

Cebus the epicurean, upon what he called good authority, chai^gf-
ed Jesus Christ with being the offspring of adultery; and asserted,
*^That the mother of Jesus being great with child,. was put
away by the carpenter who had espoused her, he having convicted
her of adultery with a soldier named Panthera9.^ Celsus further
adds, ^^that having been turned out of doors by her husband, she
wandered about in a shameful manner, till she brought forth Jesus
in an obscure place. "t Such are the charges of this ancient hea-
then calumniator against the Virgin Mary. And influenced by
the same malignant spirit, some modem Celsmei^ upon what they
caH good authority, have charged Ann Lee with lewdness and «
intoi^ication. But those who best knew the Virgm Mary, knew
that the story of that ancient calumniator was false ; and those
who best knew Ann Lee, know that the sloties of Uift^it xsskK^^isc^
ralumniators are false.


Tlie apostles and primilive cluiistians were charged with being
drunk with new wine; because under ihe operation of the Holy
Ghost, they worshipped God in a manner so different from that
practiced by the Scribes and Pharisees, and the rest of the unbe-
lieving Jews. The unbelievers and enemies of the cross could then
say they saw it with ibfir own eyes, and could therefore report it
as an undeniable fact. And doubtless many unbetievera who heard
and believed this report, thought it as presumplious in Peter and
the rest of the apostles to pretend to deny it, as to deny liiat their
accusers had eyes, seeing their conduct was so visible to all around
ihem. Peter however did deny it with boldness and confidence ;
but we do not lind that their enemies were willing to believe him :
for iheir enmity and opposition siill continued. Yet this new wine,
as they called it, had a powerful effect in producing faith in the
multitude, and in turning many souls from the error of their ways ;
But (he apostles suffered much persecution in consequence of it.

The charge of drunkenness alleged against Ann Lee and her
companions, had no more foundation in truih,lhan the same charges
alleged against the apostles and primitive christians at Ihe day of
Pentecost. The (rulh is, they were under the operatiun of the same
Spirit; and it was attended with the same effects on iliose who
received it, and excited the same opposition in their enemies, and
ga>-e rise to the same false accusations. And tho this and other
charges of immoral conduct have originated entirely from the blind-
ness and opposition of their accusers, who viewed every thing
which was said and done among the believers, through the eyes of
enmity, prejudice and unbelief; yet these calumnies are slill main-
tained by the enemies of the cross, and eye witnesses are not want-
ing, who can attest to these things with as much assurance as the
unbelieving Jews could testify that the apostles were drunk at the
day of Pentecost, because ibey saw it with their own eyes.

" But every tree is known by its fruit." ll wuuld indeed be a
most e:[tniordinary phenomenon in nature for grapes to spring
from thorns, or figs from thistles. Nor would it be less extraordi-
nary for a religion productive of the best moral principles and
practice, la spring from drunkenness and debauchery; or in other
words, /ram leaders and foandets who were a» tvoVwSwa ta \»^^


PREFACE* Tn


ncss and immorality as the first leaders of the United Soeiety have
been represented. It is truly surprising that the propi^aton of
such reports cannot themselves see the inconsistency^ and no
longer expose themsdves to ridicule for believing and propagatiag
reports which, to ail men of sense, must appear incredible.

It is much to be regretted that any writers who are not peraoii-
ally acquainted with the United Society, should have recourse to
the malignant slanders of the basest characters for information ; or
that they should even suppose that they could obtain any correct
information from such a source. Tho these, slanders have, in a
variety of instances, {uroceeded firom persons who have occasionally
visited the Society, and from their mttural opposition to a life of
purity, jmned with an inherent propensity to stander, have after-
waids taken occasion to indulge that propensity for their own grati-
fication ; yet they have mostly originated from those who have
apostatized from the Society, or were excluded from it for their
iiwn immoral conduct.

And it is well known that apostates from any religious society
whatever, will naturally incline to seek the friencbhip of the worid,
and endeavor to justify themselves to the public for thdr apostacy;
and the only reasonable prospect of success many such can have^
depends on successfully slandering the society from which dbey
have apostatised. This is a matter of such frequent occurrence in
all societies, that it cannot reasonably be disputed. Indeed it is the
natural consequence of their apostacy : for they very well know
that if they should speak or write fiiv4>rably of the society from
which they have apostatised, every body would be ready to le*
proach them for their folly. And tho some who have left this So-
ciety, have been candid enough to tell the truth, and acknowledge
their foUy ; yet the greater part have found it more to their present
interest to charge the (knit of thdr apostacy upon the Society, than
to tak^ it to themselves, even if they were obliged to admit that
the Society possessed some good qualities.

But Hxre h no man nor woman, who is well acquainted with
the Society and its principles, and who baa v^fiAuecLVcA^<9rosa«n^
from aprineij^of candor and consdoosVoteignX^ oli tfi\TL^^^dMa>Dn&
««*r abe inBxmce of this principle, ev« 'vmVteik ox v^i^^s^ ^


Chiiig wlialevei', sgaiiisl iltc Pstablished principles nnJ |iriiciic«i o(
ihe Sucieiy. This we tnn assert with cunfldence: beeiiiise we
know thut such a character \Till not do il. Doubtless much has
been spoken and written from false infonnatioit, and ermneous
itnpressions, by those who never had any personal (icquainiance
wilh the Society, which in, in many respects, ([uite nnfavornble,
and ft»r whicli the writers may find some apolory in their want of
correct informaiion, without being charge;dile with any design to
cilumnjiile ihe Society. But those who write for the public, ought
to consider ihcir responsibility to the public tbr'llic truth of what
they publish, and not run the Hsk of scattering false information
through the world, and imposing upon public credulity by netrleci-
ing a careful esLamiualbn into the truth of what they arv about to
publbh.

As to the misconduct of individual nicmhers of the Society, it
has generally proceeded from those who have afterwards left llie
Society; and in several well known instances, such individuals
hnve accused the Society of crimes whicli the}' themselves had
committed, and for which they were excluded from the Society.
Nor need it appear strange that tliose who have been excluded
from the Soviely by their own unfeitbfubiess,. should prove to be
the culumniutors of the Society which ihcy have left, especially
when ihey very well know that there are so many in the world
uho arc always mote ready to believe evil reports, than to seek
after ibe truth. But truth is trulh, and the truth will stand, whei>
all falsehood and deception will entirely he done awiiy. The
world will yel know the real foundation of nil those fnlse charges
Slid bnsecaluranies, and be fully convinced of the bnseness of those
cliaractei'swbohaveso maliciously fabricated and propagated them.

Tho we feel unwilling to hold up names to public censure; yet
justice nnd truth rerjiiire lliat we should bear testimony ^^Insl in-
justice and decejition. Of all classes of writers we consider the
malignant slanderer as ibe most vile and contemptible, and the
least deserving of attention. And tho nmiibers of that class have
endeavored to distinguisli themselves- by their writings against the
Saeiety; jvt u--e have never met with any that we considered as
r^f'rrviii:^ a trrimis reply ca our part; anA'iS <vc AiQuXA cv« ^'■^


PREFACE. 13L

tempt a direct reply to any such writer , it must be merely for the
sake of those who are in danger of being deceived and imposed
upon by them, and for no otiier cause. Tho we have no wish to
injure them in person or character; yet as they have exposed
themselves by their malignant calumnies, it becomes necessaiy
for us to caution the public against imposition from such characters*
The great professions of truth and impartiality, and the impoi- '
ing appearance of honesty and candour in the writings of some of
these calumniators, have doubtless deceived many. So a counter*
loiter may impose his trash upon the- public by imitating genuine
bank bills, and may deceive thousands ; yet all the arts of decefH
tion can never make a bad bill goody nor transform falsehood into

truth ; the deception will be discovered and the deceiver will be
detected in the end. Nothing but the plain and simple truth will
pass the final trial; and every man's work will eventually prove
what he is.

Among all the accounts of the United Society that have ever yet
appeared before the public, from under the hands of those who
have apostatized from the Society, whatever the writer's preten-
sions might be, we have never yet seen one that has met our ap-
probation, or that we could justly consider as entitled to the char-
acter of truth, honesty or impartiality. And all who have drawn
their accounts from such writers, have only deceived themselves
and the public in so doing. Tho we are far from feeling any dis-
position to reply to such writers ; yet we think we may be fully
justified in stating as a general remark, that those who have writ-
ten against the Society, or in any way endeavored to calumniate it,
after having apostatized from it, have never yef raised their repu-
tation for honesty and integrity, nor mended their moral charac-
ters by their works.

Notwithstanding ail the pretended discoveries of error and de-
hision, and all the charges of injustice and deception, by those
who have left the Society, not a solitary instance has ever yet ap-
peared, where any one, after having renounced the &ith of the
Society, and rejected the testimony maintained by the peo^^ haa
ever turned to a more moral couvse o( Yvfe. \^ ^d& ^^^ \fc^^KOi^

tbejrJiauad ibe panciplen of the peopteX^d^ot ^Jk^^^^>w^^***^

••2


^ have turned lo worse principles, and more immorol lives,
re believe that there can be found throughout the United
States, a single instance where any such person has {)urEucd a bet-
ter course of life, or obtained a belter reputation for religion, lion-
esly, morality or integrity than he had before. But instaocei
enough may he found of increasing degeneracy and depravity ir.
those who have apostatised.

There are many among mankind who are willing to acknow-
ledge the tnoral principles and practice of the Society, in its pres-
<^ni state, to be very good, and readily allow ihe people much cre-
dit lor their honesty and sobriety, their exemplary lives and jno*
rols, their uprightness and punctuality in all their dealings, their
kindness and charity to the poor, their industry, temperance and
good economy in the management of all their concerns^ and the
like ; but still insist that their principles and practice are grcat]\
changed from what they were formerly ; that they liave renounced
many of the wild extravagances in principle and practice, nhicli
were formerly luugbl by Ann Lee and the first leaders of the So-
riety; and that, of course, the people have greatly reformed, botli
in principle and practice.

With regard to a change of principles, we can assure our rend-
ers that tliere was not a single principle of faith ever advanced by
Mother Ann and the first Elders, of winch we have uny know-
ledge, hut is still maintained by the Society, wilbsut any variation
whatever. As a[l the princi]>les then advanced have been fully
•xnd abundantly proved by loDge\perience,and the increasing light
iind understanding in the Society, to be principles of truth; so the
practice of iheSoeiety hasever been conformable lotliem. Among
many other ridiculous charges of the like nature, it has often been
asserted and reiterated, "that Ann Lee declared that she should
never die; and that the principle was tauglit and believed by the
|ieople in her day, iliat after having arrived lo a certain degree of
purity and holiness, they would never die ; and tliat after the deatii
of Ann l.ec, lire principle was discarded as unsound ami untena-
ble." Those who are so ready lo charge inconsistency upon the
Sac/elf, have harped miicli Upon this story, while in fact, the ij
coat/wocj' Jies aitogviher in their own ignoianw ot Awvctf'


11.1, mt**^^, I


Pll£FAC£» XI

Now let us for a moment, eiamine this wonderful clmrge, and
-see whether those wise theohgists who have made their sneering
comments upon it, cannot with equal propriety, bring the same
charge against Jesus Christ <<If a roan. keep my saying, he
shall never see death." And again : << V^Thosoever livedi and be-
lieveth iu me, shall never die.'^ No reasonaUe person will pre-
tend that Jesus alluded to the death of the natural body ; if he did,
his words have certainly failed. Yet when the Jews heard this
testimony, they replied, " Now we linow thou hast a devil.''—
Mother Ann testified that the gospel of Christ was the power of
eternal life, and that those who kept it would never fall under the
power of death ;t and we stiU testify the same. So &r from
asserting that her natural body would never die, she invariably
maintained the contrary; and no different doctrine has ever been
maintmned in the Society, from its first rise to the present day««-*
But as the unbelieving Jews charged Jesus Christ with falsehood,
and with having a devil, because he bore the testimony above quot-
ed ; so the unbelievers in this day have charged Ann Lee with
falsehood, and her followers with inconsistency.

As to the charge of changing our practice, we readily acknow-
ledge that the United Society does not foHow the example of any
other religious denomination, neither in principle nor practice: for
we have long been convinced that a uniform course of religious
profession, joined to a lifeless stupidity io divine things, cannot be
well-pleasing in the sight of God, especially when blended with an
ardent pursuit of worldly honor and glory. And we have never
seen any profit in practicmg the same dull round «f religious forms
and ceremonies, from year to year, «nd fipom age to age, while the
only active principle of life is swallowed up in the things of time.
Nor do we see any consistency in making religious professicm a
mere name, by constantly pursuing a practice in conformity with
that of those who make no religious profession at all.

But what is the amount of this charge of change in our prac-
tice? Shall a farmer who begins in the spring to plow his ground
and prepare it for a future crop, be charged ^\\Sck VoiiSai^^'X^ ^ifi^
change^ because he does not keep on pV>Vva^i\«wsj^^^ ^s^^ai^
aeaaan, ioMteud of sowing hia seed, or oAiVs^S&s^^VfiA ^wrf«%«^


^^SM PRErACE.

according to the requiremenU of ihc season ? Can he oblain a
cmp by continual plowing, without sowing or planlitig ? Does he
□01 act more consistently in keeping pace wilji the course of the
seasuD, and varying his work accoriling to the season } By pur-
suing this course, he may reasonably expect to gatlier a crop in ils
season; but if he should continue to plow all the year round, and
never plant nor sow, nor tend his crops while in the progress of
vegetation, he could never expect any harvest, nor would lie de-
swve any.

The first leaders of the Society, may he compared to people go-
ing into a new country, and settling in the wilderness, where the
first object is to cut and clear the land, and bum the rubbish, be-
fore the ground can be suitably prepared for cultivation. In this
operation, the axe and the fire are used witl( no sparing hand ; and
the falling of trees and the crackling of burning brush and useless
rubbish occasion much noise and bustle, and great confusion, es-
pecially among the wild beasts and noxious vermin tlial infest the
land. These are now obliged to flee for their lives, into some ;
other part of the wilderness, or the fire will cunsume them. But
when the land is sufficiently cleared, and the rubbish consumed, '
and the wild vermin have all retreated, and the careful husband-
man has securely fenced his field, he can then go on to prepare ^
and cultivate his ground in peace ; and if lie is faithful to manage |
his business as he ought, he will continue to improve his premises,
from year to year ; so that in a few years, this once dreary wilder-
ness will be seen to "blossom as the rose." SucJi has been the
progress of the United Society, and such is the nature of the chan-
ges which it has passed through.

Doubtless many of the sentiments contained in the following
pages, will be treated with contempt and ridicule by tliose profes-
sors of the christian name who are still bound in the chains ofanti-
christian bigotry and superstition. Nor need it be a matter of
surprize to any one if they should meet with opposition from such
chiuracters : for who can expect people of this description to throw
off iheir chains, and divest themselves of prejudice, without a se-
rerer straggle than they are generally willing to Lnake. Such peo-
y>A? usua/fy feet too much of " the pride ot \ite," lo acVftO'n'utii^
o-utAs wtiicb laust neceflsarily require u sacuftce o^ l^"'''- V^**- —

' U


PREFACE. . XM

The Scribes and Pharisees of old had too mueb of this sort of
pride, and too lofty an idea of that Messiah whom their ancient
prophets described in sach glowing 6gureSy to be willing to believe
that Jesus of Nazareth was that exalted personage. His character
and birth, as well as the low character and callings of his disciples,
appeared too mean and contemptible, and their namber too small,
and their connexions too well known to admit even a moment's
belief, in their minds, that he was the promised Messiah.

And why should we expect the Scribes and Pharisees of the
present day to act more out of character than those of old did ?
They are no more willing to submit to the cross, and ha\'e their
pride stained, than their predecessors were. They view a smaU
Society of illiterate and contemptible Shakers, (as they sometimes
can them) in the same light that their ancestors did the ancient
disciples and primitive christians ; and like them, they have the
inibelieving world on their side. And will they forego the friend-
ship of the world, and sacrifice their spiritual pride, and the honors
of their dignified station, with all they hold dear on earth, and
yield their assent to a testimony so much beneath the calculations
of all their learned theolc^, and all their towering ideas of the
millennium ? It is too much to expect of tliem.

The small number of the Society, in comparison with those of
other denominations, may be considered by some, as an argument
against the truth of the testimony, that this is the second appearing
of Christ; and it mny also produce a belief in the minds of some^
that the Society can never become numerous, especially as a life of
continency is so opposite to the natural propensities of human ni^
ture, that few will be found willing to embrace it. These reasons
will doubtless appear plausible and natural to people in a natural
«tate ; but God- is able to accomplish his own work, not only by
small means and instruments, but by small beginnings, as he al<*
ways has done, in all ages of the world. The little stone spoken
of in Daniel, which was cut out of the mountain without hands,
and which smote the great image, <^ became a great mountain and
filled the whole earth." This significant fi^t^ «W«!i^ \w ^ ^«k^
striking light, what the hand of God caii eCccXXsN «tosJ\^«»*%
«wf whai the real work of God, tTio ^iu?\\\tv\\a Q.<i\s^s««^^'*°^^


end


Tw^ VKEfh

will finallj' amount lo. The smallness of the work is no discoui^
agement lo us, nor any disparagement to its first founders. It is
indeed a work of too much purity to fin<l a rapid increase among
the inhabitants of a sinful world, who are so far lost and sunk in
tlicir carnal corrup lions.

We shall make no apologies for what we have written, as to tlie
matter or manner. It lias been our aim to state the plain Irtitfa,
without covering or disguise, according to the best of our under-
standing and abilities; and aUo to comprise the diRerent subjects
in as small a compass as could conveniently be done, and convey
a clear understanding to the reader. To comprise much matter in
a little space, and give a full and comprehensive view of many
important subjects in a small compass, is not a small task. How
far we have effected the objecl, remains to be seen and judged of
by the candid and judicious reader. Plainness, clearness andsim-
plicity have been objects at which we have aimed in our manner
and style of writing; and we trust the matter will be found intelli-
gible lo every class of readers-

With respect tn the subjects upon which we have written, our
object has been to give a summary view of the rise, progress and
present state of the Society, together with a plain illustration of its
faith and principles: a few other subjects might liave been added
with propriety ; but we have aimed at brevity, and we think we
have noticed those of the most importauce, and such as may give
satisfaction to candid inquirers after truth. But as the light of
Divine truth is progressive in the Church, and as the preparatoty
work of salvation and redemption increases on earth; go the so-
lemn and important truths of the gospel will continue, from time
lo lime, to be more clearly manifested to mankind. As to the real
substance of tlie goiipel of salvation, it was fully revealed to the
first witnesses of Christ's second appearing ; but as the work of
salvation advances, the light becomes more clear, and truth appears
more plain ; and while those who receive and obey it find increas-
ing peace and justification ; so those who see and reject it, will
find their condemnation to increase with the increasing light t^
CAI.VIN GRKI

'J^fianon, May 12, 1823.


CONTENTS.


PART I.

and prOgreuB of the United Society^ induding $ome account

of the first Witnenes.
Cbap. Paoc

I. Introductory Remarks, comprising a short sketch of the state
of Beligion, and the operations of the Spirit of God which
led to the rise of the Society, and the commencement of the
present testimony of the Gospel of Christ's Kecond A ppearing^, I
n. Sketches of the life of Mother Ann Lee : her birth and pa-
renta|(e: her connexion with the society of James and Jane
Wardiy : her religious exercises and suiferinfi^s : her reve*
Uttion and testimony : persecutions in England ; voyage to

America, ^

Qf . Circumstances connected with the settlement of Mother Ann
and her little society in America ; Religious revival at
Hew-licbanon : Commencement and progress of the testi-
mony, followed by persecution : Decease of Mother Ann, &c. 14

IV. Some further account of the life, character and ministry of

Mother Ann Lee, 25

y. AshortaccountoftiielifeandcharacterofElderWilliamLee, S8
VL Sketches of the life, character and ministry of Elder James

Whitlaker, 42

Supplementary Article, concerning Elder John Hocknell, . 49

PART II.

T%e established order and religious practice of the United Society.

Cbap. Paox.

L Formation of the Society into a united Body, possessing a

consecrated Interest, 51

n. Hie established Order and Government of the Church, . • 58

VBL The Government and Education of Children, 63

ly. Prog^ss and present stale of the United ^ociety, .... 68

V. Remarks on the Worship of God : the origin, practice and

reasonableness of Dancing, as an act of Divine Worship, . 77

PART III.

The Nature of God and his Works of Creation.
Cbat. Pmix.

I. The Attributes of God; their harmony and consistency mani-
fested in God's dealings towards his creatures : the idea of
. chiaiian rinnera wholly inconsistent with these Attributes, 92
n. Concerning the Decrees of God, Etection and Reprobation, 103
m. The Creation and Order of the Natural World a figure of that

which IS bpirituul, 116

rV' The estabfished order of times and aeaaoxvlm\\vtTAX(QsA^'t^'-
atjoi), togetiier with the ptVmcva\ «.\aAfc vndi -^x^^Kvs^ ^'v
man, ,...-»'•• ^^


ajKTENTS.

PART IV.

• The fall, fos8 and deprattUtf of man, inrli/ding God's progress.
work, and his dealings toith man in hit fallen slate.
Cmp. PiBr..

I. The cause, nalurc and qfiecls of man's tg>s from Goif, . .
II. Objeeliong ogHiirsL the preceding doctvillea staled and an-

ni. Th^aubject Continued, in whicli further objections iireaiiited
und answered, and tlic doclrine of continence imd celibMjy
confirmed,

I IV. Tlie figurative import i>J" cireumcition and other ccremoniea
under the law, 164
T. A few remarks on the nature and typical design of ibejewisti
wars, showing llial tile law could not decide tht-fmurestaw
of the Boul, . . tfiS
VL An illustration of the progressive increase of lite work of God
tVom the creation to the present time, 173
Tit A few remai'Iis upon tlie witnesses of truth. Including a brief
calculaiiun of prophetic scriptaresalludingi') the imiioilor
Antichrist'a reign, and tlie second coming of Cbrisl, . . 184
PART y.
The second appearhig of- Chritt.

1. Various opinions concerning llie manner of llhrisi's second

appearing, MS

II. Tlic second coming of Christ not the appearance of the same
personal Being, but a manifesliition of the same Spirit. —
This illustrated by various similitudes. whicUalsu point out

Die increasing work of bis Kingdom, 2G1

m. The second manifealation of Christ not instantly universal,

but gradual and progressive, like the rising of the eun, . 307

r IV. The Manifestttlion of Chriatin the Female, 213

^^v V, Spiritual Regeneration and the New Birth 334

^^LVL Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper, 335

^B PART VI.

^^ The Faith and Prindples of the Weio Creation.

L The twelve Foundations of the law of Cbrial, exemplified in

the twelve christian virtues, 345

The aeven moral principles of the Clmrcli of Christ, as re-
duced to practice in the United Society, 358

[. Concerning Obedience 28*

'. The Confeasinn of Sin, 390

'. The ttesurrection, 303

- Day of Judgment, 313

* *Bemirksconcerniiigtbe true natureof perfection, . .'1^


PART I.

Rise and Progress op the United Society, includ-
ing SOME Account op the first Witnesses.


CHAPTER 1.

Introductory Remarks^ comprising a short sketch of the state of
Religion^ and the operations of the Spirit of God which led to
the rise of the Society ^ and to the commencement of the present
testimony of the Gospel of ChrisVs Second Appearing,

During the ministration of Jesus Christ upon earth, Iiis life and
doctrines were in direct opposition to all the inclinations of the
fallen nature of man. He revealed the Will of his heavenly Fa-
ther, and this Will was the very essence of the gospel. After his
ascension, a church was formed and established according to the
genuine operations of his divine Spirit. This was accomplished
by the agency of the Holy Spirit, through the ministry of the apos-
tles, and was a pattern of the true order of the church of Christy
and "a kind of first-fruits" of the Kingdom of Heaven upon earth.
^ui that order was of short duration. By a declension of the true
spirit of Christianity it graducJIy fell away, until the spirit of Anti-
christ, through the influence of false teachers, under the christian
name, gained the ascendency, and began his dark and deplorable
reign, which continued for the space of twelve hundred and sixty
years.

During this long and gloomy period, "darkness covered the
earth, and gross darkness the people :" so that there was not found
upon earth a church which stood in the true order and power of
the primitive church of Christ. For altho there were many bright
and powerful witnesses of the truth, during the whole of that period,
who testified against the growing corruptions of the times ; yet in
consequence of the tyrannical dominion assumed over the conscien-
ces of men, these witnesses were not suffered to build in the true
order of the church of Christ. This dominion, which originated
in the spirit of Antichrist, was strengthened and supported by the
combination of the civil and ecclesiastical powers which were con-
centrated in their own established churches. Henqe these churches
became the churches of Antichrist, and under the name of Christ,
assumed the authority of persecuting the true witnesses of God
wherever thfey could be found; because the testimony of these wit-
nesses stood in opposition to their antichristian dominion, and
was a testimony of condemnation to their false religion^ audtivsja.
the power of the holy people was scattered*

But when the persecuting power oC Xutidim\.\ife^^KJ\^a^^'*^'^'

B


''2 INTRODUCTORY RESfARKB. f PART I".

eoed by that racTiinnible diviaion in his kingdom, occasioned by
what is called The Rvfoi'maHon, then a way was opened for man
lo contend lor his long lost llbeny. From that period many men
ofraliooal and discerning minds began lo assert the righla of con-
I science, and to contend !br civil and religtoiu liberty; and heiicc

^^H forth liberty of conscience continued to gain ground until the latter
^^L part of the seventeenth century, when it was so Tar underslooil and
^^B acknowledged, that the witnesses of God began lo live and stand
^^V up in (he life and power of their tesliinony.

Ahout this time, many religious revivals broke ont in various
parts of Europe, pnrticulBrly in France and Germany, and con-
tinued, with different degrees of light and power, fur many years.
Liberty of conscience was proclnimed in England about ihe year
168!), and the subject ejtciled public attention, and gained consid-
erable influence in many other parts of Europe. This was an
event highly favorable to those honest souls who were hungering
and thirsting after righteonsness, and who had hitherto groatied
midet the despotic and perseciiiing power of ecclesiastical tyranny,
while (hey earnestly sought the pure and nndeliled reli^n of the
Prince of Peace.

The remarkable revival which happened about this time, in the
province of Dauphiny and Vivarais, in France, escileri great atten-
tion. The Bubjecta of this work were wrought upon in a very ex-
traordinary manner, both in body and mind ; nor could (he violent
^^^ agitalionsoftheirbodies,oor the powerful operations of their spirits,
^^^Lwhich ajipeared m the darning and irresistable energy of tlteir tes-
^^^Btiniony, be imputed to any thing short of \\i.e mighty power of God,
^^H vith which they were evidently inspired. Persons of both sexes
^^PF^-and all ages, were the subjects of these divine inspirations. Men,
^^r women, and even little childen, were wrought upon in a manner
^V, which struck the spectators with wonder and astonishment; and
^V their powerful admonitions and prophetic warnings "were beard
^^ and received with reverence and awe."

They testified that the enil of all things drew nigh, and admon-
ished the people to repent and amend their Uvea. They gave
warning of the near aproacA of the Kingdom of God, lie accept-
able year of the Lord; and in many propheijc messages, decla-
red to the world, that (hose numerous scripture prophecies concern-
ing the new heaveTis and the new earth ; the kingdom of the
Meeiah; the marriage of the Xomfr; the first returrection, and
iht ne«! Jerusaleia descending fivm above, were near at hand,
and would shortly be accomplished.

They also testified, with great power and enei^y of spirit,

Bgs/asl those false sj-sterns of religion, and tiial anti christian do-

^^ aioion, which had borne such extetvsWe swa^ aTOovH^ man's.vftd,


CHAP. I.] INTRODUCTORY REMARKS. 3

and predicted their certain downfall and destruction. They also
declared that when all these false systems of human invention^
and all the deceitful and abominable works of man should be pulled
down and destroyed, there would be but one Lord, one faith, one
heart and one voice among mankind. And they also declared that
tiiese things would be wrought upon man by spiritual arms, pro-
ceeding from the mouths of living witnesses who, by the inspiration
of the spirit, should be sent forth as laborers in the vineyard.

These people, like all other true witnesses of God, were rejected
by the unbelieving world as false prophets, and their testimony
greatly perverted and misrepresented. And probably too, as often
happens in times of great outpourings of the divine Spirit, there
were individuals found among them into whose hearts Satan found
means to infuse a false testimony, with a view to dishonor the true
testimony of faithful witnesses, by associating with it the dictates
of his own lying spirit.*

Unbelievers, who slight every manifestation of true light, will
often take occasion by the false predictions of such individuals, to
reject and misrepresent the whole as unworthy of credit. Hence
it was said, they predicted the immediate fulfilment of their proph-
ecy, and stated the precise time of its accomplishment, which was
evidently not given them to understand. But the candid believer
will readily discern between truth and fabehood, and pay that re-
spect to the true manifestations of the Spirit of God which their
importance deserves.

But even admitting that those who were in the genuine spirit of
that work, did state the time for the accomplishment of these pre-
dictions at three years, as has been frequently asserted, what con-
clusion can be drawn from thence to falsify these predictions ? It
is well known that St. John stated the time for the reign of anti-
christ nt forty and two monthSyf which, according to the usual cal-
culation of expositors, is now generally supposed to mean 1260
years, taking each prophetic day for a yeai', as is usual in ex-
plaining the language of prophecy.

Calculating then by this rule, their tliree years, or thirty-six
months, allowing but thirty days to the month, amount to 1080
prophetic days; but allowing 365 days to the year, they make 1095
days, or so many natural, years. And if these prophets did, hi
truth, state the time for the full accomplishment of all their predic-
tions at three years, can any one deny that this is the true calcula-
ttion? Or. dare any one affirm that all these things will not be
accomplished in 1080 or 1095 years from the date of their prophe-
cy ? It is the divine spirit of their testimony, and the real accom-

* So it was of old ** When the sons of God came to ^c«&eu\.V.\aAiCiV:\'^%% \k%V^x% ^^^^^^x^^
Satan «aiDe also amon^ them '' Job ii. 1.
/ See Rev- xi. 2» and xiiu S,


iOBVCTOKt REMARKS.

plishment of their predictions at wliich vc look; not al the false
«oloring aniJ evident niisrepreaentatians which have been put upon
ibeai by the unbelievers of their times. That the work hasalr^y
f ommenced, we ourselves are witnesses; but how long before it
I will be fully accomplished, must rest with that Almighty Being
' "who has already begun the work, and will complete it in his own
^e time-
Not withstanding these witnesses of God met with much opposi-
. lion from the mibelieving world, and were continually persecuted
l* i>y the wicked; yet they greatly increased in numhers, and Ijoldly
eontioued thdr testimony for many years ; so iliat their prophetic
warnings extended over the greatest part of Europe.

About the year 1700, a few of them went over to England,
where they renewed their testimony ; and through the ministration
«f the same spirit to others, many were united to them ; so that in
a short time tiiey iKcame very numerous, and their testimony be-
came extensive and powerful. Being commisMoned by the Divine
Spirit, and sent only as witnesses to warn a sinful world of ap-
proBCliing events, they formed no regular societies, and establislted
MO churches; but faithfully executed their office and delivered the
messages which were given them, and thus iinished their work and
left the event to God. And the the greater part, after having fin-
blied their testimony, soon died away ; yei many of them maio-
fained their confidence througli life, end a {>ortion of them, n'lio
still retained the power of their testimony, in a greater or less de-

Igree, and having full faith in its accomplishment, stood as living
witnesses of God. and, like faitliful watchmen of the niglit, waited
the approaching dawn.
About the year 17^7) a small numher who were endowed with
Jhe spirit of these witnesses, were led by the InfluenM of the Divine
}4pirit to unite themselves into a small society, in the neigliborhood
bf niancbester, imderthe ministi; of James and Jerl^ Wardley.
Tlieae were both sincerely devoted, to the cause of God^ and were
blest will) great manifestations of divine light, James was ^ 'ly
gifted in public speaking; and was remarkably clear, sol ij and
powerful in Ins testimony against sin. Both he and his wife pos-
^^ scssed great meekness and humilhy, were very plain and decent
^^L id their dress atid depoitment, and unassuming in iJieir manners.
^H This infant society practiced no forms, and adopted no creeds
^^K as rules of faith or worship; but gave themselves up to I)e led and
^^H'guided. entirely by the operations of the Spirit of God. Tlieir
^^V meetings were powerful and animated, attended with remarkable
^^K .aigns and operations, and with the spirit of propliecy and divine
^^* revelation. The manifestations of divine light in visions and rev-
" riations, raised in xhem the warning voice of God against nil sin
m,ti every evil work. They boldly testified, tliat the secund oti-


CHAP. II.] SKETCHES OF THE LIFE, &C«

pearing of Christ was at hand; and that the church was rising
in her fuU and transcendent glory ^ which would effect the fnal
downfall of Antichrist, They affinned that the work of the great
day of God was then commencing, and would increase until every
promise of God should be fulfilled.

Sometimes, after sitting awhile in silent meditation, they were
seized with a mighty trembling, undet which they would often ex-
press the indignation of God against all sin. At other times they
were exercised with singing, shouting and leaping for joy at the
near prospect of salvation. They were often exercised with great
agitations of body and limbs, running and walking the floor, with
a variety of signs and operations, and swiftly passing and repassing
each other, like clouds agitated with a mighty wind. No human
power could imitate the wonderful operations with which they
were affected while under the influence of these spiritual signs.
From these exercises, so strange in the eyes of mankind, they re-
ceived the appellation of Shakers^ which has been the most com-*
mon name of distinction ever since.

These various and extraordinary operations, together with the
singularity of their lives, and their powerful testimony against the
wickedness of the world around them,, naturally exposed them to
much persecution. Their houses were often beset by mobs, their
windows broken, and their persons shamefully abused. But they
bore these things patiently, and fearlessly continued their assemblies
and their testimony. Their meetings, which first began at Bolton,
near Manchester, were afterwards held alternately at Bolton and
Manchester ; and occasionally at Cheshire, Mayortown, and other
places in the vicinity of Manchester.

They continued to increase in light and power, with occasional
additions to their number, till about the year 17T0, when by a
special manifestation of Divine light, the present testimony of sal-
vation and eternal life was fully revealed to Ann Lee, and by her
to t(^e society. As this extraordinary woman, concerning whom
so ni^ch Aas been reported and published abroiid in the world, was
the aistinguished personage to whom Christ revealed himself in
his true character, in this day of his second appearing, it will be
necessary, in proceeding with this work, to give some account of
her life, character and ministry.

CHAPTER II.

Sketches of the life of Mother Ann Lee: her birth andparent*
age: her connexion toith the society of James and Jane Ward-
ley: her religious exercises and sitfferings : her revelation and
testimony : persecutions in England : vot^oge to Atamca.
Ann Lee was the daughter of JoVvtvAjeft, qI ^«w;5«nrs2«x^>2kv

B2


EKETCHES OF THE LIFE

England. She was bom in the year 173(i.* Her father w
occiipaiion a blocksmiih, and iho poor, he tvas respectable in char-
acier. moral in principle, honest and punctual in liis dealings, and
industrious in business. Her mniher was esteemed as a religions
and very pious woman. Tliey had eight children, five sons and
three daughters. Their children, as was then common with poor
people in manufacturing towns, were brought up to work instead
of being sent to school. By this means Ann acquired a habit of
industry, but could neither read nor write. During her childhood
and youth, she was employed in a cotton laclory, and was after-
wards a cutter of hatter s fur. She was also, for some time, em-
ployed as a cook in the Manchester infirmary, and was peculiarly
distinguished for her faithfulness, neatness, prudence and economy.
In her childhood she discovered a very bright and active genius,
was remarkably sapcious, but serious and thoughlfnl, and never
addicted to play like other children. In early childhood she was
Ibe subject of religious impressions, and was peculiarly favored
with heavenly visions. As she advanced in years she was strong-
ly impressed with a sense of the great depravity of human nature,
and of the odioiisness of sin, and especially of the impure and in-
derent nature of sexual coition. She often expressed her feelings
~ ' r mother concerning these things, and earnestly desired that
light be kept from the snares of sin, and Irom those abomina-
which her soul abhorred.
But not having attained that knowledge of God nliich she early
tlffiired, and finding no one to strengthen and assist her in the pup-
suit of that true holiness which she sought afier, nor even to en-
courage her to withstand the powerful examples of a lost world,
(her mother having deceased while she was yet young,) she grew
up in the same fallen nature with the rest of mankind, and through
the importunities of her relations, was married to Abraham Stan-
ley, a blacksmith by trade. By him she bad four children who
11 died in infancy; one only, which was a daughter, attained M
e age of about six years. They lived together at her father's
map, in peace and harmony, and procured a comfortable living,
the convictions of her youth often returned upon her with
I force, whichai lengili brought her under excessive Iribulatioo
)ul, hi this situation she sought earnestly for deliverance from
bondage of sin, and gave herself no rest, day nor night, but
ipent whole nights in laboring and crying to God for delive-
froin sin.

While under these exercises of mind, she became acquainted
xpllh James and Jane Wardlcy, and tlie society under lb«ir core.


CHAP. II.] OP MOTHER ANN lEE. f

As these people were favored with a greater degree of divine lights
and a more clear and pointed tesdinony against the nature ol sin
than had hitherto been made manifest, Ann readily embraced their
testimony, and united herself to the society in the month of Sep-
tember 1758, being then in the 23d year of her age. The lisrht
of these people led them to an open confession of every sin which
they had committed, and to a full and final cross against every
thing which they knew to be evil : hence they were endowed with
great power over sin; and hence Ann found that protection which
she had so long desired, and which, for the time being, was an-
swerable to her faith. By her faithful obedience to the counsel
and instruction of her leaders, she was baptized into the same
spirit, and, by degrees, attained to the full knowledge and experi-
ence in spiritual things which they had founds

As she occasionally related to the American believers some of
her experience and sufferings in En^and, it may not be improper
to give the following short sketch concerning th? early part of her
faith, in her own words.

^^ Soon after I set out to travail in the way of God, I labored
^^ anights in the works of God. Sometimes I labored all nighty
^^ continually crying to God for my own redemption ; sometimes
*^ I went to bed and slept ; but in the nMHning 1 could not feei
^ that sense of the work of God which I did before I slept This
<^ brought me into great tribulation. Then I cried to Grod, and
^ promised him, that if he would give me the same sense that I had
^ before I slept, I would labor all night. This I did many nights;
^^ and in the day time I put my hands to work and my heart to
^^ God ; and when I felt weary and need of rest, I laboured for the
^ power of God, and the refreshing operations of the power of
^ God would release me^ so that I would feel able to go to my work
" again.

^< Many times when I was about my work, I felt my soul over-
<< whelmed with sorrow; and I used to work as long as I could
^ keep it concealed, and then run to get out of sight, lest some one
<< should pity me with that pity which God did not. In my tra-
<^ vail and tribulation, my sufferings were so great, that my flesh
^ consumed upon my bones, and bloody sweat pressed through
*^ the pores of my skin, and I became as helpless as an infant.
*^ And when I was brought throughj and bom mto the spiritual
^ kingdom, I was like an infant just bom into the world. They
<< see colors and objects ; but they know not what they see ; and
^ so it was with me when I was bom into the spiritual world.
^ But before I was twenty-four hours old, I saw, and I knew what
** 1 saw.*'

John Hockneii^ who was well acc\ua\nledm^>wet^sk^^^«w*^


SKETCHES OF THE LIFE (PARTt

of her experience am! sufferings in England, used frequently to
speak or them, with many peculiar circumstances that came under
njs knowled^. According to his account, as well as that of her
own, and others who came from England with ber, it appears that
in watchings, fastings, tears and Incessant cries Id God, slie labor-
ed day and night, for deliverance from the very nature of sin ; and
that, under the most severe tribulation of mind, and the most violent
temptations and buffetings of the enemy, the agony of her soul was
often so extreme as to occasion a perspiration of blood, Some-
times, for whole nights ti^ether, her cries, screeches and groans
veresuch as to fill every soul around with fear and trembling.

By these pmnful sufferings and deep mortifications her flesh
aometirnes wasted away, like that of a person in a consumption,
till she became so weak and emaciated that her friends were oblig-
ed to support and nourish her like a helpless infant ; altho she
possessed by nature a sound and strong constitution, and an invin-
cible fortitude of mind. Tho Ann was wrought upon in this man-
ner, more or less, for the space of nine years ; yet she often had
kitervab of releasroent, in which her bodi^ strength and vigor
was sometimes miraculously reuewcd, and her soul was at limes
lilled with heavenly visions and divine revelations. By these means
the way of God, and the nature of his work, gradttally opened
upon her mind with increasing light and understanding. The di-
vine manifestations which slie received, from time to time, were
CDinmutiicated to the society, and tended greatly to enlighten the
understandings, and encourage the faith of the members, and to
increase and confirm their testimony.

Her mind, ever intent on the great work of salvation, was deep-
ly affected concerning the lost s^Ie of<mankind, whith she clearly
saw in all their works. But llie real foundation of that loss was
still concealed from her view: nor could she see any prospect of
recovery under existing circirm stances : for she had long been con-
vinced lliat there was nothing in all their religious professions nor
practises that could save them from sin here, or furnish any rea-
sonable hope of salvation hereafter. Hence she spent much lime
in earnest and incessant cries to God, to shew her the real founda-
tion of man's loss, what it was, and wherein itctiusisted ; how the
way of salvation could be effectually opened to a lost world in its
present state ; and how the great work of redemption was to be
accomplished.

While in deep exercise of mind concerning these things, she
was brought into a slate of excessive tribulation of soul, in which
she felt her way hedged u|y, seemingly, on every side, and was
cousirained to. cry mightily to God, to open some way of deUver-
snre. In dfewidst ol'her sufferings and earmist cries to Got ^-


CHAP. II.] OF MOTHER ANN LEE»

soul was filled with divine light, and the mysteries of the spiritual
worid were brought clearly to her understanding. She saw the
Lord Jesus Christ in his glory, who revealed to her the great ob-
ject of her prayers, and fully satisfied all the desires of her soul.
The most astonishing visions and divine manifestations were pre-
sented to her view in so clear and striking a manner, that the whole
spiritual world seemed displayed before her. In these extraordi-
nary manifestations, -she had a full and clear view of the mystery
of iniquity, of the root and foundation of human depravity, and of
the very act of transgression, committed by the first man and wo-
man, in the garden of Eden. Here she saw whence and wherein
all mankind were lost from God, and clearly realized the only
possible way of recovery. This revelation she received in the
summer of 1770, in prisqn, where she was confined on account of
her religious principles, under a pretence of her having profaned
the sabbath.

The Ann had before received many extraordinary manifestations
of God,tho she had received great light concerning the depravity of
human nature, and the effects of man's loss from God, and tho she
had taken up her cross against the carnal gratifications of the flesh,
and had testified her faith to the society on this subject, many of
whom, in consequence of her testimony, had walked in the same
faith; yet, not having then received a clear revelation of the root of
human depravity, and the cause of man's fall, she had continued to
^eld obedience to James and Jane Wardley,as her superiors, and
was eminently useful to them in leading, teaching, strengthening
and protecting the society.

But when she was released from her imprisonment, and came to
reveal to the society these last extraordinary manifestations, so
great was the display of divine light with which her soul was filled,
and so mighty the power of God which accompanied her testimo-
ny, and so keen the searching power of her spirit in discovering
and bringing to light the hidden works of darkness, that every soul
present was struck with astonishment and filled with fear and
trembling. They saw at once that the candle of the Lord was in
her hand, and that she was able by the light thereof, to search
every heart and try every soul among them. From this time she
was received and acknowledged as the first visible leader of the
church of God upon earth.

The preceding work in this society, under the ministration of
James and Jane Wardley, was evidently preparatory to the usher-
ing in of the second coming of Christ ; and it may with propriety
be compared to the work of John the Baptist, or the spirit of Elias^
the forerunner of the Lord Jesus. When thetefot^ \xvtv ^'?>s»\s5sj^
tized into the fulness of the spirit and woin. o^ \!laaX'&WAfcV:} «> ^^ ^^^


SKETCHES OF THE LIFE

llien prepared Tor tiie baptbni of die Hnly Gliost, and wns made a
fit vessel to receive ' ihe true Spirit of Clirisi, and W revive and
bring lo light his perfecl law of righteousness fur [he direction and
salvation of all souls who were willing lo obey her testimony ; and
here commencetl the real manifestation of Christ's second appear-
ance.

From this time the light and power of God revealed in Ann,
and through her adniinblered to those who received her, testimony,
had such sensible eflect in giving ihem power over all sin, and
filling them with visions, revelations and other (•ihn of God, that
she v/ta readily acknowledged as their spiritual Mother in ChrUt.
Hence she received the title of Mother;' and hence those of the
society who received and obeyed her testimony, found a great in-
crease in the power and gifts of CJod; while on the other hand,
those who rejected it, Inst all their former light and power, and fell
back into a state of darkness, and into the common course of the
world.

By the immediate revelation of Christ she henceforth bore an
open testimony against the lustful gratifications of the flesh, as the
source and foundation of human corruption ; and testified, in the
most plain and pointed manner, that no soul could follow Christ
in the regeneration, while living in the works of natural generation,
or in any of the gratifications of lust. Her testimony was oi^en
delivered with such mighty power of God, accompanied with such
a heart-searching and soul-quickening spirit, that it seemed to pen-
etrate every secret of the heart. By this means the most hidden
abominations were often brought to light ; and those secret acts of
wickedness, which had been deceitfully covered under a fair outside
profession of sanctity, were many limes brought to view in such a
manner as to make every guilty soul fear and tremble in her pre<

Here it may be proper to notice that, notwitlislanding all Moth-
er Ann's inward sufferings and tribulation, her outward afflictions
f and persecutions were often very severe and cruel. The powerful
testimony which she raaint^ned against all sin, together with the
wonderful operations of the Spirit of God which prevailed in the
meetings of her liille soriety, through her ministration, excited
public attention, and stirred up the malignant feelings of many,
both professors and profane, of almost every class and description,
to such a degi'ee of enmity that, by formal opposition and tumultu-
ous mobs, open persecution and secret malice, her very life seemed
many times in great jeopardy. She was often shamefully and
cruelly abused, and a number of times imprisoned. To state,


CHAP. II.] OP MOTHER AMI LEE. 1 1

circumstantially, the many instances of her sufferings and imprif-
onment, would swell this volume beyond the limits prescribed.
We shall only notice the following.

Her enemies, after seeking in vain for some plausible pretext to
take her life, finally brought an accusation of blasphemy against
her. They told her she must have her tongue bored through with
a hot iron ; and brought her before four ministers of the estab-
lished church, with a view to obtain judgment against her. But
these men, being desirous to hear her own testimony, gave her
liberty to speak for herself. Accordingly she spoke, and manifes-
ted such evident power of God, that they thought proper to dismiss
her ; and admonished her accusers to If t her alone, and not abuse
her. Enraged and disappointed at not bt^ing able to enlist these
ministers against her, her persecutors were determined to take the
power of judgment into their own hands, and become at once her
judges and executioners, and agreed to stone her to death as a blas-
phemer.

Accordingly they led her down into a valley, without the town,
where she was followed by four of her brethren, namely, William
Lee, James Whittaker, Daniel Whittaker and James Shepherd.*
Her persecutors^ having provided themselves with a sufficient quan-
tity of stones, suitable for their purpose, they placed themselves on
the side of the hill, at a convenient distance, and began to throw
their stones ; but not being able, after repeated trials, to hit her or
any of her companions, Texcept Daniel Whittaker, who received a
slight wound on one of his temples,^) they fell into contention
among themselves, and finally abandoned their design. Mother
Ann, in relating these circumstances to some of the believers, said,
" While they were throwing their stones, I felt myself surrounded
" with the presence of God, and my soul was filled with love. I
" knew they could not kill me, because my work was not done ;
" therefore I felt joyful and comfortable^ while my enemies felt
" distress and confusion.'^

At another time an attempt was made upon her life ; but it does
not appear that this was done by any legal process, but rather, as
is supposed, by the connivance of some of the officers of the stone
prison with the designs of her enemies. She was taken and con-
fined in a small cell of the prison, with an intention of starving her
to death. Here she was kept fourteen days without any kind of
sustenance, excepting what was conveyed to her privately, through
the keyhole of the door, after the first two days, once in twenty-four

* This WRS Dot the James Shepherd who afterwards came to America with her ; but
another man of the same name, who was considered a faitliful believer.
t This man afterwards fell away. ■


■p


BREtCHEB OP THE LIFE [pAKT't I

hours. This was done by one of t!ie believers,* who foiind access

to the door of her prison, and inserted the stem of a pipe through

the keyhole, into the bowl of which he poured a small quaiility of

9 inilk, mixed with a little winG, which tvas her only temporal sup-

I port during the whole lime of her imprisonment. At the end of

i ' jburtecn duys, the door was unlocked with the expeclatien of find-

fil^g her dead; but to the great surprise of her enemies, she was not

Ifcnly alive, but as well as before. Some who were prt^ent at the

"^me, and saw her wfdk ofi' in perfect hea'ih, remarked thai it must

£ owing to a supernatural power which iiltended her, and that

ftey did not believe it was riahi to cmfine or oppress her.

The last imprison nient which she suflered, while in England,

k.lms ilone under pretence of her having profaned the sahbalh.

FTTliis appears to have been a preconcerted jilan of her enemies, to

1 prt'veiil her and her little family from worshipping God on the

jabbHth, according to their custom. A number of spies had beeii

breviously placed in the streets, under a pretence of preventing

|)eople from profaning the sabbath. The believers assembled that

ntornlng at the house of John Lee, and began their worship, as

Wlial, by sinfring and dancing. This «as discovered by the spies,

end a mob was soon raised, headed by the principul nurden, who

surrounded the house, burst open the doors, and ascended the slaiis

into the third loft, where il)e believers were assembled. They

were all seized without any ceremony, and immediately dragged

down stairs; Mother Ann herself was dragged down by Iter feet,

and very much abused. They were all, excepting one man and

"^ivo chitdren,f immediately hurried off to the stone prison, and put i

I into close confinement. The next morning tliey were all reteased

Kicepiing Mother .\na and John Lee, her father, who were remov-

10 the house of correction, where tliey were kept confined scv-

i weeks, and then disciinrged.

These are but a part of the outward alflictiona which Mother
n endured from her enemies in England. Besides many cir-
mmstances of less note, there were several other instances of abuse
jirhich must inevitably have deprived her of life, had she not been
BToiecled by that Almighty Being in whom she always trusted ;
Rid it is worthy of remark, that nothing short of Divine Power
I eould have supported her through .all these trying scenes, and ena-

■ iled her to maintain her testimony in the midst of a crooked and
■%erverse generation. But in consequence of the sudden and un-
Vfiincly death of some of her most biiter persecutors, and the con-

■ ' Viction of others, these cruel abuses finally ceased. Her enemies
■ saw that she was evidently protected and supported, and lier life


CHAP. 1L] OP mother ANN LEE. 13

preserved, by some interposing power, notwithstanding all their
attempts to destroy it; and hence, for more than two years previ-
ous to her leaving England, she and her little band enjoyed their
faith in peace. And tho there was no important addition to their
number, yet the faith and substance of the gospel continued to in-
crease in the hearts of the faithful. But their public testimony
ceased in England about a year before they embarked for America.-

Mother Ann, whose mind was ever intent on the work of God,
and who always stood ready to obey any call of God to her, was
at length, by a special revelation, directed to repair to America ;
and at the same time, she received a diyine promise, that the work
of God would greatly increase, and the millenial church would be
established in that country. This revelation was communicated
to the society, and was soon con6rmed by signs, visions and ex-
traordinary manifestations, to many individual members; and per-
mission was given for all those of the society to accompany her,
who were able, and who felt any special impressions on their own
minds so to do. Accordingly those who became the companions
of Mother Ann, in her voyage to America, and who were all, at
that time, professedly members of the society, were Abm. Stanley,
her husband, Wm. Lee, her brother, James Whittaker, John
Hocknell, Richard Hocknell, son of John Hocknell, James Shep-
herd, Mary Partington, and Nancy Lee, a niece of Mother Ann.
These eight were all that accompanied Mother Ann in her voyage
to America.

Having settled their affairs, and made arrangements for the voy-
age, they embarked at Liverpool, on board the ship Mariah, Cap-
tain Smith, of New- York, and sailed on the 19th of May, 1774.
Before they embarked, Mother Ann told the captain that he should
not have whereof to accuse them, except it were concerning the
law of their God. While on their passage, they went forth, in
obedience to their inward feelings, to praise God in songs and in
dances. This offended the captain to such a degree, that he threat-
ened to throw them overboard, if they attempted the like exercise
again. But as Mother Ann had put her trust in God, whom she
feared, she was not willing to be restrained in her duty by the fear
of mortals ; she therefore chose to obey God rather than man, and
accordingly went forth again, in obedience to the divine influences
which she felt.

At this the captain became greatly enraged, and attempted to put
his threats in execution. But that God in whom they trusted, and
who had sent them to do his will, had power to protect them.
This he did in a marvellous manner. It was in the evening, in
time of a storm ; and the ship suddenly sprung a le^k^ Ck<^^"!a&\sss\Rj^
by the starting of a plank between w\Tvd ^xvd^^Vet. ^\Nft ^^r^'e^
now Mowed in bo rapidly that, notw\vV\s\».iid\\w ;^ ^^^ e^sstSLv^s®

C


COMMENCEMENT OP THE

he pumps, it gained upon them so fasi, iliat tlie whole sliip's
If were greatly alarmed. The captain turned pale as a corpse,
nd said they must all perish befure morning; for he saw no possi-
Ae means to save the ship from sinking.

> Dill Mother Ann maintained her confidence in God, and said,
p Captain, be of good cheer; there shall not a hair of our heads
if perish; we shall all arrive safe lo America. Ijust now saw
W two bright angels of God .standing by the mast, through whom I
^ received this promise." Slie then encouraged the seamen, and
9ie and her companions eealoualy assisted at the pumps. Shortly
afier this, a large wave struck the ship with great violence, and the
loose plank was instantly closed to its place.

Whether this remarkable incident was eflected by the violent
force of the wave against the plank, or by some other nnacrounta-
ble means, it was then viewed liy all on board, as a miraculous
interposition of Divine Providence in their favor. They were
soon in a great measure released from the pumps; and the captain,
after tliis, gave them free and full liberty to worship Hod according
to the dictates of their own consciences, and promised that he
would never molest them again. He was faithful to his promise,
mid treated them with kindness and respect during the remninder
. of the voyage, and was afterwards free to declare, that had il
L-aoI been for these people, he should have been simtc in the sea,
md never reached America.

Thus, after enduring the storms and dangers of the sea, in an
fQd leaky ship, which had been condemned as unfit for tlie voyage,
and which came very near foundering at sea, they all arrived safe
p|d NeW'York on the 6th of August following.


CHAPTER HI.

[ Ciratmslfinces conttfcterl mlh the seltlenieni of Mother Ann and

lier litllp soriety in America : Retigiaiia revival at Neaj-Leba-

no»: Comntmcemml and progreia of Ike testimony, fuUowed

hy persecution ; Decease of Mather Ann, ^c.

t After Mother Ann and her little family arrived in this country,

rfliey passed through many scenes of difficulty, of a temporal nature.

[ Being strangers in the land, and without any means of subsistence,

[ excepting the daily labor of their own hands, they were obliged lo

t seek employment where they could find it witliout hazarding the

W-frec enjoyment of their faith: for Mother Ann chose rather to

r rely upon the mercy of God for sup|)ort and protection, than to

I coun the friendship of the world, or to solicit their favor for the

'e of any temporal advantages which she might obtain ft ibsi^

-■eo/"Aej-j¥%(ous freedom, which was (leai«lo\ieriSMiii*"^^^


CHAP. III.] UNITED 80CIETT IN AMERICA. 15

They were led however, to make some arrangements, in the
first place, for their future residence, where they could be united
in the mutual enjoyment of their faith, and wait the call of God to
more extensive usefulness. Accordingly William Lee and John
Hocknell went up the river and contracted for a lot of land near
Niskeyuna, in the county of Albany, and returned a^^in to New-
York. John Hocknell soon after sailed for England, to bring out
his family, and make further arrangements for the settlement of
the sooiety in this country.

Mother Ann accompanied her brother William and some of the
rest of the society to Albany, where they found employment in
their several occupations. She then returned to New- York, where
she continued durmg John Hocknell's absence to England. She
resided in the house of a respectable family, in Queen-street,* by the
name of Smith, by wiiom Abraham, her husband, was employed
as a journeyman in the blacksmith's business. She employed
herself in washing and ironing for her support; and by her meek-
ness, humility and amiable deportment, she gained the esteem and
confidence of the family, and particularly of Smith's wife, who
treated her with great kindness. By this woman she was after-
wards solicited to take charge of her family affairs, with full liber-'
ty to manage therein according to her own discretion. But Mother
Ann could not listen to any proposition which was incompatible
with the gift and calling of God to her ; she chose rather to endure
poverty and sufferings, than to turn aside from her duty to God
for the sake of any temporal advant^es whatever.

During John Hocknell's absence to England, Mother Ann went
several times up the river and visited those of the society who re-
sided in the vicinity of Albany, and was occasionally v'lsited by
some of them ; but still continued lier residence in New-York. In
the latter part of the summer or beginning of autumn, 1775, Abra-
ham Stanley was visited with a severe sickness. To nurse and
take care of him in this sickness, required Mother Ann's whole
time and attention. This duty she performed with the utmost
care and kindness, tho often at the expense of great sufferings on
her own part. Their earnings now ceased, and they were reduced
to extreme poverty.

Abraham at length recovered his health, so as to be able to walk
the streets ; and tho he never had been considered as a faithful and
substantial believer; yet he had hitherto supported his credit and
reputation, and maintained an outward conformity to his faith.
But on regaining his health, and before he was fully able to return
to his occupation, he began to associate with the wicked at public
houses, and soon lost all sense and feeling of reli^ow^ -axAV^.^sv
to oppose Mother Ann's testimony in a \ei'^ >yft%<;>^^ TDassftK^-^^Mv^

* Now called t^esrl-atreeU


^_ woul


^ COMSIENCEMEKT OF THE

urged iier lo renounce it, imd live in sexual cohibilaiion, like the
reatof ilie world. She replied, that she was willing to do any thing
for hira ^hicb justice, reason or humanity required ; (tul she should
nevur consent to Tialnte her duty to God; and endeavored to pre-
vail on him to return lo his duty and be f^lhful.

But as Abraham was determined to jiursue the course of the
world, he continued hb vicious practise, instead of returning
lo his occupation, and loft Ann to provide fur herself. At Jen^h
lie brought a lewd woman into the house to her, and declared tliat,
imlesB she would consent lo live in sexual cohabitation with him,'
lie would take that woman for his wife. Ann replied with great
firmness and resolution, that she would not do it if he should take
her life as the consequence of her refiisal. She also informed him,
in plain terras, that she considered his cruel and abusive conduct
38 a vejT unjust requital for the uniform kindness and attention
wbidi she Lad paid to him, both in sickness and in health ; and
said she was still willing to take the most tender care of him, if he
would return to his duty, and conduct himself as he ought to do,
id urged him, in ilie most feeling manner, to return to the obcdi-
>f his fniiti; but all to no effect. ?le soon went ofl'wttli the
n, to a dJMani part of the city, and it was reported tlial he
shortly afier mairied to her. Thus ended the connection be-
tween Mother Aon and Abraham Stanley.

On (he 25th of December, 1773, John Hocknell, with his fam-
ily, arrived at Philadelphia, accompanied by John Partington and
Ills family. From Philadelphia they proceeded to New-York,
where Uiey found Mother Ann. They continued in New- York
till some time in February following, and then went on to Albany
by land. After the opening of the river, in the spring, they went
lUrwn lo bring up their elTects, nod Mother Ann returned to Albany
with ihcm, and joined the rest of the socit'ty. Having taken up a
lot of new land, their next object was lo prepare for a settlement,
in the wilderness, by de«ringtneirland, erecting suitable buildings,
and making other necessary provisions. Thb they accomplished
ta the course of the summer.

, Thus, after passing through many trying scenes, Mother Ann

^nd those who sioud faithful with her, were collected ii^lber, and

in the month of September, 177'>, took up their residence in tlie

woods of Watcrv-liet, near Niskeyuna, about seven miles north-west

if Albany. The pliice being then in a wild<:^rness state, tln'y

[ao, with indefatigable zeal and industry, and llirongh additionni

ierings, to pi-epare the way for a permanent settlement, where ,

;y could enjoy their faith in peace, amid the tumults of tiK war,

which the country was then involved. Here they waited with

itience (fntl's appointed lime, for the opening ol' the testimony of

'Blei-eilasUnggijspiA. Ibr which tliey huAakeailj 9uKwc4w*TO.wt\i.


CHAP. IIl] united SOCIETY IN AMERICA. 17

and which, above all other things, was the nearest to their hearts.
Here they occupied themselves in improving their new settlement,
and providing for their comfortable subsistence ; and here they
held thdr solemn meetings, and offered up their devotions to God,
full three years and a hdf, until the way was prepared for the
commencement of their testimony to the world, in the spring of
the year 1780.

In the year 1779, Mother Ann often encouraged her companions,
by telling them that the time was just at hand when many would
' come and embrace the gospel, and directed them to make provisions
for it, which they did according to their abilities. This same year, a
remarkable revival of religion commenced in New-Lebanon and
the adjacent towns, attended with many extraordinary circumstan-
ces of conviction, which greatly awakened the zeal of preachers
and people. Many were powerfully wrought upon, both in body
^nd spirit, and deeply convicted of their fallen state. Many also,
who had been professors of religion, began to see the false founda-
tion on which they had hitherto built their hopes of salvation.
Many were favored with gifts of visions and prophecies, by which
' they saw and testified that the day of redemption was at hand, that
the second coming of Chrbt was nigh, even at the door ; and
their meetings resounded with loud cries to God for his kuigdom
to come.

Their meetings were also attended with great power of God,
and a strong testimony against all sin ; and the various exercises
and gifts of the spirit among the people, manifested the most con-
vincing evidences of a real work <^ God. Some, under a deep
conviction of their sins, were crying for mercy; others felt un-
speakably happy in the jo3rful visions and revelations of the glory
oSr the latter day, and of the commencement of .the kingdom of
Christ on earth, which was to put an end to wars and fightmgs,
and all manner of violence, restore peace on earth, make an end
of sin, bring in everlasting righteousness, find gather the saints into*
one harmonious communion.

The work was powerful and swift, but of short duration. In a
few months their visions and prophecies ceased, the extraordinary
power of their testimony seemed to be at an end, and none of those
things of which they had testified, as yet appeared. In this situa-
tion they were filled with deep distress and anxiety of mind ; yet
still retained their confidence in the near approach of Christ's
kingdom, and continued their assemblies with earnest prayers, and
exhortations, encouraging one another to maintcun their faith and
hope, to wait with patience, to pray and not faint.

This was the state of the people inthesi^\m^<i\ Vt'^^^^\iRXk^
some of them providentially visited Mother Kuw^xid>afex\^^^^*^
Uy, and were soon convinced that they wetft \u i3Ci^ n^t^ >«a«VV*

C2


COMMENCEfifEST CF THE

f which ihej themselves haJ been so' earnestly jira^itig, and foi'
f which they had been looking and wailing with such ardent expeo
ftadons. Attracted by the report of These, others were induced to
I l%)it them ; and ibe fame of lliese strange people, who lived in tliis
[ obscure corner in the wilderness, soon esiended Tar and wide.
Many resorted to see them, from New-Lebanon and the country
round, and when they heard the new and hving lesiimooy, and
saw the various and extraordinary operations of Divine Power
among them, they were fully conflrmed in the belief, that Christ
had, in very deed, appeared again on earth. Many from various
parts of the coantry, and of almost every denomjiiaton, embraced
the faith of (he society.

Many of the new converts, as miglit be expected, were filled
with great power and zeal; but for the wnnt of experience and un-
derstanding, they were not able, at all times, to exercise their zeal
according to the dictates of wisdom. Many times they exiiibiied
3 degree of wildness and rathusiasro in their conduct, which, to the
beholders, appeared like the greatest inconsistency and delusion,
and especially to such as trusted in the forms of religion, while
they were ignorant of its internal power. To the natural man,
socn views of a new and singular manifestation of religion, were
very natural ; especially as hs tight and testimony struck at the
very root and fonndation of the fallen nature of man.

These things, however, were viewed in a very diSerent light by
those wlio were spiritually minded. But if it sometimes happened

I that irregularities look place, which were inconsistent with the
^h of the testimony, they were discountenanced by the leading
cbaracters of the society. The work was all new to those
fho embraced it, and the leaders being few in number, and the
vcvk extensive, irregularities could not always be foreseen nor
^evented. And where the destruction of the old heavens, with
MS tlieir false systems, and of the old earth with all its corruption
:Knd wickedness, was be^nning to take place in the soul, in order
to establish the new in the place thereof, it must necessarily produce
a commotion in the human system, like the clashing of two oppo*
site elements. These effects will always be vieweil in their true
light, by those who are divinely entighlened, and who are able to

(disceni the true source from whence tliey proceed.
Such a remarkable event, however, could not lake place without
Axciting great agitation in the public raJnd. Hence many conjee-
tores were in circulation conwming these strange people, and es-
pecially concerning their female leader. By some she was strongly
fttspected of tBitckcraft, and the old accusation was in substance
00nvt:d} " Ske casteih out devils by Beelzebub." But as it was a
ft»f- lificarg and^htingn, {the counuy heing then engaged in its
jwpo/o/;uDflr>'«[rogg'/e,Jand those w-lio receive d'lWXesVioiw'j,'* we


CHAP. 11L] united SOCIETY IN AMERICA. 10

averse to war, advantage was taken of this circumstance to repre*
sent them as enemies to the country. Accordingly they were
accused of maintaining a secret correspondence with the enemy^
and the charge of treason was publicly alledged against them. In
consequence of these accusations, which had no foundation, but in
the enmity of a persecuting spirit. Mother Ann, and a number of
the leading characters were, in the month of July following, im-
prisoned in Albany.*

Tho the charge of treason was the ostensible cause of this im«
prisonment ; yet it appeared evident that the real object of their
accusers was, to break up the society, and thereby suppress the
growing testimony. But so far from effecting this object, the tes-
timony had afterwards a more rapid and extensive circulation than
before. For when it was once understood that an innocent people
were actually thrown into prison, on account of their religion, the
circumstance naturally excited great sympathy among the more
considerate part of the community, and great inquiries were made
concerning the religious tenets of a people who were judged deserv-
ing of such harsh treatment.

Hence they were visited by multitudes of people from various
quarters, and from many miles distant; and every honest and
candid enquirer was soon convinced, not only of the innocence of
the people, but of the truth of their testimony. There were also
many sensible men who expressed their disapprobation of these
intolerant proceedings against an innocent people, for no other
cause, in reality, than their religious faith and testimon}', and es*
pecially at a time when the nation itself was contending for its
civil and religious rights. And all who were seriously awakened
to a feeling sense of their loss from God, and of their need of sal-
vation, and who were willing to endure the cross of Christ, regard-
less of popular clamor and the enmity of persecutors, readily em-
braced the testimony.

Their enemies were highly offended when they saw their main
object defeated by this success of the testimony. And as Mother
Ann was the founder and principal leader of this new secty which
was "every where spoken against," they naturally concluded that,
by separating her from her followers, they would soon be dispersed^
and the society come to an end. Accordingly, isibout the middle
of August, they sent her down the river, with a view to banish her
to the British army, which was then in New-York. But not being
able to accomplish their object^ she was landed at Poughkeepsie,
and imprisoned in the jail of that town. But notwithstanding all

* Nothing could be more uniuat and onfoanded than this rfaarge. Mother Ann, at the
eommencement of the wari andf frequently afterwards, testified by the syiirvtoC ^xu^Vk»c.'^>
that it weold terminate in the separation of the colomes from \^e UTVa,%Vv^iy««\tktsv«.x\\ ^oiafeX
liberty of conscience vrould be established in this country •, «Lftd \Yk«,\ V\ie '«%'^ '«w\^V»'^ V-^*

prepared for the buildiag np of Christ's Kingdom in Vhit {»3roie.4 Vwid. ^>R» CW^^ t»X>\i"M*:

fare Act afamH bee dwa Utslunooy,


I COMHENCEMGTiT OP THE

these endeavora to destroy ll>e soripty and stop ihe progress of the
I leatiroony, it still continued to inrrease by a constant accession of

^^^bluml)ers iVom various quarters.

^^|k About the 20th of December following, those who had been
^^^n»nliiied in Albany, were released (without any trial ; having been
^^HicanRned five months, witboul any shadow of evidence to justify
^^Httieir imprisonment. Being now released, they visited Mother
^^M Ann at Poiighkeepsie, and through ihejr intercession with Gov.
^^■* Geo. Clinton, who had not before been made acquainted will) these
^H circumstances, she was released, about the last of December. Thus
> ended the only imprisonment that Mother Ann suffered in

America ; an imprisonment which was designed to suppress her
influence, and check the progress of the society; but through the

I overruling hand of Divine Providence, it was the nccasi-in ol'a lar
more extensive circulation of her testisiony, and a greater increase
of the society, than any event that had ever before taken place.
Afler Mother Ann and her companions were released from
I piison, they returned to Watervliet, where they sjienl the remain-
' der of the winter and spring, and were constantly visited by those
»%ha had embraced the testimony, and also by many others from
►Ae surrounding country. And tho many came from motives of
' curiosity ; yet no honest soul, who candidly examined the lestimo-
tiy,and viewed, without prejudice, the wonderful operations of the
fjwwerof God wiiich prevailed in their meetings, could go away
"without H full conviction that the work of God was among them.
■ But they were often afflicted with mockers and scoffers, whose
main object was to seek for evil, and seiie upon every occa-
monto scandalize the work, and vilify the subjects of it. Such
were ever ready to judge with an evil eye, and from the decisions
of an evil heart, to fix the stamp of evil upon whatever they saw
among the people. Hence arose those numerous evil reports
which have been so industriously circulated, by reprobate charac-
ters, I" the present day:

On the 31st of May, 1781, Mother Ann set out on a journey to
Harvard, in the state of Massachusetts. In this journey she was
accompanied by William Lee, James Whittaker, Samuel Fhch,

I Mary Partington and Maj^aret Lecland. In the course of her
journey, she visited many who had before embraced her testimony,
encouraging and confirming them in thdr faith by those extraordi-
nary manifestations of the power of God which always attended
her ministry ; and tho the spirit of opposition manifested itself,
more or less, wherever she went; yet numbers were added to (he
faith. She arrived in Harvard the latter part of June, where alie
ifag shortly visited by great numbers of the inhabitants, and by
pB/y others Irom various parts of the counlty. Many embraced
trtesliiaoByj anrf, us is natural OQ sucfe occaaiOTa, fee ^a'A sS.


CHAP. lit] UNITED SOCIETY IN AAIERICA. 21

Antichrist was greatly alarmed at the danger to which he saw hi» .
kingdom exposed^ through the prevailing infiuence of the testimotiy
of truth.

Persecution, the usual engine of religious intolerance^ was im-
mediately set in motion ; and no means were left untried to arrest
the progress of the testimony. Every evil report and every wick-
ed device, that falshood and malice could dictate, were called forth
to calumniate and debase the character of Mother Ann and her
companions, and render them odious in the eyes of the people,
with a view to excite them to acts of persecution. The charges
of being enemies and traitors to the country ; of having fire arms
and munitions of war concealed among them ; of living in drunk-
enness and debauchery, and practising witchcraft and other base
Climes, were continually alledged against them.

In consequence of these accusations, they suffered much |»ersonal
abuse, and on several occasions, they were so shamefully and cru-
elly abused, particularly at Harvard and Petersham, that, to all
human appearance, it seemed as tho noihing short of Divine Power
could have preserved their lives. The people also, who embraced
the testimony, often suffered a large share in these abuses ; being
scourged with whips, beaten with clubs, stoned, kicked and drag-
ged about by their legs and arms, and sometimes by the hair of
their heads, and driven from place to place, in the most cruel and
abusive manner ; so that many of them but narrowly escaped with
their lives ; and numbers carried through life, the scars and marks
of abuse which they then received from their cruel and inhuman
persecutors. Through all these trying scenes they were evidently
protected and supported by the power and providence of God ; so
that notwithstanding many attempts were made upon the lives of
the believers, yet nu life was suffered to be taken.

But judgments appeared evidently to follow all tiie most active
and violent of these persecutors* Some who were before rich and
prosperous in their temporal circumstances, soon after these |)crsc-
cutions, met with some extraordinary reverses of fortune, lost all
their property and came to beggary, and were finally reduced to
the necessity of going to the very people whom they had before
persecuted, to beg alms. Some came to sudden and untimely
deaths ; others became insolvent and left the country to avoid their
creditors. Some who had before sustained a respectable charac-
ter in society, soon after lost all their reputation, in consequence of
drunkenness and other base practices ; others ended tiieir days by
suicide. In short, these misfortunes were so general upon those
who had acted a conspicuous jmrt in these perescutions, that they
occasioned the following general remark amon^ tUft vp\va!ckSNassis&\
<* These Shaker drivers are all coming lo tvqAxvtv^?^

These persecutions^ however, like X\i^ \m\^xSaoivsi<eiv\.^ fe^-oss^


. COMMENCEMENT OP THE

PffTved only lo accelerate the means of exlpni.ling llie icstlmony,
irbich greaily increased the ntimber ol" believers. It may be
broper to remark here, that notwithstanding all llie persecutions
|nU im^irisonnients that Mother Ann, and tlie Ciders with her,
,rflered from lime to time, both in England and Ainericn, and all
iccuaalions ever raised against them by the longne of slander;
BO charge against their moral characters was ever substantia-
The Cain-like enmity of their persecutors was evidently
Mirectcd ^;ainBt their religious faith, and ihe purity of their lives,
vihich was a living testimony to condemn those abominaiions in
fTrhich their persecutors lived. " If they have called the master
^ of the house Beelzebub, how much more them i>f his houaeboldr*'
. During the residence of Mother Ann and the Elders, in Harvard,
Jtey visited many places in that ({uarter, and passed through many
iBvere triab and suflerings for the testimony of the gospel; but
trere blessed, in their labors, with many powerful gifts of God, and
Iwecceded in planting the word of God in the hearts of many. It)
e course of their labors with the believers, they ministered much
e instruction, enlightened the understandings of many who
tnbraced the testimony, and taught them how to bear iheir crosses,
" ' lie their evil propensities, and gain a final victory

e of evil in their own sools. In short, ihey were
jiught bow to travel in the way of God, how to increase and grow
D love and union, peace and liarmony,and how t<> gain that abid-
ing treasure which was necessary to support them through all the
s of this life, and fit ihem for the everlasting kingdom
f C&ist hereafter.

About the beginning of July, 1783, Ihey left Harvard to return
« the westward. On their journey they visited Petersham,
pliesh ire, Richmond, Hancock and Stockbridge, in Massachusetts,
ind New-Lebanon and Slephentown, in the state of New-Vork.
Bnall these places they were followed by great multitudes of people,
%Bd many powerful meetings, and suffered much persecution, par-
ticularly in New-Lebanon, where they were most shamefully and
Bruelly abused. On the 4th of September, they left New-Lebanon
Wd relumed to Watervliet, having beai absent two years and
ee months. Here they were again visited by great numbers
m all parts of the country where the testimony had been receiv-
t and here they continued their powerful meetings, where many
ds were awakened by the sound of the gospel, and leh the puri-
Qfing fire of Zion; and all who were faithful and honest-hearted,
e instructed, strengthened and encoiu-sged, according to their
^eds and ciKumstanccs, in all things, both spiritual and temporal.
Un the Slsi of July, 1784, the society was called to sustain a
^ifusand gffectins trial in the decease of Elder William Lee,
» bad been a powerM support to Mot\>ev Ann, \tl (tte ig"^'^


CHAP. III.] UNITED SOCIETY IN AMERICA. iS

weight of care which such a body of believers brought upon her.
This event was the means of preparing the minds of the believers
for a still heavier trial, which they sensibly felt that they must soon
experience/m the loss of the visible presence and protection of their
dearly beloved Mother, the thought of which seemed almost insup-
portable to many. Being herself sensible ihat her time was short,
she often reminded the people of it, and often exhorted them to
faithfulness and perseverance in the way of God. Having finish-
ed her work on earth, she was called to bid adieu to all terrestrial
things, and was released from her labors, her sorrows and her suf-
ferings, and calmly resignsd her soul to G^d, on the morning of the
8th of September following.

This solemn event was severely felt and deeply deplored by all
her faithful children ; but their present loss was greatly compensa-
ted by the faithful labors of Elder James Whittaker, who succeed-
ed her in the ministry, and who was henceforth called Father
James.

The society being now deprived of the visible presence and
protection of Mother Ann, Father James saw and felt, with many
others, the necessity of laboring for an increase of the substance of
the gospel among the people, in order to maintain the testimony
and protect them from the snares of wickedness which surrounded
them, and the flood of opposition which now seemed ready to burst
in upon them from every quarter. Mother Ann's decease being
publicly known, it was generally and confidently believed by the
world around them, that the society would be dissolved, and the
people return to their former course of life; so that (as they often
expressed themselves) ** the delusion would soon be at an end."
According to this belief, every means which Satan could devise,
was made use of, to seduce the believers from their duty, and turn
then* minds from the faith.

But the foundation being laid by Jesus Christ, and established
by the will of God, upon the rock of ages, it could not be over-
thrown by the agency of man nor the malice of devils. And tho
numbers, from time to time, fell off, and lost their union and rela-
tion to the work of God ; yet this did not destroy the testimony,
nor weaken the confidence of the faithful. For it has ever proved
true, as testified by Mother Ann, and the first witnesses of the
gospel with her, that no truly faithful soul has ever been left with-
out the protection of God ; because the faithfulness and obedience
of such will always ensure God's protection. And it has proved
equally true, according to the same testimony, that the unfaithful
are like withered branches; tho they may hang on for a season,
and be sustained by tlie tree ; yet when storms atls^ ^xv^>\v^ ^\sAs^
blow, and there is a shaking among ihe ^eftTi\\%e&, ^^^.w^^^^jtS
JUaifs and branches must fall off ^ lor \Vifcy c%.i\>mX"\ q5\\ w^Vswgtx,


COMUBXCBMENT OF THE

The society having, through great labor aniJ much tnbuUtion,
f fUJ^eil out many remaining corruptions, and gained an increaaiiig
Fpower and victory over tbe fallen nature of llie flesh, and baving
Vttained to a greater degree of spiritual light and sensation, were
able lo discern and mark, more clearly, the distinction " between
tiie preciotis and the vile,'' and to draw more closely, the line of
'separation whicli was necessary to protect the people &om the
snares of sin. And all those who bad been faithful and honest
hearted, being now firmly eatablished in the increasing work of
God, were led in ilicir travel lo see and feel the necessity of being
gathered into a more united borly, for ibe benefit of greater protec-
tion, and a fiirtber increase ollheir spiritual travel. In the autumn
of 1785, was raised the first house fur public worship ever built by
ibe Society. From this lime the afTairs of the Society began to
assume a more regular form and order.

During tlie ministration of Father James, he visited almost
every place where the testimony of the gospel had been received,
teaching, encouraging and strengthening the believers in their most
khoty faith. In this time they found a great increase in their faith
tnd iindersEanding, and in tbeir power and victory over tlie nature
'f evil, and were gradually prepared for that gospel order and
nion, in things 3|)iritual and temporal, which was afterwards es-
tablished among them. Father James having laid the foundation
the establishment of order, und finished the work which was
'n him to do, departed this life at Enfield, in Connecticut, Jn^
1787.


Father James wa
am, who was a nat
11th, 1740. He «
tol powers; he liai
leading character ir
Lucy Wright, a v.


a succeeded in the ministry by Joseph Meach-
ve of Enfield in Conneclicul, born February
as a man of deep penetration and strong raen-
d formerly been a Baptist preacher, and was a
1 the forementioned revival at New-I-ebauon.
man greatly distinguished for her faithfulness,
wisdom and discretion, was also chosen and appointed as the first
|r<1eading character in the female line. She was a nativeof Pittsfield,
'i Massachusetts, bom February 5tb,17C0. These two Indbeen
mineutly useful during Father James's ministry, and had ably
_f!ilippor[ed him in protecting, strengthening and encouraging the
people, and preparing them for ilie increasing work which was to
follow.

In the progressive manifestations of spiritual light which brought
^that increase to view, these two were established by tlie gift of
IS spiritual parents in church relation, and first ministers of
ospel order. X'nder thdr ministration the people l)egan (o gather
Ho a united body, and were gradually formed into church relation
r NewLebanoa, and united their inietesl in one common stock,
as to become one in all things, l)0li\ ipmWiii wA VftmjavA,
" "•tviag all things common."


C^AP. IV.] CHARACTER AND 3IINISTRY, &C. 25

After the example of the church in this place, societies were
formed in many other places where the gospel had been planted,
and successively established upon the same foundation and prin-
ciples of order and government, as branches of the Mother-church
at New-Lebanon.


CHAPTER IV.

iSome further account of the life^ character and ministry of

Mother Ann Lee.*

Mother Ann Lee, in her personal appearance, was a woman
rather below the common stature of woman ; thick set, but straight
and otherwise well proportioned and regular in form and features.
Her complexion was light and fair, and her eyes were blue, but
keen and penetrating \ her countenance was mild and expressive,
but grave and solemn. Her natural constitution was sound, strong
and healthy. Her manners were plain, simple and easy ; yet she
possessed a certain dignity of appearance that inspired confidence
and commanded respect. By many of the world, who saw her
without prejudice, she ws^ called beautiful ; and to her faithful
children, she appeared to possess a degree of dignified beauty and
heavenly love, which they had never before discovered among
m^ortals.

^She possessed remarkable powers and faculties of mind in
mature, which were greatly enlarged and strengthened by tlie gift
of God. At times, when under the power and operation of the
Holy Ghost, her countenance shone with the glory of God, and
her form and actions appeared divinely beautiful and very angelic.
The power and influence of her spirit, at such times, was great
beyond description ; and no one was able to gainsay or resist the
authority by which she spoke.

Tho her words were fevf^ yet they always seemed adapted to
the occasion, and it did not appear that she ever spoke in vain.
Her whole soul appeared to be always engaged in the work of God,'
and the Spirit of God seemed to breathe through all her words and
actions. She inspired into the hearts of her faithful children the
greatest fear of God, and excited their highest admiration, love and
respect. But in reproving sin and sinners, the power of her spirit
seemed irresistible, and often struck terror into the souls of every
one present. Her admonitions were sharp, powerful and penetrat-
ing ; yet while she struck at that which was evil, she seemed al-
ways anxious to separate and preserve the good. ■

* Tho the mere de8«ripUon of Mother Ann's person and mKtktv<fc'C% ^VN&ti\.'^«tyt\x»\!b^^
memory of her heavenly virtues ; yet as some f cry di«loT\A^ tc'^ttike.TiVa.'CvotA ^ Xk^i^V*:*^
been published to the world by those who nevtua^ Vvct t«ice, «lu8l "s«Y» "«««««^\tA.^'^*^ ^

ternaost maJiciout eaemiea for their diMng«n49R|MCTnk^Qta. ^« ^WMftV^Sik'Wftto**^*^ «*

cafed hip&Btiog them over in silence. "^'

D


SB CHARACTER AND MINISTRY

Her soul was frequently inspired with such divifte efficacy, thai,
with a single word or touch of lier hand, she would often raise in-
dividuals, and many times, with a few w(h^, a whole assembly,
from a slate of deep distress and tribulation of soul, to a state of
great heavenly joy and comfort. Again, she lias often ministered,
in a few weirds, to a lar^ assembly, such a measure of the power
of conviction and repentance, thai in a few minutes the floor lias
been wet with tears.

She possessed a degree of discernment and penetration which
nothing short of Divine Wisdom could inspire. In her labors
with young believers, she seemed lo peneirale the inmost recesses
of their souls, and would oAen lay open the state of thrir minds
more clearly than they were alile to do of themselves. It often
seemed that not a soul near her could hide the most secret feelings
from her; and in whatever she asserli-d for tnith, tho at the time
ever so doubtful to otiiers, she was never known to be in the least

Her mind rose superior to the ordinary passions of iiuman na-
ture, and her great labor seemed lo be, to subdue those passions
in her followers, and to inspire their souls with divine and heaven-
ly affections. During the whole period of her ministry, she was
never known to;be in the least degree ruffled, or out of temper witti
anyone; but even in the severest reproof, she appeared to feel
unbounded charity for those she reproved, and onxious only to put
away the evil and cherish ilie good. V

Tho Mother Ann, in the course of her ministry, passed througlr
many scenes of sorrow and tribulation of soul ; yet she was ofien
filled with heavenly joy and comfort. When she rejoiced under
the influence of Divine Power, her joy seemed far above all earth-
ly joys ; the heavenly melody of her voice, in the gift of divine
songs, was beyond description ; and to those around lier, it seemed
as if tier whole soul was in harmony with the angelic host, rejoic-
ing in the mansions of glory. When she wept, it appeared as ibo
» every feeling person was constrained to weep with lier. She was
ofien in tears and supplication before God ; and such was the di-
vine sympathy of her weeping soul, as oflen to melt the feelings of
a whole assembly into tears with her; and it seemedatsuch times,
as tho the very sound of her voice was enough to cause the most
adamantean heart to breali and yield before <>od. In times of
tiibulation she was often heard to say, " There is no sorrow like
my sorrow." It appeared that every feeling and faculty of her
soul and body was wholly devoted to the will of God in all things.
She of\en said, " Unce I served God through fear ; but now J serve
"him through love."
So great was her sense of the lost slate o( mantiftd, and so ar-
r/e/it her desire for their deliverance from v\ie boftAo^ o^ Bift,»aA


CHAP. IV] OF MOTHER AKN LEE. 27

from the awful state of misery which she cleariy foresaw awaited
sinners, that she was often in the deepest agony of soul, and the
most fervent cries to God for their salvation. In expressing her
compassionate feelings to the believers, on this subject, she often
wept like a child under the most excessive sorrow.

Mother Ann, in her ordinary manners and deportment, was
meek, simple and harmless, very just, upright and conscientious
in all her conduct, and very careful to wrong no one in any man-
ner whatt;ver, and she was always ready to acknowledge an act
of kindness from any person, even from her most inveterate ene-
mies. She often manifested, with great humility and thankfulness,
her continual dependence on the gift of God, and humbly acknowl-
edged his goodness and mercy to her imder all her trials and suf-
ferings, and frequently expressed her thankfulness for the blessings
she received. She was far from assuming to herself any power or
authority whatever ; but that which was given her of God, she
felt herself bound to exercise in strict obedience to his Diviiie Will.
When any of the believers kneeled before her, she would often
say, " Dont kneel to me, but kneel to God ; I am but your fellow
servant." She often kneeled herself, when any one kneeled be*
fore her.

In her daily deportment she manifested the most distinguish-
ing marks of humiliation. She frequently waited on those who
came to see her, with the same attention and assiduity as tho
she had been a mere servant in the family. When people came
who were fatigued with their journey, who were feeble, wet or
cold, she often used to wait upon them with the greatest kindness,
and with her own hands, make all necessary provision for their
comfort. Sometimes, while waiting upon them, she would say,
" I am among you as one that serveth." When great numbers of
people were collected and assembled at the table, she often waited
upon them with all the attention of a dutiful and faithful servant.

She never repined at poverty, nor desired delicious fare for her-
self; but always accommodated herself to her circumstances,
however poor or scanty her provisions ; and would readily econo-
mize in such a manner as to render the poorest fare comfortable,
anu make a little suffice. When occasion required, she would
cheerfully make her meal on the fragments leA by others, and say,
" This is good enough for me; for it is the blessing of God, and
must not be lost." She many times took such occasions, both at
home and abroad, to teach the people prudence and economy,
and was often heard to speak to them after this manner : '' You
^ must be prudent and saving of every good thing that God bless-
*^ es you with ; so that you may have wherewith to ^n ^ \» ^««j^
^ that stand in need. Fou cannot make a %p«LWC ^l ^^^^^nss^"^
^kernel of grain groxft, if you knew you mvjsX ^ve tot >^<i ^^^^ ^^


^K^i


CHARACTER ASD MIXISTRT

It is by the blessing of God ihat Ihese things come : liieri?-

ftre you ought not to ■waste the least thing."

Motber Ann was very remEirkable, not only for her humility,
Vharity and zeal to do good; but also for her temperance, aobriety,
industry, prudence and good economy. Being herself wholly d&-
■'Oied to the cause of God, she was ever faithful in her endeavors,

ilhby precept and example, t» plant the same good iiualificationa

her followers j so that in nil things, she was a pattern ol godli-

ss, and showed herself lobe a Mother indeed, in every good
Word ond work.

In her labors and instructions for tlie increase of the gospel
among the believers, she spared no time nor pains ; but seemed
willing at all limes to spend her strength and her life for the ad-
vancement of the work of God. She often used (o say to the be-
lievers who visited her, and were about to return home, « The
'' gospel is the greatest treasure that souls can possess ; go home
" and be faithful j put your hands to worli, and give your hearts
" to God. Beware of covetousness, which is as the sin of witch-
" craft; if you have any thing to spare, give it to the poor." Her
love and charily seemed boundless, always ready to succor the
afflicted, and minister to the wants of the needy. She often said
to those in comfortable circumstances, " How many poor crea-
*' tures there are in the world who suffer with hunger and cold,
C and here you have enough ! How thankful you ought to be to
« God for his tender mercies towards you !"

Mother Ann often called the attention of the believers to faith-
fulness in the care and management of their temporal concerns.
."ilie frequently enjoined it upon them as a necessary duty, to be
industrious in business ; to be neat and cleanly, and observe good
economy; tobe prudent and^uving, and let nothing be losttbi'ough
carelessness or neglect; lo use the tkiites of tJds leorld at not
nlfUiing them i to avoid equally covetousness and prodigality ; to
be kind and charitable to the poor, and to keep clear of debt.
These things were strictly enjoined upon the believers, from time
to time, as matters of importance to secure a spiritual blessing.
For it was often testified by JVtolher Ann, and proved by the ex-
perience of many, that tliose who were unfaithful in temporal
ihings, could not find the blessing and protection of God in their
spiritual travel : hence a faithful and wise ini|)rovement of their
time and talents, in the things of time, was essentially necessary in
(*derto inherit the true riches.

In the spring of I7S3, while Mother Ann was al Ashfield, in

Massachusetts, where many believers had collected from iNislancei

sad having had considerable npportunily to he taught arvd instnio-

i in tbe way of God, they were about to rftutti home. In tak-

/cave of them. Mother Ann spoke lo l\ie WexVwcft as lift-s^^ •,


^^


CHAP. IV] OF MOTHER ANN LEE. 29

^ It is now spring of the year, and you have all had the privilege
** of being taught the way of Gk>d ; and now you may all go home
*^ and be faithful with your hands. Every faithful man will go
^ forth and put up his fences in season, and will plough his ground
*^ in season, and put his crops into the ground in season ; and such
^ a man may with confidence look for a blessing. But the sloth-
*^ ful and indolent will say, to-morrow will do as welly and to-mor^
*< row witt do tis well. Such a man never finds a blessing; if he *
<^ has any thing it is afterwards, and there seems to be no blessing
^ in it. Just so he is in spiritual things ; he will be slothful in
^^ the work of God, and he will reap his reward. He that is un-
^ faithful in the unrighteous mammon, how can he be trusted with
*^ the true riches ?''*

In addressing a certain sister who was the mother of a family^
and had considerable charge upon her. Mother Ann spoke thus;
^ Be faithful to keep the gospel ; be neat and industrious ; keep
*^ your family's clothes clean and decent; see that your house is
'^ kept dean ; and your victuals prepared in good order ; that
" when the brethren come home from their hard work, they can
'^ bless you, and eat their fiiod with thankfulness, without mur-
^' muring, and be able to worship God in the beauty of holiness.
^ Watch and be careful ; don't speak harsh, nor cast reflections
" upon them ; but let your words be.few and seasoned with grace.''

The mother of a large and respectable family, who had all
embraced the testimony, asked Mother Ann's counsel concerning
some superfluities which her family had in possession ; such as
gold necklaces, jewels, rings, silver buckles, and other ornaments
of the kind, and desired to know what she should do with them.
Mother Ann replied, ^'You may let the moles and bats have
*^ them,t that b, the children of thb world : for they set their
'^ hearts upon such things ; but the people of God do not want
" them." She then added, " You ought to dress yourself in mod-
^^ est apparel, such as becomes the people of God, and teach your
<' family to do likewise. You ought to be industrious and prudent,
'^ and not live a sumptuous and gluttonous life ; but labor for a
^^ meek and quiet spirit, and see that your family is kept decent
^^ and regular in sdl their goings forth, that others may see your
^^ example of faith and good wori&s, and acknowledge the work
<* of God in your famiiy."

Again : in addressing the same sister, together with a number
of others who weie in good temporal circumstances, she s^id,
** You myst remember the poor and needy, the widow and the
'^ fatheriess ; and deal out your bread to the hungry and your
^ clothes to the naked. Your "natures mV\ «a.^, ^W^ xswj ^^cs^i-
*^ and get these ihingi& for themselves*, bvxX v^nsX'iaiA'i Qfwt^^

^ See Luke %vl 11. \ Xw^Sb^ x^'^S^ *

D2


rSD CHARACTEB A!tl> MINIEtTRV [PA&T' ti

" At'ffl (Aa/ askelh. You must put away your cnvelousness, yoiiT
■ " lust and your fililiiness, and be prepared for tlie increase of the
" gospel : for the time will come when this gospel will be preached
" to all nations, and many will flock to 'Zion to hear the word of
•• the Lord."

In answer to a certain sister who stpoke to her concernint; a
\ Boor woB-an that had applied to her for help, she said, " Remein-
I •• ber the cries of those who are in need and trouble ; that when
I •* you are in trouble, God may hear your cries."

As Mother Ann was ever attentive lo the protection aTid wel-
hre of all her children, whatever their age, conrlitipn or circum-
stances, she often manifested her care and concern for the youtl)
and children, and frequently counselled and instructed believing
parents eonceming their children, and enjoined it upon them to
bring them up in the fear of God and teach them their duty. She
often spoke to the youth and children herself, and counselled them
to be faithful and obedient to their parents ; to be good children,
and never sin against God by giving way lo any wickedness.

In ihespring ofl?^!) while a large colleelion of believers were
assembled at Watervliet, Mother Ann, in addressing them, endea-
vored to show them the necessity of becoming tike little children,
in order to gain an inheritance in the kingdom of God, and in ber
discourse, spoke particularly concerning nl tie children. " Little
" children," said she, " ore nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven than
" ihoae of riper age. Chriai took little children in his arms and
** blessed them, and said, Sirfer little children to come unto me,
" and forbid them not : for of' swcA i> the Kingdam of Heaeen.
" Little children are simple and innocent ; they should be brought
"up so, afldlhey ought never lobe brought out of it. If they
*' were brought up in simplicity, they would receive good as easy
" as they would evil. God at first created the soul pure and in-
" nocent; and when aouls are redeemed from their loss, they will
« be restored to God, and will again be pure and innocent."

When she was at Samuel Fitch's, in Richmond,(Mas»acliuBetts)
^ere she was visited by many of the believers, she spoke to a
number of the sisters who were parents, concerning children, and
Bsdeavored to impress upon their minds their responsibility fur
tbrir children, whom they had been instrumental in bringing into
the world. She said, "It needs great wisdom to bringup children^
*' and if they are rightly taught, they will grow up in the way of
•' God. You ought not to cross your children unnecessarily : for
" it makes them illnaiured ; and little children do not ki^w how
■' to Eoveni their natures. You ought not to blame ihem for every
■" Jj'ltJe fault or (rhildi.'b notion ; but when they are disobedient, then
-' /et ihcm feel your seventy , and let your wiwdWalaw la tliem,

1''Metyoa ought never to apeak to your chWdten m a \«i^\w ■, W
^.you do, you will put devils into (heW


I


CHAP. IV.] OF MOTHCR ANN LEC. 31

Being at Elijah Wilds's, in Shirley, Mother Ann felt a particular
impression to examine the children and search out evil among
them, and soon found that thay had idols and foolish toys in their
possession. ■ She admonished their parents for indulging their
children in these things, and testified that such things would shut
out the gift of God from their souls, and that if children were care-
fully kept from such foolish playthings, and suitably instructed
by their parents, they would abound in the gifts of God, and grow
up in the gospel. " When I was a child." said she, " my mind
^< was taken up with the things of God, so that I saw heavenly
*^ visions, instead of trifling toys.''

Shortly before Mother Ann's imprisonment in Albany, a num-
ber of young people came to see her, who had lately embraced the
testimony with their parents. Having tarried several days, and
seen and feh the great power of God, and received much good in*
struction, and being about to take their leave^ she spoke to them
as follows :

^' When you return home, you must be diligent with your hands;
^ for godliness does not lead to idleness. The devil tempts others ;
^^ but an idle person tempts the devil. When you are at work,
^^ doing your duty m the gift of God, the devil can have no power
^ over you ; because then there is no room for temptations. You
'^ must be obedient to your parents. Children should obey their
^' parents : for this is right ; and the younger should submit to the
^^ elder. You must come up to the requirement of the law. Christ
'< did not come to d^estroy the law, but to fulfil it ; and you must
^^ do the same. Arm yourselves with meekness and patience. If
*^ you improve in one talent, God will give you more. Go home
^^ and be obedient; this is the way I have found salvation, and you
'< must find it in the same way ; 6y being obedient.^'

A certain youth came one day to Mother Ann, with some peach
and plumb stones in his hand, and asked her if he might plant them.
*< Yea," repUed she, " do all your work as tho you had a thousand
" years to live, and as you would if you knew you must die to-
" morrow."

A young man who had but lately set out to take up hb cross,
having been overcome with a spirit of jealousy and false judging,
and being convicted of his wrong, came and confessed it before
Mother Ann. After kindly admonishing him to beware of such a
spirit in future, she said, ^ Creatures see and judge according to
*^ the state they are in, and according to the influence they are ,
" under. When their senses are daikened by the flesh, and their
" minds are under the influence vf an evil spirit, they see aud v^d^K.
" according to the dictates of that evil spmV.\ \i\\X wvwv^'aX^R^wi
*^ sense is purged away, and they areundw V\\^ wSlvx^v^^ ^^ "^^^
"^spirit of Christy then they can see and jud^e ^xxox^vw^^si Nx^saaw^*


I


CHARACTER AND MINISTRY

While she was al Ashfield, tliere came a man to see her who
wae in trouble of mind; and feeling a deep sense of liis own evil
nature, he said to her, •' Mother, I am full of evil." She turned
her ej>es upon him, and after a momentary pause, replied, " Nay,
"you are not_^//of evil: for if you v/ere full af evil, there could
" be no room in you to receive any good. You have indeed a
" great deal of evil in you ; but this conviction that you feel b

Being visited one day by some men of note, whose curiosity had
led them to see and converse with her, and after answering their
questions, and relating some of her religious experience and suffer'
ings, she concluded her discourse to them in these words ; " 1 was
" once as you are ; I had feet, but they walked in forbidden paths;
" I had bands, but they handled unclean things; \ had eyes, but
" they saw nothing; ofGod aright. But now my eyes see, ray ears
" hear, and my hands handle the word of life."

In reproving and condemning sin, and all manner of evil, in
feelings, words and actions, the power of Mother Ann's testimony
was beyond description. As nothing appeared to bring such ex-
cessive sufferings and tribulation of soul upon her as sin among
believers ; so the evident manifestation of the power of God, through
her, in reproving it, was often so extraordinary as In cause the
most stubborn and stout-hearted to shake and tremble in her pre-
sence, like a leaf shaken with the wind.

In the autumn of irS3, when many believers were assembled at
Watervliet, some individuals among them, having bpen overcome
with hard feelings, which brought distress of soul upon Mother Ann,
she came into the room under a solemn weiglit of the power of
God, and after looking round upon the assembly, she spuke with
great power as follows : " Hear ye my words, you that have hard
" feelings one against another, and vet think to keep the way of
" God ! Vou are awfully mistaken ! You cannot prosper \ Tho
" you may bang on for a while, yet you will certainly fall off,
** like withered branches ; and when you drop into hell, these hard
" feeluigs will be like devouring worms to torment you [ Remem-
* ber my words ! Yon can never enter the Kingdom of God with
'< hardness against any one : for God is love; and ifyou love God,
" you will love one another."

At another time there came two women who were at strife with
each other; each one venting, in bitter words, her hard feelings
against the other, and each one justifying herself and condemning
the other. On hearing this. Mother Ann reproved them and said,
" You are wicked women ! You are both in the wrong. Humble
"j-ouraelves before God, and pal away your wrongs, or yon can
"never be saved; and instead of yow Viatii tet\vTi'^'&, m^We con-
^fssioo to each other: for God will noX accepx ■jc* 'i» a«'j ^Com


CHAP. lY.] OF MOTHER ANN LEE. 33

" way ; he will not love you, except you love one another." These
words were spoken with such great power of God, that the women
were struck with amazement, and falling upon their knees, both
confessed themselves in the wrong; and taking each other by the
hand, they embraced one another with such affectionate expressions
of love and friendship, that even the bye-standers seemed much
affected at the scene.

Mother Ann having, on a particular occasion, reproved a cer-
tain sister, said to her, '^ You may always remember that the
^ reproof of a friend is better than tlie kiss of an enemy." To
another sister whom she had reproved, she said, " When I reprove
^* you, it is to bring your soul nearer to my soul, and nearer to
^- God."

The doctrine of confessing every secret sin, one by one, before
the witnesses of God, was uniformly and plainly taught by Mother
Ann, from the beginning of her ministry. Her labors in this par-
ticular, were often attended with such mighty power of God, and
such sharp and piercing testimony, that few who heard it were
able to resist its convicting power. Many were so powerfully
wrought upon^ that they could not refrain from crying out and con-
fessing their sins on the spot. Others whose feelings were more
bound by the fear of -the cross, could Hnd no rest, day nor night,
from the tormenting weight of their sins, till they had honestly
confessed them before some witness of God, appointed for that pur-
pose. And ever}' one who was honest and faithful in that impor-
tant work, soon experienced the forgiving power of God, and felt
an inward evidence of union and relation to the Kingdom of
Heaven.

After Mother Ann arrived in Harvard, in the summer of 1781,
she was visited by many people who had heard of her from com-
mon report ; and after hearing Christ preached in his true and
sinless character, and the loss of man laid open, and its real nature
exposed to view, and the only possible way for souls to find re^
demption from that loss, they were convinced that Christ had
come, in very deed, witliout sin unto salvation. She then address-
ed them as follows :

*' The first step of obedience that any of you can take, is to
" confess your sins to God before his witnesses. Herein (Christ is
" to be found as a Savior and forgiver of sins, and no where else :
" for herein is contained the promise of God ; but in no other way.
" It is the heart which God looks at : the heart with its hidden
" abominations covered and concealed from the witnesses of Christ,
" becomes like a cage of unclean birds, and never can be cleansed
" short of a full and free confession. They that hotvesXV^ ^'ovx^^^^
" all their sins, with a full determination to fotsa^RA i\vw«v WeN^st-v
'^ will 6nd strength of God to forsake Xhem •, wi^ vaV^vw^ vs^ ^«^


CHARACTER AND MINISTRY


•* crosses against every known sin, and following Christ in the re-
" generation, in tliat life of obedieDce, tbey will be clothed with the
*' righleoosness of Christ, and become ihe sons and daughters of
" God, being heirs f,f God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ."*

To those who came to confess their sins to her, she said, " If
" you confess your sins, vitu must confess thein to God : we are
" but bis m'tnessea." To such as asked her forgiveness, she used
to say, " I can freely forgive you, and I pray God to forgive you.
" It is God that forgives sins ; I am but your fellow servant."

Mother Ann was greatly blessed with heavenly visinns, prophe-
cies and divine revelations; and thus, by the operation of the
Sjiirit of Christ, in her, she was able to reveal the mind and will
of God to the people, and to ndininisier a greater measure of di-
vine light and purifying power than had been given to any people
nnce t)ie fall of man ; but she uniformly acknowledged the power
and work to be of Chrisi.t To relate the numerous instances of
those e^ilraordi nary manifestations ofGod which, from time totting,
she revealed to her people, and ofthe truth of which she gave the
most incontestable evidence, would far exceed the proposed limits
flfthis work. But injustice to the cause oftnith, we lliink ii pro-
per 10 state a lew instances of her prophetic testimony, which may
not be unacceptable to the candid reader, especially as some of
ihem have since been fully realized.

In addressing an assembly of believers at Watervliet, shortly
alter her return ft'om Poughkeepsie, she spoke as follows; " You
" are called in I'elalion to all the rest of mankind; and througli your
" faith and obedience,they must receive the gospel. Fain and suf-
^ ferings will never cease in the church until all souls have heanlthe
f gospel of salvation : for this gospel will befreely oflered lo all souls,
« and will be a savor of life unto life, or ofdeaih unto death. The
" increase of the gos)>el,Bt the first, will be small ; but the lime will
" come when souls will embrace it by hundreds and by thousands:
*■* fur this testimony will overcome all nations ; it will iucrease till
" Ihe covering is ink en off;| then mankind will see the rottenness
" of Antichrist's foundation ; ihrn those souls tlial are bound in
" their sins, will call to'the rocks and to the mountains to cover
" Ibeiu. But the saints will never be overcome again by the beast-
" ly power of Antichrist, The work of God, in th'ia day, is an
" inward, spiritual work ; it is not so great, in outward appearance,
" as it WHS in past dbpensations ; and therefore souls must be very
" cautious how they treat this gospel : for such as tinally reject
" this tesliraony, will not have another day,"

t The foiiii.l.i:Dii Dtlbg f Kirit niilild Id Jodi Chdit, who »ni lit Mtlltmi Iloilf,


I
I

I


k.


CHAP. lY.] OF MOTHER AKN LEC 35

At another time she spoke to a number of believers as follows :
^^ Some of you think that you will yet subdue and overcome the
^^ nations of the earth ; but you are mistaken : they have that wori^
<^ to do themselves. They will 6ght and devour and dash each otlier
<< to pieces, until they become so humbled as to be willing to re-
" ceive the gospel.'^ Again she spoke with great power and en-
ergy of spirit, and said, ^' They will build up ; but God will pull
*' down ! they w^ill build up ; but God will pull down, until they
<< can build no more ! but vou will have nothin&r to do with it.*'

Being one day in deep tribulation of soul, she wept with fervent
cries to God, in consideration of the scattered state of believers.
<* But/^ said she, " the time will come when the church will be
" gathered into order ; but not till after my dorease." She also said,
" After my departure there will come grievcms wolves, who will
" destroy many of the flock." Again she said, " The wisdom
^' and knowledge and light of God will increase in the church until
" Zion shall travel to li^r full glory.'' Afterwards she said, " It
** will not be my lot, nor the lot of any that came with me from
<< England, to gather and build up the church : hut it will be the
** lot of Joseph Meacham and others." Again she said, " Ji»scph
*^ Meacham is my first-bom son in America ; he will gather the
<^ church into order; but I shall not live to see it."

One day, as she was walking the floor under j^reat power of
God, and singing a very melodious song by divine inspiration, her
mind apparently abstracted from all the objects which surrounded
her, she suddenly stopped, and turning to the people in the room,
she said, " 1 feel a special gift of God ; I feel the power of God
^' runnii^ all over me." And extending her hand towards the
southwest, she added, ^^ The next opening of the gospel will be in
" the southwest ; it will be at a great distance, and there will be
^* a great work of Gtni." And turning to Eliphalet Slosson, she
said, " You may live to see it ; but I shall not." This prophecy
she repeated at diflerent times, and in diflerent places, of which
numbers now living can bear witness. These predictions have
been amply fulfilled.

As Mother Ann was one day viewing an apple tree in full
blossom, she said, << How beautiful this tree looks now ! But some
^^ of the apples will soon fall ofl* ; some will hold on longer ; some
*f will hold on till they are full half grown, and then fall off; and
" some will get ripe. So it is with souls that set out in the way of
" God. Many will set out very fair, and soon fall away ; some
^^ will go further, and then fall off ; some will go still further, and
** then fall ; and some will go through."*

Near the close of Mother Ann's labors lu \Vi\^ \»cyc\A, ^ wwsiXsRSt

• Tbij aatanl $imUitude shows not what necessanW mutl \»k« p\*ct'«\xtx*^***^*J' *V
Oe gogpel is sowa, but wb^t actuftU/ does tsike plac«, And Vi umWoLt V> C^t\%'0* \iw«»>* '^
the sower. * • r"


I


I


38 LtFE AND CHARACTER

Thus departed from this mrntal stage, ihot exlraordinary female
whn was chosen of God to commence, in this biier day, the regen-
eration of a lost world ; in whom Christ, In very deed, appeared
the second time wilhout sin unto salvation ; whose life of righteous-
ness eveited against her tliL- enmity of the wicked, and against
whose character the envenmned longae of slander has never ceased
to pour forth its cahimnies even to this day. In her die sullerings
of Christ appeared conspicuous; in her the righteousness of Christ
was clearly manifested tii all her faithful followers. In her Christ
was revealed llie Lord from Heaven, a quickening Spirit; in hei-
was renewed his example of perfert uhedience to the will of his
heavenly Father; In her was tevived the way of life and salvation
by the cross, and she plainly taught the impossibility of obtaining
h in any olher way. In her was first wrought the complete re-
demption of the female; and through her niinistnttion a way was
opened for the restoration of the female character to its proper lot
and dignity, from which it had been degraded by the transgression
ofthc first woman.


CHAPTER V.
ji short account of the life aitd chararier of Elder William Lee.

William Lkb was the fourth son nf John Lee, and the brother
of Mother Ann Lee. He was liorn in the town of Mnnchesler, in
England, in iJAO, and was brought up in the occupation of a
Uacksmilh by his father. He was married, and had one son ; and
was allerwards an officer of horse in the king's royal guard, belong-
ing to a volunteer regimen! called the Oxford Blues.

In his "person be was of a commanding figure, rather abo\-e
middling height, thick set, large limbs and strong body- His hair
was of a light chesnut brown, his eyes blue, his countenance open
and very bold, calculated to inspire confidence and respect. lie
possessed a strong and robust constitution; his voice was strong,
«lear and sonorous : in shoit he was very remarkable for his
fltrenglh, both of body and mind. In his faith he was firm, zeal-
Bos and powerful. He feared not the face of man ; but was faltb-
)ij, liiboripus and persevering in the cause of God. In times of
Ipobs and persecutions he was always undarmted, and often testi-
~>d against the wickedness of his persecutors with a boldness and

wfidence which dearly evinced that be was a stranger to the

IT of man.

■ming his first embracing the testimony of the gospel, he
e the following account of himself. That he was a proud,

^biy young man, fond of dress and gaiety, and ambitious of

amioi- and fame : ibat In the midst of his pursuit ot -wotUIs glory


CHAP, v.] OF ELDER WILLIAM LEE. 39

he fell under deep conviction of sin. In this state of mind he went
to see his sister Ann, who was then a member of the society under
the ministry of James and Jane Wardley. When he arrived at
hb sister's, being very gaily dressed, she reproved him for his
pride, showed him his dangerous situation, and greatly increased
fais convictions. He immediately threw off his ruffles and his
silks, and put his hands to work and his heart to God, and faith-
fully labored to find the forgiveness of his sins and acceptance with
God.

Concerning some of his religious exercises, in the first of his
faith, he gave the following account. *' Before I confessed my
^^ sins, I felt great tribulation ; and after I had confessed them, I
'* cried to God, day and night, till I heard an audible voice from
^^ Heaven, saying, William thy sins are forgiven^' He further
said, ^< Mother's testimony was so awakening to my soul, that
** when I was at work over my anvil, I sometimes felt so weary
^^ that I would have given any thing if I could have set down and
^' rested myself upon my anvil one minute ; but I durst not; for I
*' felt my soul, as it were, upon the point of a needle, and there-
" fore kept my hands to work, and my soul in continual lal>or to
'^ God. And often when I went to my meals, I felt so unworthy
*' to put any of the creation of God into my mouth, that I could
" n'Jt eat, but wept and went back to my work again."

He fiirther stated, that he frequented the society of James and
Jane Wardley; and when he was in tribulation, he sometimes
opened his trials and feelings to them, and was encouraged by them ;
but instead of crying to God for victory over the evil which caused
his tribulation, he suffered himself to rest upon their encourage-
ment, which gave him some releasement of mind. But when he
returned to his sister again, she would often spoil his comfort by
shewing him his real situation, which would again plunge him into
deeper tribulation than he had felt before. This made him cry ear-
nestly to God, till he gained releasement for himself, according to
her counsel.

When Mother Ann received the revelation of God against the
flesh, William united with her, and zealously stood forth in her
defence against her persecutors. This raised the enmity of his
neighbors and acquaintances, who opposed and persecuted him.
He frequently suffered abuse from mobs and persecutors, and some
of the scars which he received from the wicked, in consequence of
his faith and testimony, he carried with him through life. He
once received a stroke upon his head, from a mob, with an
iron fire-hook, which fractured his scull ; he fell apparently dead,
and bled profusely. But the wicked, with all tKew ^Vwafts*^ ^«t^
never able to overcome his faith, nor aupipxes^s \vv& \<i%>LVKvaw5 .
^e passed through many scenes o{ sufeun^, XiQ'Ca ^l >aQ^^ ^^^


^■pul, BOd aefm^il dpitiiiPi). through \he whoir coiimr of Uh Mth,
^K siiffrr for thr pmtpi'l'g mikr. Tlin in li'ii crrntion \te was n mao
^bf rcmBrkiible alrcnelli of body, an vivM nt n( lorliiuile or ininil {
^■pei •uch wan often ili« il^gtw.' of hi* sufTcriiip, tlmt he liHt hen,
^fc A short tiiDF, rcHiirn'i m thi- wcnknuu nf a cliild, ihraiigh cxctu
Hbf xutrFring*. Biil he wuk oUtii Middt^iily rfknMrd by the punw
^■f Cioit, and otien liniJ litx tout instantly (t\M wUh licnvrnly song>
^ptf lov and coinforl. It is nswrtcd by ibosc who were iiitimsudy
HKG<l"a>""'d v'i'li him diirin<! ilir wlinir prrind of his ministry in
Hjimcririi, thnt }ii- wua Iniiy, " u liiun »f Kurrown Hud ucqnanileil
Hjjltli trrii'tV ttiHl hf wui indeed iia apostle in suHeringft-, and ibx^
^R lim», when lie was rclenfird frntn ntflV-ringi, hf was ofim Allinl
H^th >t)ch fiilncs* nf lii^iivcnly jny, tlial his soul xeemeil lobeiD
HBiG mniaionx of glory.

B'> EldPr William's soul was greatly enriched willi Ibo (-ifts of God,

PiIb visions, rcvclntions, and otUer divine mojiirrstHtions ; and be

■ 'Abnund«ii in mprcy, lovi' and chiirity; but |Hi,«M-«scd a very (ioit-

[ 'krAil spirit, and ntalaiHincd a nwifl tuhtimony against all sin. Tbo

I Ue teldom »pokp much in pubhc: yet he was eminently uufy) is

I tcncliin^, I'lirouniEttig and utrMigtlirning the bclicvcni under all

' llieir tnt^ utid dilTiculfini. 1J« was reraarkalile for imdurant

of Itosrt, and would ufirn weep like a child, for the siifleringt and

aflliclionii of (>iid'» people. In tears he ofti-n expressed hi* (irent

ihankfulnesi for the ^ivipel, and fur tlie sgiRs and liteixin^s of God,

bMh in ihings spiritual and letnpural. So fcelint;ly alive wk* hk

-cvjI in llie gnndnes ond nicrey ortinil, even for the >^niii!Icsl bta^

tlu, ihni he liai been observed, wlw-n golnc to wnxh liinHtrlf^ 1*

Krecp and say, " I iliank Ileuveii for this water ; for it is llie blea^

" inif of Heaven,"

Many times when lie snt down to his meals, he would eipnat
thankfulness, with tears in hi* eye*, for llie goodness of Owl IB
>«ldln(; liiesc lemiunral bleMiiigs for llie euiii7url and support pT
_^. t)n> day at Aslifield, as he wns going to hit down id die

I lable triili a iininber ol'yuuiie believers, lie uriuke niid said, " I Kw
*' thai you are nnl so thankful ait you oiiulil to l>e, lur the CInil
« tiling* thai Gml provides for you : but you will cat and ilrinli
« of these preridu* things, and mit r^nwider, from whence ihty
" cuinc. Tiie Bin of ini;raiitiiiie is a great sin : tee tlioi you WO
jf not icullty of it. I often eat my fiaid with tliiuikfiihu^H and uota,
" avery nioullitul I ral." 'Hie^ sal dowit, and KtdiT WilDi Mrti
«n Honed, with freniient ekiiriwiims of dtnnkliih
Ins llie nhiitr lime lliey were eulinc-"
Thn LIdei Willinin fio»«e»«ed ureal kindiit
ich flow* of hraveidy love, thsl be never failed lu gain'
id aflitiions iif i-xery liiilhful believer ; yet in n-provl
lea* tbe /itinrr of God in li'im, that hi* ve'y »vi<''' »**•


ler WilDimi^i
InessuSH


CHAP, v.] OF ELDER WILLIAM LEE. 41

a two-edged sword against sin, and every one that had any feeling
sense of sin at such times, could not but tremble at the sound of
lus voice. Sometimes he used to reprove the believers for walk-
ing about in a careless, thoughtless manner, as tho they did not
feel the fear of God, and would say to them, ^^ You ought to pass
'^ by each other like angels ; but instead of that, you appear to me
'< more like the troubled sea, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
^ But I can but be sorry for you ; and it feeb to me as if there were
*• no sorrow like my sorrow."

In delivering a short and very powerful testimony against sin,
to an assembly of believers at Petersham, in which he admonbh-
ed the people to a faithful and honest confession of their sins, he
concluded in these words ; ^^ Altho we rebuke sin ; yet we have
** nothing against the soul ; it b only against the devil that soweth
<< tares among the wheat. One sin, wilfully covered, will be like
^ mountains of lead upon the soul, to sink it from the presence of
« God."

Being one day in conversation with Ephraim Welch,* concern^
ing the war which then existed in America, and tlie great troubles
occasioned thereby, Elder William said, " Wars will never cease
*^ until God has finished hb work with the nations of the earth ;
^< and altho it may be buried, like fire, for a season ; yet it will
^^ break out, with sevenfold increase, among the nations of the
" earth." Again he said ; " The same sword which has persecu-
'^ ted the people of God, will be turned into the world among them^
'^ selves, and it will never be sheathed until it has done its work."

Sometimes he used to say, ^^ We are poor ; but we are able to
** make many rich ; poor afflicted people of God ! Once I served
" God out of fear; but now I serve him out of pure love." Some-
times he used to say, ^^ I love my Mother ; altho she is ray sister ;
^^ yet she has become my Mother, and the Lord God has made me
*' to love her." When great numbers of believers came to Water-
vliet, to see them, he would often meet them at the door, and say,
^^ Come in, brethren and sisters, come in ; we have but little room
** in our house ; but we have a great deal of room in our hearts."

Tho Elder William was not gifted in public speaking; yet he had
a very feeling soul ; and his speeches, whether in public or private,
were often very pathetic, and always sententious and power-
ful, capable of awakening the attention and feelings of the most
stupid and careless. He labored but little in public word and doc-
trine ; but his gift and strength were almost continually exercised
in sufierings. His work of suffering continued to the end of hb
days ; nor did he appear to die by any natural infirmity ; but seem-
ed to give up his life in sufferings.

During the last days of his life, tho hb end was evidently n^ar^

* A believer wbo Utely deceased at Hancock, ^

£2


»


ARACTER AND MLVISTRT

Spd his boiJilj sufferings e«renie ; yet hia soiil seemed to be lilled
with the love and power of Gud. His spirit was coinl'ortable and
joyful, and his Zealand tbniiude onabaied,even lo the last. When
any of the brethren and sisters came in to see him, instead ofcom-
plniDing of his sufferings, he would oflen express his joy and com-
fort, his love to the work of God, and his desires for their faithful-
ness and prosperity in the gospel. He was on eminent example
of patience and meekness under sufferings, and always manifested
his willin^ess to suffer for the increase of the gospel.

Elder William delighted greatly in singing divine songs, for
which he had a remarkable gift; his voice was strong, and his
music melodious and powerful; and when under (he inimediale
operation of the power of God, it seemed like the music of some
superior bring. A little before lie expired, bnn^' unable to sing, ho
rose from his bed, and asked one of the brethren,* who n-as great-
ly gifted in apiritust songs, to sing for him, and who according lo
his request, sung for him a few minutes; but he was so far gone,
ttat he was soon obliged to lie down again, and shordy after
breathed his last, about six o'clock in the afternoon, July 31st,
1764, aged 44 years.


CHAPTER VI.


James AVhittaker was the son of Jonathan Wiiittaker, of
Oldham, near Manchester, in England. His mulher'a mnidei)
name was Ann Lee, probably a distant relation of Mother Ann.
She was a member of the society under James and Jane Wardiey,
and was a faithful believer. His father stood in opposition for
awhile ; but was afterwards convicted and embraced the gospel,
and had an anxious feeUog to come to America with his son ; but
was not able : he died in the faith.

James was born February 28ih, 1731, and received the Icsit-

mony of the gospel in his childhood; he used to accompany his

mother to the meetings of James and Jane Wardley, and was re-

n^arkably faithful and obedient to the instructions of his teachers.

' Ui his youth he was placed under the care of Mother Ann, and by

I ivr was carefully instructed in the way of God. Having by his

^"^hhfiilness gained a great portion of theJife and power of ihegos-

w. he became eminently useful to her in the ministry.

f Concerning his early experience in the way of God, he gave ilie

||lowing paniculars. " 1 was Ijrought U|> in the way of God b'

Sy AloUier, and knew no unclean thing. But when ''"


3odby

i


CHAP. VI.] OF ELDER JAMES WHITTAKER. 43

^^ was waked up, I found myself a child of wrath. I then cried
^^ mightily to God : I do not think I spoke more than five words
^^ in a day ; and I verily thought that the earth trembled under me
^^ for the space of a whole year. At this time I saw, by vision,
^^ my own soul in America with Mother's soul ; and I heard all
^^ the conversation that passed between us and the men that put
'^ us into prison in Albany ; and yet during the whole time of oar
^' imprisonment, I never once thought of my vision ; but as soon
" as we were set at liberty, it all crime fresh to my mind."

Among other extraordinary manifestations of God to him, in
early life, we give the two following instances in his own words,
<^ One day, as I was walking with Mother, I felt the heavens open,
^^ and such flows of the heavenly manifestations and givings of
'^ God fell upon me, in so marvellous a manner, that my soul was
^^ filled with inexpressible glory ; and I felt such an overflowing
^^ of love to Mother, that I cried out. As the Lord livethy and of
" my soul iivethy I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.^^ He
added further, ^' that Mother then and there prophesied that he
would succeed her in the ministry."

" When we were in England," said he, " some of us had to go
** twenty miles to meeting, and we travelled anights on account of
" persecution. One Saturday night, while on our journey, we sat
" down by the side of the road to eat some victuals. While I was
" sitting there I saw a vision of America ; and I saw a large tree,
^^ and every leaf thereof shone with such brightness as made it
" appear like a burning torch, representing the church of Christ,
" which will yet be established in this land. After my company
" had refreshed themselves, they travelled on, and led me a con-
" siderable distance before my vision ceased."

Elder James was evidently ordained of God to be Mother Ann's
successor in the ministry. After attending her funeral, and speak-
ing to the assembly under a great weight of grief and sorrow, he
returned home, and the believers being assembled, he spoke and
said, " My two friends and Elders are gone ! I pray God to help
me !" He then called upon all the brethren and sisters to help him
keep the way of God, and urged the necessity of their being more
faithful in the work of the gospel than they had ever been, as those
who had the greatest gift for their protection were gone. The tears
flowed abundantly. He spoke of the great weight that fell upon him
with regard to the protection of the society, and his great concern
and labor that the gospel might be kept and honored. So solemn
and impressive were his words at this time, and so evident the
power of God that appeared in him, that it produced a great im-
pression upon the mind of every feeling beUe\et» \V'waav ^<ew:^.^
seen and feJt that Mother's mantle had (aWetv \x^oxv\x«sv^ "assk^^^oBa*.
God had cbosen him to lead and protect Vv\a i^^o^e.


I


I


I


■ER AND MINIS'

_ Elder James, in his person, was rather above ihe common
tore, n'eU proportioned in form, of mure than ordinary strength for
bis sine, and a man of great arlivitj. His complexion n'as fair, his
.eyes black, and liis hair of a dark brown color, and very straight.
iJBe possessed an o|>en and placid countenance, mixed with a pleas-
ilig gravity, that at once evinced the goodness of his heart and the
amiable mildness ofhis disposition. His voice was clear and solid,
but mild and pleasant. In short, his visage, deportment and con-
versation were all marked with an inexpressible something which
could not but impress the feelings of a stranger with confidence
and respect. It was not an uncommun expression among stran-
gers, on hearing him, to say, " I love to hear that James Whillaker

In his temper and disposition he was mild, gentle and forbear-
ing: yet firm, undamited, and inflexible in his duty. So amiable
was his deportment, and so winning hjs manners, thai he ojien
disarmed the most violent opposers of their rage. He was much
beloved by those who knew him, both believers and unbelievers ;
and none were his enemies, except those whose opposition to the
way of God which he taught, rendered every subject of it an object
of hatred. He possessed great mecknesss, humility andsimplicity
of soul, was remarkably tender hearted, kind and charitable, and
abounded in heavenly love. The sympathetic powers of his soul
jirere such, that when he wept it seemed as iho no feeling heart
eould refrain from tears; and when he rejoiced, every soul that
possessed the life of the gospel, could not but feel the power of his
joy. and rejoice with him.

in reproving sin, he was sharp and powerful; yet wise and care-
ful not to hurt the soul. In laboring with lost souls, in admonish-
ing the careless, instructing the ignorant, strengthening the weak,
relieving the bufletted, and binding up the broken hearted, his gifi
of wisdom and understanding was remarkable. He knew how to
come to lost souls in every situation, and to administer help in due
season.

He passed through many scenes of sorrow and aiBiction for the
gospel of salvation, and planted and nourtsheil it in many souls.
Being young while in England, he did not sufler so much persecu-
tion there as Mother Ann and Father William, and others: yet
he had his full share of sufferings to pass through ; so that it might
ibe truly said that, the mifferings nf Christ abounded iii him. In
America he suffered much every way; yet he always bore his
suffieiings with fortitude, and even with cheerfulness ; so that when
most cruelly abused by persecutors, he would often kneel down
mad pray for then with great fervency ; sometimes saying in4^
rorrfs of Christ, '■father, forgWe thetn: foi ihey know


CHAP. VI.] OP ELDER JAMES WHTTTAKER* 46

As he was brought up in the gospel from his chUdhoody he
possessed a remarkable degree of purity of spirit. Indeed it seem-
ed as tho every feeling of his soul breathed purity, righteousness
and love : hence he was at all times able to bear a strong testim(^
fly against all impurity, unrighteousness, and every kind of evU.
He often said, <^ The gospel is without fault ; it is as strait as
^' straitness ; it is pure as the heavens; and if you obey it not, you
'* will lose your souls."

With tears rolling from his eyes, he often expressed his love to
God, and his thankAilness for the gospel in the following language;
** O how precious is the way of God to my thirsty sonl ! I feel the
*^ love of God continually flowing into ray soul, like rivers of living
" water I It is sweeter to my taste than the honey in the honeycomb.
" J know that God owns me for his son ; and yet I will pray to him.
^^ I know how to pray, and I know how to be thankful for the
^ gospel ; even my breath is continual prayer to God.''

Sometimes he used to say, " I could willingly la}' down my
*' life for my brethren, if I were called to it : for I feel that degree
^^ of love for them, that they feel near and dear to me, like my own
*' soul." Again he would sa}^, " My only treasure on earth is in
^^ them that believe; I have no relation but in the people of God.
" They who are faithful to serve God are my relations ; they arc
** my interest and my treasure, and all I have is theirs."

As there were some who received great faith in Mother Ann,
and were zealous during her ministration ; yet as their faith cen-
tered in her person, and not in the revelation and power of Grod
which dwelt in her, and which was transmitted through her to her
'successors ; consequently such ones were exposed to suffer loss ;
and some indeed did suffer great loss, after she was taken from
them. Father James felt a deep sense of their danger in this re-
spect, and of the unspeakable worth of souls ; and being thus im-
pressed with the great importance of a deep and genuine work of
salvation in every soul, he did not cease to warn the people, with
tears in his eyes, to be faithful and persevering, and not lose that
which they had already gained, by neglecting to labor for an in-
crease of the gospel in their own souls.

In solemn warnings to the people, and for their encouragement,
he used to say, " Wherever you are, whatever may betide you,
" how dark soever things may appear, how unjustly soever you
" may suffer, keep your faith ; for the time will come when all
" wrongs will be righted." And again ; " i am not ashamed
" to build up your faith ; for your faith is most holy ; but 1 know
" you have infirmities, and I pray that the forbearance of God
" may be lengthened out to you, till you le^vtv \'5i ^Ck \Y^pX\ ^"o^
"you must have an exceeding rigViteousuess \ -^ovxt fv^>Xfc«^'^^^^
^^jaust ejiceed the righteousness of iVv^ ?>cu>ae* w^'^ ^>d!«^srs»'


LIFE, CHARACTER WD MINISTRY


*Thererore treasure up in >'«ijr hearti that huly Ireasure which

' •• will krrp you in lime of irouble. K<*[) ytntr iaUh : for the end

i'<nryoiir fnith will be the salvation ofyoiir soiiii; nnd when I urn

^' gone, jiiiil you see the hrnnrbRX flmmuli, ihrn know ye that the

N root in huly. I Iwvc vi^niurvd my life nful huuI uniong ^on, and

I" you hiive received the gos|)cl, and you are welcome tn it."

*, Failirr Jumrs was u man nf great humility, nnii nlti'n abased

nimseir publicly before (iod, in deep hiimilitilion ol'ifml. Speak-

W nne sabhath day ut Hurvaid, in (lublic, before a lar^re concourH

11 peoplf, ttnd after addiMslng himself to the assembly with peat

Vsolcratiity, nnd (evidently under n erent wi'i^ht of thepowerof God,

vhith brought a very iwlemn nnd nlfertin); senxaltun upun all ib«

•Mcmbly, he kneeled down ; and the believer* immrdiatclv fell

''upon iheir kneci, and also inniiv of the wiirld who were a««tily

BlTected with bis discourM'. Wltile im In* knees in deep humilli^

lion, he uttered (hew wunN; " I urn but a poor worm of (he dui^

** nnd u viTV little one loo ! I feel many timf'* n« tho I could cnuit*

"ble into tlie duit before Ciod." He oRen ubuved IiimwITiu ihla


At another time, in » public aKsembly at F'.nliclil, before be

began to speuk, li<- kneele<l down under great humility of Honl, and

I mid, " O.kI lia!i eummilied the pispel to my trust." — He pauMd—

Ltlie lenni flowed iilentifullv down Ills checeki — He proreedwt—

'f< I pray liiiii (iud would luy nothing to my charge !—Chrlit !a

^ revealed ; I feel lili power in sorrow and in love — God htf

■ bleiM-d me with a broken heart and godly sorrow for sin." After

nis l*e delivered a very alTecting ilincuurRe, in which he preachsd

0u! ^pel of self-denial aii-l llitf croKi, and urged the absoluitf o&-

HctMsily ofcnnfessing and forsaking all sin, srid eluded hin duKOurM

~ In ihme word* ; ** A* ynu ireai this gospel ; so (lod will treat you.

** If you slitiht il, (iud will iJighlymi; if you retard it, tiod

" will regard you ; for as the miimoiiy vf Noah condemned tha

<* old world) «u uluill ihin tcxtimoiiv condemn the preoerit ireiioni*

u lion."

Father Jnmei often solemeiily warned 'he believers not to siifTer
(heir souls tube ovenhadnwed nnd darkem-il with thiiie thtiigs
tffhlch had a leiulency to utiui tlie pfl of <iod from thi- kiuI. " I
" wiini you brethren,'' said he, '-'nut lolw overcome wiib the earaa
** of this world, Wl your souls lose the pnwr of (iod, and you
" become U-nn nnd bnrreii." Agnin lie lalil, " The uuy to labor
i** ffir llie )^pel is, to keep your minds cxerci»ed In laboring Upon
^ the things that belong lo your {leHce. and uoi on the ihings of ibv
P world : for if yon pivp your inind« lo bdmr upon the tbitin of
Ef/w> world, they will Ixicoine corrupted." And again; " Xj
^^hi lobf trniehful over your won\i,Matt »W»»i. »t*A'


am ; « WU ,

■M


C^AP. VI.] OP ELDER JAMES WHITTAKER* 47

^' not know to be true, in such a manner as to deceive others : you
^^ ought to represent things as they are ^ and not deceive one ano-
" ther ; it is lying; it is wicked."

He used often to say, '^ Be what you seem to be, and seem to
** b^ what you really are ; don't carry two faces." And again ;
" You that dare use deceit, remember what 1 say ; God will yet
" meet you in a strait place." In reproving the believers for their
wrongs, he often used to say, " If you don't love to hear of these
" things, then leave them off; put away the cause, and the effect
*' will cease." Again ; " Ye who have believed in God, be care-
*^ ful to maintain good works." And again ; " I will know no
" man by his speech ; but by the fruit he brings forth."

In the time of Shays's insurrection in Massachusetts, some of
the believers in that state, in expressing their sentiments, manifes-
ted some party feelings concerning that event. Father James
immediately rebuked that spirit, and said, " They that give way
'^ ta a party spirit, and are influenced by the divisions and conten-
" tions of the world, so as to feel for one political party more than
*' for another, have no part with me. The spirit of party is the
^^ spirit of the world, and whoever indulges it, and unites with one
'* evil spirit against another, is off from christian ground."

In addressing a public assembly of believers at Ashfield, he said,
^ You ought to fear God in all you do. When you are about
" your work, you ought to fear God ; and even in the gifts of God,
*' and under the operations of the power of God, you ought to keep
" the fear of God ; lest by feeling releasement in those gifts, you
" run into lightness." Again ; " Heaven is a place of joy and
^^ tranquility to those that find it; but I am jealous, and with a
*^ godly jealousy too, that there are some here now, that never
^^ will find it."* And again ; " There are many and many pious
** souls in this world, who live up to the best light they know, that
** have never heard the sound of this gospel ; but except your
" righteousness shall exceed theirs, you shall in no wise enter into
" the Kingdom of Heaven." Again he said, " Those that are called
" by the gospel when they are children, and are faithful and obe-
** dient, and keep out of sin, will be the flower of Heaven, and the
" glory of Paradise."

About the middle of January, 1787^ Father James, having assem-
bled the believers in New-Lebanon together, in the meeting-house,
came in under great heaviness of spirit, and with tears flowing
from his eyes, he said, " I am going to leave you ; I feel that my
** work is done here, and I do not know that I shall ever see you
" again in this world ; but I leave those with you who are able to
** teach you the way of God. I desire that you would treasure ui^
^ the gospel and make it your only interest. Xoxsl w^ ^^'^.xsv-

♦ There were some tbea preseot who afterwards fcU away^


" teiest I have in litis world ; I have no oilier i merest.'' He then
kneeled down and wejjt exEeedingly, and all ihe assembly wilh
hiin. After rising frum liis knees, he warned tlie people in a very
leeling; and uffecting aildress, to be faiihlul, and keep ihe way of
God when lie was gone, and said, " We have given you llie gos-
" pel; see lo it tliat yuu make a. good use of it. Do abide fallli-
" ful ; those of you tliut abide fuilliful, will be like a bnt] in the
" bloom ; but those tvho do nut abide, will be like a fulling; leaf;
" and you will reiuemher these words when you cannot see me."
fie then addressed the elders and laborers amou)! the people,
and gave them a very solemn charge to be faithful and watt-h over
the people for their protection, and said, '■ Deal with the brethren
" and sJslers as I have ilenit with you." He also warned them in
a very special manner concerning the youth and children, and said,
" You MUSI lake cure of the rising generation : for if they are
" protected, the lime will come when they will be the flower of
" the poplo of God." The next morning lie set off IbrEnfietd, in
Connecticiil, fr(>m whence he never returned. After tarrying a
short time at Enfield, he visited the believers in Harvard, Shirley,
Wuburn,and other places at the eastward where they then resided,
and returned to Enlield sometime in March, where he remained,
and was continually visited by the belicveis, till his decease.

Father James's ministry was short, but very active and labori-
ous. He visited all the diflerent places in the land where the g«is-
pfl had been planted, and some of them several times. His lobuint
were coniinunlly employed in strengthening the weak, comforting
the afflicted, and purging out sin. It was the peculiar gift of bis
ministry to wean the aOections of the believers from their natural
and earthly ties, and prepare them for a spiritual relation in church
order, which he foretold was at hand, and often spoke of it. His
instructions to Cider Joseph Meacbain and those with him, relative
to gathering, building and establishing tlie church in gOB|iel order,
might, with gi'eat propriety, be likened to the instructions of David
to Solomon, concerning the building of the temple, which i
eminent type of this very work.

Many were the inslniciions, exhortations and solemn warnings
which he delivered in the last days of his ministry. When lit;
^B came near the closeof his life, he said, " I have given yon my life ;
^k " all I have, I have given unto you. If I ever had any thing, you
^H "possess it — it is yours; and now see that you make a good use of
^V " it." About two weel« before his decease, he said, " My body
^H " is under great sulTerings ; but I feet my soul at peace with God
^V " and man. 1 have given you the gospel ; now see to it, what
^^ <* Jtind of use you make of it. If you keep the gospel, the gospel
^^^'^ trU/ keep yoa. I have given my life for the people;
^Hp/2f» gone, there will he a great increaw.'''


I


I


to it, what
, the gospel
; a^mj^


GHAP. VI.] OF ELDER JAMES \VHITTAKER. 49

A little before his decease, there came a number of the brethren
and sisters from New-Lebanon to see him, and being about to re-
turn home, they went into his room to take their leave of him.
On entering the room where he lay, they all kneeled down in sor-
row and tears, and in prayer to God, feeling sensible that this
would be the last time they should ever see his face in this world.
He addressed them and said, ^^ I feel thankful to see you all, and
'^ that you have come to see me in my sickness, once more, before
^' I leave the world. I feel weak in body, but comfortable in my
^^ spirit ; and whether I live or die, the gospel will increase. I
^^ have had a great desire to come and see you all ; but I have not
^' been able ; but my heart has been with you 5 and now your
" hearts must be with me, to labor for the power of God — for one
^^ union. I desire you would give my love to the people where you
"go, and tell them that I am alive, and that I never expect to die;
^' for the sting of death is taken from me^ and all fear and terror ;
^' yet I expect soon to put off this earthly tabernacle. Farewell.'^

When he was on his dying bed, numbers of the brethren and
sisters went to see him. On enquiring how he felt, he said, " My
<^ sufferings are exceeding great ; but that peace and consolation
^ which I feel in my soul, overbalances them all. That peace
" and comfort which I feel in the gospel, I would not exchange
" for a thousand such worlds as this." He then exhorted all to
hold on and hold out to the end, and said, " If 3-ou hold out to the
" end, you will feel that peace which I now feel."

Thus he continued to exhort, encourage and strengthen all
around him till he expired, July 20th, 1787? in the 37th, year of
his age. His funeral was attended on the following day, and the
scene was very affecting to all the believers, who viewed him as
their Elder and Father, and the last of those faithful ministers of
Christ who had brought the gospel of salvation to this land, and
who had been called to stand in the ministry.


SUPPLEMENTARY ARTICLE,

Concerning Elder John Hockne^.l.

John Hockndl, whose name is repeatedly mentioned in the
preceding pages, is very justly ranked among the first founders of
the United Society, and was one of the principal supporters of the
gospel in its first commencement in this country ; and it is there-
fore but just and reasonable that he should be particularly noticed
in this work ; but for want of room the notice will be short*

He was a native of Cheshire, in EngVaud, ^wA. y*^'s ^ tc«xw ^S. \fc-

spectabJe character, and possessed considetaVAe i^to^exV^ » >X^V^^

formerly belonged to the Methodist society, ^ivd^ix^i^^'^^'^'^^^'^'^^

F


50


SUPPLEMENTARY ARTICLE.


a aealous member of the society under James and Jane Wardley,
and readily embraced the increasing light through Mother Ann,
and was a faithful believer. He was a man of very meek deport-
ment, and was greatly gifted in visions and prophecies, and was
well known among' the believers of his day to possess the gift of
healing. He was a great help to Mother Ann and her fittre family,
in a tempomi vieiv, and WEks very zealous in the support of the
gospel. It was through his instru mentality that they were enabled
to cross the ocean, and establish themselves in this land. Indeed
the temporal assistance which his zeal end liberality afforded the
society, in its infant state, was its principal dependance. He was
a very honest, conscientious and upright man, and continued faith-
ful and zealous during life, and lived to see the church established
in gospel order, and with great joy, saw its growing prosperity, in
things temporal and spiritual. He departed this life February
anh, 1799» aged 76 years.


PART II.

The established order and religious practice of

THE UxNITED SoCIETY.

CHAPTER 1.

Formation of the Society into a united Body ypoascising a conae*

crated Interest,

As the manner of God's work, both in the natural and q)iriti]al
creation, has always been progressive, increasing from one degree
of order to another until it arrives to perfection ; so the order
which has been established in the church of Christ on earth, was
necessarily progressive, being effected by the progressive opera-
tions of (us Divine Spirit in the hearts of the faithful. Wiiile the
believers, as a people, remained in their respective natural familieaf^
scattered about in different places, possessing respectively the
temporal interest inherited by natural heirship, or acquired by
their own labors in their respective callings, there could not be
much order among them, excepting the common order of nature.
But all who. had honestly confessed and forsaken their sins, and
AtitiiAilly ctfiicinucdcvtakvTiptfarhr ci vases,' according to the mani-
festation of the gift of God which they had received, who had
paid all their just debts, and freed themselves from all outward
embarrassments, and by their faithfulness and obedience, had gain-
ed a sufficient degree of mortification to the fallen nature of the
flesh, were thereby prepared for a further increase of gospel order.
To gain this increase, it was necessary that they should be brought
into a nearer connection together, and thereby be enabled to serve
God in a more united capacity, as members of the body of Christ
in a church relation.

To constitute a true church of Christ, there must necessarily be
a union of faith, of motives and of interest, in all the members who
compose it. There must be " one body and one bread ;"* and
nothing short of this union in all things, both spiritual and tempo-
ral, can constitute a true church, which is the body of Christ. And
wherever that united body exists, it will bring into operation every
Individual talent for the general good of the whole body. And
herein is the prayer of Jesus answered ; " That they may be one,
" even as we are one.^'t In this united capacity, the strength of
the whole body becomes the strength of each, member 3 and being
united in the one Spirit of Christ, they have a greater privilege to
serve God than they possibly could have in a separate capacity,
and are better able to be mutual helps to each others and t\\e^
also find a greater degree of protecliou irowi X>aft ^tcdx^% o^^ ^%<$&5^
0nd worldly nature,

* 4 Cor, J, 17, \ l^xi xVVv 9Ct.


■^J


rORMATlOS OF THE SOCIETY [PART

The way hiiviiig heen gradually prepared for the attammenl of
this importanl object, particularly by the ministraiion of Fallier
James, it now began to take place iinderlheniiiiislration, of Father
Joseph and Mothev Lucy. The lirsi step was to gather the be-
lievers into a body, where they could enjoy all things in common,
both ofa spiritual and temporai kind, and in which their temporal
interest could be united together, and be consecrated to religion*
purposes. This proceeding, being dictated by Divine Wisdom,
was a matter of free choice to every individual : for no one was
compelled to give up his interest contrary to his own faith and
inward feelings. But all who had faithfully kept pare with the
work of God, in its increase thus far, and had beeu able to settle
their tempordl concerns, were prepared for it, and esteemed it ft
special privile^ to be admitted into that united body, and be num-
bered with the most faithlul. But the permanent establishment of
order was necessarily a progressive work, and could not be sud-
denly accomplished.

The gathering nf the society began at New-Lebanon, in the
month of September, I78r, and continued to progress as fast as
circumstances and the nature of (he work would admit. Elders
and deacons were appointed to lead and direct in matters of spiri-
tual and temporal concern ; suitaiile ttuildmgs were erectea for
the accommodation of the members; and order and regularity
were, by degrees, established in the society : so that by the year
1792, the Church was considered as established in the principles
of her present order and spirit of government. Those who were
thus gathered into a united body, were denominafed The CAurcA,-
bein^a cnllectivc body of christians separated from the world, and
enjoying, in their united capacity, one common interest. In this
situation, ihey were enabled to gain a greater degree of victory
over the nature of sellishness, and thus to subdue, more effect ually,
the evil propensities of a carnal nature. By this means they foimd
a greater degree of mortification and death to the nature of sin,
and experienced a gradual growth in love and union, peace and
barraony, and all those heavenly graces which adorn the man of
God, and render him perfeff* every good word and work.

But there were many whoaft circumstances did not, at that lime,
admit of so complete a separation from the world, being still under
more or less embarrassments, or entanglements with those without.
These were progressively gathered into families, in a separate ca-
pticity, having a subordinate privilege j but at the same lime, they
were at full liberl}' to follow the example of the church, to walk in
their steps, and to maintain the like united interest, in that capaci-
ly, as fast as their situation and circumstances would ndniiL iMany
ti/'/hese, having unbelieving children and heirs, or being otherwise
—'ingiod in tlieir temporal circumstances, cooV\ i " — '-~' —


CHAP. I.] INTO A UNITED BODY. 53

with the principles of justice to those without, immediately devote
and consecrate their interest in the manner the church had done.

But in order that they might enjoy the benefits of a united in-
heritance, as far as their circumstances would admit, and be able
to prove their faith in that capacity, they were allowed to unite
and gather in their interest by agreement, and afler taking an in-
ventory of whatever they brought in, they devoted the use of it for
the mutual benefit of the family thus gathered ; but agreed to make
no demands upon the family for the use of the property so devoted,
or for any services which they might perform in that united capa-
city. But if they chose afterwards to withdraw from the family,
or from the society, they were at liberty to withdraw the property
which they had brought in : it being expressly understood tha; no
property was to be brought in, except by the mutual agreement of
the parties concerned.

This mode of proceeding is still practiced in the Society, and is
considered to be just and equitable ; because it secures to l^al
heirs their just portion of the inheritance, whether they belong to
tlie society or not. Nor can it be considered as any injustice to
the proprietors, who have voluntarily devoted the use of it, togeth-
er with their services, with a full understanding of the conditions
thereof. Besides^ it has been found by experience, that families
gathered In that capacity, are seldom able to do more than main-
tain themselves, and discharge those necessary calls of duty and
benevolence which occasionally fall in their way; because such
families are generally encumbered with children, and often with
those who are aged and infinn, besides more or less poor persons
who bring in nothing with them ; and all who are held in union,
must have their equal share of support, whether they are able to
earn it or not.

But families formed under these circumstances, have an equal
right with the church, whenever their situation and circumstances
will admit of it, voluntarily to consecrate their interest, and enter
into the same covenant relation, in their family capacity, as the
members of the church enjoy. It is however necessary that fam-
ilies, as well as individuals, on their first coming out from the
world, and gathering near the society, should prove themselves in
that situation, for a suitable length of time, in order to confirm
their faith by experimental obedience, before they can be admitted
as members of the society in a united capacity.

But in that separate situation, tho they have the entire control
•f their own temporal concerns, they may, at any time, apply for
counsel and instruction, either spiritual or temporal, whenever
they fed the need of it. They have also the privilege of attead^^M^t^
and uniting in the public meetings of l\\e soewv.^ ^ 'dxv^ oil nSsvCvw^
their elders for the benefit of spifituaY \iv^Xt>K>\\v^^ ^sw\ ^S.\i«>».'^

F %


I


5<( FORMATION OP THE SOCIETV


^^^pti-l


visited by ihero, so long as ihcy continue faiilifiilly to take up
(heir crosses, and walk worthy of their profession. For altho
fevery lionpst and faitliful believer considers it a very desirable
privilege to become one willi the united body, in all llrings, and to
devote and consecrate himself, soul and body, time and tttlents,
\rilh all his earthly iniieritance, to the service of God forever; yet,
to arrive at (hat order, and obtain sn desirable a privilege, is as
Necessarily a progressive work, hi this day, as it •k&s in the Rrst
comniencemem of the work in America, and requires a preparato-
ry work DOW, as really as it did then.

In this situation, lYiey are required to prove their failli by th«r
works. This they will generally do in the course of a few years,
«nd sometiraes in a few montlts; and will either gain an increase
«f faith and strength, and spiritual understanding, bo as lo be pre-
pared for a further privilege; or they will fall back, in conse-
quence of their unfaiihfuhiess, and return again from whence they
came. But while they remain In that situation, they are required
lo manage their own temjioral concerns, according to the best of
their understanding and abliilies, to pay all iheir just debts, and
^eltle all thdr concerns abroad, according to the principles of jus-
tice and equity ; to provide for themselves and their families, to
bring up their children in the fear of God, and instil into their
ninds the principles of virtue, and to be just, upright and consci-
entious in all their dealings. By these means, they will gradually
prepare themselves for a furdier privilege in a united capacity.

Such families, provided their circumstances admit of it, are oflen
enlarged by tlie addition of individual members, who have recently
embraced the faith of the Society, and who are admitted to the
^ivilege of proving their faith along with Ihe family. All that is
required of such individuals is, to live cnnsrirntiously according to
the principles of continence, purity and holiness which they have

SrofeBsedly received, agreeable to the precepts and example of
esus (Jhrist ; and in conforming to these principles, their local
situation does not prevent their union with the society.

But as the work of God is an increasing work, neitlier families
nor inilividuals, if they continue faithful, can feel satisfiod to re-
main in any Ntuation short of the more perfect order of the gospel.
Because, if they gain an increase of faith and understanding, they
will soon feel the ^vant of a nearer relation to the society, and a
greater sejiaralion from the world. But if they do not gain this,
tiiey will, of course, tiili back to the ivorld; for all who are faith-
ful and honest-hearted, will find an increasing gain ; but Unwe
wlia ai'e unfaithful, instead of an increase of faith and understamt-
w", or any spiiitual light, they will necessarily fall into a stale of
•"■'itiial rlarknesa^ andtlien will he verified in them, the wonte


CHAP. I.j INTO A UNITED BODY. 55

of Christ, ^^ If the lig^t which is in you become darkness, how
** great is that darkness !'^*

As the law of Christ can never bind the conscience of any soul ;
so, where there is a difference of faith between married persons^
the husband or the wife, whose foith it is so to do^ has a just and
lawful right to preserve his or her own body in sanctification, and
devote it to God, in a life of continence and purity; and this b an
inherent right which no law of God nor man can disannul or take
away ; therefore, no person whatever, can have any right to for-
bid or hinder such a devotion in either party. Conscience is the
throne of God in the soul, and the souPs justification before God,
must depend on the purity of its conscience ; hence a right to vio-
late the conscience cannot possibly exist in either party. ^ We
'^ are not debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh,"t in any of its
gratifications.

If a brother have an unbelieving wife, or a sister an unbelieving
husband, and the parties can agree to live together in peace, they
are not required to separate on account of their faith; but the be-
lieving husband is bound to take care of his unbelieving wife, to
provide for her, and treat her with christian kindness and charity,
to set her an example of godliness, and give her no just cause of
ofifence. So also tiie believing wife is bound to live with her un-
believing husband, to treat him with all kindness, to show forth an
example of humility, meekness, modesty and faithfulness in all
things, to lay no stumbling blocks in his way, nor give him any
just cause of offence. But if they cannot live together in peace,
they may separate by mutual agreement, and divide their inheri-
tance according to the principles of justice and equity. The
Society does not admit of a separation on any other conditions;
unless the conduct of the unbelieving party be such that the be-
liever, after having faithfully fulfilled all moral obligations, can be
fully justified, both by the laws of God and man, in a final separa-
tion. The practice of the Society, in this respect, coincides with
the directions of the apostle to the Corinthians.|

As all people, whether married or unmarried, who have proper-
ty at their own disposal, are left to their own choice respecting the
disposition of themselves and their property; it must therefore
depend on their own choice, after having embraced the gospel,
whether they will devote either themselves or their property to

* The' darkness of sacb touls is often truly astonishiof We have known repeated instan-
ces of persons who, r.aving been once enligntened by the Spirit of Truth, and having reject**
ed their light, and indulpred themselves in actual stn, contrary to the dictates of their own
consciences, have gradually sunk into such a state of spiritual darkness, as notonly to testifr
against the pore principles of their former light, but alio to run b^ degrees, into total infidel-
ity. Sittne hare become insensible and regardleu of every thing pertaining to reli^.on ;
others, after contending with different denominations, have run, first into iJewRV. a,«L4 \.Vft.Tv
inlo professed Atheism: and truly, if Athrism can ex\st \n «. T%'^oue\ %ov\, >Jtttx\>5a«t.*.^V«>.
have rejected the <freate8t light, have been suffered to UXWvftu «L%Va\A o\ ^%.\>s»*^'i*.\f^^^«'^
jj»i' the ncaregt to it*
t Rom. riiL 12: \^tt\ CoT« V\\. ViVt» \^-


I 56 FORMATION OF THE SOClETr

Btte service of God. But after they have had siiiTicient lime to
Prrove iheir faith, and gain ei full understand! tig of the principles of
me Society, so as tn be able to make a deliberate and conscientious
choice for themselves, and having settled all their temporal con-
cerns, so as to be free from all outward embarrassments, they may
then freely dedicate and devote lliejuselves and ihejr services,
together with all their temporal interest, la the service of God, to
be forever consecrated to pious and charitable uses, according to
the covenant of the Chiirrh.

Having deliherat''ly done this, there can be no room for any
recantation; because whatever is thus devoted cannot be with-
drawn without the sacrilegious violation of a consecrated right.
And whoever deliberately violates his faith, and withdraws or
separates himself from the Church, after such a solemn dedication,
mn be viewed, by the faithful, in no other light than as a reprobate.
And thn the deacons may grant a moderate donation to such a one,
as an object of charity ; yet his own volnnlaiy act, in putting his
hand to a religious covenant, and consecrating himself, his services
and property to God, and afierwnrds turning his hack, and actually
violating his sacred promises, must forever debar him from any
lawful claim lo any of the property or services so consecrated.
This will appear evident by the following extracts from the writ-
ten covenant.

'* Ardcle IV. We solemnly and conscientiously dedicate, de-
" vote and give up ourselves and services, together with all our
'^ tempi»al interest, to God and his people; to be under the care
" and direction of such elders, deacons or trustees, as liave been,
" or may hereafter be established in the church, according to the
" first Article of this covenant."

" Article VI. We further covenant and agree, that it is, and
" shall be the special duty of tiie deacons or trustees, appointed as
" aforesaid, to have the immediate charge and oversiglii of alt and
t singular, the property, estate and interest, dedicated, devoted and
" given up as aforesaid : and it shall also be the duty of the said
" deacons or trustees, to appropriate, use and improve the said
"united interest far the benefit of tlie Church, for the relief of the
*' poor, and for such other charitable and religious purposes as the
" gospel may require, and the said deacons or trustees, in their
"wisdom shall see fit; Prooided aevertheksa, that all the Irans-
" actions of the said deacons or trustees, in ihcir use, managemmt
" and disposal of the aforesaid united interest, shall be for the ben-
" elil and privilege, audio behalf of the Church, (to which llie
" said deacons or trustees are, and shall be held responsible,) and
" not fiir any personal or private interest, object or pmpose wha^

}*'ArlicJe VHI, As the sole objecl, puvpost bb4 iesi^ o^ wm


eHAP. 1.] INTO A UNITED BODY. 57

^* uniting in covenant relation, as a church or body of people, in
^^ gospel union, was from the beginning, and still is, faithfully and
*^ honestly to receive, improve and diffuse the manifold gifts of
^< God, both of a spiritual and temporal nature, for the mutual pro-
** tection, support, comfort and happiness of each other, as breth-
*^ ren and sisters in the gospel, and for such other pious and chari-
*' table purposes as the gospel may require : Therefore^ we do, by
" virtue of this Covenant, solemnly and conscientiously, jointly
<' and individually, for ourselves, our heirs and assigns, promise and
<^ declare, in (he presence of God and each other, and to all men, that
** we will never hereafter, neither directly or indirectly ,make nor
*' require any account of any interest, property, labor or ser\ice,
" which has been, or which may be devoted by us, or any of us, to
^^ the purposes aforesaid ; nor bring any charge of debt or damage,
'' nor hold any demand whatever, against the Church, nor against
" any member or members thereof, on account of any property or
" service given, rendered, devoted or consecrated to the aforesaid
^^ sacred and charitable purposes."

The preceding extracts are made from the written covenant of
the Church ; but every separate Society, being a branch of the
Church, has the care and management of its own temporal con-
cerns, arid tin» ttt»o ia «flwM»n«MJly the; case Wlffl separate fuiiiilies in

the Society, whose circumstances will not admit of being immedi-
ately connected with the united interest of the. Church : hence
each society has its separate written covenant, for the protection of
the temporal property belonging to it ; but where a family is es-
tablished upon the principles of a united interest, its covenant is
essentially the same as that of the Church.

' It is an established principle of faith in the Church, that all who
are received as members thereof, do freely and voluntarily, of their
own deliberate choice, dedicate, devote and consecrate themselves^
with all they possess, to the service of God forever.* Hence the
property and services of each individual, after being consecrated
and improved in the manner specified, must ever be considered as
consecrated property, and no longer subject to the legal claims of
the former owner.

According to the law of Moses, which was typic^ of the law of
Christ, " No devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the Lord,
^* of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his
" possession, shall be sold or redeemed : every devoted thing is
" most holy unto the Lord."t So also, according to the law of
Christ, whatever is de^licated to God, according to the Covenant
of the Church, can never be returned or withdrawn, but must for-
ever remain devoted to the objects of the gospel.

* To attempt such a consecration in derelt, wou\A b<» \o vitV \>[i% ^%x\. «»^ K^mvv^*^^
Sappbira, whose fate nras a strikingr evidence of ihe DWvofc ^\%^\e%.vxc% ^^vvW.WasJo.'^^**!^
hjrpocrisjr See Acts, cb- v.
t Lcr. j^rii 29.


iSTABLISHED ORDER AKI

jl as ihp law of Christ requires that whatever h consecrated to
, should not only be done by a voluntaijact; but also that
e who undertake it, should he of mature age and understand-
ing, capable or acting deliberaiely and considerately; therefore,
children under age cannot be received into the Church as mem-
bers; but they may be taken under the care and guardianship of
tlie Society, by the request or free consent of their parents or guar-
dians, together with their own consent. Bui when they become of
lawful age, they must then make their own choice, both with re-
gard lo themselves and property, if ihey are heirs to any property.
And it is an established princlule in the Society, that children, who
"»re faithful and obedient to their parents until ihey become of age,
are justly entitled to their equal portion of the estate of their pa-
rents, whether ihey continue with the Society or not.

^ CHAPTER n.

The eslabHshed Order and Govemmeal of the Chvi-ch.
f The government of the Church of Christ is spiritual, and it
tauBi always remain so ', because it must always be under the pow-
er anil inlluvaCK of me Spirit or Gl>r^ > trtho^^rue H i^AIKIOl DC the
Church of Christ. Any power or authority exercised over tbe
■rue Church of Christ, which does not proceed from his Spirit, or
is not conformable thereto, cannot stand.

A false church may be supporied and governed by a' false spi-
rit, but it is not so with the true : the cause of truth must be sup-
ported and governed by the Spirit of truth. A church founded
on human wisdom, supported by human creeds, and governed by

^ human authority, is but a dead body, being destitute of the real
life and power of the gospel; of course it cannot withstanl tbe
powers of darkness and tbe corruptions of sin, and therefore be-
^mes, at once, a churcli of Antichrist, and holds its power and au-
Ibority in direct opposition fo the Spirit of Christ.
The visible head of the Church of Christ on earth, is vested in
^ Ministry, consisting of male and female, not less than three, and
generally four ui number, two of each sex. The first in the min-
istry staiids as the leading tLlder of the Society. Those who com*
pose the ministry, are selected from the Church, and appointed by
the last preceding head or leading character : and their authority
is confirmed and established by the spontaneous union of the whole
body. This is the true order of election and succession in the
Church of Christ, and there never can he any other so long as the
Spirit of Christ governs Ins Church,
This was dearly typified under the Jewish dispensation,
fJt'cJi fvas figurative of ihc Churdi ot CWvsi.. Goi o.'^viw***'


CHAP. II.] GOVERNMENT OP THE CHURCH. 59

Moses, and Moses appointed Joshua ; and so also, €rod selected
David firom among the sons of Jesse, and David selected Solomon.
And while the Israelites kept the law, this manner of succession
was observed and blessed ; but when they rebelled, and turned
from the law of the Lord, to follow the examples of other nations^
the appointment of their leaders was often factious and arbitrary.

Under the gospel dispensation, Christ chose his own apos-
tles. " Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,'' said he.
And this was also the order of succession in the primitive church.
The apostles appointed their immediate successors ; and while
this order was faithfully observed, the church was preserved in its
union ; but when the primitive christians began to be influenced
by the spirit of Antichrist, and the contentions principles of the
world, and elected their bishops by strife and debate, the unity of
the church was destroyed, and contentions, divisions and animosi-
ties followed. By these means the church lost the power of God^
and fell under the dominion of Antichrist, and gradually degene-
rated into an ecclesiastical despotism, and became one with the
world.

Those of the United Society who are selected and called to the
important work of the ministry, to lead and direct the Church of
Christ, must be blameless characters, faithful, honest and upright^
clothed with the spirit of meekness and humility, gifled with wis-
dom and understanding, and of great experience in the things of
God. As faithful ambassadors of Christ, they are invested with
wisdom and authority, by the revelation of God, to guide, teach
end direct his church on earth, in its spiritual travel, and to coun-
sel and advise in other matters of importance, whether spiritual or
temporal.

To the Ministry, therefore, appertains the power to appoint mi-
nisters, elders and deacons, and to assign offices of care and trust to
such brethren and sisters as they shall judge to be best qualified for
the several offices to which they may be assigned. Such appoint-
ments, being communicated to the members concerned, and hav-
ing received the mutual approbation of the church, or the family
concerned, are thereby confirmed and established until altered
or repealed by the same authority. All selfish and aspiring feel-
ings and pursuits are excluded 5 and, as far as it is practicable, ev*
ery member is placed within his proper sphere for usefulness. By
this means every gift and talent is brought into its proper place,
and put into exercise where it can be the most useful.

This is not effected by any worldly wisdom ; but by the eternal
law of righteonshes in G'^d : for no man nor woman, as such, can lead
and govern tiie church of Christ. The cVwwcVv \i^\xv^^'^\i^^ ^^
Christ, is supported by his Spirit, w\\\cV\ \s xVve Xx^'t q\. ^^vX^^iJcj >
consequently the operations of bis tife uipoix \\x^ xa«a^^^ '^^ ^"^


TBE ESTABLISHED ORDER AKD

I body, miist neceaaHilly govern llie body, nnd bring every thing into
Lits [iroper place and ordur; so that llic whole body, with all its
[members, can operate liamiuniously with I lie Spirit, in bringing
h forth the fruits of the gospel, in their regular order. As the sap,
ft which b the life of the tree or vine, operates in the body and all its
branches, to bring forth the leaves, blossoms und fruit, according
to the times and seasons established by tlie laws of nature ; so op-
erates tlic Spirit ofChrist in his body, the Church. This accords
with his parable of the vine.*

Altho the Society at iVew-Lebanon is the center of union to all
the other societies; yet themoreimmediate duties of theMinistry, m
this place, extend only to the two siK'ieties of New-Lebanon and
Watervliet. Other societies are under the direction of a Ministry
appointed to preside over ihem ; and in most instances, two or
more societies constitute a bishoprick., being united under the su-
perintendence of the same Ministry.

In every souety, ministers are appointed to bear testimony of
(he faith and principles of the society to tliose without, and give
informaiton to candid enquirers; also to receive and instruct those
who visit the society for that purpose, and to admit those wjio re-
reive the same fniih, and desire to unite themselves to the society.
They are also occasionally sent abroad to preach the gospel to the
world of mankind, as duty may call, and the way be prepared for
it. The number of these ministers, both male and female, is more
or less, as occasion requires.

In every society, elders are appointed and elablblied in each
large family, consisting, generally, of two persons of cacli sex.
These are considered as the head of the family. They are re-
quired to be persons of blameless character, well approved fat
jkiihrulncss, integrity and stability of soul, and gifted in wisdom
and spiritual ad ministration. As faithful watchmen upon the
[ walls of Ziion, it becomes their duty to watch over their respective
iamilies, to teach, exhort and lead in spiritual concerns.

The manageineni of temporal concerns, in such families, is in-
trusted to the deacons and deaconesses, as trustees of the temporal
property of the society or family to which they belong. To these
pertain the duties of providing for the support and convenience of
their respective families, of regulating the various branches of bu-
siness in which the members are employed, and of transacting bu'
siness with those without. All the members are equally holden,
according to their several abilities, to maintain one united inter-
est ; and therefore all labor with their hands, in some useful occu-
pation, for the mutual comfort and benefit of themselves and each
t/lher, und for the genenU good uf the society or family lu whidi
^fliejrbeiaDg. AJinistei^, elders and deacons, all without


CHAP. II.] GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH. 61

tiotif 9^ industriously emplayed in some masual occupation, ex-
cept in the time taken up in the necessary duties of their respective
callings.

Thus all are faithful^ cheerful and happy in the conscientious
performance of their respective duties; and such is the spirit of
industry that pervades the whole Society, that an idle, lazy person
will not long abide in it. And this b effected by no other coercive
power than the force of conscience, and the spirit which prevails
throughout the Society: for none are required to labor beyond
their strength and abilities, and each one must act conscientiously
in this, as in all other duties. If reproof or admonition is at any
time found necessary, it must be applied through the medium of
the conscience : for the law of Christ admits of no external com-
pulsion.

No selfish or party feelings can have any sway in the Church of
Christ : for the whole power of government being founded in the
law of Christ, and supported by the union of the members, any
power, authority or influence, which has any tendency to produce
disunion, contrary to that law, is necessarily excluded from any
participation in the government. In shortj the whole government
of the Church is effected, and all its important concerns are regula-
ted and maintained, by the spontaneous union and subjection of
all the faithful to the law of Christ, established in tlie Church.
And thus is fulfilled the prediction of the prophet : " They shall
" see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion."*

In our extracts from the covenant of the Church, in the preced-
ing chapter, it will be seen that the temporal interest of the Church
is intrusted to the deacons, for the purposes therein specified.
Hence it may be seen, that neither deacons nor elders have any
more claim upon tlie property of the Church than the rest of the
members, otherwise than by the trust reposed m them, for the ben-
efit of all concerned. Those intrusted with the greatest care, are
the greatest servants ; and those whose care and concern it is to
labor for the welfare of the whole, are verily the servants of all,
and are * the more highly esteemed in thoir calling, " for their
*' works' sake.'^t

Such are the principles of faith, order, regularity and gospel union,
planted in the hearts of the members ; and such their sense and un-
derstanding of the law of Christ, that no faithful soul can ever seek,
or even wish to seek for the preeminence, or have any desire to
usurp authority over another. Those in places of trust feel them-
selves under the greatest obligations to be faithful, knowing tlieir
accountableness, as servants of Christ, and stewards in the house
of God, to be just, upright and faithful in the discharge vi<\!a& ^>^<^
incumbent upon them. But should anj ot\e.,\v\^w^ ^^^^ ^o^^axfe

* Im. Uu «. t See Mark x. 44. V. T\ies\ v . \^. wA'A^ti . vvvv» W .

G


I


THE ESTABLISHED ORDER, &C,

and irust, yield to the Influences of evil, and cease from hia faitli-
fulnesa, he would unavoidably lose That union of (he spirit which
so strongly binds the faiihful together in the bonds nf love and
harmony; of course, he would forfeit the esteem and confidence
of the niembers, and could no longer retain his office in tite Church.

The very spirit of the gospel, which governs the Church, and
influences all its members, has a direct tendency to excite every
faithful soul to feel an interest in building up Christ's Kingdom on
earth, ill things spiritual and lemporaJ; consequetiily all the faitli-
fol are united, " as the heart of one man," to improve their time
and tnlents in acts of virtue and goodness. This work is effected
by a life of daily self-deuiataud the cross; by subduing every evil
propensity ; by fulfilling the law of love to <>od and good-will to
man; by cultivating the principles of peace and harmony; by
practising industry and prudence, kindness and charity ; by seek-
ing the comfort and happiness of each other, and endeavoring to
promote the prosperity of the Charch.

These are duties which all are consdentiously bound to perfori
and herein is a practical iHusiration of ihai genuine love wbicii
distinguishes the true followers of Christ from all others. *' By
" tltisshall all men know thai ye are my disciples, ifye have Jove
•* one to another."* " Ye shall know tliem by their froits,"t Here
the rich and the poor all lare aUke, Hceording to their needs ajod
circumstances, without any respect lo the properly which they
ha\'e separately brought in. And here is verily ftiltilled, in sub-
stance, what was |)refigured by the manna gatliered in the wilder-
ness: "He thai gathered much had nothing over, and be thai
" ^thered little had no lack. "J "

It is certain that nothing short of Divine Wisdom tould ever
have devised a system of equalization, so just and equitable, and
yet so contrary to the partial, aspiring and sellish nature of man.
And surely, no selfish motives ronld ever lead any people to em-
brace a system of religion which strikes at the very foundation of
selfishness, and inspires its subjects with the principles of impar-
tial love and disinterested benevuleuce. But all honest-hearted
believers, being the subjects of that one religion, are governed bv
one spirit, which tends directly to a oneness in all things. And
this oneness gains the ascendency over disorder and confusion,
and necessarily produces order and regularity, in things spiritual
find temporal ; while those things which lead to disorder and con-
. fusion, are gradually purged away.

Such is the force of conscience, and the sense of rectitude in
ivery faithful member, that should any inadvertently violate the
u/e» of good order, or in any manner transgress the law of Clirist,
ad be overcome with evil, they would immediately lose their


CHAP, iil] the government, &c. 63

justificatioo, and could feel no peace of mind until they had con-
fessed the wrong and found forgiveness : this every faithful soul
would readily do. But if a^y are found unfaithful, and regardless
of good order, they soon lose their union, and it becomes the
duty of the elders to examine, admonish and reprove them, and
endeavor to reclaim them in the spirit of kindness and charity.
But if 6uch ones will not be reclaimed, they will fall of course ;
because no one who lives in any known violation of faith, or wil-
fully persists in any wrong, is able to keep the union of the spirit,
which is the very life and support of the Church and all its members.
AH those of the Society who have received an understanding
faith in the work of God, are conscious that the most faithful, hon-
est and upright souis do not only gain the greatest share of love,
confidence and respect from their brethren and sisters; but do
actually experience the greatest measure of the Divine favor and
blessing. Hence all the honest-hearted are stimulated to faithful-
ness, feeling and knowing it to be the only means of securing the
favor and blessing of God, and the love and confidence of their
brethren and sisters ; conscious also, that if they . fail in these
things, they must eventually lose their union and relation to the
Society, and fall off, like withered branches, as has been the caae
with many, whose fate is a solenm warning to all who prize their
privilege in the gospel.


CHAPTER m.

The Govermnent and Education of Cltildren.

The suitable government and education of children is a very
important concern, and one among the practical duties of the Soci-
ety, which claims particular attention. The time of childhood
and youth, is the choicest period of life to instil into the mind the
principles of virtue, to store it with useful instruction, to form
practical habits of goodness, and to regulate and bring into opera-
tion every useful talent. It is also the most critical period of life,
and requires the greatest care and attention to form, regulate and
govern the various dispositions of the mind, and subdue the natural
propensities' to evil, before they become habitual and unconquer-
able, as they most genenilly will, if neglected in childhood.

By strict attention at this early period, the mind, in ordinary
cases, is easily formed for a life of virtue and usefulnesar; but by
neglect, the child is often ruined. Where children are suitalny
governed by their parents and guardians, when young, they readi-
ly acquire habits of self-government; and thus a most important
point is gained : for a man or woman mlVvoxaX >\\^ \kQ^^x <^^ ^tf^&r
^yemment, is Uke a ship without «l tud^c^, N«\iv^ Xi^^^^^^"^ "^


I


I


W^^^ THE UOVERNSIENT AN»

one'e the sport of minds and waves. Hence a railable government
in cliildhood, b a matter of the first concern,

Moral and religious instruciioDs come next in order. When a
aan is able lo govern himself, and subdue his evil propensities,
•r at least to keep them in subjection, he is then, and not till then,
in a fair way lo be benefitted by moral and religious instructions.
So when n child 'a governed, it may be instructed to some profit ;
but not before.

A suitable school eilucalion, if not ne.^ t en importance, is un-
doubtedly the next in point of time and age. Indeed chiUlien may
be governed, and receive their moral, religious and literary instruc-
tions, and be conducted along by degrees, in all these points, to
good advantage, provided each i» wisely administered in its preipef
lime, place and order.

But to give cliildren literary instructions, witbont governing,
and leaching them to gcivcm the natural propensities and disposi-
tions of tlieir minds, and nilliout instructing them in the principles
of moral virtue, would be a ready way to lead them to ruin. Be-
cause, in such a case, their literary knowledge would only tend to
sharpen their talents, and assist them in the pursuit of evil inveti-
ttons. A few such characters (and there are generally more or
less such ones to be found in all public seminaries) would be liable
to ruin tlie morals of thousands.

Were all children suitably governed and instructed in early lite,
one single age would undoubtedly produce a vast reformation in
the morals of the community at lai^e; and criminal courts, state
prisons and the gallows would, protrably, in the course of a single
century, become nearly or quite useless.

The government of children, being of essential importance, was
strictly enjoined upon the believers, and especially upon parents,
by MoUier Ann, and received the earliest attention of the Society.
Moral, religious and literary instructions were also particularly
recommended by her, and carefully and punctually attended to,
where children wpre gathered into families, within the reach of
such instructions. But in the early stages of the Society, believers
who had cliildren, were very much scattered; so lliat much of the
moral and religious insLiictions administered to tltc children, were
olleu lost upon them, in consequence of the prejudices continually
infused into their young minds, against every thing that bad any
ronnection with what was ccmteroptuously calleil S/taficriem.

Tlie inveterate ciimily and opposition which, in those days,
prevailed so extensively against the Society, was a serious obstacle
FLi the way of schooling children. The Society was not, at that
lime, sufficiently organized to establish regularschoolsof their own;
"m/ie was found altogether unsafe to send their children to the
vrg-Zilioring schools, wlieretliey had i\ol\iin^\o fsv^W\)iaaiMi^.,


CHAP. III.] EDUCATION OF CHILDREIf. 95

or a corruption of morals. It was therefore extremely difficult,
for a number of years^ to pay much attention to literary instruc-
tion, even had the object been ever so desirable ; besides, the gen-
eral attention of the believers was engrossed with matters, which
thenfappeared of much greater concern.

put the children were not altogether neglected in this respect*
Day and evening schools were opened and kept up, where it wa0
practicable. By means of these and other private instructions,
given from time to time, as circumstances permitted, the children
brought up in the church, both male and female, are all able to
read and write ; and those who possessed the best capacities and
the brightest natural talents, have generally received a proportion-
ate degree of literary instruction. This is indeed more than could
have been expected, considering the difficulties which attended the
organization of the Society, and which, for many years, pressed
so heavily upon the people.*

But these diffikruhies were at length so far sarmounted, that
schools were regularly organized and maintained in the Society ;
so that the children now gathered in, are regularly instructed in
the various branches of common school education; and where
traits of genius appear, they have opportunities of instruction ac-
cordingly; 'and thus all receive instruction proportioned to their
genius, talents and capacities for usefulness. This we consider ag
sufficient ; because it will avail nothing for children to spend their
time in acquiring a knowledge of the higher branches of literature,
and especially of what is called classical learning, unless they can
apply their knowledge and learning to some beneficial purpose.
Learning without usefulness is, at best, but mere lumber of the
brain, and often excludes those things which might have been far
more useful in its place.

We are not insensible that among the most numerous and pop*
ular professors of Christianity, and especially those of the theolo-
gical school, a liberal education isxleemed indispensable in those
whom they are willing to receive as ambassadors of Christ. Many
youth are annually sent to college for this purpose; and after
having spent four years time, and obtained a sufficient classical
education, they are admitted to the study of divinity. They must
now spend, perhaps, three yearsy more in some theological semina-
ry, in order to finish their education, and qualify them for the

* Th« people, at the time of their eomiDg together, were mostly poor; a large proper*
lion of them were utterly destitute of aoj temporal property, and had therefore aothing (o>
re£ommead them hut their faith To establish ordorand regularity arooog a large body of
people, so circumstanced, to provide for their support, protection and convemence, aud to
Duild them op in the principles of union, peace aod harmony, both in things spiritual and
temporal, was an arduous uBdertaking, which required mnch time and labor, and was at~
tenaed with many trying diffirulties ; and these difficulties wer« ^««\Vl VDL'&x«.'».\«.Wk^ ^«^
powerful opposition of an unbelieving world, '^hich^ )\k« «, va^V} tkiwA^ «\\K6k >^««>A»ft.^
Um dcftmctjoa oi tb9 Societj.

G2


F«


THE GOVERNMENT A


I


I


gospel minhtry. Tlius qaalitied, X\viy are commissioned and sent
forth as ambassadorg of C/crist !

Those who commission ihese young students, are doubtless
ircry careful to see thai they are, according to their riilea, fully
Qualified, by their classical ajicl theological studies, for such a work.
But what evidence have lliey that God has chosen them to this
Work? or that their studies have qualified them, in his view, for
ambassadors of Christ ? Are they as careful to obtain evidence of
these (acts, as of their literary attainments? And dare they com-
mission these pupils without evidence equally positive and satis-
fiictory ? These theological divinea will doubtless actiiowledge
that it is the prerogative of Christ to chuse his own ministers,
and to commifsipn whom he sees fit ; and yel they presume to act
as divine agents in this business ; but by what authority ? and
where is their divine commission ? They will admit also, that
Jesus Christ called Peier and olhers from their nets, and conferred
on them the aposileship, without a liberal education. He also
called Paul, and sent Annanias to commission him for a tike pur-
pose ; and ajtho it i^ admitted that he had received an education ;
yet wlio ever supposed that he was educated with a view to the
apostleship ?

What man would presume to educate his son for a-foreign min-
ister, and then commission and send him to a foreign country, in
Ibe name of hb government? And what government would ac-
cept such a minister, unauthorized by the government wbicli he
professes to represent? Civil governments do not receive nor ao
knowledge ministers of this description ; and yet what better is
the common practice of educating and commissioning those who
■re styled ambassadtirB of Christ? And where is the divine
authority to sanction the practice ? Is it not an imjuous and hea-
ven-daring usurpation of a Divine prerogative ? for if the indivi-
dual subjects of a government cannot, educate and commission
foreign ministers, nor even ministers for the home de|>arlment, for
their own government, which is composed of men of like passions
vrith. themselves, how can they, without a divine commission, pre-
sume to do it fur tli.M who '' seeth not ac man seeth,"

Without boasting of any extraordinary literary attainments,
believers have hitherto been able to learn their duly, and to do it ;
to receive moral and religious instructions, and live according to
them ; to understand the plain and simple truths of the gospel,
and walk in them ; firmly believing that those who know ibeir
Waster's will and do it, render a for more acceptable service to
God, and will obtain a more glorious reward than those who, with
the greatest literary attainments, have never learned to do the will
efGod.
\Jn their scbooln, the Society at New-'Lf;banot\ ^»4 ^oww ^aW


CHAP. III.] £DUCATION OF CHILDREK. 61

places, have adopted the Lancasterian mode of instruction, as pre*
ferable to any other ; but with some variations, more congenial
with their manner of government and tuition : And the remarka-
ble proficiency of the scholars is a proof of the excellency of their
institution.*

After a suitable common school education, the youth are instruct-
ed in spme manual occupation, which, as far as practicable, is
adapted to their genius and capacities ; so that all niay have the
benefit of some useful calling, by which they can procure a main-
tenance, provided they are capable of it. The children gathered
into the Society, are mostly those brought in by their believing
parents ; tho the Society has, occasionally, taken in the children
of others, by the earnest solicitations of their parents and guardi-
ans ; but this is not a common practice.

All are carefully taught to regard the principles of honesty,
punctuality and uprightness, in all their conduct ; to keep a con*
science void of offence towards God and all uien ; to be neat,
cleanly and industrious; to observe the rules of prudence, tempe-
rance and good economy in all their works ; to subdue all feelings
of selfishness and partiality ; to let the law of kindness, love and
charity govern all their feelings towards each other ; to shun all
contention and strife, and be careful never to give nor take offence;
to conduct themselves with civility, decency and good order before
all people ; to promote the happiness of each other as the only
sure way to enjoy happiness themselves ; and to bless one another
as the best means of securing the blessing of God.

In short, both aged and young, male and female, are required
to live and conduct themselves towards each other as becomes
faithful brethren apd sisters in the gospel. And it is found by ac-
tual experience, that those who are the most solicitous to promote
the peace and happiness of their brethren and sisters, do themselves
enjoy the greatest measure of peace and happiness. Hence male
and female, as faithful brethren and sisters in Christ, renouncing
all amorous conduct and conversation, can live together, from
year to year, in gospel purity, peace and union, enjoy each other's
society in social harmony, freely share in each others kindness,
and faithfully labor to promote each other's happiness.

* We feel no disposition to combat the false reports of our enemies ; thej are welcome
to all the bepefit they cao reap from such reports ; but to qhiet the anxiety of thote wh»
have been induced thereby to believe that we bring up our children in heathenism, by de
ujiog them the use of the Bible, we would merely state that, besides other ofeKful books on
various subjects, the Society has always been well supplied with Bibles and Testaments, of
various sizes, suitable for all a.»es ; and we believe there cannot be found a single dwel*
Hog room in the Society, that has not one or more Bibles in it ; and the children have, at ail
tjsaes^^ free access to them, as soon as they are able to rea4>


rr PROGRESS AtiD PRESENT STATE [^^^^^1

CHAPTER IV. ^^^

Progress and present stale of the United Society. ^^^^H
In the be^inDing of the year 17^0, the Society consisted, in sIIt -'
of but about 10 or 12 persons, all of whom came from England.
Early in the spring of thai year, the people in this country, having
heard theirtestimoiiy,began to gather to them; and from this time,
there was a gradual and extensive increase in numbers, until the
year 1TS7, when those who had received faith, and had been faith-
ful from the begioning, and who were the most fuUy prepared,
begtir) to collect at New-Lebanon. Here the church was estab-
lished, as a common center of union, for all who belonged to the
Society, in various parts of the country. This still remains as the
Molher-Church, being the first that was established in gospel or-
der; and all the Societies in the various parts of the country,
which are established upon the same gospel foundation, and gov
erned by the same spirit and principles, are branches of the one
Church of Christ.

During a period of five years, from 17S7 to 1792, regular S&-

uelies were formed and established upon the same principles of

order and church government, in the various parts of the eastern

11^^ states, where the testimony of the gospel bad been received. The

^^^ local situation of each Society, and the present estimate of their

^^H numbers, may be staled as follows.

^^P The first and lai^est Society is at New-Lebanon, situated about
^H 3 1 miles south of Lebanon Springs, in the county of Cohitnbis
'i^ and Slate of New-York, about 25 miles southeast from Albany,
and contains, at present, between 5 and 600 persons, including
I old and young, male and female.

. There is also one at Watervliet, about 7 miles northwest from
Ltte city of Albany, in the same state. This was established soon
I after the church at New-Lebanon, and now contains upwards of
I aOO members.

I One at Hancock, in the county of Berkshire and state of Massa.
ubuselts. This is situated about 3 mites southeast from New-Le-
^ttnon, and 5 miles west from Fittsfield, and contains about 30a
faembers.

One at Tyringham, about 16 miles south from Hancock, in the
hme county, which contains about 100 members.

One at Enfield, county of Hartford, in the slate of Connecticut,
ibout 5 miles east from Connecticut River, and about 18 milev
lortheasterly from Hartford, which contains about 200 membeit.
One at Harvard, in the county of Worcester and state of Massa*
hiisetts, about SO miles northwesterly from Boston, which con-
ms about 200 members.
^fine at Shir!ey, county of Middlesex, >t\\Ws).\ftE%\a.\.es*«w.\.T
f weet Urom Harvard, which cotiWitis aloQ* Va*i laeoiiwv


CHAF. IV.] OP THE UNITED SOCIETY. 69

One at Canterbury^ county of Rockingham, in the state of New-
Hampshire, about 12 miles north by east from Concord^ which
contains upwards of 200 members.

One at Enfield, county of Grafton, about 12 miles southeast
from Dartmouth college, in the same state, which contains upwards
of 200 members.

One at Alfred, county of .York, about 30 miles southwesterly
from Portland, in the state of Maine, which contains about 200
members.

One at New-Gloucester, county of Cumberland, about 25 miles
northwest from Portland, same state, which contains about 150
members.

These were all the Societies formed prior to the year 1805.
About the year 1785, the testimony -was withdrawn from the world;
so that for a number of years, there was no public manifestation of
the faith of the Society to those without. The great and impor-
tant work which was then progressing in the Church, rendered
this cessation of the testimony essentially necessary : for while the
believers were gathering themselves into Societies, and establishing
gospel order, they found enough to do, without testifying their
faith to others. As this was an important change, and absolutely
necessary for the protection and permanent establishment of the
Society, it required all the energies of soul and body to accom-
plish it.

It was necessary for the believers, after having received the
faith of the gospel, to prove the efficacy of their faith, to try their
obedience, to establish their principles by the test of actual experi-
ence, and to build themselves on that foundation which could never
be shaken. And even after the order of the Church was gained,
and its general principles established by the revelation of God, it
required some years of persevering faithfulness in every good work,
on the part of the people, to strengthen and invigorate the whole
system. This was essentially necessary in order to render it a
permanent, spiritual institution, calculated to be a pattern and an
example of a true gospel church, a purified body, in which the true
Spirit of Christ could abide, and from which could proceed that
spiritual life and Divine light, which must extend the power of
salvation to all who are willing to receive it.

During this important period, very few were added to their
number. But neiar the close of the 1 8th century, the order of the
Church being established, and the foundation of Zion laid, for the
ingathering of souls, the way was prepared for the sound of the
gospel trumpet to be renewed. Accordingly the testimony be-
gan to be held forth to those whose minds were awakened to ea-
quiry. Many, by reflecting upon the si^xvs ^^ >\v^ ^vKvei's.^^ccv\ ^.«W5«-
paling them with the prophecies o{ scivp\\x\fe, cqii'^^'Ccwkv^^^o^ '^'^^


I


Wf^^M PROGRESS AND PREEENT STA'

cond coming of Christ, were let! to believp that the period to whicli
lliese prn})liecies alluded, had actually arrived, and were earnestly
looking for some visible display of tliat great event,

Soine of these, by vi^ting the Society, and observing the lives
and manners of the people; and es»inining and comparing their
butward fruits with the testimony of Jesus Christ and his apostles,
sod with the lives of the primitive christians; and pei'ceiving that
ibe general conduct ofthe Society was invariably governed by vir-
tuous principles, they were thereby excited to a more particular
enquiry. The result was a full conviction in the minds of many j
ao that from that time to this, there has been a gradual increase of
nuTnbers, more or less, in every society of believerN throughout
the land.

But the greatest and most remarkable increase has been in the
western states. About the beginning of tlie I9lii century, a most
extraordinary revival of religion, commonly cHlled The Kentucky
Jleutra/, commenced in the western slates.* This work wasswifl
and powerful, and exhibited such evident proofs of supernatural
power> that it excited the attention of all classes of people, and,
far a season, bore down all opposition. The extraordinary and
very aslonishingoutward operations which attended that work, are
well knowi],aad have been made the subject ofserlous investigation
an* reflection, in various parts of the (Jniied Slates. The sub-
jects of this wonderful work, besides the marvellous operations of
the power of God upon their bodies, were greatly exercised in re-
markable dreams, visions, revelations and the spirit of prophecy.
In these gifts ofthe spirit, they saw and testified that the great day
pf God was at hand ; that Christ was about to set up his Kingdom
!«! earth, and that this very work would terminate in tlie full ma-
nifestation ofthe latter day of glory.t

This remarkable work extended through several of the western
states, and continued, witii increasing light and power, about four
giears. During the latter part of die year 1804, many ofthe sub-
jects of this mighty work were powerfully impressed with a belief^
ibat another summer would not pass away without realizing a full
dsplay of that great salvation from sin, for which they had been
^ long and so earnestly praying, and which they had nut yet at-
tained, by all the light and power of the revival.

The believers in the eastern states received repealed intelli-
^ nee of this work from the public papers, and well remembering
the prophecy of Mother Ann, concerning the opening of ihe gos-
the western country, they began to look for its speedy liilfll-


CHAP. IV.] OF THB UNITED SOCIETY. 71

ment. This prophecy had often been spoken of, while that coun-
try was the theater of Indian wars ; and it appeared that its fulfil-
ment was now near at band. Accordingly, near the close of the
last mentioned year, the Church at N.Lebanon was impressed with
a feeling to send out messengers to visit the subjects of the revival,
in that country, with a view to search out the state of their minds,
and open the testimony of salvation to them, provided they were
in a situation to receive it. John Meacham, Benjamin S. Youngs
and Issachar Bates were selected for this important mission.

Without any previous acquaintance in the western country, or
any correspondence with the inhabitants, these messengers set out
on the first day of January 1805, on a pedestrial journey of more
than a thousand miles. In the course of this journey they passed
through some trying scenes, in which they were evidently protect-
ed and supported by the overruling hand of Divine Providence.
They arrived in Kentucky about the first of March, visited a num-
ber of places where the spirit of the revival "had prevailed, saw and
conversed with many who had been the subjects of it, and felt some
freedom to declare their mission. They then passed over into the
state of Ohio, and after visiting and ■ conversing with some of the
subjects of the revival in Springfield in this state, they proceeded
on to Turtle-Creek, near Lebanon, in the county of Warren, where
they arrived on the 22d of March.

They were providentially led to the house of Malcham Wor-
ley, a man of respectable character, handsome fortune, and liberal
education, and who had been a leading character in the revival.
Here they felt freedom to declare their mission and open their tes-
timony in full, which Malcham received with great joy, and de-
clared to them that it was the very work which he had been taught
to look for, by the spirit of prophecy. This man had before fre-
quently testified, by the spirit, that the work of the latter day,
which Would usher in the Kingdom of Christ, SS that country,
would commence in this place, and spread between the two Mia^
roies. This place was situated between these two rivers, near
Turtle-Creek; and there the work did, in reality commence, and
he and his family were the first who embraced it.

From thence it spread, and was cordially received by many of
the subjects of the revival, in that neighborhood, and in a short
time, had an extensive circulation through that part of the state,
and soon afterwards extended into Kentucky and Indiana, and
was joyfully received by many, and violently opposed by many
others. Indeed the violence of opposition, in various places where
the testimony was received, was often so great, that nothing short
of Divine Power could have protected the lives of ihssft. \siRs^^»r
gers, and rendered their testimony efCectOdV.

The great opposition which was ia\»^d^!ga\\>aX^^\ffs»^'>'s^^'^^^


NSv


fed

Bfli


BtlESS AND PRESENT STA"

that country, was first insiigated bj the principal leaders of a class
of people wlio had sljled ihcmseivcs Christiam, in con trad isiinc-
tion to all others who professed that name, under dilTerem deno-
JninELtions. Some of these had been dbtinguiahed leaders in the
laic revival ; but instead of advEcncing forward iolo that increasing
work, to which the spirit of the revival had so powerfully dhvcted
ihem, they had set themselves lo building up labemacles on that
illuminated grnund, which had been so eminently distinguished by
the lig] It of the revival. Havingdevised a plan,embracinga universd
■ysleu of religion, which was to blend all denominations into one,
and in which they doubtless expected to hold a preeminent rank,
ihey had assumed the christian name) as an appropriate title to
their profession.

But when they percfived by the spirit of the present testi-
mony, that instead of ruling in earthly tabernacles, on a mount
of eminence, and wielUing the banners of a universal religion,
they must descend into the valley uf humiliation, and humble
'lemselves on a level with the people over whom they had be-
ire presided, conl'ess ihek sins in tiie presence of those whom they
~ ' Idered as greatly llieir inferiors, and take up a final
nst."the lust of tbe Qesh, the lust of thet^ye, and the pride
tif life," and thus renounce forever these most darling pleasures of
nature, they flinched from the dreadful undertaking, and chose ra-
llier to forego the answer of their former prayers for Christ's King-
dom lo come, than to enjoy its blessings at such a kilHng sacrifice.
Hence, afier rejecting so great light, they became the foremott
in opposition, and exerted all their influence to prejudice the minds
of their hearers, and excite them to acts of violence. In this they .
■were but too successful, especially with those who were determin-
ed to have the pleasures of a carnal nature at the risk of their eter-
nal salvation ; and hence arose tliose scenes of opposition and per-
secution whicV followed. These scenes began by opposing, mo-
lesting and di|turbing the believers, in their testimony and wor-
"' ip, by various kinds of mockery, railing and cursing, by threat-
ling, pushing, collaring, and other acts of personal abuse and in-

From these things they proceeded to more extensive acts of vio-
'nce and injury, both of a public and private nature; such as be-
tting their houses in the night, breaking their windows, assault-
g their persons with cltilis and stones, beating and abusing their
Bodies, throwing down their fences in the niglit, and turning ■>>
Battle to destroy their grain, cutting and manghng their fruil trees,
cropping and disiiguring their liorses, and what seemed irill more
faalicious, burning their place of worship, and also their barns and
toA/es, which contained their stores ofhay and grain.
TJiese violent and lawless abuses lM!i(\6i»WLw4'«a>aS!WK


ISifi'KnMl^^J


CHAF. IV.] OF THE UNITED 80C1ETV. 73

terminate the society, or to suppress thdr testimony, more delibe-
rate and more extensive measures were adopted. Legal prose-
cutions were instituted upon the most frivolous pretences ; peti-
tions were drawn up, subscribed and laid before the legislature ;
and finally, to insure success to their measures, subcription papers,
accompanied by malicious reports, and enforced by inflammatory
speeches, were industriously circulated through the country, with a
view to raise forces sufficient to expel the believers from the coun*
try, and thereby effectually to suppress the hated religion and its
galling testimony. The minds of the mhabitants being thus insti-
gated and prepared, it required no legal authority to raise forces
sufficient, in their opinion, to accomplish their object.

Accordingly, on the 27th of August, 1810, a body of five hun-
dred armed men, led on by officers in military array, appeared be-
fore the principal dwelling of tlie Society in Union Milage. This
formidable force was preceded and followed by a large concourse
of spectators, of all descriptions of people, estimated at nearly
2000 in number,* whose object was to witness the mighty conflict,
expected to take place, between a body of 500 armed men, and a
few harmless and defenceless Shakers, Among this great concourse
were many who were friendly to the Society, and whose only wish
was to- prevent mischief and preserve peace; but the far greatest
majority were either entire strangers or decided enemies, who
came to support the military in case of necessity. Many of these
were armed in mob array, some with guns and swords, some with *
l^ayonets fixed qn poles or sticks of various lengths, and others
with staves, hatchets, knives and clubs. These formed a motly
multitude of every description, from ragged boys to lioary headed
men, exhibiting altogether a hideous and grotesque appearance.

But notwithstanding all these threatening and warlike appear-
ances, no confusion appeared among the believers through the
day; but they remained calm, peaceable and undismayed, and
attended to their usual occupations with as much regularity as the
confused circumstances of the day would permit.

This motly multitude having collected, and the troops having
taken their station near the meeting-house, a deputation of 12 men
came forward, headed by a presbyterian preacher ;t and after
making a number of unreasonable and inconsistent demands, (de-
mands with which the leaders of the Society had neither power
nor authority to comply,) they proceeded to state, as the principal
requisition of this extraordinary concourse of armed men, that the
Society should relinquish their prmciples and practice, their public
testimony, mode of worship and manner of living, or quit the coun-

♦ Some supposed the namber to exceed 2000, exclusive of the mU'vlvr] ^c.\«.t.
t Matthew G. Wallace, tvho acted as chief speaker, ^n^ «.^\(^%t«^ \»\« S^«^ w^^sx«sv
fliif mighty Army*

H


IRESS AND I'RESENT 9TAT1

Sy. Tliese estraordinaiy demands were aecompaiued with threats
^violence in ease of rel'iisa}.

The answer of the Society was caJni and mild, but plain and
posilive : That lliey esteemed their faith in tlie gospel denrer ilian
their lives, and were therefore detemiined to maintain it, wlmtei-er
they might suffer as the consequence; and a$ to quitting the coun-
try, they were upon iheir own possessions, whjdi they had pur-
cnased with their own money, and for which they were indehiM
to no man ; that they held no otan's property, and therefore had
a just right to tlie peaceable enjoy meat of their own possessions,
in a free country, and were entitled to those liberties granted by
the laws of their country, including the liberty of conscience.

It cannot' reasonably be supposed that such an extraordinary
assemblage of men, in hostile array, could have been mustered on
such an occasion, had they all been personally acquainted with the
believers. But many of tliem, having prububly never seen a Sha-
iei; had been influenced by false reports, inflammatory speeches
aiid publications of evil minded men; some of the most malicious
and influential of whom were professed preachers of the gospel;
and the more ignorant pact being called out by their officers, to
^sh a growing society of people, whom they verily supposed
^'ere more inhuman than the savages of Uie wilderness, and whose
ilig^on they had been tauglil to believe was far more dangerous
jbn popery or mahometanism, they readily complied with the
flL And unfortunate^ for the honor of civilized sodety, there
'■e generally many found in it, who are always ready to assist in
any riotous proceedings, whenever occasion oRera.

But many who came armed, were astonishingly disappointed
yhen they found that they had no occasion for arms, as they found
& enemy to combat. The calm, peaceable and harmless deport-
fcnt of the believers, together with the expostulations of a few
Ispectable individuals who were friendly to the Society ; and the
' rti shown, and liberty given lo examine the youth and chil-
reported to be held in bondage; the orderly and floiirisiiing
aearance of their school; the marks of conlentiVieni visible in
! countenances of the children, and the decent and orderly ap-
araoce of every thing around them, all conspired to change the
fenlimenls and feelings of iheae ciTtdiclipe warriors to such a de-
^ee, that they all withdrew without committing any abuse, or oc-
jtsioning any contention, except among themselves,*
|~ The enemies of truth being thus defeated in this bold and for-
mdable enlerprize, renewed their exertions lo inflame the public
Bmd, and elTectthe destniciion of the Society, Bui in consequence
Van increasing acquaintance of the inhabitants with the people of


eHAP. IV*] . OF THE UNITED SOCIETY. 76

this Society, by which their lives and manners became more gene-
rally known, together with some signal instances of the interposi-
tion of Divine Providence in their favor, the malicious efforts of
their enemies became, by degrees, less successful. For there are
but few, in the present day, who are willing to persecute an honest
people for their religion, when once their real sentiments are well
known; and, -unhappily, those few are generally found among
tlie most bigoted professors of some false religion : for true religion
never produced any persecutors. But, unfortunately, there are
many inconsiderate mortals to be found in' every civilized country,
who, having no principle of their own, readily become the dupes
of designing bigots, and by them are often urged to acts of violence
wliich would put even savages to shame.

These persecutions in the western states, produced inquiry and
personal examination, which generally led to a knowledge of the
truth : consequently the testimony of truth prevailed, and believers
were multiplied. People of all classes, and various denominations,
the high and the low, the rich and the poor flocked together, and
-seemed equally anxious to hear the testimony and become partak-
ers of the way of life and salvation. In various places the preach-
ers and their people, with equal zeal, embraced the testimony and
iook up their crosses; and among the great numbers who set out to
walk in the narrow way, were many respectable characters of dif-
ferent denominations.

The testimony has mostly prevailed ii^rthe states of Ohio, Ken-
tucky and Indiana, where Societies have been established. There
are at present, five Societies in these three states. But many from
other states have embraced the testimony, moved in, and become
members of these Societies. There are two Societies in the state
of Ohio ; one at Union Village, in the county of Warren, about
four miles west from the village of Lebanon, and 30 north by east
from Cincinnati. This is the oldest and largest Society in the
western states, and contains nearly 600 members. The other is
at Watervliet, on Beaver Creek, in the county of Montgomery,
about 22 miles north from Union Village, and 6 southeast from
Dayton, which contains about 100 members.

There are also two in Kentucky; one at Pleasant Hill, in Mer^
cer county, about 7 miles easterly from Harodsburg, and 2 L south-
westerly from Lexington, which contains between 4 and 50O mem-
bers. The other is at South Union, Jasper Springs, in Logan
county, about 15 miles northeasteriy from RussellvUle, and con-
tains between 3 and 400 members. The fifth and last is at West
Union, Knox county, in the state of Indiana. It is situated on
Busseron Creek, near its confluence with the Waba&K^ ^V^^vs^V^
miles above Vincennes, and coulams yi^nnat^^ o^ *1^5R^ xsv^xsiossc^-
Vbfins are also numbers in various ps^n^ oi ^e,\iTsAft^'^^»^'^'»'^^'^


{


I


have emiiraced ihe failh of tlie Socfety, but whose circiimslances

have not, as jet, atlmitled of their bfing gaihertd inlo a regular

The number nf believers contained in aH (he Societies, both in
the eastern and western states, exceeds 4000. Two thirds, at
least, of titrs nufflbcr h«ve been added since the commencement of
the present century; and the number is gradoally increasing.*
Most of the Societies contain a number of large families ; and each
family is accommodated with one or more large and convenient
dwelling-houses, and with shops and oiit-hoaaes, for the convetti-
ence of carrying on the various branches of business pursued by
tlie &inily. There vs also, in each Society, a house for public
worship, and an ofiice or ofBces for the transaction of public bus-
ness.

The principal employments of the people are agriculture, horli-
tulture, and the various branches of dtyneatie inanutaciitre ; of
tourse the principal articles of consumption among them, are
mostly of their own produce and manufacture; and their various
awhauical branches fiirnish a variety of articles for market.
jj Temperance and chastity, plainness and simplicity, neatness,
Siilustry aiid good economy, are among those virtuows prinriples
which actuate the people of the United Society, in all their lempo-
riil concerns, and which lend greatly to promote the health and

nsperity of the Socleiy. and insure the blessings of Divine Prov*.
ee upon all their limors. And it is found by many years es-
perieocc, that this manner of life is more conducive to the general
health of tlie body, than any other with which we are acquajniedi
and thU experience has also proved, that fewer deaths have occur'
red in the Society, since its establishment, in proportion to the

• IVe are far from feeling a diapoailii
the world j but tlie inquiries wlncli are i

to nsctrtuiii our numbers, and tlie local situation ol tuc Uittcrent bocie-
ties ill our communion, have induced ua to give a stateiDunt of iIipbg
paJ'ticuliirs. We are, as yet, but a small people, and few in number,
(ompnL'Bil with the vualniultituiles enrolled in the calalog:uesnf other
1 1c no m in all one : hut wlien we consider the testimony of Jesus Christ,
lliat, " Strait is the gate, and narrow U the way, which leailedi unto
"life, snd (few lliere be that find it," ivecannut but feel a st-nseof
ihanklihiess fur that mercy of God, which has called us to te number-
ed with tile chosen few i and to ub it is a. matter of more importance
to increase in the pi'inciples nf peace and righteous nes.i, than to in-
crease in numbers. Yet we feel a firm reliance upon Ihe promises oF
God, by the mouth of his prophets : " 1 will multiply them and thev
, "shall not be feivr I will also glorify them, and they shall not h*
J'OTiall. — A little one shall become a tlioiisand, and a small on^ a st rong
"Utioii: Idle Lord will hasten it. in his time." See Iw. li^


ne attronr


(»AP. v.] THE WORSHIP OP GOD. 7T

number of people, than is usual among those who live after the
common course of the world.*


CHAPTER V.

Remarks on the Worship of God: the origin , practice and reaf
sonableness of Dancing ^ as an act of Divine Worship,

The subject of religious worship has excited the attention of all
nations, of all religions, throughout all ages of the world. Per-
haps there is no subject on which there has existed a greater di-
versity of sentiment. Even among those who profess the christian
religion, the great variety of opinions would seem to indicate to
an impartial observer, that almost every different denomination
believed in a different Grod, and expected to be saved by a different
Savior, and to enjoy a different Heaven.

This great diversity of opinion, on a subject of such infinite im-
portance to all, is certainly a most conclusive evidence of the great
deficiency of the Spirit of God among christian professors, and of
their ignorance of his ttne character and most acceptable worship.
In former days, this diversity of sentiment was the occasion of
great contentions and persecutions; but since the principles of
civil and religious liberty have had a prevailing influence, and the
spirit of persecution has lost its tyrannical power, modern chris-
tians profess gi'eat charity and forbearance towards each other;
but still the same difference of religious sentiment prevails, and
there are still many ways of performing religious worship.

When Jesus Christ was on earth, he prayed for his followers,
that they might be one with him, as he was one with the Father.
" As thou. Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
^^ one in us." And again : " that they may be one, even as we
"are one. "t And the apostle Paul to the ' Ephesians, testifies
that there is, " One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
" Father of all.^J If then there is but one God, one Lord, one
faith and one baptism ; and if Christ is one with the Father, and
his people are one with him ; how is it that those who profess to
be his people, at the present day, are so divided into sects and
parties? Surely Christ's true followers cannot be divided; they
are one with him, as he is one with the Father.

Again : Jesus Christ testified, saying, " I am the way, and the

* Toe ancients reckoned a generation to l.ist SO years, iind the inodcros have genernlly
agreed that the life of man has not increa.-ed From the commencement of the Unlied So-
ciety, in the year 1780, up to 1000, the average ages of those who deceased at New Leba-
non and Watervliet, exceeded 50 years. Smee that period to th« present time, the aver-
age ages of all thathnve .leceased in these two societies, amount to about 60 years Tho
tber'>wu«,in the beginnin-^, at least, an ordinary proportion of yovkW^ ^VvVv^^^.w, ^\A<^<ck
many children have sin e been gathered into l\\e So\vvfeV.^ •, -jtX. ovX^j bVciN^, \*.'ts.^'*»^.xsk«
der 10 years, and hul 27 ua Jer 21 years of a«;e
t Jobaxvii. 21,22. % F.^b/vv.S (i.

H2


THE WORSHIP OF GOD.

"triilh, snd the life."* He did nnl say, "I sm one of the wtiys;"
but, " 1 am (Ae ainy." Again hesaid; "God isSpirit; and iliey
" that worshij) him, must worship In spirit and in trulh."t How
then is it possible that the One Spirit of God, which is in Christ,
who teaches us to worship in tpirit ani in trtitU, should at the
same time, leach christians so many diCTerent o])inioiis, and direct
and establish so many different ways of worsliip, as the result of
these dtfTei-cnt opinions i Surely »o true christian, who knows any
thing of the Spirit of God, can ever suppose this to be the case ;
and if oot, then we would ask, who has taught these opinions, and
directed and established all these ways of worship ?

The Spirit of God and of Christ, which is one, necessarily leads
to B tmenesa, both in doctrine and in worship ; but the various
doctrines and modes of worship among the various sects of pro-
fessing christians, instead of uniting souls in the Spirit of Christ,
ptoduce a contrary effect. They tend mucii more to scatter nud
divide; and hence the increasing divisions and separations that are
continually taking place, from lime to time, among those who call
themselves christians,

" In \ain do ihay worship me, teaching for doctrine the com-
mandments of men.'f And so long as their systems of religious
doctrine and worship are of human invention, so long will they
worship in vain. The only worship which is, or ever can be ac-
i!e|)table to God, is that which is performed in obedience (o his
wilt. Therefore, the first object of every rational sout ouglit to be,
to know the will of God, and to do it. " If any man will do hb
* will, he shall know of the doririnc, wjielhcr it l>e of God,"||

In the eariy ages of mankind, after the fall, it dues not appear
that there wns any established order of worahip given ; but, those
whose hearts weie turned to honor the living and tme God, wor-
shipped him by their obedience in those things which he command-
ed t1iem> Thus Enoch, Noah, and the rest of the early patriarchs,
served God ; and thus Abrnham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and the
, prophets, in after ages, served God. And tho ihey frequently
offered sacrifices and burnt-ofierin^ ; yet it was dont? in obedience
to (lie will of God ; otherwise their ofierings could not have been
accepted.

After the children uf Israel were brought oul of the land of
Egypt, they, as a body oi people, a chosen generation, serveiiGod
Ay th?ir obedience to iliose ordinances which God gave to Moses
>r their protection. This was the established worship of the
lAildren of Israel; and this continued with all who were ol>edient
fe the will of God, till the coming of Jesus Christ. A short time

•evioas to the niinjsiration of Jesus Christ, John the Baptist was

tf to preach repentance and bapfw.ti w\\\v wtow, ■and all who


CHAP» v.] THE WORSHIP OP GOll. 79

received his testimony, and were obedient to it, honored God by
confessing their sins and receiving the baptism of water, which
was a figure of the baptism of the Holy Ghost, which was to fol-
low, as the true baptism of Christ.

But during the dispensation of Moses, through all the law and
the prophets, it is worthy of particular remark, that God would
not accept the oiierings of those who were disobedient, but se\-erely
reproved them by tlve mouth of the prophets. ^* Ah, sinful na-
^ tion, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children
*^ that are corruptors I Bring no more vain oblations : to what pur-
<^ pose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me ? saith the Lord:
'^ when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
*'you: yea, when ^'e make many prayers, I will not hear.'-'*
These, and many other severe reproofs, clearly show that God
would not acccept an oflering from those who were disobedient
and sinful, even tho the oflfering, in other respects, were confonrf-
able to his Divine Institution. And so it is in the present day ;
God never will accept any kind of ufTering, nor any manner of
worship, from those who live in disobedience to his will, and
knowingly commit sin.

When Jesus Christ came, he served God by doing his will in
b11 things^ he faithfully finished the work which the Father frave
him to do. The apostles also, and the primitive christians, who
were faithful to obey the law of Christ, worshipped God as they
were moved and directed by his Spirit ; and by their perfect obe-
dience they found justification before God.

But as the Kingdom of Christ was not permanently established
t)n earth, at that time, tho the work of his Kingdom was begun,
and the foundation of his Church was laid, yei the time had not
arrived, nor was the way prepared for a permanent establishment;
therefore no particular order of religious worship could be fully
established in that day; and indeed, if any such had been given,
it would undoubtedly have shared the fate of those institutions
which were given, that is, it would have been shamefully cornipt-
•ed or utterly destro^^ed by the wicked works of Antichrist, which
soon followed. But while the primitive christians stood faithful
in their calling, they assembled themselves together, and worship-
ped God in prayer, vocal or silent; in praise and thanksgiving;
in exhortations to faitlifulness, and in feasts of charity, by which
the}' expressed their lo\*e and union to each other ; in prophesying
and speaking with new tongues, and in such other acts of worship
as they were led into by the operations of the Holy Spirit.

This various kind of worship, excepting perhaps some of the
apostolic gifts, continued, mostly, with all the true wit.c«s3«.%^ ^Vv^
followed the dictates of the Spmt ol T!tu\\v, ^wx^^i^'^'^Viw^

•^•ifa. i. 4, II, 13, 15,


I


E WORSHIP OP GOD.

BDil gloomy rei^ of Anticlirisdaii darkness, until near tlie lime of
Christ's second appearing.

At this time, there were many who fell tliemselves involved in a
night of spiritual darkness, in which ihey saw that the great body
of christian professors, instead of being led by the influence of the
Hoty Spirit, had become the blind and bigoted dupes of human
creeds and human ceremonies, and were led and governed by
worldly wisdom and ecclesiastical policy, under the power of Ati-
ticbrist. Under a sorrowful impression of this trntli, they chose to
distrust their own natural wisdom and Judgment, in regard to
spiritual things, as being liable to lead tnem into ibe same dead
formalities, and to rely on the influence uf the Holy Spirit to guide
and direct them in the w<vship of God, Hence they performed
no acts of worship, excejit such as ihey were involuniwrily moved
to perform by the influence of the Spirit of Life from God.

A number of these faithful souls, having united themselves to-
gether, and being tlius separated from the lifeless formulas and
fruitless ceremonies of human inveniion, and feeling wholly de-
pendent on the f^ft of God, devoted llitinselves to his will, deter-
mined to follow no guide short of a clear manifestation of Divine
light. Hence the light of Divine truth, and the operations of Di-
vine power, increased among them, until they were involuntaiily
letl, by the mighty power of God, t'> go forth and worship in the
dance. The apostolic eil^s were also renewed in their full power;
so that "they spake with new tongues and prajihusied." In these
operations, they were filled with melodious and heavenly songs,
especially while under the iiperalion of dancing. These mvolun-
tary operations of singing and dancing were repeated, from time
to time, in their assemblies, tho often intermixed with other spiri-
tual gifis, till, by Divine Revelation, they became an established
exercise in the worship of God.

Thus ihe exercise of dancing in the worship of God, was brought
to light, not as an exercise of human invention, iuslituted by hu-
man authority: but as a manifestation of the will of God, through
the special operations of his Divine Power. '

This exercise was ejijiressly pointed out by the law and the
prophets, as the peculiar manner of worship to be establislied
among God's people in the latter day. As ihe great and last dis-
play of God's grace to fallen man, and the peculiar mode of reli-
sloiLs worship attending it, were to be introduced through the
female; soitb worthy of remurk, that under the law and ihr
prophets, both the example and the promise were, in a peculiar
manner, preRgured in the female.

Whet) the children of Israel were delivered from their Egyptian

ttf^ge. (which was a striking figure o( l\\e YetJem^tion of God's
^pie n-om [/le dominion of sm,) Moses and \\ve iA\'i\4wwq^\s\'4&


THAP. v.] THE WORSHIP OF GOD. 81

sung unto the Lord a song of thanksgiving for their deliverance.
*^ And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel
" in her hand ; and all the women went out after her, with timbrels
"and with dances."* Also, when Jephtbah returned from his
victory over the children of Ammon, " his daughter came out to
** meet him with timbrels and with dances.'^t So also, after the
victory of David and the Israelites over Goliah and the Philistine
armies, " The women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing
** and dancing."! And again ; at the yearly feast of the Lord in
Shiloh, the daughters of Shiloh came out " to dance in <1ances."
And when the ark of God was removed and established in the city
of David, the occasion was celebrated by the same exercise ; David
and all Israel danced before the Lord.

It appears evident that dancing was practised among the chil-
dren of Israel, on all joyful occasions, ahd especially on obtaining
a victory over their enemies ; which was a figurative manifestation
of the manner in which the true followers of Christ were to be cal-
led to worship God, and manifest their joy in the latter day, for
their victory over the powers of darkness. And as this kind of
worship was acceptable to God in that day, and was the highest
expression of joy and thankfulness that could be used on such ex-
traordinary occasions ^ so it was not only a most striking figure of
the joy and triumph of the saints in the latter day, but an evident
example of the most expressive kind of worship in which they can
unitedly exercise fhe faculties of soul and body, in the service of
God.

In consequence of the captivity of the Israelites in Babylon^
they were deprived of this sacred exercise, and, like the vessels of
the sanctuary, it was profaned by the wicked, in the service of the
Devil. Hence the lamentation of. the prophet Jeremiah ; " The
" joy of our heart is ceased ; our dance is turned into mourning."||
And tho this kind of worship was abused in the idolatrous revels
of the wicked; yet a promise was given that it should be restored
in the latter day. And it is worthy of remark, that this promise is
particularly connected with the promises which allude to the resto-
ration of the church, and the latter day of glory.

Thus saith the Lord, by the prophet Jeremiah ; " Behold, I will
" bring them from the north country, and gather them from the
" coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the
" woman with child and her that travaileth with child together : a
" great company shall return thither."1T Here is a particular allu-
sion to the operations of the gospel of Christ, in his second appear-
ing, which was to be made manifest in calling lost souls from the
various quarters where they were scattered, and ^athetlw^vVNft.vQk\Rk

* JSxod. XV. 30. f Jadg. xi 34 X\ Sam. x^u\, %. >^'Ua.\Si*'* vW.

ffSee Jer. chap xxxu


I


THE WORSHIP OF GOD.

a place of peace and safely, where they were to enjoy the benefits
«f the gospel, in a united body>

Anii again : " They shall come with weeping, and with suppli-
'* rations will I lead them : I will cause them to walk by the rivers (
"of waters in astrait way, wherein they shall nut stumble." This
iinpli«sthat, forsaking the former course of their lives, they were to
come as humble penitents, imploring the mercy of God, and seek'
ing salvation from sin/ By the rivers of materia is to be under-
stood, the refreshing strenms of eternal life, which will cleanse,
piifily and refresh the soul that receives the benefit of them. By
walking in a slrial way, wherein they shall not stumble, iinplies
that the way wilt be so perfectly plain, clear and certain, lliat no
one can doubt the safety of it, nor stumble iuto any darkness or un-
certainty while he keeps in it ; and being a way of perfect riglite-
cusness, il cannot possibly admit any thing that is sinful or wrong.

" Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and
"shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord: — Then shall ilie
" virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together :
" for I will turn thdr mourning Into joy, and will comfort them,
*' and make them rejoice from their sorrow. And I will satiate
" the soul of the priests wiib fatness, and my people shall be satis-
•"' fied with my giMnlness, swth the Lord."

What can be more plain and clear to the point than these de-
clarations of the prophet ? What words could describe with more
certainty, not only the fulness of joy, comfort and sutisfaclion of
those who should come into this plain and perfect way, but also
the divine exercises, and very manner of worship in which they
would be engaged ? The term virgin, signifies purity ; and this
prediction of the prophet was evidently intended to imply, that
those who should be called to this glorious work, and enjoy these
blessed privileges, must be a pure people. Hence, " both young
men and old," beUig characterized by the title virgin, must po»-
sesa purity of heart, and live a virgin life.*

We are aware that a strong prejudice prevails against tite exer-
cise of dancing, as an act of divine worship, in consequence of its
having been, for many ages, perverted to the service of the wicked.
Hence it is coosiderod by many as, at best, but a vain recreation,
much more calculated to gralily the levity of giddy, thoughtless
mortals, and to divert the mind from sober reflections, than to en-
liven the devotional feelings of the heart, and promote the solid
enjoyments of the christian. Therefore they judge it altogether
unreasonable and inconsistent to suppose it can be acceptable to

*ltlsEliB pFCFAlling opinlm IhAtlbif pt«pbacy bllHiled to U\6 retHTn of Ihe Jcw> ^roin
Babjiaiti buLulDiilUn^ Ifirl thv^prophfliJJ Uad a lilcnj iLlluaioD lo IttBI evtAI^ yet Iheir


CHAP, v.] THE WORSHIP OF GOD. 83

God, as an act of diyine worship. But we would seriously ask
whether the same objections will not operate, still more forcibly,
against singing, as an act of divine worship ?

It is a well known fact, that every cieated talent, pertaining to
fallen man, which was designed" for the service of God, has been
perverted and abused to vain, foolish and wicked purposes ; and
perhaps none more generally so than that of singing. Music, uur
connected with dancing, is doubtless much more generally used,
as an amusement of the wicked : besides, as it is the very life of
dancing, it must, at least, be eqOally reprehensible in that view
alone. But tliis is not all. The talents of poetry and music, ex-
clusive of their connection with dancing, are still far more abused
by being devoted to base purposes.

Is there a single base passion or evil propensity, in human na-
ture, which has not been more or less excited, indulged and grati-
fied by means of poetical and musical compositions ? How often have
the angry passions been roused by war stongs, and urged mankind
to mutual butchery, blood and slaughter? How often have the las-
civious passions been excited and indulged by obscene songs ! —
How often is morality set at nought, and piety and religion abused,
yea, and the name of God and all sacred things blasphemed by
the wicked, in their profane songs f How often has vice been ex-
alted, and virtue depressed — ^yea, how often has the virtuous mind
been robbed of its innocence, and villany emboldened in crimes,
by songs calculated and used for those very purposes ! Do not
the revels of drunkards and profane swearers often owe their ex-
cesses to their bacchanalian songs, as well as to their bottles ?

In short, have not thefts, robberies and murders, and indeed
every species of villany, been much more excited and encouraged
by music than by dancing ? And yet music has been encouraged
and practiced, as a part of divine worship, by nearly all denomi-
nations, while dancing has been condemned and excluded. But
upon what principle ? Why truly upon this ; that dancing cannot
be an acceptable mode of worship, because it is practiced in the
carnal recreations of the wicked ! Thus man assumes the right
of deciding in what manner God shall be worshipped! But will
God acknowledge such a decision as this ? And must the follow-
ers of Christ, in compliance with this decision, bury a portion of
their talents in the earth, which were given for the service of God,
because the wicked have profanely abused such like talents, in the
service of the Devil ? Does such a decision appear honorable to
the wisdom of man, even upon the supposition that he has a right
to decide in what manner God shall be worshipped ? Is it not
rather a glaring evidence of the total insufficiency of huaiaw ^^^^g^
city to regulate those things which beVoi\^\o\yvNYW^N^\^^!a«C^

God has created man an active/mte\\\^eTvX\i€\\v^^^'aR«&«^


I


TH& WORSHIP OF GOB.

portant powers and faculties, capable of serving himself according
»to liis neiils und circuni stances ; and lie is required to devotetheae
powers and faculties to the service of God. To devote only a
pan lu the service of God, is to render an imperfect service, which
God never will accept. Man is required to love God with ail bis
heart, suid, mind and strength.* Every faculty must therefore
be devoted to the love of God; hut it is in vtun to talk of loving
'..God with all the faculties, without serving him with all the facuU
^Jties; for no man who truly loves God with all his faculties, can
frain from devoting oU to his service ; and he who is unwilling to
evote all to the service of God, can never devote all to his love.
God has created nothing in vain. The faculty of dancing, as
;ll as that nf singing, was undoubtedly created lor the liunor and
^ sry of the Creator ; and therefore it must be devoted to liis ser-
vice, id order to answerthat purpose. God has created the tongue
of man, and endowed it with the faculty of speech, by which he
is enabled to manifest the desires and fedings of his mind. He has
bIso created the bands and the feet, and enabled them to perform
itieir functions, in the service of the body. And sbalj these ira-

gsrtant faculties, or indeed any of the powei^ and faculties of man,
; active in his own service, or in the service of sin, and yet be
idle in the service of God? Or shall the tongue alone bennploy-

. ed in the service of God, while alt the other faculties of the body
are idle, or otherwise employed? employed too, perhaps, in some
evil, or at best, some useless jmrpose.

The parable of the unfaithful servant, who buried bis talent in
the earth, is well calculated to show that God requires of man the
faithful improvement of his talents; and it must hence appear
evident, that lie who will not improve his talents, cannot be accept-
ed of God, nor find an entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Han is made up of certain active powers and faculties which were
created of God, and which must be employed in some active aerr
vice, or remain idle. AVhen these faculties are exercised in divine
worship, God is honored and glorified by them; but when they
are exercised in the service of sin and Satan, then God b dishon-
ored thereby- If therefore the soul who sulTers these talents to
rentain idle and unimproved, is to be excluded from the Kingdom
of Heaven, what must be tiie portion of him who employs iliose
talents in ie service of the Devil, which were given him for the
service of God?

God requires the faithful improvement of every created talent.
"O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice
"of triumph. — Sing unto the Lord a new song; sing his praise in
*'lhe ct>nj;regaiion of the saints. Let the children of Zion be

^*Joy/al ia their King; let them praise hia name in the dance."!


CHAP, v.] THE WORSHIP OF GOD. 85

These expressions of the inspired Psalmist are worthy of serious
consideration. Do they not evidently imply that the Divine Spirit
which dictated them, requires the devotion of all our faculties in
the service of God ? How then can any |)eople, professing religion,
expect to find acceptance with God by the service of the tongue
only?

Since we are blessed with hands and feet, those active and use-
ful members of the body on which we mostly depend, in our own
service, shall we not acknowledge our obligations to God who gave
them, by exercising them in our devotions to him ? Or shall we
act the part of dishonest debtors, who deal in good words and fair
speeches, instead of repaying what they justly owe ? Words arc but
sounds uttered by the tongue; and if uttered in truth tind sincerity,
they may express the ideas and feelings of the heart ; but the heart,
without the assistance of the tongue, is capable of expressing to
God all that we can express by the tongue.

God indeed looks at the heart; and altho some may plead the
merit of devoting their hearts to God, and urge that he can be sufii-
ciently worshipped by such a devotion, without the exercise of
dancing, or any other exertion of the bodily faculties, not even
excepting the tongue ; yet the heart must be but feebly engaged
in the worship of God, when all the active powers of the body are
idle. There is too powerful a connection between tlie body and
mind, and too strong an influence of the mind upon the body, to
admit of much activity of mind in the service of God, without the
co-operating exercises of the body. But where the heart is sincere-
ly and fervently engaged in the service of God, it has a tendency
to produce an active influence on the body.

" From the abundance of the heart the moiuh speaketli." So
also from the heart proceeds that fervency of spirit by which we
worship God in the dance, and by which we show forth the ac-
knowledgments of the soul to Him who gave us life and activity.
The devotion of tlie heart, which includes all the feelings and in-
tentions of the mind, is indeed, absolutely necessary at all times
and under all external exercises. For a thousand adorations of
prayer and praise, pronounced by the tongue, would be but empty
sounds, without tlie devotional feelings of the heart, which must
finally test the sincerity of the worshipper, in the sight of God.
So also, with regard to the exercise of dancing, or any exercise of
the bodily powers, they must proceed from tlie heart, or they cau
never find acceptance before God. "

As union is the distinguishing characteristic of the true followers
of Christ ; so it is an essential part of the worship of God. Where
a body of christians are united in spirit, they caivuot Vwx.^-^^^-^^^-
culiar blessing when united in their TeV\^\ovv& ^<eso>L\aos. ^<i vk^w-
der this the more perfect, a umforimly o^ e^"5XQSaft v& YsR5yess?^^^

I


THE WORSHii' OP COD.

Indeed llic inie union of the spirit Itasu direct tendency to produce
a hHrinonious nrdcr, in the exercises o{ divine woraliip. As Christ's
rollairers are one with him, as lie is ane with the Father; so,
where all are united in one spirit, to worship God according to liis
own appointment, the^ will be engaged in » unlTorni exercise.
Such is the harmony ol'ilie heavenly ivurld, and such nnist be the
hnrmony of the christian church.

]t will doubtless be granted, that no one can worship God for
another; that each' one must exercise his own faculties in the ser-
vice of God, and not depend on the exercise of another's faculties.
And hence the necessity of a hJirnionious qnily in tlivine worship,
that each individual may participate in the united devotions of the
whole body, and iniilually contribute to the strength, and shnre in
the harmony of all. Uiiion is the sitenglh of G(jd's people, and
the glory of divine worship. Thus imited in spirit, and inspired
with divine love, a whole assembly can nuive in harmonious order^
and devote the active powers of soul and liody to the Giver of all
good, while they chant their songs of adoration to their Redeemer,
ind " praise his name in the dance." What, among all the v-arie-
nf religious devotions, by which mankind attempt to worship
! Eternal God, is more calcnlaied to inspire the soul with heaven-
1y sensations, and give us an idea of the worship of angels ! How
far from this haiinonious worship, are the dull attempts of a con-
gregation, wherein hut a small poriton of the people are engaged,
while the far greater part are entirely silent, inactive and uncon-
cerned .'

Who can behold an assembly of people thus united, and thus

lercised in the worship of (jod, and nut perceive that they are

■emed by one spirit? And is not this ihe one virgin body of

rial to whom the promise alluded? "Then shall the virgin

ajoice in the dance, both young men and old logetlier.""

re both young and old, under the character of the virgin, are

iforied from their sorrow and "rejoice in the dance." Hci-e is

ck-Bnsed sanctuui'y; and here every vessel, or in other words,

lery talent which God ev<T gave bis people, tho defiled by the

ieJced, for many ages, is now purified and restored, in this Uvlug

imple, the church of the bittcT daj/.

How clearly this was prefigured by the cleansing of the profan-
vessels of the Jewish temple, and restoring them to the second
iple! Here the second temple is manifested. In this temple is
(Vealed the ark alluded to in John's vi3ion,T and we have found
dancing of David and all Israel before the ark,
that day, was typical of the tiue worship of God, under the
-lel dispeasatioo. Then how much giieaier cause have the
followers of Christ, in the preseni day , \o dcvov; all tlicir ac-


CHAP, v.] THE WORSHIP OF GOD. 87

tive powers to the worship of God, before this spiritual ark which
is the real substance.

As the predictions of the prophets, concerning these thinsfs^
could only be in pd^t fulfilled, in Christ's first appearing, therefore
he renewed these predictions, and the promises contained in them.
His parable of the prodigal son, alluded expressly to this subject.
In this is represented, in a striking light, the state o( fallen man.
Having ^< wasted his substance in riotous living,' ' havinir strayed
from Gtyd, and abused that light and wasted those talents which his
heavenly Father had given him, in doing his own will and sacking
his own pleasures, he at length conies to his senses, feels his pov-
erty and laments his folly. Having returne<l from ftHHling the
swine, quitted the filthy companions of his wickedness, and the
miserable gratifications of hts carnal nature, he confesses his sins
and begs his Father's forgiveness : And being stripped oC his old
garments of sin and uncleanness, and clad with a robe of righteous-
ness and purity, there is " music and dancing/'

But observe the conduct of the elder son : this mtutic and daH"
cing is highly offensive to him ; and in his angtT, he refuses to
enter in and partake of the general joy of his father's house, exalts
his own righteousness and goodness, condenms his prodigal brothr
er, and accuses Ills Hitlier ot mjustice.

This character clearly points out the formal professor of religion,
who readily acknowledges the manifestation of God in a former
day, and strictly adheres to the forms and ordinances of a past dis-
pensation, in which he places all his trust, without regarding any
present manifestation of divine light, except with feelings of jeal-
ousy and opposition. And tho he may have been faithful for a
season ; yet, being regardless of any increase of righteousness in
his own soul, he" loses the Spirit of God, and settles down upon a
form of godliness without the power. Such are ever more ready
to reject any increasing display of God's work, than those who
make no profession of religion.

Jesus Christ testified against the conduct of the high professors
of religion in his day, who pretended great zeal in keeping the law
given in a former dispensation ; but at the same time, rejected his
testimony : " Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and harlots
*^ go into the Kingdom of God before you."* But had they been
willing to receive his testimony, and enter into the increasing light
of his Kingdom, they would not have been excluded : he even
^* entreated them to come in ;" but they refused ; as appears evi-
dent from his lamentation over Jerusalem: *'How often would I
" have gathered you, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under
*' her wings, and ye would not !"t And wherefore d\d vW^^^'s*
reject Christ, while, at the same litue,l\\e^ \iXo^vi^^^t\%>\0aiRS5S.Vw

♦ .Vaff. xxi. 31. ^ KaU. xxm. y, .


BE WORSHIP OP GOD.

ihe law of God ? The aposlle Paul says, " They being ignorant of
" God's righteousness, and goin^ about to establish their own
" rig-hieousness, have not stibmitled themselves unto the righteoiis-
" ness of God."" How dearly this is exemplified in the elder son,
who condemned his Other's righteousness, and extolled his own !

As the elder son was angry at bis father's proceedings, and would
nol come in, it ap]iears evident that, whatever obedience he might
formerly have yielded, he still possessed the carnal mind, which it
" enmity against God." Therefore, in applying this character to
the formal professor, we may ^th propriety and justice remark,
that whatever degree of confidence he may place in liis former
righteousness, he never can find liis union wiln the Father, unless
he is willing to unite with the increasing hght of truth, wherever
it is made manifrst ; and tho the Father should ofliir him all his
possessions, he could never enjoy them so long as be continued in
disunion with the Giver.

The parable of the Pharisee and the publican, who went up into
the temple to pray, is designed to represent the same characters.t
As the Pliarisee, like the elder son, justified himself in the observ-
ance of formal ceremonies; so the publican, like the prodigal,
condemned lumself.and Uecged for mercy: therefore, being the

■ jtBOre honest, lie was "justified rather than the other;" yet neither
r isihuta could be justified, as to their original characters.}

[ ■ From such aelf-juslilied Pharisees and professors of religion,
arises the greatest opposition against any new manifestation of the
light of God. The reason is obvious; they fix iheir sense upoa
ihe'work of God in some post dispensation, instead of pressing
forward to find the liglit of God before them. Tims the Scribes
and Pharisees of that day, had their sense so firmly fixed to the
law of Moses, as.the foundation of their hope, and the ground of
ihdr justification, that they couldnut hearken to the voice of Jesus

• Bora. .. a. 1 B^. L'.it ..Hi. iO.

* Modern Pliiirisees linve Ero*n mure arlfill in tlieir hypocrisy tha»
Ihose of micient times. Finding' tliat tlie honest confession of the |>ub.
licun was more uccqiuble to Ood llisn tlte boastini; of lliQ Pharisee,
they have learned to couiileHcIt his clianurler by borrowinghis language
lo cover their hypocrisy. Tlieir lungusge now is, " Gud lie mrrclfui <o
ue a tinner. I am a poor sinner — I can do nothing of myself — I rely

■ wholly on the m^rcy of God — The atoning bloitd of Chrlit is nil my de-
r . pendencefbrBilvBlion,"&c. Andyelnt uie same time, tliey will supcr-
t. Kitlously maintain their old forma, and slriEtly iidhete to their luiman

invented creeds and ceremonies, under a profiaslon of cbristianity, while
they continue to follow tlie course oftlic worhl, and walk in the ways of
sin ; as tho the liypocriticiti contession of being sinners, were sufficient
to pra|Htiate ihe tavor of God, Mid recommend them to hig mercy, with-
■ 'lit acfiixlly fnrsakinf; \]k\t s'laa. Thus they are, by profession, chri^titm
■■■■lanei's. But sue"! hrpocritea otiglit lo remeirioes ^biA, " He that
mitteth ain, /a of [lie Devil." fee 1 John \Vi, 8,


M


CBAP. yj THE WORSHIP OP GOD. 88

Christ, " who is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
** that believeth j" especially as they found that his righteousness
required a greater cross against the fallen nature of man, than was
required by the law. And even to this day, the Jews, as a people,
have never acknowledged Jesus Christ as the promised Messiah.

The same kind of conduct is observable, in a greater or less
degree, among the formal professors of the various denominations,
at the present day. After having lost the spirit and power of their
religion, by. the indulgence of their corrupt propensities, they settle
down into a lifeless form, upon some fixed, external principles,
established by their first founders, without ever looking forward
for any further increase, unless it be that increasing indulgence to
the fiesh which tends to diminish the cross, and assimilate their
religion with the principles and spirit of the world. And so strong-
ly opposed are such professors to every thing that has any appear-
ance of that light and power of God which requires a greater cross
against the pride and lust of man, that we generally find the great-
est opposition against dancing, as an act of divine worship, to
proceed from professors of this description. Yet such characters
will generally manifest great zeal for that ceremonious and formal
worship which is performed by the tongue only.*

Thus while they are ofi^nded at the increasing work of God,
they still maintain the character of the elder son, who was unre*
conciled to the merciful displays of his father's kindness and chari-
ty. And yet the same call of the everlasting gospel is extended
to them, as freely as to their more prodigal brethren, who, if they
are not less sinners, are less blinded by traditional forms of goUli-
ness, and therefore have no cloke for their sins. Therefore all
are invited upon equal terms : ^' Come in and share the fatted calf,
" the feast of the Lamb ; be stripped of your oLd garments of sin,
'^ and be clad with the robes of righteousness : Come in and rejoice
<^ with your repenting, prodigal brother, and worship God in the
^* dance.''

* See Matt. xv. 8.

13


PART III.

The Nature of God and his Works of Creatiok-


CHAPTER 1.

The Attributes of God$ their harmony and consistency manifeS'
ted in God^s dealings toioards his creatures: the idea o/* chris-
tian sinners wholly inconsistent vnth these Attributes.

Much learned labor has been spent in vain attempts to search
out the nature and character oi God, and to pry into the attributes
of the Almighty ; as tho poor sinful man, in his fallen and deprav-
ed state, were able, by his own wisdom and understanding, to trace
out those qualities which constitute the Almighty God ! ^^ Canst
^^ thou by searching find out God ? Canst thou find out the Al-
^' mighty to perfection ?"*

The infinite and invisible God can be known only through the
medium of Divine Revelation. As far as God in his wisdom sees
fit to reveal his true character to man, so far it may be known,
but no further. And it is certainly most reasonable and consistent,
as well as most just and equitable, that a Being who is infinitely
just and righteous, should make the greatest displays of himself to
those who, by faith and obedience, approach the nearest to him.
Therefore it is not to the learned Theologist, immured in the deep
recesses of philosophical speculation, that God deigns to revesil
himself in his true character; but to those who deny themselves of
all ungodliness and every^ worldly lust, who walk in the paths of
righteousness and peace, who are not merely knowers of his word>
but doers of his work. Such, and such only, have a just right to
look to God for a true knowledge of his Divine character ; and
such can, with humble confidence, rely on a faithful display of
his goodness, without involving themselves in the dark mazes of
scepticism, by a pertinacious confidence in their own wisdom, and
discernment.

To have just conceptions of the real character of that Divine
Pkinciple or Being whom we call God, it is necessary to under-
stand the nature of his attributes, which stand in perfect correspon-
dence with each other, and which are fully displayed in liis Word
and Works, and clearly manifest his Divine perfections, " For
" the invbible things of him from the creation of the world are
^^ clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made.^t

It is certainly most reasonable and consistent with infinite Wis-
dom, that the image and likeness of God should be most plainly
manifested in man, who was made the most noble part of the na-
tural creation. Accordingly we re^id, ^^ Nxv^ ^q^ ^t^^^ \jrN. ^»-


^2 THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD. [pART in.

" make man in our image, after our likeness. — So God ci'eaied
" man in liis own imagv; in the image of God creaied he liim ;
« male and female created he thera.'' Hence it must appear evi-
dent that there exists in the Deity, the likeness of male and female,
forming the unit; of that creative and good principle from wbien
proceeds the work af Fatlier and Mother, manifested in Puioer to
create, and Wiadam to bring forth imo proper order, all the works
of God. If it mere not so, then man, who was created male and
female, as father and mother, could not, with a«y propriety, be
sEkid to show forth (he image and likeness of God. But the mani-
festation of Father and Mother in the Deity, being spiritual, does
not imply two Persons, but two Incompreliensiblrs, of one sub-
stance, from whom proceed all Divine power and life.*

The Almighty is manifested as proceeding from everlasting, aa
the first Source of all power, and the fountain of all good, rhe
Creator of all good beings, and is the I^tgilnal Father; and
ihe Holy Spirit of Wisdom, who was the Co^Btrrhr .with him,
from everlasting, is the t^TEfuvAL Mother, the bearing Spirit of
all the works of God. This is according to the testimony of her
own inspiration.

" Doth not Wisdom cry ? — She crieth at the gates, at the entry
" of the city : — " Unto you, O men, I call ; and my voice is to the
" sons of men. Hear ; for I will speak excellent things ; and the
" opening of my lips shall be right things. I love them that love
" me; and those that seek me early shall find me. — I lead in the
« way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment. —
" The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
" works of old. I was ael up from everlasting, from the beginning,
" or ever the earth was, — Wlien he prepared the heavens, I was
" there : when he set a compass upon the face of the deep : when
" he established the clouds above ; when he strengthened the foun-
" tains of the deep : when he gave the sea his decree, that the
" waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed
" the foundations of the earth : then was I by him, as one brought
" up rtijh him; and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always be-
" fore him." And again: "Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
" and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay
" hold upon her; and happy is every one that reiaineth her."t

The attributes of God are manifested by the light of Divine rev-
elation, and confirmed by the testimony of eternal truth, through
Christ, in this day of his second ap^tearing, and may be stated in
the following order.

tJlin the miKulioe f.o/er, ■■ iiUbliihed bj •"guocil ™ ,i>'lhX 'tiXjVl'r.'hr fiiurib
f Sc4 finr, ttmp. liii. irnl chop iii. 11, IS. U.


^JM


1


CHAP. I.] THE ATTRIBUTES OP GOD. 93

1. Power. It is necessary, first of all, that God should possess
power sufficient for self-existence and independence, and for the
accomplishment of all his works. His power is infinite, and there-
fore fully competent to perform any thing consistent with his na-
ture. " He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established
" the world by his wisdom."*

2. Wisdom. Tn all the operations of God, Wisdom stands
connected with Power : for without the corresponding operation
of Wisdom to direct and bring forth into proper order, nuthing
could ever be brought to perfection. ^The Lord by wisdom hath
^^ founded the earthy by understanding he hath established the
** heavens. '^f Wisdom appears evident in tlie beauty, order, har-
mony and perfection of all God's works. ^< O Lord, how mani-
^ fold are thy wot ks ! m wisdom hast thou made them all."]:

3. Goodness. The goodness of Grod is abundantly manifest
in its operations towards mankind. ^^ The earth is full of the
" goodness of the Lord."|| All the operations and works of God
ai-e good, being planned in perfect wisdom, and every way adapt-
ed to the respecilve purposes for which they were intended.

4. Light. " God is light, and in him is no darkness at all."*]
Without light, God could never be known to exist ; and it is by the
operations of light that his works arc seen, and his goodness made
manifest to his creatures.

5. Holiness. The holiness of God is abundantly declared in
the scriptures. " O Lord, who is like thee, glorious in holiness ?"**
Holiness is, in the highest degree, expressive of the perfect purity
of the Divine Nature. Nothing unholy or impure belongs to God ;
and therefore nothing of that nature can ever proceed from God,
or be owned and accepted by him.

6. Love. God's love is abundantly manifested towards his
creatures in the kind dispebsations of his Providence, through
which they receive all their temp<ira] blessings; and also in the
merciful displays of his goodness and tender compassion, whence
flow all their spiritual privileges. "God is love; and he that
" dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him."tt

7. Righteousness. " The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
" and holy In all his works. Righteousness and judgment are the
" habitation of his throne. — The heavens declare his righteous-
" ness."JJ Righteousness is ascribed to God, throughout the scrip-
tures, as a distinguishing attribute, and is peculiarly expressive of
the perfect uprightness of his Divine character.

These seven are the only inherent attributes which constitute
the very nature and essence of God, as revealed to man, and from
which all others proceed.

* Jer.x. 12. t Prov. iii, 19. t V»a. t\v,'i-V. V^^*- -twvKw^^.

^1 Joho i, 5. ** Exod. xvt 11. tt 1 Jo^<^ *^^- ^^- \%^%%.x^Vvv.*i..V wAo^'^ v\


THE ATTRIBUTES OP GOD.


All other attributes or principles, with every thing pertaining to
Godliness, tnuy be con^ilered as com preli ended in, and proceeding
a these seven. Justice, tho an essential attribute of God, is so
malely connected with his Bighteniisness, that ihey, in eflfect,
form but one. Rtghteougne»g, is that which is inherently right
and equitable in God. Justice is a display of that which is right
.and equitable towards his creatures. Merry is also an esseriliai
attribute; but it proceeds from goodness -And lore; for wherever
■God, from Iris infinite goodness and love, administers his gifts in

J Mndet compassion to the needs of his creatures, there is a display

. otmerct/. Understanding and knowkdge are the operations of

^tlfisdont and light, without which there coiiUl be no uoderstand-
*ng nor knowledge.

As to the terms oinnipoteitce, ontmicience and omaiprnaence, so
much use-t among theologists, and which ihey consider as terms
expressive of Divine Attributes, it may be proper to remark that,
omnipotence is only another name (av Ahnighti/ Poreer; and that
OMHfVfence impllfcs B knotuledgp. of all things, and of course, jiro-
ceeds from Wisdom and Light. Omnipresence carinot properly
be called an attribute. Undoubtedly, " the eyes of the Lord are
" in every place, beholding the evil and the good ;" but God's eg-
aenlial preaewe cannot be in any evil work. Some tidk of OuJ*s
infinity, eternity and unchange.ableness, as essential attributes ;
but this seems to be a distinction in terms, more calculated tn be-
Itilder the mind than to enlighten the understanding. By a little
feflection we may easily perceive that, if " God la infinite, eternal
" and unchangeable in his Being," which all must admit, then all

'"'his attributes must, of necessity, be infimle, all must be elemaJ,

^ and all unc^a;^eni/e; and hence arises his independence of all

pother beings, and his sovereignty over all.

' Truth is the declarative attribute of God, which proceeds from
all his other attributes, and by which ihey are all declared and

I made manifest, and without which man could know nothing of God.

^ Thy word is truth,'" In Jesus Christ, the Sou of-God, who is
iie Truth, was manifested the real character of God : "For in him
^ilwclleth all the fulness of the Godhead (or Deity) bodily. "t

Vi'hat is, in him was manifested the very nature of those attributes,

and in this sense, God dwelt in him. We read that, " Our God is

a consuming fire."| This includes every attribute of God; and

, these, being all manifested by the truth, operate like (ire, and will
finally consume and destroy whatever is contrary to the nature of
fiod. It is also declared in the scriptures, that " God is a Spirit ;"
^ rather, according to the original, God is Spirit. All his attri-
'"" re spiritual: He is thai infinite and eternal Fountain whence
's ail spiritual blessings to a\\ bis Mettlvices. [lence ,


tc.


'"Jgg


CHAP. I.] THE ATTRIBUTES OP GOD. 95

the only proper object of spiritual worship. " God is Spirit j and
they that worship him, must worship in spirit and in truth."*

It is worthy of notice that the seven attributes^ already mention-
ed as inherent in the nature of God, have been particularly figured
out, in many remarkable instances, both in God's works of creation
and providence. All God's works are a manifestation of these
attributes ; all scripture and divine revelation bear testimony to
them. They are " the seven Spirits of Gody^ which were repre-
sented by John, as " seven lamps of fire burning before the throne.^t
It is by the operation of these only, that any thing of God can be
seen y and without tJiese, nothing could ever be discovered or
known of him : for no other light ever comes from God, but through
the operation of these seven attributes. Hence the foundation of
the.number seven^ so often used in scripture, in representing the
works of God and sacred things.

^^ And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne stood a Lamb
^^ as it had been slain, having seven horns and severi eyes, which
" are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth." J It is
well known that the Lamb is a title which, in the language of scrip-
ture, is often applied to Jesus Christ. A horn, in the figurative
style of the prophets, signifies power or strength. These seven
horns of the Lamb represent the power or strength of those seven
Spirits or attributes of God, by which all his works are performed.
The seven eyes represent their spiritual light and discernment.
This vision of John clearly shows that in Christ, is manifested the
brightness of his Father's glory ; and that in and through him, are
displayed all those attributes, by which he is able to reveal llie
true nature and character of God, and to declare his name and
perform his work through the world; and in this manner, and for
this purpose, are '< the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the
" earth."

By this we may see, not only that all the manifestations of God
to man are revealed in and through Christ ; but also that all the
gifts and blessings which come from God, and are sent forth to
man, arc evidently the operations of the spirit and substance of
these attributes: and certain it is, that nothing which is inconsis-
tent with these attributes can ever flow from God.

John saw, in vision, the Son of God walking in the midst of
" seven golden candlesticks,'^ and holding in his right hand " seven
" stars. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches ;
" and the sevej^ golden candlesticks are the seven churches.'^lj
This vision has a direct reference to the same foundation upon
which these seven churches were built, and upon which the true
church of Christ must ever be built. Stars are emblematical of
the heavenly light and glory of the ai\^elvc otd^\,\4\v\0cv\^VssfflA^^

*Jobniv,34. fKeir.^v,5. + Rev. v, 5. \\^ee'R*'?.\A'iA«k>kX3k«. ^tA.-.^vvA*


W.Q6 THE ATTRIBUTES OP GOD, [pART III.

and establislied, uDder Uie government of Christ, on ihese sevcti
principles. Tile Son of God, being in possession of tlie seven
Spirits or altribirtea of God, and having power and dominion over
the seven churches of Asia, whiclt were nourished and supported
fty tliese atliibutes, may, bj a figurative representation, be said lo
^old the seven stars in his right hand, and to Wiilk in the midst of
"Tie seven golden candlesticks.

The neven »eal», tvhicb were opened by ilie Lamb, have their

Ibundation in these seven attributes, or Spirits of God : for the true

j^lure and operation of these attributes were never known imtil

J jtvealed by tiie Lamb. The seven angels with ihe iKvenirumjitla ;

I ,^d also the seven angels with the seven- vials of ihe wrath of God,

.all show the same order which appears in all God's works.*

work of God, from ilie beginning, all came forth in Ibis
order. The heavens and lite earl)i were created in six days, and
were ended and blessed and sanctified on the seventh; because
on that day God rested from all his work- And [hu$ were the

i seven days of the week established by the Creator, conformable
,to the seven attributes of the Deity. The sacred institution of the

,• .^bbBth,by which llie seventh day was set apart and sanctified by

l.pivine authority', as a day of blessing and rest, was not wily a
Standing memorial to the chosen tribes of Israel, of God's having
rested I'rom liis work on that day ; but it was also figurative of
the final blessing and I'est of the saints, which will be edected by
the Itnal display of God's aitribuie of Righteousness and Justice,
when "the righteous shall shine forth as the sun, in ilie Kingdom
" of their Father. "t

Finally : Man, both in his niitural and moral constitution, was
created in the same order. His five natural senses, together with
|)ie two faculties of speech and understanding, make seven, and
^nstiuite him a natural maji. These seven natural facuhles are
■e or less perceptible throughout the animal creation. In the
no last, however, man evidently stands preeminent ; yet these
faculties are all natural and corporeal, depending on the life of tlie

' animal borly, and the constitutional soundness of the paits they
occupy.^ But man, in his moral constitution, is abo endowed
with seven rational powers or faculties, corresponding willi llie

^ Thut these seven fHculties arc natural ani! corporeal, is evident from
Uie circumstance thiit each one is separately liable to be mnve or less

I effected, and even ilea troy ed, by a disorgan'tzatioii uf Ihat pari of the
r liuman body in which lliut particular fuciilly is seuted. A man may
k^te hia heariiie- by the disor^nlzation, or disnider of the cars ; he
K^lay alau lose hi9 sight by a disorder of the eyes j and so also of the
^^aities of feeling, tasting, smelling and speech ; and even Iris uu-
jieaianding depends on a proper oi-ganiiation of tUe brain. Hence, by
a disorder of the bruin, many lose t-beiv UTvitvaVmvCivo^, OT.4.\it(»TOt
'i.-^ane, delirious or crazy.


CHAP. I.] THE ATTRIBUTES OF GO]>. 97

seven attribotes in Deity. These being implanted in him, accord-
ing to the spiritual orcter of his creation, properly constitute his
rational soul, and bear witness of the true nature of the Creator.
In this sense, man was created in the image and likeness of God,
and was constituted God's representative in the natural creation.
This is agreeable to the testimony of Solomon : ^^ Wisdom hath^
*^ builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars."* This'
evidently alludes to the seven rational powers of man, who was
eminently designed to be the house or habitation of Wisdom.

Thus man, in his sphere of action, became as God, capable of
exercising to good purposes, and to the extent of his limited capa-
city, all the attributes of God, with which he was endowed by his
Creator; and also capable, by the perversion of his natural facul-
ties to base purposes, of darkening and debasing his moral attri-
butes, and thus rendering his rational soul subservient to his ani-
mal propensities. Herein he was made independent, as to his
choice of good and evil, being left as free to act within the narrow
limits of his sphere, as God his Creator. Hence arose his ac-
countability. For, being the offspring of God, from whom he re-
ceived his natural and moral faculties, and by whom he was pla-
ced as God's representative on earth, it was absolutely necessary
that he should improve those powers and faculties to the honor
and glory of his Creator, and in obedience to his will, as the only
means of gaining honor to himself, and of answering the end of
his creation.

God having constituted man a reasonable, intelligent being,
capable of knowing and doing his will, addresses him as such.
" Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord : — If ye
" be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land.''t
Man is not required to believe nor practice that which is contrary
to the plain and obvious dictates of right reason. Right reason
has its foundation in the acknowledged attributes of God ; other-
wise it is not right reason : for no one can with propriety call that
riff At which is known to be contrary to rigJUeovsness,

In all the works of God there is a perfect consistenc}', and all
his manifestations to man are perfectly reasonable. The opera-
tions of all his attributes are displayed in the most perfect harmo-
ny and correspondence with each other. "It is impossible for
"God to lie:" for he is "a God of truth, and witliout iniquity,
" just and right is he."f It is therefore impossible that he should
devise any plan, fix any decree, or perform any work which would
operate against any one of his attributes. His attribute of Power
can never operate against that of Wisdom, His Justice^ which
necessarily proceeds from Righteousness, can never be sacrl^c^^d
to mercy y nor can mercy be sacrificed Xo justice* ^^x ^'as^V>s»

K


Power, wlih all his sovereignty and independence, or any tiling
pertaining to his thuracter, ever operate against Tfutli, Goodaesa,
Ughi, Holinegg or Looe.

The want of just conceptions concerning the character of God,
as manifested in his attributes, lias been the cause i>f ihe many
dilTerent opinions whicli prevail among mankind, respecting divine
thui^. Hence it is that people in the pursuit of religion, are so
often led to adopt false principles, and establish themselves upon
a wrong foundation. And false principles, when once adopted as
divine truths, have a delusive tendency ; and however inconsistent
witli the plain dictates of right reason, they are very apt to obtain
a atrnng hctid in the mind, and, like an inveterate disease, are very
difficult to eradicate, especially ivhen suppoited by the authority
of great names, and confirmed by length of time.

We liH^'e a striking example of the truth of this remark in that
unqualified doctrine, maintained by many, who aflirm that God, as
an independent. Almighty Sovereign, has a jusi right to do what
he pleases, and can, consistent n'ith that i*jght, sentence to eternal
misery, many millions of souls who never were fdvored with the
light of Ibe gospel. This soul-sickening doctrine, which had its
origin in the regions ofantichriatian darkness, has caused thousands,
and perhaps millions, to blasplieme the very name of God, as a
Being of inhnite injustice and cruelty- The Almighty has truly a
right to do what he will ; but it is impossible that he should ever wtTf
any thing which is inconHiBteni wilhliisallributeof iii'^Afeoumew,
or with any attribute of his nature : for this would at once destroy
the harmony of his attributes, and render him an inconsistent and
. changeable Being.

All doctrines which represent God as making any difference in
be future state of his rational creatures, respecting tlieir salvation
ir damnation, without a special reprd to iheir works, and all ihe
) advanced in support of such dncirtnes, are falacious and
infounded, and ought to be rejected as inconsistent with the attri-
bute of righteousaess and Justice. Such doctrines, being fraught
wilh the greatest possible evil to the creature, are equally inconsis-
fenl with goodnew. They also operate against the attribute of
light; for DO doctrine ever produced a more darkening and di»<
couraging effect upon the mind of man- To suppose the fate of
man irrevocably fixed, must necessarily discourage all attempts to
alter it by any good which it is in his power to do. Such a doc-
trine must not only greatly obscure the benevolent and gluridus
character of the Deity, in the eyes of his rational creatures; but ren-
der bim more like a tyrannical devil who delights in the misery of
his creatures, than like a gm>d, merciful and gracious God, " who
"hath no pleasure in the detttli of the wicked.""


CHAP. I.] THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD, 9S

All doctrines which maintain that gloomy opinion, that a man^
when called by the gospel, may be in doubt as to the knowledge
of such a call, and cannot positively see and know his duty, nor
discern the certainty of the way of life and salvation, or tlmt he
can be a follower of Christ and not know it, are inconsistent with
the attributes of light and knowledge. " For God who command-
** ed the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our hearts."*
Jesus saith, " 1 am the light of the world : he that folio wet h me
<^ shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.'^t
Hence the very message of the gospel to souls was designed, " To
** open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from
" the power of Satan unto God.'^J *^ If any man will do his will,
^^ he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God-"|| Here is
neither doubt nor supposition expressed, but a positive declaration
of Jesus Christ, who hath declared himself " the way, the truth

^ and the \ife.''tt

Hence it is evident that the plain and obvious reason why so
many professing christians of the present day, do not positively
know the way, the truth and the life, is, they do not do the will of
God : for those who do his will, are in the way ; and to do his
will is indeed the only way. Therefore^ those who express such
doubts, are evidently witnesses against themselves, that they are
not in the way.

The doctrine of christian sinners, or the idea of christians' liv-
ing in sin, so strenuously advocated by many, is utterly inconsis-
tent with every attribute of God. All doctrines which imply that
real christians cannot live without sin, are inconsistent with the
attributes of power and goodness, and indeed with every Divine
attribute. " Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not;^wliosoevet
*' sinneth, hath not seen him, nor known him. He that committeth
^' sin is of the devil."fl The opinion which prevails so extensive-
ly among mankind, that no man, not even a real christian, is able
to live without committing sin, is one of the most destructive errors
that ever proceeded from the powers of darkness. It strikes di-
rectly against a life of holiness, and is calculated to discourage all
attempts in the pursuit of virtue : for what inducement can any
man have to pursue that which be believes it impossible to obtain ?
He who imbibes the principle, that it is impossible to obtain power
over sin, will soon find that every spring of his carnal nature is
ready to cherish tlie deception, and check the reproaches of con-
science.

If then, this principle is so agreeable to the " carnal mind,''
which the apostle declares to be " enmity against God ;"** surely
it cannot proceed from God. The very work which Christ came

* 2 Cor iv. 6. f John Tiii. 12. t AcV& xvVv \%, ^ ^^N:^'^ Nf<\. W .

*fJoba xiv. ft ir 1 John iVi . ft & B. ** "^.^m. V\vv."^-


Wl^^ THE ATTRIBUTES OV GOD.

into the world to do, was to take away sin — " lo gave his people
" from iheir sins,"* Was ihen the objeei of Iii« mission unallain-
«ble? Was be sent into the world lo undertake a woiit wbich he
was unable lo accomplish? By no means. His own testimony
proves that his power was sufficient for the work. "All power
" is given unio me in Heaven and in earih.'t Iftlien, all powCT '
isgivenhim, andifthe very object of his mission was "losave
" his people from ibeir sins," why are not iheae r&rislian sinners
saved from sin ? for if they are clirialians indeed, ihey must be
Christ's people. Besides; he has promised explicitly; "All things
■' whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive."±
Again; " If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall
■' ask what ye will, and it shall be dune unto you.''||

Thus it appears that Christ's power is sufficient; and surely nv
one will pretend that he is unfaithful in his promises : What then ?
Is he dclieieni in goodness and love? By no means. All profess-
ing christians will readily acknowledge bis goodness and love. Is
tie itnable to discern the devices and stratagems of Salan, so as to
counteract llicm and protect his people ? Certainly not: for this
VDuld exclude the attributes of wisdom and light ; and the apostle
*aul declar.ed Christ to he " ibc poteer of God, and ibewisrfom of
'" « God :"1I and Christ himself, as belore ofistr>c(j, icaiificd, taying,
" I am tlie light of the world: he that followeth nie shall not wbUc
" in darkness, but shall have ihe light of life." Here we find
nothing deficient on ihe part of Christ ; ypt these sinmng christiaiu
still continue to walk in darkness and live in sin, and plead the
■ impossibiliiy of doing otherwise; and yet ihey name the name of
[ Clirist, and claim the character of christians ! But what title heve
t&tiy lo this character ? If the testimuny of Christ be true, ihey
' cannot possibly be his followers, while they live in sin and walk la
ilarknesa.

The attribute of Divine Love is readily acknowledged by aU
the professors of Christianity; and many, even among these sin-
nitig christians, profess to share bountifully in the love of God.
But if they really piissess the true loveof God,wbirh is indeed the
most certain evidence thai they are beloved of God, why does not
ibis love keep iheni from sinning? "If ye love me, keep my com-
" niandiBents," said Jesus; and surely there can be no sin in keep-
ing his commandments. "No good thing will God withhold from
" them (hat walk uprightly."** Do these christians walk upright-
ly ? or does God withhold his goodness ? Surely they cannot im>-
^^ jteacU the goodness of God. If they really possess his love, lliey
^V jflust also possess Iiis goodness : for these are so intinialely connect-
^^L at togetfaer, that they cannot be separated. Why then are they not


I
I


CRAP, ij THE ATTRIBUTES OP GOD. lOl

delivered from sin ? Can sin abide with God's love and goodness?
Can righteousness have fellowship with unrighteousness? Can
light have communion with darkness?* As well might Satan dwell
in a tabernacle of holiness.

The Spirit of God is holy ; but sin is unholy. Hence the holi-
ness of God is opposed to sin ; therefore, wherever the Spirit of
holiness operates, it must effectually exclude sin ; unless where sin
is more powerful than holiness ; and there it must equally exclude
holiness : for they can never abide together in any soul. Hence
we must conclude that sin has dominion over these sinnnig chris-
tians, being more powerful in them than the Spirit of holiness :
for that which is most powerful must have the dominion. But
holiness must then be excluded : for they cannot dwell together.
And if the sins of these christians exclude God's holiness, they
must exclude his goodness and love, yea, and his righteousness
also, together with every attribute pertaining to the nature of God.
If this be done, what then becomes of their Christianity ?

The apostle Paul, in writing to the church of Corinth, expresses
himself in these words 5 " Know ye not that ye are the temple of
^* God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you ?" and then adds^
*^ tf any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy: for
" the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."f Thus it ap-
pears that some of these Corinthian christians to whom Paul ad-
dressed himself, had, at least, a measure of the Spirit of God dwel-
ling in them ; and it was evidently the apostle's desire to keep
them in the Spirit of Grod. Hence his warning ; " If any man de-
" file the temple of God, him will God destroy." Did these chris-
tians then live in sin ? Certainly not while the Spirit of God dwelt
in them. Why then ciannot christians of the present day live
without sin ? Was God more partial to the primitive christians
than he now is to modern christians? This would exclude his attri-^
bute of righteousness.

" What shall we say then ? Is there unrighteousness with God ?'*
Does he deal unjustly with his people ? Does he hold out promises
of reward to the ("iithful and upright, who are willing to bear the
cross of Christ, and deny themselves of all ungodliness and every
worldly lust; and, at the same time, withhold from them his power
and goodness^ with all the means of gaining power and victory
over sin ; and yet threaten destruction to the soul that defileth
himself with sin ? To suppose that Qod can deal thus with his
people is, in effect, to deny, not only his attribute of righteousness,
but also his power and wisdom, his goodness and love, his mercy
and truth, and in "short, it is to deny every thing that pertains to
the holy Spirit of God.

Thus it appears that the impious aivd so\i\'A'^?XtQ^\\v^ ^w.>x«a,

* See 3 Cor. vj. U, ' \\ Cot* \V\ A^» VI .

K2


ATTRIBUTES OF GOD.

Mpl clfUtian-tinnerg, or the impossibility of living without sin, ex<
PiAdcjcs every attribute of Deiiy, and renders Clirisi's missioi] into
ilie world n mere nullity, and throws the responaibility of the crea-
lure^s sin directly back upon the Creator. But let no man deceive
himsplf: God is not mocked. The sinner can never escape re-
sponsibility in this way. The righteousness of GoJ will yet be,
displayed before ail people ; and the living power of fternal truth
will manifest every attribute of God lo be what it really is. to the
shame and confusion of sinners, and to the destruction of all their

Therefore, let all those christians who plead the impossibility
of living without sin, faithfully examine the subject, and they wil)
find that the deficiency is not in God, who is All-sufficient ; that it
isnotinCbrist in wbura dwells the fulness of the Divine attributes;
but in their own faithless hearts. They do not believe it possible
lo live without sin ; because they have never received that power.
And why have they never received it? Because they do not " ask
'iin prayer, beheving that they shall receive :" because they do
t faiilifully and honestly take up a full and Anal cross against
J.l because -they do not believe in the promises of Christ; be-
luae they do not abide in Christ; and because his word does
't abide in tbcin. These are the true causes why they cannot
r^ without sin.

■ " Without faith it b impossible to please God."» Then what
tmofrhrisUans must these be who are so destitute of faith ? Sure-
» they cannot be the faithful followers of Christ : for tliey do not
Wliei-e it possible for any one to live without sin ; therefore they
intent themselves with living in it; and this they £nd to be moM
reeable to their carnal inclinations. Thus they cherish their
fa delusions, Tho such christians will often ascribe holMett
> the Lord with iheir tongues, and declare bis goodncM in the
' i of eloquence; yet in their practice they will deny
in their prayers, they will extol lo the neavens the
pry of Ins righteoafmeM andjM«(ice. bis aierry and truth ; while
^ their doctrines, they implicitly deny in liim, the veiy existence
"Obese attributes.

"Nevertheless, the foundation of God standeih sure, having this

K seal. The Lord knowelb them that are his. And let every one

ly that nnmelh llie name of Christ, depart from iniquity."+ Such,

^^Bd such only, are known of God in the great work of salvaiior '

fed such only are sealed with the Lamb, and stand on Mount 2kj


CHAP. II.] THE DECREES OF GOD, &C. 103

CHAPTER II.

Concerning the Decrees of Gody Election and Reprobation.

The Decrees of God have, for many ages, employed the pens
and tongues of many professed divines, and great controversies
have been excited and raaintsuned on this subject; but the difler-
ences of opinion still remain without producing much light to man-
kind, except that of discovering the darkness and ignorance o(
the disputants.

Many arguments have been drawn from certain passages of
scripture to prove that God, by an unalterable decree, and with-
out any respect to faith or good works, has elected a certain por-
tion of the human race to eternal salvation, and reprobated the
remainder to eternal damnation. Hence we hear much about the
doctrine of election and reprobation, from those preachers and
writers who build their tenets on these favorite passages. But it
is to be lamented that there are so many, in this enlightened age,
^^ who minister questions rather than godly edifying which is in
" faith ; desiring to be teachers ; yet understanding neither what
*^ they say, nor whereof they affirm ;"* who presume to maintain
doctrines so contrary to the liberal and righteous principles of
the gospel, and so inconsistent with the true character of God.

As it is by Divine revelation, that the true character of God is
made known to man ; so a true knowledge of his decrees, as far
as they relate to what he requires of man, are known only by reve-
lation. But those decrees by which, in the beginning, God estab-
lished the laws of creation, and by which the works of creation
and providence are* governed, tho they are beyond the reach of
man, yet th(Hr existence is readily ascertained and confirmed by
their visible effects. And by these effects, the rational mind may
easily be led to believe, what none can deny, that God works by
an unalterable plan of wisdom, which necessarily produces an un-
changeable order and regularity in all his visible works. And
hence we must rationally conclude that all his invisible works are
under the same established laws ; and that they all must and do
operate with the greatest order and harmony, and in the end, will
most certainly accomplish all his divine purposes in perfect wis-
dom and righteousness.

The decrees of God, so far as they are made manifest, either by
Divine revelation,- or by their visible effects in the natural world,
are of two kinds. The first are those which respect God's own
established and determinate laws and purposes, whether they re-
late to man, or to any other part of the creation. The second are
those which God has given to man, for his protection, and which
are calculated and designed to prove his favUv{\ilu<t^^^\A0w^^5ii&^^^

» i Tim. L4it7


i DECREES OF GOD,

First. Those decrees which respect God's own established laws

i piirpusea, comprehend not only the wojks of crealioii and

mvidence, but the final event of whiitever he has designed. In

e works of creation, it is obvious that God hns establislied laws

e unalterable, except by tlie sariip Almitrhiy Power which

rsl established ill era. Among these we may reckon the establiah-

^^ d order, courses and relative situation of the sun, moon and stars,

rTtogeiher with tlie whole planetary system ; tlie order and courses

of the seasons, and tite laws of nature hy which they are govem-

■td; heal and cold, light and darkness, the powers of procreation

lihd vegciHiion, the laws of gravitation, attraction and repulsion,

with every thing which depends on the established laws of nature:

'■these are known by their viable eflects.

Also Gild's detenninale purposes, relative to the operation of

bis divine atlributes willi respect to man. Among these may be

menlioned thederree of his ^lower, in creating man a moral agent,

' ^rfectly capable of exercising his moral faculties in chousing and

r 'acting according to the dictates of his own mind, in doing good or

^*vil. Also tlie decree of his utWom, in placing man in a state of

ribation, and giving him a fair trial, that he might prove himself
the choice of good or evil, without any influence, on either side,
1 iporc than what he was fully able to resist or follow, according to
t hh own free choice. And also the decree of his gooiheut, by
which he determined, after the foil, to extend mercy to man, and
I tend a Redeemer to redeem hun from his fallen state, and r&ise
' 'liiin to a heavenly Paradise, of which the earthly paradise, from
rhich he fell, was hut a figure.
Man being still endowed with the faculty 'of free agency, not-
t ^thstanding his fall, by which he was brought inio'Jarkness and
Lhondage, God, who is the source of light, decreed to afford him
r* sufficient degree of light to see and appreciate, in some measure,
\ the benefits to be obtained by accepting the offers of salvation,
tbrauirh the mediation of The Redeemer; that he might be at no
I Ijiss respecting his duty and privilege, in choosing fur himself, nor
\ Inspecting the course of life to Iw pursued, in order to obtain sal-
f .fstion through this medium. In his hoUnfss he decreed that man,
hy a life of holiness, which he might obtain by obedience, should
find an entrance into the mansions of holiness; and he decreed
at the same time, that " without holiness no man should see the
Lord." In his love he also decreed, that the blessings of his love

t should attend the faithful and obedienl. And in his righlemimen
aad justice, he decreed a crown of righteousness, as the just re-
Wnrdofallwhoshould walk in the way of righteousness and peace;
had this decree neceasarily excludes the disobedient from any in-
)^iaace in the Kingdom of Christ,
^j&ese are the uoi^lerablc decrees ot Oo4, a.iv4 ^ ""'tm ms V4-


CHAP« II] election AND REPROBATION. 105

ling to accept the benefits of these decrees, are freely entitled to
them, in the line of obedience; but God has decreed that they
shall not be obtained in any other way. By a careful examination
of these decrees, we can see nothing in them but what is perfectly
just and reasonable, and perfectly consistent with infinite wisdom
and goodness ; and they certainly display, in very striking colors,
the great perfection and glory of the Divine Attributes. The fixed
and unalterable nature of these decrees, by no means renders them
unreasonable or unjust; but the contrary. Even those which
more immediately respect man, show forth the unchangeable
goodness of God, by their permanence, and are rendered infinitely
valuable, by being unalterable.

When we ccnsider that God is infinitely wise and powerful, that
^^ he Is righteous in ail his ways, and holy in all his works," and
that be is perfectly free and independent, it must appear perfectly
consistent, just and reasonable, that he should create man a moral
agent, perfectly free to choose and act for himself, independent of
any supernatural impulse. Herein appears man's divine origin.
And where is the man who is willing to have his moral freedom
and independence taken from him, and to be compelled to think
and act according to the dictates of some other being, without any
choice or -n-ill of his own^ and at the same time, to be made ac^
countable for his thoughts, words and actions.

But this cannot be: for God has endowed man with moral
agency, and it cannot be taken from him ; it is fixed by an unal-
terable decree ; and tho intolerant Popes and ecclesiastical perse-
cutors have often attempted it, even by the power of fire and sword,
and every implement of torture; yet they never could control the
moral powers of man, nor deprive him of his free agency. They
have sometimes, indeed, compelled people to speak and act the
hypocrite, in order to escape punishment or gain favor; but they
never could destroy his moral agency, nor extinguish the light of
his conscience. They may indeed bind, imprison or kill the body ;
but they cannot fetter the thoughts, nor destroy the soul. As
well might they attempt to arrest the sun in its progress through
the sky, or change the course of the stars.

Second, Those decrees which God has given to man for his
protection, and which are calculated and designed to prove his
faithfulness and obedience. Such was his decree to Adam : ^^ In
*^ the day that thou eatest thereof thou shah surely die." Such was
his decree to the Jews, by the mouth of the prophet Isaiah : " If
" ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land."*
And such was the testimony of Jesus Christ : " If any man will
" do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whe.tVvet vVVi^ ^^^^^^"^^
This may also apply to any command, ot tvxv^ ^^X"a^s:^L\^'^\^a^ ^

*i§m,i.l9. t Johnyu. IT


THE DECREES OF GOft,

lod, for the government of his people, which requires their obedi-
nce ; and in case of disobedience, exposes ihem lo suHer the pea-
elty decreed by thai law.

The decrees of God nhich require the obedience of man, con-
sist in the declaration of his mind and will, concerning ihejr duty,
and are mnnilested by divine revelation, either nietlialely or inime-
diaiely. His decree to Adam respecting the forbidden fruit, was
direct and positive. His decrees to the people of Israel, through
Moses, Joshua and the judges and prophets, were positive, and
the promises conditional ; yei punishments or sufferings of some
kind followed disobedience. Adam and Eve violated the decree
of God to them, and therefore they fell from their union with God :
for the decree could not be altered. A decree may be permanent
and unalterable, or It may be temporary and alterable. Decrees
which are temporary and alterable, are given according to the ex-
isting circumstances of those to whom they are given ; but the
annulling of them argues no changeableness in the Giver, it only
shows a change of the circumstances which occasioned the decree,
God's laws are his decrees, and thej may be permanent and un-
conditional, or temporal and conditional. A sovereign may enact
laws for the government of his people, which may be repealable;
y« ivkUo tlu>y pirUi, ihpjr are_posiuve, snJ '"u*" tie oneyefl. So h
is with many decrees given for the government of God's peoplei

The doctrine so strongly maintained, and ao extensively believ-
ed, that God decreed the fall of man, is most unreasonable and b-
consistent. If God decreed that man should sin, then man could
not be at all culpable. If he fnltilled God's decree in eating the
forbidden fruit, then he must have done the will of God, and there-
fore did not commit sin in so doing : for it cannot be sin to do the
will of God, and God cannot decree any thing contrary to his will ;
therefore he cannot decree that man shall commit sin. Such b
decree would indeed be contrary to every attribute of his nature.
The command of God to Adam, was his law ; in keeping that law,
he could not sin : ^' for sin is n transgression of the law." The
command was given to prove Adam's obedience, and protect him
from evil. In transgressing the command, be violated the law of
God, and that occasioned his fall.

If sin is a transgression of the laws of God, as the scriptures
declare, and God's decrees are his laws, as all must acknowledge;
then it follows, that God never decreed that man should sin : for.
Id say that be decreed that man should sin, is to say that sin is not

E-am^esslonof his laws, but a compliance with ihem, and there-
e, cin h not iin; which is a conti adiclion. Again: If God did
'ree that man should commit sin, then sio must hare been a^ree-
• to the will of God : for God cannot, without an absolute in-
istency, decree any thing wUcb ts conViavv \o\ws ■wv^ ^t'ott


GHAP. II.] ELECTION AND REPROBATION. 107

the sin cannot be imput/^d to man ; it must be imputed to the will
of God ; consequently no condemnation can fall on man, seeing he
did the will of God. This involves the same absurdity, namely,
sin is not sin/ Such are the inconsistencies which necessarily
flow from this soul-darkening, this heaven-blaspheming doctrine^
which had its origin in the regions of antichristian darkness.

Again : God could not interpose bis power to prevent the fall
of man, or to prevent him from sinning, whether he would or. not;
because this would, at once, have deprived man of the trial of his
obedience, and of all accountableness, by fixing an insurmountable
barrier to prevent in him the power of transgression. In this case
man could never have been the subject of praise nor blame ; he
never could have known the power nor the extent of his own free
agency ; he never could have enjoyed the glorious reward of faith-
fulness, nor have felt the dishonor and shame of unfaithfulness;
having no law which he could, of his own choice, obey or disobey,
his conduct, in all things, must, of course, have been impelled by
Almighty power, like the stars in their courses. This would have
deprived man of the power of self-action, and rendered him a mere
machine.

Man was created a moral agent, at the beginning : that is, he
was endowed with free-agency, capable of acting according to his
own voluntary choice, without any compulsion, either of good or
evil: and his having good and evil set before him, was that which
constituted his state of trial. God assumed no compelling i)ower
over him ; and the devil could have none, without the man's pre-
vious consent. He was therefore, in this respect, left entirely
without control.

But it may be asked, whence came the choice of evil ? This
may be answered in short: It was insinuated by the tempter.
The temptation was first addressed to the mind : " Ye shall be as
<.iods;'' and thence applied to the animal propensities, which were
inferior to the rational powers. The faculties of the soul, being
superior to those of the body, ought to have had the government.
But when the man's animal sensations were addressed, and excited
by the temptation, tho he possessed a governing power in the fa-
culties of his soul; yet he gave up that power, and gave loose to
his animal desires, and under their excitement, yielded to the
temptation. This occasioned his fall ; and hence the loss which
ensued. He proved himself unfaithful to his trust, and the curse
fc^owed as the inevitable consequence.

Some will argue, that because God is omniscient and knows all
things, even before they come to pass, he must of<;ourse foreordain
that they shall come to pass. But this consequence does uot C(^V>
low ; it is taking for granted, that which canwoX V^i^xqn^^S \»safc-
}y; that God canaot foreknow thai such «iii cs^iix V^ ^-a^safc^*^


I


LEES OF GOD,

Lk|ia3s, without first Toreordaining that it shall come lo pass; thus
/niiking,h)s fore knowledge to de|)ejid on a previous decree.

Bui if God pi>Hsesse8 almighty powei ; if in him " are liid all
the treasures of wisdom and li now ledge ;" then he must certainly
be ahle to endow man with perfect frpedom, and render him pcr-
fectly independent, as to his power of choosing or refusing, with-
out any constraint of the foreknowledge or decrees of God, And
certain it is, that theie is nothing in the foreknowledge of Ood
which can operate, eilher directly or indirectly, against the free
•nd final choice of any soul, in respeci lo the work of salvation;
for this would be predcsii nation in very deed. To say thai God
cannot foreknow without foreordaining " whatsoever comes to
pass,'-' is to limit his allributes of power and tmdiim, and subject
them to his rfe(Tee», making his decrees, which are evidenlly tlie
elfcciof his power and wisdom, superior to both; this is, in reality,
mahing die effect superiorto tlie cause, and placing tlie common
absurd ductrine of predestination ubove the Divine attributes. '

The advocates of nncooditional decrees readily admit, that God
is able to give his creatures intelligence and volition, and to endow
them with the power of ihonght and action ; because this appears
too evident to be denied. But still ihey contend that the operation
of these laculties, is immediately dependent on a supernatural im-
pulse ; iML-ause they cannot conceive how God can confer on man
an independence of this kind; or in other words, how be can give
man f he power to chuse and refuse, according to bis own will, in-
dependent of bis Maker's inllueiice. Herein they discover iheir
contracted ideas of Divine Power and Wisdom. Hut inan's rea-
son and observation, wliere they are not blinded by tlie dartc mists
of antichrislian doctrines, might teach him thai, acem-ding lo what
is made aianifesl in ibe works of the visible creation, "the Power
" of God and the Wisdom nf God" must extend infinitely beyond
all human concepiion. This truih may be illusiraied by a com-
parison.

It is well known that a clock, being constructed on certain me-
chanical principles, is able to keep time without the maker's assis-
tance ; and tho ibe maker cannot confer the power of intelligence
and volition on his clock, so as to enable it to go right or wrong, of
its own choice ; yet it is capable of keeping time, according to ihe

Erinciples of its construction, independent of the maker, even were
e a ihousai)<i miles distant. And since it is admitted, that God
can and does confer the power of intelligence and volition on man,
- why should it appear unreasonable to suppose that he, as an Al-
Itnighty Creator, can render ihat intelligence and volition perferily
V/ree and independent of his own influence, or the influence of any
itiier being, as easily as a clock, can be made to keep '
~Jident ofitsiaaker?


ptiBXjM^


CHAP. II.] ELECTION AND REPROBATION. 109

God is not only able to endow man with perfect freedom and
independence, in this respect, but he has in truth done it ; and
herein consists man's free agency, and his accountability. For if
the mind of man were not free, if its action depended on some
foreign influence, whether that influence came from God, or some
other being, the man could not be a free agent, and therefore not
accountable for his conduct. But man being a free agent, and
having received the law of his Creator, by which he is taught how
to govern his conduct aright, that law is the decree of God to him;
in obeying that decree, he finds justification before God^ in viola-
ting It, he becomes a transgressor.

Altho man is indebted to his Creator for the power of intelli-
gence and volition, as well as for all his power and faculties of every
kind ; and altho he is continually dependent on the providence
ofGody for all the benefits and privileges he enjoys; yet without
the power to exercise and improve all these gifts, to good or evil
purposes, according to a free choice of his own, ind.*pendent of
any external or foreign influence^ he could not be accountable for
his conduct. But being honored of God, with this most important
and highly exalted trust, he is therefore highly responsible to his
Maker for a faithful discharge of his duty ; and herein appears his
great accountability.

The doctrine of particular election and reprobation, so called,
which maintains that God, by his omnipotent decrees, ^' has, from
all eternity, elected some to everlasting life," and doomed others
to eternal damnation, without any regard to faith or good works, is
supposed to be confirmed by certain passages of scripture, which
its advocates, contrary to all truth and right reason, have seen fit
to interpret in that sense. But it appears evident from all that
we have seen written and published on this subject, by its most
strenuous advocates, that they are entirely ignorant of the true
sense and Import of those passages. Certain it is, that nothing re-
corded in the scriptures, on the subject of election or predestina-
tion, has any reference to the final lot of any souls, without a spe-
cial regard to their faith and works. There is not a single passage
of scripture advanced in support of this doctrine, but what will
easily admit of a reasonable explanation, consistent with the free
agency of man ; while on the other hand, there are many passages
which are direct and positive in the support of free agency, and
which cannot consistently admit of any other explanation ; but
for brevity's sake we shall only notice the few following:
. 1. " I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that
" I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing ; there-
" fore chuse life, that both thou and thy seed may live*"* tt^-vvi.
is a positive declaration of God, thtou^Vi M.o»ea^Xo ^'i 0«KAx«^ ^''^

* D»ut, XXX* 19


tlE DECREES OP COD)

Israel, lliat he had set before Ihem ilie free and uncontrollL'd choice
ofgochd <ind evil; and thai their reward of life or death depended,
not on any predestinated decree, hut on their gooit or evil works,
freely doiie ; for God is a God of righteousness and truth. But to
say that God had Ijefore determined to Rx then- choice by any
secret decree,* isto tnafie this declaration a moi't glaring imposi-
tion upon their faith and understEuidiiig, which is wholly incoiisi»-
tenl with ihe righteousness and goodness uf God.

2. "What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the
" land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, end
" the children's teelli are set (tn edge ? As I live, sailh the Lord
" God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in
" Israel. ''^ This proverb is founded on the same principle with
that which maintuiiis, that because Adam partook ot'the forbidden
fruit, it is Just and riglit for God, by an arbitrary decree, to damn
all his children, vuhnul any regard to tlieir works, or rather for
works wiiich they were impelled to do by irresistable necessity;
and that if any are saved, it must.be through a partial election, by
the same arbitrary decrees. Rut if this he really the case, we cer-
tainly have still occasion to use this proverb, notwith-sianding the
positive declaration of Jehovah to the contrary. Thus we may
see that this preposterous doctrine has a direct tendency to im-
jjeach the character of ibe God of justice and irmh,

3. "The I'ighteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
" the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. — Yet ye say,
" The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Is-
" rael ! Is not my way equal? are not your ways«iieqaal!'"J What
can render the way of God more unequal than the doctrine ofun-
conditiimal decrees ? On the other hand, what can be more equal,

~'i]at and reasonable, tlian to reward all souls according to their
"arki, whether good or evil ?

4. " As 1 live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
^S|*-death of the wicked ; but that the wicked torn from his way and

"live."|| What can be more plain and positive? It is impoRnble
that God should foreordain any thing contrary to his own will and
|)1easurc. If therefore, God has foreordained that man should
commit sin, for which he must die. then, of course he certainly
must Iiave pleasure in the death of the wicked. Here again, we
may see that the forementioned doctrine not only chart^es Guii
with the height of injustice, hut with the grossest dteepliun and

I falsehood towards bh rational creatures.
, But it may be objected by some, that, as these declarations were
Bade tinder the law, they only concerned this life, and not the
5*rt. xJ^fs'S!""' t Bull. i.Ui. 20 b, IS.


i|< cond

^■■-tiei
P^i'liv.


d not the

m


fSHAP. II J ELECTION AND REPROBATION. Ill

final state of the soul; and that unconditional election was in
Christ, which respected the eternal state of all souls. But we
would ask, Are God's ways more just and equal to men in their
temporal, than in their eternal state ? Is lie more favorable to the
bodies, than to the souls of men ? Even this supposition can by no
means remove the inconsistency of the doctrine, nor lessen the
absurdity of the argument advanced in its support. But the de-
clarations and promises under the gospel are equally plain and
positive.

5* ^^ Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and
*^ I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me;
^' for I am meek and lowly in heart ; and ye shall find rest to your
^^ souls."^ Here is a positive call, and a positive promise, to all
who will obey it. Where then is the decree that can hinder the
fulfilment of this promise, aside from the unwillingness of mankind
to comply with the call ? Has God decreed that they shall not be
willing to comply ? Then the call must be a mere mockery — a
vain pretence, to deceive souls into a belief that the gospel was
intended for all, when in fact, only a part were to be saved by it ;
while the rest, after being mocked with a pretence that the grace
of God was free for all, and that the call of Christ extended to all,
without exception, were to be eternally damned ! Such are the
natural and necessary consequences of that blasphemous doctrine
of unconditional decrees, which have been forged in the tyrannical
school of Antichrist, and palmed upon the God of righteousness
and truth.

6. " Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons ;
" but in every nation, he that feareth him, and worketh righteous-
" ness,is accepted with him.^t This testimony of the apostle Peter
is directly to the point, and shows plainly who will be elected,
and what the conditions are. He that feareth Gody and worketh
righteousness. But if God has, in fact, decreed the final lot of all
souls, " from all eteniity," and has unconditionally elected some
to salvation, and others to damnation, which necessarily fixes an
eternal difference between them, he must, in thb case, be the
greatest respecter of persons, and must display the greatest possi-
ble partiality and injustice towards his rational creatures.

7. " The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some
*^ men count slackness ; but is long-suffering to us-ward, not wil-
^* ling that any should perish, but that all should come to repen-
" tance.^'J Here again, we have another plain testimony of the
same aposde. If therefore, God is " not willing that any should
perish," and yet has foreordained, by an unconditional decree,
that any part should perish, that any part should not cc\\!c«.\ft^«fc-
pentance^ then he must have passed V\i\s dftcx^^ ^'^vo^ \ss& ^'^'^v


I


t


DECREES OP GOD,

jfiU ! Siith is the rMicutous light in which ihis homd doctrine
'|doces the God of wisdoni and goodness.

8. "For this isc<xid and acceptable in the sight of God our
" Savior, who will have all men to he saved, and to come unio
" the knowledge of the Iruth.'" If then God " will have all men
to be saved and come to iheknowledgeof theiriilh,"lie ciinnot poa-
sibl; will to the contrary; therefore lie could not foreordain that
any slioidd not he saved, nor come to the knowledge of the trulld

Thus it appears that the law and the propjiets, and also the tes-
timony of Jesus Christ and his apostles, all lend lo disprove the
doctrine of unconditional election and reprobation, and to conlirm,
in the most pasitive manner, the free agency of man. Hence it is
clearly evident that the obedience or disobedience of all souls de-
pends on their own free choice, and that their reward will he ac-
cording In their works. As to those passages which are supposed
to imply tlie doctrine of predestination, according to ihe sense in
which it is held, and which its advocates generally advance as evi-
dences in its favor, they are easily explained upon nrtional princi-
ples, without involving th»t absurd doctrine. Election does not
necessarily im,ily predestination; nor does tbreordinalion, as used
in the scriptures, by any means involve the final destination of any
soul, without a fair and impartial trial, according to the jus[ and
equitable principles of the gospel.

Election, according to the common import of the term, means
choice; and where it is used in ihe scriptures, ii implies a paiti-
cular selection of certain pei'sons or people, for certain purposes.
Itis subject maybe illustrated byacompitrlson. It is well known
'Ont in an elective government, the officers are elected or chosen
■lo fill certain places or stations, and to perform certain duties. But
dils election does not necessarily imply that they were predestina-
1^ to those ofliccs; nor does it exclude other citizens from the
privilege of puriicipaline in the affairs of the government, or of
enjoying its benefits. Tlicre must be public offices in every well
r^nlated governmenl, and suitable characters must be dected and
appointed to fill those oflkes. But all cannot be presidents nor
secretaries of state ; all cannot be senators nor representatives in
congress ; yet all may enjoy the blessings and privileges of a good
government, provided they conduct themselves woiliiy of it.

The eoDstitution of the United Stales has foreordained or pre-
destinated, that the persons elected and qualified, according to such
and such provisions, shall hold such and such offices; consequent-
ly their election is established and confirmed by certain articles or
decrees of the constitution which, perhaps, woie enacted, and
made a part of tlie supreme law of the Innd, before some of the
elected were born. Yet tlie constiUBton did nrt fur^-


CHAP. II.] ELECTION AND REPROBATION. 113

ordain nor elect these persons, it only designated the charactersr
and qualifications necessary for such offices ; but left the actual
election of the officers to the future determination of the electors,
who were to be governed in their proceedings, according to the
provisions of the constitution on the subject. But the choice of
the worthy candidates, so far from being detrimental to the rest of
the citizens, is of essential benefit to them, being chosen for their
service. And it must be obvious also, that this choice can be of
no use to the persons chosen, unless they accept of it, and fulfil
the duties of the office ; so it Is with the election of all souls in the
work of God.

Hence we may see the comparison between things temporal and
spiritual. By the constitution of Heaven, which was decreed and
established by the Almighty, it was predestinated that such and
such characters, possessing such and such essential qualifications,
should be leaders, teachers and prophets to the people, to guide
and direct them in their duty. Accordingly when the time ar-
rived, in which the occasion required the selection to be made,
Noah was chosen to build the ark, and save himself and his family
from the flood ; because he '^ was a just man,'' and one who was
obedient to the will of God, and thereby found favor with God.
Abraham was chosen and ordained to be the typical father of the
faithful ; because of his faithfulness and obedience to the call of
God. For the saiQe cause, Moses, Joshua, Samuel and the proph*
ets, were chosen as faithful servants of God, to do the work which
God had ordained to be done.

But these individuals were not chosen to the exclusion of others
from the work of God ; but for the benefit of all over whom they
were appointed the leaders and guides, that all might be sharers
with them, in the blessings promised to the faithful and obedient.
Thus the election of Moses as a leader of the Israelites, was de-
signed for their deliverance from their Egyptian bondage, and for
their protection and salvation in their journey through the wilder-
ness. But this election did not decide the final state of a single
individual of that nation, or of any other ; it was intended to serve
as a figure to typify Jesus Christ, who was to be the Savior of his
people. And as sul who were faithful and obedient to the law of
Moses, were blessed and protected, and delivered from the power
of their enemies, while the disobedient and rebellious were destroy-
ed ; so all who will be faithful and obedient to the law of Christ,
will be blessed and protected, and delivered from the power of sin
and Satan, and find an inheritance in the heavenly Canaan, as
God's elect ; while the disobedient and rebellious will lose their
day and their privilege, and be excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Tho the posterity of Abraham were Vv\^\^ Ytw^^^^'^^^^*^*

L.2


^t^^^m 'THB DECREES OF GOD,

potal blessings, according to tlie promise of God lo their fuithful
father Abraliam ; tliii they were called God'x clioxen people and
hit ekcl; vet that election could neversecuretlieirliDal saJvation,
without their own faithfulness snd obedience. It b evident that
it did not decide the final character and state of the Jews: for they
proved a rebellioui people, and therefore, notwithstanding their
election, they were afterwards cut off by the judgments of God,
I M(l scattered over ilie face of the earlh, and exist, even to ibis
^'tliy, 09 a monument of God's displeasure against the sin of diso-
bedience and rebellion.

" Many are called, but few chosen," said Jesus. And this was
evidently ihecase with fpspecitotheJews: forallholhe whole na-
tion waa called, and was figuratively a chosen nHtion; yet compara-
tively, very few of them proved so faithful as to be found at last
among the real chosen of Glod. " For they are not all Israel,
which are of Israel." Election is therefore not the seal ol' salva-
tion. It did not save Judas, altho he was elected, and appointed
as one of Clirist's twelve apostles; yet he proved himself a trai-
lur, and was therefore disinherited and cut off; and anolhn was
chosen to fdl his place.

The case of Jacob and Esau is otten advanced, as an argument
in proof of the doctrine of predestination, which is supposed to be
fully conCrmed by the following passages of scripture. '* Was
"not Esau Jacob's brother? sailh the Lord; yet I loved Jacob,
" and I hated Esau."' And again : " For the children being nol
" yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose
" of Uod, according to election might stand, not of works, but of
" him that calleth."t

But what does this prove ? What was " the purpose of God ac-
cording to election," concerning them ? As before observed, elec-
tion implies choice. Tlie purpose of God tiierefore, in the choice
of these two individuals, was to typify in iliem, ibe flesh and the.
spirit ; and to show where the love and blessing of God would
finally rest, and where his r,<itred and displeasure would fall. It
I liwtilten, "The eldL=r shall serve the ynunger-^f But iho we
hbve 00 account that ever Esau served Jacob, personally ; yet this

Kedieiion was evidently fulfdled in lite two nations which spriing
im them, which rendered the ligurc still more complete. Goit
1 tberpfnre selected these two children, (even before they were born,
i imd ol' course before they had done ehher good or evil, by which
ttiey might be judged aslo their own merits,) for the very purpose
Ydisptaying in them, and in their posterity, a figurative represen-
ion of the wide diDercnce between the flesh and the Spirit ; be-
Kn tlie old creation and the new.

1 lliLi eit'Clion, tiiere U nothing which could decide ti
'*3; tBooi. u.n. '.(Jtti


CHAP. IL] election AND REPROBATION. 115

future state, as to their salvation or damnation. The final lot and
portion of these two nations, and every individual of them, was
yet to be proved and decided, in a future day of greater light and
spiritual power, and by a more unerring rule of judgment, than
could be given in that day. Therefore the election or choice of
these two brothers, was never intended to decide their eternal state;
but only to represent, in a figure, God's hatred of sin and the fal-
len nature of the flesh, in the children of wickedness, who will sell
their heavenly birthright for a little carnal pleasure; while he mani-
fests his distinguishing love and blessing to those who will wisely
distinguish themselves, by their faith and obedience to the calls of
the gospel.

The instance of Pharaoh is produced as another argument in
favor of the doctrine of predestination. " For the scripture saith
^' unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee
'^ up, that T might show my power in thee, and that my name might
" be declared throughout all the earth."* But this choice of Pha-
raoh was also designed, as a figure, to represent the arch oppressor
of God's people, in the spirit of wickedness. And the subsequent
destruction of him and his host, in the red sea, typified the flood of
destruction which will finally overwhelm the enemies of God's
people, and put an end to all manner of oppression. But neither
the hardening of Pharaoh's heart, nor the destruction of the Egyp-
tian host> can be any evidence of the final state of either. It will
doubtless be more tolerable for them, in the day of judgment, than
for the rebellious Jews ; and beyond comparison more so, than for
those who reject the light of the gospel in the present day. Obe-
dience or disobedience to the everlasting gospel, the light of which
must finally be extended to all, whether living or dead, will at
length prove the salvation or damnation of every soul.

The scriptures, have been greatly wrested to prove doctrines
which have originated in antichristian darkness; but afier ail, there
is nothing to be found throughout the sacred volume, that affords
the smallest proof of that gloomy and soul-darkefiing doctrine of
eternal and unconditional decrees, which so unjustly fixes the final
salvation or damnation of souls, without a special regard to their
works. The election of individuals as ministers, prophets, or
leaders of the people, by no means implies a certainty of the final
salvation of tlie persons so elected,t any more than it implies the
damnation of those who are not elected to these offices; because
all must finally be judged and rewarded according to their works.
Those- works, however, which were performed in a state of dark-
ness and ignorance, tho they must have their due reward, can nev-
er decide the final doom of any soul. Those performed undec
the light of the gospel, and with a fu\\\mA<lt^^.^\v^vcv^^i^^&\^^J^^5fc•

* Rom ix. i7v I Wilnest BaUam, Sau\, }u^«a mA ^)»Ss&mv


I


I


^iPPHT THE NATURAL WORLD [PART [II.

lat^nls, are the works by which the Boul must be tried, and for
which he niLisi receive hts linal reward.

The truth of these things is so abundantly testified in the strip-
tures, and appears so consistent with the righteousness and justice
of God, that there seems to be no possible ground to dispute it ; and
yet we find many antichristian preachers and writers continually ex-
claiming against the efficacy of ^nor/ioor^, and thus discouraging
all attempts to obtain the mercy and favor of God by the virtuous
w:t<i of faithful obedience. But this discouraging doctrine will final-
ly prove a poor excuse for their own idleness and disobedience.
" Behold 1 come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every
" man according as hb works shall be."*


CHAPTER III.

TAe Creation and Order of Ike Natural World a Jtgure of thai

tekich ie Spiritual.

The natural world, and the things therein contained, were, from
the b^inning, wisely designed as figurativerepresentations of spiri-
tual things to come. As this earth was created for a temporary
use, and was never intended to be the abiding place of man, but
only a place of preparation for a more substantial, durable and
jlririous state, in the spiritual world; it was therefore highly proper
and tiecessary that, in its creation and order, it should bear a suita-
ble comparison with that spiritual cj-eation of which it was a figure-
But as the difierencc between things natural and spiritual is very
great; so this comparison is but as a shadow compared With the
BubsiatJCe.

Jesus Christ, both in his public ministry, and in his discourses
with his disciples, often made use of natural similitudes to repre*
sent spiritual tilings. By this he evidently manifested that the na-
tural creation, and the things pertaining to it, were welt ailapted to
represent spiritual and eternal things, which indeed could not be
represented otherwise than by the things of time. This truth is
more tolly revealed, in these last days, to those who are now made
partakers of the real substance ofthose tilings, which were formerly
represented by ty|ies and shadows. " That was not first which is
'< spiritual, but that winch is natural; and afterward that which is
" piritual.'*t

In the first of Genesis, we have the following account of the
nmencemenl an-l progress of the natural creation and its estab-
psbed order, t>i>;ether wiih the first creation of man.

In the beginning Oiid created the heaven and the earth. And

the earth was without form, and void ; and darkness was t)poa


CHAP. III.] A FIGURE OF THE SPIRITUAL. 1 17

*^ the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God moved upon the face
" of the waters. And God said, Let there be light : and there
'^ was light. And God saw the light, that it was good: and God
" divided the light from the darkness.^' Or rather, according to
the original, " God divided," or made a separation bettoeen the
light and tJie darkness,^ The sacred historian then proceeds to
show the formation and order of the natural heavens and earthy
the sea and the dry land, and the natural productions and estab-
lished order of each. " And God said, Let the earth bring forth
" grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit
*^ after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth 5 and it
^^ was so.''

Thus the fixed and unalterable laws of nature were established
in the fnuts ; each kind must bring forth fruit according to its na-
ture. It was therefore contrary to the nature of the oak to bring
forth oranges, or for the fig-tree to yield peaches. The seed of
the melon could not produce cucumbers, nor the flaxseed bring
forth barley. The laws of nature could not be violated, in this
respect, in any part of the vegetable creation.

" And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven,
** to divide the day from the night : and let them be for signs, and
" for seasons, and for days and years : and let them be for lights
" in the firmament of heaven, to give light upon the earth : and it
'^ was so." Here we see that when these sources of natural light
were created, and established " in the firmament of heaven to give
" light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and over the night,
" and to divide the light from the darkness," God at the same
time, ordained that they should be "/or signs and for seasons ^^^ as
well as " for days and years." Thus it appears that Divine Wis^
dom has ordained that the things of the natural creation, under the
government and influence of these lights, should be regulated by
times and seasons; and these are for signs to those who walk in
the light. But this subject will be moie particularly noticed in
the sequel. The account thus proceeds.

" And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the
" moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the
'' earth in the open firmament of heaven. And God created great
*^ whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters
** brought forth abundantly after their kind, and every fowl after
" his kind. And God blessed them, saying. Be fruitful and multi-
^' ply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the
"earth. And God said. Let the earth bring forth the living crea-
*^ ture after his kind, cattle and creeping thing, and beast of the
^' earth after his kind : and it was so." Thus all these thing^s were
created and established in their order, and ewdow^^^V^ ^^Osskw^^'v
creation, with tlie power of generating \W\t wixi ^^^v^-i ^xw'^'^^*-

-» See jQwgiaa,} Bible,


ttder, and according to the llniM and seasons Rppointed by the

" And God said. Let us make man in oitr image, after our like-
"nesKi and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
^'overthefowloftheair, and over the earth, and overevary creep-
" ing thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man
^ in his own image, in the image of God created he him ; male
P and female created he ihem. And God blessed them, and God
' said unto them, Be rniiiful, and multiply, and replenish the earth,

ind subdue it: and have dominion over the Gsli of the sea, and
f* over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth
" upon the earth. And God saw every tiling timt he had made,
*' and behold it was vwy good."

Thus man was appointed the sole lord of the creation ; liis pow-
er and dominion was over all. But as he was conslilutcd God's
representative on earth, who best knew his situation, and the dan-
ger to which he was exposed, it was necessary that he should yield
perfect obedience to the commands of his Creator, as the only
possible means by which he could retain that power and dominion
vi'hicli the Creator had given him.

From the foregoing statement the following observations may
be drawn.

1. It appears that ihe natural creation was gradually formed and
brought into order: that this order, which extended through the
whole creation, was supported and governed by certain laws and
re/^ulations, which consthuted the beauty and harmony of the cie-
aiion, and which could not tie broken without creating confusion;
and that every thing in its proper order and place was pronounced
good, and placed under the dominion of man.

2. In the creation a separation was made between light and dark-
ness, day and night, and many other tilings of different and oppo-
site qualities which, when contrasted, clearly represented good and
evil, and were calculated to present lo the mind of man the quali-
ties of things Ueautiful and ugly, lovely and hateful, harmless and
hurtlid, and were doubtless nccesaary to impress upon his unde:^
standing a sense of good and evil, happiness and misery.

5. These things, so different and o)iposite in dieir nature, were
entirely separate and distinct from each other; and as each In its
place was designed, as a sign or figure, to represent that which was
good or evil among spiritual things, it was therefoi-e necessary for
man, in all bis transactions, lo keep tliat distinction in view, and to
govern himself accordingly.

To the spiritually minded the comparison between natural and

spiritual things is plain and obvious. The light of the sun, being

the source or founia'in of light in llie natural creation, is a most

strikmg ligure of the Fountain of sp'mmaV Vi^U, \V\rt\^\^i«

«/'ei'er/as(uig' liie, the glorious Lighv oJ V\eaNTO»*A'w\iwintta.wiM>»


CHAP. III.] A FIGURE OP THE SPIRITUAL. 119

who shall be found faithful to improve the light which God has
given them, will be made partakers. The darkness of the night
evidently prefigures the shades of'spiritual darkness, and the gloomy
mansions of hell, where all souls who chuse darkness rather than
light, must sink at last. The beautiful and harmonious songsters
of the grove are so many emblems of happy spirits, whose blessed
influences communicate happiness to all ai'ound them. The vora-
cious raven^ the midnight screech-owl, and the like, are emblemat-
ical of those destructive and tormenting spirits which haunt the
infernal regions, and torment the wicked.

Similar comparisons may be made relative to good and evil
beasts, beautiful and ugly animals, and useful and destructive crea-
tures of every kind. The fruits of the earth, the plants and herbs
of the field, and every thing that grows upon the earth, as well as
all living creatures which inhabit the watery world, or fly in the
airy regions,' are either useful or destructive, pure or impure, and
are figurative either of spiritual good or evil, purity or impurity :
for God has created nothing in vain. Therefore, tho all these
things are temporal, as to their existence, and must soon perish,
like all other works of time; yet in their creation, infinite Wisdom
evidently had real and essential objects in view, as spiritual sub-
stances, to be typified or pointed out by these created objects.

It may be asserted as an objection to the foregoing doctrine,
that these things were created for the use and subsistence of man.
Admitting this to be true, it does not prove that they were not, at
the same time, intended as figurative representations of spiritual
things. But there are evidently many kinds of living creatures,
as well as many other things in the natiJfral creation, for which
mankind have never yet found any use, and perhaps never will in
this world ; and certainly they were not created in vain. What
then could have been the object of their creation, if it was not to re-
present something of a spiritual nature to be revealed hereafter ?

The fact that sheep and Iambs, as well as a variety of other
creatures, were given to be slain, both for food and for sacrifice,
did not prevent their being used as figures to typify the sacrifice
to be made for sin, and to represent the meek and innocent char-
acter of the Savior, who was " brought as a lamb to the slaughter."*
Nor were they, on that account, less typical of the meek and inno-
cent character of his people, whom he calls his sheep and his
lambs.t So also the best fruits of the earth, which were evidently
created for the immediate use of man, and expressly given for his
subsistence, a|re n(i less figurative on that account; but'eveu the
very circumstance of their being given for food, was intended to

♦ How apUy does the circumstance that man is depcnden\. u-jivji^ \\\^ iVv^^^-^ Vk.i\\\vk.w^a%. tA
the flock for the clothiog of his natural body, show uvx depttiA^uviei w^oi\ V^ Vki&xc^ «i\^^^
ior "the garments o/jiaJiration," of which our naturaV e«^tmeu\% utt «.&«>»^\

/ See Joho xxi. 15, St J6, also chap. ^. llio 16.


iKDER of T1ME9 AND SEASOl


'K^T^™B^«»^B


«how that tbcy are ti^rative of that spirituul fruit irith which the
^ghleous will be fed in ihe Kipgdum of Heaven. Jesus Christ
bull reference tii this, when he'^aid to his disciplm, " 1 will not
'* ilr'tnk henceforth of tlie fruit of the vine, unlil tlrat day when I
" drink it steva with you in my Fnther's Kingdom."*

It is well known that those who are born into Uiis world, must
be nouriahed with temporal food, or they would soon perish. And
it is as ceiiain that the new born soul, who has been begotten in
the regeneration, and brought forth in the new creation, by the
renovating power of Christ, as really requires spiriiual food, as

tthe natural mikn requires that which is natural. Even the pure
•■waters of the fountain, so refreshing tu a thirsty man, are figurative
«f those spiritual waters which flow from the fountain of everlasting
life, and wilhoiil which souls in the spiritual world niti.it suffer,
and be constrained to cry out, like the rich man in the parable,
for a drop of (Ac water of life 10 cool their tongues.

These figures extend to every thing which |jertains to the natu-
ral creation : nor do they stop here. All the useful and important
works of man, which are produced by the e^iercise of his nstural
faculties, are also figurative of the good works to be wrought by
his spiritual faculties hereafter. And he who is faithful in perfarm-

»iog his duty here, whether in things which are in themselves great
or small, will be honored with it glorious employment in the hea-
venly world, compared with which his greatest works in diis trorld
are but a shadow. " If therefore, ye have not been faithful in ihu
" unrighteous mammon, who will committo your trust the truerich-
" es ?"t And as the diflerence between the faithful and the unlatth-
fiil, in lliis world, is manifested by their works ; so in the world of
spirits, the diflercnce will appear as much greater, as heavenly and
divine things are greater than those which are earthly. The faithful
will be honored and the unlairhful degraded ; the former will have
bh talents doubled to him, and tlie latter will have his taken from
him. The parable of Jesus Christ concerning the talents, is a

I striking illustration of iliis subject.^
CHAPTER IV.
Tht egtabSsked order of times and neasons in the nntttrul crea-
%
:


tiwi, together wilh the pritneval slate and probation of ,
Whe.v God created the world, he established in it certuin laws
Ay which it was to be governed. Among these were included the
order of times and seasons. These laws being established by the
Almighty, could not be altered by any inferior power. Tltecs-
^blishud order of the sun, moon and stars, which rise in the east


#HAP. IV.] AND THE PRIMEVAL STATE OF MAN. 121

aBd set in the west, could not be broken, nor their courses change
ed, so as to rise and set in an ^posite direction, and at different
periods of time. Nor could th^establisbed order of the seascMis
be changed, so as to produce effects contrary to the designs of
infinite Wisdom. Day and night, heat and cold, summer and
winter, seed time and harvest must have their appointed courses ;
nor was it in the power of any human being to change them. It
would have been utterly inconsistent with Divine Wisdom to sub-
ject, to the control of man, the establbhed laws of nature by which
the creation was governed ; therefore these laws were necessarily
independent of all human power.

When God brought forth the vegetaUe creation he established
in it the laws of vegetation, which required that every thing per-
taining thereto should bring forth fruit, each according to its kind,
and be regulated by times and seasons. Hence every different
kind had its allotted period to grow to maturity, to bud and blos-
som, and to bring forth fruit. Thus established and r^u]ated,the
order and harmony of the vegetable creation was rendert;d beauti-
ful and glorious ; no violation of nature, nothing disorderly to cor-
•rupt and mar its beauty nor destroy its harmony. Similar laws
were also established in the animal creation. They too, in their
various orders, had their appointed times to grow to maturity, and
their seasons to generate and bring forth their offspring according
to their kind.

Man also had laws given him according to his lot and order
in the oreation. As he was made superior to all the rest of God's
creatures in the natural world, being endowed with superior facul-
ties and a rational «oul, it was necessary that he should be govern-
ed by superior laws. The vegetable creaticm was regulated by the
periodical seasons of the year, and these were sufficient for it.
The animal creation,* in addition to the rotation of the seasons,
was endowed with the law of natural instinct, which was necessary
to guide and regulate the various kinds of animals in procuring
sustenance, and in the propagation of their species, according to
their different classes and orders, in their times and seasons.

But man, being superior to all other creatures, had not only the
rotation of the seasons, and the law of nature, in common with
the animal creation ; but he had also a superior law, by which he
was made capable of overruling and governing all the dispositions
and propensities of his animal nature. The rational powers of his
soul were superior to his animal faculties, and constituted him a
rational being, and brought him into a near relation to his Crea-
tor; he was therefore capable of receiving the law of his Cre-
ator to govern and direct his rational soul, in all its movemfi.w^«
Hence he was enabled^ not only to keei^ i\v^ V^^^ ^^ xa^ssl^^ tov^

M


' J22 THE OHUEK OP TIMES AND SEASONS,

govern liis own infetior propensities, but aha lo bave tUe govem-
luem and dominiiiD over all the infcriur crcittion.

The m-ork designed for man, in his primeval slate, was not onlj'

■ ;lo increase and multiply, and replenish the earth with his own off-
T ^)ring, but also lo subdue it,' and improve llie condition of it, and

k Ipjth it liis own condition. 13iit he was to be regubitcd in all these
^tfiings, not by the propensities of his animal passions, but accarA-
"^ 'o the order which God had appointed for him, and which was
' made manifest in his living soul, by the Spirit of <lo(l.i By
b doing, he would have been enabled, under the special guidance
■id protection of his Creator, to rise by degrees to a higher state
If perfection, and might have been, even in this world, tiie honor-
felc progenitor of a numerous offspring who, by their obedience,
tflight Imve blessed and beautified the earth, honored themselves
and their primeval parents, and glorified their Creator. This was
the primeval state and standing of man.

But as the man was to be the ruler and governor of all the infe-
rior creation, it was necessary that his faithfulness should be prov-
ed. Being created a tree agent, and endowed with power to act
according to his own will and pleasure, as far as hia capacity
extended, independent of any other being:, it was therefore necess^
»y that he should have a law lo direct him aright — an order which
fiifi must keep, for his own safety and protection. For altho he had
I Wearer to act freely; yet his eiiiiation and inexperience were auch

■ m to need protection. There was a work before him ; and it was
a matter of importance that he should he fully endowed with power
and wisdom to perform it. This he wits to gain by obedience to
the counsel and instructions of his Creator. As a young and inej^
perienced child is required 10 walk in obedience to the counsel and
instruction of his wise and experienced parent, as the only sate
means of gaining wisdom and experience for himself; so he must
prove his faithfulness by his obedience, before he can be justly en-
titled to the heirship of any portion of his father^ inheritance.

Hence we may see the importance of man's obedience to his
Creator, and the necessity of proving his own faiihl'ulness, by his
obedience, before be could fairly be entitled to the full government
and dominion over the new formed world. It was for this pur-
|)ose thai God gave him a positive command. By strictly keeping
I this command, he was fully able to preserve his honor and dignity,
L and retain his lot and place as the iirsi in the government and do-
ion of all this lower creation. This command was not entnist-
o his animal sensations; but beingfrom God, it was committed
B the more exalted faculties of his rational soul, and was, emphat-

icj.«foMh»gK««mm.ail(l,wcilW.iefra1of(.ri^lllji.BBrt<.fil.


CHAP. IV.] ANB THE PRIMEVAL STATE OF MAN. 1 23

ically, the law of God to mojij for the trials and proof of his faith-
fulness and obedience.

It may be asked, What was this command ? We read that he
was forbidden to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
or to touch it. This injunction was a prohibitory and positive
command to the man, whatever might have been the figure by
which it was manifested to him. To abstain therefore from this
fruit, was only to govern his animal propensities, and keep them
in subjection to the la^v of God in his rational soul. This was an
easy task while he kept the power of self-denial in his own soul ;
but when he had once yielded to the tempter, and had given up
his self-denying power, he could not recall it, it was gone forever
from him. Thenceforth, without the protecting care and overruling
power of his Creator, he was liable to be completely ruined and
destroyed by the power of the enemy, to whose temptations he had
fallen a victim. What a lesson of warning to mankind in the
present day, and especially to young people, to beware of all in-
sinuating allurements to sensual pleasure, and to shun every temp-
tation to evil !

But what was this tree of the knowledge of good and evil ? and
whence arose the temptation to eat of it ? Some suppose the for-
bidden object to be the fruit of some natural fruit-tree. But we
would ask. How is it possible that a tree or its fruit should con-
tain the knowledge of good and evil, or be able to communicate
that knowledge to man ? Yet it was evidently something by which
the man's obedience was to be tried. But if the mere proof of
obedience had been the only object, tho a very necessary one, we
might naturally suppose that any other command or prohibition
might have answered the same purpose. Proof of obedience was
undoubtedly a most essential point. But no candid person will
deny that the wisdom of God would select the most important ob-
ject for the trial of man's obedience ; an object not only important
in itself, but one which really required that injunction for the roan's
own benefit, and the benefit of his posterity.

And what could be more suitable, and better calculated to try
the man and prove his obedience, than to lay upon him an order
calculated to govern his animal propensities, and suppress any dis-
orderly influence upon his mind? Hence the forbidden object
might, with the greatest propriety, be compared to a fruit-tree of de-
licious fruit, as a suitable figure to represent to mankind, in after
ages, the influence of the temptation upon the animal propensities
of the youthful and inexperienced couple. Their propensity to
satisfy hunger and slake their thirst, was necessary to support
life, and therefore could not consistently be denied \ w<yt ^<5f5»k^
such a denial be attended with awy i^o%?M^\j«»fc^\^ \\v^€\x^i^««^»^


E ORDER OF TIMES AN'D SEASOHS,

Biit as the power of generation was giTen to man solely for the
purpose of procreation, and not for the gratrficatjoii of his animal
nature, the dignity of his crealion required that he should maintain
a greater degree of order and purity, in the work of generation,
■han was required of the inferior pan of the creation, which waa
governed hy the law of nature. This was the more essential, aa
, Ae olTspriug of man were to possess rational and immortal souls,
LtfSsiined to an eternal existence. It was therefore a matter of the
[jlrst importance, that the primeval parents of mankind should strict-
n^ obey (he injunctions of their Creator, that their offspring should
f'tmt be corrupted by any violation of the order of nature, on the
r MLTt of their parents, in respect to the times and seasons of genera-
' mm ; but iltat they should be generated under the sanction of Di-
vine Antiiority, according to the times and seasons of God's ap>
potntmeni, as well as in strict conformity to the law of nature.
This therefore, was the comoiand of God to man, and was given,
not only to prove liis obedience, but fur his protection against that
subtle enemy whose object was to destroy the crealion, by infusing
his poisonous influence at a point which was calculated to corrupt
the whole hunmn race, and produce the most extensive mischief,
Biit why was it called, " The tree of the knowledge of good and
evil t" Because these were the most appropriate terms by which the
figure could be expressed : for in obedience, the greatest good was to
be mode known and ensue ; and in disobedience, the greatest evil
wns octufllly made known, and did ensue, both to himself and all iiis
)K>sterity : hence no other terms could be so suitable to express the
I real nature and design of this ligure.

I The limes and seasons of generation were evidently designed
ky the Creator, as the esmblbhed order of propagalioo, in tlie ani-
hial creation. This order is very visible in the inferior creation,
and doubtless would have been no less manifest in man, had he
been feithful to his trust. His rational soul, while standing in its
primitive purity and uprightness, could never be degraded to the
servitude of his animal passions ; it must havestood preeminent in
dignity, and held the govcritment ofevery inferior propensity. The
power was entrusted lo the living and rational soul of man; and
the commnnd of God was sufficient to maintain that power, as long

I as the soul maintained its obedience. This waa the point of trial;
on this deiieiided the man's fate ; on this depended the state and
character of bis olTRpring : for like begets like ; and if parents are
l^enaied from God, they will of course produce an alienated off-
'^ing.
I The innn ibereAire, in his primeval stale, stood in a nohle capa-
bly, nut only to prove his ^ithfulness by his obedience, but to
jmserve inviolaie the order of the creation, for ihe support
maintenance ol' lijs important and dinniftiid wauow, toviv ft"


I;


rtat wi


CEAP. IV.] AI^D THE PRIMEVAL STATE OF MAN. 1 2$

own happiness and the happiness of his posterity, and for the hon«
or and ^ory of his Creator. His task was easy ; it required no
sacrifice, but merdy the subjection of liis animal propensities to
his rational powers. But still he was in a state of trial, a state of
probation ^ and his obedience was the very point to be tried. So
long as he kept this, all was safe ; but if he failed in this, all was
lost. This state of trial was necessary ; for without it there could
be no proof, either of obedience or disobedience. The soul in
yielding obedience to God his superior, was safely protected ; but
in yielding to an inferior propensity, he must of necessity fall under
the power of that influence to which he yielded obedience. '^ Know
^^ ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his
'^ servants ye are to whom ye obey ; whether of sin unto death, or '
^^ c^* obedience unto righteousness.'^*

But whence originated the evil influence which led to disobedi-
ence ? It could not be in any of the works of God ; for they were
all pronounced ^' very good," and it is impossible that vertf ml
should proceed from very good. It could not spring from God ;
for no evil influence could originate from the source of all good-
ness. <^ God is light, and in him is no darkness at all." Hence
darkness could never proceed from light. The evil therefore, must
have originated in darkness; it could have had no other source.

By recurring back to the order of the creation, in the preceding
chapter, it will be seen that tho God's works were *' all very good,**
tho light was created in the midst of darkness, and order establish-
ed in the midst oi confusion ; yet the darkness was not annihilated,
nor was the source of confusion destroyed. In scripture, the pow-
er of evil is called the power of darknessA Hence that invisible
power of evil, which is eternally opposed to all good, and which
is called The Devil, has its existence in that spiritual darkness of
which the natural darkness is a figure. From this power flows
all spiritual and moral evil ; it is the source of all those principles
and influences which, in their operations, oppose the nature of god-
liness and injure the works of God. It is therefore the height of
folly and wickedness, in any one, to charge any of those evil pro-
pensities which lead to the dark works of sin, up<m the God of light
and holiness : for they never originated from him.

The darkness which was left in the natural creation, and which
was divided from the light, was designed to show that good hath
no fellowship with evil, nor the spirit of lic^ht with the spirit of
darkness. It also shows that there was still a place left for the
entrance and temptation of an evil influence. That evil influence
indeed entered, in the hour of darkness, and found access to the
woman, in the form of a serpent, a sly, cunnin? serpent, a crooldLed.
serpent, an inferior, grovelling ceplWe, ow^ Qil>5a«>ftfc^wga«&^^ ^^

*Mom.rLi6. t See LuV x\u, W lE.^Yi.VvWofc^^V'v-'^'^*

Ma


THE ORI>EH OF TIMES AND SEA30SS,


[part


Kl26

^H iriiii'l) vas intended its a wariung to man, and which oughl to liave

^rWil the woman on hrr guard. Instcail of listpniRg to the deceitful

^^ insinuations of a reptile so ranch her inferior, she oi^tto have

been guided by the wbolesome counsel of her superior, and kepi

the law of her Creator, which it is evident she well recoUeeted,

even in the midst of her fatal interview with the serpent.

I But the woman was overcome. She yielded to that evil influ-
pnce which, tbrotigh the subtilty of the serjient, wrought upon her
■nimal propensities, and infused into her mind the filthy passion of
huit. The woman being thus enticed and overcome, enticed her
nisbaiid,and tlirough tbesaineevi! inSuence, overcame him. Thus
Ae noble order of the creation was reversed. Man having yielded
In the temptation, and received and indulged an evil propensi^,
his power was gone. And having been once overcome, by yield-
ing to the insinuations of an authority inferior to his own, he had
henceforth no control over the inferior creation, any further than
by the permission of bis Creator : for he had forfnted his right by
^Jhs disobe<lieiice. Thus man became a servant to the power of
wil bv yielding obedience to it, by which means his nature, and,
Vough that medium, tlw whole natural world became cmrupted
^b evil.
Hence it is easy to see that this earth was, in every respect, cal-
railaled for a stale of probation. Had there been no darlcDeBS
upon il, had there been nothing in it to which evil could find ac-
cess, then truly it would have been no place of trial ; and if no plac
tftriid, then no state of probation to n ■ • ■ ■ ■

ibilalion of evil; so the spirit of evil
lierever he finds darkness. But darkuE
d order; and had man been faithful ic
n confined witliin it
n the bcgittniiig, to


As darkness is the
I always find access
ad its appointed place
n his duty, evil might have
n limits. It was evidently man's duty
Q his place of protection, and rest in


ie time of darkness, and wait the returning light ;

IC himself in the dark till he had obtained light sufficient lo witb-

ind the power of darkness.*

bMap, by bis disobedience, exposed himself to the power ofdark-

' , and opened the way for the entrance of (he enemy wliere,

trwise, he never could have entered. This occasioned his fall,

e loss of his jjower mid uiithorily, and completed his ruin, as far

il respected his relation and connection with the spiritual world.

Trum this loss and ruin, it was impossible that there should be

Iny (cstoralion without a new order of tbinys, and a new raan who

Wild prove fsilbfiil to his trust. Whala.lessonofwamiagtothech!l.

"^ 1 of Uud to be faithful .' im faith fulness leads to inevitable ruia.

fap la l.ghl'Tn^'hJ'^mK^i! "'"'''''"'''''' " "■""'"■'"""" '^"''"'*"r*" *""*
)fiwBiFfl^™»n,/»dotl>!n!ni, -


v:kjh: drun cwotirAU^l ID


^\n'wA ^^lAiu t h^


CHAP IV.} AND THE PRIMEVAL STATE OF UAW. 127

This world being created and designed for a state of probation,
it must necessarily continue to be such to Adam's posterity, as well
as to himself. To suppose that Adam's faithfulness would have
released his posterity from a state of trial, is a mistaken supposi-
tion ; because a season of probation was no less necessary for them
than for him : for evil still existed; and it was therefore as neces-
sary for his posterity to gain power over it, as for himself. His
faithfulness could not have released them from the trial of their own
obedience, nor have secured "them from the wiles of the Adversary.
Each individiud must therefore necessarily pass through a state of
trial ; and had Adam stood faithful, his posterity, even to the latest
generation, while the order of nature remained, must have stood
by their own obedience, or fallen by their own disobedience, to the
authority of their righteous parents, who, by standing in the order
of God, and keeping the Divine law, would have been God's rep-
resentatives to their offspring.

Adam and Eve having, through disobedience, 3delded to the in-
iiuence of evil, were overcome by it ; and the spirit of evil having
once found an entrance, could enter again and again. They must
therefore, ever after, be under the power of that evil influence, unless
protected by some superior power. And as like causes produce
like efiects ; so they b^at children in their own likeness, an o£P
spring like themselves, and under the power of the same evil inflii-
ence in the work of generation. Their union and relation to their
Creator was now lost. They were now forever debarred from the
tree of life, which was before accessible to them, and by which
they partook of the life of Godj and shared communion with him,
in their natural state. Having now nothing to support them in
their former exalted station, they of course, fell from tneir relation
to God, into that nature which they had indulged and gratified;
the nature of luist. The rational soul having yielded its power, their
animal propensities, being corrupted by the nature of die serpent,
had now the preeminence over them.

Here we may clearly see the cause why it is, even to this day,
that the rational soul of man is so much under the influence of his
animal passions. And yet, even of this, the greater part of man-
^d seem to be utterly insensible, and will often imagine that thev
are guided in their speculations and pursuits, by the dictates of trut»
and right reason, while in fact, they are either led by their animal
passions, or deceived by some of the propensities of a fallen nature.
This is often seen, not only in the ordinary transactions of life, but
also in the pursuits of religion, in the establishment of many reli-
gious institutions, in the speculations and writings of men on sub-
jects of divinity, and may be observed in a thousand in8t»xv^<Q!&^^^«^
among those who are esteemed great and ^<(kA isiKisk** "B^xttW Vv^^
is ihimon dy itsjruit.


PART IV.

The fall, loss and depravity op Man, including

god^s progressive work, and his dealings

WITH Man in his fallen state.

CHAPTER 1.

Hie cattsCj nature and effects of Man^s loss from God,

It is universally acknowledged by the professors of Christianity^
tliat in consequence of Adam's transgression, mankind are lost
from God. This is so fully taught in the scriptures, and the evi-
dence of it so visible throughout the world, that it cannot be dispu-
ted. But what was the real cause of that loss, aiid wherein its na«
ture and effects are most clearly manifested, is but little considered^
and still less understood. It is generally viewed, however, as a
punishment inflicted on mankind, for an act of disobedience com-
mitted by their first parents. In this view, God is represented
as an arbitrary despot, with his eternal and absolute decrees, im-
puting guilt to the whole human race, as the effect of Adam's trans-
gression. But this doctrine, to say the least of it, is a blind impeach-
ment of God's righteousness.

The idea that mankind are bom into the world with Adam's
guilt upon them, is wholly inconsistent with Diviue Righteousness,
and contrary to all the light of reason and revelation that ever God
bestowed on man, and has no foundation in truth. Even the com-
mon sense of mankind must teach them, that it is impossible for a
son to be guilty of an act of sin which was committed by his father,
before he was born ; and it would be considered as the height of
injustice to punish the son for his father's sin. ^^ The son shall
^^ not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear
^^ the iniquity of the son : the righte<Hisness of the righteous shall
^' be upon hfm, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
<< him."* Yet this son might afterwards become guilty of the
same sin by his own act ; and in that case he would justly deserve
punishment.

To say that the child of fallen parents is bom in a fallen state,
or under the influence of a fallen nature, is to declare the truth ;
but this by no means implies guilt in the child. No one will pre-
tend that a child who is the oflspring of adultery, is, on that account,
chargeable with the guilt of his parents ; nor would it be consis-
tent with justice for him to sufier for the crime of his parents. But
as a corrupt fountain cannot send forth pure waters, and as like
causes necessarily produce like effects ; so the fruit of eivcx^ ^x^^
partakes of the nature of the tree "wVudi iptcAwt'eAL>X« ^^^^"^^^
tiw wicked act of the parent canuQX \)^ wmm^js^ xk^^^^o^ ^s^»-\


i


I


jn/^^ THE CAUSE, NATURE AND EFFECTS

yet the child is liable, unlexs restrained by a superior principle,
to fullow the same wicked eiainple, and bring guilt upon iiimself
by a similar aci.

This isJuGt the situation of Adam's posterity. Those who yield
to the same propensity, and follow his exiimple, naturally run into
the same act of ^D, and as really partake of the forbidden frait as
Adam did; and by that means they bring the same guilt upon
themselves, and are thenceforth as elTectually excluded from the
Iree of life as Adam and Eve were. But those who are willing to
yield obedience la a superior principle, and to deny themselves
and take up their crosses agwnst the propensities of that nature
which they have ''eceived truta their parents, arc Justly entitled to
oat of the tree of life and live forever.

Disobedience to the positive command of God, was eridently
(hecavse of man's fall; and hisfallwas the inevitable conseij'u^nF^
of the act which he commhied, of which he was forewarned at the
lime he was forbidden to commit it. As if a father who had a son
residing in the neighborhood of an enemy, should warn his son of
thediingeroflistening to the insinuations of that enemy, and com-
mand turn not to do it at his peril. The son disobeys, and the
consequences of which he was forewarned, follow of course. Here
the blame and loss falls upon the son, while the father stands justi-
fied, having done liis duty in warning his son of the danger. It is
impossible that there should be injustice with God. A holy and
rigtiteons Being cannot tempt any of his creatures to their own de-
struction : it is inconsistent with his nature. « Let no man say
" when he is tempted, I am tempted of Uod ; for God cannot be
" templed with evil, neither tempteth he any man : but every man
" is tempted, when he is drawnaway of his own lust, and enticed."*

The very command of God to the man was an evidence of lus
danger, and showed that there was an opposite influence, against
which it was necessary to be guarded. The temptation to disob^
dience proceeded from the prince of darkness, the great enemy of
iSDuls, who found an entrance into God's creation through the ser-
" ent, the very emblem of subtilty and deception. Tlirough the
isinualions of his deceitful spirit, he infused into tlie animal sen-
itionsofthe woman die lust of concupiscence, which she commu-
Dicated to the man, and by which they were both overshadowed
with darkness, and unseasonably led into the act of sexual coitioit;
and thus they partook of the forbidden fruit.t Hence the curse
which followed was denounced, and actually laid upon that nature


hgdfauiid'lUmiuin


CHAP. I.] OF man's loss FROM GOD. 131

which they had thus received from the serpent, and mutually in-
dulged in themselves. And the same nature and the same curse,
have both been continued down, in the line of natural generation,
to this day. And this curse can never be taken off without a full
and final cross against the indulgence of that same fleshly lust,
and the final destruction of that nature which leads to it.

Many objections have been urged against this doctrine, as well
as against the doctrine of celibacy and continence in general, which
are well known to be among the principle articles of our faith.
To enter fully into the discussion of this subject, and answer in a
satisfactory manner, all the objections that may be raised against
this doctrine, will require great plainness of speech.* But as
this appears to be the most darling principle of the world, and as
the greatest opposition against our faith is levelled at this particular
principle ; therefore, in conformity to the strict demands of light
and truth, revealed in this day, it appears necessary that the cov-
ering which has so long been spread over all nations, should be
taken away, and the vail removed from the face of all people.t

This vail was prefigured by the vail of the temple, which sepa-
rated the entrance into the most holy place. " The vail of the tem-
ple was rent in twain" at the crucifixion of Jesus,:^ which signified
the rending of the vail of the flesh by his suflerings for sin. After
that, those who faithfully followed his footsteps through mortifica-
tion, and lived a spiritual life, were able to look within the vail,
and to discover, in some measure, what it was which separated
those who lived in the works of generation from having, access to
the most holy place. Yet the vail remained untaken away.
" Neverthless," says the apostle, " when it shall turn to the Lord,
^^ the vail shall be taken away,''|| And this never could be done
till the second appearing of Christ, when it was taken away by
that chosen female in whom the second appearing of Christ first
commenced. As the vail of darkness which hid the face of God
from man, was first caused by the transgression of the first woman ;
so it could not be removed until it was removed by that distinguish-
ed woman, in whom was revealed the firide of the Lamb, the first
Mother of the children of the Kingdom, in the new creation.

That Adam and Eve were unseasonably led into the act of sex-
ual coition by the lust of concupiscence, through the insinuations
of the serpent, and (whatever may have been done in a figure) that
thb lust was, in reality, the forbidden fruit of which they partook,
appears evident from the following considerations.

1 . The sentence denounced upon the woman. ^^ I will greatly
^^ multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow shalt thou

* We would not wilhngl^jr give oflence to any ; our onlj desizn ii to shov «A^.Vv^i^^&'«^».
our faith clearly en \h\% subject, fof the iaformatioa oC aW ^Vuk «itiiT« V» >isA«T%N»si^^X«'wa2k.
are willinfp to be benefitted bj lU

tSeeIsm.xsr.7. t See MftSt. sxtU. Si. ^^^«t,KCxA%.


1 32 THE CAUSE, NATURE AND EFFEI

* bring forUi children ; and ihy desire sIihU be U> thy husbFtnd ;'
or, (more properly, according lo the original,) "ihy desire shall tn
" siibject iu thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."*

Here it may be asked, Why was the sentence directed againi
hercimoeption ? Why was she to be punished with sorrow In brini
ing forth children ? And why was her desire (or more properlj
ber lust ) lo be subject to the will of her husband ? Why this rig
orous sentence ? Is not God just and righteous? Most certajoly
flnd therefore he dispenses punishments according lo the nature <
ihciiffence; ornither,he forsakes those who forsakehim,aiidleavi
them to reap the reward of their own doings. Whatever a ma
sows, the same he must reap ; and whatever he eats, that he mil
digest, however pninful it may feel. He who, after being faithfiilt
warned by his friend, foolishly swallows a poisonous fruit, becaii!
«f its fair appeanince and peculiar flavor, must feel its elfects ; bi
he nughl by no nienns to chaise bis sufferings upon his friend.

From the very nature of the curse denounced upon the womaE
the discerning mind will readily perceive what the nature of it
olTence was. This same curse has been more or less felt by tb
ftUen daughters of Eve to this day."| This remark will appli
willi peculiar force, to all those who have been decoyed by tk
same insinuating Bllurenienta lu pleasure, who have yielded to ti
seme desires of an animal nature, who have been ensnured by it
same deceitful influences of concupiscence, and have conceive
and brought forth children in obedience to the inordinate demanil
of lusL Thus the woman is not only subjected to the pains am
sorrows of childbirth, but even in her conception, she becomi
subject lo the libidinous passions of her husband ; and in th
sense, her desire is subject to ihe will of her liusb;ind.§ Th
slavish subjection b often carried to such a shocking ejitent,

•S..in.r Bib O-n UL IB, fS-c Crudf n". OoncurJ.nce. ArlicI, flrrire.

t TJiQ it 'a dbviuus that lliEclfects or Ihe pHmitive curse are iti
felt by the whole human ruce, us iheon«]iririg; ofrullen parcnldand
of that curs:; aiul thn tXl wumankiniL Luve inherited their portiun ol'tl
curae deiiDuncL'd upon the tirst woman i yet there has always been an c
ception in fuvor of lliQse virgin daughters wlio li»ve wisely kept ther
scivc* from the contain inating corruptions of luat. Thej have bee
thereby, not unlyelempted from the pains anil surrows of childbirth, ui
preserved from those debasing pollutions, and that servile wreicliednei
sDCommonto those wliasul^ect themselves to the inordinate passions
man ; but Ibey have often been diitlng'uUhed m peculiar objects of [
vine favor.

S Tliismay indeed bea willing subjection an the part of the woman, iir
her pas&ions muy be even muredcluaed iban his , bui wlielher lier bu
jeclioii be willing ur unwilling, alill >hi$ does not alter its servile natui
as reapects rlie miin's power of enforcing it, ao long us he posaesaes lb
power, as Jier husband. ande»:ti:uieBi\ii.l live inmiKatlon of liispaaaioi
instead ot being governed by llic law oSn»,VBc,w>iwW.'« t&^<A.


<:HAP I.] OF MAN^S LOSS FROM GOD. 133

many females have suffered an unnatural and premature death , in
consequence of the unseasonable and excesave indulgence of this
passion in the man. Thousands there are, no doubt, who are able
to bear a sorrowful testimony to the truth of this remaric.

The libidinous debauchee may sneer at this unseemly picture,
and the squeamish prude may frown at it ; but the candid and re-
flecting mind will readily acknowledge and deplore its painful and
melancholy truth. Some, convinced of its truth by sorrowful ex-
perience, will doubtless be ready to exclaim, This is surely a heavy
curse upon the woman ; but is the man spared ? By no means :
but his curse appears more obvious in another pmnt of view. Tho
the ground was cursed for his sake, at the time of his first trans-
gression ; yet it is evident that he has greatly increased the curse
of the land, by his own corruptions, and degraded himself far be-
low the state in which the primitive curse left him ; as will appear
in the sequel.

2. The evident violation of the order of nature, in a total dis-
regard to times and seasons j^ in the work of generation.

That source from which man derives his earthly existence, from
which his very being springs, ought to have been preserved
pure and uncorrupted. The order of his generation was never
designed to be polluted by disorderly passions, nor perverted by
untimely seasons. Yet what is the fact in this respect, when con-
trasted with the inferior part of the creation ? As before stated, the
various orders of the animal and vegetable creation are governed
by the established laws of nature, and generate and bring forth
fruit according to the regular order of times and seasons.* But
man is a most marvellous exception in this respect. He who alone
was created and appointed the lord of all this lower world, alt ho
in many other respects, he displays a mind capable of a far supe-
rior degree of perfection ; and altho, in the ordinary transactions
of life, he often observes a good degree of order ; yet in the gene-
ration of his species he regards none.

Notwithstanding his dignified station as lord of the earth ; not-
withstanding his rational soul, with all its noble faculties ; notwith-
standing his light and knowledge, his instruction, experience and
observation ; notwidistanding the law of his Creator, which was
. given to regulate in him the times and seasons of generation (as
well as all other things pertaining to his work) to a greater degree
of perfection than could be expected in the brutal creation ; yet in
this important point, man has shamefully degraded himself below
all the inferior creation. Regardless of the regular order of nature,
he consults it not ; blind to the times and seasons of conception,
he sees them not^ deaf to the law of Moses^ hel\%\fi.\!k<si^^\.v^'^\
an enemy to the pure and perfect law ol C\if\sX^ >ftft \»s»^or&''^

*See *» Estiblithti. order df timei and seatout,^* P»%^ '^^^


rSE, NATURE ASD EFFI

from his thouglils. Hp is eagerly bent upon the acts of generatioi
but seeks none of Jis fruits; the desire of ofTspring is not his mt
tive; his rule of action is diclnted only by bis inordinate paasioDs.
The insatiable nature of bis hisi knows no bounds, submits to na
order, and cares for no limes nor seasons; except it be the time
Rnd season of darkness, which is so con^'enial to his lawless and
sbamelul works.

Sucb is the lost stale of man, and such the subverted order of

nature in the works of generation. To the truth of ihese remarks

let the world ilself Lear witness. ■ And herein we have a striking

[ proof of that carnal mind in man, which the apostle says, "is not

subject to the low of God, neither indeed can be."

3. The shame lehich is gmeraiiy found to be initeparabk from

K thu ad ofaexual coition.

^^B This is not only a powerfal evidence that ihe act itself is under a
^^^K curse,but an undeniable proof of its impurity and unholiness. If this
^^^B be not so, why did the shame which was the consequence of Adam's
^^■^ and Eve's transgression, lall upon the parts which (hey covered ?
Does not this plainly point out ihe very act which they had c<
mitted ? Does it not evidently show what the forbidden fruit w
If by y\\e forbidden fi-mt, we are to understand literally, ihe fruit of
* Eonie natural tree, which Eve plucked willi her hands, anil which

they both ale with their months, why did not ih? shame fall upon
the hand that plucked, and the moulh that ate it? As before observ-
ed, God always dispenses his judgments according to the oi
the olTence. But in ll^is case, there does not appear to be ai _
ishment inflicted upon the hand or the mouth ; but the parts to wliicli
pertain the power of generation, arenow, for the first time, condemn..
ed to feel shame; aud their first object was to conceal those parts

Ifroni the view of each other; accordingly "they sewed figleaves to-
together and made themselves aprons," And even to this day, it a
justly accounted a shame, botli in the male iind female, to expose the
nakedness of those parts : and more especially in the female, who
it seems is doomed to share the greatest portion of the curse in this
respect, as being the first in the transgression.

Thisguilty passion ofshame seems lobepecullarly connected with
that libidinous act which tirst produced it; so that it naturally shuns
the light, and seeks to cover itself in the shades of darkness, seclud-
ed even from the eyes of the most intimate friends. Is not this fact,
otitaeir, a most Striking evidence that there is something, either in
the act itself, or which is inseparably connected with it, which '
never came from God? And yet are there not many, very many,
among modern christians, who, setting aside that which Jesus
Christ declared to be " the fim and great command," have set up
this lascivious act in its place? anddii they not, instead of loving
t (fie Lord God with all their \ieatU ani aoM\8,\ctv\'j\<iN*;vVtM •-—


CHAP. I.] OP man's loss FROM GOD. 135

with all their hearts and souls, and devote all the mind and strength
to support and maintain it ?

Corrupted and abused, and shamefully debased, as the work of
generation is, by ihe lust of concupiscence, it is still supported
and maintained by the professors of Christianity, who profess to
sanction it by a legal ceremony, under the name of a divine insti"
tution. But where is the evidence that the nature of the act is
purified, or the shame taken away, by the means ? For altho the
most reverend and pious divines may exert all their piety, and all
their divinity, to gospelize it in their sermons, legalize it in their
marriage ceremonies, and sanctify it by their fervent prayers ; yet
they can neither take away the shame of the act, nor purify the
nature of it ; nor can they ever induce the pious devotees of this
holy ordinance to show forth their obedient zeal, by fulfilling this
great command before the eyei of their Reverend itdxhersy who
have done so much to sanctifv the deed to them.

Nor can even these pious divines themselves, with all their zeal
in its favor, be induced to set them a public example of this sort of
worship, however faithful they may be to perform it in private.
So closely is shame attached to that action which claims for its
authority the first great command t)f God! What! Does an ac-
tion which is authorized by the command of the Almighty, and
sanctioned by a divine ceremony, require to be performed in the
shades of darkness ? Can darkness preserve the sanctity of an ac-
tion which would be profaned by the light of the sun ? Is it a shame
for christians to obey a divine command in the presence of their
christian brethren and sisters ? If so, the command must surely be
a very shameful one.

Probably these remarks may feel offensive to some of our pro-
fessedly good christian advocates for this great command^ and
perhaps they will be ready to cry out, by way of exclamation,
Shameful! shameful! We freely acknowledge that the subject is
a shameful one, and deeply lament the shameful cause which has
excited such remarks. We can truly say, in the language of Paul,
" We have no fellowship with thesf unfruitful works of darkness,
" but reprove them/' And we also acknowledge with him, that,
" it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of
" them in secret.''* But if it be a shame to speak of such shame-
ful conduct among a people professing the christian religion, sure-
ly it must be a far greater shame to practice it.

It will doubtless be readily acknowledged, that he who lives in
the practice of stealing, acts a far more shameful and dishonorable
part, than he who takes up a full cross against every thievish pro-
pensity, and bears an open and decided testlaioiv^ ^^^\nsX*^. "^^sst
ean it be disputed that such a testmotv^ vfovii^ ^^ \sssn!^ \sssi\!^

* f^pb. V. n, 12.


136 'im, V.MlW.f'BSTUBE aSd effects

ofiensive to a thief than to an honest man, espi^ialiy if it siiniild
•xpose any of his own thievish r.onducl. The truly tionrst and
virtuouB, wiiether male or female, will never be olTended at a les-
tiraony against any evil condnct cil' which they ihemselves are
really innocent. Nor indeed can tliey feel unwilling ro be enliglk-
lenen respecting the evil nature and tendency of any act, concern-
ing which tiiey have hitherto been ignorarlly guilty.

We would now seriously ask, Whence proceeds all tliisshame?
It must have some foundation ; and there can be no cause of shame
in virtuous actions. " God is light, and in liioi is no darkness al
" all. If we Bay we have fellowship with him, ami walk in dark-
" ness, wc lie and do not the truth."* Sexual coition claim.t for
its sanction, an ordinance of God. But if it be an onlinance of God,
it must have fellowship with God. Tlie action, however, requires
to be performed in the dark; therefore those who prucliceil, inusj
necessarily walk in darkness. If then, Uieu my it halli any fel-
lowship with GotI, "thry fie, and do noi ilie tnilh." If there is
no darkness in Goil, then nothing which proceeds from God, can
require to be veiled in darkness. That shame which sq^ks to con-
ceal its lascivious actions in llie shades of darkness, and blushes to
have them brooghl to the light, b the notorious concomitant of
guilt J why else should it seek the abodes of darkness ?

This guilt-denoting passion is not connected with the sexusil
intercourse of any other part of God's crraiioii. The beasts of
the field, tlie fbWlK of llie air and the fishes of the sea, are total
Grangers to it. It is found no where but in the fallen race of Adam
and Eve ; and its very source is in that which many modern chris-
tians esteem as the greatest and most importlint of all their wofka
on earth ; that of generating their own species, and propagating
immortul beings for the eieinal world ! The sense of shame con-
iieeleJ with this act, is a most powerful evidence of its entire op-
position to gospel light, purity and holiness ; and therefore it caa
have no part In the work of regeneration. The idea of sanctifying
these works of darkness, and of being regenerated souls, and born
of God, while living in the gratification of ihem, is a graiid decep-
tion of the enemy of souls, calculated to conceal from raaii tlie true
hatuM and origin of his loss. Truly this is '* the vail which is
spread over all nations," and ivhich God has promised to " destroy
in his holy mountain.'-'

4. The vile use and ghamcful nhuse of tJiU Inalesg piit^tenrity.

This is an evidence of man's loss which' one might naturally

■suppose could not escape observation. But as a blind man who

is wandering in darkness and wallowing in the inirt, cannot dia>

rarer ihc liarliuess which surrounds him, nor the filth which coven

.^im} so those ivlio are spirittiiiHy Wvnil camwl discover their owi


CHAP. I.] OF MAN^S LOSS FROM GOD. 137

dark and lost situation, nor the filthiness of that lascivious nature
which overspreads the world around them. If those professed
moralists (not to say christians) who so strenuously advocate the
works of generation, had no other motive in it, but to .fulfil the
primitive design of the marriage institution, and generate offspring
in obedience to the will of God, they might, as natural people,
have a plausible, if not a reasonable plea for so doing, provided
they kept themselves within due bounds, and observed the order
of nature, and the regular times and seasons of generation. But
still it would be a natural, and not a spiritual work, and therefore
could have no part in the work of Christ, which is spiritual.

But the lawless passion of lust has no respect to the will of God;
the generation of offspring is not its object; nor does it regard the
order of nature, nor the times and seasons of generation, even in
the marriage state ; its only motive is the gratification of its own
lawless propensities. In the pursuit of these gratifications, how
often is the law of nature violated ! How often is this insatiable
p^sitm indulged when the state of pregnancy, or the courses of
nature forbid the indulgence ; or when tlie advanced age of the
female denies all prospect of issue ! How often is the marriage
covenant violated, and the legitimate offspring intermixed with an
adulterous issue ! and what is still more shocking, how often are
abortions procured to prevent issue !

Is not the bare mention of these abominations shocking to the
moral feelings of humanity ? and are not such things shamefully
debasing to the fallen race of man ? Then how offensive and odious
in the sight of a holy and righteous God, must be the shameful
and abominable crimes which are here exposed to view ! Yet these
are but a few of the numerous and shocking violations of the law
of nature, the law of decency, the law of humanity, the law of
purity and the law of God, which are committed, even in that state
which is legalized by the laws of man^ and sanctioned by a religious
ceremony.

But this is not all. How often, is that insatiable propensity in-
dulged alone and in secret ! and how many are the schemes and
inventions to indulge itc and that too, even among those who make
a great profession of Christianity ! Let the appeal be made to the
consciences of those who plead the ^rea^ commanc? to justify their
criminal indulgences. Is not the secret indulgence of that filthy
passion, in the act of self-pollution, much more frequent with many
modern christians, than secret prayer? Are there not very mnnyy
of both sexes, who can publicly seat themselves at the sacramen-
tal board, and professedly partake of the consecrated memorials
of the body and blood of a dying Savior ; an 1 yet in their secret
chambers, indulge their concupiscence, ^xvd ^^morIvjJ^ ^^S^po^^


t


ifaur bodies with acts wliich they would blush to comm'tt in the
presenre of a child ?

Are not these " the unlruitfu) works of d&rkness" with which
the n|io9tlc coniinands us to "hawe no fellowship." And shall
ehristians indulge themselves u) these thiagsi' Can God be Imnor-
ed thus? Is this fulfilling his-comniBtids? la this living in obedi-
Oice to llie apostle's precept, which requires us to moKity the flesh
with on its affections and liisls ? Is ihis the secret devotion which
God requires of christians ? and will God accept of such devotions
ftcm such christians ? or can tliey with cunfidence enter a temple,
professedly dedicated lo the worship of a pure and holy God, and
presuntluously attempt to lift their defiled hands and deceitful
hearts to Iliiit whose Allsee'ing eye b able to ^earefa the heart and
try iho reins of every creature ?

This lawless passim) is not only the most corrupt, but abo the
most unbounded propensity of roan's, fallen nature, and its aedons
are ilic least subject to restraint. All other evil propensities hare
some limitations to their actions. Profane swearing, drunkenness,
gambling, frauds, thefts, robberies and murders, are chiefly confin-
ed to tlie more licentious and abandoned classes of society, and ar^
under some restraint of the laws of the land. But the lawless pas-
sion of lust knows uo bounds, ts cnntined to no limits, and subject
to no laws. Altho its shame is not hid, nor cau it be confined
wilhiniheUmitsofdarknesa,itsmostnat[iral and congenial element;
yot its practical advocates are ntnnerous, and many of them Mghly
honored and respected. All ranks and classes, from the prince to
the bea^r, from the sanctimonious professor of rriigion to the
blasplteming infidel — all nre anxious to support, and zealous to
pl^d for this delusive passion, this deceptive enchantress, this
heathen Vrnnt, this adorable goddess of lost, under the deceitful
mask ofan onlrnance of heaven — a great coimnmid of God 1"

How faacmatiug is the power, how extensive the dominion,
how numerous the worshippers oiT this alluring goildess.' Did the
vast miiltitudei of heathen idolaters who worshipped the Great
Siaiia of fphesus, bear any proportion to the eoimtless ihou-
«S|idft of ihost! called christians, wlio honor the lascivious Venus
with ihe oFTerings of concupiscence ? LooX ai the numerous de-
votees who surround her amorous shrine; bok ;tt the numerous
female, shamefully atiandoned to her amours ; look at the libidi-
nous herd of debauchees haunting their infamous dwellings ; look
at our hirge towns and cities, more especially our seaports ; see
these haunts of lawless lust and infamy; see their worshippers of
all classes, the high and the low, the ricli and the poor, the bond
iiAd free, flocking and mingling, under the cover of darkness, with
iafknioas prostilates, all ^oiaiscuously «u^ged in these o
^i/fralions !


CHAP. I.] OF MAN^S LOSS FROM GOD. 1 39

It has been stated by a noted writer, that in the smgle city of
London, there were no less than nine hundred bawdy houses, and
fifty thousand women who procured their living at the expense of
their chastity.* Doubtless these receive their support from a far
greater number out of all classes of dignified noblemen, professed
gentlemen, merchants, clerks, tradesmen, mechanics, apprentices,
sailors, officers, soldiers, and laborers of all sorts, who haunt these
dwellings, and expend a considerable portion of their incomes in
supporting these scenes of debauchery, while they indulge their
concupiscence with the inmates. If this is the state of the city of
London, what must be that of Paris, which, if not equally populous,
IS said to be more licentious ? Yet these two cities contain but a
small part of this description of people who inhabit the numerous
towns and cities of Europe. Add to these the other three quar*
ters of the globe, and what must be the numeral amount of the
worshippers of Venus, both in and out of the bands of wedlock?

Are all the denominations of professing christians now in the
United States, with all their professed worshippers of the true
God, able to boast of half the number which constitute the multi-
tiide of devotees to Venus ? We presume they are not. What
then shall we think of the Christianity of America, and indeed of
the whole world ? Are not the worshippers of Venusy in every
country, far more nunierous than the worshippers of the true God ?
And is not a vast portion of those who profess to worship the true
God, far more zealous in the worship of Venus? And shall the
worship of the true God be divided with the adorations paid to
the goddess of lust ? Never ! never !

Did the sins of the antedeluvian world bear any proportion to
those of the present day? And will it not be far more tolerable for
the unbelieving Jews, in the day of judgment, than for those of the
present generation, who profess to be followers of Christ, and yet
secretly indulge themselves in such filthy and shameful abomina-
tions ?

Doubtless the more sober and considerate part of mankind will
readily censure these abominations, as lamentable deviations from
the path of virtue, and very dishonorable to the dignity of rational
beings. But let us examine, impartially, tlie nature of these things.
Human nature, in its present, lost state, is blind, partial and self-
ish ; and very readily inclines mankind to justify in themselves,
those practices which they condemn in others.

But let those who condemn the promiscuous and lawless lust of
the inmates and devotees of public brothels, and at the same time,
indulge the same propensity under the sanction of the civil law,

* Dr. Morse, in aformer edition of his Geography. It has aUi h«^tv t."»\A\svaX* W^ •^isv"*^
istrate of I^ondon, in " A Treatise on the po\\ce of lYit Tnt\tOT^Vvft,^"» >Ji\*N.>3ckfc xv«w^«-^ *^^«M^
mains, of nl) classes, who live either wholly orin ■p'*^- ^"J ^to^VaW^vsu, »«ow<»»S. N» '^*^^*^^


NATURE AND EFFECTS [PA^P

Bwail the seal of a religious ceremony, examine with canJor, (he
lature of that propensity which is ihe leading principle of action
n bdtli cases. Is there any teal difference between the married
and the unmarried, either as to the nature nf that propensity, the
HRsalions raciied by it, the effect it produces, or the gialiUcation
experienced in it ? Does the marriage ceremony alter the nature
of either?* If so, why is not the shame reinnvecl from the artion t
Why must it still be covered in the shades of darkness? Why da
not i Is shameful abuses cense? and why is it not subject to the
order of nature, and to the limes and seasons of generation?

Doubtless ihe sanction of a legal ceremony gives a iiceoce
which, assisted by the shades of darkness, removes all restraint
from Ihe feelings of those who do not look beyond it, especially
where Ihe mind has been previously polluted bg lascivious gratifi-
cations ; so that they can now indulge their concupiscence in the
dark, without shame or remorse. But in the estimation of those
who have been enlightened by the law of Christ, and who do not
walk in darkness, this b no evidence of the purity or innocence of
actions which require to be veiled in darkness to conceal their
shame So where a wrong education gives a bias lo acts of violence,
a declaration of war, and the ceremony of enlisting as a soldier,
may remove all restraint to nib and plunder, murder and destroy,
from the feelings of men who do noi look beyond the authority
whi-rh gives the licence. But those who view all wars as unchris-
tian, unmanly and unjust, considerthese enormities in a very diffe-
rent light. The nature of robbery and murder cannot be altered
by a war manifesto ; nor can the law of Christ be repealed by it.
Nor is the nature of lust altered, nor the sensations ot gratification
purified by the legal ceremony of marriage. Hence the sliame of
the action is not removed, nor do its abuses cease.

Another shameful and disgraceful efiect of that lascivious nali
is, that children are frequently led into its gratifications by their
older companions, and greatly coirupted by it. We believe that
parents are not only insensible of the corrupt tendency of these
things in their children, hut carelessly ignorant of the shameful and
shocking extent to wliich they often run in such practices, even at
a very early age. It is not uncommon for children to become the
corrupters of each others' morals in this way, by the opportunities
afforded them in the season of attending school;t and by their fre-
quent Intercourse with their more corrupt companions, ihey ollea
become more apt scholars in these shameful practices, than in the
elements of literary instruction, and by this means a fuundaiion is
laid for future scenes of carruption and wickedness.


«HAP. I.] OF man's loss FROM GOD. 141

Nothing can have a more fatal tendency to weaken and destroy
the force of virtue on the infant mind, and strengthen the power of
evil propensities, than the early indulgence of this sordid passion.
In hoys it is the incipient road to a life of debauchery, and pre-
pares them to become, at the age of maturity, the shameless cor-
rupters of female virtue. In girls, it leads them to become the
easy, yielding objects of artful insinuation — the early victims of
seduction ; and without the seasonable protection of parents and
friends, exposes them to become confirmed harlots, who, in their
turn, will often prove the shameless corrupters of other heedless
youth. Those who duly consider the natural tendency of these
shameful indulgences in children, will be at no loss to understand
the reason why that lascivious propensity is so much more power-
ful, at the age of maturity, in some people than in otheis.

The natural and direct tendency of these gratifications is to cor-
rupt the mind, blunt the efforts of genius, debase the nobler feelings
of humanity, deprave all the moral faculties of the soul, and swal-
low up the whole man in the filthy and ignoble passion of lust.*
In short, the indulgence of this passion in children, not only tends
to sink them below the order of the brutal creation, as before observ-
ed,but it often leads to the horrid crime of bestialiti/ itself; a crime
which, however shocking to the feelings of uncorrupted nature, is
not unfrequent among the human race.

5. This alluring passion holds out promises of pleasure which
never can be realized.

The promises of God are true and faithful ; but the allurements
of lust are deceitful and fallacious. Of all the promises and invi-
tations which God has ever held out to man, to allure his mind to
the practice of virtue, whether by the spirit of prophecy or other-
wise, not one was ever known to fail or come short of the testimo-
ny given ; but on the contrary, the reality of the promise has ever
exceeded expectation, and often surpassed all imagination.

Not so with the promises of sensual pleasure : and here we would
appeal to -the experience of all who have ever listened to the allur-
ing temptations of lust, and sought pleasure in its enjoyments.
The youthful imagination, in listening to these temptations, is often
wrought up to the highest pitch of expectation ; but in the enjoy-
ment, does it not invariably find itself more or less disappointed ?
Ask of these who, from their infancy, have kept themselves pure
and uncontaminated with any of these filthy gratifications, even
till ihe nuptial ceremony had sanctioned the deed, What were the
sensations which succeeded the loss of their purity ? The candid
and honest answer will, invariably, be found to be. Disappoint'

* Many ancirnt heathen philosophers were ao »cnsvV>\t o^ V\vft tv7L\.wx«\ \ft,Tv\«t,T»ft.^ ^"^ "CsiN*.
propensity to debase the oioral and iiienlal facuUvc*, \Y\si\. NXve-j no\v«vVm^>j ^''^^'^'"^^^'^^^^
vrosseg agaiast it, a.ad prooouncod those the most ^va^Y"? '^'^'^^ ^^^ >j5v<i\tiwX^^t:^^ tQ«aK»-
with wotaeU'


■ill 1 iliiL *rm9tKm


dill ut^JLiI wtiKn; •• k 4

VE. -Fran ■
" Wf§ aMoaf jcair ci«tMt Am' um bcMR. even o*' s^m '"'Bi 1
" war in ;war MmAm r" 'And a^in: -When km k^ «
" eritfA, it bragvdi ibrtli m ; and «n, a-ben k it finiibnt, bfi
*<etbfefifa dndi."* Here bMb phinljrppresenMdai the naai
oTctil and ibr csmk uf d«Mli. IV OMce this puncn is MMhilgi
ibr mnrr tf Wi-TTTt^ Tf)'^ v^nuriH ffcliags of hi


e dee


unit ii <" ' ■' M<rp rrom inrancji to matihriod. We

Hi^r iliiii ■iiim' 11(1 Kniiinw will be found where any one has r
•\iv\i\y Into criminal praci'tcoi, who has not first quaffed largely
Uhlillo'Mii ititliiliieneu*. It gem'rnlly happens that deceit, lyi


|.rtty rrHiiiln, pr-ifmi

iinth, u.: < '.


IhlJi'l.lNll'.


language, and tippling, folio

li ■i^rrnltoleehery. Noin' '
■ 'i-Mi'jfj-, an J Imi'deoetl by

ii> ^. iii'ivnle thefts And hi^h-hani
\. i.Nr;;liiry, highuray robberies,
nwel! [lie lial of""—- -■"•• -'■•>"


Anil lifre lilt ii be rttnembcred, lliui the foundation <
llii>»r i>nni|i1iiittfil vlllninlei, in the iuordlnale indulgence of th
urdfd |>ni|ii<ii*]iy of luiit.

Il It nerilkn in [idiUirc fnrtit in prnnfof this position; they a
liMi iiniii>'J'iHiJi mid (00 in'II iittimit^d io I>e refuted. Ii may not t
Inipi'uni'r. Imwt'^iT, lu lntrodu(« litre nn extract from the rejw
trnlot'iotoi ill.' iir-»»\ -Tiip;v. made at the court of General Sessioi

In il"' .1" ■■> Ml .rune I8:.'l.

"til Mil.. . ' . , . iiiiiiiii which the grandjury have been ^

"fitlii-irn ..| ,.|L ill.. ii1i;rct, nnd the best information acquire
"rti^ .11. iii.l.Kt'.l (i. Uiiievc, \VvaV w«at\'5 i!^*i^ '^'^™^^^^ "*


CHAP. Il] objections ANSWERED* 143

*^ confined in our gaol, were first corrupted by firequenting houses
" kept up for prostitution.^*

Such is thus publicly acknowledged to be the contaminating in*
fluence of this shameful gratification. It requires little more Ught
to convince the reflecting part of mankind that the lust of concur
piscence is, in truth, the corrupt source whence flows all iniquity,
even every evil work.

Perhaps it may be urged that these things proceed firom the abu-
ses of that propensity, rather than from the propensity itself, which
is supposed to be innocent and useful, when kept within due bounds.
But we would ask. Where shall we find the man or the woman,
who indulges that propensity at all, that does keep it within due
bounds ? And where is the man or the woman who never indulges
it, by day nor by night, in any way or manner, but purely to obey
the command of God, and raise up seed to his honor and glory ?
If any such can be found, they are, indeed and in truth, an honor
to human nature, and an example to the fallen race of man. But
if no such can be found, then let not that propensity be deemed
innocent or useful, which produces such horrid corruptions among
the human race.

The faculty of generation, being created of God, was at the be-
ginning, as simple and innocent, in itself, as the faculty of eating
and drinking; and had it never been corrupted, it might, as to its
natural order, still have remained so ; but it was violated by trans-
gression, and corrupted at the very fountain, and brought into sub-
jection to the inordinate passion of lust; and that passion still
maintains its power and influence. Hence all who yield to that
passion, yield the power and strength of soul and body to gender
and nourish evil propensities. Therefore it is no wonder if they
are afterwards unable to deny themselves and refrain from those
evil propensities which still continue to grow stronger by repeated
indulgences ; while every virtuous disposition (if they ever had any)
continues to grow weaker, till at length they find themselves utter-
ly unable to do good, or to refrain from evil.


CHAPTER n.

Objections against the preceding doctrines stated and answered.

We shall now proceed to state and answer some of the princi-
pal objections which are often advanced and strenuously urged
as conclusive against the doctrines advanced in the preceding
chapter.

Objection 1 . It is argued that the very circumstance of man's
being created male and female, is, of itself^ a swf^cSftwX ^^\^\n5:.^

* See Albma/ Onxette of June 33(1, 1321 .


OBJBCTIOKa ANSWERIi:&.

that Cod deaigneil, from the begin niii);, that the earth should be
peopW l)y them ; and the cerlahuj ilial there was no oiher possi-
ble inetmH pmvidctj by whiclj h couM be pi.'opled, is an undeniable
prouf that sexual coitJon was tjie means appoinied, and the only
means ever intended of God for the population of the world.

Answer. All this may be granted; but that il is conclusive
a^insl ihe doctrine wliicli we maintain, remains yet to be proved.
Man was created in a natural slate, like all the rest of the animal
creation, (tho mucli superior in form and faculties,) andbi^gs.
natural man, he was required to keep the law of nature which vtm
given him in common with them. Tliat law required him to p»n-
ps^to his s|)ecies according tn the order of nature, at certain times
snd seasons, which the law itself dictated. And even admitting
that the man had faithfully kept that law, he could never have risen
to n higher slate, withnnt a superior law, but must liave continued
in iliai natural state, and subject to that natural law, like all the
rest of the animal creation, tu the end of time.

But man Iwing destined, as God's repiesentative on earth, to
oecupy a higlier station than any other part of tlie creation, and
God knowing tlic subtilty of the old adversary, and the weakness
and inexperience of (he new formed man, gave him a sjiecial and
positive command, which was calculated not only in prove his
obedience, but to be his strength and protection, in the line of obe-
dience, against the snares and devices of the enemy. This com-
mand was Xo the man a law superior lo the law of nature, and wai
calculated to raise him to a state of honor and dignity far above
the animal creation ; hut it required the man's perfect obedience,
as the only means by which he could preser\'e his power, and se-
cure that protection and those benefits which the law was calcu-
lated lo afford him. Had he kept this law, he would have been a
rightful heir to eternal life. And as this law brought the roan into
a near connexion with his Creator; so the penalty of disobedience
must be proporlionably great; it must nect^sarily separate hini
from God in proportion to the nearness whicli the law had brought
him to God: for the greater a man's privileges are, the greater
must be his condemnation and loss in misimproving them.

But unfortunately for the man, through the subtle influence of
tlie serpent, he was led into disobedience, and thus violated both
ihe law of God and the order of nature. Having been created in
a superior state, and favored with a superior law, he was in a con-
dition W govern all the mferior creation, had he kept his obedience.
But instead of hearkening to that superior law, the Utw ofhis Creator,
or even adhering to the law of nature, he yielded tn the inainua-
lions of the serpent, through the woman, which wrouglit upon hiar
^ inferior, unimal passions, and induced him not only to violate the
Uaivofbia Creator, but also the law o£ oaWt«. ftett^^t^^R■ii.•*.*lA'3


CHAP. II.] OBJEiCTIONS ANSWERED. 1 45

fell from God, but his fall was below the order of nature, and. of
course below the brutal creation : for they had never violated the
order of nature.

This being the state of fallen man, all his works of generation,
while led by the propensities of his nature, are performed in this
fallen state, not governed by the law of God, nor regulated by the
law of nature ; but influenced by the deceitful insinuations of the
serpent, the lawless passion of lust. Therefore it is in vain for
man now to plead the original law and design of God, in justifica-
tion of his conduct in the works of sexual coition : for while he
still continues to violate that law by the inordinate and unseasona-
ble indulgence of his lascivious passions, he can have no just claim
to it ; but will unavoidably separate himself still further from God,
and increase the measure of his loss by every repetition of the act.

Where is the civil government on earth which, after having con-
fided an honorable and important trust to a distinguished citizen,
would not, on finding him treacherous and unfaithful to his trust,
immediately degrade him from his oflice, and deprive him of his
delegated authority? Instances of this kind frequently happen in
civil governments. And shall a just and righteous God be less
careful and scrupulous than civil governments, and in matters too
of infinitely greater concern ? And with what confidence could any
citizen who has been thus degraded,' or any of his posterity, hav-
ing still a copy of his original instructions and authority, presume
to plead a right to the privileges and benefits of that authority,
after it had been so basely violated ? Yet such, in a comparative
view, is the nature of the case with respect to the fallen race of
man, at the present day, who plead the authority of Grod, ^ven to
Adam in the days of his innocence, to justify themselves in still
abusing that authority to a far ^eater extent than was ever done
by Adam.

The original law of nature was given of God, and was very good
in its place and order, and might have remained so till repealed
by the Lawgiver, had it not been violated and basely corrupted ;
and that it stift continues to be violated, in the most shameful man-
ner, has been suflici^tly proved. Therefore, those who still plead
the law of nature^-or the law of God, to justify sexual coition,
under a pretended necessity of maintaining the work of generation,
ought first to examine their secret motives in it ; and if they are
able to lay the propensities of lust entirely aside, and enter upon
that work without the influence of any other motive than solely
that of obeying the will of God, in the propagation of a legitimate
offspring, to be heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, then they arc
able to fulfil the law of nature. But if they are uol -aJcAft. \a \'Sk'^i«Nai^
then let them never plead the or\gina\ coTtivci'dXk^ oH^o^^ xssst^ioR.
law of nature : for If they cannot corae uo Xo li!la»\v« ^*^ v«&sw^C'^^^

O


r 146 OBJECnONS ANSWERED. [PART IV

can they oliey ibc law of God ? It is therefore n vain pretence for
fnllen man lo lay any claim, either to the law of nature or the law
of God ; for be has violated both, and forfeitpd his right.

It may be proper to remark here, that it is not the work of gen-
eration, in itself considered, in the order of nature, which is con-
demned ; but it is that libidmous and lawless passion which was
infused by the serpent at the beginning, and by wbicb the work of
generation has been, and still continues to be so basely corrupted ;
it is that which has filled the earth with abominaiions, and that is
the object of condeni nation. If that cursed nature could be entire-
ty purged out of the natural man, so that his feelings could be wholly
govenied by the will of God, he would feel a very different acaaar
lion in this act, and would he in no danger of violating the Ime
order of nature by it. But that lawless propensity has become ao
incoiporated into the animal life of man, that he finds himsel/'
utlerly unable to separate it. Hence, beinc compleiely under ibe
power and dominion ofthal fallen nature, all his acts of generation,
instead of being directed by the will of God, are influenced by the
lust of concupiscence.* Thus "sin taking occasion by the com-
mandment," has deceived hint and " wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence," and by it he was slain; that is, he lost that por.
lion of the Spirit of God which was given to regulate and protect
him in his natural state, and thus he died to God ; and ibis is the
ilealhorihefall.t

Objection 2. The fruit ofgeneralion is a creatcil being, of which
God himself is the Creator ; therefore the act of generation would
I>e entirely fruitless without the help of God, who blesses it by the
formadonof a human being, complete in all its parts, and endowed
With an Immortal soul; hence it appears that God has not only de-

_ fdgned and authorized the act from the beginning, but that he is

L^unself ihe author end finisher of it, and has verily sanctioned it by

■lt;s own works.

r Aagieer. This is probably considered, by many, as an incon-
trovertible atpjment iu favor of the practicMf generation, notwJtb>.
standing its present corruptions. But it is arule in logic thai an
ai^iment which proves' too much, destrojTEnilself, and therefore
proves nothing; which is evidently the case'fcth this. For by
the same rule we may also prove that God saneiions fornication,
adultery, and even the basest kind of incest. And will any one
presume to say that the Almighty sanctions these base crimen, be-
cause the act by which ihpy are committed is productive of its

"liBtural and geDuine fruits ?;{ Who would acknowledge the agency

ifDHehl (onh. RtchM, -1 Wiia .utlcm. m«n rrom Ihc Lori," But
Clio tobi o/iAt Tclrtedtne-, »nd]«v\x.v«!i«vWn»fl™LViO».


CHAP. II.] OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 147

or sanction of a pure and holy God in the act of generation between
a father and his daughter? And yet, unnatural and abhorrent as
such a connexion is, it has often produced its natural offspring, as
perfectly formed as that of the most lawful wedlock. The act is
the same, and the fruit the same, in both cases ; and therefore if
the agency of God be necessary in the one case, it must be so in
the other also.

But the truth is, God is not the agent in either case, having from
the beginning, committed the agency of this, together with all other
things which come within the province of human capacity, wholly
to man, whose seed is in himself. Yet, while man remains in a
state of nature, and is wholly ignorant of any superior law, he is
required to govern himself by those just and equitable laws of na-
ture which were given him for that purpose; and therein he may
be justified until, by Divine goodness, he shall be favored with the
superior laws of divine revelation. These laws, which are design-
ed to lead him from a state of nature, and bring him nearer to God,
must henceforth govern his actions ; and by his faithful obedience
he must be brought to God, or he can never find true happiness.
Therefore, every lascivious gratification, and even every act of
sexual coition, which is contrary to any order of nature, or to any
divine manifestation known to the actors, must bring condemna-
tion upon them, nor can they, if guilty, escape God's righteous
judgment.

It may perhaps still be objected that, as man is not himself a
creator, he cannot give existence to any creature without th^
essential aid of the Creator; and therefore his offspring must ne-
cessarily owe their existence essentially to God the Creator. Tp
which we answer ;

God created man, at first, from the dust of the earth, and ea-
dowed him with certain -powers and faculties, suitably adapted to
his nature, lot and situation, and constituted him a free agent.
And as he possessed freedom of will and choice, he was therefore
able to act perfectly free, to the extent of his capacity, without any
control of his Creator; but as his powers and faculties were con-
fined to certain limits, he could exercise them to the extent of those
limits, but no further. His ageitty extended to the power of life
and death ; he was able by the power of procreation, which he
possessed, to give life to beings like himself, and to take it from
them : beyond this he could not go. But having laws given him
to govern his conduct, and regulate the powers he possessed, he
must of necessity be accountable for all his conduct. Thus man
being a free agent, and having power to exercise his faculties la
doing good or evil, in all cases, and uudet ^VV c\tcxOT\^\»»wii^^^^^^
in the limits of his capacity, he doea,\u iac\.,^TON^\vs&Ssci2^V;^^^
or unfaithfulness by his own works, audxVi^t^^o^ TSiTO\:&«s!A^^^
receive his reward according to his work«.


%>rti'on S. This doctrine condemns and wholly rejects sexu^

Ion, as corfupl and unclean in llie siglit of God, nnd contrary

W to the gospel of Clirisl. But upon tbe sitppu&ilion ^lliat th? whole

ft*;world sliuuld embrace this doctrine, and actually live according tg

■ ftf the human race would be extinguished from the face of the earth,

*a the space of little more than one hundred years.

j4naeer. Tliis objection destroys itself, and proves directly the
reverse of what the objectors intend: It proves thai the priticiple
of continence is not of the world; and "therefore the world hatcib
it" Anil as it is agreeable to the eismple of Christ, and is able
to control the pssions of nature, it must therefore be a heavenly
principle, — a principle which rises above the sordid propensiliea
gf nn earthly natui'e.

Mankind, who are sunk and lost in the fallen nature of the fleah,
are very forward in devising means to support that nature, and
always ready to object against any testimony which condemns it.
It is not the extinction of the human race whldi the objectors fear;
the smallest apprehension that ihe'tr carnal pleasures are in danger,
is fur more alarming to them. Their pretended anxiety to prevent
tlie world from coming to an end, is hut a hypocritical mask to
cover their lust. MitliDDs of the human race may be cni ofTand
destroyed by the horrid wars which are waged among mankind^
merely to gratify the ambition of rulers, and glut the blood-thirsty
passions of man ; and these scenes of destruction may be approved
and encoiu-agej by the gr.^'al body oflhe highest professors of chria-
' tianity ; and yet no fearful apprehensions are discovered about ex-
^tisguishlng the huinnn race in this way.

f But when souls are called upon Ibr their own salvation's sake,
Id deny themselves and lake up their crosses c^inst their carnal
pleasures, the cry of these hypocrites is, Tlie world loill come to an
tndf As tho it were u duty incumbent on man to preserve the
lawless abominations of lust, which have so long corrupted the
earth, lest the prevailing influence of this docirine of continence
and purity should destroy the world, by putting an end to alt its
iniquities. It appears evident from the language of these object-
ors, that they consider the doctrine of christian celibacy, which is
designed to make an end ofshi, and bring in an everlasting law of
righteousness, as more inconsistent, unreasonable and unjust than
the bloody mandates of war, which are attended with consequences
far more distressing and deplorable to luinianily.

It appears to be the general opinion of the professore of chris-
tianhy, that the world is to be destroyed by fire ; and njany seem
lo imagine that a deluge of lire and brimstone will be poured out
uptm the earth, and destroy all its wicked inhabitants at once. But
ire would ask, which would appear the most veasooablf and con-
"'-yp/j/ with AlmigUiy wisdom anii tig\i\eovisftvas', *-a Ac^rVto-j ftss.


eHAP. il] objections answered. 149

filthy abominations of sin by the purifying fire of the gospel of
Christ; which mercifully allows lost souls to take up a fall and
final cross against their lustful passions, from which all these
abominations spring, so that all who are willing, may be purified
from their corruptions and become heirs of the Kingdom of Hea*
vcn ; or by a deluge of natural fire and brimstone, to deprive them
forever of all hopes of future happiness, which, according to the
prevailing opinions of modern christians, must be the natural con-
sequence ?

We firmly believe the world will come to an end, and that it will
be destroyed by fire. And we also believe and confidently testi-
fy, that this fire has already commenced ; because we have felt its
operation upon our own souls, and have found it to be, in very
deed, a consuming fire to lust and pride, and every other corrup-
tion of man's fallen nature. This fire, we have no doubt, will
prevail with increasing power, and many will yet feel its purifying
efiects ; and all who come fairly into it, may depend on having
their lust and pride, their selfishness and avarice, their deceit and
hypocrisy, their envy, malice and hatred, together with all their
evil deeds and evil Ima^ations, efiectually consumed by its pow-
er ; and when this burning is completed, they will find themselves
among that happy number ^^ upon whom the ends of the world are
come.''* But those who shall be found unwilling to come into
this fire, by the way of the cross, and to consign their lusts and
corruptions to its purifying flames, will at length be compelled to
feel the fire of those very lusts burning in them, with inextinguish-
able fury, and they will not be able to help themselves.

Objection 4. But this doctrine seems to involve in it some unan-
swerable difficulties : for, admitting the abuses of sexual coition by
the wicked, can that be any reason why christians should reject
it ? If every gift of God were to be rejected because it has been
abused by the wicked, we should be deprived of nearly or quite
every blessing we enjoy, and should even be obliged to refrain
from eating ar^d drinking, because these privileges are abused by
drunkards and gluttons. What should occasion such an opposition
between the doctrines of Christianity, and the laws of generation,
in themselves considered ? Was not God the author of both ? Did
not the same God who created man male and female, and com-
manded them to increase and multiply, also send his Son Jesus
Christ to introduce Christianity into the world, and to preach the
gospel to the married as well as to the unmarried ? Why then
cannot a man be a christian, and still live in a state of matrimony,
and generate offspring, provided he does not abuse his privilege?

Answer, We should suppose that a proper atteivtvQ»w\a'^'^^^r
marks in the preceding chapter mig\\X i^t^Avx'^^ ^'^ Ttf'Kwa*^ ^

02


the


E


these ijueslions; bul llie inveterate force of opinions so long estab-

Hshed, and so congenial to the carnal mind, seems not easily over-

" me. Let the objectors benr id mind, and randidly consider the

lential diflerence between the work of the first and second Adam,

cauaeof that d'tflerence, and the absolute necessity of maintahi-

a proper distinction between the children of this world, and

true followers of Christ, and they will find no occasion to ask

lesiions of this kind.

We would observe in the first place, that a divine blessing, tho
ickedly abused, is still a divine blessing; and the abuse of it by
the wicked, can be no reason why the righteous should be depriv-
ed of the privilege of enjoying it, so long as it is given and con-
tinued by Divine Goodness. But there b an essential diirerence
between a divine institution given for the gOTernnient of mankind,
and now in actual force, and one which has been disannulled lo
make room for a new and more permanent institution, even admit-
ting that the disannulled institution had not been abused while it
was in force. The disannulling of tlie law of Moses, and the e»-
inblishment of the gospel institution by Jesus Christ, Is no evidence
that both were not of divine origin : and tho the Jews, as a people,
still cleave to the law, and reject the gospel, they cannot be saved
by the law ; nor can they be saved by the gospel while they stub-
bornly reject it. Their rejectian of the gospel of Jesus Christ,
which ivas first sent to them, and which had been long foretold by
Iheir prophets, has ever been considered as very dishonorable (o
*teir nation, and a striking evidence of their great darkness, blind-
^ss and vrickeJness.

And shall the people of this generation, and in this enlightened
bring a still greater dishonor upon themselves, and maiufest a
ter degree of darkness, bUndness and wickedness, than the
iWs did ? Will they still cleave to an institution which, by its sub*
tion to the violations of lust, has been attended with a curse to
inkind ever since the transgression of Adam and Eve in the gar-
den? And willtheystilt continue these violations under liieifecelt-
(ut pretence of obeying a divine institution, when in fact, lust b
the moving cause, and the greatest object in view is the gratijica-
'\ioa of their carnal pleasures ? Yet when we view the inestimable
'" icrifice which mankind make to secure these sordid and momen-
irv pleasures, what a cuulrast appears! It is nothing less ihan
: sacrifice of a divine institution of peace and righteousness, puri-
and holiness, the most invaluable ever oflered for the benefit of
mankind. But we shall proceed to point 'out, more clearly, the
distinction between the children of this world, and the children trf
Ood.
7'he Kingdom ef Christ and the Witindoms o( t.Uv8 wotJ«
ttiaJlj' different from cwA «h»i and 'liwi ivSeiujawi « '


CHAP. II.] OBJECTIONS ANSWERE0. 151

been and ever will be strictly maintained in Christ ; and no less is
the distinction between the subjects of the different kingdoms. The
children of this world are pursuing the things of this world, and liv-
ing in the fallen nature of the first Adam ; but the children of €rod
are seeking salvation from sin, and redemption from that fallen
nature. Those who follow the example of the first Adam, follow
the example of a fallen progenitor, and like him, beget a fallen
ofl!spring. And tho mankind should continue in this practice for a
hundred thousand years to come, they would still beget a degene>
rate and corrupt race, and still degenerate more and more ; and
in that way they could never be redeemed, but must still sink
deeper and deeper into loss. But those who wish to find redemp-
tion, must find it by following the example of the second Adam,
who came to lead mankind out of the nature and fallen state of the
first Adam, into the nature and life of Christ.

The first Adam was created a natural man ; ^^ he was of the
earth, earthy ;" his work was to increase and multiply and replen-
ish tlie earth in the order of natural generation ; and had he not
violated that order, and transgressed the law of his Creator, he
might have done it in innocence and justification. He would not
then have been instigated by the power of lust, to gratify the base
and sordid propensities of an animal nature; but influenced by the
agency of tne divine law, he would have acted from the pure mo-
tives of duty. In so doing, instead of a degenerate race of murder-
ing Cains, whose ruling passions are lust and rapine, he would
have propagated an uncomipted seed, whose innate innocence,
nourished by the wise and godly example of their parents, would
have been a powerful protection against the future insinuations of
the adversary ; and if a part should afterwards have yielded and
fellen, they could not have corrupted the whole human race.

But Adam having yielded to the insinuations of the serpent, and
violated the law of God, and by his example taught his posterity
to do the same, he has corrupted the whole earth. And shall chris^
tians now continue to follow his base example ? This is not the
example of Christ ; and therefore those who follow it, cannot,
with any propriety, be called the followers of Christ.

Jesus Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, is a
quickening Spirit ; he came not only to redeem mankind fix>m that
loss into which the first Adam had plunged them, but to rabe them
to a state far superior, even to eternal life, from which they could
not fall; therefore he could not do the work of the first Adam.
His work was to increase and multiply and replenish the Kingdom
of Heaven, not by begetting a corrupt seed, after the example of
the first Adam, but by redeeming lost souls thto\3L^ \k\ft. ^'s^^:^
spiritual regeneration. His work v«l* ^«t«Ssst^, ^\«ss«xtsk-^^!&::s
opposite, to thox o( the first Adanv Kxwi casi f^MJoaaw^ ^vso:»s>»ft


BJECTION'S ANSWERBI).

lo do the works of the firal Adam ? If so, they rausl be the follow
as of the first Adant j they tannol be tlie followers of Christ:

I it is impossible that they should follow both al ibc same time,
ling their works are so essentially difTerenl from each uilier.
id this is the difference between them: The only true follLiwers
Christ, are tliose who deny themselves of all the carnal propen-
ies of a fallen nature, who do the works of C+irist, and walk in
edience lo bisesample; and these may, with stricl propriety,
called christians.
On the other band, those who live in the works of generatioij,
III- nnlow the example of the 6rst Adam. By doing his works, Ibey
necesaaiity become his followers ; and therefore are not true cbris-
lions : for, " As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy }
md ss is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly."*
, People may profess what Uiey will; they may be called pKS>
kteriana, episcopalians, baptists, metbodists, or what not; yet so
mg as they live in the works of the first Adam, and follow hit
fcaniple, they do not follow Christ. Those who assume tlie name
■christians, do thereby implicitly profess to be a spiritual people;
ibt what evidence do they give of being a spiritual people, while
pey live according to the propensities of a carnal nature ? We
wid request the candid observer to notice the lives and conduct
those who, notwithstanding their profession, are led and govem-
H by the same natural propensities as the non-professor, the Deist
M Atheist, and compare them with those who, agreeable to their
rofession, do actually deny themselves of all the natural propeu-
' a carnal nature, and manifest by their fruits that they are
Ibverneil by a superior law, in living a life agreeable to the exani-
"e of Jesns Christ, and then say whether the practice of the for-
ir latter appears the most consistent with the spirit of chri^

re is the deceplion which has so long blinded the eyes of the
_ rfifessors nf chritianity : ihey sec not the most essential difference
between the Jii-»t and K<}tmd Adam ; hence in their works they
are the real followers nit\^ former, while they follow the latter in
profession only. The idea of following both at the same time,
proceeds fnim the same delusive principle, which supposes that
because we are the natural offspring of the first Adam, we are
tberefoie bound to follow him in the work of generation ; and that
this is no impediment to our becoming the spiritual offspring of the
secoud Adam, and following him in the regeneration. So readily
IB the the carnal mind.of man led to believe that which it mostde-
nrei, however contrary to the dictates of reason and truth. This
J8 literally blending the flesh with the spirit, which tlie apostle Paut
^^ares "an coiiirary the one to the odier,"'


eHAP. I1.J OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 153

As well may we talk of a man's travelling both east and west at
one and the same time, as of his following Christ in the regene-
ration, while living in the works of generation. The thing is im-
possible; because the work of regeneration is the operation of the
Spirit of Christ upon the soul, which destroys the nature of sin^
and raises the soul out of the fallen nature of the first Adam, into the
spiritual life of Jesus Christ the second Adam. And this can never
be gained by any soul short of crucifying the flesh with all its afTec-
tions and lusts. Yet so unwilling are mankind to have the fallen
nature of the flesh crucified in themselves, that they will use every
means in their power to nourish and preserve it, as tho they were
even unwilling to go to Heaven without it ; and will therefore con-
trive any way to carry it along with them. But their contrivance
will all be in vain ; for that nature must die before the soul can
ever live to God, or find an entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.

All professors of Christianity will agree that mankind are lost in
Adam ; and that there is no redemption but in and through Christ.
'^ For as in Adam all die; so in Christ shall all be made alive.''
If in Adam all die^ then it follows that the works of Adam bring
death ; consequently we must quit these works before we can be
made alive in Christ. ^^ Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God." So testified Christ ; and here let it be
again repeated. It is impossible for souls to find salvation from
sin, under the light of the gospel, revealed in tliis day, short of
utterly renouncing the work of generation, and crucifying the flesh
with all its afiections and lusts. Nor will any soul ever pass
through the new birth and be redeemed to God, until the whole of
that fallen nature, root and branch, is entirely destroyed out of the
soul ; and the longer a soul lives in the indulgence of that nature,
the more difficult, painful and distressing will it be for that soul to
erucify it ; and this, he will find, must be his own work, or he can
never enter the Kingdom of Heaven. If a man " must be bom
again^^' he must, in passing through this birth, be raised out of that
nature in which he had his first birth ; and become dead to all its
propensities

Objection 5, But if this be so, says the objector, what is become
of the good old patriarchs and prophets ? They lived in the works
of natural generation, and, as you say, followed the example of old
Adam, in this respect, and not the example of Jesus Christ; your
doctrine must therefore exclude them from the Kingdom of Hea-
ven : ^d are they all lost ?

Answer, They could not follow the. example of Jesus Christ;
because he had not then appeared ; and he could not set them an
example before he made his appearance. Those who lived hi^C<^^
the coming of Christ, were under "lVi^\aw ^l ^ ^'oroai ^wosoacs!!.^
went;'' and while they strictly obeyed \Sn»X.\v«, tmAXvi^^^s^'^^


IBJECTIONS ANSWEBEB.


ihe Tight of Gud, given in tlieir day, they fouud J tistili cation before
God, and were blessed of God and protected from evil according
to the measure of iheir light and obedience; and this was all thejr
could do in that day. Thej could not be redeemed from a fallen
nature, in that day ; because, as Christ had not then appeared, the
work of redemption could not take place. But Christ having been
prombed, as their Redeemer, to appear in the fulness of time, they
lived and died in the faith of that promise ; they looked forward to
a future day, the day of full salvation and redemption.

Hence the apostle, in speaking of the faith of Noah, Abrahain,
Isaac, Jacob and the rest of the patriarchs and prophets, says,
" And these all having obtained a good report through faith, re-
" ceived not tte promise : God having provided some better thing
*' for us, that they %mthout m should not be made petffcl.''*
These having been faithful to walk according to the light which
was revealed in their day, were owned and blessed of God : they
depai-lcd in faith and rested in hope, believing that the lime would
■ come when the promised redemption would appear. Their hav-
|- ing left their earthly tabernacles, and consigned those mortal bd-
dies to the dust long before the day of redemption appeared, could
. not ejtclude them from its benefits when the time was fully come.
, For the wiirk of ledemptioD, being a spiritual work, must operate
upon the soul, whether in the body or out of it ; and therefore the
■ :KpCiratlon of the soul from the body, cannot prevent this operation.
I The patriarchs and prophets having been faithful unto death.
Band having rested in hope, and waited with patience God's appoint-
r«dlinie, forthegospelof Christ to appear, their faith directed them
I Ipto a willing obedience to it. They had now to pass through its
lAurifyiog fire, in order to cleanse them fromjhe fallen nature of the
r :nrst Adam, before they could gain their redemption and be made
^ perfect in gloiy. In this work of purification, they are united
\ with those of the samu faith in the body ; so that those who are
prcKeiit in the body, and those who have departed out of it, become
one in Christ j and being joined together in the same spirit, and
under the opeiations of the same gospel, ihey are made perfect in
righteousness together. Thus ihey become the real followers of
Christ in (heir disembodied state, not having had that privilege
while in the body; and in this manner, they with vs are made
perfeet +

This doctrine will doubtless apjiear new and strange to tfaoM
who have always been bound, by the tradition of their fathers, to
a, different faith. And as t]iey have been taught to believe no doc-
trine but what can be proved from the scriptures, ihey will natu-
rally ask. Where is the scripture evidence of this? But let the d4^,
^ reiJ of the ffesb be removed from the e^ea of t.^? miud, and i^^ri^J


CHAP. III.] OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 1 5i

will then ask for scripture evidence to prove a doctrine which
must carry with it, and in it, the most certain conviction. As the
scriptures are but a record of those events which were revealed
and brought to pass in former dispensations, it cannot reasonably
be expected that they should contain doctrines which were not to
be made manifest until the fulness of time came, unless it were by
types and shadows, or the mysterious revelations of prophecy,
which are but imperfectly understood, if understood at all, before
the fulfilment takes place. Yet the spirit of the scriptures, if not
pointedly expressive on these subjects, is in every respect, con-
formable thereto, without a single instance of any thing to the
contrary.*


CHAPTER III.

The subject coTUinued^ in which further objections are stated and
answered^ 8f the doctrine of continence and celibacy confirmed.

We shall proceed to answer a few more objections which are
frequently advanced against the doctrine of celibacy and conti-
nence.

Direction 6. The primitive christians did not all live lives of celi-
bacy, but many of them lived in a state of matrimony, as we find in
the New Testament, and the apostle Paul tolerated them in it, as
appears in his first epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 7th, where he
gives directions concerning husbands and wives. Were not these
people christians ?

Ansfoer, If they were christians, the same apostle calls 'them
carnal, and severely reproves them for their carnality .t But as
the time had not then arrived for a full revelation of the man of sin
to be made, and as that revelation was necessarily connected with
the second coming of Christ; therefore these Corinthian chris-
tians, who were with so much difficulty persuaded to renounce
their former licentious practices, were tolerated in living, in some
measure, according to the course of the world. The same tolera-
tion was also extended to other gentile churches; but the church
at Jerusalem seems to have preserved a greater measure of purity
than any other. And tho it is clearly evident that the primitive
christians (lad received a far greater measure of divine light than
had ever before been revealed on earth ; yet while they were still
under the vail of the flesh, they could not have a full sight of that
way of redemption which they still waited for ; and therefore they
were justified in walking in obedience to that degree of light which
they had received; and as this was all they could ihen do, God
required no more of them.

* See Acts ii. 3L J Pet iii. 19. & \r t, IUt. Vu %, VO, \\. X'Sa* \C»T.•vvv.^^^»


I


^■fec


E


*JECTIOK3 ANSWERED. [pART IV.

But the Bjiostle Paul evidently saw fiirllier; he clearly saw
that a day of further liglit and greater puriiy must necessarily take
plare, at the second »ppearin{> of Christ. Peter and JuIid, and
doubtless others, had siniilar vietvs, and looked forward to a day
of Bfreater puriiy and lidrness. Bui they also saw thai a falling;
away would first lake place, in which Antichrist would rise and
exercise great power and dominion : " For that day shall uot c<
except ihere come a falling away first."*

The falling away of the primitive church, which was attended
with the inlroUuciioQ of a flood of corruption, in morals and
manners, was the occasion ofthose dark and deceitful doctrines
which have blinded the eyes of the professors of Christianity to ihe
present day. In every age, the great object of the spirit of Anti-
christ, in ail his works, has been to counterfeit the religion of Christ.
And what more eHeciual method could he devise, than to attach
erroneous meanings lo tlie names of christian doctrines, anil blend
them with practices which have not the most distant conoectioa
vith the pure gospel nf Christ? Hence arose that universal de-
iception which supposes that generation jind regeneration are per-
fectly consistent with each other ; that christains may jiractice the
generation of the flesh, and at the same time be subjects of the
regeneration of the spirit; that is, that they may a) once live ac-
cording to the flesh and walk according lo the spirit, regardless of
the apostle's testimony that, "these are contrary the one to the
other. "t Hence also, the resjirrection oftlte tmd from the fallen
nature of the flesh, is understood lo mean, a f'e«urrecfieino/f Ae nei-
taral body of flesh and bones, from ihe mouldering ruins of the
grave.

The names of these, and many other doctrines of the gospel,
are retained, while ihe real substance is wholly perverted and lost
in antiehristian darkness. This is undoubtedly the principal cause
that modern professors of Christianity do not discover the real
distinction between the flesh and the spirit, and see the ulier in
^p08»bi1ity of following Christ in the regeneration of the spiri
iVhtle living in the praciicaL generation of ihe desh. Hence a
4liose chrislians, so called, whether of primitive or modern times,
.who, under their christian profession, have hved in the practical
works of generation, can be viewed in no other light than as car-
nal cht^stians ; and with all their Christianity, they can never j "
complete possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, until they
completely purified from the nature of llie flesh and all its corrupt
and debusing propensities, And iho in consequence of having
obeyed the light which they had received, they may be free from
C0f)demnation ; yet ihey cannot find theu- redemption short of

ling through the puhfytng five of ihe ^os^l.


CHAP. III.] OBJECTIONS ANSWEREB. 157

Objection 7« The doctrine of celibacy appears to be condemned
by the scriptures, particularly in Paul's epistle to Timothy, where
he gives the following testimony in plain terras : " Now the Spirit
*< speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
*' from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
'^ devils 'y—forbidding to marry ^ and commanding to abstain from
*^ meats."*

Anstoer, Perhaps no passage found in the sacred writings has
furnished a more popular argument against a life of continence
than this. It is indeed considered by many as sufficient to con-
demn the doctrine of celibacy altogether ; and it is often urged as
a testimony' of condemnation against every religious society whose
faith leads them to maintain such a life, however far they may be
from ^^ forbidding to marry," or " commanding to abstain from
meats." But a little examination will readily show that it furnish-
es not the smallest proof against a life oi conscientious celibacy,
either in a societv or an individual.

The objectors evidently suppose that the apostle's expression
is to be understood in a literal sense ; otherwise it would be use-
less to advance it as an argument in their favor ; and therefore,
for the sake of a fair examination, we will admit their literal con-
struction.

Forbidding and commanding then, according to this sense, must
necessarily imply power to enforce what is thus forbidden and
'Commanded ; otherwise no effect could be produced thereby ; and
of course the prediction of the apostle would have been of little or
no importance. In order therefore to render the passage applica-
ble to any society or denomination of people, that society must
not only positively forbid to marry, and command to abstain- from
meats, but it must actually enforce its commands and prohibitions
by a power jsufficient to effect the object. It must also fill up the
whole character described by the apostle; otherwise the charge
must fail in its application : for there can be no real consistency
in the charge, unless it be applied to a people in whom that char-
acter is fully displayed ; and certainly it cannot, with any consis-
tency, be applied to the United Society. With this Society, a life
of continence and celibacy is a matter of conscience, proceeding
from their religious faith, and therefore needs no " forbidding ta
marry" in the case; because the cross of self-denial is a voluntary
act.; and surely the apostle's prediction cannot apply to any such
people.

Protestant writers have generally charged this, " forbidding to
marry" upon the Church of Rome ; and if we are to consider the
apostle's expressions in a literal sense, there appears to h^%^\si^^^>«ic^

♦Tim.ir. 1 <cd.


i


I

w

I


BBJECTIONS ANSWERED.

dationfortliecliarge." llis slated bj bishop Newton tlmtj^Aslong
" ago as ills yrar SSG, Hiriciug held a counril of eighty bishop at
" Rome, and Torbade the rler^ to cobabii with their wives. This
" decree was confirmed by Itmocent at the beginning of the fifth
"century; and ihe celibacy of the clergy was fidly decreed by
*' Qrcgory Vlt. in the eleventh century ; and this haih bem the
" universal law and practice ever since, "t These facts are eon-
firmed by other ecclesiaslical writers. We find in Mosheim, that
Pope Gregorj/, in the year 10"*, assembled a council at Rome}
liicli it was decreed, " That the sacerdotal orders should ab-
stain from marriage; and that such of them as had already
wives, or concubines, should immediately dismiss iheni, or quit
the priestly office. "|

But tliese things afford no evidence against the doctrine ofchrli-
tian celibacy and continence, but rather the contrary. For these
measures bnng adopted at Giich an early period of the apostacy,
evidently show that the purity of the primitive church at Jenua*
lera, in this respect, was well known in the church of Romej and
that their object was to preserve the ap]iearance of k in that
church. But the lordly rulers of that corrupt church, having lost
Ihe true spirit of the gospel, by which that purity was maintained
in the primitive churcli, attempted to make a show of sanctity sad
,dec«ve the world, by counterfeiting this purity. And being wholly
■destitute of the true Spirit of C-hrist, which leads lo purity, and of
that divine love which governed the primitive church, they were
under the necessity of enforcing their doctrines by arbitrary derf
crees. Thus their counterfeit purity and continence became a'
matter of compuI«on, not of choice; and was therefore contrary
to the very spirit of the gospel^ which allows liberty of conscience
to every soul.

But with all their arbitrary decrees and compulsive power, which
were professedly designed to reslrain the corruptions of the
ecclesiastical orders, and lo preserve nnd maintain purity amoDg-
the dignitaries of iheir church, they never could reach the source
■of human corruption, nor restrain the libidinous passions of man.
Their established fasia, including wbat ihey call lent, or forty

• It isljut juat to remark here, that the S. Caiholica plausibly deny
" forbiilding to msrry •" becnuse it is not only allowed among Ihe peo-
ple At large, but is made one uf their sacred inslitutinns, and classed
among their levtn aatrammu, and conscquenlly ia held in liiglier eatj.
by them, tlian bv the proteslints. The protcatanls on the other
. c'lff at the popish sacrament ofmarriage, and call It ''abastard
wcrnment," and say it is not any sacred rite at all ; yet they themaeiwea
— -" —'"'Xaliiv'HieinititutKn, and often lidk of coCrmntainf Ao/ji mar-

DnttrtmlUm en the FronhKitl. vo\^. 9. ««.
■ Keel. Hill, val.ii.p Vit.


CHAP III.] OBJECTIONS ANSWCREB. 159

days abstinence from animal food, are considered by protestants
as of the same arbitrary character ; ^^ commanding to abstain from
meats.'' With a view to keep up the appearance of sanctity, after
they had entirely lost the real power of the gospel, it seems they
enjoined upon their subjects these days of abstinence, with other
religious ceremonies, and thus required them to observe ordinances
which, for want of true faith, they otherwise never would have
observed as religious duties. But even admitting that their reli-
gious ordinances were of Divine authority, as they pretended, what
could they gain by compulsive obedience ? Forbidding and cowt-
manding, for the sake of enforcing religious duties, where there is
DO faith to induce a willing obedience, will answer no good pur-
pose. God must have a willing people to worship him, or they
never can worship to his acceptance.

But the United Society can have no occasion for any such coer-
cive laws ; nor will the faith of the Society admit of any compul-
sive or hypocritical obedience. Nor can any obedience which
does not proceed from faith, be of any use : for without faith it
w impossible to please God. Religion must be a matter of free
and conscientious choice, or it cannot profit any soul. It is the
true Spirit of Christ in the soul which must and does enable any
one to be^r the cross of self-denial. Without this, all " forbidding
and commanding'' is arbitrary and useless.

Hence the charge of" forbidding to marry," even when viewed
according to the sense in which the objectors understand the apos-
tle's testimony, can by no means apply to the United Society, who
consider marriage, as practised by the world of mankind, to be
merely a civil right, sanctioned by the laws of every civilized na-
tion, and with wiiich the Society has never had any inclination to
interfere. Can any reasonable person suppose that the apostle, in
that prediction, alluded to a life of conscientious celibacy, when he
himself lived such a life, and pliainlv declared that he would that
all men were even as himself? Surely the apostle would not con-
demn himself, and live in opposition, to the dictates of his own
prophetic spirit.

If we are to understand the expression, commanding to abstain
from meaf^j. in a literal sense, protestants can charge nothing
upon the papists that will not apply with equal force to themselves.
" Toobservedaysof fasting (say they) we judge both scriptural and
^^ rational ; and a religious fast requires total abstinence from food."
And what did the papists more ? But the United Society main-
tain no such principle ; and therefore the charge, considered in a
literal sense, cannot possibly apply to this Society. And if the
charge fail in respect to meats, it must of course fail in res\^ect tc\
marriage : for in the apostle's pred\c\\ow, \Jwi^ «x^ ^Qwass^Nj^^'i'^^-^
kmJiare made to apply to the s^me cAbs^ o^ ^o^^*


I


I


I


160 OBJECTIONS ANSWER!

But we view the aposile's lestimoiiy in a very ditTerent I^fal
from that in which il is generally understood. We do not sup-
pose that the prediction had any further altusiun to that civil iii-
stiimign which L« generally called marrmge, than as a significant
figure. " The Spirir spenkelh espressly," saith the apostle. This
prediction was therefore given in ihe language of the Spirit. And
according lo the testimony of the same apostle, " The natural
" man receivelh not the things nf the Spirit of God ; for they are
" foolishness unto fiim ; neither can he know thejn, because ihey
" are spiritually diacemed."* How then siiould the natural maa
be able lo vtidersland what the Spirit ineuni by " forbidding lo
marry ?'' Yet the lovers of carual pleasure profess lo know all
about it, and confidently pervert the language of the Spirit into an
Bi^Draenl to condemn the United Society, and favor their own car-
nal gralilkations.

Tiie apostle's testimony undoubtedly alluded to spiritual moi-
v\age. This appears evident from his own language on other
occasions. " He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit.''f And
ag&jn; "Neither is the man without the woman, nor the wontan
« without the man, in the Lord.lf This is a great mystery," sdlfa
iheapcutlc; " but I speak, concerning Christ and the d)urch.|| —
" For I have espoused you to one husband, that 1 may [^sent you
"ass chaste virgin to Christ."^ In this consists the true spiritual
micriage, or marriage of the Lamb, by which souls are enabled lo
biing forth the fruits of the Spirit, " Wherefore, my brethreo, ye
" also are become dead lo the law by the body of Christ ; that ye
f should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the
*' dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God."** This is
the maniage which the apostle invariably maintained, and is that
which was forbidden by those apostates of whom he spoke ; and
which the lovers of carnal pleiisure among all denominations, have
always opposed, as being contrary to their carnal corruptions ;
because they are " lovers uf pleasure more than lovers of God."

In this sense, the charge of " forbidding lo marry," which the
iovns of carnal pleasure are so ready to charge upon ilie Uoited
&«:iety, may with strict propriety be retorted upon themselves.
For, not content with the free and unlimiti-d indulgence of their
dtirling pleasures, they have ever been loud in their vociferations
against that life of virgin purity which the apostle so strimgly re-
commends as the only true spiritual marriage. Wliileon the other
hand, the United Society, tho they have couscionliously borne the
cross of self-denial themselves, have ever been willing that all who
differ from them in opinion) should freely act according to llie dic-
tates u{ their own consciences} without any disposition to moleat


CHAP. HI.] CHUTECTIONS ANSWERED. 18|

diem in their pleasures^ or hinder them from marrying whenever
they please.

Objection 8. Jesus Christ himself did not condemn marriage ;
but on the contrary, he not only honored a marriage with his pre-
sence, but gave it an extraordinary and most miraculous sanction^
by turning water into wine for the guests to drink. What
greater evidence could any one ask to-prove his divine approba*
tion ?

Answer, His enemies adopted the same mode of reasoning to
prove him << a gluttonous man, and a wine bibber, a friend of pub-
licans and sinners ;" and doubtless they felt as much confidence
in the strength of their argument as our objectors do in theirs.
And why should they not ? Did he not honor with his presence
the assemblies of publicans and harlots ? Did he not eat and drink
'With them, and work miracles for them ? And where was the true-
blooded Pharisee that would not have condemned a man for a
wine-bibber, and a promoter of drunkenness, who would go and
turn so much water into wine after men had well drunk ? And
could any man that would frequent the assemblies of such base
characters, escape the scandal of being a. partaker with them, or
the charge of encouraging them in their wickedness?

So reasoned the Scribes and Pharisees, and so will all carnal
men reason when they want to subvert the testimony of truth for
the purpose of promoting their own carnal views. And indeed if
we are to consider the attendance of Jesus at the wedding, and his
miracle of turning water into wine, as any evidence in favor either
of marriage or drunkenness, it must unquestionably have by far
the greatest appearance of favoring the latter : for there is not the
least evidence that he sanctioned the former, either by word or
work ; but his enemies found a very plausible reason to charge
him with sanctioning the latter.

But with all their reasoning and all their .evidence, they could
never prove that the Lord Jesus ever sanctioned the evil practices
of these sinners, or authorized them to continue in sin. It is true
he did not condemn this darling practice of the world; nor did he
condemn the adultress, tho she was taken in the very act ; but after
convicting her accusers, he bid her " go and sin no more." Hq
was not sent into the world to condemn the world ; that was not
the object of his mission ; *' but that the world through him might
be saved."* In making these visits, the Savior of .the world had a
nobler object in view, which was to preach the gospel to poor fal-
len creatures, who were thus lost in sin and wickedness, and to
teach them, by precept and example, a better manner of life. It
was therefore necessary that he should come down to thftwv vsv>k>Kcs;,
ftJlen and lost state, and find tbem N?\i<^t^^«^ ^w^x^V^'^^-as^^Vis^

¥2


I


der himself accessible ta iheni in that stale, in

ihem, or they never would have heea saviiil hy hiin, but must still

tave remained under their toss.

The miracle of turning water into wine, on iliat particular occ^
non, which is the only insianci.' we have on record, and doubtless
Ae orAy one which ever look place, was for a for more impuriaiit
pimtose than to sanction matrimony or promote inlein)>enince.
« This beginning of mirecles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
" manifested forth his glory ; and his disciples believed on faim."*
By this lie showed forth the divine anthorily of his mission, proved
his God-like power, and confirmed the faith of his followers. Bui
this was not all : It was designed and eminently calculated to bes
figurative representation of his own spiritual niarriage at the period
of his second coming, and of that heavenly wine, which he al\er-
wards spoke to his disciples of drinking with them, in his Father's
Kingdom.'''

Objection 9, This doctrine of celibacy, if geneially admitted,
would overthrow the institution of matrimony j the conseque[ic«s
of which would be very shocking to society. Abolish this institu-
tion, and all those civil and reUgious tics which bind families
Ic^ether, would be severed at once. The legal descent of inheii-
lance, the property of heirs, and the ties of consanguinity would be
no longer known. Those social connections which unite husbands
and wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters, and on whicb
depends the very foundation of human society, would be entirely
desti'oyed, and mankind would soon be reduced to a state of an-
archy and confusion.

Aimeer. This objection, if applied to mankind in a natural
slate, would indeed appear formidable; but when applied to the
followers of Christ, it is more specious than solid. As an objec-
tion against tite doctrine of chri!<tian celibacy maintained by itie
United Society, it is witliout foundation. That practical celibacy
and christian continence, which we consider as the great privilege
of tlie true fullowers of Christ, in this day of his second appearing,
IS very far from inlej-ferlng with any useful institution of civil soci-
ety' The children of this world and the followers of Christ are
"two distinct orders of people. " The children of this world marry,
and are given in marriage;" and have a natural right to all ihe
civil insiituiions of the country to which they belong, ?o lung as
riiey are subject to its hiws and ordinances. " But they who shatt
■* be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrecijoti
■' from the dead, neither marrj' nor are given in marriage."} The
followers of Christ are governed by the law of Christ, which is a
fatfofjustice and holiness; and so long as they do not interfere
with tile civil iitstitat'ions of mcn,tVve5 c'jt«ioV\ic t'ora^jKAite witbr
-•vering the bonds of civil society.


CHAP. III.] OBJECTIONS ANSWCIIED. 163

We consider matriinony to be a civil institution, and as such, it
is both useful and necessary for mankind in their natural state ; but
it does not belong to the true followers of Christ ; and for that
reason they have nothing to do with it. As members of a chris-
tian institution, established by the law of Christ, and wholly un^-
connected with the civil, political and religious institutions of the
world, it is inconsistent with our christian faith to interfere with
any of their concerns. But at the same time, we are perfectly
willing that every such institution, which produces any beneficial
influence on its members, should be freely supported by those to
Vhom it belongs, and whose concern it is to support it ; and it is
Tight and just that all people should act their own faith in this, as
well as in all other matters.

The apostle Paul taught the Corinthians that it was ^< better to
marry than to burn ;" and we have ever acknowledged it better to
mairy than to do worse. We readily admit that the institution of
marriage is useful in its place ; because it has a tendency to pre-
vent many evils in society which could not otherwise be avoided.
And for mankind, in their present state, it is absolutely necessary f
because without it, the excesses of lawless lust would destroy
every vestige of good order in society, and produce confusion and
ruin among the human race. We will even admit that marriage
is honorable in a state of nature, where the parties enter into it
from honorable and conscientious motives, and are honestly and
sincerely united in their endeavors to make an honorable use of it.
But its frequent, fraudulent and shameful abuses are disgraceful to
the parties, and cast a shameful blot upon the institution itself.

But tho we acknowledge the marriage institution to be both use-
ful and necessary for the - world in its present state ; yet for the
followers of Christ, who are called to forsake the course of the
world, and to crucify the flesh with all its affections and lusts, it
is neither necessary nor useful, but the contrary ; it therefore forms
no part of their duty, and can have no place among them. Their
union is spiritual, and needs no fleshly support ; their parentage i»

, spiritual, and produces no fleshly offspring ^ their relation as breth-
ren and sisters is spiritual, and can have no dependence on fleshly
relation ; their inheritance is spiritual, and cannot be controlled by
human laws and institutions. Their temporal property, which is
necessary for the 'support of the body while in this life, is regulated
by a sacred compact, being, by mutual agreement, consecrated to
religious uses, for the benefit of the whole body ; and as such, it
descends to their spiritual heirs in the same united capacity. Sa
that all those diiKculties concerning temporal property, so commoa
among natural heirs, are prevented by tl\^ n^t"^ wiaXwx^ 'oJl ^^*\ar
stitution, and, unless its rights are m{nn^^^\x^o\v\x^\Wi«3J8.\iSJ«-

pers from without^ the descent of mtentMiC!^^*cc»^sscfii^*»'^'3®**^^

B€sg to the Society^


CIRCUMCISION Atin

This spiritual relation in the church of Christ, is produced by
r •" the Inw of the Spirit of life." It is tlie relation claimed by Je-
ws Christ, and lie acknowledged no other, " Whosoever shall do
* the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my broth-
" e»and sister and mother."* This relation is governed by the
law of Christ, which is a law of righteousness and peace ; and this
law which governs the church of Christ, supersedes the necessity
of human laws Hnd human institutions to regulate its own internal
concerns. And we have found by experience, that ibis law is a
superior remedy against all those scenes of confusion and ilisorder,
which are so common in the domestic circle, under a slate of ma-
trimony; and that it is more eminently calculated to promote the
true spirit of union and harmony in society, than all (he laws and
institutions of matrimony, or any other law or institution c
vised by man.


I


CHAPTER IV.

P TAe Jtguralive import of Circutncigioa and other ceremonien wii-

[ der the lain,

. As Circumcision was an important institution given to Abra>
ham, as the typical fadter of the fuithful, and was continued to his
posterity, as a primary and abiding institution, through all the law
and the prophets, until the coming of Jesus Christ, it will be ne-
cessary to make some remarks upon this subject.

It is generally acknowledged that the ceremonies under the law
were typical of gospel ordinances ; that they were figures or sha-
dows: of something to be fulfilled in subslsjice under the gospel ; and
that these " carnal ordinances," as the apostle calls them, plainly
pointed to the spiritual work of Christ in his first or second appear*
ance, or both. But among all the types of the law, none couid be
more important than that of circumcision, not only because it was
the first, and the foundation of all the rest ; but also because it
was the very seal of the covenant of promise given to Abraham,
and typified a most important instilutiim to be given to the faithful
children of God in the latter day, and which was to he a peculiar
mark of distinction between them and the rest of mankind.

A figure, lo constitute a real type, must have a proper resem-
blance to the substance which it b designed to prefigure; otherwise
it is not a type. It was therefore necessary that ine institution of
circumcision should bear a real analogy to that gospel institution
which it was intended to point out. It is a prevailing opinion
among many who consider water baptism as a gospel institution,
Utal it if-as rfesig'ned to suipjilj ths pl3£« ot ciicumcision under ih*


CHAP tV.] OTHBR LEO At. CEREMONIES. 1(5

law ; some indeed suppose that circumcision was a type of water
baptism. In this however, there must appear an obvious inccm*
sistency : for there is no kind of analogy between baptism and cir-
cumcision ; and water baptism itself, was but a type of the baptism
of the Holy Ghost. This appears evident from John's own testi-
mony : "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he
'^that Cometh after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes 1 am not
** worthy to bear : he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
" with fire." Therefore, to say that circumcision was a type of
baptism, is nothing less than calling it a type of a typcy which is
an absurdity.

The circumcision of the male in the flesh of his forei^in, was a
significant mark of mortification in that particular member of the
flesh in which is found the seat of its carnal pleasures. This seal
of the typical covenant made with Abraham, was the most lively
figure ever given to man, of the mortification of the very source oi
iniquity, by the spiritual work of Christ, and of the complete de-
struction of that carnal pleasure received from that source, in the
act of sexual coition.

As circumcision was the seal of the covenant of promise to
Abraham and his posterity, under the law; and as none were con-
sidered as God's covenant pedple without this seal, whatever de-
gree of conformity they might observe in other respects ; so it was
a very plain manifestation that the seal of the covenant in Christ,
was to consist in the cutting off, and total rejection of fleshly lust,
by a life of self-denial and the cross. This is the very foundation
of the true cross of Christ, and the separating line between " the
children of this world," who " marry and are given in marriage,"
and " the children of the resurrection," who " neither marry nor
are given in marriage, but are like unto the angels ;" because they
live a spiritual life. And without this seal, this distinguishing
mark of the cross of Christ, no soul can be in the real covenant of
Christ, revealed in this day, whatever profession he may make,
or whatever duties he may perform, in other respects.

This figure is so obvious and striking, that it seems as tho none
could mistake it, excepting those who are blinded by an obstinate
determination to maintain the carnal life of the flesh, at all events.
There is nothing else to which circumcision, as a type, can bear
any consistent analogy. " By the law is the knowledge of sin."
But as the law was only figurative of spiritual things, and not
the real substance ; therefore if its types do not bear a plain resem-
blance to their antitypes, then it is in vain to seek by them to find
the knowledge of sin. Man has been too long imposed upon by
false systems and imaginary theories, which have no fouudAlv^'^^x:^
truth, nor any consistency in themselves. Q»wVi\v\^ ^^^^^ ^^ ^^
much importance as circumcision e\\detv\\y ^^^a^i >xKARX^iBfc'^»^'*


the I

Kafier
K^ T


CIRCUMCISION AM>

o be wpII consiilered by those who profess to be under ihe

_ It of the gtispel ; lest, unhappily, ihey lose boili the knoivlcdgc

Did the benefit of the most important principles of the gospel.

Let those who consider u'aler-baptism to be the antitype of cir-

I, (for if it was substituted under the gospel in IJeu of cir-

I, It must be the antitype,) consider also, that upon this

* principle, the antitype is not ao mortifying to the flesh, nor so deep

and lasting as the type. This clearly involves Ihe absurdity of

mating the shadow of a substance more substantial than iht! sub-

stance itself. What figure could have been formed, under the Law,

to represent more plainly the cutting off and rejection of the carnal

works (if the flesh, under the gospel, than outward circumcisiao,

or cutting ofl" the foreskin of the flesh? This not only wouihlud

the flesh in such a manner that the mark remained visible ever

t took blood, which is the life of the flesh, from that

Eirery member in which is found the seat and center of all the plea-

Ew res of lust.

The object of the covenant with Abraham, which was establish*
ed and confirmed by this seal, was to show that under the gospel
dispensatinn, the everlasting seal of the spiritual covenant, which
was to distinguish Clirist's chosen people from all others, must be
^^. thaX cross which destroys the life of fleshly lust. " For he is not
^Hji's Jew which is one outwardly; n>'iihcr is that circumcision
^^Mr which is outward in the flesh : But he is a Jew which is noe in-
^K^* wardiy : and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spuit, and
^^pfjiotin the lejtcr; whose praise is not of men, but of God."*
^VThis then is the true seal wliich hath praise of God, but twt of
^^tben : for nothing is so opposite to the natural inclinations of lat
^r^kn man as this seal, whieh is, in very deed, the cross against the
last of the flesh.

It may perhaps be objected that circumcision, when compared
with this cross, is not a perfect figure ; because males only were
the subjects of circumcision ; and thei'efore it could not properly
typify that cross, which seems to be enjoined on females as well
as males. True indeed, males only were the subjects of circum-
cision ; but if sexuai coition ceases in the male, it must cease in
the female of course.

But there was anotlier legal ceremony respecting women, which
was sufficient to balance ihecniss of circumcision in the male, and
which was not only a cooflrmaiion of the impure nature of the
works of generation, but an evident token that these works were
to be excluded Irom the church of Christ, which is the spiritud
sanctuary of God. A a-oraan who brought forth a male child,
waa counted unclean, under the law, seven days; and <
e^hch day the child was to be cwcumciaeil. And even iIk


th^H^


t3HAP. IV%] OTHER LEGAL CEREMONIES. 167

woman was not allowed to come into the sanctuary, nor touch any
holy thmg, for the space of forty days from the birth of her child.
After the birth of a female child, the time of her uncleanness and
separation from the sanctuary was doubled, extending - even to
eighty days. After this she was required to bring a sin-offering
and a burnt-offering to the priest, at the door of the tabernacle,
where they were to be offered, before she could be admitted into
the sanctuary with those who were accounted clean.*

Therefore, as circumcision was a figurative ceremony of purifi-
cation to the male; so likewise these legal injunctions were figu-
rative ceremonies of purification to the female ; and both were
designed to typify that state of purity and separation from all the
works of generation, which were to be required of the church of
Christ under the gospel dispensation. But why was the time of
the woman's separation from the sanctuary doubled after she had
borne a female child ? This was to show that tlie female could
not find her lot and order in the spiritual creation of God, until
the second gospel dispensation, or second appearing of Christ,
when the Spirit of Christ, manifested in a woman, should redeem
the female character, and bring her into her proper lot and order
in the new creation. t

Again : The law enjoined ordinances respecting sexual coition,
which applied to both male and female, and which clearly pointed
out the sinfulness of that nature in the sight of ^ pure and holy
God.:|: Every act of that kind excluded the parties from the camp,
and from the society of those who were accounted clean ; they
could by no means be admitted into the sanctuary, nor come be-
fore the Lord at any time, nor partake of any holy thing, without
being first ceremonially cleansed and purified from those works.
When Moses was ordered to sanctify the people, and prepare
them to appear before the Lord at Mount Sinai, he commanded
them saying, " Be ready against the third day : come not at your
wives."|| If this was not an unholy act, why did Moses give this
charge ?

As the ceremonies of the law were but types and figures of
things to come, they must have their antitypes, and be fulfilled in
substance under the gospel. If therefore these works of the flesh
were not, in their very nature, unclean, and if they were not finally

* Sie Lev chap, lii

•\ The man found his lot and order in the first appearing of Christ,
wlio appeared in the male,.(in the person of Jesus,) which was the first
^spel dispensation, op antitype of the first temple. But the second
gospel dispensation, which was prefigured by the second temple, was
first manifested in the female, and was called the second appearing of
Christ, in wliich the woman, as well as the man^ Is tc^Xat^'^Na X^&x ^'t^-
^p lot and order in the new creation.

* See Lev xr. 18. W £xod. x^x.. VS.


THE TrP^CAI. DESIGN OP [PART IV.


K


to be excluded from tlie s|)iritual sanr.luitr; of God. then we would
ask why ihey wen.- decbred unclean under the law, and excluded
from the saiiciutirj' of Israel, which was but a ijipe of the true gos-
pel sanciuarj'? Was the law more (lure ihan the gospel ? or was
nnrlettnnes!! under the law to be counted cleanness under lUe gos-
pel? Was the type more pure and holy than its antitype ? or in
[her words, can wc rationally suppose llial the Ictnporal and
^'pical sanctuary ol' Israel was more pure and holy than that
.feinciUBry of liolinoM which is established in the church of Christ,
BB n Spiritual Mtncluary i' And if those works nf the flesh whicb
were so pointedly marked out under the law, were not sinful, why
did the law require a sin-offering ? Will Ciud require a sacrifice for
»ui, where there is no sin? Certuinly not.

Tli«se injunctions and restrictions were evident tokens of the
unclefln nature of those acts, and plainly lyjiifu'il the purity which
Ood would requir** of souls under the dispensation of the gospel.
]n nothing short of this can the types and shadows of the law Ik
iswered with any degree of consistency. In nothing short of
the righteousness of the law Ik- manifested in us, "whe
after the fl^sh, but after the Spirit."
Hence it is evident that circumcision and other legal ceremoBJH
learly pointed to a life of self-denial and the cross of Christ, by
'hich souls receive the washing' of the regeneration, and the purl-
ing fire of the gospel, which is the real baptism of the Holy
host; and that nothing short of this can entitle any sou] to the
iprivilege of entering into the camp of the saiuts, and worslup{iiiig
Gud in the spirilu^ sanctuary, of which the camp of Israel Bud
the sanctuary of Jacob were but types and figures.

CHAPTER V.
A fete remarks on the nature and ti/piral design of the Jewish

wan, nhowing that the law could not decide the future slate of

the soul.

Ths advocates of war who make a profession nf Christianity,
often urge the example of the Jewish wars, dirocied by Divine au-
thority, as an argument in justilicalion of the lawfulness of war
under the dispensation of the gospel. And tho some of them en-
deavor to enforce this arginnent upon the principle that the nature
of God is unchangeable, and that the na[iu-e of man is essentially
(he same in all ages; yet. the ai^umenl would doubtless appear
very inconsistent, even in thdr own view, did iliey but consider
the most essential difference between the law and the gospel, and
the nature, tendency and design of God's work, as it respects the
' tot of rnHn. The same argument would apply, with ectual
to ali the ceremonies o(rtie\a,*) aoi\ "wiictiVs e^crj ^isn^


CHAP, v.] THE JEWISH WARS, &C. 169

which God ever commanded or authorized among men, whatever
might be the occasion or circumstances which required it.

When God deals with mankind, he always deals with them ac-
cording to their situation and circumstances, and in a manner best
calculated to answer his own Divine purposes, and at the same time,
to give them a fair opportunity of proving themselves by their works.
The work of God is an increasing work, and has always been
attended with an increasing degree of light to man, from one dis-
pensation to another, ever since the fall. And as the light of GtKl
has increased among mankind ; so righteousness has increased in
those who were obedient to that light. In the same proportion,
also, has wickedness increased in those who were disobedient.

But the light of God to man, from the fall to the coming of Christ,
was very limited. Even under the law, which was given to regu-
late man in his natural and fallen state, and which wss but a sha-
dow of things to come, he could have, at most, but an imperfect
sense of a future state, compared with what was revealed after the
coming of Christ. For this reason, the promises and blessings to
the faithful and obedient, and the threatenings and curses upon the
wicked and disobedient, were mostly of a temporal nature.

By the law was the knowledge of sin ; and the work of the law,
as it respected the then existing state of the Israelites, was to search
out and condemn the transgressions committed under it : hence
the severity of its penalties. The law was a law of justice, and,
in most cases, enjoined immediate execution upon the offender. It
required strict and ample justice between man and man, and be-
tween God and man. It required " an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth." It inflicted the penalty of death by stoning and burn-
ing for specific transgressions, such as profaning tlie sabbath, blas-
pheming the name of the Lord, rebellion against parents, adultery,
fornication and the like.

The law also enjoined the total destruction of enemies, with all
their possessions, wives and children. In many cases, it gave no
quarter in battle; but death and destruction was the decided por-
tion of enemies, without pity or compassion. These severities,
considered in a natural view, at the present day, would appear
shocking to humanity. Yet they were executed by Divine autho-
rity, and when viewed in their true light, they appear not only per-»
fectly consistent with all the displays of Divine Justice, but they
are also full of solemn instruction and warning.

The law was figurative of a future state of things which were to
take place under the gospel ; and therefore it is not improperly
called, " a law of types and shadows." But its most mysterious
injunctions had a more particular reference to the U&V. ^'lis^^ ^>s«'
pensation, which was to accorapWsVi «t ^w^ ^^\3\«Wkfe^v ^*>25icv "^^
gouls^ in which the mystery of God w«k.a Vo>a^ Wv^^^-j^^^^^^*^"^

Q


creature to be rewarded " according to his works." The rewards
of obedience, and the peoalties of disobedience, under the law,
were designed to show that every work must finally "be brought
into judgment, with every secret thing:" and that every otu? must
receive liis reward according lo the nature of his works.

As the law required "an eye for an eye,and a tooth for a tooth;"
so the future punishment of sinners, for every injury done to iliejr
fellow creatures, must be repaid in exact proportion to the natarc
of the offence, without any mitigation whatever. As slubbornnesi
and rebellion against parents, after all their endeavors to reclaim
tlie rebel, was punished with death and destruction; so rebellion
against the law of Christ, under ihe gospel dispciisatitHi, after all
the warnings, reproofs and instructions of the gospel, will finally
cut llie soul ofTand consign him to destruction, without the possi-
bility of recovery. As a profanation of the sabbath and blasphe-
my against God, were equally sinful, being rebellion against ihe
sacred ordinances of the law, and were condemned to the same
punishment; so (hose who wickedly and wilfully violate the laws
of Christ, under the light of the gospel, must share the same fate.
As adultery, fornication, incest, and all manner of uncleanness of
that nature were punbbed with death and deslruclion, by stoning
vr burning; so all kinds of impurity and defilement, so contrary
I to the perfect purity of the Spirit of Christ, unless purged from the
I toul by the purifying Gre of the gospel, must prove its final de-
'Structioo.

The iJestTuction of enemies in war, with all that pertained lo
them, was designed to show thai, in the spiritual warfare of chiis-
tians against their carnal corruptions, which are the enemies of the
soul) no qtiarter can be allowed. Every evil propensity, together
with all the comiptions which have been engendered by the in-
dulgence of these propensities, and every thing which has any
connection with a life of wickedness, must be utterly dcstroyeii and
purged out of the soul, before it can find complete redemption.
I This is the work required of every christiim soul onder the dis-
pensation of the gospel. But as God, by his providertce, assisted
p jthe Jews against their enemies, while they were perfectly obedient
to his commands; so Christ, by his Spirit, will assist every honest
and truly faithful soul, in this work.

The destruction and expulsion of the heathen nations out of the

land of Canaan, was just; because it was the just reward of th«ir

i wickedness;' and it was a very striking figure, and was eminently

t^lculated to show that all sin, all manner of wickedness, and eve-

^rjr thing which had a tendency to gender evil, must be purged out

tH^lbe church of Christ, and be driven from the spiritual Canaan ;

tiierwise the whole church "isexpoaeA vote tavra^wii, and its


CHAP, v.] THE JEWISH WARS, &C. 17 1

members ruined and lost. As the children of Israel were warned
of the danger of suffering one of the heathen nations to remain
in the land ; so Christ warns his people against tolerating one sin
in hb church.

But "the law made nothing perfect;"* and therefore " Christ is
^^ the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.^t
As the dispensation of the law was a tem|)oral dispensation, it was
beneficial to the Jews in a temporal view. Its blessings to the
obedient, and its curses on the disobedient, were mostly limited
to tliis life ; and tho it took the life of the body, it could not
decide the final state of the soul in the spiritual world. This was
to be the work of the gospel : for Christ came " to redeem them
that were under the law,'^ as well as them that were not ; because
the law could not do it. For the same reason Moses was under
the necessity of enforcing obedience by promises and threatenings
of a temporal nature; while Christ was able to enforce his precepts
by the retributions of eternity.

Thus the operations of the law, by being confined to this life,
could only extend to those who were under the law ; while the
operations of the gospel can and will extend to all souls, through-
out all ages of the world, whether in the body or out : for no soul
can ever obtain redemption but by the gospel. Therefore a future
state of trial was reserved for those who had lived under the law,
as well as for all others, both for those who had been obedient to
the law, and those who had not. This was just and equitable;
not only because it gave to those who had lived in subjection to
the law, a further opportunity of proving their subjection to the
gospel, which requires a greater cross a^sunst the evU propensities
of a fallen nature than the law enjoined ;f but also because it afibrd-
ed another trial to those who had abused their temporal probation
under the law, by which they might (if they chose) seek their re-
demption by their obedience to the gospel. And to this they might
be the more stron^y excited by a remembrance of the puni^ments
inflicted upon them for transgressions under the law.

"For this cause was the gospel preached to them that are dead,.
*^ that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
'^ according to Grod in the spirit." j( "For this cause also, Christ
'^ once sufiered for sins, the just for the' unjust, that he might bring
^< us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the

*Heh. vii W. tRom-»-4-

X Thoie evil propeositiet which pertain to the fallea nature of man, and which lead him
into sin, can never be destroyed by the death of thti body; for tbey are propensities of the
mind, not of the body; therefore nothing but the gospel of Christ, which operates upon the
mind, and which is the power of God onto salvation, can ever purge these corrupt propensi-
ties out of the soul Hence nothing short of the gospel'can ever redeem the soul framlhA
reigning power of sin.

if" That they mi^ht be j odred according; \o men \n \X\* tL*^.^** 'X:\3v% w^xt^'wvLwo. ^^ '<i«*^
Mffitlle erideati/ ibovt tJiat fliey were not men la <\k« fl«Av.


The tvpical desick, &c.

Spirit; by which also he went and preached to the spirits in
prison," who for their wickedness liutt been destroyed by the
flood in ilie days of Noah." As roan first fell into sin in this world,
't was necessary that the gnspi^l of salvation should first be preach-
'd on earth, to men in the flesh, and thence descend into the world
ifKpiril^, to the millions who had never heard it in ibis world,
' id that Jesus Christ, after his crucifixion, did aclually descend
IS of the (lead, and there preach the gosjiel to lost
as that God is a just and equitable Being. After
resurrection, he»ppearpd to his disciples and coinmnndeit them^
iiig, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
;.''t

:e it h evident that ali must hear the gospel by some mealiis

oilier. And as "there is no other name under hcavec given

men whereby we must be saved,'' but tlie name of Christi

can be saved who have not in truth heard that name. Bot

;he greater portion of mankind have died without even heaiiny

sound of ilifit name in this world ; therefore they could have

no chance of knowing the way of salvation in this life. Gut sti

God is ri^rbleous, they will have a fair call of the gosplit

linn: lor the everlasting destruction of such souls /rum the

'sencc of God, without their having ever known the means of

pe, would efiectually destroy the attribute o


^Sttion


lerefore, Christ having come to open the way of life and sat-

for all souls, that all might have a free Oder ol the gospet,

ana receive their just reward in a future state, he has himself

preached tl>e glad tidings of salvation, both tn this world and is

the world ofupirics; and has also commissioned his ministers to do

the same. Hence his faithful ai;^ true witnesses, after putting ofiT

this mortal body, will find a work to do in preaching the goipel

to those benighted spirits who never heard its peaceful sound in

this world ! and millions of sonis who, ignorant of the true spirit

of the gospel, have been compelled to shed each others blood, and

give up llieir lives on embattled plains, will joyfully embrace thes«

merciful calb, while those ambitious rulers, who impiously waged

war under a christian profession, together with their blood-

■sty chiefs, who marshalled their hosts on the sanguinary field,

' profanely compelled the battle in the name of God, will in

: turn be compelled to reap the reward of their own doings in

regions of darkness and despair.^

fcThedoctiineof aprobationtirj- state licjoi.dtlie griive, will p robs hly

^ear new and strange to tlmse wbo have ahv.-iys cansidcrei! deatb as

tr/osi'jig- scene of in.-.ii's piiib'rtiois Tot e^vMiv'. But it ia a doctrine

•ri-rcctly conii'ateiit with mH tlie piccev^^ •-v^^4 \w.4'tmc\\'™i oS V^nw


t>Hh9. Tl.} THE INeitEASINO WORK OP GOB. 17^

These solemn truths may perhaps be treated with contempt and
ridicule by the incredulous advocates of war; but they will yet be
seen^ felt and acknowledged as serious realities. If the advocates
of war, who profess the christian religion, did but understand and
duly consider these things, they would never more plead for a
barbarous and sanguinary principle because it was once author-
ized by the Almighty, in a barbarous state of society, and among
a benighted race of beings who, at that period, were incapable of
receiving any thing better ; and which the Divine Being wisely
improved for an instructive lesson to future ages and generations^
who ought, by this time, to be better able to view it in its true
light.

Notwithstanding the Jewish wars were authorized by the Al-
mighty; yet when Jesus Christ appeared, he became ^^ the end of
the law for righteousness ;" and therefore he disannulled all the
laws of war, together with all those sanguinary and ceremonial
statutes which had been authorized under the dispensation of types
and shadows, and began to establish new laws for the government
of his followers. ^^ Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou
'^ shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy : But I say unto
^' you, Love your enemies." From that period no follower of
Christ ever had any divine authority to engage in war. And had
all who have since professed the christian name, been faithful to
obey this precept, this earth might have been^ long ere this time^-a
terrestrial paradise.


CHAPTER VI.

^n iUnttraium of the progressive increase of the work of God
from the creation tt^he present time.

The work of Grod, from the beginning, was intended and wisety
calculated to be an increasing work. This appears evident frbnl
the account we have in the scriptures of the progressive operations
of the work of creation and |H'ovidence. In the creation of the

Christ and his apostles, and one which was maintained by the primitive
church while that church stood in its greatest purity. It is also ^ doc*
trine which ha^ been clearly and explicitiy taught by BfCother Ann, and
fully confirmed to the society by many risions and divine revelations to
the present clay. But after the declension of the primitive church, and
during its corruptions under the papal hierarchy, this gracious doctrine
of the gospel, so just and equitable, and so full of mercy to the fallen race
of man, like that of the confession of sin, (commonly caUed auricular
confession,) was sacrilegiously perverted to the purpose of extorting
money from the deluded multitude. And hence tiiese doctrines were
both rejected by the protestant reformers, andTel^!&cs^^:^cRvcfl^KS^s^^s^
the people upon the supposition that the^ vret^ ^QBkfc\vN«cfiasswkfR.^^
ehorch of Rome.


TBE tXCREASlN'G WORK OV QOBJ

aalural world, as recorded in the first chapter of Genesis, the
work of God came forth, in a regular gradation, from less to great-
er degrees of perfection. After the earth was formed and estab-
lished in its order, (he grass of the field, the herbs and trees so^
ceeded in their order. Then followed the living animnU in their
•rder; first the fishes of the sea and the fowls of the air, whose
life and perfection exceeded all that had been displayed in (he
vegetable creation. Next folloired the beasts of the field, which
occupied a still higher grade in the order of the animal creatioo,
b«ng more highly important, because they were designed for more
general and essential service. Man, the last or all, came ttirth w
the most noble part of this lower creation : and Jn man, including
malt- and female, was the order of the natural creation couipleted.
But there was slill to he an increasing work in the order of Di-
»ine Providence, The fruits of the earili, in their established
erdei-, each accordinjr to its kind, must come to perfection in their
proper limes and seasons, under the influence of liie natural ele-
wents, by a regular and gradual increase from the seed to the ftiU
crown plant or tree, and from the blossom to ibc fruit in its mMa-
rtty- The same regular increuse is observable in all the animd
juettiion. The human race also, from the concepijon to the birth,
id from infancy to manhood, in the order of nature, are brought
their hi^esl ettninmenl of naiurnl perfection by the progressive
nd of time. The a^es of the world also, have their regular and
[dually increasing operations upon mankind, in bringing tbetn
m the lowest state of ignorance and barbarism to the highest
degree of civilisation. The productions of man in the works of
art are also gradual and progressive, from less to greater degrees
"'^irfection.

hen this prc^ressive increase in the natural world is seen and

lerstood, why shnald it appAr strange or unreasonable to be-

~! that, in the spirilual world, there is also a r^ular and gradual

JHSe from the lowest to the highest degree of perfection ? If

nattml world and the things therein contained, as we have

ndy stated, are figurative of spirilual things, it must appear

feclly consistent; and that it is so in reality, the experience of

'ery. truly spiritual man and womun can bear witness. Tha

iptiires are also suffiricntly plain and explicit on this subject.

ivid, under the influence of Divine inspirdlion, says, "The

rightsvos shiUl flourish like a palm tree ; he slutll grow tike «

gcedar in Lebanoih''* So also the prophet M^acki; "But

j'anto you that (tai my name shall tlie Sun of riehleousaess arise

iwith healing in his wings; and ye sluill go fortli and grow up

''slves of the slall."'f The prophet Isaiah, in hisprediclic

ui^fZie coming of Christ, says, "Of the increase of faisj


a|


tHAP. YI.] THK INCRBAfilNG WORK OF QOb. 175

ment and peaee there ^all be no end.''* Here is an express de>
daration of an endless increase.

As the work of God, in the formation of the natural creation,
was a progressive, increasing work ; so all the works of his provi-
dence and grace on earth, among his chosen people, have been
attended with a progressive increase from one dispensation to
another; and the preceding has ever been preparatory to that
which followed ; and all Imve been designed and calculated to
show forth in a figure the great and last dispensation of Xjrod'f
grace, in which his sfHritual Kingdom is to supersede all other
kingdoms in power and majesty, and whose increasing glory^
purity, peace and righteomness will endure forever.

From the fall of man to Abraham, the only law revealed to man
for his protection, was the law of nature. This law was plain and
obvious ; and all who kept it, found justification before €rod, ae«
cording to the work of the day in which they lived. To this th^
apostle Paul had reference in his epistle to the Romans, where he
says ; ^^ For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by
'^ nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law,
^ are a law unto themselves ; which show the work of the law
^^ written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness,
^ and their thou^ts the mean while accusing or else excusing on^
^^ another."! Hence in every age, those who had no other law,
were required to keep this. And as there was no other law givm
to any people before Abraham, therefore all were bound by it;
and whoever violated it, most necessarily fall under condemnation-

This law of nature dictated thait man shotild not violate the
order of nature ; that is, he shou](l not commit any kind of violence
or injustice against any of his fellow men; that he should not mur-
der, nor defraud his fellow creatures, nor injure them in any way
or manner whatever. It also taught that he should not violate the
times and seasons of nature, in any manner: for the law of nature
has its regular order, which the natural man could not violate witb
impunity. These thii^s were plain to the understandings of men
in a state of nature who had never received a superier law, nor
been so far corrupted by the influence of the spirit of evil, as tv
lose the knowledge of moral good.

Man in a state of nature, and under the influence of this law,
would not i^nt nor sow the seeds of the eafth out of season ; nor
would he even generate bis own offspring out of season. In short,-
he would not perform any duty out of season, nor neglect any in
season. Instead of remaining idle, he wouki perform the duties of
the day while the day lasted, and take his rest at night ; and there-
in he would be able to find justification and peace, and live to GcM^'ib
acceptance according to that order. ^\i\ vrt«©«'^x\»fe>a«<Q2KvVst


THE INCREASING WORK OP GOS:

hearken to the influences of evil, a irain of disorderly sensations
began lo spring up iu his minij ; and he was then led to violate the
konler of nature which had before been his prolectton; hence fol-
Pk>wed a successive train of evils.

Adam, before his fall, in addition lo the law of nature, had the
r express commEind of God 'is an additional protection. Thla be
violated ; and his first transgression was ihat which struck st llie
very order in which his offspring were to be propagated : so that,
instead of producing an ofispring subservient to the order of nature,
be icenerated one which soon began to nhow from whence ori^ns<
ted his disorderly and unnatural conduct. By the first fruit of
Adam's transgression the lirst murder was committed ; and hence-
forth those of his posterity who readily followed his example, be-
gan to corrupt themselves with wickedness: so that long before
the flood, wickedness greaily abounded among them ; "and tl>e
earth was filled with violence." And so few were there who kept
the law of nature and refrained from acts of violence, that at last
none were found worthy of God's protection, except Noah and his
family.

" Noah was a just man." Instead of violating the order of
nature, and corrupting his seed by inordinate affections, " he walk-
ed with God," and begat no children fill he was five hundred
years old j and even then, instead of lieiny led by tlie corrupt in-
clinations of a fallen nature, he went forth by the pennission of
God, according to the law of nature : fur it is said, " he was per-
fect in his generations."* In obedience to the command ofGod,
Noah built an ark to save himself and his family from the flood ;
and did all that was commanded Jiim to do. Thus "Noah found
grace in the eyes of the Lord," by hU obedience, and was preserv-
ed from the flood of waters whtcn swept off the rebellious children
I of violence.

T the flood a new generation of men began to multiply upOR
rth, who, instead of following the righteous esample of Noah,
lose rather to follow the iiiflijences of the power of evil, and sooa
Eorrupted themselves with lust and pride, which increased among
Jiem till the building of Babel, when God confounded their Ibd-
piage, and scattered them over the face of the earth.

But God having respect to the work of his own hands, always

l^reserved a chosen seed to bear tesiicnnny against the violations

lx)f tlielaw of nature, to support the belief of one invi»ble, everlivlng

ind true God, and to maintain the line of distinction between good

ad evil, obedience and disobedience, until the coming of the

romised Messiah, who was to commence the work of redemption)


€HAP.VI.] . THE INCREASING WORK OP G0». 177

and effect the salvation of all who were willing to become his true
and faithful followers. But this great salvation could not be effect-
ed at once ; it must be brought to pass through the progressive
operations of Divine Providence, which were designed and wisely
calculated to enlighten the minds of mankind, and gradually pre-
pare their understandings for such an event ; and ages must pass
away before it could be fully accomplished.

This line of distinction between good and evil, between the sons
of violence, and that chosen seed by whom the testimony of the
true God was to be preserved in the earth, necessarily required a
cross against that fallen nature from which disorder and violence
always proceeded. Hence the first manifestation of God to man,
after the fall, from which proceeded a law enjoining an external and
practical cross upon that nature, was made to Abram. He was
first called to forsake his country and his kindred, and received
the promise of a blessing as the consequence of obedience. This
was a striking figure of the requirement and promises of God under
the gospel dispensation. Here was a cross required of Abram
before he could receive the promised blessing, or even be entitled
to the covenant of promise. This was doubtless a cross against
the feelings of his nature, which would have inclined him to cleave
to his native land and his father's house. But he took up his
cross and obeyed the call of God ; and, for so doing, he was bless-
ed, from time to time, with still greater manifestations of the notice
and favor of God.

After this, God made a covenant with Abram ; and after chang-
ing his name from Abram to Abraham, and renewing his promises
with many additional circumstances, God required him, as a token
or seal of the covenant of promise, to circumcise the males of his
family. Here was established the first outward sign of a practical
cross against the fallen nature of the flesh ; and here let it be re-
membered, that this first permanent cross which Grod required of
his people, was one which pointed directly to the very nature and
foundation of man's loss from God.

Abraham being found faithful to obey the commands of God
thus far, and to keep the law of circumcision, God, according to
his promise, blessed him with a son in his old age. And here it is
worthy of remark, that this child of promise was not generated ac-
cording to the will of the flesh, in the days of his youth ; for the
inordinate propensity of carnal gratification could claim no share
in the promise of God ; but that it might be made manifest that
the promised seed could not be begotten according to the will of
the flesh, Abraham and Sarah were both advanced in years;
" and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner oC ^HwsNfcwJ*^
Hence this child was given to be AbtaVvawk's \\e« vs\^^\v«>fc^t
the promise^ and from him was to V»>Ma> Va >Jcke\v\^ QJL«aK«»K««^


^^^Pf^ THE INCREASING WORK OF Gl

that promised seed in which all the fiimilies oT the earth vere to
be blessed.

God having noticed Abraham's faithfubejs thus far, determined
to make a fmal proof of his faith and obedience, and to give him
iin opjmTtunii; of showing himself worthy of the confidence {daced
in him, and of the htmorable station to wliich he was appointed,
as the typical father of the faithful, and the legitimate progeaitor of
that peculiar people who wei-e to typify the chosen followers of
Christ, the Lord from Heaven, the Father of the nac creation,
and the faitliful Ucdeemer of his pcojile. Accordingly God com-
manded Abraham to lake his only son Isaac, whom he loved, anl
offer him for a burnt-ofTeriiig.

Abraimm was now undoubtedly brought to the greatest extrem-
ity of trial. Here was evidently a |,Teater cross required of him,
thait that which was required of Adam at the beginning. But
Abraimm did not stop to query with God, how he would fulfil lus
promise if Isaac should be sacrificed; he did not plead his great

t affections for his beloved son ; he did not dispute the present com-
■tand of God, as being contradictory to his former promise; he
jdid not object to it as an act of murder, and urge the word of God
to Noah; "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
" be shed." Nay; instead of urging these objections as insur-
Bountablc against the fulfilment of the promise of God, (as many
jit the present day, urge the necessity of the old command to in-
tretae tmd multiply, in order to prevent the world from coming
10 an end,) Abndiam immediately went forth iii ubedieni-e to the
command of (iod, and made all the necessary preparations to ac-
complish the solemn and awful task. And having proceeded far
enough to prove bis faith and obedience, he was released fiom the
iJreadful sacrifice, with the blessing of God, and was ever after
honored as the friend of God.

In these displays of the will of God to Abraham, was laid the

Aiuodafton of all the most important types and figures under the

law, and of all the succeeding dispensations of God to man. The

l%w of circumcision was the first risible sign which pointed to the

I destruction of the root of sin. And the offering up of Isaac was a

I' -prelude to all those ceremonial sacrifices under the law, which had

a .special reference to the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and to

the final sacrificp, in his followers, of all the lies and beloved objects

I of nature. The posterity of Abraham, in the line of the promise,

~ ere henreforlh greatly distinguished from alt other people, by

e peculiar notice and favor ofGiid.

Aiier the children of Israel, the promised seed of Abraham,

P>were released from their Egyptian bondage by Muses, {an eminent

p^jpe of the dejjverance of God's people from the bondage of sin

''y Jesus CJirisi,) they recei\ed\\ie\*\t Q^GoiU'i-a^\<s»i\'S\wi;\i


CHAP. Vt.] THE INCREASING WORK OP QOB. l79

which brought with it an additional cross against the fallen nature
of man, and was a further manifestation of God against those car-
nal and sensual indulgences in which the generality of mankind
lived. Here the work of God was attended whh an increasing
testimony against sin, and additional restraints upon the gratifica-
tions of the flesh.

Hence those chosen people were still further separated from the
rest of mankind by their obedience. And such was the strictness
and purity of the divine law, that those who violated it were cut
off from among the children of Israel, by the penalties of the law
and the righteous judgments of God; And tho they were stiH
under the vail of the flesh, and still allowed to increase and multi-
ply in the order of natural generation ; yet the restrictions of the
law were such that they could not violate the order of nature with
impunity.* Therefore, those who lived tmder the law found a
much greater cross against the carnal indulgences of nature than
had ever been required before. And henceforth, while the Israel-
ites continued faithful in their obedience to the law, they were more
noticed of God than any other people on earth, and were more
highly distinguished by temporal blessings and divine manifesta-
tions. These blessings and privileges were the fruits of the cross
which they bore, and by which all who were truly faithful, were
justified according to the measure of the work of God in that day,
and rested in hope of the promised redemption in Christ, wheii he
should appear.

The law and the prophets continued until John, who was the
forerunner of Christ, and came to bear witness of him. John
came with a sharp and powerful testimony against sin, and preach-
ed the baptism of water unto repentance^ saying, "Repent ye:
" for the Kingdom of Heaven Is at hand." And again; " I indeed
" baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that cometh
" after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to
" bear : he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, aiid with fire !
^^ whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor,
" and gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the
" chaff" with unquenchable fire.^'t

All who heard the testimony of John, and were willing to obey
it, began to prepare themselves for the coming of Christ and his
Kingdom, by taking the first step which John's testimony required :

* This subject is clearly illustrated in The Testimony ofChritt^s Sc"
cond Appearing , in the chapter entitled, «• The true end and design of the
law given by Moses," where it may be seen what restrictions were laid
upon the works of generation under thj law ; and what purifications
were required of those wha lived in those works, before \i\^"^ ^-^nvJAXsr;
accepted of God, and admitted to the sancVuw^ . ^^^ \\%*i\^«N>J«..^ii»^«
Kii, and XV. \ ^uXX/vvv *i,V\ A'^-


INCREASING HOHS OF Gl


I


I hi

E

E


id that was, to confess tlieirsins, and be baptized with water unto
xepcDiance. " Then went out lo him Jerusalem and all Jutlea,
~ and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptisied af lum
" in Jordan, eonfe*slng their sins," The minisimiiDn of John
was a necessary prelude to that of Jesus Christ ; and his baptism
was a fieure of the biipiism of the Holy Ghost and of fire. As
the baptising or washing wilh water, as practiced in that day, will
cleanse the body from outward pollution; so the lire of the Holy
Spirit will cleanse the soul from sin, and burn up and destroy that
felten and corrupted nature in man which is the operating cause of
';jaH iniquity. Hence it is evident that John's baptism was n typ:
of, and a prelude to that of Jesus Christ : and John himself bIsb
lesiltit^d, saying, " He must increase, but I must decrease."*

The way being sufficiently prepared by John's ministration,
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was ushered into the world, to be
the head of the new and spu'ilual creation of God, and the Savior
and Redeemer of his people. He was begotten, not in the order
of natural generation, by the willof man, but by the power of God,
" He was made, not after tlie law of a carnal commandment, but
" after the power of an endless life."t Born of a virgin, whose
chastity bad never been contaminated by any lawless act, be be-
came l/ie end of the law for righteou»ne.g» to all who believe and
^ obey bim.j: To such therefore, the law was no longer necessary
, Id curb (he licentious passions of human nature: for thiisqfgbo re-
ceived and obeyed his testimony, found it a far more powerful re-
straint upon the carnal propensities of man's fallen nature, than
the law of Moses ever had been.

Those therelbre who obeyed the gospel, were free from the law;

because the gospel, by fulfilling the real spirit and design of the

law, superseded its outward ceremonies, and rendered ifaem useless.

Kol that believers were now left at liberty to indulge themselves

in all those carnal gratifications of the flesh which were forbidden

by the law; but that the purity ofthe gospel was such as to super-

' Bede the necessity of the law^ by saving all who obeyed it, fro/n

ffdiose filthy pollutions which were kept within certain limits by the

I law, but could not be subdued by it.

The object of Christ's first manifestation was to lay the foundth

tion of salvation by the cross; to take upon himself human nature^

crucify that nature, and to suffer in the flesh and die to a sinful

lure in the person of Jesus, and rise to God, that he might, by

_ I sufferings, death and resurrection, be able to open the new and

bving way of eternal life to his followers ; that he might thereby

become the first-begotten of God, and firstborn from the dead.

Having entered upon his ministry, he commenced a new and

liritual work, and began to teveal the tesl nature and substance


CHAP.yi.] THE INCREASING WORK OF GOD. ISl

of the law of God, and showed what it required of man ; that it
taught mankind to love God with all the heart and soul, and their
neighbors as themselves ; that this was the real spirit of the law
and the prophets ; and the object of his mission was to fulfil this
law himself, and teach all his followers to do the same.

To accomplish this great object, he introduced the most pure
and simple system of morality, and taught that all disorder and
every kind of violence must be done away ; that the true spirit of
the gospel was, Peace on earth and good toill to man ; and that
nothing contrary to this pure spirit could find an entrance into
the Kingdom of Heaven. " Except your righteousness shall ex-
^' ceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in
" no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."* He also taught that
nothing short of this spirit of purity and holiness could ever over-
come the nature of sin, or destroy the deplorable effects of the fall
in the soul of man ; that this overcoming power could be gained
only by self-denial and the cross ; and that there was no other way
to find salvation and redemption. " Whosoever will come after
" me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me."t
Again ; " Whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me,
*' cannot be my disci pie." J

Under the ministration of Jesus Christ, we find a far greater
increase of the work of God than had ever taken place on earth
since the fall of man. In this increase was manifested a cross against
the carnal nature of man proportionably great ; far greater indeed
than had ever before been required of man ; a cross against all the
corruptions of man's fallen nature. This, of course, created an
opposition against the testimony of Jesus, from the unbelieving
Jews, which betrayed their darkness, blindness and ignorance of
the real nature of the law ; and clearly manifested their hypocrisy
in pretending to keep it, by observing some of its outward ceremo-
nies, while in their hearts they were enemies to God. This oppo-
sition from these unbelieving hypocrites, against the Lord Jesus
Christ, was carried to such an extremity of persecution, thctt he
finally gave up his natural life to his persecutors, and suffer^ the
painful and ignominious death of the cross.

The ministration of Jesus Christ opened a new era to the world.
It taught ' mankind what they had never known before ; that the
real work of God was not to build up the kingdom of this world^
and to render the earth a durable habitation for man ; but to pre-
pare them for an eternal and immortal state beyond the grave.
It taught them that the dispensation of the law and the prophets
came short of the power of salvation from sin ; that it could never
^•' make the comers thereunto perfect;" and that the wotk ^^^^ofaiu^
dispensations was but preparatory to xVi"d\ ^t«»X ^sA \\a!^"wJ^»s^

* Matt. V, 20. tee ttho cbap. xviii.S. \ MatVVm. ^4- \\*>iKftTic« .*=£^-

R


i


nCrRLA^l.VG \\0KK of *iO]

wurk whidi was lo redeom niHnkintl /rom ilie rallcn nalure of tbc
I" fleth, and fit ihem for the Kingdom of Heaven. Hence the words

Iv(Jesii6 ; " Among them that are born uf women, there hath not
W risen a greater than John the Baptist : Rotwithaiandlng, he that
P » least in tlie Kingdom of Heaven, is greater than lie."* This
Man evtdenl proof that John himself wns not in the Kingdom of
Beaven, and thai none before liim had ever entered it. The
Kingdoro of Heaven, therefore, which John dMared to beat liand,
Eld for which lie was sent to prepare the way, was first revealed
Jq' Jesus Christ, as a state to which all the former dispensations
of God to man, trere but as types and shadows, and preparatory
events.

Bui the revelation of Jesns Christ in ilie ilesli, was but the com-
mentemeiil of tliis great and glorious work. He was the begin-
tiing of the nete creation of (Sod. Jle eame to open the way of
salvation from !>in ; to declare himself " tlie way, and tlje Irutli,
and tile life,-' and set an example of rigliteousness to menkinil;
and to show what his followers must be, in order lo inherit a place
Lbi his Kingdom. And all who believed on him and received his
^BBtimotiy in that day, became " a kind of firstfruits" of his King-
lorn.

Jesns Christ having Hnished his personal work on earth, and
Bcended to his Father; and having, through the agency of the
loly Spirit, established the primitive church, which was to serve
I a pattern of the true order of his church in the latter day, his
-Spirit was, by degrees, withdrawn from the cartli, lo est^hsh th«
licavenly order of his Kingdom in the world of spirits. This was
agreeable to what he had spoken lo his disciples before his cruci-
fixion ; "In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were
M not so, 1 would have told you. 1 go lo prepare a place for you.
g And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and
preceive you unto myself j that where lamlhereyemay bealso,"t
Hence the work of Christ, afier the establishment of the primitire
^urch, and before he could make his serond appearance on carlli,
Iss to prepare and set in order those heavenly mansions for the
eeeplion of those faithful soub who, ilirough the work of the re-
vneration, should finally be found prepared to inherit ihem.
' In tlie mean time Antichrist rose, and began lo infuse his spirit
""o the members of the christian church, and by artfully disguis-
_» his false doctrines wiih sacred names, he so far succeeded as
p undermine the primitive church, and establish his kingdom upon
V ruins thereof. In process of lime he filled the world with his
ark and benighted systems of religion, and, for sacred truth, «-
Alishcd many corrupt and pernicious principles which were cogr
lU/^/^' at variance with cbrislias puiity. By ihesemeansbei"* '


CHAP. VI.] THE INCREASING WORK OF GOD. l83

the earth with corruption, religious persecution^ blood and fire ;
and maintained his deplorable reign for the space of twelve hun-
dred and sixty years.

During this long and gloomy reign of Antichrist, the only true
spiritual work of God on earth, by which he revealed his will to man,
was intrusted to chosen witnesses, who bore testimony to the purity
of the primitive church, and condemned the depravity of the times,
and the corruptions of those false churches which had assumed the
name and authority of Christ. This period was indeed a gloomy
night of darkness; but these witnesses, like stars in the night,
often broke through the gloom and gave a glimmering light to
honest souls. These witnesses prophesied of the coming of
Christ's Kingdom, and the great increase of the work of God in
the latter day. And altho amidst the universal gloom which pre-
vailed, all appearances seemed far distant ; yet there was still an
increasing WQrk in the world of spirits, by which a foundation was
gradually preparing for a more extraordinary increase of the spir-
itual work of God on earth, than had ever taken place since the
foundation of the world.

But the day of full redemption was yet to come ; the real and
effectual work of which could not be accomplished but through the
travel of the regeneration only; and this spiritual travel could not
fully take place till the W9.y was prepared for it. When the ap-
pointed time arrived, the way was opened, and this long predicted
day was ushered into the world ; and that work which was design-
ed to establish the Kingdom of Christ on earth, and effect the
final regeneration of souls, then commenced in very deed. Here
began a new and important manifestation of Divine goodness ;
the great and last display of God's grace to a lost world, which
superseded all former dispensations, to which they were all but
preparatory events, and in which all the types and shadows, and
prophetic signs of the law and the prophets, concerning the day
of redemption, began to be eminently fulfilled.

The important period having arrived, the work of this great
millennial day has now commenced, and is yet in its beginning ;
but it is an increasing work. The Kingdom of Christ is now es-
tablished on earth, and his reign is begun ; and henceforth he will
rule and reign till all enemies are put under his feet ; and, ^^ of the
increase of his government and peace there will be no end.*^


' #


V


"EW REMARKS I rO.V

CHAPTER Vn.
r" reOarh upon the Witnesne* of Irvtli, including a brief
Wcalrtiladon of jimphflic Mripturet alluding to tjte period of
'Antichrist' I reign, and the second coming 0/* Christ.
The dotlension of the primitive church, and ilie rise of Aoti-
luisi hnve been briefly allutled to in several places In this work;
fat our limits will iioi permit iis to enter fully into the discussiofi
phesc subjects. AVc shall, however, make a few rpmarks cqii-
ming those wilneases whom God raised up find sent forth, from
w In time, to b?ar teslimony of the truth to niankind ; and in
doing this, tre shiill also examine the prophetic periods, and the
true import ofsome passages of scripture which allude to the lime
of Antichrist's reign, and the second appearing of Christ.

Those H'ho <iuppose that God has always had a true church an

earth, ever since the first appearing of Christ, and who expeci to

iind the order and power of the primitive church solely by iht

jevdalton given in that day, will, in ihe event, most certainly be

^""(appointed. It appears evident from the predictions of Jeaus

' tt and his aiiostlea, that they foresaw a time coming when the

ind power of the church would he lost from off the face of

^ earth; and therefore could not be known nor found by any

lople whatever. Jesus testified to his disciples, saying, " The

rtdays will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of

me Son of man, and ye shall not see it. — Then if any man abaU

k«tyuntoyou,Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. — ^Take

" heed that yc be not deceived: fur many will come in my name,

"saying, I am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not

" therefore after them."*

Tliese testimonies of the Lord Jesus evidently alluded to the

time of Antichrbt's dominion; and if Christ had any true churdi

on earth, at that time, he must certainly have been in it ; because

his chinch is his body in which he dwells, and of which lie is the

' ead and life. Those therefore, who are the real members of

A body, can say in truth, <' Christ is our life." Hence they can

y truly, " Lo, liere is Christ !" and such might be followed with

e greatest propriety. " Be ye followers of rae, even as I atii of

" St ;" saith the apostle.t But if there ever was a time on earth

I none could say in truth, " Lo, here is Christ ;" and conse-

Kntly none could depend upon such a testimony; then it is cer-

In that Chi'ist had not, at that time, any true church on earth.

Again : St. Paul saith, " Let no man deceive yon by any means :

" for that day shall not come, escept there come a falling away

■' lirst, and that man of sin he revealed.''} This is a clear proof

thai the apostle foresaw that the church would fall away, and " ~

^*ii(t u.'r. iS,— L«i. jvii. M. ni Hi B, (.1 Cii.iv-l. Vf^Vti^u-j


CHAP.VirJ THE WITNESSES OP TRUTH. 185

Antichrist would have his reign, before the day of Christ's second
coming. .

It has been generally admitted that there was a falling away,
and that Antichrist has had his reign ; but that Christ had no true
church on earth during that period, will hardly be acknowledged
by any of the churches of Antichrist ; because such an acknowl-
edgment would implicitly condemn all these churches as counter-
feits. " But the tree is known by its fruits." And certain it is,
that if the predictions of Christ, on this subject, have ever been
fulfilled, then there was a time when he had no true church on
earth. This period may easily be ascertained by an impartial
examination of ecclesiastical history, which developes ages of con-
troversy and strife, fraud and violence, tyranny and persecution,
war and bloodshed, licentiousness and debauchery, and every spe*
cies of crime, committed under the authority and by the sanction
of these professedly christias churches, and which sufficiently prove
that Christ was not there.

Many attempts have been made under the reign of antichristian
darkness, to ascertain the true meaning of those prophetic num-
bers given by Divine inspiration, respecting the rise and duration
of Antichrist's power, and the prophecy of the " two witnesses.'*
But the nature of these events being concealed from the view of
man, those who have attempted to make the calculation, were
unable to discern 'Hhosc times and seasons which God had put in
his own power:" and hence they have always failed in their
attempts. Even the prophet Daniel himself was unable to com*
prehend the nature and event of those thongs which were repre-
sented to bim in the vision. This appears evident from hb own
testimony.

" And I heard, but I understood not : then said I, O my Lord,.
^^ what shall be the end of these things? And he said. Go thy way
" Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of •
^Mheend. Many shall be purified and made white, and tried f
<^ but the wicked shall do wickedly ; and none of the wicked shall
^ understand ; but the wise shall understand. — But go thou thy
^ way till the end be: for thou shalt rest^ and stand in thy lot at
" the end of the days."*

Thus- it appears that these things were ^^ closed up and sealedf
till the time of the end." It was therefore impossible that the
predictions relating to these events, should be understood, as to
their nature and substance, or the period of their accomplishment,^
till the time of God's appointment; and even then, they could be
known only by the revelation of God. When the seals were
taken off, and the book of Divine Revelation was opened^ ib»?ck
ttese predictions which were deUvered Xo X\i'ft \it«^<5X\>«s»^^'«»^


aAfTwarda renewfd by Jesus Christ, and again confirmed by die
angel to Jultn, could be clearly seen and underslood, but niit !•»■
fore. And it is but reasonable to suppose that litis revelation
would (irBl be. made lo tliose who nere in ilie real work of God,
and whose mlods were enlightened by the Divine manirestatiDiw
which succeeded ihese events. Those things having now been
levealed by llie l^hi of Divine Truth, and tlie events clearly »e«n
and understond, they may be pointed out and illustrated, agreeaUe
to ancient predictions, and confirmed by the events recorded in

Tho the spirit cfAniichrist began to manifest itself in the apos-
tle's dayB,as appearaevident from their writings; yet it was many
yeers before it gnined so much ascendency ns to exclude the true
and laithrul witnesses of Gnd and followers of Chiisi from the
sanctuary. When this was effectually done, then the disciples of
Antichrist, with great leal, set about modelling the precepts and
doctrines of Jesus Christ and his apostles to suit their own carnaL
_ views. And as the practical diKlrines of the cross of sfflf-denial
L vere the most olHiuxiuos to the spirit of Antichrist, the first object
H l^as to pervert these doctrines in such a manner as to render the
^«ross of Christ ineffectual.

' This was done by snbsiituiing the form of a wooden cross in the
place of practical self-denial, and making the show ut* religion
supply the place of the reality. Hence when the Emperor Con-
stantine assumed the christian name, lie formed such a cross for
bis stanilard, uiider which he prosecuted his bloody waiS] and
fought his way to the throne. Similar devices were formed to-
supplanE ev:ry thing that bore the mark of christian purity and
simplicity, till the views of Antichrist were fully accomplished,
and the sanctuary itself, with every thing belonging to it, was com-
pletely trodden under foot.

As this was a gradual woj-k, it was not fully affected until the
period when Pnjie Leo thefimt came into full possession of his

f'&iihmited power, ubout the year 457- Tiiis was the year in
iWhich the emperor Marciaaiit died, and left Leo in the full pos-
'MSBion of bis power and sujiremacy, both civil and ecclesiastical :
so that henceforth he was under the control of no power on earth,
neither civil nor ecclesiasUcal, but ruled both church and state, ai
it is called, with unlimited away. And from this time, the power
of the IVpes of Rome was fully established above the power of all
earthly princes ; and by their authority laws were framed, anil
creeds drawn vp and established, lo regulate and govern the re-
ligious hhh of the whole christian world, so called, as far as their
dominion extended. The scenes of tyranny and persecution
which followed, to enforce obedience to their liloody religion, fully
mark this gloomy period as the days oS 6M,oVdVvsa,Mi4 WVov^W
>.inr reign of A nticlirtst.


CHAP. Vll,] THE WI'fNESSES OP TRUTH. 187

Hence it appears that the year 457 was the period in which the
unlimited reign of Antichrist fully commenced. The closing
period of this reign is pointed out in the visions of the prophet
Daniel, and by reckoning from the date of the vision, may easily
be found. The question was asked, ^^H:'W long shall be the
^ vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of
^^ desolation, to give both the sanctuaiy and the host to be trodden
*^ under foot? And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three
*^ hundred days 5 then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.''* Tli»
vision is dated 553 3'ears before Christ ; and allowing 2300 pro-
phetic days to signify so many years, which is generally admitted^
we have the time fi oni the date of the prophecy to the cleansing of
the sanctuary. Then by taking 553 from 2300 leaves 1747 for
the year of the christian era when the cleansing of the sanctuary
was to commence, and when the testimony of truth and all sacred
things were no longer to be trodden under foot by the unlimited
dominion and persecuting power of Antichrist.

Again : The duration of this reign of Antichrist is given in
another vision, and which also confirms the preceding calculation.
^^ And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away,
*^ and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be
^ a thousand two hundred and ninety days." These are with
propriety called the days of desolation, being the period in which
the true church of Christ, or sanctuary of God, was trodden under
foot. These days, like the former, signify so many years. Then
by adding these 1290 years of desolation to 457, (the year of their
commencement under Pope Leo, as before stated,) we have 1747
for the year in which these days of desolation were to end. This
agrees exactly with the former calculation, and each one confirms
the other.

In the Revelations of John we find the following testimony :
^^ And there was given me a reed like unto a rod : and the Angel
^^ stood, saying, Rise and measure the temple of God, and the
*' altar, and them that worship therein. But the court which is
^ without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is givea
^< mito the Gentiles ; and the holy city shall they tread under foot
" forty and two months.t And I will give power unto my two
^^ ^(itnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and
^^ threescore days, clothed in sackcloth."} This measuring had
reference to the period of time in which that order of primitive
christians existed who worshipped God in the inner court of the
temple, or in other words, who rejected the works of the flesh,

* Dan. viii IS, 14.
t This revelation couli not allude to the Jewish temple, except at a ti|^are : for b«Ov \K«
city and its temple were destroyed about 25 years befut« \,Vi« xvi Av^Miu "w^^ ^v««%>\'S^
eridently alluded to the primitive ehcMTchi wUicbiv«s Vbe vg\ri\a!(2i\]tm^^«1^^^
♦ Jitf' XI Mf 2^9»-


I FXW REMARKS UPON


pon

U M«l

p

r ii?stj


If:


and worshipped God in ihe spirit, and separated themselves from
[he course and rriendsh'tp of the world.

But the question will nalurnlly arise, Who were these Iibo wil-
neaset .' and for what purpose wero they sent r* As our limits will
not permit us (o enter lully into ihe discussion of this subject, onr
remarks must be brief.

During the long reign of anllchristian darkness, God always
had bis ^iihtiil witnesses, tlimugh whum he dispensed a sufficienl
portion of light to preserve the world from total darkness and ruin.
Many such were raised up, from time to time, to whom God re-
lied himself by his Spirit, who always bore testimony against
I in whom was the only divine Kglrt then manifested on the
They were called the hoo leitnexfes, because they were
from the two sexes, male and female, and becaose their
testimony pointed to the twt> great dispensations of the gospel, the
first and second appearing of Christ, They were lo prophesy
1260 years (in prophetic language called days) " clothed in sacK*
eloth." This denotes the duration of their testimony under %
stale of darkness and mourning. And this is an evidence that
Christ could not have been with them during that period : for his
presence would have dispelled all darkness and mourning froni
them. " Can the children of the bridt^-ehamber mourn, as long as
the bridegroom is with them?"

The lesiimony of these witnesses commenced at the treading
down of the holy city, by the Gentiles, under the dominion ofAn-
lichrisl. These gentiles having obtained full possession of the
outer court of the spiriluttl temple of God, the way into the temple
WHS shut ; of course there could be no entrance into the holy place-
While the printhivc church stood in its purity, it constituted the
living temple of God, where souls could lind an entrance imo the
sanctuary of holiness, and offer their spiritual saeriJices upon the
holy eltar.

But when this church fell away, and came under the dominion
of Antichrist, then the spirit of the world in the fallen nature oT
man, (called by the angel the Genlileg,) under the government of
Antichrist, took full possession of every thing that belonged to the
church, which was called the holj/ citt/, and corrupted and trod it
under foot. But the spirit of holiness, and the true spiritual order
of the church were shut from ihem, and were henceforth inaccessi-
ble to man. Therefore, during the reign of Antichrist, there
could be no true church of Christ on earth : for if such a church
bad then existed, that church would have been the true temple o(
God, and man could have had' access to it.

When that measure was fulfilled by which the temple and the
!/■ KWe measured, according to iVw dwecuow of ihe angel, then
iiilSUed the vision of Da(iK\lL« po5\i'i\-. " \.\iO\^,«a6.*i»


chap.vil] the witnesses of truth. 189

^< same honi made i^Str with the saints^ and prevailed against them,
'' until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the
" saints of the .Most High."* As the saints, or true worshippers
of God, were excluded from the temple and the altar during the
reign of Antichrist ; so these two witnesses prophesied, ** clothed
in sackcloth.'^ during that period. And as the temple was ^ut,
and the true sanctuary trodden under foot ; so there was no light
of God on earth except in these witnesses; and wherever they
appeared and bore testimony against th^ corruptions of a false
church, and the bloody religion of a degenerate world, they were
followed by the cruel arm of persecution, and all the power of this
beastly hierarchy was exerted to exterminate them from off the
face of the earth. These witnesses continued to rise, from time to
time, in the power of their divine testimony, and were as conti-
nually opposed and oppressed by the power of persecution, during
the whole period of Antichrist's reign.

The testimony of these witnesses pointed both to the first and
second appearing of Christ. They bore testimony to the precepts
and example of Jesus Christ, and to the purity of primitive Chris-
tianity ; and plainly testified against the doctrines of Antichrist,
the religion of the times, and the degeneracy of the world. They
also foretold the second coming of Christ, and what it would effect ;
that all false religion, pride and hypocrisy, all tyranny and perse-
cutions, wars and fightings, and all manner of wickedness, and
every kind of corruption must then be done away ; that there
should be one fold, and one shepherd. Altho these witnesses of
God were raised up in different ages and nations, and bore testi-
mony against the particular corruptions of the age and nation in
which they lived 5 yet the real spirit of their testimony, while they
kept in the truth, was uniformly the same, and pointed more ox
less to the first and second appearing of Christ.

The testimony of these witnesses has ever been opposed and
rejected by the established ecclesiastical orders, and the popular
religions of the day, who have generally stigmatized them with
the name of heretics, fanatics and enthusiasts. And by the au-
thority of these self-styled orthodox churches, they have often suf-
fered severely under the iron hand of persecution. Many thou-
sands, yea, millions of them in different ages, have laid down their
lives for their testimony, being sacrificed to the vengeance of those
who claimed authority to dictate religious principles to all others,
and who never failed to bend these principles to their own corrupt
standard.

These witnesses were the stars of the spiritual heavens j for
they were indeed the only spiritual lights that were seen upon earth
in this gloomy night of Antichristian datk$v<&^« 'YV^afc ^^^^'^c**

* Pao. r/j. 9it 3^


I


A FEW BF.JIAllkS UPi

i^rs that were cast down by the " little hom, which vased ex-

'" peding great, even to the nost of heaven, and cast down Bome
if tlie host of llie stars to the ground, and stampcil upon (hero."*
When they had finished iheii leslimony, "the beast made war
" against UieDii and overcame tbem, and killed them.'l' Yel
whUe ihey stood faithfiil in the truth, and faithrully delivered tbeir

[: ti-siiinony, they could not be overcome. But they were never
commissioned of God to build up and establish tliemsejves in the
order of a church : for'the true order and power of the church

■mat lost from tiie earth, and they had not light and power given
Ihem to resiore it. This work could t»ot be effected till Cluur
made his second appearance, to cleanse Uie sanctuary, and buOil
up the second gospel temple.

Tlic true order and power of the Church of Christ on earth, was
first given by divine revelation, and being trodden down and lost
by the power of Aniiehrist, it could never be restored without a
aerimd revelation as great, at least, as the former. Therefiut!,
whenever these witnesses undertook to build themselves up into a
church, or to restore the true foundation of the primitive church,
tlicy always failed in thdr undertaking, and built more or less
upon the principles which Antichrist had already estabUshed.
By these means they gradually fell into union with the standiDg
order of professors, and they and their natural successors were
finally tolerated as christian churches. Hence they soon lost U»
spirit and substance of their testimony, and hy degrees became one
tvitli tlie world. Thus the beast (which signifies the falleu natait
of man) overcame them, and killed tliem : for the arm of per3«cn-
lion, which could only destroy dieir bodies, could never suppress
their testimony. Gut when they united with the world, they lost
their testinumy, which was the life of their souls, and then Ih^
were conquered, and then the world could rejoice over them.

Hence the churches whicli were formed by these people, after
the closing of their testimony, were but dead bodies, standing on
the same foundation with that great christian hierarchy whicli govi
emed the world under the sacred name of the church of Christ.
Ill this manner many of these stars frit lo the cnrth, one after
another, through the whole reign of Antichrist, and thus frrmeil
dend bodies. Hence the origin of many of those false churcbesi
which still exist under the christian name ; and hence the dominion
of Aniichiist was still supported, iho under various names and
denominations.

The first elfccliial blow that weakened the power of Antichdsl,
and paved the way for the deslruciioo of his tyrannical govern-
ment, was that memorable division in his kingdom called The
ffe/aivaation. Tho this &ii. not alter the nature of his subjects;

■ See Van. uli. 3, ifl. ( ^tUsi


CHAP« VIk] THE WITNESSES OP TRUTH. 193

Qiid religious revivals have greatly increased. Those who under
the reign of persecution, were branded with the odious name o(
heretics, iclld fanatics^ and enthzisiastSy were now distinguished
by the milder appellation of dissenters, puritans, and new-lights.
Tiiey were ardent in their expectations of the second coming of
Christ ; and often testified, by the spirit of prophecy, that it was
near at hand. These things were evidently preparatory to the
great work of the millennium ; and the concurrence of events seem
to point out this period (1735) for ihe expiration of the " forty and
two months," in which the holy city was trodden down by the
Gentiles.

It ought to be particularly noticed that the 42 months, and the
1260 days, point to two different events, both commencing at the
same time. The 42 months allude to the time in which the holy
city was trodden under foot of the Gentiles; the 1^60 days allude
to the time in which the witnesses prophesied under sackcloth.
As these two numbers are differently expressed, and were evident-
ly designed to mark the period of two important events, they ought
to be calculated accordingly. In 42 months, or three years and a
half, there are 1278 days. These days, in prophetic language,
signify so many years. ^Vs before stated,, the period of treading
d6wn the holy city commenced in the year 457- Then by adding
1278 to 457 we have 1735. This appears to be about the closing
period of Antichrist's tyrannical reign.*

Liberty of conscience was a remarkable display of the provi-
dence of God in favor of the witnesses of truth. At this time the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood up on
their feet. In obedience to the voice of eternal truth which called
tiiem, tiiey rose up, in the life and power of tlieir testimony, above
the power of antichristian tyranny and all its corrupt principles
and doctrines. But from the time that these witnesses began to
rise, it was a number of years before they could gain real possession
of the holy city. Antichrist and the Gentiles still had possession
there. But iiaving entered upon the primitive ground of the
church, they advanced forward, and began to strip off the false
covering and deceptive colors and glosses whh which the pride and
sagacity of the Gentiles, and the deceitful spirit of Antichrist had
obscured the pure doctrines of the cross, and the beautiful simpli-
city of the gospel, and thus restored the daily sacriQce. Then was
completed the 1290 days, already noticed, which were to be ac-
complished before the power of the holy people could cease to be
scattered. This brings us to the year 1747? as before calculated;
and here began the real cleansing of the sanctuary.

But the cleans'mg of the sanctuary, after being so lon^ tcoddj^cv

* It mnybe noted »s a remarknblp circuin<il«nc«, \Vi%V K.i»"Uwt "tc%^\»wti^-.'«*.'«l ^'"^''
^•ettr, viz t7^6.

S


I long bepn deprived by ecclesiastical supremacy j and, in their (um,
' they soon began lo deprive this great ehrietian hierarchy of the

fower of persecutioD, and to establish tiie rights of conscience,
lere it may willi propriety he said, that the earth began lo open
and lo swallow up "the flood which the dragon cast out of his
mouth." And in this manner the earth has continued to swalloir
up ihe fliiod of the dragon to tliis day.

The two mtnettet were to prophecy 1260 days, "clothed in
Mchclotb." This period coronienced in the year 457") when An-
tichrist allained his unlimited power, as before slated. By addine
|tI260 lo 4r»r, we have IJ'IJ' forthe close of that period in which
mthe witnesses were lo remain under sackcloth, or in a state of dark-
Pkness and mourning. About this period, through the operations of
Divine Pro'vidence, tlie power of |>ersecution had so far declined,
and the rising witnesses had gained so much light and understand-
ing of tiie true nature of Christianity, and had received such bright
views of the second coming of Christ, and of the nearness of ibeir
redemption, thai ihey began to lift up their heads and rejoice, and
could no longer be considered as under sackcloth.

About this time, the emperor of Russia, called Peter the Great,
established a plenary liberty of conscience throughout that exten-
sive empire. And tho that nation, to their honor, had been the
rnost free from religious persecution, perhaps, of any nation in the
civilized world ; yet the established church, previous to ih'u period,
had possessed great authority, in ecclesiastical matters, over the
minds of the people. But the full and tree, exercise of reltgioua
liberty, and the freedom of civil rights granted by that Mnue,
opened the way for a great increase of light and understanding
among his numerous subjects. This liberal act from a prince who
was reputed so wise and powerful, had great influence upon the
neighboring nations, in leading them to establish the same liberty,
and was probably aa great an incentive towards promoting the
civil and religious rights of man as any act of any government
whatever. The Emperor's final edict, which completed what he
had been tweniy years in performing, was dated January 17^1."
From this period Ihe principles of civil and religious rights and
liberty of conscience continued to gain ground, especially in Eiig^
land and other parts of Europe; so that about the year 1735,
there remained no power in the civil government lo persecute untu
death any people for their religious principles. Nor ha J the priest-
hood of the rsiahlisbed churches any t^al anlliority to hinder these
witnesses from the free exercise of their religious faith, or to pr»-
vent the declaration of tlieir testimony to the people.i

Since this time many bright witnesses have continued to rise,

f IliMlruc tbtyefltD •iiumoa lh»t mUwi'iVj ™*« 1!u' ^i^iAntiol »n»Li«\ni:*\«ilei


CHAP« VII,] THE WITNESSES OP TRUTH. 193

and religious revivals have greatly increased. Those who under
the reign of persecution, were branded with the odious name of
heretics J wild fanatics^ and enthMsiasts, were now distinguished
by the milder appellation of dissenters, puritans, and new-lights,
Tiiey were ardent in their expectations of the second coming of
Christ ; and often testified, by the spirit of prophecy, that it was
near at hand. These things were evidently preparatory to the
great work of the millennium ; and the concurrence of events seem
to point out this period (1735) for the expiration of the " forty and
two months,'' in which the holy city was trodden down by the
Gentiles.

It ought to be particularly noticed that the 42 months, and the
1260 days, point to two different events, both commencing at the
same time. The 42 months allude to the time in which the holy
city was trodden under foot of the Gentiles; the 1^60 days allude
to the time in which the witnesses prophesied under sackcloth.
As these two numbers are differently expressed, and were evident-
ly designed to mark the period of two important events, they ought
to be calculated accordingly. In 42 months, or three years and a
half, there are 1278 days. These days, in prophetic language,
signify so many years. As before stated,, the period of treading
d6wn the holy city commenced in the year 457- Then by adding
1278 to 457 we have ij^b. This appears to be about the closing
period of Antichrist's tyrannical reign.*

Liberty o{ conscience was a remarkable display of the provi-
dence of God in favor of the witnesses of truth. At this time the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood up on
their feet. In obedience to the voice of eternal truth which called
tliem, tliey rose up, m the life and power of tlieir testimony, above
the power of antichristian tyranny and all its corrupt principles
and doctrines. But from the time that these witnesses began to
rise, it was a number of years before they could gain real possession
of the holy city. Antichrist and the Gentiles still had possession
there. But Jiaving entered upon the primitive ground of the
church, they advanced forward, and began to strip off the false
covering and deceptive colors and glosses with which the pride and
sagacity of the Gentiles, and the deceitful spirit of Antichrist had
obscured the pure doctrines of the cross, and the beautiful simpli-
city of the gospel, and thus restored the daily sacriQce. Then was
completed the 1290 days, already noticed, which were to be ac-
complished before the power of the holy people could cease to be
■ scattered. This brings us to the year 1747> as before calculated;
and here began the real cleansing of the sanctuary.

But the cleansing of the sanctuary, after being so lon^ ttc^djisCTv

♦It maybe noted as a reinarkablp circumRlance.^ l\\a.V K.iwa"Uwt "^'^^\»«w^'^'*'^*'^^ "^^'^'^
vear, viz 17^6.

s


A TEW REMARKS, A;C. [PART IV.

ider fool, and polluted by llie Bbomiciniion of desolNtion, could
.lot be accDtii|)lbhed at onre; it tva» a work of time. Itut when
it was sufficiently cleansed, then a body was pre[Mred in wlikh
the Spirit of Christ could dwell, having had no abiding place on
PBilh during tbe long reign of Antichrist. Then Christ ibe Lord
tlesirended and took up liis abode in his spiriltiat hou.ie; attd then
W83 fulfilled llie wortb of the prophet; " And the Lord whom ye
■It, shall suddenly come to his temple."* Here the seventh
impel began to sonnd, and here began the preaching of tbe ever*
thig gospel of Christ's second appearing, which will prove a
decisive work to all souls: fur this is tbe last trumpet, in which
" the mystery of Goil will be finished."

From about the year 1747, there was a gradual increase of light
nnd understandiDg in divine tilings, and of power and victory over
the evil nature of sin, among these faithful witnesses, who were
now formed into a society, and united tugeilier to worship God in
the spirit. This increase of divine light and power continued
through various changing scenes, till the establishment of the JHU-
lennial Church, or second gospel temple, in the year 1792, which
then became the habitation of soukjn tnie^ gospel order. Then
expired ihe days of waiting spoken of by the prophet DatUel :
" Blesiied is he that waiteih, and comelh to tbe thousand three faun-
" dred and five and thirty days." These 1 335 days added to 457'
make 17i'''^. In this year the church was considered as eslabliali-
cd in its principles of order and government, in wliicli it has con-
tinued to increase to the present day.

The Millenuial Church being established, and having by a num-
ber of years experience, proved its principles and order, and gain-
ed a suflicieni degree of strength and stability, the lestirnnny begun
10 go forth from the true gospel temple about ihe year 1 SOO. 'I his
brings llie work of God down to the full revelation of the great
and last display of bis grace to fallen man, and ciimpreheiids the
latest period which is described by the jirophet Daniel in a con-
' ' ' d chain. '• Jiiitgraent is now given to the sHints of the Most
; and the time (> come that the saints begin to possess the
ingdom."t Henceforth to the end, the work will increase until
^e final separation shall be made between good and evil, and
iintil the lull accomplishment of every promise of God ever made
""d the laintg sthce the foundation of tbi; world.


PART V.

The second appearing of Christ.


CHAPTER I.

Various opinions concerning the manner of ChrisVs second

appearing.

It is a prevailing belief among the professors of Christianity,
that Christ will again appear upon earth, and usher in the latter
day of glory. But the opinions concerning that event are, per-
haps, as various as the tenets of theur faith. This circumstance,
tho it may be considered as an argument in favor of the event itself,
is a certain proof that they are yet in ignorance respecting the man-
ner in which it is to take place, and the work which is to be ac-
complished thereby. Of course, when the event comes to be made
manifest by the real work of the day, what can be expected but
that unbelief, opposition and disappointment will follow as the
natural consequences?

It is well known that about the time of Christ's personal appear-
ance in Judea, the Jews were in earnest expectation of the coming
of the Messiah, who had been promised, irom early ages, by the
repeated predictions of their ancient patriarchs and prophets. But
concerning the manner of his coming, and the real nature of his
work, they were left in the dark ; and therefore, like natural men,
they put natural constructions on all the prophecies which related
to his coming. They expected to see a highly distinguisjiied
earthly Prince, from the lineage of their kings, ascend the throne
of David, and sway the royal sceptre with superior power and dig-
nity. They firmly believed that they should then be delivered
from their bondage to the Romans ; that all their temporal enemies
would then be subdued and brought into subjection; and that
their nation would be exalted to the highest pitch of temporal
glory.

But instead of the mighty Prince whom they so confidently ex-
pected, they beheld a man of low degree, of obscure birth and
parentage, whose appearance was, in their esteem, mean and con-
temptible, in whom they could see " no form nor comeliness.''
Instead of conquering armies at his heels, they saw tliat his follow-
ers were those of the lowest order of the people. Instead of mag-
nificent displays of royal authority, his self-denying precepts and
examples were in direct opposition to all their ideas and expecta-
tions of temporal glory. Instead of proclaiming war and destruc-
tion to their enemies, he preached " peace and good- will lo \»a!ev."
Instead of revenging their injuries, Vie ioxXndk. m^'WL Vi x^sssx^^^ ^'^^
i0r evil Instead of exalting t\\e g\oTy oi \\vf£vt wa!C\Q^> >»^^ ^^^^ss«s^


mud

1


S OPI!<IOKS eONCEKKINQ

ted the iiller destruction of thrircil^ Find ti-mple. And when tbey
were told that lliis man was the pninilsed Messiah, lite king of the
Jews, ibey rejected liim wilh scorn, peisecuted him through all
their coasts, accused bim uf blasphemy against God, and of break-
ing the laws uf iheir country, spoke all manner of evil againsi him,
•ndtinvored to render his naoie contemptible tliroiigh the nalioB,
and, as a (rniehing stroke orroallcious envy, they put him to the
i-i'uel ami ignominious death of the cross, in hopes thereby to put
an end to (lie gi owing influence of his testimony which tbey so

ich lireaded.

Tfei after all iheir endeavors to destroy the increasing reputatioit

"llie Savior, lo ovcrllirow his lesiimony, to falsify his predictions

1 prove bim an impostor, they were defeated in their object.

le blessed gospel of peace and salvation which he iiilroduivd,
had a far more extensive inrrease aJier his crucifixion than before;
his testimony was nlore fully confirmed, and all bis predictions
concerning that rebellious nation came fully lo pass. Notwitb-
standing all this, they refused to yield lo conviction or stay their
enmity. Their wilful and determined opposiiion to the Savior
and to his tesiimony tended only to increase their hardness of
hearl, their blindness and unbelief. Tbey slill went on to cry
down llie lesiimony, and persecute his followers wherever they
could find tlieni.

These facts are generally understood and believed at the pre-
sent day ; and, in all probability, the conduct of the Jews is as
generally condemned by the professors of Christianity. Andwhnt
shall he said of these same professors of Christianity, witli the
knowledge uf all ihese things before thcni, if, in the manilesiation
of Christ's second appearing, ihey should be found speaking and
acting under the innuencc of the same spuil which actuated the
persecuting Jews? Would they believe that while tliey ivere prBy-i
ing for Christ's Kingdom to come, they wtre actually fighting
against It ? Will tbey, Ukc the stubborn Jews, obstinately trust in
tlie religion of their fathers, which they have so shamefully dishon-
ored, and Slill slop their ears and harden ihetr hearts against the
inci'easing light of God ? Or will they candidly listen to the voice
of reason,. anii acknowledge the truth ?

The Jews' believed that God would send them a Delivcrei; ae» ■
cording to h'ts promise. But when he came, ihey rejected him,
because he did not cooio in the manner which they expected, nof
du the work wLJch ihey ex pec led. So in the present day, th^
professors of chrislianily are living in the full belief thai Christ-
will come lh« second lime, according In his promise. And why '
are they nol us likely [o lie disappointed in Ibe manner ofhis cum- ■
mr, awrfffipnature ofhis work, asU\eJewswete? Do they profess
J be favored wlih the word of VSoA"? ?"a AA \\\c iew*.- 'iio'toKij


CHAP. 1.] THE SECOND APPEARING OP CHRIST. 1 97

profess faith in the promises of God ? So did the Jews# Do they
profess to enjoy the blessings of divine light, and to worship the
only living and true God, while the heathen nations walk in dark-
ness and bow down to dumb idols ? So did the Jews. Do they
profess to be a people highly distinguished and chosen of God to
support and maintain the only true religion ? So did the Jews. Is
their claim to that distinction greater than that of the Jews ? By
no means, as will readily appear by a little examination.

The Jews were the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise was
made ; and tho they had often rebelled against the God of their
fathers, who had called them by his name, and had greatly cor-
rupted the law of Moses, which was given for their protection f
yet they strenuously mamtained the outward ceremonies of the
law ; as strenuously, perhaps, as professing christians of the pre-
sent day do the outward forms of their religion ; and doubtless
with as good reasons too. For the Jews were not so divided into
sects and parties 5 and the ceremonies of the law were, to them, a
lawful inheritance: whereas the professors of the present day
have no such specific and pointed authority for their religious cer-
emonies.

For the want of such authority, or rather for the want of a suflfi-
cient portion of that divine Spirit which their antichristian fathers
have lost ; that Spirit which led the apostles into a knowledge of
divine truth, and taught them how to worship God to his accep-
tance; for the want of that Spirit, the religion of modern professors
of Christianity has been dividing and subdividing into ^^ names and
sects and parties," for many hundreds of years, all professedly
founded on the written words of Christ and his apostles. Yet not
one among them all is able to say^ with certainty, what is the true
import of those passages on which they profess to found their con-
tending systems and jarring creeds. Since then, they are so divi-
ded in their opinions concerning the religion "of Christ's first ap-
pearing, which they and their fathers have professed to follow for
nearly two thousand years, how can they be expected to agree
about the manner and work of his second appearing ?

Considering all these, circumstances, are they not likely to be
more full of unbelief concerning the testimony of his second coming,
than the Jews were concerning that of his first coming? The unbi*-
lief of the Jews is proverbial. And it is a truth which is confirmed
by the experience of all ages, that every renewed manifestation of
divine light to a lost world, which has been attended with an increas-
ing degree of the power and testimony of God against the nature of
sin, has never failed to meet with opposition from the great body of
the high standing professors of religion, who have lived in the day
in which the light was given. Is it not then ^VBaSiVRX OkVYccw^^-^VKSw^^^^
to all who profess the christian reW^iou^ ««v^ ^%?^^rX \^\sfc ^wh^^^^"^


T^^^^ VARIOUS OPIKIOSS COXCEBKIKG

il, but who do not believe tiiat Christ has made his second appear-
ance, to beware of rejecting ihe teslimony of those who do believe
it, lest they be found ligliling ngainst God.

Tlio there ore many different opinions among mankind coiicern-
ing ihe second coming of Christ ; yet that which scema most gen-
erally to prevail is, that he will appear in person, and literally
fulfil those passages of scripture which speak of his " coming in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory." In this how-
ever, there appears to be a material difference of sentiment. Many
lielieve that his reign on earth of a thou^ind years, will be in hu
pcj'sonal or bodily presence ; while a siill greater proporlioa seem
more inclined to think that he will manifest himself by a universal
(lUliwuring of his Spirit upon the nations of the earlli, by which
nearly all the inhabitants of the world will embrace the christiui
religion, and enjoy a slate of universal happiness and prosperity
ander ihe spiriiual dominion of Christ. This latter opinion u^
pears to have gained considerable ground within a few years.

But it is the prevailing sentiment, if not the general belief, anoong
ihose who have embraced this opinion, thnttho the thousand years'
reign of Christ on earth is to be by his Spirit; yet at the end of
this period, he will appear in person, for the final judgment and
consummation of all things. Thus, in order lo answer ilieir own
ideas of ihcesact fulfilment of the scripture prophecies concerDing~
his coining, they have embraced the plan of two appearances yel
tiiture ; the first in spirit, the second in person.* Hence the tliou-
sand years of blessing and prosperity, in which " the carlb shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as The waters cover the sea,"
is to consliiutc the millennial state of the world, or latter day of
atory. This appears very plausible; but what comes next?

To render tills glorious period the more conformable to homan
wisdom, it seems that these modern miltenarians have calculated
In build their millennial paradise upon the old heavens and eanlr,
and to enjoy their old cliristian religion; not indeed exactly in its
present Slate, buf a little more refined, preserving tliose fimdamen-
tal pthiciplcs which were fii^i established by the catholic fathers,
and aflerwyrds corficted and improved by the great Reformers j
but hipping ulT thciic useless excrescnces which form the disiinc-
Letween the inosi approved and popular sects; so as to rtv
! and blend all tlwir numerous systems into one, in which they
all agree. This newmodelled, universal system of religion^

By wliuC autlinl'ity do tlicy look for twn appearances, jet future)
TLe scriplurcB afford no such suthupity, Hrs first appearance, pVedicl-
edbylhe Jewish proplieCs, took pluce amnng- ilie Jews, wIjo rejected
Hiid crucilied liim uh iin impnsler. His second appearance w.is predlc.
■ei!, both by liimseiranil liis spnsVlesiUbe made mmiraat by liis Spnit .
'.' ire Aaic no pmimiac of wij oVhct.


buth


CHAP. 1.] THE SECOND APPEARING OF CHRIST. 199^

they expect, all will enjoy together, in perfect harmony ; and with
it, th^ pursuit of those earthly objects which they consider the -
most conducive to the happiness of man, in his present, natural
state ; but entirely disconnected with those unfortunate occurrences
which now so often disturb and disappoint them in their pursuit of
happiness.*

In the formation of such a millennium as this, they seem to for-
get that God has promised to create " new heavens and a new
" earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness;" or that "the day of the
** Lord will come as a thief in the night ; in the which the heavens
" shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
" with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein,
" shall be burnt up."t They forget also that, " The Lord hath
" purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into con-
" tempt all the honorable of the earth."| Or rather, they put
far away this evil day^ and place these events to the end of that
glorious millennial period, expecting that they will then be fulfilled,
not upon them, but upon the wicked. In short, they seem not to
know what is meant by the " new heavens and new earth ;" nor
what is to be understood by the passing away of the first heavens
and earth. For such is the force of natural ideas on the mind of
^' the natural man," who " receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God," that he always inclines to put a natural construction on tiiose
prophetic descriptions in the sacred writings, which relate to the
second coming of Christ, and to the day of judgment. Hence the
ideas of personality and locahty in contemplating the coming of
Christ ; and lience the opinion of his coming in the natural clouds
of the atmosphere, and operating upon the natural elements.

The idea of Christ being personally revealed in the natural
element of flaming fire, " to judge the quick and the dead, to take
vengeance on his adversaries," and receive the righteous into the
Kingdom of his Father, is but a counterpart to their millennial
plan. And here again, they differ so much in their ideas, and
have formed so many different schemes concerning the first resur-
rection ; the resurrection of natural human bodies; the order of
trial ; the form of decision ; the awarding of judgment to the wick-
ed ; the nature and duration of their punishment ; and roan}' other
things of a like kind, that the whole, taken together, is much more
calculated to confuse and bewilder the mind, and lead mankind
into darkness on these subjects, than to enlighten their understand-

• In anticipation of this happy state of religion, ajid of society, vari-
ous attempts have already been made, in diflerent places, and among
diilerent denominations, to bring about this desirable and long expected
event ; but unfortunately, like other Babel-buUdert^ ihey ca^vcwcx -^j^^ac:
who shall be placed on hivih, or whose re\\^o\\%\i«SL\wJ«:^^Y^^^"^^^^^2Ck.--
eiice : 0£ course ihev soon get confounded and ^c^VX'tt^^ ^"^^s*-^-


I


200 VARIOUS OPINIONS, &c.

ines. Il also afTords a very striking proor, ihctt the autliors of ihe
(liflVreiii schemes, are themselves involved in great darkness con-
cerning these things; and conHnns the derlaraiion of the prophet
Isaiah, Ihnt " dar^ess shall cover the earth, and gross darkness
the people."

Alany of late are inclined to think that the millennium has alrea-
dy' begun to dawn upon the earth ; and that those benevoleni, hu-
mane and religions institutions which, of kite jears, have so great-
ly increased in the world, are so many evidences of its commence-
ment. Societies for the abolilion of slavery, missionary and bible
Kicitiif-s, and humane and benevolent societies of every description,
together with the extensive and general difitision of the principles
of civil and religious Mberly, are considered, by many people, as
certain preludes to the ushi-ring in of that period, if not real evi-
dences of its having already begun. But it is worthy of observa-
tion that, whli all these highly esteemed and greatly boasted lnsti>
tutions, the general tenets of their religion remain the same as be-
fore; nor has there been any essential change with regard to its
practical duties.

As the latter day of glory has bpen the theme of patriarchs Bod
prophets, of poets and philosophers, of almost every age; ami as
it lias been held up lo the view of mankind by the prninises of
God, ever sincL< the fall of man, and most pointedly confirraed by
Jesus Christ anti his inspired apnstles ; it is certainly rational) as
well as scriptural, to believe thai it will produce by far the peaiesi
revfilution that the worid ever yet witnessed.

The first manifestation of Christ to the Jeivs, which was attend-
ed with a great change in the lives and manners of those who re-
ceived him ; which abolished their law religion, and established
the gospel religion, certainly eflected a revolution in religion un-
known before. But as his appearance, at that lime, was person-
ally in the flesh, and consequently limited to time and place ; and
as the work he then commenced was but the prelude, the earnest of
that which is to be made manifest in his second appearing ; we must
rationally believe that, in his second appearing, he will introduce,
and bring to pass a work, of which alt the former manifest aliens
of God to the worid, were but mere types and shadows; and com-
pared with which, these remarkable revolutions in the civil, moi^
and religious world, are but preparatory events, designed to pave
the way for the real work of that glorious revolution which will yet
astonish all mankind.

Whatever may be the opinions of mankind concerningihe second

i^pearing of Christ, which has been rcpresenied by ihe spirit of

prophecy, m many sublime figures and wonderlul similitudes, and

ofiea in very mysterious Ian ^ags, cmVawvwS-t. \V\M.*.\iose figura-

OVe represeufalions can iieveibe Ti^\^3 -into A«*wi 'S^ 'CoK'ttmfe


CHAP. II.] THE SECOND COMING OP CHRIST, &C. 201

of their fulfilment ; and even then, by those only who come inta
the very spirit and work of the event itself. This accords with
the testimony of Jesus to his disciples, shortly before his crucifix-
ion. " But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the
^^ angels of Heaven, but my Father only."*

In his last interview with his disciples, they being still ignorant
of the nature of his Kingdom, notwithstanding he had said so
much to them about it, asked him saying ; " Lord wilt thou at this
" time restore again the kingdom to Iscael ?'' He answered, " It
" is not for you to know the times, or the seasons, which the Father
'' hath put in his own power."t And the prophet Daniel, to
whom many things were revealed concerning the coming of the
Messiah, testifies saying ; " And I heard, but I understood not :
" then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things ?"
And it was answered, "Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are
" closed up and sealed till the time of the end.^f If then, these
things were not understood by those witnesses of God to whom
they were revealed, how can poor shortsighted mortals, at the pre-
sent day, expect to be able to understand them before they enter
into the work itself, to which these prophecies allude ?


CHAPTER 11.

The second coming of Christ not the appearance of the same
personal Being, but a manifestation of the satne Spirit, Thii
illustrated by various similitudesy which also point out the in-
creasing work of his Kingdom,

As God is a Spirit, so his work, pertaining to the restoration of
fallen man, is a spiritual work. And as the first appearing of
Christ, to take upon himself human nature, and declare his mis-
sion, was in the fiesh ; so his second appearing, for the redemption
of his people, must be in the Spirit.

The word Christ is derived from the Greek word jc^t^^iy
which signifies Anointed, Messiah is a Hebrew word of the same
import. Jesus being anointed with that Divine Spirit uMiich pro-
ceeded frttm God, and which contained the elements of eternal
life, was constituted the Christ of God; that is, the anointed of
God. Wherever that Divine Spirit exists, there is Christ ; or as
the apostle, in writing to the Colossians, expresses it, ** Christ in
you, the hope of glory."(j It is certain that the person of Jesus
Christ cannot be in any other person ; yet, in speaking to his dis-
ciples, in reference to the time of his second appeariiv?.^ V\fe 's^cAs
'^ At that day ye shall know that lam \umy¥«S^<et^^«A^^vcw'B^^


" and I in you."* Here is an undeniable testimony of his coming,
lerson, but in Spirit.
Lhnsl, the Anointed of God, was first revealed in Jesus of Na«
larelli. The same Ciirist was also io the primitive Church. But
vhen ihe spirit of Antichrist entered, and through the inSuence of
hiimiin wixdom, took ihe lead and governmejit ofthe church, then
the Spirit of Christ was withdrawn : hence it was no more lh«
church of Christ, but of Antichrist. Tlie true church of Christ ii
bi» living body ; but when the Spirit of Christ was withdrawn, and
ihe spirit of Antichrist entered, it became the body ot An^chrisi !
•se it was no longer the body of Clirist.
IS Christ, when speaking to his disciples of his second con-
f ing, was asked, " Where Lord?" He did not point out any pai>
. ll<;uUr place, but said, " Wheresoever the body is. thilber willthe
raglea be gatliered together. ''t By this he plainly intimated liiai
his presence, and his work would be in his body; thai is, *'tkt
"cAurcA, which is his body, the fulness of him thalfillethaU in sll,
" And he is the head of the body, the church. "J By the gather
ing of the eagles, he shows, in a striking figure, that the evidence
of his co]nin«:, and the nature of bis work, will be seen and oada-
stood by the s])iritual discernment of those who, like w^chfiili
kpcn-eyed eagles, in ijucst of food, will be able to discriminutebe-
' tween a living and a dead body, and gather to thai which aSbrdl
L spiritual life and nourishment, xnd let the dead alone.|| Thus, in
his true and living body will Christ be found, " in the dispensation
I of the fulness of times. "^ There will those truly honest and
I faithfid souls, " who bunger and thirst atler rishieousness," be galh-
( ered; and there "they shall be fiiled;" while the lifeless churches
^ of Antichrist, like so many dead carcases, which have lung been
\ sinking in their own corruptions, are cautiously avoided.
I It may perhaps be objected, that when the Savior ascended,
[ lliere stood by the apostles two men in wliite apparel, and said
" This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, sb^
« so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaveni*
This however, affords no proof that the natural body of Jesus was
taken up into Heaven j but his Spirit undoubtedly did ascend-
^^ Yet this r-iiraculous a^^cension was seen by none but those whom
^E he had chosen to bear witness of it ; and their testimony was llic
^ft only evidence the world ever had of it; and even ihat, very ftw
^^L were willing to believe in that day. Nor did any others in those
^^L days ever know it, escepting those who in faith received the lesti*
^^H mony and spirit of those who first declared bis ascension. They
^^^^ knew, in truth, that he had ascended, and that he gave gifts unto^
^^^ttheai, by which they were raised above an earthly nature, aud sa(

^^H ///l'">-M.HB,rtj-,oree«iiliii.Vuimi«lVv'.5-\«i!,\tV-Vp"\*"'^¥"a»s™AE«\«».

^^B Tr.ph.uio.

H : \ '


CHAP. II.] HOT PERSONAL, BUT SPIRITUAL. 203

with him "in heavenly places." If then, Christ is to come in like
manner^ it certainly follows, that he must come equally out of the
sight of natural men, and be equally unknown to the world. Of
course, none but his chosen witnesses can have any knowledge of
his coming ; so that the world must again rely on their testimony,
or remain in unbelief.

Again: Christ, by his Spirit, testified to John in the isle of
Patmos, saying; "Behold I come as a thief! Blessed is he that
" watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and
" they see his shame.'** It is well known that a thief comes pri-
vately, in the night, while mankind are asleep, and of course, not
on their watch. " For behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and
*^ gross darkness the people : but the Lord shall arise upon thee,
" and his glory shall be seen upon thee."t Thus it appears that
the time of Christ's coming was to be a time of darkness ; (of spir-
itual darkness to the world, no doubt ;) while he was to arise in
his glory, upon those who were found faithful to watch and keep
their garments — ^to keep themselves clothed with the garments of
righteousness, unspotted with sin.

It b worthy of particular remark, that about the period of the
first manifestation of Christ's second appearing, there was a time
of great spiritual darkness, which continued for a number of years.
And tho great and exalted were the professions of Christianity,
throughout the countries called Christendom ; yet the pure and
genuine spirit of Christianity was scarcely known upon earth.
There were, indeed, many who made great professions of religion ;
yet their works of darkness greatly dishonored their professions ;
so that they were evidently walking in darkness and discovering
their shame, from day to day.

This has become more and more apparent among nominal pro-
fessors, even to this day ; and more especially among the higher
classes of professing christians, both ministers and people. And
thus we see pride and ambition, fraud and violence, hypocrisy and
deceit, luxury and lust, drunkenness and debauchery, with almost
every crime that can be named, still carried on under the sancti-
monious cloke of a religious profession ; while even the common
people, who make no profession at all, can see through the decep-
tion of their pretended goodness — can see the shame of their
nakedness, through the flimsy cloke of such a profession, which is
enough to make the heart sicken at the name of a religion which
covers such abominations.

Thus Christ having actually come (zs a thief, in the time of such
extensive spiritual darkness, while mankind, who are living in sin,
and spiritually asleep, have been utterly unconscious of his ccivxsjow^^
and not being, even now, on theii: watch, caivTvoX ^\^<2^\«^V\^^^


pearancp. Peijple of this dpscriplion, wIiq make a great proi^s-
siuii of religion, mvever mnie ready lu contend a^inst i lie true light
of God, at ftucli a linn*, ihiiii those whu make no sucli professiuni
So it was in the ila^s at Christ's Iirst appearance ; ihe Scribes and
Phnriseea, ttie chief priests and elders, and all lite greal and migh-
ty among llie Jews, wew liis greaiesi opposers and persecutors,
while " llie commnii people heard hiin glailly."*

Many comparisons have been made, under prophetic inspiration,
nii^ recorded in the sacred writings, to show the nature of the
Coming of Christ, and the state of the world at that period. These
comparisons, thn natural, evidently point out a spiritual work : fiir
the work of Christ's second appearing, being necessarily spiritmil,
must be represented by natural similitudes, if represented ataJl,
tliere being no possible way to represent spiritual things to natural
men, only by natural similitudeH. These, iho they cleqriy show
(hat the wicked will be taken unawares, in their sins ; yet they
almost invariably point out a prt^ressive, increasing word. Jesus
Christ, iu his parables, likened llie Kingdom of Heaven to many
things which, in their nature, were very different from each otlier;
euch us a grain of mustard-seed; the sower and his seed; the good
seed and llie tares; the leaven; the net cast into the sea^nid
many other things. But as the Kingdom itself is spiritual, and
the work thereof a spiritual work ; it could not be literallv^ like'
any of those natural things to which it was compared ; touch te»
like all of them.

The Kingdom of Christ, being a spiritual Kingdom, is atlogeth-
^ er beyond the conception of the natural man, until his mind is en-
lightened by the Spirit of Christ; and therefore the nature of it
could not be understood, even by his disciples, who, at that time,
were but naltirat men. And yet the things which Jesus brought
up to view, as comparisons, were very apt similitudes, by which
he could, with the greatest propriety, represent many ihin^ wluelt
he knew would be matle raatiifest, during his reign ujion earth.
So that when the day itself is ushered in, its work begun, and tbe
nature of it understood by those who are in it ; then these similt
tudea appear very striking and uppropriale, and must operate on
every candid mind, as an inconiesiible evidence in favor of ihe pr^
sent work, and prove, to a certainly, that Christ hinis<'lr is i, '~
and that his pnrables and predictions could not, with any coi
tejicy, be fulfilled in any otlier way.

Thus the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a grain of muii-
lard-seed, which was then considered as the least of all seeds. « Bui
" wlien it is sown, it groweth up and becometh greater than all
" herbs, and shootclb out great branches ; so that the fowls nf the
*' air may lodge under the shadow of il.''t This clearly »bovs


CHAP. II.] NOT PERSONAL, BUT SPIRITUAL. 205

the first operations of the work of Christ, in his second coming,
to be, not only very small, but entirely out of the sight of the world ;
ns much so as a grain of mustard-seed is, when covered in the
earth. It also shews a progressive and increasing work, like the
growth of the seed to a large pl^nt, the greatest among herbs,
branching out like a tree, so as to afford a shelter for the birds of
the air.

Again, it is compared to leaven. " The Kingdom of Heaven is
^^ like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures
** of meal, till the whole was leavened."* This is also a figurative
representation of the hidden and progressive operations of the
Spirit of Christ, in his second appearing ; which is entirely out of
sight of the world of mankind,- both professors and profane ; and
yet it is a work which operates with a progressive increase, in eve-
ry faithful soul.

The Kingdom of Heaven is also compared to a man's sowing
good seed in his field, and afterward his enemy came and sowed
tares among the wheat. This clearly shows that wherever the work
of God begins, and the seed of Christ is sown, there the enemy fol-
lows, with his secret influences, his works of darkness, to corrupt
and contaminate the good by a mixture of evil, intending thereby to
dishonor and abase the genuine fruits of the true gospel of Christ,
by endeavoring to blend therewith his wicked and corrupt fruits.
Evidences of this have appeared, more or less, in every place
'where the gospel has been planted, since the first opening of the
testimony in America; and will undoubtedly continue till the final
separation shall take place between the good and the evil, and
each shall receive its due reward.

The season of harvest is a very apt similitude of the coming of
Christ. " The harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers
are the angels."t It is well known that the work of harvest is a
progressive work ; and tho it may require the reapers many days
to accomplish It; yet every stalk of grain, whether good or bad,
when encircled by the sickle of the reaper, is very suddenly cut
down ; and tho but an instant before, it was majestically waving
in the field, whhout any premonition of its sudden fall, it is hence-
forth forever separated from the foundation on which it stood, and
must now )>ass through a new scene, and either be gathered to a
place of safety, for the use of the husbandman, or devoted to de-
struction, according as it shall be found to be either good or bad.
And such will be the fate of all souls in the great harvest of the
world. Thus the useful wheat and worthless tares are used, as
plain similitudes, to show the distinction which will be made be-
tween those who do good^ and those who do evil ; and the result

* Matt, xiii 33 t Watt; jiiii 38 lo 42, ftptt %\i^o "^.ftN . ^\n • \^ V* ^5«v^. ^tv\.


THE SECO.M) COAlK.Ci OF ClllUsr, ic. [I'Ai;!' \

nf the panible is a certain luken of ihat righteous and inipiirlial
. judgment wliicli will reward all souls according to dn-it works.
^_ "Again, llie Kingdom of HeaveD is like unto a net that was
^^fc" cast into the sea, and gathered of every kiad ; which, when it
^^V' was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the
^^B''' good into vessels, but cast the bad away." Tlirs jioinU out a
^^BBreat and important work wliich, in its progress, will make a fintil
^^^Eeparalion b^ween good and evil. " So shall it be at the end ol'
^^V< the world: the angeb (signifying the messengers oftrulK) shall
^^^1 comi? forth, and sever the wicked from among the just."* Thi»

tias been continually fulfilling ci'cr since the fiist gathering of the

|ico|ile in America; and these are the people, '-upon wliiim

ends of the world are corae."i'

The event of Christ's second coming is also compared to tlie

ffiroe of Noah, and the days before the flood, " for as in the days
" that were before the floodj ihej' were eating and di'inkmg, many-
" ing and giving in marriage, until the day thai Noah entered into
" the ark ; and knew not till die flood came and look them all away;
, " so shall it be also in the days of the son of man."!

Noah was called «preflcAer of rig/(/coaM(e«s. But it appears
lliat the inhabitanis of the old world were disobedient lo his testi-
mony which undoubtedly continued during the whole lime the ark
was building, which is said to be a hundred and tnenty yean.
But nolwitlistanding their unbelief and disobedience, ibey were nl
last overtaken in their sins, and could not escape. The foremeji-
tioned umilitude of our Savior, is evidently designed, and n%ll cal-
culated lo show the state of unbelief, disobedience and disrespect
to the testimony of truth, in which mankind will be found; and
their careless insensibility and disregard respecting the second
coming of Christ; and that altho they will he earnestly and re-
peatedly warned by the preachers of righteousness, from time to
lime, and in all probability, even from generation to generation,
during the time of Christ's reign upon earth: yet ihcy will i>ot
believe the teslimony, nor turn from their wicitednes*; bill still
go on, '■ eating and drinking, marrying and giving in murnage,"
seeking their own graliiicatiuns, and pursuing their oivn pleasures,
until they are overtaken by judgments which tbey cannot escape

Tho the judgments of God upon the wicked are oden spoken o
as coming suddenly, which is Irequently the case in lealily; ye
in thelimeofNoah'sflood,it rained "forty days and forty nights;''
.md in all probability, the destniction of lives was nut fully accom-
plished till the end of that period; (for there could have been no
use in continuing the flood aAer its design was accomplished.)
So in the present day, many may remain secure for a long time;
b»l the deluge of destruction, tho it may endure many ages, and


. CHAP, iii.l Christ's second manifestation. &c. 207

operate in many ways, will finally accomplish the work for which
it is sent.


CHAPTER III.

The second manifestation of Christ not instantly universal^ but
gradual and progressive^ like the rising oftlie sun.

It has long been maintained that Christ is to come in the clouds
of heaven, and that all shall see him. In a spiritual sense, this is
true, and accords with his own testimony : " They shall see the
" Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven, with power and
^^ great glory." Again, when questioned before the Jewish coun-
cil, he said, " Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting gn the
" right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven,"
And again ; " Behold he cometh with clouds 5 and every eye shall
" see him, and they also which pierced him : and all kindreds of
^' the earth shall wail because of him."* These and other similar
passages are often advanced as evidences that Christ is not only to
come openly, in the clouds, but that he will suddenly appear in the
most public manner, so as to be seen at once, by all mankind, the
wicked as well as the righteous, who have lived in all ages, and in
all quarters of the world.

But it ought to be considered in the first place, that these clouds
are not the* common clouds of the atmosphere, but the clouds of.
Heaven; therefore they must be heavenly clouds — clouds of faith-
ful witnesses of God, who are ready and willing to embrace the
testimony of Christ, whenever and wherever it shall appear; and
to declare it to the world without restraint and without disguise.
*^ Who are these that fly as a cloudy and as the doves to their win-
*' dows ? — Seeing we are compassed about with so great a clouds
" of witnesses."t Thus cloud is used in scripture as a figure tgi
express a multitude; and in this sense it was often used by ancieht
writers, both sacred and profane.

Secondly. As Christ, the anointed of God, is a Spirit, and
can only be seen and known in the spirit; therefore his Kingdom
must be spiritual and divine; not natural and sensual. Hence, as
before stated, his appearance must be in the spirit; and the clouds
in which he appears must be spiritual clouds, pertaining to the
spiritual heavens ; and tl^ese things must be discerned by spiritu-
al light : for, " The natural man receiveth not the things of the
" Spirit of God ; for they are foolishness to him ; neither can he
*^ know them, because they are spiritually discerned."! Yet the
natural man looks for Christ to come in a bodily appearance,

<■ See Matt. xxir. 30. chap.xxvi 64 and Rct \. T. ^\w,\T..'i.VcVk.'<?o -wCv.x.

+ I Cor. u.U.


tin


througli the clouds of llic natural henvens, and expects, wkli bis
nuiural eyes, in bcliold in liim a su partial ura I being, magniliceiilljr
grtat and iranscendanilv glorious; and supposes iliat liis appear-
ance will be so universally visible that every eye in heaven, earth
and hell Hhall see him al once.

But u little Teflerlioii will show the inconsistency of this opinioD.
For ifChrial should liescend in person, from the alorry regions to
lliU earth, and appear in our henjisphere, tlio in ever so great
splendor, he could not be seen at the same time, hy those who live
on the opposite side of the globe. But in order to be seen by
rhem, ill the same manner, he must descend in their bemispbeiv.
And to he seen in both hemispheres »l once, he must descend in
two opposite directions at the santf time. But if Christ is to make
ii bodily appearance, as a personal or material bein^, as many
suppose, tl must be impossible Toi' Jiiin to descend in l)iis manner.
For it is ii selfevident truth, as every person of sense will acknow-
ledge, that no malerial siibslaiice or local being, can descend from
two opposite directions in ttie heavens, and appear in Iwo oppo-
Htc hemispheres, and on two opposite sides of the earth, at ua6
and the same time. Thus the natural man's plan destroys ttsd^
But if we consider Christ as the elemental spirit of elernal life, tbfi
diflicidty bat once removed; because upon this principle, that ^^
rit cnn appear in many places at the same time, however distant Of
differenily situated.

Tliirdly. It ap|reai's evident, not only from the lesttraony of
the scriptures, but from the very nature of God, nhu is Spirit, That
the work of Christ in the new creation, pertaining to the salvation
and redemption of man. is a spiritual ivork. This none can deny.
Therefore the things relating lo Christ's seconil coming, and the
tini^hin^' of the mystery of God, must be of a. spiritual naltice.
'How then should ffie tintural man be b hie to conceive of these
Hhiiigs in their true light, seeing he rcceiveth not Ike tilings oftke
■'irito/God?

The ideas formed in ihe mind of man, concerning the coming of
!hrist in the natural douils, and appearing visible to the nalnral
.jBf are merely natural conceptions ; natural enough indeed to tlio
tiatural man, and therefore, If (he foredted testimony of the apos-
lie be true, they must be faUe conceptions. It is true that, in the
proiTtcss of his work, "every eye shall see Mm;" for he will be
mode manifest to all, either lo their evcrlaBling joy or sorrow; bqt
iliey will see him witli the eyes of the soul, not of the body. Those
who accept the invilalinn, ami come when called, and failhfUlly
obey the testimony of the gospel, will sec him to their joy and siu-
vation ; bid those who reject it, to their condemnatipn and soiYOW.
7o the former it will pi-ove " the savor of life unto life ;" but to tho
//irter, "the saior of death unto i\ea\\\"


CHAP. 111.] NOT INSTAI^'TLY UNIVERSAL. 2(M>

But it may be objected that Jesus Christ himself has said, ^^ As
^^ the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the
^^ west ; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." This
passage of scripture is generally quoted as an evidence of the in-
stantaneous and universal manifestation of Christ in his second
appearing. But we apprehend that when the passage is duly con-
sidered, and its real import rightly understood, the objection found-
ed upon it will appear groundless. It is well known that our Sa-
vior often made use of natural things, and natural occurrences, as
similitudes to represent and illustrate things of a spiritual nature.
In the above quoted passage, he alluded to the dawning of the day,
and the breaking forth of the morning light in the east, as a clear
and striking similitude of the commencement of that period, so
often represented in scripture, as the day of gospel light and liberty,
or thousand years of Christ's reign upon earth. This appears
evident from the following considerations.

1. It is not the peculiar nature of lightning "to come out of the
east and shine even unto the west ;" its flashes, tho often seen in
every direction, are known, in this country, to come out of the west
much oftener than out of the east ; and they never extend so as to
be seen but a few miles distant, in any direction. If therefore
Christ intended, by the similitude of lightning, to represent an in-
«tantaneous and universal display of his second appearance, the
similitude is quite imperfect, — ^the com^iarison falls very short.

2. The Greek word «r^«Tii, tho sometimes properly translated
lightningy signifies any vivid brightness or shining light, as that of
the sun, or of a star, a lamp or candle, as the same word is used
in otlicr places.* It is sometimes used to signify the breaking

forth of lights as the dawning of the day, or the rising of the sun,
which is evidently the meaning in the text quoted above. The .^
light breaks forth in the east, " and shineth even unto the west,'*
still progressing on in its western direction, till it enlightens t^.
whole earth ; and this it will effectually do in the space of twenty-
four hours, so that all nations, even every eye^ may see the light
thereof; unless it be those who through blindness or some other
cause, are deprived of that privilege.

We also find the same testimony in Luke, but a little differently
expressed : " As the lightning that lighteneth," or more properly,
" As the shining light that shineth forth from the one part under
" heaven, and giveth light unto the other part under heaven ; so
" shall also the Son of man be in his day."t This plainly implies
that, as the light of the natural day (alluding to the sun as before)
proceeds in its course, enlightening the earth from place to place ;

* The same oriprioal \^ori which in Matthew xxW. 27, is translated /|gAtnin^>\v Vc^V^ikn.
xi. 3rt, translated bright thinUig \ in Luke xxiv. 4, %4.».n^^*^et>AN^,\V\\\v^t^V^v^%Yax<&*it\
and in Acts ix 3, usva a* a verb, \\ is tranalaled «}Uncd\ ^*\>Qfctt^^RXU»»l ^fc*"
t Luke zyii. 34,


!t)XD AIAMFBSTATIO.\ [PA^JIP

so til I he progressive increase oTdivine light, in the millennial clay,
it will continue lo shine from one place lo anolhei, unto ail ibe
cailii or every part ciniJer heaven, ahull be fully illuminated. Not
iliBt all will receive the light and profit by it; for many will un-
itoiibtedly hate and shun it to their conderanBtion ; according ta
ihe testimony of our Savior: "And tliiB is the cond em nation, that
" light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rallier than
•* light, because their deeds \wre evil. For every one that doettt
'' evil, haleth the light, neither eometh lo the light, lest bis deeds
■' should be reproved.""

The same ideBS concerning an iDslantaneoiisIy univeisul'dia-
play of the coming of Christ, in the clouds of the sky, which att
generally prevail at the present day, were doubtless entertained b^
the translators of ihe Bible. Hence it is easy to account for the
tratisUtioQ of so many passages in a manner most favordble lo their
preconceived notiims : and especinlly where the, words in i)ie
original would admit of such a translation.

I As to the e^ipressions, " In a moment, in the twinkling of an
<je, at the last trump," and such like, nothing cnn lie proved from
them to confirm the opinion of an instantaneous and, at the saine
time, 3 universal display of Christ's second coming to judge ibe
Vorld. Nor are those expressions, even in their most literal sense,
*y any means inconsistent with the idea of the event's having
fiegun to take place in this country more than forty years agoj but
1» perfectly consistent with the belief of its having taken place sud-
denly, with respect lo thousands, during that period of lltnet and
ulso with the belief that it may lake placeas suddenly, with rtepect
lo many thousands more, wilhin forty years to come. For allhn
the increase of the light of ihe gospel in the soul, is grudual and.

» progressive, from its dawn to ihe perfect day; yet the convictitH).
of sin, and also the lirsl rays of light, are often sudden and inslait-
4neous; an'] so slso are the judgments oFGod on the wicked, aad
many oiber changes which both the righteous and the wicked wilt
find to pass ihiuu^h, before God shull have finished his work in
liiera.and with tliem.

But it will be necessary lo illuslrate, more particularly, the pro-
gress of ihe WDvk of Ciod, in Christ's second coming, by ihe simili.
lude ofthebieaking forth of light in the east; for as before observ-
ed, Dur Savior, in ihis similitude, evidently alluded lo the sun, ihs
light of theiiaTnnil day, itndnot to the lightning. It is well known
ihni ihi? d>'i}> first commences by the dawning of light in the east.
The twilight succtetis; and the morning light gradually increases
till the rising of the sun. The sun however, docs nol shine ov«t
llie face of the whole earth at one and the same time; but appears
ri-iiiig from one degree of longitude to anoihei' still fnniipr west,


CHAP. III.] NOT INSTANTLY UNIVERSAL. 211

until, in the space of twenty-four hours, it is seen rising and en-
liglitening the whole habitable globe. So that it necessarily hap-
pens, that while the eastern nations are enjoying the cheering rays
of the morning sgn, the western world is wrapped in midnight
darkness.

Agreeable to this comparison, if we consider the great length of
the millennial day, we may readily perceive that, in its progress
through its whole course, there must be a great difference in the
period of its commencement, in different parts of the world. The
labors and employments of the natural day are as various as the
times of their commencement. The act of waking from sleep, of
rising, dressing and performing the duties of the motning, or of
making preparation for the more important work of the day, is
very different from the general labors of the day ; yet this morning
labor is really necessary, and preparatory to that which appears
more important. But it must be considered that this preparatory
or morning labor cemnot take place all over the earth at once ;
and so it is also with regard to the general labors of the day. For
while the labors of the morning are going on in one part of the
earth, the midday labors are progressing in another pail, and the
evening labors in another. Thus the morning, midday, afterno<m
and evening labors are all in actual operation at one and the same
time, but in different and distant parts of the earth.

" So also shall the coming of the Son of man be." The light
of the millennial day is as gradual and various, in its commence-
ment and progress, as the light of the natural day; and, like this,
cannot possibly take place throughout the world at once, any more
than the light of the sun can be seen at once over the face of the
whole earth. It appears to be the prevailing opinion among those
who are looking for the millennium, that the preparation for that
day is to be finished over the whole world first ; and that the se-
cond coming of Christ is to take place in a similar manner, and
become at once universal. This idea is wholly inconsfstent with
reason, and has no foundation in truth.

Among the many providential events which are»evidently pre-
paratory to the introduction of this new era to the world, we may
remark,

1. The* extensive and increasing prevalence of the spirit of
reh'gimis toleration among mankind. This is absolutely necessary
in order to check and bind the spirit of persecution, which would
olht rwise rage beyond control, at the introduction of a new reli-
gion which must and will be contrary to every feeling of the carnal
nature of man.

2. The increasing sense of the importance of peace and ^ood
tri// among mankind, as abvolitely esseu\\^\.ci OcvivaJcsa^WLVj % "^sx^
the many esertiotis in various \\^z^ Xo ^to\ftoV^^>& ^<^««sJ^^ ^^^


i


,a of peace societies and peace publications, Tliese
intly npcessury, in nnier lo ctirb those Ciiin-Ukp passions
oi :naii, which would olherwise defeat, if possible, I'very aUempI
to prupagate h pmcel'ul and sinless gospel among the tDbabitanis
of a ri>nien[ious anil sinful iVDrlcl.

?. The ra&ny exertions tvliicli are made throug'h ihe influence
of benrvolenl and humiine sncietjes, and other liberal meunH, for
the ubolition of slavery, and the ameljanttion of mankind. Thi«
is an Importani object : for unless every nation, class and color of
people can enjoy free, >iist and equitable rights, they cannot be
made ihe partakers of a free, just and equitable religion, the be-
ne vroleni and impartial girt of Him »ho "hath made of one blood
nil nations of men."

4. The increasing atleniitm to the important concerns of religion,
and the many religious revivals which are continually springing up
in various places, atlendf^i with mani festal ions of peculiar light
'ind power. These are the most efTecIual operations of Dhine
Providence to excite niankUiil to see and feel the necessity of fintl-
ing some way of deliverance from tlie bondage of sin, and to call
iheni to that genuine repentance which leads to a life of righteous-
neu and true liulint'ss, " without which no man shall see the Lord."

Some seem to be aware that these events are preparatory to the
milU-nnium, and view thfm as evident signs of the coming of
Christ, while they ar« utterly unconscious that the preparation
and the real woik of the day. are both in actual progression, ai
the same tiiiie, agreeable to tlie aimiliiude already noticed. The
work of rising from spiritual sleep, of being convinced of the need
of a Savior, and of lifting np the head and looking lor redemption
in Christ's second coming,* are all very difTereni fnjra receiving
and walking in him, and being in the real work of his Kingdom;
yet all ibese are necessary, and peiiain to the woik of the millen-
nial day. The foremenlioned providential events are evident pre-
parations, and actual signs of the approach of that day to an eiien-
sive increase, which, in a limited degree, has already commenced.

Many, seeii^ these signs, are looking for the appeai-ance of the
Son of man, not knowing that he is already come, nor where to
look for him. The reflecting rays of the Sun of righteousness
wake sonls from the sleep of a fallen, sinful nature, and afli>rd
thtm light lo see their lost and deulorable state, and their absolute
need ofa Saviot. Hence iliey sign and groan for deliverance, aiid
hence they pray and wrestle in spirit, for that redemplioo which
is promised in the day of Christ's second appearing. And nil
who continue honest and faithful to the preparatory light, looking
hb6 waiting for his coming, are noticed of Cod, and wiU be lA


CILVP.IV.] THE MANIFESTATION OF, &C. 213

readiness to receive and enter into the perfect work of the day,
whenever it shall be manifested to them.


CHAPTER IV.

"Hie Manifestation of Christ in the Female,

Many objections have been raised against the doctrine of the
appearance of Christ in the female, the principle ground of which
seems to be, that it is not warranted b/ scripture, nor consistent
with reason. To obviate these objections and confirm the doc-
trine, both by scripture and reason, is the design of this chapter.

In searching the records of scripture we find that, on man}' ex-
traordinary occasions, in past ages, there were females, as well as
males, raised up and qualified to do the will of God and to accom-
plish his work. There were prophetesses, as well as prophets, in
those days ^ which evidently shows that women, as well as men,
were not only designed to enjoy the special favor of God ; but also
that they were originally designed to have a jcorrespondent share
in teaching and guiding the human race, in directing the destinies
of nations and governing the world, which is composed of females
as well as of males, who certainly stand in need of instruction, di-
rection and government.

It appears evident that Miriam the prophetess had a share with
Moses and Aaron, in delivering the children of Israel from the
bondage of Egypt, and in leading them through the wilderness :
for thus saith the Lord ; " I brought thee up out of the land of
*•' Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; and I
" sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.'^* Esther was also
raised up, as an instrument in the hands of God, to deliver the
Jews from destruction, when no man was found able to do it.

Deborah the prophetess was also raised up, in the days of the
Judges, and set over Israel ; and, through her instrumentality, a
very great deliverance was wrought for that nation.t This ap-
pears the more extraordinary, as being a deliverance from their
bondage to the original inhabitants of the land of Canaan, whom
they had been commanded to cast out and destroy ; and it appeal^
to be the only time that they, as a nation, were ever brought into
bondage to these natives of the land. " And the hand of the chil-
dren of Israel prospered and prevailed," under the ministration of
Deborah, until they destroyed the power of the Canaanites, so that
they never obtained any dominion over Israel afterwards. Thus
the work which had been begun by Joshua, (who was a type of
Jesus,) was at length completed by a female.

Herein was typified the work f>f God \w CW«»>2% ^'^ "ws^


i


THE MAMFESTATfOS OF

L second ajipparance, as it respected tbe warfare of christians against
Lthdr spiritkitti enemies. The Canaanites prefigured the carnal
l|^awiions of human nature, which God had commanded his people
VtO cast out. and ugainst which Jesus Christ began the warfare.
■ But hy leaguing with thtm, as ihe Israelites diti with the Canaan-
D il«s, (he primitive Christians, in process of lime, lost their power
Band tlieir order, and were overcome and held in bondage by these
1 DOriial uassions, until the way was opened for a final deliverance,
I througli the instrumentality of a female.

The simgofDeborah, after this extraordinary victory, ik worthy
of remark. "They ceased in Israel, unul that I Deborah arose,
that I arose a mother in Israel." If then a mother was raised up
in Israel to deliver that nation from their bondage to liie Canaan-
ites, and to destroy ihrir power and dominion over Israel, why
sliouid it be tliought inconsistent for Ood to raise up a mother In
the spiritual Israel, to dehver them from their bondage to the spir-
itual Canaanites, and lo destroy ihetr power and dominion, and
thus to complete the work which Jesua began f
. The many instance* recorded in tbe sacred writings, prove be-
I Vond dispute, that in past ages, God did condescend to reveal
L Ills mind and will to females, who were then commissioned, by
^ Divine Authority, to bear testimony thereof to man. And the
two signal instances of deliverance effected through the insiranien-
talily of Drt)orBh and Esther, are sufficient to show that God did,
on each of these extraordinary occasions, raise up and empswer
« female to accomplish an ex trfl ordinary deliverance, which was
beyond the power of man to eOect without theii' assistance.

If then, God has, in these last days, raised up a female to reveal
the true testimony and Spirit of Christ; and enduweil her with
power to effect- the deliverance of lost man from the bondage of
sin, and to usher in the latter day of glory, shall man reject llie
work on that account? Is ii too debasing to the pride and haughti-
nws of fallen man ? If so, let it he remembei-ed that, " Tbe Lord
" of hosts haih purposed it, to stain ihe pride of all glory, and to
"bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth. And the
" loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the hatighliness of
" men shall be made low; and the Lord alone sliall he exalted id
" that day."*

Il is well known thai when souls come lo be awakened to a
fei'ling Bense of their need of salvation, their general cry is, " What
" shall we do to be saved ? — Lord, send by whom tlinu wilt send —
" Work by means of thy own chusing; only show us thy will —
" bring us salvation from the bondage of sin." It is on, these con-
ditions we are willing to receive Christ, lln) revealed in a manner
cootrary to every feeling of a fallen nature. We are deien


CHAP. IV.] CHRIST IS THE FEMALE. 215

•

to exalt the Lord alone — ^to know none but Christ, wherever man-
ifested and in whomsoever found, and to bear the cross, tho it cru-
cify us to the world, and the world to us.

Altho it was necessary that the Spirit of Christ should be mani-
fested in both male and female ; yet no man nor woman that ever
appeared on earth, could ever be a proper object of divine worship.
" God is Spirit ; and they that worship him, must worship in spirit
*< and in truth."* God is therefore the only proper object of divine
worship; and no one can ever worship in the spiritual work of
God, unless called and durected by the Spirit of Christ : for accord-
ing to his own testimony, " No man cometh unto the Father but
by me."t Therefore no man can worship God, but through
Christ 5 and the only true worship that we can render to God, is
to honor and glorify him by yielding obedience to his will. And
tho a portion of the Spirit of Christ must be in every solil, in order
to unite them to his body; yet the manifestation of the will of God
for the guide and direction of souls, in his true spiritual work, must
be revealed in the order of God's appointment, through those wit-
nesses whom he sends for that purpose.

As the Divine Spirit and Will of God, in these last days, has
been manifested in Christ, through the two first messengers of
salvation ; so tlie same Spirit continues to manifest his will, through
the same line and order, in the church of Christ, and will ever
continue so to do, as long as Christ shall continue to have a true
church on earth. Therefore, as the ancients worshipped the God of
their fathers ; so worship we that God who has been revealed to us
by our spiritual parents in the gospel, whom God hath raised up,
and sent to open the way of salvation to us. We worship neither
man nor woman ; but we honor and obey the Spirit of Christ,
whether revealed in man, woman or child.

The natural creation, and the things therein contained, are figu-
rative representations of the spiritual creation which is to supersede
it, as we have already shown .J The first parents of the natural
world were created male and female. The man was first in his
creation, and the woman was afterwards taken from his substance,
and placed in her proper order to be the second in the government
and dominion of the natural world; and the order of man'*s crea-
tion was not complete till this was done. For it must be acknow-
ledged by all, that without male and female, the perfection of man,
in his natural creation, must have been less complete than that of
the inferior part of the creation, which was evidently created male
and female. Hence it must appear obvious, that in the spiritual
creation, man and wonjan, when raised from a natural to a spiritual
state, must still be male and female: for the spiritual state of roan^
which is substantial and eternal, cannot be less i^«t^^<:X W^& \s^^«x^

* John Jr. 34. j John xivj «. X Set ^%tV\V\. tXi*.-^ vvv -^^^^^^


pan his natural siBle, which is but temporal, and ligiirath'e ontie
Kriiun].

■ As the true church of Christ, wJiich ia his body, is composed of
Bale andJemnk, bs its menibers ; and as there must be a corre-
Bondent spiritual union between the male and female, to render
■e church complete, as a spiritual body; so it is essentially ne-
Essary that such a spiritual union should exist In Ibe head of thai
■ody, which is Christ; otherwise there could be no source from
hicli mieh 9 correspondent, spiritual union coutd flow to the body*
B inuat he admitted by every reasonable person, ihot iha order of
pan cannot lie complete without the woman, if so, then the
Bntrch cannot exist, in its proper order, without male and female
Bemhcrs : fur, " neither la ihe man without the woman, nor llic
■omnn without the man, in the I^rd."* And it would be very
nreasonable to suppose that the l>ody of Christ should be niorp
ftpmpleie and perfect, in its order, than llie head. This woold
Eve ilie body a superiority over the head.

r This spiritual uniiw between the male nnd female, in the body
■pd in the head of the churcb,is that which the apostle calls a great
ms»ttri/A And indeed it is a great mystery to the lost children
If men, who seem to have no conception of any other union be-
Breen the male and female, than that which is natural, according
K ihe order of the flesh. Nor do they seem to know any other
Keign in the creation of the female, nor any other essential uae
Hk her than that of carnal enjoyment in a sexual union> and the
boduclion of offspring through that medium. But the work of
Ehrist, being a spiritual work, the union must therefore be spiritu-
u; and it i^t impossible for souls to coroe into this work, aud enjoy
Hs union, unless the fipiiit of Christ become iheir life.

■ Since then, Christ must appear in every female, as well as in
Bcry mak% before they can be saved ; and since that Divine Spirit
bs 3ppe.ared in one man, whom God has chosen as the Captain
Bf our salvation, and an exanijile of righteousness to all men ; is it
not leasoiiahle and consistent that the same anoiniiog power
(which is Christ) should also appear in a woman, and distinguish
iier as a leader, and an example of righieotisneas to all women ?

It may be asked. How can Christ appear in a woman? With

iitbe samepropriety we might ask, how can Christ appear in a man?

rist is a Spirit : " The l^rd is that Spirit. "J In that Spirit if

itained the only power of salvation. If Christ could not appear

then no man could he saved ; so also, if Christ could not

appear in a woman, then no woman could be saved. Christ first

appeared in Jesus of Naxareth, by which -lie was constituted the

bead of the new and spiritual creation of God. The Spirit orChrisI

' primitive cjiurch^ and the Spirit of Christ is also in


CHAP. IVi] CHRIST IN THE FEMALE, 217

every one of his true and faithful followers. The Spirit of Christ
is the same, whether revealed in man, woman or child.

It may perhaps be urged, by way of objection, that if a female
was to be raised up, to stand in a correspondent connection with
the first-born Son of God, in order to usher in the latter day of
glory, and bring about the regeneration of a lost world, it would
appear reasonable that she also, as well as he, should have been
brought forth by a miraculous burth. But a little reflection will
show the impropriety of this. Such a birth would not have cor-
responded with the figure given in the creation of the first man and
woman. Adam was called " the figure of him that was to come."*
He had a miraculous creation, being formed out of the dust of the
earth. Jesus had also a mu-aculous birth, being bom of a virgin
without the co-operation of man. But this virgin, being a natural
woman, a daughter of Adam, her body was of the earth ; and in
this sense, she was as the dust of the earth, tho in its highest state
of natural perfection under the fall, as was needful it should be,
when designed for such an extraordinary purpose.

Eve, who was "the figure of her that was to come," was not
created out of the dust of the earth, as Adam was, but was formed
of his substance, and taken from his body ; therefore she was de-
pendent on him, and it was her duty to be subject to him as her
head and lord. Had the woman been created in the same' manner
that the man was, there would have been two separate heads of the
creation 5 and as neither of them could have had the pre-eminence ;
so rtMther of them could have been placed in a state of subordina-
tion to the other. So also, agreeable to this figure, the second
Eve was not brought forth in the same manner that the second
Adam was ; but, as to her person, she came into the world as all
other women do. But as the substance of the first woman was
taken from the body of the first man ; so that Divine Spirit with
which the second woman was endowed, and which constituted her
the second Eve, was taken from the Spirit of the second Adam,
the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore she was necessarily dependent
on hiin, was subject to him, and always acknowledged him, as her
head and lord.

It was absolutely necessary that the human tabernacle of Jesus
should not only be created in a supernatural manner, by the im-
mediate operation of tjie Etei'nal Father and Mother; but also
in a state superior to that of the first Adam ; otherwise he could
never have had the pre-eminence, as to the superiority of his origin.
As no stream can rise higher than its fountain; so no being could
proceed from the Ipins of Adam with a life superior to that which
he possessed: for he was formed of the elements of tem^w^VVk^ifc^

*Rono. T, l-i.

\3


THE MANIFEST ATIOS OF fPART V.

I lud not of the elements of eternal life." Tliereforc, had Jesus been
F begotlcnof iheseed of Adam, his life could not have been superior
to the hfe of Adam; norcoiildhe have hadsiiperinr power: helice
he could not have been the first to possess eternal life; and there-
fore the source of eiernaf life could not have been in hini; coi
ijuently It could not have been brouglii to light by him.

But Jesus being created in a stale superior to that of the ftrsl
Adaiu, he was the first who received the elements of eternal life
from his Eternal Parents. His heavenly descent was announced
by ihe message of the angel to JMary : " Tlie Holy Gbost shall
" come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shol! overshadow
" thee,"t Here was plainly manifested the opsralion of the
ExEa-NAL TWO, the Highest and the Holy Ghost, by whom the
Son of God was ereated.J And as the human race, in their liillsii
and lost state, are composed ofmale and female; so it is necessorjr
that the Spirit of Christ, in which is the only power of salvatioo,
should be manifested in both male and female, in order to coinplett
the work of regeneration and salvation,

But it may still be iirgetl, that if it was necessary for God to
endow a female with the spirit of eternal Ufe, to make ber a par-
taker with Jesus Christ, in the power of salvation, and toco-ope-
rate with bim in the work of regeneration, it would at least have
appeared more reasonable and consistent, had she been a vJigin
character. But it ought to be considered that mankind arelosi in tlie
works of generation ; and that it was therefore necessary that one
I who was actually under that loss, should first set the example and
' .e llie lead in coming out of it Therefore, bad a virgin char-
•r been chosen, tho she might have been a pattern ofrighteouft-
; yet she could not have set the example of coming out of a
into which she had never entered. Jesus Christ himself
fMevec went into the work uf generations therefore he could not
«et the example of coming out of it ; but he could, and did set the
pesample of abstaining from it, as well as from all manner of evil.
As Ihe first Eve, through the deceitful influence of the power of
evil, was the first to violate the temple of chastity, and to lead man-
kind into the work of generation, in actual disobedience to the
positive command of G«!, and by ihis roeans corrupted the work
at the very fountain; so a female, who was ihe natural offspring of
the first Eve, and under the same loss, was the proper character


CHAP. IV.] CHRIST IN THE FEMALE. 219

to be empowered to break the charm which binds mankind under
that loss, and to take the lead in coming out of it.

Ann Lee was the distinguished female who was chosen for that
purpose ; and being wrought upon by the power of God, she actu-
ally took up a final cross against that nature, and against all those
propensities which lead to the gratification of it. And having re-
ceived the Spirit of Christ, by the operation of which her soul was
purified from the fallen nature of the flesh, she rose superior to it,
and by her example and testimony, she actually led the way out of
that nature and all its works, and was prepared to stand in a
pro()er order to manifest the Spirit of Christ in the female line.
Hence the image and likeness of the Eternal Mother was formed
in her, as the firstborn Daughter, as really as the image and like-
ness of the Eternal Father was formed m the Lord Jesus, the first-
born Son. Thus was she constituted the second heir in the cov-
enant of promise, and was placed in a correspondent connection
with Jesus Christ, as the second pillar of the church of God in the
new creation.

We would by no means be understood to apply this character
to the human tabernacle of Ann Lee ; that tabernacle was but flesh
and blood, like those of all other women ; but it was a chosen
vessel, occupied as an instrument, by the Spirit of Christ, the Lord
from Heaven, in which the second appearance of that Divine
Spirit was ushered into the world. It is this Spirit which has con-
stituted her immortal part the second pillar in the new and spirit-
ual creation ; it is this Spirit which is the image and likeness of
the Eternal Mother, and which is, in reality, the true Bride of the
Lamb, and the first Mother of all the children of Christ. The
apostle saith, " We preach Christ the Power of God and the Wis-
<lpni of God." But the Spirit of Wisdom in Christ, could not be
manifested in her true character on earth, as the Mother Spirit in
the work of regeneration, until she was revealed in the female, as a
IVlolher in Christ.

It may perhaps be further objected that, according to the testi-
mony of the apostle, Jesus is " the author and finisher of faith ;"
that his mission into the world was to ^* save his people from their
sins" — to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself;" and that " there
h no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must
be saved ;" and therefore we must be saved by his power alone, if
saved at all. But, as we have already said, Christ is a Spirit ; and
it is by this Spirit only that salvation is wrought. It is this Spirit
in the male and female, by "U'hich souls are begotten and bom in
the regeneration. And as this Spirit is Christ, and whether it be
revealed in male or female for salvation, it can never he. s^^'v^'^is^s^ii^
from Christ ; therefore it is by lW\s ^\v\t\X o^ ^VvcvsX oi^^ ^ ^^X'*!^
vitfioo and Unal redemption can b^ YfTovv^\.\\v^xv^ ^'^'^^


The makipestation or


Tho the day of rcderopliun was prpditlrd in early ages, and the

y period alluded to, when a new order of tilings was lo loke place ;

and tliu ilie nntiire of ibese things wiia often poinlt^U oul by types

and shadows, mid the rerlainly of tlie event declared by \be spirit

ufprDiihecy, nnder l)ie law, and afierw.itds more fully illustrnted

and coiUirmed by Jcims Chrbi and his aposilts; yet a full rev«la-

Uon of the fallen nnlure of ibe flesh, and of ibut power which was

lo iieconiplifih its deslniclion, mid usber in Ibe real wurkofthe

latter day of glory, could not take plate unlit the time arrived for

l^^ibe uinniti?sliHi(.n of CJirisl in ibe female, in whi-ni the second ajt-

^^H^earance ofCliriat conimcnccd. This is the rcn^on \> hy even those

^^Hivbo haie been must highly favored of God, under former dtspen*

^^V 'ntions, have never been ablelo discover the nature of man's loss^

^™ Bnd ilie real foundation of iniquity. Consequenlly a true spiriliul

union between the sexes, coulil never be fully nialnlained : for &

union belwerii the sexes naturally iiielint's to tbe Gesli. There-

tore, until ihe female was brought into her proper order, in the

spiritual work of God. a union between the sews, tho Ix'gun in the

Ejilrit, generally ended in the flesli. And ibis has been Ibe cflec-

lual cause of a declension Irom tbe spintual work of God, in all

F rfligiotis revivals, from the falling away of the primitive church

nren to this day.

;* Tho lliuusands in past ages, wiio conscientiously lived up to tlte
iKst light ihey were able lo obtain, were so far enlightened by ilie
"Spirit of God, as to see the natural tendency of indulging theweinor-
' dinale dc^'ires which led to ihese baleful corruptions, andhonestVy
took up their crosses, and, for a season, maintained a principle of
continency ; yet the fountain of iniquity was not discovered; the vail
of the flesh, winch is the covering that darkened the sight, wns not
yet removed. So great indeed has been tbe darkness wliich hiw
covered the earth, and so benighted were tiie minds or the gieat
mass of the professors of chrblianity, that those souls wlio were
thus partially enligblened, have generally been sligmaiized us
heretics, and have sufltred great persecutions on accomit of their
faith. And tbo such sonla,' like stars in tlie- night, inigbt shine in
the midst of surrounding darkness; yet they could not dispel the
darkness, nor enligbien the earth. This remained to be acconw
plished by the Spirit of Christ in tbe femalii. The dawning of the
millennial day, and the j-isiiig of ibe Sun of Righteousness, having
nnw commenced, will gradually disperse these clouds of darkness,
and open ihc eyes of a benighted world ; and tlien wii! the lost
stale of man be fully displayed in its true culurs.

in tliose pans of the sacred scriptures which relate to the worft
o/t/ie latter day, we find mwiy figurative ar.d prophetic allusions
to two correspond on t powers w\i\t\iase nivwAXn fli^t5>vi\'QiMv the
same purpose; and ihenumlier ticoKTe^xc'ieW*4'«i"^=K''';'^^^'?»^


CBAlf. IV.] CaiRIST IN THE FEMALE. 221.

which evidently point to the two first pillars of the church of Christy
and to the united influence of the male and/emale in the work
of redemption. Such are the tioo cherubimsj whose wings covered
the mercy-seat above the ark;* the two tobies of the covenant jt
the ttDO silver trumpets ;l the ttoo olive-trees; the ttvo oUve^mu^
es ; the two golden pipes through which the two olive-branches
emptied the golden oil out of themselves, and " the two Anointed
Ones which stand by the Lord of the whole earth ;"|| and many
others which might be mentioned.

The two cherubims placed over the ark that contained the two
tables of the covenant, were very remarkable types of "the two
Anointed Ones," the male and the female, who were both united
in the work of redemption; "and the comicil of peace is between
them both,^^ Over the ark was placed the mercy-seat of pure gold ;
and the two cherubims of gold, of beaten work, were placed on
the ends of the mercy-seat ; and their wings were extended on
high, so that they covered the mercy-seat with their wings ; and
their faces looked towards each other, and towards the mercy-seat.
These figures are so. plain and obvious that it seem^ as tho they
could not be misunderstood. And the Lord said unto Moses^
^^ Thou shalt put the mercy-seat above upon the ark ; and in the
" ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee. And
" there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
'* above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which
'^ are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give
'* thee in commandment unto the children of Israel."fl

Here God manifested his mind and will to the people of Israel^
from above the mercy-seat, and from between the two cherubims;
and here they were to look for the word of God in that dipensa-
tion; and hence their addresses to that God who dwelt between
the cherubims,** A striking figure of the true order of the work
of God through the male and female in Christ ! Between the two .
cherubims, was the mercy-seat from whence the law of God was
declared ; which not only pointed out two gospel dispensations,
but also showed, in a figure, that the merciful displays of God'd
grace, in the last dispensation, would proceed from between the
two. And here also was the ark of the testimony, showing that
between the two would be found the everlasting testimony of .
truth, in the day of Christ's second appearing. The pure gold
evidently pointed to the purity of the gospel ; and the beaten work
alluded to the mortification and suficrings, by which the two An-
ointed Ones were to be prepared for that important work which
was to redeem and regenerate a lost world. The two silver trunk"
pets were typical of the heralds of Christ, in the male and femak^

* Exod. XXV 18 & ixxvii. 7. t ^euV Vx. \5. \"S^\W!Sa.i..*i« , j.


I


Ki2 THE MANirESTATtON Of

wtio were lo be sent forlli lo prench the everlasting gospel, which
pruceedB from ihe two Anointeil Unes, and wlileh will yet be pro-
rlaimed to all nations.

The golden ranJIeslick, in the vision of the prophet Zechariah,
represented the reiviation ofGod, in Christ, npoa which his church
or spiritual house is built. The golden bowl upon the lop or the
candlestick, with its seven lamps, was an enibtein of the true rhnrch
of Christy which wns to be formed of purified souls, who'were po-
lified by the refining work of the gospel, as gold is (lurified in the
Airnace. Its being represented by h golden bowt, signified that
its formation was to be according to the perfect order of God'a
workiiiaiifilup ; and it also prefigured the compact and pure
union of its members. The two olive-trees, one on each side of
it, whicti supplied the golden bowl with oil, represented the aatne
work and order of God as did the two cherubinis, and were declar-
ed by the angel to be " llie two Anointed Ones, that stand by the
Lord of the whole earth."

As llie golden bowl received the golden oil from the two olive-
trees; so the church of Cbi'ist receives the pure oil of light and life
from the trees of life, which are "the two Anointed Ones," These
are the male and female in Christ, whn are anointed with the Di<
vine Spiiit of God, and between whom the gifts and graces of the
Spirit flow to the church. And the seven pipes to the seven lamps,
by which they were supplied with the oil of light from the twt>
•live-trees, represented the manifestations of the seven Spirits of
God, through Christ, to the church. The seven lamps siginlleil
the operations of the*e seven Spirits in the church, by which ihe
church is enlightened with the true light, and by which it becomes
the light of the world. These types and figures are plain and si^
nificaut, and the objects to which they allude are so evident, that
ihey cannot, with any consistency, be any otherwise applied, nor
be fulfilled in any other manner than according to ihe preceding
iUustraiion.*

As n further evidence in ^vor of the manifestation of Christ in
the female, we find in the prophet Jeremiah, this testimony ; " The
" Lord bath creaicil a new thing in the earth, A woman sltall com~
^ jHtit a tnath,"^ Mnny suppose that this alluded lo (he virgin
Mary, as encompsssing the man Jesus, who was born of her. But
in this sense, every woman who conceives and brings fbilh a mas
child, may be said to compass a man; and therefore that is not
■' a new thing Id the earth;'' of course il cannot be the meaning- of
the pFtiihecy. This prophecy evidently alluded to the female in
whom the second appearance of Christ was to commence: for


CHAP. IV.] CHRIST IN THE FEMALE. 228

being endowed with such an extraordinary measure of the Sfnrit of
Christ; she was able to compass and surpass the natural man, with
all his wisdom, and all his knowledge and understanding of di»
vine things, and did, in truth, efTectually do it.

We have also further evidence from the parables and testimony
of Jesus Christ himself, that his second coming would be manifest*
ed by the female. ^ The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a cer>
** tain king, who made a marriage for his son."* This parable is
so plain and pointed that it cannot be mistaken, nor mbapplied
without the grossest perversion of language. There can be no
marriage without a bridegroom and a bride. In this parable it is
generally admitted that Jesus Christ alluded to himself as the Bride*
groom ; but who is the Bride ? It has generally been supposed that
the church was alluded to as the Bride; indeed this seems to be
the general opinion of expositors. But if the church is to' be con-
sidered as the Bride, then who are the guests ? They must certainly
be an assembly of people, male and female, who are invited to
the marriage, and have the honor of sitting down to the marriage
supper With the Bridegroom and Bride. These evidently consti-
tute the church, which is made up of the faithful, who are called
to attend the marriage of the Lamb and Bride. It would be^
very singular sort of marriage for the bridegroom, instead of taking
a chosen female for his bride, to take all his guests, both male and
female, and call them the bride. If this be the true meaning of
the parable, then the figure, by which Jesus Christ chose to repre-^
sent his marriage, does not agree with the substance, and was there-
fore very improperly chosen. The figure, in this sense, would
be much more complete in its order, than the substance which it
was cliosen to represent.

The parable of the wise and foolish virgins, which also alludes to.
the same subject, is very plain and pointed.t No one can reason-
ably dispute that these vi^ins were designed to represent the wise
and foolish professors of Christianity. Nor will any one be at a
loss to know who is meant by the Bridegroom. But where is the
Bride ? She must evidently be a distinct character from the ten
virgins. Who then is she ? A bridegroom necessarily supposes a
bride also, whether she be mentioned or not ; it would therefore
be very inconsistent to call the Lord Jesus a Bridegroom, without
admitting him to have a Bride : <<For the marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his wife hath made herself ready ."J But if the church
is to be considered as the Bride, then who are the .great multitude
that rejoice because the marriage of the Lamb is come? Again:
" Blessed are they who are called to the marriage supper of the
Lamb." These are they that rejoice; and these are evideoitlbi
the church, distiiKt from the Bride.


SPIRITUAL BEGEWERATION [PART V.


w

^■| It ii nnl to be denird that the proj}liels and apostles nften spoke

^^Mlhe church in the ff m'mine gender, and they sumelimes spoke of

^"Hie church as b^-ing marripd to Christ. Thus saith ihe nposile Paul

to the ('urintlTJaiis; " t ha»e espoused you to one husband, that f

nmy present you as a chaste virgin to Christ."" Butthetiinefor the

Bride to be revealed had not then arrived ; and therefore »he waa

|:en spokeu of ui a figurative xense. The church was the body
Christ: aad as Adam had a budy cnniaining the substance of
lie and female, berore Eve was lake m h d Christ.

berpfore as Christ had then been ma ed n n le only,
d nut tn the female, the apostles we u d h n essity of
caking as ihey did, and they could not n peak herwise,

I the rV'male was taken from his body, and p d proper

der, as a distinct character. But the ti n w ved, and

the female is made manifest; therefore it o ng ssaryto

use figni-ative language in speaking of these things : for we can
now plainly declare the Spirit and the Bride.
^^ " The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that heai^
^H^,eth say. Come. And let him thai is athirsi, come ; and wliosi^
^Hp ever will, let him take of the wnii-r of life freely ."f Here ibe
^^EB^irit and tlie Bride are Grst distinctly mentioned as inviting souls
^V^ come to tiie fountain of life, and partake of its waters. Should
it still be contended that by the lirttte, is here meant tkf rkurci,
we would fliik, who then are those thai hear? " Let him that faear-
elb say, Come." This alludes to a character of people already
sailed, expressly distinct from the Spirit and the Bikle, and who
V called upon to invite souls to cume, and evidently applies to
« church. The voice of the Spirit and the Bride is to the chtirch.
he church heareth, and having received the Spirit of the "two
Anointed Ones," is therefore ready to declare the same call of the
OS pel to other souls, who are hungering and thirsting aller rigli*
tousness. " Let him that is athirsi, come ; and whosoever will;**
Kt all the lost children of men, who feel their loss, and are willing
Hi'cept the offers of the gospel, come and "take the water of lift


CHAPTER V.
Spiritual RegeneTatwn and the New Birth,
Rbgeskbation, in its general sense, signifies a renovation or
Kfbi'ming anew that which had been previously formed. Sometimes
IS used merely to imply the restoration of any tiling lo a state
im which it had fallen by craruption, decay or some other means;
mel'imea it signifies a renewing of the original principles off jT


CHAP, y,'] AND THE NEW BIRTH. 225

old, and establishing them upon a difierent foundation. And it is
generally expected that the new, being built upon the improvements
of time and experience, will be superior to the old. But when we
speak of spiritual regeneration, as applied to mankind, we mean,
not merely a restoration to the state of innocence in which man
was first created;* but a renovation of the whole soul and life of
the man, in such a manner as to raise him, not only from the state
into which he is fallen, but into a life of righteousness and true ho-
liness, far superior to his primitive state, even into a state of eternal
life, from whjch he never can fall.

As the act of ger.eration, and the bringing forth of a natural
offspring, are two different and distinct operations, and the former
necessarily precedes the latter ; so it is in spiritual regeneration
and the new birth. The child of God must be begotten in the
spirit, by the word of life, and travel in the spiritual regeneration,
till he comes to the new birth, before he can be bom uato the real
nature and Kfe of Christ. This work first began in Jesus Christ;
and no one was ever bom out of the flesh, into the Kingdom of
Heaven before him.

The patriarchs and prophets, previous to the coming of Christ,
were moved by the Holy Spirit, as a spirit of prophecy, uriiich tes-
tified of the coming of Christ in the flesh, in a future day, to raise
man out of the nature of the flesh, into the nature of the Spirit.
But this Spirit did not take up its abode in any; so as to become
the divine life of the soul, and direct all its faculties ; therefore none
of them were raised out of the nature of the flesh, but they all still
remained natural people. Nevertheless, they were accepted of
God, according to the work of that day, in living up to their best
light ; and when they had done with time, they slept with their
fathers, were gathered to their own people, and rested in peace.
Thus they were " taken away from the evil to come.^t Or as the
apostle ex|)resses it, " These all died in faith, not having received
^* the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuad-
" ed of them." And again : " These all, having obtained a good
" report through faith, received not the promise : God having pro-
" vided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
" made perfect.^f

It appears to be a prevailing opinion, that those who died in
faith, before the coming of Christ, were immediately received into
Heaven. If this be so, they must have received the promise,
which is contrary to the express declaration of the apostle, just
quoted. And Jesus himself hath also declared that, "No man
^ hath ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Hea-

♦ If tbi? were all that maa could gajn by regeneration, heNfo\A^V>« tQ^\CCv.^ Xvi^'t Nft VSt
again, and of course would nerer be Qot of'dan^er.
/ See Jsa.Jfii. /. i Ucb. iv. IS,^^, 4.^.


^■^ ven, even t!
^^^^ocirines ma


SPIRITUAL REGF,\ERATION


g.ven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven."* Wha..,fcm
^pocirines may be taught to ihe coolrary, it appears evident frJwn
the piYceding testimonies, thnt all who lived befon- the caming
of Christ, were nuling for the fulfilment of tlie promises, and ex-
pected (he way inlo Heaven to be opened by Christ, and that none
of all the iiuman race could enter there, until he bad iJrst opened
The apostle undeistood this : speaking of llie eairunce
f 'of the high priest, onte a year, into the most holy place, he sailh;
•* The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
** all, was not yet made manifest."! If, therefore, Ihe way iiUa
Vtiio boly place was not then made manifest, it is certain that no aU
could have entered into it.

Here the question will probably be aslied, What then became
-of tiiose who died in faith, if they did :iot go lo Heaveu ? Surely
ymi will not say, lliey went la hell.' By no means. A^ before
obsei-veJ, ihey were gathered to their people, and rested in peace;
*' each one walking in his uprightness."^ Bui where was thdr
.resting place? and where did ihey walk in their uprightness? If
itliey Dciiher went to heaven nor hull, and j'ct walked in dieir up-
rajgntness, they must have been some where.

The opinion which generally prevp.ib, concerning llie spiritual
rorld, even among those who call ihemse Ives chrititianii, seems to
B^e cunfined to a heaven and a hell, both of which xhcy imagine lo
J6c matcriate places, fixed at an immense distance frora this worU,
U)d from each other. They also suppose that when a soul leav<»
hhe body, it goes immediulely to heaven or hell ; and that there is
o other place for the habitation of souls: conseiiuently. tlial im-
biense space between them must be a perfect void. These erro-
neous ideas evidently proceeil from the want of spiriluol light, nnd
jie prejudice of ediicntion. "Thus saith ilie Lord, Heaven is nij
fihrune, and t!:e eartli is my footst>jol."|| Hence the place between

n cannot be .- void,
f ' The connexion between the temporal and spiritual world, ii
Dike that of soul and body. Man, being composed of the*nattiid
Pclements, is the oifspring of the world in its highest degree of per-
^ieclion ; the spiritual and temporal parts being united in bim, lu.
Ceomes forth with a sonl and body, and thereby shows the orda
pfrom whence he pnicerded. When a soul leaves the body, b«iig
a living and conscious being, it moves in the eli'meuls of the
L spiritual world, while the body, being dead, soon dissolves and
y mingles again with the elements of the temporal worid.
* The distance between Gad and man, and between heaven and
, It measured by space, as we measure distance* on earth.

L3"he fulfjMs of Heaven itself, is a alale of perfect separation from
tf evil, and contains the hii^esl ^fecCwix ot otdec, g,!ory and
|»/i-iij. i;i. ij. tiicii.u.t. i.v»A"i.v \\\«,\«\,v


fcHAP.Vj.] AND THE NEW BIRTH. 227

bappiaess. Hell, in its fulness, is a state of entire separation from
all good, and the source of all evil, disorder and confusion ; and
hence it forms a situation of the most awful and excessive horror
and misery. Between these two, there is an infinity of different
states and situations of souls, both in the body and out of it, each
containing different degrees of good or evil, according to their
good or evil works. And bence it is, that, as the soul is the real
acting principle in man ; so when souls leave the body, and are
waked up to see and feel their real situation in the world of spirits,
they find their reward to be accordmg as their works have been
in this world. Man, in his natural state, is under the vail of the
flesh, which shuts hiin from a real view of either heaven or hell.
His nearness to hell is measured by the proportion of evil which
exists and reigns in him ; his nearness to heaven, by the propor-
tion of good which he has attained, and which has become a ruling
principle in his soul.

Hende those who were faithful to the light of GJod before Christ
appeared, in whatever degree that light was given them, were
accounted righteous, and were so far governed by heavenly influ-
ences ; and hence they felt peace 5 and when they lefl this world,
they rested in that peace which they had obtained by their obedi-
ence. But they could not enter into the heavenly state; because
the way was not then opened by which they could travel out of
the life of nature, by regeneration, and be born into a heavenly
and eternal life. And the way could not be opened until sufficient
power was manifested in fallen nature, to raise souls out of the life
of that nature, into a heavenly life. This never took place until it
was manifested in the person of Jesus.

A man must be born into this natural world, of the substance of
natural life, before he can become a living being in this world ;
and being so bom, he becomes a natural man, soul and body, and
must forever remain in a state of nature, unless he can be bom
again : for unless his soul can be born into the heavenly world, of
the substance of eternal life, he never can become a living being in
that world. Mankind being in a natural state, and being lost from
God, it is evident that they had not eternal life in them. Christ
was therefore sent as a Redeemer, to redeem them from their lost
state, and fit them for the " new heavens and new earth, wherein
dwelleth righteousness,'^ which God had promised by the mouth
of the prophet Isaiah.* This work is to be effected by regenera-
tion, and by this means eternal life is administered to man ; and
it is impossible that the work should ever be effected, or that eter-
nal life should ever be obtauied in any other way.

Tho Jesiis Christ had a miraculous birth, yet ^^he took not on
<^ him the nature of angels ; but he took on hica Xlv^ ^'^j^*^ ^^ ^Cicsc^

* See Jss. Ixf. 17. aod izri. 92. also 3 Pel. u\. 13.


SP1R!TUAI. Bi;(.t.\£KATlu,\ £l'.WtT\,

^^ bam. Wherefore in all things it behoved him 1o be mad# like

w unto bis breihren."* Hen>"e it appears lliai oothin^ was cxcepl-

Ped, not even the dt^iUli of tlie fall. It U tlierufore evident ihat he

was born into a liillen nature, with r1! its propensities. This na*

ture he received, ihroiigh (he medium of liis natural birth, of llie

Vii^in Mary j therefore lie necessarily Iwd a progressive travel out

kof it. And by yielding obedience to<the will of his heavenly Pa-

i'tenls, lie overcame the power of that death which reigned id the

B^en naliire of man, and rose IriDnipbiint out of it; and was thus

Pfbrmed into the very nature of eternal life, the elements of wbkli

Ik had received from hiii E^iernal Parenbi. Thus he was "tfie

"first Uegnlien from the dead, and ihe firstborn amon^ niary

« brcthien.'t

Hence It is evident tliat tlie work of regeneration first ccimmenr-

ed in liiin : for if nny one liad ever been born iiito eternal life b^

fore Jesus Christ came into the world, and passed throueli iJie ne«

birtli, he could not have been ihe firstborn. Therefore he was

evidently the beginning of the new and eternal creation of God.

L Having gained eternal life in' himself, he could, through a propei

b.inedium, trimsmit that life to Adam's posterity. " For as the

L" Father hath life in himself, so lie hath given to the Son to have

t" life in himself.'^

The new birth was not even taught before Christ was manirest-

id in the flesh, in ihe person of Jesus; and Jesns having been ihc

Jiirat who travelled in the regeneration and received tire spiritual

r!>inh, he was the 6rs( to teach it to others. He was the first who

r said, " Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of

L God."|| This was a matter of great wonder lo Nicodemus ; and

r this spiritual birth has always been a mystery to the natural mtin,

and must always remain so, until he bpcomes enlightened, by the

true light, to see the operations of tl>e Spirit of God : for as bis

sense is natural, he may hear of such a work as being born again;

but it is to him like the sound of (he wind, " he cannot tell wheitce

^ it comelh nor wliither it goeth." And tho modem christians pr»

Efess full faith in it; yet it appears that even ihetr most learned dh

;, so called, are as insensible of the nature of it, and the nim-

Q which it is to be effected aa Nicodemus was. Hence tt h

I that tbey consider the work of generation and regeneration as farv

Kjio means inconsistent with each other: or in oilier words, that i

Lman may be regenerated and born of God, and ycl be as activdy

. concerned in the work of natural generation afterwards as befoiv.

Thev seem to be ignorant that iliose who are bom by the Spirit

of Christ, tlirough the process of regeneration, are born uut oi ihe

nature of the flesh, and thejefore tiecome entirely dead to gpnerv

tnd Jieitcealso it is, that they blend the regeneration and


^HAP. v.] AND THE KEW BIRTH. "229

the new birth into one and the same thing, and call it an instanta-
neous work. But we would ask, Where then, is the resemblance
between this kind of spiritual conception and birth, and tliat which
is natural, and which is a figure of it? We might, with equal pro-
priety, suppose the natural conception, travail and birth to be one
and the same thing, and call that an instantaneous work, while all
the productions of the natural world teach us the contrary. But
as the natural conception, or planting the seed of natural life, and
the birth of natural offspring, are operations entirely distinct from
each other; and as the travail of generation commences with the
former, and is completed in the latter; so is the planting of the
seed of eternal life in the soul; and so is the travail of the regene-
ration and the spiritual birth, which are "truly prefigured by the
natural.

According to the testimony of St. John, " Whosoever is born of
" God, sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God, keepeth him-
^^ self, and that wicked one toucheth him not."* Hence it appears
evident that, in the regeneration, a man must be both begotten and
born : of course there must necessarily be a spiritual father and
mother in the work of regeneration, as really as a natural fatlier
and mother in the work of generation. And as it is by natural
generation that the kingdoms of this world have been peopled by
a race of natural men and women ; so it is by spiritual regenera-
tion that the Kingdom of Heaven. must be peopled by a race of
spiritual men and women. And as the natural offspring of the
■first Adam and Eve have received the nature of the toicked one^
through the corporeal union of their earthly parents, in the work
^f generation ; so the spiritual offspring of the second Adam and
Eve must receive the nature of the Holy One, through the spirit-
ual union of their heavenly parents, in the work of regeneration.

But the work of generation, being corrupted by the fall, must
l>e put away, and cease in man, before the work of regeneration
can have any salutary effect upon the soul : for souls must be born
out of the nature of the flesh, in order to be bom into the nature
of the Spirit. ^' That which is born of the flesh, is flesh ; and that
which is bom of the Spirit, is spirit."t That which is born of the
^sh, is subject to death and all the deplorable effects of the fall;
but that which is born of the Spirit, is born into eternal life, and
can neither die nor fall. Therefore, when souls are really born of
God, they become the offspring of eternal life ; and it is then im-
possible that they should ever beget a natural posterity : for being
in eternal life, and having the power of eternal life in themselves,
their offspring, if they ever have any, must also be born into eter-
nal life, and therefore can never die nor fall. If therefore^ thosft.
who profess to be bom of God, do be^el ;\ Ti^VacnX ^S!»\fw«^^ ^>^de-

♦ J John r, IB- \ 3o\in u\. ^.

V


MRITLAT, RECENERATJOK [PART V

ject to dealli and ihe fall, it ts a decisive proof that they are not
born of God, tiul are still a natural people, siill in the flesh, and
under ihe fall, nolwithstanrling all their professions.

It is a truth genemlly acknowledged, that the secret influence of
(heseriKDt, wbich Arsl occasioned man's fall, found its entrance
into human nature, ihrotigh the foniale. And it is equally true,
thai the fecy foundation of man's loss centers in the work of cat^
nal coition. Hence all mankind are brought into the world in a
fallen state, by the female, through the agency of this work, ll
was therefore indispensibly necessary, for the final restoration of
man to eternal life, that the Spirit of Christ should be revealed in
that sex where sin first began; and there destroy that enchanlinE
influence which tlie woman received from the serpent, that alluring
power by which the natural man is led, and through wliich the
fall of man was first produced,

By thus rnisiog the female from the lowest state of the tail, and
purifying her from all its baleful corruptions, she is made a fit tem-
ple for the Holy Spirit to dwell in. And being divested of that
enchanting power, so alluring to the carnal lover, she becojnes as
amiable pattern of Divine love, unmixed with llie deceitful blan-
dishments of sensual desire, and is able to bring forth the true spir-
itual seed of the new and spiritual creation. Thus a foundation is
laid to undermine the power and influence of the serpent in the
human race; and thereby the true seed is brought forth which
raises man from the union and relation of a carnal nature, into (be
very nature and spiritual union of Christ.

By this means the root of human depravity is destroyed and
rooted out of the very soil where it was firat planted; and this
could never have been done without the manifestation of Christ in
the female, where llie evil seed was first sown. For if the Spirit
of Christ could not have descended to the lowest depth of man's
loss, even to the depth of Satan's power and influence in mankind,
then the evil seed must still have been below the reach of Christ;
and therefore it could never be eradicated, and consequently the
redemption of mankind could never be accomplished.

Again ; it must appear obvious, that if Divine Wisdom had d»-

signed that Christ should ever be manifested in the female set,

for the purpose of raising them to their proper order in ihe work

of redemption, (which none can reasonably dispute,) there must he

3 beginning; and this manifestation must Gr^ commence inane

woman, and from her be extended to others; and it must necewa-

^M rily appear and be confirmed Lo others, by the fruits and works

^V brought Ibrih by her. As the true character of Christ in the male,

^B was first manifested in Jesus; so the true character of Christ in the

^^^ /hnaJe, must Arst be manifested in that female who first received

^^L tie fulness of the sante Spirit Kn4 aa \\iv4 Msrresvsiniw*. ONaxaR-

^ I


CHAP* v.] AND THE NEW BIRTH. 231

ter was never displayed in any woman^ until it was manifested in
Ann Lee ; therefore she must be that distinguished female who
was selected by Divine Wisdom for that very purpose.

The true foundation being thus laid, in both the male and the
female, the work of God proceeds by a corresponding spiritual
union and relation between them, through which souls ^e regene-
rated, and born into the everlasting Kingdom of Christ. And
without this correspondence, the work of the new creation coald
not proceed, any more than the work of the old creation could go
on without a natural correspondence between the male and female.
Hence it appears evident, that the work of regeneration and the
new birth could not be accomplished mitil the second appearing of

But so far as the apostles and primitive christians, who received
the testimony of Christ, were separated from the course of the
world, they were gathered, by his Spirit, into a work of renovation,
and were formed into a united body, in which the Holy Spirit
dwelt, as "the Comforter," to lead and guide them in the truth,
agreeable to the promise of Christ to his disciples.* Yet no mem-
ber of that body was really bom into the elements of eternal life,
so as to become a being with eternal life in himself. The primi-
tive christians were therefore moved by the Holy Spirit, as an
abiding Spirit of promise, and an earnest of the new birth, to be
accomplished in a future day. If this were not the case, why did
the apostle say, " The earnest expectation of the creature, waiteth
" for the manifestation of the sons of Grod : and not only they, but
" ourselves also, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we
^^ ourselves, groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to
" wit, the redemption of our body."t

By the expression, our hody^ he alluded to the body of the
faithful, of which the apostles were members. Again he saith,
" We are saved by hope. But hope that is seen is not hope : for
'* what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for ? But if we hope
" for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it."f Thus
it appears that none, in that day, had attained to the fulness of re-
demption and the new birth ; but they were waiting with patience
for its accomplishment. For had they received it, they would not
have been waiting in hope, for that which they did not see. Hence
it is evident that the apostle did not expect the accomplbhment of
it in that day.

The work of Christ's first appearing, was to establish the prin-
ciples of the new and spiritual creation ; to separate between the
true spiritual light, and spiritual darkness ^ and between the spir-
itual and natural elements ; to form the ground or soll^ <<yc vVir.
growth of the spiritual seed. By iVua Yift \ai^ >3aa ^wwAsaSbss^ q^'^or.


w

■Mi SPIRITUAL HEGESEBATIOR fp&RT V-

** new heavens anil the new earlii," wlikh are ihe piinciplea of
nghteousness, antl in whici) is ihe seed i>r elcnml llti?, by which
souls arc lo be creaiod anew, itimiigli (Jirist, into an elcmal and
immontil slate. Thus lie prepnred, and set in order, eternal inaik-
naBBf wliere souls rould be gathered und placed in their proper
order, in lut evertnsling Kingdom. For hesuiih, "1 goto prepare
" a placeTor you. And if 1 go and prepare a pltice /or yim, I
" will come again, and receive you to myself; iliiii where 1 am,
'*■ ihere ye may be also.''* Here he eviileutly alluded to ibe tim^
of fab second coining.

The (iperaiion prodnced by seed sown in the earth, and the
change effected, before ripe fruit can be brought forth, is a figure
Dfthe work of regeneration. Seed sown in the earth, must die
before it can bring forth fruit; but bein;; quickened, and properly
nourished by ibe natural clonents, it springs up, grows and pro-
duces rriiti,' which, when n'pe, is gathered ; but the stalk tliat bore
it is left in the earth: hence it is only the life of the seed which is
bruught forth in the fruit.

So the natural miin, when sown in tlie gospel field, must die lo
that wliich is natural and earlblj', before he can rise iniu the life of
CJirisI. This death is eQected by the operalioD of iJie seed of
eternal life, by which his soul is begotten in the work of the regen-
erationi And this seed uf eternal life, being properly nourished
by the spiritual elements, spring up and grows, and gathers tlie
spiritual part of the man, which is ihe life of his soul, into its own
nature, and changes the life of the soul from that wWch isnataral
and earthly, to that which is spiritual and heavenly. Thusit raises
ihc soul out of Ibe elements of an earthly nature, and leaves them
behind, like Hie withered and dead stalk and root. And thus ripe
~^' '' is brought forth, which is not natural and earthly, hut spiritual,
;nly uid eternal. And lierein are Christ's words fulfilled;
KWhosnever shall lose bis life for my sake and the gospel's, the
fiiianie shall save it."}

K, Tho tiie primitive christians received the faith iif Christ, and

jre gathered into ilw principles nf the spiritual work of God j

t ihey were not brouglii forih as ripe fruit in that day. They

;re figuratively like seed sown in aulumn, which, tho it springs

, and gives an earnest of future fruit; yet it cannot bring torOt

_^K grain in that season ; but during the winter, it lies hid in thft

^lh, and appears as tho it were dead. But when returning

Bring appears, the living plant, being quickened by the enlivening

nys of the sun, and properly nourished by the natural elements,

^d llie refreshing showers and dews of the natural heavens, it

rings up again and grows; and after passing through the varigijj^

aerations of vegetation, il brin^ forth ripe grain.


CHAP, v.] AND T^ NEW BIRTH. 233

Thus it was with those who were planted in the gospel field, in
the first appearing of Christ. A long and dreary spiritual winter
ensued, and according to the prediction of Jesus Christ, ^^ iniquity
abounded^ and the love of many waxed cold."* This was tluf
effect of the long, gloomy and deplorable reign of Antichrist, which
naturally produced a spiritual winter. In consequenc&f>f this, the
spiritual seed, which had sprung up in the primitive church, was
hid in the earth and could not grow. But when the second ap-
pearing of Christ commenced, it was like returning spring. The
spiritual seed, being quickened by the divine influences of the Sun
of righteousness, and nourished by the refreshing showers and
dews of the ^^ new heavens," began to spring up and grow, and
bring forth fruit.

It appears evident from the uniform tenor of the discourses of
Jesus and his apostles on this subject, that they did not expect the
work of full redemption to be accomplished until Christ's second
appearing : for they frequendy exhorted the people to look and
wait for the coming of the Lord. Jesus himself, when speaking to
his disciples of the signs that should precede the coming of the Son
of man, said, <^ When these things begin to come to pass, then look
'* up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh."t
This is not only a proof that their redemption had not been before
obtained, but that all those extraordinary signs, of which he had
spoken, must appear before they could even look for its near ap*
proach.

It is not disputed that tlie apostles sometimes spoke of the new
birth, and of being born of God, and described the character of
such as receive this birth. But it ought to be considered, in the
first place, that it is usual in the language of revelation, to speak
of future events as tho they were present. And secondly, that tlie
apostles spake and wrote as they were moved by the Holy Spirit,
which they had received as a spirit of promise, and which bore
witness, in them, of its future work, of bringing forth souls to God^
in the very essence of eternal life. And it is evident from the tes«
timony of St. John, who spake more concerning the new birth
than the other apostles, that they did not receive the accomplish-
ment of it in that day ; but considered it a work to be fulfilled, in
them, in a future day. " Beloved, now are we the sons of God j
^^ and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that
^^ when he shall appear, we shall be like him ; for we shall see
" him as he is."J But if they had been born of God, this matter
would have appeared very plain to them. Hence it also appears
that he did not expect the full manifestation of this work, until the
second appearing of Christ. But he evidently shows^ aa <lid.^

* SciB Matt. ixir. 12. f Luke xxi 'ZA \\ )o>aa\>cu%;


aluo, thai they "knew in port, and prophesied in part."*
^<lii«illy they could hut in part see liie work of regeneration,
■ut il mmy he asked, How then were they the sons of God ?
aniwer; By adopiion. "Yehiivereceivcd the Spirit of adop-
." And again : " Thiit we might receive the adoption of «ons,"t
if ihejrfvere the real sons of God, where was the necessity at
pltun? The reality was evidently designed to take place >n a
re day, when the manifestation of Christ should appear in d»
ler of the female, as the Mother Spirit, lo bear souls To God;

I being already the sons of God by adoption, they would tb^
be brought forth as the real children of God. And this was the
work for which ihey were waitine-

II may be proper to remark here, thai if souls can be regenera-
ted and bom of God, agreeable to the common opinion of modem

islians, without a complete renovation of the whole aoul, ftom
life of Adam lo the life of Christ, and without the united infiiH
ice of spiritual parents, in the order of male and female; then the
lws of regeneration must not only be ai variance with all tiie rest
■f God's works, but they must also be very deficient and imperfect
in their order, having no relative connexion wilh the order of t)ie
natural creation in any of its prtHJuciions. In this case, the pro-
ductions of the natural creation, and the birth ofnatural olTsprinf;,
which are but merely temporal, must be more perfect, in iheir order,
than those of heavenly birth, which are spiritual and eternal. I'his
is innking the figure more perfect than i lie substance: ttirn&turai
generation, which is but a iigure of spiritual regeneration, is cffecir>
sd by the united operations of male and female.

Dut if spiritual regeneration nnd the new birth, is the work of a
father only, then the female is entirely excluded from ai^ part in
it; consequently no woman can ever enter the Kingdom of Hea-
ven. How then is the regeneration to be perfected ? and how we
souls to be brought to the birth ? According to this doctrine, the
irsi birth, as a figure of the spiritual, is very improperly cbc^
; in truth it can he no figure at nil- Therefore, admitting th«
ininion opinion of the new birth, it must be a mere speculative
id ima^nary thing, iind can have no foundation in the established'
order of God's works.

But we admit that there is tins difference between the work of
generation and regeneration : as tlie former is natural in all its
operations ; so the latter, in all its operations, is spiritual. By the
. former, a conscious being is brought into natural existence who
Lliad no agency or Will in ihe worh; by the latter, this consciouB
Kfceingis brought into a spiritual and eternal exbience. And tts
^ifte work is Hrougfat upon the sinul of a conscious being, it cannot
be accomplished without the (teea^eac^ a.wi>N\ftTOtolvediencerf
iLat aoiit.


GHAP. VI.] BAPTISM ANfi THB LORD^S SUPPER. 234

The primitive christians, who were faithful according to the
work of their day, and gave up their lives for their testimony,
'^rested in peace, and wall&ed in their uprightness," and were
shehered from the corruptions, storms and distresses which pre-
vailed in Antichrist's kingdom. But they were placed "under ther
altar ;" which showed that they had a further work to do, and a
further sacriQce to make; otherwise they would not have been
seen under the aUar.* And tho " white robes were given them 5"
yet they had still to rest until the time of that dispensation was^
ended. But when the time arrived for the Bride to be declared,
and the marriage of the Lamb took place, then they co^e with that
great multitude y that rejoiced and praised God ; because the day
of redemption had fully arrived, and that spiritual union, by which
the new birth could be fully effected, was now made manifest.
Therefore they could now be brought forth, each one, as it were,
a ripe grain, endowed with the very life of Christ. And now they
were able to come into their proper lot and order, in the everlasting
Kingdom of Christ.

This great spiritual work has now commenced. And as grain
that is sown in the spring, if properly nourished by the natural
elements, springs up, grows and brings forth fruit in the same s^^a-
son, without passing through the chilling blasts of winter; so all'
souls, who are partakers of the work of this great day, will be nour-
ished by the spiritual elements of eternal life, and will grow into
the very nature of Christ, and bring forth the precious fruits of the
gospel, without being exposed to those chilling blasts of ecclesias-
tical tyranny which once bound the heavens and earth in a spiritu-
al winter. Those gloomy clouds of religious intolerance, and pelt-
ing storms of persecution, which once deformed the heavenly
atmosphere, and deluged the earth with blood, are now blown
away; and the cheering spring of Christ's second appearance is
now made manifest, and will extend from clime to clime, and from
shore to shore, until " all the ends of the earth shall see the salva-
tion of the Lord ;" and all shall have an opportunity to come into
its work, and enjoy its blessings, to their eternal glory ; or to re-
ject it to their everlasting destruction.


CHAPTER VL

Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper,

Baptism and the Lord's supper have, for many ages, been coii-
sidered by the great body of professing christians, as institutions
of Divine appointment, and necessary to be observed as dA&v.vcv'^Na^^^-
ing ceremonies of the christian reW^ou* TlWj %x^ ^^\!»ss«nss«^^^

* See Her, ri. 9.


^M


^cbristian sacrempnts," and are esteemed by many as essential to
Mlvaliiin. Wt have therel'ore 1 hough r proper to treat of them in
■jinrate cliapler, anil to make such remarks upon them as we
It tviti lead the candid and unbiassed mind to vien' them in their
-• light.

7'he many dilTerent opinions and jarring contentions that have
Mig existed amen^ the prolessnrs of Christianity, concerninpr iliese
o reremoiiies, are so many evidences that their most strenuuus
taries have fixed tbeu" views on mere shadows and signs, instead

embracing the real spirit and substance of Divine life to wliich

lliey alluded. The great importance which has long been attach-
ed to the external performance of these ceremonies, and the ages
of contention wliich have darkened and bewildered the worlil on
these subjects, tiret nri^naled in aniichrisiian daikness, after the
church liad lost the real knowledge of the true sjiirilual work of
Cod. We shall therefore proceed to speak of these two sut^ects
separately.

" iT, Concerning Baptitm. Tfiat the true prinriple of bap-
B divine institution, and essentially necessary to saivalion,
ii indisputable: for, according to the express declaration of Jestn
Christ, " He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved."* Yet
man may believe that Jesus Christ came into ibe world, and was
acitied and died on Mount Calvary for sinners, and may also
t baptized with water, and still be utterly destitute of the true
nith and principles of the gospel; and therefore lie as fin- froni
following Christ in alifeof righteousness, as those who never heard
his name. And as such a one gives no evidence of his having re-
ceived the promise of salvation, it must appear obvious that, niit-
vithstanding his water-baptism, he has not received the tnie bap-
- n of Christ.

s worthy of remark, thai in all the instructions of Jesus to
B disciples, he never once directed them to baptize with water:
tnce it is evident that he did not require it of ihem. The l>apiism
Bf Christ is not the baptism of water, but of the Holy Spirit. AtJ
'it appear reasonable to suppose that he would send his disel>
o baptize with John's liapiism, and not with his own? " Ve
Pshall indeed drink of my cup," said be, '^and be baptized wilb
f the baptism that I am baptized wilh."t Surely be could have m
Itference to water-baptism; for these disciples had doubtless been
ittiUzed with water already. Again he said, "John indeed bap-
Btized with water ; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost."(


J .. ... .... -.1 ,:-! ^■... .!.,. ...1.. Jjff„,|

at At
'«lut


...... . JifccMI


udaftheSanmai of l)u! BotlGtraV;'


h


CHAP. VI.] BAPTISBU 237

Thus it appears evident that the true baptism of Christ, is a spir>
itual work, of which John's baptism was but a figure. As water
washes and cleanses the body from outward pollutions; so the
true bapt'ism of the water of life washes and cleanses the soul from
all the pollutions of sin. It is a purifying operation of the elements
of the H0I3' Spirit, which must run through the whole travel of
the believer, unto perfect sanctification, cleansing the soul from an
evil conscience, and from all corrupt propensities : ^^ Having our
^' hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
" with pure water ;" even the water of life."*

By this washing and cleansing, faithful believers are gradually
baptized into the one body of Christy where the Spirit of Christ
becomes their life, and rules and reigns in them: for there is
^^ One Lord, one faith, and one baptism."! If there is but one
baptism pertaining to the true christian faith, there certainly can«
not be two. Which then is it? Is it the baptism of natural water^
or of the water of life from the Holy Spirit ? The apostle has clear-
ly decided this question : " For by one Spirit are we all baptized
" into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free,
" and have all been made to drink into one Spirit. — Now the Lord
^^ is that Spirit.":): The testimony of John the Baptist is also plain
and decisive : " I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance ;
^' but he that cometh after me, is mightier than 1, whose shoes I
^^ am not worthy to bear : he shall baptize you with the Holy
<^ Ghost and fire."|| Thus it appears that tl^ baptism of Christ is
the baptism of the Spirit, and not of water.

But it may be urged, that Jesus himself went down into the
water and was baptized of John. This is true ; and it is equally
true that he was circumcised, that he ofiered sacrifices and kept
the law. John came under the law, and the baptism of water was
instituted under the law; and as the law was a shadow of good
things to come, and not the substance; so John's baptism was a
shadow of that baptism which was to be manifested through Christ.
Therefore Jesus Christ, previous to the commencement of his min-
istry, kept the law, and passed through John's baptism ; and thereby
acknowledged and fulfilled the work of God in the preceding dis-
pensations. This is agreeable to his own testimony : " For verily
" I say unto you. Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
" shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfillcd."fl He
was indeed the first that ever perfectly kept the law of God. When
therefore he had perfectly fulfilled the law, he put an end to all its
figurative ceremonies. "For Christ is the end of the law for righ-
teousness to every one that believeth."**

* Heb. X 32 The apostle evident] j a1la<1e4 to Uie water of life ; for^ %\xvcW-<) ^-^^.v^iKt^^n
BO natural water can be called pare : nor can the heaxlot a.\Vntt^ tsaA\k« vQ.TVf&iNft.^^'v^'>>^ .
t Ef b. \v.i i 1 Cor. xii 13 & 2 Cot.ux. VI ^^^vv Kx). %X*


I


I

I


PTISM.

As John's baptism was under the dispensation or the law, and

IS, at mcist, bu[ a tigiire or shadow of the true baptism of Christ;
fliereforc, when the baptism of ihe Holy Ghost was introduced,
which was the real baptism of Ctuisif there could be no further
need of llie shadow ; nor coutd it be of any possible use to those
who understood the substance.

It is not to be denied thai the apostles and primitive christians
did, in sonie instances, use water baptism ; but it is equally true that
ftey also used circumcision and oilier Jewish ceremonies.* Paul
circumcised Timothy; yet he declared that circuiucision was
Bolhing; nay more; "I, Paul, say unto you, that if ye be circum-
" cised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify to every
" man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.''t
That is; if he chuse to depend on the law, he must Iceep every
pan of it ; but even then, lie cannot be benefitted by the privileges
of the gospel of Christ; because he has chosen the law and placed
bis trust in that, and not in the gospel of Christ.

Paul circumcised Timothy to prevent occasion of reproach firom
the Jews, that his doctrine might thereby be accessible to ihem.
For the same cause he was counselleil by the elders at Jerusalem,
to purify himself after the manner of the law, and make on offering
in the temple. He also baptized a few at Corinth, and thanked
God thai he had baptized no more, declaring at the same time,
that Christ sent him not to baptize, bflt to preach the gospeJ.J But
if waler-baptism was really an institution of the gospel, it must
have been connected with the preaching of the gospel; why then
was he not sent to administer it ? But it is clearly evident thai he
performed these ceremonies to accommodate liimself to the stale
of Ihe peoplej to become all things to all men, that he might save

We are however, very far from condemning water-baptism, or
any other religions ceremony which is conscientiously performed,
» a religions duty ; especially if attended with any beneficial efiecta
in reforming Ihe lives of the persons concerned, and keeping them,
from the snares of sin. Rut it ofien happens thai people, under
die conviction of sin, will resort to water-baptism and other reli-
ginus ceremonies, to ease ihe reproaches of conscieilce, and then
•ettie down under the cover of some established religious denomi-
nation, and soon leaven into Ihe same lifeless state, with a full pei^-
Buasion that they are now liecoroe christians, while the real princi-
ples and practice of their lives continue the same as before. Thus
they grasp at the shadow, but lose the substance. In such cases,
their water-baptism serves only to extinguish ilie fire of the Spirit,
prhich had .been burning in their consciences and produced coi^
iWKtioti of sin, and which ou^V\n\iM'ct\\\\\™v\s wawsumed out of

I ■• Sie Acts in. 3. mil 111. 90 was. 1B*V.>.^a- \fe«\^w.\.V'.WW,


CHAP. YL] the LORD^S SUPPER. 239

the soul. But water-baptism never can wash away sin, nor justify
the soul.

But the only true baptism which can profit the soul, is that of
" the Holy Ghost and fire." This baptism will bum up and de-
stroy the base and unclean passions and propensities of man's fal-
len nature, and thus effectually consume all the dross of the soul;
and in this operation it will prepare the soul for the refreshing
streams of the waters of life, which will cleanse, purify and invigo-
rate every faculty, and eventually raise the soul into the very na-
ture and heavenly life of Christ. This is the true baptism of Christ ;
and this baptism renders all shadows and figures entirely useless.
When souls partake of this baptism, then tliey know in truth, what
is meant by "the Holy Ghost and fire;" because they experience
its salutary and blessed effects.

Second, Concerning the LordPs supper. As baptism, or the
washing with water, was a figure of the true baptism of the Holy
Ghost ; so that institution which is commonly called. The Lord^s
supper, was also designed as a figure. But what was the import
of this figure ? As water is used to cleanse and refresh the body ;
so the water of life will cleanse and refresh the soul : and as bread
is used to nourish and strengthen the body ; so the bread of life will
nourish and strengthen the soul. Those outward ceremonies call-
ed baptism and the Lord's supper, which were sometimes used in
the days of the apostles, were in substance, practised under the law.*
Hence they must be considered as figures or symbols of spiritual
substances, which were to take place in a future day.

When Jesus Christ kept the Jewish passover for the last time,
he is supposed to have instituted what is called, " the Lord's supper."
But it ought to be considered that, in the performance of this cere-
mony, he officiated in a manner similar to that practised by the
head of a Jewish family ; and the only alteration that he introduc-
ed and directed his disciples to observe, with regard to this feast of
the passover, was, that tliey should do it in remembrance of hin^.
That is ; instead of doing it as they had done, in remembrance of
their deliverance from their Eyptian bondage; they should do it in
remembrance of him who came to deliver them from the bondage
of sin, of which their deliverance from Egypt was but a figure.
But it appears very evident in each place where this transaction of
our Savior is recorded, that it was designed as a figure of a spiritu-
al work to come. The circumstances are particularly stated by
Luke.t « And he said unto them. With desire I have desired to
" eat this passover with you before I suffer ; for I say unto you, I

* The washing with Wc«ter was a common ceremooj "which was strictly enjoined under
the law, fur the purpose of cleansing the body from rarioas kinds of pollution- Ani the
passover was an insth'ition kept by the Jews iu commemoration of lK« LktkT&^%'^v(.vvxir^ v«^x
their houses when be slew the first-born of £^^1, and d«V\v«T«^ ^«w^t55Tiw^<\x'S.^n^^'^
bonda£-e. -^ l.vik^ xi\\» 1 Va ^.


¥ will not any more eat titereor, until it lie fuifiUed in tie King-
• dom of Cod."

Thp uhurcli, or assembly of the faUhful, Ffitablisheil by ibe apos-
" s at JeruMilem, " were of one henrt and one soul j" and we have
I account iliai they ever kept any exteinBl sacrament, as the
I Lord's auftper, in any oilier manner than by eating and drinking
Jguther. daily, as Ji^siis Clirist set ihem tlie eiamiiie while lie was
jivith iheni. "And nil thai believed were together, and had all
C things common : — and breaking bread from house to house, did
"est their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. "' Jt is Irne
-that when the gospel was preached to the Gentiles, those wtio t>e-
tieved did not generally come inio a united interest ; and thefefon
'coittd not eal and drink Hither, doily ; hence they came together
at appointed times, and held their love feasts, and eat and dmnk
together, in remembrance of the last supper of liie Lord Jesus
with his disciples. But as Ihey soon fell into disorder in these
things, the apostle Paul interfered, and set proper regulations among
them, and said, " As ofien as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,

tdo shew the Lord's death til! he come.'H
Hence it appears that, tlio it might be done to cnmmenioralc
; Lord's death; yet aftei the second coming of Christ, ii could
longer be necessary ; because the reality must then be made
mifest. But where can we find imy evidence to show, that (lie
Bstles and primitive christians ever pretended to a ceremonious
nsecranon of a little bread and wine, and to make a totmul dis-
buiion of it among the members of the church, and call it llie
incrameat of the Lo^tPs supper? This practice was first introduc-
ed into ibe church by Gentile philosophers, who professed the
christian faith, and whose object was, (as Dr. Mosheim. says,)
" to give ihetr leli^on a mystic air, in order to put it upon an ential
" fooling, in point of dignity, with that of the pagans."J Thij
was undoubtedly the origin of all those ideas of the mysterioui
virtues which have ever been attached to that ceremony.

is however certain, ihat if ihe bread and wine in tliis ccrem^
fey, arc to be considered as symbols of the body and blood ofl
kying Savior, ihey must'be symbols of an absent Savior: for timjX
Bill be no kind of use in repteseniing the Savior by signs amj syiii>
|oU, when he is really present. Wherever Christ has a tnu
Bnirch, there he abides, and there is his body and blood. Tfce
[faurch of Christ b fed with the bread of life, and refreshed wWi
Uie water of life; and this is the body and blood of Christ, afld
these united, become the life of his Inie followers, and of which
they ull partake by their onion to the body. " If we walk in the
" li;;hi, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another;

I^and the blood of Jesus ChmV^tinalLift, l\U Spirit and hfe) deans*
[etit us from all sin."l|


GHAP, VI.] THE lord's SUPPER, 241

Thus the true sacrament of the Lord's supper is found in the
spiritual union of the saints, who have fellowship one with another^
by walking in the true light which is in Christ ; and thus they par-
take of his Spirit and life, according to his own testimony : ^^ I am
■** the bread of life — I am the living bread which came down from
^* Heaven : if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever. —
^ Except ye eat the fiesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood,
<^ ye have no life in you. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
<^ blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh
" my blood, dwelletb in me, and I in him."* This is partaking
of the Lord's supper in very deed 5 and they wlio truly do this,
have the promise of eternal life; and none can ever possess eternal
iife, unless they enjoy this holy communion, and really partake
of this food, in its true spiritual sense.

No person can reasonably suppose that Jesus meant that we
must literally eat his flesh and drink his blood, in order to obtain
eternal life. His language on this occasion, as on many others,
was used figuratively, to imply his life and his Spirit. His mean*
ing was, that those who partake of his life and Spirit, will live as
he lived, and walk as he waUced ; that is, in perfect obedience to
the will of God. " My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,"
said he ; and that which was his meat, became also the meat of
his true followers, who thereby became the members of his body,
and were made partakers with him, of the bread of life which was
manifested in him. This is the food of heavenly minded souls,
and this is the true sacrament, and there is no other. " To him
" that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna." And
again ; " I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until
^' that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's King-
dom."t This remained to be accomplished at the period of his
second coming.

Hence we may see what the true supper of the Lord is; and
what his supper with his disciples was designed to typify : and
when souls really come to partake of this bread, and drink this
wine, they will no longer contend about shadows and signs. ^
Jesus Christ did not say, " Except ye eat that bread and drink
thatmnCy^^ which is called the Lord's simper, "ye have no life in
you." Yet the professors of Christianity, who have been so soli-
citous about the performance of this outward ceremony, instead of
commemorating the dying. love of the Divine Redeemer, by par- ■
taking of his Divine Spirit, and exercising it in love one to another,
have manifested the most bitter animosities towards each other.

The violept contentions among christian professors of former
ages, upon this subject, instead of promoting brotlierly kindu!e$s&^
christian charity and heavenly love, ofleii\e^\oQX\\<^\ft!«^^V^'^^^

* Job a vi. 48 to 56. \ "MaVV. txV\. 1S^ wi^ "^tx .'il. V\ •

W


and ilnuglitrr. IS'o rational christian can suppose lliat Cbrist would
establish tin in^itniinn tulrulaled to priHluco ttrath and strife, and
that too amiiitg rliristians. And yei itie great body ol* christian
professors of I'le pi-esent day, {llflir very little, in titeir views of tlic
subject, from their sniiclirislinn fathers, who contended witli such
violence about the Rhadow, while the real substiinee was wholly
out of their sighL Tims, while lliuse who call themselves chris-
tians, still continue to contend about the xigns of the body und
Wood of a Snvior, who was crucified on Mount Calvary nearly
eighlci'n hundred 3'eiirs ago, they are niluesses ngainst ihemsdvea,
that the body and blood of a present Savior is not with them.

But we would ask thuse who are so icuacioiis of the ceremony
0< the bread and wine, why they have neglected another, whicD
was far more positively enjoined, both by the precept and exampk
nf our Savior? While a pompous display is made of the ceremo-
ny of the bread and wine, the command to wash one another's
feet seems to be wholly disregarded. " Supper being ended, Jesas
" rose from the table, and laid aside his garments, and took a low-
" el and girded liimself. After thai he ponreth water into a bason,
" and began to wash tlie disciples' feet, and to wipe ihem with the
" towel wherewith he was girded. — So after he had washed their
" feel, and iiad taken liis garments, and was set down again, he
■•" said unto them, Know ye what I have done unto you ? Ve call
" me Master and Lord : and ye say well ; for so I am. If I then,
■' your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, yc also ought lo
" wash one another's feet : for I have ginen you on e.femplc, that
" yr should rio as I have done to )/ou."'

What rule of action was ever more positively enjoined upon
clirbtiane ? No exception was made lo its literal requirement ; and
Jesus was evidently the first who introduced it as a Divine com-
mand. Nothing was ever so posilitcly enjoined by lum, in favor
of partaking bread and wine as a sacrament. Jesus said to Peter,
" If 1 wash tliee not, thou hast no part wilhlne." But he never said.
If ye do not partake of this bread and wine, ye have no part with
me; nor was he the lirst who introduced it; but as it bad been
practiced among ihe Jews, at the feast of the paasnver, in commem-
^ oration of their deliverance from Kgypl, he directed his disciples
L to do it for a different purpose : " TliU do in remembrance of me.**
^L But his command to wash one another's feet, was a new and more
^H' particular injunction. Why then is the practice neglected by those
^V who so earnestly contend for the ceremony of the bread and wine?
^V The answer is (ibvioos: The fiirmer'is toohumiliating anexercise.
^H and «ne in which they cannot display so much pomp and panidi
^L as iff eating hread and drinking wilie.
^^^ Tfte reqitirements of our Sa,\\« wfxs jo«.OT\d


CHAP. Vh] THE lord's SUPPER. 243

(lid not come to teach mere lessons of theory ; but to inculcate the
principles and practice of virtue. His washing the feet of hb dis-
ciples^ was ail example of his humility, kindness and love ; and
where is the real christian who could follow this example, without
possessing a measure of the same virtues ?

But we are told by some great and learned expositors, that our
Savior did not mean to enjoin a literal performance of this ceremo-
ny ; and that the disciples knew better than to practice it literally;
tliat is, according to the opinion of these expositors, they knew
better than to obey the positive command, or to follow the example
of their Lord and Master. But they evidently did practice it ;
and it was one of those essential virtuous practices which the
apostle Paul required of widows, to entitle them to admittance into
the joint communion of the church ; " If she have washed the saintt^
feetf'^ not, if she have partaken of the bread and mne ; this was
not essentiiU : for this might be done without giving the least proof
of virtuous sincerity. But if the former is not to be literally prac-
ticed, why should the latter? It is certain that the washing of one
another's feet was literally practiced among the primitive chris*
tians 5 and it was evidently designed, not only as an outward token
of the inward principle of humility, kfndness and charity, but as a
figure of the washing of regeneration, which cleanses the soul from
the pollutions of an earthly nature, in which the feet of all natural
men walk, before they receive the baptism of the Holy Spirit.

*< A new commandment I give unto you,'^ said Jesus, ** That ye
" love one another, as I have loved you. — By this shall all men
" know that ye are my disciples, if j'e have love one to another."*
Here is a plain and positive command given ; and those who faith-
fully obey this command, cannot live in contention and strife; but
will love one another, not in profession and word ; but in practical
deeds of kindness and charity. This is a plain and visible criterion
by which all men may see and know who are the true disciples of
Christ. But a great profession of religious love, with all the cere-
monies of consecrated bread and wine added to it, without a cor-
responding practice, is no evidence of discipleship : for such are
often as full of contention and strife, as those who make no pro-
fession at all.

But the greatest practical evidence of genuine love and disinter-
ested benevolence that can be manifested on earth, is found where
all are of one heart and one soul ; where the rich and the poor can
inect together, and eat and drink at one table, and cheerfully par-
take of one common blessing and interest, and mutually share in
each others comforts and afflictions, both in things spiritual and
temporal. Here souls, by eating and drinking together, in chris^
tian love and harmony, may daily partake ot XVjft Via\^%%N5^^'«^'

• Jpbo xiii. 34, 95.


■*rHE LORD S SUPPER.

BCCDiiiing to lite manner in nljich the primilive clinrrh parttwk of
h. Here they may show forth the Lord's ileaili, in very drecl, by
llieirown example, in gliomngthat He died to a selfisli, partial i
lure ; and that ibey have become partakers of that ricutli, and bi
consequently riien with him, into thai life which the world, with
nil its profeasions of religion, have never nblained.

Herein ihey [ilainly show to all men, tlint tliey are partakers of
that real body and blood which is the true life nf Christ ; uad are
fed and Hourished by the true bread and wine of his spiritual King-
dom. And in ihem is truly fnlfilled ihc prayer of the Loid Je$iu
loins hciivenly Fntlicr: "fkatt/rpit maij be nnc, even


PART VI.

The Faith and Principles of the New Creatioi4

CHAPTER I.

The ttoelve Foundations of the law of Christy exemplified in (ht

twelve christian virtues,

' The great principles of the gospel, revived and brought to light
by Mother Ann, and the succeeding Witnesses, comprise the whole
law of Christ, manifested in this day of his second appearing. The
true nature and character of God can be known only in his Divine
Attributes, which are the seven Spirits of God^ represented to
John by the *^ seven lamps of fire burning before the throne.'*
These seven Spirits are the only true source of all divine light^
knowledge and truth, and the only real foundation of all the works
of God revealed to man ; and these are manifested in Christ the
Lamb of God. By the operation of these seven Spirits, through
Christ, the foundation, increase, order, beauty and glory of the
new creation is formed, brought forth, and manifested to and ia
man. This brings to light the holy city, New-Jerusalem.

" And 1 John saw the holy city, New-Jerusalem, coming down,
" from God out of Heaven, having the glory of God : and her light '
^ was like unto a stone most precious."* Herein is represented
the true work and glory of God, proceeding from ihose divine
lamps, or seven Spirits of God : and by these the glory of God is
brought to light, and his spiritual work made manifest to man.

'^ And he that sat upon the throne, said. Behold, I make alj
*• things new.'^t It is by the operation of his Divine Attributes,
through Christ, that he creates all things new, and establishes the
church of the latter day in all its order and glory. The order of
the church on earth, proceeds immediately from that which is in
Heaven. Indeed the true church of God on earth, is one with
that which is in Heaven ; and all who are, in truth, united to that
which is on earth, are also united to that which is in Heaven. This
is agreeable to the declaration of the apostle to the Hebrews ; " Ye
**' are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God,
" the Heavenly Jerusalem."

And of the holy city it is said, " The glory of God did lighten
It, and the Lamb is the light thereof." The seven Spirits of God
were the only lights seen before his throne, and the only sight,
power and strength of the Lamb. Nothing therefore existed in
this holy city, except what proceeded from these seven Spirits.

^^ And the city lietli four-square; the length and the breath and
the height of it are equal." That is, it is equally \|e.tC^<^ ^scw *&


Wlt'tG THE LAW OF CHRIST E\EMI'LIF1ED [l' \ RT V t.

siilrs. And Ic-rf it b worthy of particular remark, ihiit all its
mt-ux>ii'es, all its works, fniils, Iicaiity, order anil glory linve their
foundaiioii in the number heclve. These represent tlie twelve
Iicuvenly virtues manireslrd in Christ; and ihese are the pillars,
protection nnd gubslance of the new and elernnl creation nf God,
" wherein dwelleih riglueousness," They may be denominated

Fetid arranged in ihe following order: Faith, Hapr, Honeaty, Can-
lincnre, lunormce, Simplicitt/, Meekness, Hatnility, Prurience,
fttiitMce, Thanl^ulw9H,nad Charity.
These twelve virtues, estnbllahed in the soul, and o|-ierBtiRg In
perfect harmony, form the internal and everlaslini; law of Ctvrin.
All other virtues, gifis and graces are the genuine fruits of these
twelve, which are the primary piinciples of virtue proceeding from
the Divine Attributes. And altlio there maybe dilTerent names
' ich imply nearly the some principles; yet names, in thems^lvei
Considered, are but mere sounds ; ii is the real spirit and substtoico
if these virtues which cunsiilute the principle. These all priK.eed
iireclly from the Attributes of God \ yet each particular virtue
Rbas a certain relative connecliun with its correspondent attributes,
wfroin which it more immediately proceeds.

I. Faith, "Whhoul fiiitli it is impossible to please God."
f Sirine fajih is that pure influence proceeding from the Plernal
^urce of all good, which plants the seed of Gud in the soul. And
(he obedience of faith pr()duces all the virines of the gospel, " n-hieli
I js the power of God unto salvation." True faith proceeds froni
ihe/imfer and Hght of God, and stands in connection with all his
attributes : ''For God who hath commanded the tight to shine out
of darkness, hath shined into our hearts."" True faith views every
Divine manifestation to the soul in its true light; and believes
eveiy promise of God, and every display of his power and goott
ness to mankind, to be ^vhat Ibey really are.

But those who profess faith in the gospel, and who profess to b£<i
he followers of Christ; and yet do noi believe in alt the promises''
►f God, nor in all his declarations through his true witnesses; who
)b not believe that every work will be brought into judgment, with.
(Very secret tiling, and that every one will be rewarded necordijtg.
Plo his works { who do not believe that Christ is come to open a
■nay by winch souls can be saved from all sin, and that this snlv^j
'on is really atlainalile in Ibis life; who do not believe that the-
Dspel is free for all souls without distinction, and ■A'ill elTectimliy'
ivB nil who believe and obey it; in short, those who do not b^
^ve all these things, are certuinly lacking in the true fniili of du)'
Bepel nf Christ, Tel iheir professions be what they may. Or it
jy really possess fallh, and yet indulge themselves in any thing
tlch is contrary to their tiiitli-, ot Vwo^'wi^-j wc^to. awv duly


CHAP. I.] IN THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES, 247

which the gospel requires of them, they are disobedient fo faith ;
they are not the faithful followers of Christ ; they do not keep the
law of Christ, and therefore are not true christians. /

XL Hope. Tho souls may receive the true faith of the gospel ;
yet without hope, no one would be able to set out in the cross-bear-
ing work which faith unfolds : " For we are saved by hope."*
Divine hope is a display of the power and wisdom of God in the
soul. Hope " hath respect to the recompense of reward."t It
inspires the soul with confidence in the promises of God, that his
reward is sure. " And every man that hath this hope in him puri-
" fieth himself, even as he is pure."f Hope is styled in scripture,
" an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast. — Happy is he
'* whose hope is in the Lord.'^

All doubting in the work of God, is contrary to this hope ; and
therefore contrary to genuine Christianity. Those who make a
profession of Christianity, and, at the same time, distrust the Uve
and goodness of God, or doubt his mercy or his justice, and have
not full confidence that the power of God, contained in the gospel,
is sufficient to enable them to obey all its requirements, and save
them from all sin, and in the end reward them with a crown of
everlasting life, without any hinderance of the decrees or foreknow-
ledge of God, or any thing inconsistent with their own free-agency,
are without true gospel hope, and therefore are not true christians.
If they are ashamed of the testimony of the gospel, or of the works
of godliness, in any respect, or do any thing whatever, of which
they are ashamed, they act contrary to the divine virtue, of hope :
for " hope maketh not ashamed."

UI. Honesty. Neither faith nor hope can bring forth good
fruit, unless they are received "in an honest and good heart."
Agreeable to the testimony of Jesus Christ, those who receive the
word of God, which is die seed of faith, " in an honest and good
heart, bring forth fruit." So important then is the virtue of hon-
esty or sincerity, (which is essentially the same,) that no one can
be benefitted by the gospel, or by any gift of God without it. The
virtue of honesty is the operation of the righteousness of God, in
man, and plants the principle of uprightness in the soul. " The
tabernacle of the upright shall flourish."

The professor of Christianity who is not honest and sincere, in
all his conduct and conversation, who uses any dissimulation, or
seeks to cover any of his conduct, in word or deed, under the cloke
of deception, who designedly deviates from the truth, in any re-
spect, and does not honestly do good and shun evil, and conduct
himself, in all things, according to his best light and understanding,
transgresses the divine principle of honesty, and sins against God ;
and £erefore cannot bring forth the fruits of the gQs^l« '^W ^^

♦ Bom. viil S4. \ See Heb. x\. 36» X\^^\>sxxsv«'^-


r OF CHRIST EXEMI'LIFIEl) [PART VI,

lo abiding place in such n sr>ul : Tor God is a God
hypocrisy can find accieplanct In his pieseixe.
Iiupi^ urilte liy|K>rrite shnll perish.''

IV. CoN-riNEjNCB, This t« iheTruit of thai swcl sown by faJtli,
id nourished by hope, in ibn good and liunest h^arl. 1i b tlie
'inciple of self-dpniaJ and abstinence from sll evil ; the source *rf
.'lusiun ot sep«niiion from ihe principles ivnd practices of (he

Porl.l ; and the spring from whenci> proceeds tlie virgin life. It a
thastc and pure principle, and flows ftoni ihe hoiinpsa of God.
Blnscd are the pure in heart: for ihey shall see God."
He H'ho, under a profes»on of chrisiianiiy, indulges a loscivioui
ipensiiy, in actions, words or feelings ; he who does not take up
cross against all tmpurily, according lo the requirements of tlie
ipel ; but who indulges himself in any thina whatever, that hu
lency to lead tht; niind from the pure »-<irk of God, and to
I it to the impure things of this world, viuhitcs the virtue df
-, defilffi his soul and dishonors his chrisiian profession}
ld therefore he is not a true self-denying christian.

V. Innocence. This is the handnMid of Continence, and, like
1, proceeds from holiness. The operation of continence de-
;vs all fleshly lust, ;ind implants in the soul the virtue of inno-
re. Thus the soul is fitted for the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the arcepialile wi>rship of God. " I will wash my hands in

linnocency; so will I compass ihine altar, O Lord!" said the
Jhatinisi,* And, '' Rxcept ye be converted and become as litlle
6 childreijj ye i>hall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;"' said
J«8Uf,f Little children are innocent ; their souls ate not defiled
vritb any kniiiVRsin; ihey know nothing of the nature of pTide^
lusl or any evil ; they feel dependent on their parents for proleo
'^n and support.

[ Hence it must appear plain and obvious, that professors of Ibe
Vistian religion, who do not beconip ns liide children, by living
ires of innocence, and feel their daily dependence on the gin m
lod, for spiritual nourishment, strength and support, and for caa>
pnual direction in ihe line of their duty, can have no just title to
e Kingdom of Heaven, and need not expect lo enter therdih
Jhose wHio indulge, in themselves, any feelings of lusl, pride, envy,
kvelousness, malice, haired or revenge, are nut innocent before
lod J ihey csn bring no acceptable sacjifice to his altar ; they aie
It the humble followers of the innocent, ineeli and lowly Savior:
erefore they are not true christians ; and their profession will
by increase their condemnation in the day of trial.
fVI. Simplicity. True gospel simplicity implios a godly sin-
tity, and a real singleness of heart, in all our conversation and
Induct. Thia v'utue is the operation of holiness snd £(


CHAP. I.] IN THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUEST. 249

and produces in the soul a perfect oneness of character, in all
things ; its thoughts, words and works are plain and simple, and
wholly directed to the honor and glory of Gk)d. It is harmless
and undefiled, and wholly unmixed with any evil. It is without
ostentation, parade or any vain show, and naturally leads to plain-
ness in all things. In all the objects of its pursuit, in all the exer-
cise of its powers, in all its communications of good to others, it is
governed solely bj" the will of God, and shows forth its peculiar
singleness of heart and mind in " all things. " If thine eye be sin-
gle, thy whole body shall be full of light."

Hence it will readily appear, that a professor of Christianity
must be greatly deficient in true gospel simplicity, however great
iiis profession, whose heart is not single towards God, whose
faith is corrupted with a mixture of pride and vain glory, whose
conversation is mixed with duplicity, and his conduct with crafti-
ness, whose mind is filled with jarring passions, and continually
exercised with vain imaginations. Such professors do not live
simply according to the faith of the pure gospel of Christ; they do
not seek to do the will of God, and live to his honor and glory in
all things ; they do not honor their profession ; they do not follow
Christ, nor bear his cross ; they do not walk in christian simplici-
ty. How then can they, with any propriety, be called christians ?

VII. Meekness. This is that mild, gentle and unassuming
virtue which is the very opposite of pride and haughtiness. Pride
separates the soul from obedience to God ; but meekness readily
leads to obedience. Meekness fits the soul for that gospel soil in
which it may bring forth fruit unto godliness. " Blessed are the
meek: for thev shall inherit the earth." This alludes to the
" new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness," and which is com-
posed of that spiritual soil in which souls can " take root down-
ward, and bear fruit upward." True meekness is the fear of God,
the beginning of wisdom and gospel understanding. It implants
in the soul a lively sense of the greatness of God's power, and the
dependence of the soul upon him for every good gift.

Many make great professions of religion who are, at the same
time, utterly destitute of the virtue of meekness : hence their reli-
gion is but a name without the substance. He who is not mild,
" gentle, and easy to be entreated," is lacking in meekness. He
who pursues projects of ambition, or seeks after worldly greatness,
in any manner, transgresses against the virtue of meekness. He
can therefore have no just claim to Christianity ; he cannot inherit
the new earth, nor bring forth fruit unto God.'

VIII. Humility. This virtue goes hand in hand with Meeh-
ness,* and, like that, flows essentially from Wisdom. Humility

* The essential diflTerence between mnekaess anH humUUv,*e«ttt%\B\it\>»\'^\v^\">^>asK5v\vj
t)ring8 dwwo the bnu^htiness of man: meekness b'mda \\vv% Wv\'»\\>l\^^w. vtA \x\tN^x!\^">x^'«®»>


T or f HIUaT EXEMfLlflEW

■ ihni principle! of virluc, i.-xercisetl ia modt.'sty, which produces u
Vuc, suber, caulious, discreet and amiable deportment, in conduct
nd conversation, ihrougli all the members of the body of Chrisl,
nd in each one and all, according to their respective lots and
pillings, and accordiug to the measure of their acquirements, gifts
Md graces in the liouse of God. This virtue is indispeasably.no
Etssary to promote and maintain the union and harjnony of the
ftiurch of God, which is the body of Christ, and greatly proiuotes
r union of tlie spirit in all the members. It b one of the bright-
;s of the inner man, and the cliurch cannot be suppoil.
i wiihnut it.

le of bumiliiy leads to a modest conversation and de-
triment towards Gud and man. It teaches us To speak with rev-
Tcnce and godly fear concerning God and all his works ; it lead)
B to a humble und willing submission lo the wili of God, in all
pin^s, and under all circumsianeea. Humility is regardlex^of
orldly lionor, it seeks uo preferment, and looks witli indiflerence
D all those allurements wliicli feed llie pride and vanity, and op-
pvatc the feelings of a vain world. This is that lowly Tirlue to
Vhich Jesus Chrisi had a piirtieular reference when he said, '• Bil-
led are the poor in spirit : for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven."^
??herefore, '' Be clothed with humility: for God resistelh the proud,
lf«Bd givelli ^aace to the humble."'t From tliis virtue proceeds re-
) pentancc and godly sorrow for sin : to this Jesus Chrisi allude<l in
■*-— ying, "Bkswd an? they thai mourn: for they *hali be comfort-

t How great is the contrast between i!ie esalted feelings of pride,
pd tlie modest sensations of humility! How excessively foolish
r fallen man to pursue schemes of self-exallaiion,
bd voin glory, which must and will finally end in debasement and
legradation of soul ! Let all who profess the christian name, tfr
feember the lesfimony of Jesus Chnsl; " Wliosoever esaltctli hlnh
F self, shall be abased ; and he that humbleth himself, shall be ex-
¥ alled.^J

^IX. Prudence. The virlueof prudence isofinestitnable value.
; christian prudence is that virtue which leads to a dLsereel,
uous and wise improvement of eiery natural and mond fatul^,
d of all the powers, gifts and graces given of God toman. T«bu
perancc is one of ihe distinguishing (graces of prudence: forallgiOi
I and graces are bestuwed in vain, unless a discreel and tempernie
Ifaaprcivement he made of them, " Thr ivisdom of the prudent is
d his way ;" and " the prudent man looketh well to
Is going. "II Prudence proceeds from Wisdom, and the ln>usc of
irudence is the habilaUon of wjsdoin. " I WUdom dwell with


<;HAP. I.] IN THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 25 1

He who is blessed with the virtue of prudence, is not hasty in
his words, nor rash in any of his conduct ; but is watchful over all
his words and actions ; he is careful and discreet in all things. He
is industrious and faithful in his duty, both in things spiritual and
temporal ; but does not go beyond his strength, in soul nor body.
He does not carelessly scatter and lose the .gifts and graces of God ;
he does not waste nor misimprove anyJblessing, spiritual nor tem-
poral ; but makes a wise and temperate use and improvement of
all things committed to his charge, according to the best of his un-
derstanding and abilities. He who transgresses against the virtue
of prudence, is deficient of the spirit of Wisdom from whence it
proceeds. This virtue can be maintained by watchfulness only.
^^ What I say unto you, I say unto all. Watch."*

X. Patienck. This is a very powerful virtue, and flows es-
sentially from Power and Love. It is of essential importance to
every christian, especially when under trials and afflictions. For-
bearance and long suffering^ are its distinguishing graces. It fills
the soul with constancy, ana enables it to bear up under the sever-
est trials, and to persevere through the greatest diiRculties. It is
always subject to the will of God, and always ready and willing to
wait God^s appointed time. It never faints under any trials ; and
therefore reaps the reward of its constancy and perseverance in
due season. Without patience, there is no perseverance ; there-
fore, " let patience have her perfect work."

He who fully possesses the virtue of patience, is never unrecon-
ciled to any duty, however severe and trying. He never murmurs
nor repines at his lot ; nor does he complain that his way is hard,
and that of others easy. He is never fretful and peevish ; but
always exercises such a degree of love to the work of God, that he
can constantly persevere in the performance of every known duty,
whatever difficulties may attend it. He is willing to endure all
things ybr Ckrisfs sake and the gospeVsj and to bear any cross
rather than lose his justification before God.

But he who indulges feelings of discouragement, suffers loss,
•and is always in danger of falling away, because he is lacking in
patience. He who faints under trials, is destitute of patience, and
must fall, unless supported by others. He who gives way to feel-
ings of impatience, dishonors himself and his holy calling. '^ Ye
" have need of patience," saith the apostle, " that after ye have
** done the will of God, ye might receive the promise."t

XI. Thankfulness. This virtue proceeds from the free ope-
ration of the love and goodness of God in the soul. A soul in the
possession of the genuine love of God, feels a sense of his unbound-
ed goodness ; and is thereby feelingly excited to a holy fcrvw o^C
heavenly joy and gratitude. He is iVvus etv^V^!(^^ \q\J^«5.^Q^q.Ws^

* -VarJt xiil 37. \ Ht\> . X. «i.


ESEMl-LlFlEl


hb goodness, la praise him for liis love, and clieerrully serve luoi
«iih ull tlie racultien ol' soul and body. 'I'his is the virtue of (bank*
' ■fulness, nnd it is the moat acteplable worship orGod. Cheerful-
less and good-will ure tlie attendant gnu:es of this heavenly virtue.
True gospel thankfulness is not the transient excitement o/a
luomPrJt, produced hy an occasional manifestation of love and
goodness, and wliich has do abiding residence in the soul. Such
lemporary excileraenis are often experienced by many waim and
zealous proleMors of religion ; and tlio they may proceed from the
occasional efTiisions of ihe Divine Spirit ; yet they are soon scattei-
ed nnd destroyed by ihe inveterate corruptions of the human hiart
which, like !i cage of unclean birds, will soon waste and consonK
all the good seed (hat comes within their reach, and leave the pnor
soul as destitute as ever.

But when the seed of Divine love and goodness is sown int

k1 and honest heart, which has been cK-ansed from all uortghi-

isness, and made a fit temple for the Holy tiliost lo dwell in,

n it becomes an abiding treasure ; and this produces true thaob-

fulness. By the operation of this virtue, the soul is consiandy

prevented from the indulgence of any ungrateful and miihankful

feelings; and is at all times ready to render thanks lo God, for

t every appearance of his love and goodness, and for ttll the kind

^favors urfiis Providence, boili spiritual and lemporal.

T- He who is unihankfid, is unholy; and " wilhuut holiness, no

r>|nan shall see the Lord." He who indulges any feelings rftat (he

way of God is hard, or that the cnjss of Christ is unreasonable, or

Ihal any duty which ihe gospel requires is unnecessarj', is devoid

«f thankfulness. He who, after having been called by the gospel,

' hankers after tlie comal gratifications of nature, and regrets lliai

ftot longer enjoy the aUuring; pleasures of this world, isinaen-

■pible of the mercy and goodness of God, in calling him from these

' 1 and transitory enjoyments, to the way of life and salvaUoo

a all sin : be is uatnankful and ungrateful, and is in danger of

Efalling away and losing the way of God.

r XII. Chahitv. This is the last and the greatest of all tW
E christian virtues. It is the genuine opera lion o(gondnest and htt
_ n llie soul, and is exercised in righteousness. It is " full of mercy
'and good fruits." It is that benevolent principle which kindly
administers whatever is truly needful for the benefit, support agd
happiness of soul and body, each in its proper order. It adminis-
ters, indeed the treasures brought forth by all the other vlriuesj
and thus is produced the perfection of happiness in the holy City,
The apostle Paul considered charity as the greatest of all the vir-
'^ues : and why ? Because, without charity, there can be no abiding
'vlcalaisttailon of the gifts ot Ood-, ai\ii vlietefore all others ntuai
'I, unless they are supporWi by "rt-


CHAP. I.] IN THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 253

Let a man possess never so much of that religious fervor which
he calls the love of God, it will avail him nothing without charity.
True charity \Yill influence him to love the children of God, and
to administer freely to their necessities ; to love all the creatures of
God, and be ready to promote the comfort and happiness of all,
both of soul and body, according to his capacity and their necessi-
ties. He who is destitute of this kind of charity, is equally desti-
tute of the love of God. He who bears any grudge or hardness
against any person, or is unjust or cruel in any case, even towards
his domestic animals, acts in direct o})position to the divine prin-
ciple of charity ; and whatever his profession may be, he can have
no just claim to the love of God ; he does not possess it.

Finally : All false judging, jealousies, evil surmisings, evil speak-
ing, railing, backbiting, slander, and the like, are violations of the
virtue of charity ; and So far as the christian professor is faulty in
any of these respects, he is deficient in christian charity, however
exalted his profession ; and hence, in proportion as he is deficient
in this virtue, all other gifts and graces will profit bim nothing.

Thus far have we attempted to show the nature of the twelve
virtues, which constitute the eternal law of Christ, in the new
creation of God. The substance of these virtues is everlasting,
and can never be changed. They are the operating springs of all
the works of God, in the true order of Heaven and earth. They
are the foundation of the number twelve, so often used by the in-
spired wrilers, in describing the. order of the work of God, both
typical and spiritual. The twelve tribes of Israel, according to
the order of the flesh, were but shadows of this spiritual order of
the work of God. The twelve apostles of Jesus Christ also repre-
sented these twelve virtues, which constitute the substance of that
gospel which they were commissioned to preach.

But the most striking representation of these virtues may be
seen ia John's vision of the Holy City.* " And he carried me
^' away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me
*^ that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
" from God." The following remarks will illustrate this subject.

X, This Holy City had twelve gates ; and tho, according to the
testimony of Jesus Christ, " Strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it;" and
again ; ^^1 am the way, and the truth, and the life ;" and also ^* I
am the door ;" yet the holy city had twelve gates ; and these gates
were the entrances into the city. The true meaning is, the twelve
gates which John saw in his vision, were the figurative represen-
tations of the twelve heavenly virtues, manifested in Christ, who
is the only way; and it is through the power and lw^>^w^'^ ^^^V-^

♦ See Rev chap xx\.

X


I'AW OP CHRIST EXEMPLIFl

llieu! vinui?!i, that the soul must find an entrance into the Holy
C!iv. Tlial is; lie must come into the possession of all tliese
vinues, in a grealtr or less degree, according to tlie measure of his
capacity, bdore he can become a fit inhabitant of the Holy City,
and acliially possess it. For it is declared by tlie tesiimonv of
eternal truth, tliai, " There shall in no wise enter into it any thing
that defilelh, or workelh abominalion, or niakelh a lie.'' The
operation of these virtues will efTectually exclude every evil from
all souls thai jiossess them, and walk in them.

2. "And the twelve gales were twelve pearls; every several
" gate wns o( one pearl : and the street of the city was pure gold,
" us it were transparent glass," Thus these gales wei^ of the
one gospel pearl, which is the "pearl of great price." For they
are the one only way of entrance into the Iluly City, or Kingdom
of Heaven. The pure gold, like transparent glass, whicli formed
the street of the cily, shows not only the perfect purity of the wy,
but also its perfect clearness. No impurity nor im perfect! on, no
shadeof darkness, doubt or uncertainty, can possibly exist ia ihu
pure way; but all b clear and perfect, and will truly be found se,
by every faithful soul who shati continue to walk therein. This pure
and clear street, therefore, is the one only way of God, in which
all souls must walk, in order to possess the Holy Cily, and dwdl
in it; for it is situated in the midst of those twelve virtues, sur-
rounded and measured on all sides by them.

3. "And the gatesofit shall i.ot be shut alallhyday; for there
'' shall be no night there : for the glory of Uod i^d Ughten it, and
" the Lamb is the light thereof." All darkness and doubts are
done away by the light and glory of God, revealed in and througli
the Lamb, and made manifest in these christian virtues ; and t^e
way of entrance is free for all souls. And these same virtues,
through which is found the only entrance into the holy city, aje
also its defence and protection : for while souts walk in these vir-

I tues, llicy are safe from all evil ; no evil can possibly enter through
' them. Hence it is said, " There shall in no wise enter into it any
?^" thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abominHiion, or
'" maketh a lie."

4. " Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may
' '•-ve right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates

o the city."* Some suppose this to imply that there are many
Ways of entrance into the Holy City, or Kingdom of Heaven.
But let no one deceive himself with this supposition. Christ is
the only way, and this one way contains all these gales : for whcv
^ soever is obedient to ihe operation of all the precetling virtues, will
keep all the commands of God; and tlius he finds an entraitce

•RtT.UJi. I«.


CHAP. I.] IS THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 255

through ail these gates. Such therefore, and such only, have a
right to the tree of life, and to an inheritance in the Holy City.

5. ^^ And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in
^^ them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. — ^And the
^^ foundations of the wall of the city were garnished mth all man-
" ner of precious stones." The twelve apostles were the first
whom Christ sent to preach the gospel of the Kingdom^ which is
founded on these twelve virtues. And the precious stones with
which they were garnished, are all the gifts and graces of the Spirit,
given through Christ, which proceed from these twelve virtues,
which are the foundations on which the wall of the city b built.

6. It is worthy of remark that, tho the wall had twelve founda-
tions, which were each of different kinds of precious stones ; yet
the building of the wall was Jasper^ and also that ^^ her light was
like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as
chrystal." Jasper is here represented as the most precious of ail
stones ; and therefore the most proper representation of Him who
is the Eternal Foundation of all goodness and virtue ; and it also
clearly shows the work to be all of God. ^^ He that sat upon the
throne was to look upon like Jasper." Again ; the first founda-
tion of the wall was jasper. This evidently represents/m7A, which
is the seed of God, the first virtue, and the medium through which
all the others proceed from God to man.

7. And the wall was ^^ great and high." This was measured
by the same number, twelve times twelve, equal to one hundred
and forty-four. ^^ And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred
'^ and forty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man,
'^ that is, of the angel." Thus the foundations, height and mea-
surements of the wall, were according to the same number with the
gates. This shows that the Holy City, as respects both its de-
fence and entrances, is protected by the same twelve virtues. But
why is it called the measure of a man and of the angel? This
shows that, tho it is all of the angelic or heavenly order ; yet it
must be manifested in man ; that is, man must be measured by the
same rule, and be found in the same heavenly and angelic virtues,-
in order to become a fit inhabitant of this Holy City, and be pro-
tected in it.

8. As the natural man cannot conceive of a building, without
associating with it the idea of materiate substances, as the constitu-
ent parts thereof, he will perhaps infer from thence, that the Holy
City cannot be composed of these virtues ; because they are not
materiate substances. But we would ask. Of what can the spirit-
ual building of God be formed, if not of spiritual virtues? As the
material world is composed of materiate substances ; so the spirit-
ual world must necessarily be composed of s^vd^^ak. ^cJw^w^s.^'^'-
for there is a real substance in sig>\t\\\xA^v\\^^^»^^'^^'^^'^^'^'^^


<)P CUBIST E\EMI>L1F1ED


[■•-


pa, ami a subslonre too, which is infinitely tnore substantitl
fi durable. Thus sailfa iheaposlli^; "Ye took ioyfiiily the spoil-
tt gouds, knowing ihnt ye liave in Heaven a better and
e enduring tubalance.-' And again : " Faith is tb£ nth-
« of thingt hc^ed for.'^ It must iherefore he adiuilted,
; Bpiritusl crfatton is substantial and eternally durable, tn
•r of e.tielencc. And certainly these virtues are spiritual
1 elernal, and therefore more substantial and durable in (hdr
ritual and eteniul order, than any materiate substance whatever.
d tho the natural man is unable to discern spiritual subsfanus;
1 the Holy City is represented and revealed to him, by
; twelve virtues, he may, as by a figure, form some idea ef
it ihe substance consists.

. All things in the natural world, and all the works nod deal-
f God with man, on eartii, are but shadons and figurative
matrons of spiritual things, and of the works and dealings
nilli his people, in the new creation. As the sonsof Jacd^,
mposed the house of their father, and were the primary
iiions of the cliosen tribes of Israel, were twelve in number;
* tlie apDsdes who were the piUhrs, or primary foundations
e church of Christ on earth, in the days of his first appearing,
e also twelve in number ; so these numbers represent the pri-
vy foundations of the spiritual work of God in man, as manifes-
|t in this day ol" Christ's second appearing. The measure of the
'y City is according to the same number, being twelve ihousanty
mgs every way.

10. Thus we see tliat the Holy City, Nae-Jentsaltm, in ita
loundations, entrances, adornings, productions and measurements,
is eslablislieii, furnished and regulated by the same number. The

BKvants of God were also sealed according to the same number;
e thousand of each tribe of Israel, being the Israel of God.
e also, who were seen standing with the Lamb on Mouot
were of the same number, twelve times twelve thousand, or
J hundred and foriy-lbur thousand. Mount Zion is the same
By city herein described. This clearly shows that the servants
fcCod, in the work of the new creation, that is, those "who fol-
V llie Lamb whithersoever he goeth," are all prepared and
Bpught fortli, numbered and sealed by these twelve virtues ; and
■ la, that '* they are without fault before the throne of God.**
e hut such can enter and dwell in " Mount Zion, the City
Klhe living God."

1 1. *' And he showed me a pure river of water of lile, clear as
hrysial, proceeiiing out of the throne of God and of the Lamb."
' I is tbe source of eternal life, and is brouglit to light by the

n S/firifv ot God. '' In the midst of Ihe street of it, a ntf
mberside ol' tha river, wns \he tree oj' lije, \\W\\ Vwt'


CHAP. I.] IN THE TWELVE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 257

manner of fniitSy and yielded her fruit every month.'* These are
the fruits of the twelve virtues, which are produced in twelve regu-
lar orders, one after another."* " And the leaves of the tree were
for the healing of the nations." These leaves are the gifts and
graces of the twelve virtues ; and are to be administered by those
who possess them, and which must heal the lost children of men,
end give them eternal life, if they ever obtain it. The tree ofiife,
which stands in the midst of the street, is Christ, who stands in the
midst of the way of life, yielding the fruits of these twelve virtues
for all who walk therein. The tree is represented in the vision,
as standing on either side^ that is, on each side of the river. This
was designed to represent the manifestation of Christ, both in the
male and the female, between whom the waters of life flow in the
church, producing the fruits^of Christ in the members.

12. John's vision of the ^^ Woman clothed with the Sun, and
having upon her head a crown of twelve stars," represents, in a
striking manner, the same twelve virtues. These are placed as a
crown of glory upon the head of the divine Spirit of Wisdom^
who is. the Mother or bearing Spirit of all the works of God to
man ; and from whom they flow, as heavenly lights to the righ*
teous, in the new creation of God.

Many among the world of mankind have been engaged, for
thousands of years, in searching after religion of some kind or
other; but with all their searches and researches, aided by all the
human wisdom they could obtain, they have never been able to
find the real substance of true religion. The reason is, true religion
cannot be known without the revelation of God, and instead of
looking to God for direction, and seeking to do his will, with pure
hearts and clean hands, they have pursued tKeir own imaginations,
and sought religion in thev own devices, and blended it with the
indulgence of their own corrupt propensities. Hence they have
generally placed religion in speculative tenets, and ceremonisd
forms : so that among the great bulk of mankind, in every age,
human creeds and human ceremonies have ever constituted the
Bummum bonunty or essential virtues of their religion.

But it is through the revelation of God only, Uiat true religion is
made known to man. And it is through this revelaUon alone,'
that the twelve christian virtues, and their attendant graces, have

* The nomber tmelte represfnts the different orders and states of <ouU in the spiritual
iirork of 6t>d ; and these different orders and states bare their foundation in the twelve pri*
marv virtues which constitute the foundations of the holy city. The order, state and class
of all sools are deteimined and fixed bjr their relative connection to these resp« itive vir-


same spirit '* This may be clearly seen amonff all the human race ; all have their peculiu
girts and talents, •• one after Uiis manii«$r. and another after that;" tha >!bL'b ^N:^ %V vsnwi
are often abused, misimproved or perverted lo a. ^ton^ VAft. ' H«%^ vc^ ^'^ Xafidvaiu^''^^
Bare rectxred, aatl for Ui« mprsTeiBtol of w\aQ\i \]da^ %i(« uMV^tiMibVt ^ ^«^»


■pra brought to light, tuitt made manire»t in the true children of
HM- These virtue*, proceeding from ihe seven Attributes, m
HpiritsofQod, form the everlasting: and unchangeable law of Christ;
^pd tliis is the only true religion which ever will, or ever can save
^ny soul, nnd fit it for the everlasting hahitatioti and enjoymenl of
^Bod. Wherever the true gospel is prcaciied, it shows fonh the
^ny esscnee of these virtues; and tliey are all thereby opened ti»
^■teive souls. Thus they represent the very gates of the NewSe-
HjMlem, into all of which the soul must finally enter, and powess
^Btir substance, according to his measure, or he can never dwril
^Bihis holy habitation.

^P By walking in tliis law of eternal life, souls find a progteative
^■crease in the very nature and substance of these virtues ; and be-
Bpme as lively stones, fitted and bujll up into a spiritual bouse, a
mfcly temjile and habitation of God. And nune can enter thbboly
■Mnple, but by and through this eternal and unchangeable law,
Hbe law o( the Holy City, New-Jerusalem, which is revealed in and
Bfaoueh Chri&t. The operation of these virtues eHecloally shuts
B|lt every unholy thing, and forms the law of Christ, for the gov^
H^tnent of his church, which is the house of God, and " the bab-
M^tior. of his throne;" as it is wrhten: "This is the law of the
l^faouse; Upon the tup of the mountain, the whole limit ibereof
BhtHiod about shall be most holy. Behold this b the law o/ the
M^ouse.""

B This is the pattern of llic eternal law, the only iniJe for chr^-
Bfcna to walk by. Therefore, lei all judge by this, who among
B^iessors, really possess the character of true christiuis> Let all
H^fessora of religion examine themselves, and seriously consider
ifc)w near they come to this panern, shown by the Lamb, in the
^Dly mount of God; for none ran enter and dwell in the Holy

Cily, the spiritual house of the sew creation, unless tliuy walk by

ihb rule, and keep this law.


CHAPTER II.

\e seeenmorat Principles of (he Church of CAritl, as reduced
to practice in the United Socieli/.
t The illuslration of ihe twelve christian virtues, contained in
~K preci'ding chapter, brings to view aeveii moral principJts, whkli
'~~ii the practical and external law of Ule for the direction and
nmcnl ofChrist's followiTS in bis everlasting Kingdom, which
V begun on eariV- These seven prinri|iles were esUbli»hed
it the piecppts and confirmed by the example of Jesus Cbrij
B//f on earib, and may be stated in the following order :


CRAP. II.] OF THfi CHURCH OF CHRIST. 259

1. Duty to God; 2. Duty to man; 3. Separation from the
world; A. Practical peace; 5. Simplicity of language; 6, Eight
use of property ; and 7» ^ virgin life.

I. DUTY TO GOD.

This principle flows from the attributes of hve and righteous^
ness in God, and is inspired by faith and hope. It is displayed in
our thankfulness to God for all his goodness, and in our perfect
obedience to his Divine will. It directs all those feelings of prayer,
praise and adoration, which are due to God, as the Great Author
of all good, and the only source of all our happiness here and here-
after. ^^ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy hearty
^^ and with all thy soul, and with alt thy mind, and with all thy
^^ strength : This is the first and great commandment."* This
duty is paramount to all others, and is the foundation of every
moral principle. AH our moral and religious duties ; all our de-
votions of heart and soul; all our exercises of mind and body, in
the service of God, comprehending all our strength j must be foun-
ded on our love to God; otherwise we fail in our duty to him.
*^ For this is the love of God, that we keep hb commandments.—-
** If a man love me,^ said Jesus, "he will keep my words."t

Genuine love to God, naturally produces obedience to his com-
mands ; and whoever, in honesty and meekness, performs any of
those duties which are comprehended in our duty to God, proves
thereby his' love to God. But a thousand professions of love to
Gt)d, will avail nothing, without obedience to his commands. That
servant who makes great professions of love to his master; yet
instead of obeying his commands, or doing his service, spends his
time in pursuing his own gain, and seeking his own pleasure, can
neither be considered as a faithful servant, nor an honest man.
What then shall we think of that professed servant of God, who
talks largely of his love to God, and yet, instead of obeying his
commands, or doing his duty to God, is continually pursuing his
own schemes, seeking his own pleasures, and indulging his own
carnal propensities? Surely he can neither be considered as a faith-
ful servant of God, nor a good christian.

It ought also to be remarked and seriously considered, by every
professor of religion, that whoever is influenced to attempt the
performance of his duty to God, from any cause which is contrary
to the love of God; or is influenced by any motives which do not
proceed from honesty and meekness, will find his attempts to
prove barren and unfruitful; -and let all such beware that they ar«
not guilty of sacrilegious mockery^ instead of perforniing their duty
to God.

« Makt saii. 97, SI. U l&fk xii SO, \ JobAlxt .^. V.X^^'taDL^ .%


THB SEVEIT MORAL PRIKCtPLE^
n. DUTY TO MAN.
1 shall love thy neighbor as thyself."* This dutv i;
ind only In ihe preceding one, and, like that, flows from iht
Tibutes of hve and righleoumess. "All things whatsoevei
r ye would ihat men should do to you, do ye even so Ig them.'t |
I This n)le, laid down by Jesus Christ, is so pl^n and comprehenstve,
I'llisi it not only shows our duly to man, in the clearest light} but
I ll includes every obligation of man to his fellow creatures, undei
my circumstance. Let every person endowed with rational un-
ETstnnding, conform strictly to thi» rule, and exercise it in wisdont
Bd prudence, and with respect to his duly to man, his justificaiioD
■ feure, and his reward certain.

' Every violation of thi* rule shows a deficiency of the vJriuetof
Jonesiy, humility and charity, and is a transgression of the law of |
Christ. As mankind are rational and social beings, the field for
\ ^e exercise of this duty, is very eitenslve, as well as very impat-
There are but few situations in life, in which a man cannot
„e more or less useful lo his fellow creatures, in some way or other,
P' Vhicli comes within this golden rule, as it is called ; yet how few
\ there are, in the present day, who call themselves christians, that
(ally live up to this rule!

m. SEPARATION FROM THE WOULD.

I This principle Sows from God's attributes of light and fiolineas.
is sown by faith, and nourished by hope and continence. It is
f important principle in the new creation, mthout which the
^dren of God would soon be t>lended with the children of tlus
, and lose their relation to the Kingdom of Christ. " My
■•Kingdom is not of this world," said Jesus,^ And tho the King-
n of Christ is now established on earth, in his chosen people;
. it b a spiritual Kingdom ; and therefore cannot be blended
nth the kingdoms of this world. Nor can his real subjects itJIsfi
n the affairs of these kingdoms, without blending ihemselvH^
1 some manner, with the world, and thereby hazarding th^r in-
it in the Kingdom of Christ. " Know ye not," saith the apot-
"that the friendship of the world is enmity with God ? Who
f soever therefore, will be a friend of the world, is the enemy ot

RGod."||

\ Hence every faithful meml)er of Christ's Kingdom, feels the ab-
lolule necessity of abstaining from all those things which are can*
^.peeled with the honor and gloty of this fallen world ; from civil
E^d, political offices and emoluments ; from party contentions and
I -political strifes; from the vain pursuits ol ambition and papular
f ap/ilause; and from all those transitory enjoyments whick

t VitW. lii. 13. \ Is'ftim'


CHAP. II.] OP THE CHURCH OP CHRIST. 261

the pride and vanity, and constitute the very life of the natural
man.

These things belong not to the Kingdom of Christ; nor has
Christ any part in them ; no^ can those who live in these things,
with any propriety, be called the subjects of his Kingdom. The
imperative testimony of eternal truth is, " Come out from among
** them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the un-
" clean thing, and I will receive you."* Neither Jesus Christ, nor
any of his apostles, nor any members of the primitive church, had
any thing to do with the government of this world. " When Jesus
*^ perceived that they would come and take him by force, to make
" him a king, he departed out of their way."t And when reques-
ted to judge between two* brothers, concerning the division of an
inheritance,-he replied, " Man, who made me a judge, or a divider
over you ?"J By these things he evidently proved, agreeable to
his own testimony, that his Kingdom was not of this world, and
that it did not belong to him to meddle with any of its concerns.

It would appear very inconsistent for the subjects of any earthly
government, or kingdom, to hold offices, and officiate in the con-
eems of a rival government, or enemies kingdom. None but those
who are real citizens or subjects, either by birth or adoption and
naturalization, can take an active part in the concerns of an earth-
ly government. He therefore, who would share in the concerns
•of a foreign government, must -first renounce the government of
his native country, and become a subject of that foreign govern-
ment. How then can the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, which is
spiritual, and not of this world, have any share in the government
of this world, without first renouncing their allegiance to the King-
dom of Christ, and becoming the willing subjects of this earthly
government ? For as it is an undeniable truth, that the order, pow-
ers, manners and customs of the governments of this world, are
corrupted by the influences of the spirit of evil, they, of course,
stand in direct opposition to the Spirit and government of Christ,
and hfs Kingdom. *

Christ's Kingdom and government can never be established on
earth, among any people whatever, without a separation from the
world 5 not indeed a separation from the natural creation, which is
good in its order, nor from any thing in it which is virtuous, com-
inendable, or useful to his true followers ; but a separation from
the follies, vanities, contammating principles, and wicked practi-
ces of fallen man, under the reigning influence of a depraved hu-
man nature ; and from all those things in which the great bulk
of mankind seek their own honor and glory, instead of the hon(W[
and glory of God.

♦ 3 Cor. vi. 17. | John vi. \5. \"U>jJ*fc xvv W


RAL PRINCIPLEa *

PRACTICAL PEACE.
1 principle flows li'om the altribtites of love and goodnea
in God, and is ibe fruU of meekness, patience and charity. In-
deed Ibis heavenly principle so clearly characterizes the Spirit and
Kingdom of Chris r, that the violalion of it seems eridently a viol*
lion of every Divine attribute, and ofevery christian virtue*
Christ's Kingdom is a kingdom of peace; hence his subjeeB
fcigiust be a peaceable and harmless people. ,"My Krngdom is noi
f* of this world," said Jesus: *' If my Kingdom were of this world,
^ then would my servants fight,"* And because his Kingdom is
>t of this world, those who are truly his servants will do! figbl.
R'hen Peter in his zeal to defend his Master, drew a aword wA
Mruck a servant of the high-priest, "Jesus said unto him, F^t up
" thy sword into its place : for all they that take the sword, sbail
_" perish with the sword. ''t Here is a plain and pointed teslitno-
^y of Christ against the use of the sword. Indeed it is impossible,
ft-om the very nature of Christ's Kingdom, that he should ewr
■ButhorJze warlike passions, jarring contentions and strife, upon aoj
^occasion whatever.

All the predictions ofthe ancient prophets concerning the nature
I if Christ's Kingdom, have represented it to be it kingdom of pence;
r^ud he himself was emphatically sliled, The Prince of Btart,
Bnany hundred years before he made his appearance on earth,
f^is people are also represented as a peaceable people, dwelling tn
peaceable habitations; and his government is described as a gov-
ernment of peace, '• F'.r thus saith the Lord, Behold I will ex-
" tend peace like a river; — I will make thy officers peace and thy
" exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more he heard in jhy
" land. — All thy children shall be taught of the Lord ; and greal
J* shall be die peace of thy children. — -The work of righteousness
f' shall be peace ; and the elTect of righteousness quietness and a^

Thus ii appears that his coniing, his Kingdom and his people,
c described, in early ages,, by the tongue of inspiration, in (A^
tic strains of peace. And when the time came, his birth ws
Innounced by the angels of Heaven, in glorious songs of pncc
" Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, and good-«BI
" towards men."[| And all these predictions, asfar aslheyi^BM
to h'ls personal ministration, in that day, were fully confirmed : fx
^he was evidently TAe Prince of Peace; and his ministration irts
':nistration of peace and good-will towards men; and all Vrbti
! willing to receive him, were made partakers of his peace.
" Blessed are the peace-makers : for they shall be called the dut
« dren of God;" said be. He taught ihcm the way of peace ^


CHAP. II.] OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 26S

righteousness, bore their infirmities, healed their maladies, com-
forted theni in their auctions, encouraged and strengthened them
in their faith, and at last, when about to leave them, he commend-
ed them to his Father, prayed for them, blessed them, and said,
** Peace I leave with )-ou, ray peace I give unto you ; not as the
^^ world giveth, give I unto you. — Hereafter I will not talk much
** with you; for the prince of this world cometh, and hath noth-
** ing in me."*

Before the preceding predictions could be fully realized, in the
final establishment of Christ's peaceable Kingdom on earth, there
was a time in which the spirit of Antichrist prevailed to root out
and destroy that good seed of peace which Chnst had sown. Then
succeeded ** the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the prophet, standing where it ought not,'^t of which Jesus had
forewarned.his disciples. Then every species of abomination was
committed, under the sacred name of Christianity, and blood and
carnage deluged the earth, under the professed banners of The
Prince of Peace. Abomination of desolation, sure enough ! This
was the work of that spirit to which Jesus alluded in saying, " The
prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.'^ The prince
of this world, is a prince of war, and not of peace.

Ever since that celebrated heathen warrior, called Constantine
the Great ^ assumed the christian name, to sanctify his bloody
deeds, and obtained the title of the first christian emperor^ the
prince of this world has reigned among a people who have called
themselves christians. Hence the ori^n of that incongruous title,
christian warriors, which has been so often applied to those mur-
dering Cains, who have imbrued their hands in the blood of their
brethren, under a profession of Christianity. But it is in vain for
the advocates of war to call themselves chiistians, or to claim any
relation to Christ: for they have no part in him. They are the
subjects of the prince of war, and not of the Prince of peace.
Kings, princes, nations and people, who make war upon each other,
and shed the blood of their fellow men, and still claim the name of
christians, are the deluded subjects of Antichrist's kingdom — the
children of the prince of this world, who, under the assumed name
of Christ, are violating the best principles of Christianity, the prin-
ciples of peace and good-will to men.

All the precepts delivered by our Savior, breathed " peace and
good will to man ;'^ and they were all confirmed by his works. And
it was doubtless the peaceable tendency of his ministration and
doctrines, which so alarmed the jealous and envious Jews ; else
why this argument ? "If we let him thus alone," said they, "all
*^ men will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take
" away both our place and nation.^J But xvQ^m>J\^\»s\^vwi^ -jSSsl


B&u\L.\ mdkal rjti.vciPfcff

theii warlike principles, aided by their cruel policy in glutting him
to deailj, ill order lo stop ihe prevalence of his doctrines, and
. Hcure ihe nafelv of itiL' nation, ihey were at length overtaken bi
the very calHOiities which their burbaroiis policy was intended lo
avert. And it ought to be remembered, as a warning to persecu-
tors, thai the persecuting cruelty of the Jews, towards Jesus Christ
and Ilia followers, was evidently the very cause of ihe calamities
which befel their '^ place and nation.'-'

It is evideni that Jesus Christ, and his apostles alVr Iiim, inva-

tiably maintained the principles of peace, both by precept and

luaniple; and ibese prinriples were continued in the primitive

uhurch, so long as that. church stood in its purity. This fact i>

^confirmed by the mast authentic accounts of those times. C^ieas,

fa heathen philosopher, who wrote against the christians in ibc

latier part of the second century, brings this charge against them;

" That they refused to bear arms, even in case of necessity ;" and

complains, "that if the rest of llie empire were of their opinion,

h would soon be overrun by the barbarians."* But notwithstand-

ing this objection of Celsus, tlie Romans, with all tlieir warring

powers and principles, even after professed chrhliaag b<^an tu

bear aims, were unable lo save ihe empire from being "overrun

by the barbarians, "t

It is not a little surprising that there should be so many, at the
present day, who opeuly profess the peaceable religion of Jesus
Christ, and yet are, in principle, the advocates of war, and will
make the same objections against the principles of peace which
this heathen niade. What then is the difference Iwtween a warring
christian and a warring heathen ? The objection of boib against
the principles of peace is, in substance, that if the whole nation
rtrere of this opinion, we should soon be conquered by other na-
nons, who maintain the principles of war. But the objections of
^le warring christian evidently appear mucli more glaringly inCQjip
,^tei)l : for the heathen warrior talks of no enemy but the biU'l)&-
^'Hans, while the christian warrior wishes la be armed against tttoce
who by profession are bis brethren and fellow christians !

But we believe, without the least shadow of doubt, tliat the
* principles of peace are the best means of preserving peace that B
nation can possess. As like causes produce like effects ; so the
principles of peace liave a natural tendency to produce peace}
while the principles of war wiQ invariably produce war. And wb
feel full confidence in the opinion, that if the principles of peace
were faithfully cultivated at home, and carefully maintained in all
le abroad, ihey would prove a more sure protection


terMncailiiot jijaiuii the irue ckrUtiani ; farv


CHAP. II.] OP THE CHURCH OF CHRIST* 266

to any nation, than the principles of war, with all its expensive
preparations ; and that they would also have a much greater ten-
dency to preserve the honor and increase the glory of a nation, all
the fears and apprehensions of warriors to the contrary notwith-
standing. An impartial examination of the history of all ages
would doubtless confirm the truth of this remark.

As before observed, the principles of peace flow from the attri-
butes of goodness and love, in God ; consequently the spirit of war
is opposed to these attributes. Goodness to a nation is the result
of peace ; but great evils result from war. " Love worketh no ill
to his neighbor 5" but hatred, which is the source of all wars, leads
mankind to " bite and devour one another.'* The spirit of war
leads its advocates to revenge real or supposed injuries, and always
involves the innocent whh (he guilty. It produces no goodwill to
man ; but 'is the ruin of many for the aggrandizement of a few.
Where is the nation among all the warring powers of Europe, that
has not received more injury than benefit from'the wars in which
it has been engaged ?

War is opposed to God's attributes of righteousness and justice :
for altho it is often waged under pretence of obtaining or defending
certain real or supposed rights, or of avenging real or supposed
wrongs ; yet, in reality, it pays no regard to right 5 its great object
is wrong; it seeks revenge; it produces injury; and its greatest
injury often, if not most generally, falls upon those for whose rights
the war was professedly undertaken — ^the rights of the nation — the
rights of the people. And in the end, it generally injures their
rights and increases their wrongs ; and is therefore, throughout, pro-
ductive of great injustice-

The spirit of war is opposed to God's attribute of holiness. It
engenders and promotes in man, the most unholy passions. Am-
bition, pride and lust, wrath, envy and strife, revenge and cruelty,
and the most heaven-daring impiety, are the notorious concomi-
tants of war. In short, an army in a state of warfare, is the great-
est school of vice and iniquity of any on earth. And if any are so
fortunate as to pass through it without the ruin of their, moral char-
acters ; yet it must be acknowledged, that very few escape the
general contamination of morals which it is calculated to produce.

The spirit of war is contrary to the attributes of light and truth,
Jt darkens the light of truth in the soul, and makes men blind to
their own best interests — to their best good, both in this world and
that which is to come. It seeks, through false pretexts, to injure
the innocent, as well as the guilty. It i^bscures every virtuous
sentiment of the heart, and falsely exalts heroic pride and daring
ambition as the highest standard of merit, and the most honorable
principles of man.

FJnaJ]/ ; The spirit of war is cotvXtat'^ Xo ^^ ^VVt'JwsXR^ q^-^U^x^^t

Y


THE SEVEN MORAL PRINCIPLES

tmd leisdom. Cenainly no human power can be so fboli^l; ev-
ened, nor any human policy so unwisely employed. Ttie 'power
and wisdom of God can nevpr be exercised to fevor the spirit ol
war, in fallen man, wHhoul operating directly against his oiher
reveuledaliribules, which cannot be done: for the attributes of Go]
can never clash with each oilier. Tho God may sulTer one nation
to contend with another, and leave both (o hear lliejudgmentof
iheir own tblly ; yet he never can confer his power lor the purpose
of exalting the pride of fallen man, nnr bestow his wisdom on such
demonian policy. "This wisdom descendeth not from above, but
" is earthly, sensual and devilish. But the wisdom tliat is from
" above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be en-
** treated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and
" without hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in
*' peace of them that make peace. '*•

V. SI.MPLICITY OF LANGUAGE.

This principle flows from God's attribute of holiness, and is en-
joined by the declarative voice of truth, '• Speak ye every man
the truth to his neighbor. "t It b the practical operation of ^
virtues of honesty and simplicity, in all our communications.

As language is the medium through which we convey our ideits,
it is a matter of the first importance that our language should pro-
ceed from an honest heart. Honesty of heart and simplicitj of
language, will always insure us a good conscience towards God,
and proper respect towards our fellow men ; and safely conduct ua
through all the scenes of this mortal life. " Swear not at all," said
Jesus, " but let your communication be, yea, yea, and nay, nay:
"for whatsoever is more than these eomethof evil."J It has been
objected that this alludes to profane oaths; but these were con-
demned by the law of Moses ; and it is evident from the express
testimony of Jesus Christ, that he had reference to the oaths alloi^-
ed by the law, as well as all others. "Ye ha\c heard that it balb
" been said by them of old lime, Thou shall not forswear thysell^
« but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths: But 1 say unto _yoo,
*' Sinear no( at all." What can be more plain and pointed. |{

• J... iki. IS.ll, 11- (Zccb riil.in 'H.ll . 3*1.37.

n TKt fom of wbmlld ecDiidireJi l.wrul cbililiin »l]i. ^t .«h • K.lrmo profninUmt

Ujilllt (o«0 ot la^.U™ inJ lli« MBcUMotbim.B I.W. hiTC .0 fir blinJod'ui. BiiwIMf
h.lnr ca-K_iou.oni.™»1iii.np<L Bui lglgl«.iiii<ie iUiJirias prufiDiIr Th. i m t »r^
»«— ni 10 Ihu fiillywlnjcfomiiirwnrdj! "J^Hbrnnlu ruxarupnt/ie Wy HaiigtlilU*f ST
nfrjIWCM iAU»)at/niiil»r(M»yiit»iicair», iwitefte irKM, tAcr mM» MM.
ttSntMnglialklltulk ttitlpuilCll." VfbnWi Ibitbul oiling ufim [hf li^ ***SL


CHAP. II.] OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, 263

Jesus Christ having thus pointedly excluded all swearing, it is
therefore evident that oaths do not belong to his Kingdom ; conse-
quently true christians can have nothing to do with them. Hence
the practice of swearing must belong exclusively to those kingdoms,
nations and people, who are under the government of the prince of
this world. Its professed object is to prevent false testimony in
judicial causes, and maintain confidence in civil society, and in the
reciprocal transactions between man and man. But the numerous
frauds continually practiced, under the sanction of oaths, to the
^reat perversion of truth and righteousness, are so many proofs of
their insufficiency to maintain justice and equity in civil govern-
ments. We believe that a man who has not a principle of honesty
in himself, will never be made honest by the formality of an oath.
And there is doubtless much propriety in the vulgar maium^ ^^ j9e
that will swear f mil lie,^^

All swearing and taking the name of God in vain ; all profane
language, foolish talking, vain jesting, and using sacred words and
sacred names, in foolish exclamations ; all low and profane vul*
garisms ; all filthy and obscene language, calculated to defile the
sense and exclude the fear and love of God from the soul, and
whatever else is contrary to the spirit of honesty, simplicity and
truth, are violations of this principle, they manifest a vain, empty,
wicked mind, and mark a soul destitute of the fear of God. ^^ Keep
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.'^* All lying
and deceit, all quibbling, cavilling and double-dealing, and in short,
every kind of communication, and every manner of expression,
and all use of language which does not proceed from an honest
heart, and is not consistent with plain and simple truth, are viola-
tions of this principle. ^^ Be what you seem to be, and seem to be
what you really are," is a maxim enjoined by our first elders, and
is held as a sacred principle by every faithful believer.

We are not required to communicate all we know, or all that
we have heard and seen, whenever it is demanded of us, without
any respect to persons, place or circumstances ; this would be the
height of folly and weakness, and would do more harm than good.
" The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright,''t We ought
to guard carefully against all unnecessary and disorderly communi-
cations, and especially against communications to those who are
liable to make a bad use of them, or to an enemy who b seeking to
lake imdue advantage of us. Tale-bearing does not belong to the
followers of Christ; it is of the wicked one; it is an enemy that
<* soweth discord."

But in all our intercourse, with all people, where a reciprocal
communication is required for mutual understanding ; or where
reasonable intelligence b required, from just and ^easotliahl^v»fi^<^^^'»»^


SEVEN MOKAL PRIN'CIFLI


cannoi be justified
^m ever.

■v All flattering titi
^^ teil to enalt liit; }iii

^^^■ftmong the liumble
^^^Bf sdiilaiion, liesif
^^HptoVB his Maker,


are ezchitkd
tn the low of

called Rabbi!

? brethren.""


s fair, opeo and free communicstion will not, and cannot tir justly
wilhlielil, by any intly lionest and upriglit soul. And in all our
comniunicfttions, noibJng but the plain and simple trutii can justify
us : for nliho we may be justified in withholding the truth, where
its coin niunicat ion is unnecessary, and can do no good; yet we
cannot be justified in uttering a lUlsebood, on any occasion what-
ever.

All flattering titles, and vain appellations of distinction, c^nilEt-
ted to enalt the }uide and feed tlie vanity of niitn, being in direct
,ef)posiiiDii lu sioipliciiy of language, are therefore excluded iWtm
'" long the humble followers of Christ. Titles of hunnr and terou
sdulaiion, designed to Baiter fallen man, and reiercnce bim
>ve his Maker, lind no place here. Hence the
Sir nnd Madam, Mister and Miss, and the like,
ftom the language of the United Society, aa contrary
Christ and the simplicity of his gospel. "Be ye
fur one ia your Master, even Christ; and all yc
Our Savior here alluded m the haughty, high-minded Scribes and
Pharisees, who were fond of worldly honors and titles of tlisliue-
lion, and warned his disciples against following their example.

Thus he condemned the love of wcO'ldly honors, and fluttering
titles of distinction, as unbecoming the chUdren of God and sei^
vanis of Christ. Yet how often do we see, at this day, those who
profess to be the servants of Christ, seeking and obtaining titles gf
honor and distinction which he never assumed, and ncter autfior-
ized his followers to assume; such as Doctor of Divinity; Reo-
ereiid Sir ; Right Rtverend Father in God, und ihe like. TUese
faigb-suundiiig titles, su fascinating tn aniichrisiian vanity, are <Kia-
ferred, like that of Ambnssailm-t of Christ, by human' authority,
and not by the authority of God. And tiius inese aspiring digni*
taries, while ihey profess lo be the humble followers of the medt,
and lowly Savior, instead of following his sclf-^lenying and bumili*
Btinj; exum pie, must he dignilied, and almost deified, with ecclest
astical litli-s, far above any thing ever assumed by the Lord Jesus
Christ.

How clearly do such professors show that they are under the
influence of that spirit, " Wiio opposeih and exalieth himself above
all that is called Uod:"' " ■ • ■ -
'■ God will lay judgnu

met;" and all these profane and sacrile^ous honors will be strept
away with " the refuge of lies. "J

VI. RIGHT USE OF PROPERTY.

This principle flows from llie attributes of righleousnesa and

'" " " " ' 'a it is fully displayed the virtues of simplicity, humili^


But the day is fast approacliing wli^
o the*line, and righteousness lo the plun>


CHAI*. n.] . OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 269

and charity. It is an important duty, and a distinguishing privi-
ly of the gospel. The true folJowers of Christ are one with him,
as be is one with the Father. This oneness includes all they pos-*
sess : for he who has devoted himself to Christ, soul, body and
spirit, can by no means withhold his property. As Christ, by his
oneness with the Father, is made a partaker, in his lot and office,
of all the attributes of God ; so the true followers of Christ arcj
according to their measure, made partakers of all that he posses-
ses; agreeable to his prayer to the Father: "The. glory which
" thou gavest me, I have given to them 5 that they may be one,
" even as we are one."*

This oneness is the fruit of the gospel, and it can be obtained in
no other way than by obedience to the gospel. The very nature
and design of the gospel of Christ it to lead souls into this oneness;
that they may possess one faith, enjoy one hope, and be able " to.
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. ''t This unity
of the spirit leads to a oneness in all things, both spiritual and tem-
poral ; while the nature of selfishness tends only to scatter and
divide. Hence mankind, under the influence of selfishness, are
led to support and build up a separate interest, in all things. Dear
self is the great object of all their concern and all their pursuits.
The selfish man acts from selfish motives, iii all his undertakings ;
even in his professed acts of charity, he bestows his alms with a
view to trumpet forth his own praise, and obtain honor of men.

But it is impossible for souls who really enjoy the unity of the
spirit, to feel satisfied with a separate enjoyment which their breth-
ren and sisters might, with equal propriety, partake with then|.
Their comfort, their peace, their happiness, their enjoyments of
every kind, are greatly augmented by sharing them in union with
their brethren and sisters. Nor can they feel unwilling to sufier
with them in their afflictions. Hence after having experienced
the blessed enjoyments of this unity, their temporal property would
feel like an intolerable burden to them, were they condemned to
share it alone.

"The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." But selfish
man has long claimed it as his, and long appropriated it to his own
use. Forgetting that he owes all to God, he is continually grasp-
ing after more to gratify his own selfish propensities. But man
was created to serve God ; and he is required to serve him with
all his faculties, which were given him for that very purpose. He
is also required to serve God with his property, which was com-
mitted to his charge for the same purpose.

Our time in this world is but short: but a little while and we
must appear before God, to give an account of the improvement
we have made of our time andtaknts, ^xiAxVi'&Vi\a^^\Ss.\ftav*2tf^


IGN EN MORAL PRlI«CtPLES


I ininislecl to (lur tare. If God has eniloiveil us with talents
jood lo our ftlloNv aiurluls, we cannot be jiislined iinkss vre im-
prove ihose lalentsto ihat very purpose. And if lie linsako made
us heirs of lempoml properly, or furiushed us tvitti the means and
fucuhiL-s to acquire il, as failhTuI stewards of God's heritage, weaie
nu mucli the matv accountable for the improvement we make of
these privileges. Theu let us improve tliem wisely.

There are many, very many of our fellow beings, as good by
nature as ouiiselves, and doubtless as precioui; in the sight of God,
who, lliTougli misfortune, are suflering for the want of the good
ibingx which we enjoy; and shall we be justified before God, if
we do not extend the hand of chnriiy according to our ability ? By
no meuns. The parable of the rich man and La^.arus is an id-
structive lesson to those who possess property. While mimya
{toor. sutTering, but honest Lazarus lies pining in misery and wao^
shall we withhold the crumbs uf charity ? Shall we sufier tlie dop
lo ouldo u.? in acts of kindness ? If so, we must enpect the scale
tliortly to he turned.

How many are the favorites of fortune, who share largely in
the ihingi of this world, and yet expend the properly entrusted la
iheir charge, in gratifying iheir own selfish propensities, in liviBg
in luxurious splendor, in faring tumptuoualy every day ; while
many of iheir poor neighbors are jJiiing in poverty, and su/Tering
iindt'T the hanl hand of misfortune, and would gladly share in the
fragments wasted by estravagance, onhrown to the doo;e.' CouW
these wealthy sons of pleasure draw aside the veil of futurity, and
behold the dny in which those who llius abuse their riches, vill be
constrained to cry to ihe suffering poor, from whom lliey now with-
hold the hand of charity, and beg for a drop of water lo cool their,
tongues, they might Ihen see the awful res|>onsibility which lies
upon the rich, and feel the vast iinportuuce of making a right us6
of iheir properly.

Theadvice of Jesus Christ lo the rich man, who desired to knov
what he sliould do to intierit elermil life, is an instructive lessoD
10 tile rith.* Origen, who lived in the latter part of Uie second
ceniury, has related this drcumslanee, as recorded in a book (non-
lost) enlilled, The gmpel according to the Hebri^ti. It is givai
by Origen in the Greek knguage, and quoted by Lardner, who
^ves liie following translation :

" A certain rich man said to him, Masler, what good thing shall
» I do, that I may Uve? Hesaid unto liim, Man. keep the law and
'■ the prophets. He answered him, That 1 have done. He said
" uDto him. Go sell all that thou hast, and d'isiribute among ilw
" poor, and come follow me. But the rii-h man began lo scrati4i
'■'ha head, and Jt did not, please hini. And the Lord said untn


CHAP. Il] op the church OP CHRIST. 271

" him, How sayest thou, I have kept the law and the prophets?
^< seeing it is written in the law, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
<< thyself; and behold, many of thy brethren, sons of Abraham,
" are clothed with rags, ready to perish for hunger, whilst thy
'^ house is filled with all sorts of good things, and nothing goes
^* out of it to them. And turning about, he said to hb disciple
^< Simon, who was sitting by him, Simon, son of Joanna, it is easier
<< for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
" man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.''*

" The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof, the world and
they that dwell therein."t And as there are many in the world
who, by the favor of Divine Providence, enjoy much more than a
competency, it is doubtless with a view to prove them, and see
what use they will make of their property, that God has thus no-
ticed and distinguished them above the suffering poor whom he has^
placed in their neighborhood for the same wise purpose. How
then can so many of these probationary sons of wealth assume the
christian name, and professedly devote themselves to the service of
Giod, while they witlihold their property and essential services for
their own selfish purposes ? And what is a professed devotion of
the soul, while all that a man sets his heart and affections upon, in
this world, is withheld? So he may profess love and charity fpr
his poor neighbor, and yet give him nothing. Where then is the
evidence of his love and charity ? and how is his neighbor benefit-
ted by either ?

What reward has that servant to expect, who professes to de-
vote himself to his master's service, to do his will, while at the
same time he actuaUy devotes his time and talents, with all he
possesses, in serving himself, and doing his own will ? Will his
master accept of empty professions and promises for real service ?
Will he, or ought he to reward him as a faithful servant? Injus-
tice he cannot : righteousness would forbid it.

Let every professor of Christianity, and especially those who
possess property, apply the case to himself, and then ask his own
soul, what reward he has a right to expect hereafter, for his pro-
fession, without a real and actual devotion of substantial service^
with all he posseses to God. Can he expect a substantial reward
forprofessed services, empty prayers and formal ceremonies, which
cost him little or nothing, and which afford his poor neighbors, and
even his fellow christians, no real benefit, temporal nor spiritual,
to soul nor body ?

Tho many of the rich are able, in their individual capacities, to
do niuch good with their interest, were they so disposed, without
impairing the principle; yet experience has proved, in the United
Society, that under the blessing of God, VW tv^V xxsa ^\ y^«^'«^^

*5«eL«rdocr'5 works, vol 2 p 505» \ V^^-xlv^. V^\^^^-"*''*»^'^'


r

I


r SEVEN MORAL FRISCIPLES

in conformity to the law of Christ, is best promoted, among hit
Icillowers, by uniting it in a common stork, ivliere all belonging to
the Sock-iy, can unite tu make it an Increasing interest, for benevo-
lent purposes, and at the same time, enjoy a competency out of it,
upon (erim of eqaslit)-. Thus used, it aflords a competent suppoiT
to il3 former possessors, and is still increasing in usefulness, to an-
swer llie demands of benevolence and charity. The same experi-
ence Rl»a proves, that a little, with union and harmony, and under
judicious management, suffices to supply many wants.

It is doubtless generally understood, that Jesus Christ and bii
little family of dliciples, all fared alike, being chieSy dependent on
ihe contents of the same scrip, for their temporal support. Tbc
primitive church at Jerusalem, was also founded on a united iaWt-
est. " And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart
" and one soul : neiiiier said any of litem, that augbi of the things
" which he possessed was his own ; but they had all things com-

Thus they divested themselves of all selfishness, and like a band
of disinterested brethren and sisters, lived in love and harmony,
and ell fared alike. These amiable examples were designed as ft
pattern for christians; and had all who have since professed that
oame, been led by tlte true spirit of ihe gospel, and carefiilly con-
fcrmed to this pattern, what an amiable and harmonious band of
du-islian nations might, long ere this day, have existed upon earth !

Vn. A VIRGIN LIFE.

The term vir/pn implies purity, and when used literally to ex-
press the quality of any thing, it signifies pure, uniq>xed,unde61ed,
Hnadulterated. Hence ihe terms virgin gold, virgin copper^ vir-
gin mom, and the like, are used to represent those substances in a
pure, unadulterated state. .4 virgin life, tlierefore, means a life
of purity, a life undeliled with sinful indulgences, unmixed with
corrupt practices, unadulterated with carnal Ratifications and un>
pure desires and pursuits. But the sense to which we more imme-
diately confine it, and which is indeed the most obvious, is to ex-
press a life of continency, or a life of abstinence from the carofll
gratifications of the flesh, from sexual coition, and from all lascivi-
ous indulgences.

This pure principle flows from the attribute of harness, and Ei
Ihe genuine offspring of conlinettce and innocPHce. *' God bath '
" not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, without which
" no man shall see the Lord. Blessed are the pure in heart: Ibr
" they shall see God,"t Hence it is evident that, without purity
and holiness, we cannot find acceptance in the sight of Ood. And
ft is an /mmulable truth, iVaX the heavenly sensations of purity

* Acts if. 33. \ lTtTO.i''1. Krt v:,A* fc.-»»\\ '-».


CHAP. II.] OP THE CHURCH OP CHRIST. 273

and holiness, and the unclean passion of lechery can never abide
together in any soul : for where the former are in operation the
latter is effectually excluded; and where the latter is in operation
it equally excludes the former. Hence a virgin life is that which
approaches the nearest to God, and partakes most of the Divine
nature. This appears evident from the following well authentica-
ted facts.

1 . Among the ancient heathens, whatever was esteemed sacred
and pure, was committed to the care of virgins. Their sacred fire
was entrusted to virgins ; their sacred oracles, prophetic warnings,
and other divine manifestations were given to virgins. So that,
notwithstanding their false religion, and the shameful and fraudu-
lent superstitions of their priesthood, it is evident that on many
important occasions, their virgins were honored with the prophetic
gifts of the Spirit of God.

2. The devout Jews esteemed the virgin life the most pure; and
virgins were often honored with prophetic oracles and gifts of the
Spirit, when such manifestations of Divine favor were almost en-
tirely withdrawn from all other classes of people among them.
Josephus informs us that the Essenes, who maintained the virtue of
continence, were many of them favored with Divine revelations.*

3. In the days of the apostles, virgins were particularly honor-
ed with the Spirit of God. The daughters of Philip the evangelist
were virgins, and were blest with prophetic gifts.t It is stated by
Dr. Horneck, that in the days of the primitive christians, " Thou-
** sands of their virgins freely dedicated themselves to God, and
^' would be married to none but him ; and tho many times they
" were tempted by rich fortunes, yet nothing could alter their reso-

"^^ luUons.''J

4. From the most authentic accounts we have of the christian
religion, in different ages, since the days of primitive Christianity,
it appears evident that those people, under whatever name or sect
they have been classed, who, from a principle of devotion to God,
have maintained a life of continency, notwithstanding they have
been generally stigmatized as heretics, and have had their names
cast out as evil, have been more highly favored, as a people, with
the effusions of the Holy Spirit, and more particularly blessed, as
individuals, with the heavenly gifts of God, than any other class of
people whatever. These things prove the purity of the virgin
character in the sight of God.

The term virgin is often used, in the language of the prophets,
to represent the Church of Christ, and to signify purity of charac-
ter; and to that character the promises of God were given. The
prophet Jeremiah, in his predictions concerning the latter day of

♦ ll is worthy of remarkt that these Essenes were the oul^ »ecv. VKv<itv<?, >JckR, ^^.^w^^X^sa^
Jesos did not reprove. ^

f 9ee Acts wi. 9, J See 'Wc»\ey»<^V«\»\:\^\i\A\»xwi,^^V'»- V^^'^


I


r implJ
^■Vtrutb


rilE aF-VKN MOHAL PRINCIPLES f PAHT VI.

glory, ihree times in one chapter, applies the appellation of mrgia
(o the milltnninl rhurch, by which he evidently points out its pu-
rity. ■' Aeain I will build thee, and thou shale be built, O oirgin
" o( Israel T thou shall again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shtill
" go forth in the dances or them that make merry. — Then shtiU
" the virgin rejsice in ibe dance, both young men and old tt^th-
"er. — Turn again, virgin of Israel! turn again to these thy

It will probably be contended by some, that the prophet lia»
here used the term virgin mei-ely as a figure, to represent the chiircii
in its pure and happy state ; not with any particular allusion tc
the character of continency, but in allusion to its general purity
This is, at least, admitting the purity of the virgin character- Bui
it is necessary to observe in the first place, thai a figure must beat
a true analogy to the substance; otherwise it cannot be a proper
figure. We would then ask, whether the selection of this term, as
a figure of purity, does not clearly show that the character itselfil
more pure, in the sight of God, than any other ? If so, then is not
its opposite the most impure? Again: If God has chosen to repre-
sent his people by a figure which implies the most pure character,
does he not therefore require that they should support that rharac-
ler by the most pure life? And if the virgin life is the most puie,
did he not intend that they should live such a life ? If not, then
where is the consistency of representing them by s figure which
'■ plies a pure character?

When ail this is duly considered, we must conclude that the

'ni vir^n was designed, not only as a standing toeroorial of that
fe which is the most pure in the sight of God ; but also as a most
_ Dwerful evidence that God did design that a people of that char-
ircter should build and inherit the church of the latter day. This
truth may be more fully confirmed and illustrated by the folluwiiig
remarks and observations.

1. Jesus Christ was bom of a virgin. Thusa pure vii^in char-
acter was chosen to receive the first seed of the Neio Creatim;
an incontestible evidence of the puce imture of that work which
be was sent to introduce into the world, for the salvation andte-
tleniplion of mankind from that impure nature in which they were
begotten. And as his conception was without sexual impurity, il
teaches us that, at the first entrance of souls into the life of Cbral,
they must reject that very impurity which was first rejected in his
conception.

The miraculous birth of Jesus Christ by a virgin, also shows
that, in him, the work of natural generation ceased, and a new and
spiritual creation commenced. Hence in the regeneration, all who
are begotten of Christ, tnuit necessarily cease from that work) or


CIIAF. 11.] OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 273

lose that spiritual life which they receive from him. Tho he was
born Into the world, vet he wah not of the world. The same re-
mark will upply to all his true followers, according to his own tcs«
timony: ^^They arc not of thw world, even as I am not of the
world.'^* It is readily admitted by all tliat it wa9 not the work of
Jesus Christ to propagate an earthly ofispring ; and the same is
equally true of his followers also : for ^^ xithey are not of the world,
even as A^ is not of the world," they can have no more to do with
its works of generation than he had ; because that work belongs
solely to the children of the world, and not to the followers of
Christ : they have a verv different work to do.

2. The cross of Christ necessarily includes a virgin life, or a
life of continency ; because the carnal nature of man must die, be-
fore the soul can ever rise to God ; and that nature, having its
source and foundation in sexual coition, is fed and nourished by
lascivious indulgences ; therefore its death cannot be olTected with-
out this cross; and there is iM)thing in nature — nothing within the
comprehension of the natural man, which can be more crossing to
that carnal propensity than a life of continency. The follower of
Christ is indeed required to deny himself, and take up his cross
against every evil propensity that pertains to man's fallen nature ;
but he finds none so powerful, in nature, as that which is directlv
opposed to a life of virgin purity ; because that is the source of all
others; and therefore a cross against that protiensity, is necessarily
included in the general, self-denying cross which, according to the
testimony of Christ, must be taken up in order to become his
disciples ; and indeed it is much the most weighty and important
part of the cross of self-denial.

^^ If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother^
^ and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own
*^ life also, he cannot be my disciple."! Here we have the plain
and positive declaration of Jesus Christ, that not only these natural
rtlalives which stand in connexion with the man, according to the
OKWr of natural generation, but even his own life also must be
hated, or he cannot be a disciple of Christ.}

* John xrii. lA | Lukr sir. *lt

i It ii not u little viirprihing to ste how the Hen«c of ttiis and other
similar paftiiagis U perveru d by the blindness of expositors. The word
katt in this text, thi*> say, is used in a comparative sense ; that is, they
are not in reality to hatt these relations, but only to love them Utt, when
they stand in competition with their love to Ctirist. TUeJortaAing
spoVen of tn the 33d verse of the same chapter, they also qualify in
such a manner, us entirely to remove a free and voluntary cross, by cull-
' inf^ it a coinparative Jortakinr, or a wiilingnets to fortaJ^e, ifi case they
ihoulil be ('iill«*cl of God to do it ; tliat is, when necessitv requires it.
This ii like their vfillingneu to (/if, w\\e\\ iViV^Kv \^ 'A Vwt ^vwt^'w*^
they gcc there is no escape, but t\iey must OJi*. '!^>aX C.Vm\ ^\^ '^R^- ^"*H -^


I


i SEVtN MOBAI. PRtNCIPLl

Bui niankiod are bo \iTone to the indulgence or that fallen natun
which binds them to the fli'sh, that ihey will exert every faculty In
evade tlic force of truili mid abolish ilie cross. Tliey are willing
In a]i|ily any oilier meaniog to Christ's Trords, and to acknowledge
faith in any other cross, except tlial which strikes at the very
source of llieir camal enjoyments — the very clioicest of all tbeii'
pleasures — llie very life of the naturul man. Such a cross is too
piiinful for a fallen and corrupted nature to endure; it is killing— -
it is death (o such a nature.

But ilie painful excitement, the distressing opposition vlucli
man's carnal nature feels against such a cross, is a most poweilul
evidence of ita necessity. And were there no other argument in
favor of it, this alone is sufficient to convince us that it is the very
cross lo which Christ had a particular reference : for that natun
must be destroyed out of the soul of man before he can find his re-
demption ; and this cross of Christ is purposely designed to ei&ct
its deairuction, without whicli it never wilt be destroyed."

3. The nature of fallen man is selfish, being wholly bentoL
adlish graii Ilea lions. His desires are seliish; because they art
directed solely to objects which tend to gratify his selgshoesL
His love is selfish; because it is confined to those who indulge
and please his selfishness. In short, tlie gratification tif self ia the
great object of all his pursuits. Tliis selfish nature is doomed to
destruction, and it is this which Christ requires his followers to
hate. They are not required lo hate the souls nor the bodies of
their oWural kindred, nor of any other creature: for this would be
''inconsistent with the whole tenor of Christ's precepts and examples,
lut the real object of haired is that fallen, selfish nature, wViich b
lie very life and support of this carnal relation, which binds the
r^put of man to the earth, and wliich produces and sirengther "
. Iiis CHrnal and earthly connections.

Carnal affections must die, that spiritual afleclions may live;
, for it is impossible for both to have an abiding residence in 4lw
I. Carnal affections are selfish; they cleave to natural f

lets, nor foraaie comparativtly: hia esprcBsions are used williiSt
.. _ nuiilifimtinn whutever ; uid they arc |iosili*e and decisive, ni
plainly declure tlie oaly conditions on which they csn he his discipta.
" If any man come to me, ind hatt bo( hh father and muther, and ajh
*' and children, and brethren hxA tUteri, j ea, and kU own /j/t ajsO^'U
" cannat tie tnj ditctple — So likewise, whosoever he be of you, ihut Ibr*
"sukcth not all that h katk, he c».nnii1 be my disdple." Wliat canlw
more plain and posilire! and whence do such Interpi'elera derive thdr
Buihorily tu rererae tlie express declarstiun of Jrsus Christ '. Sui-ely it
can be from no other aource than from the.corrnpi. nature of the flesh,
which always seeks to rival God's clajm in mai..


^:Sg|


CHAP. II.] OP THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 277

drcd ; they are chiefly confined to those narrow limits which cir-
cumscribe the connective ties of flesh and blood, and seldom, if
ever, extend further than to those who are excited by interest, or
some other selfish motive, to indulge, flatter and exalt their selfish-
ness. And even here they are liable to be turned from one flatter-
ing object to another more flatterifig, and which can aflbrd a higii-
er gratification to self. So contracted, selfish and fleeting are
carnal aflections.

But spiritual aflections are not circumscribed within so small a
compass. They cannot be confined to such narrow limits ; they
embrace the whole creation of God ; they shed abroad their be-
nign love to all the human race; they extend the hand of kindness
and charity according to the spirit of that Divine precept, " Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." The most powerful operations
and the most extensive stretch of natural affections are very feeble
and limited, when compared with the wide-spread effusions and
divine operations of spiritual and heavenly affections. These
heavenly affections are the rich and abiding treasure of every faith-
ful believer 5 they are the treasures of a life of continence, the
fruits of the cross of Christ, the genuine offspring of a virgin life.
As carnal affections have a natural tendency to produce selfishness,
with all its consequences ; so spiritual affections will bring forth
the genuine fruits of peace, love and disinterested benevolence.

4. Man is required to love God with all his heart, soul, mind
and strength, and to place his highest affections there. lie is at
the same time, required to deny himself of all those carnal and
earthly propensities, affections and lusts which bind him to the
flesh, and which constitute the life of the natural man, in his fallen
and depraved state ; and in this sense, he is required to hate his
own life. It is the same fallen and depraved nature which he is
required to hate in all his earthly kindred. And when this nature
is overcome and destroyed in himself, and in them, by tlie power
of the gospel and a daily cross, then there is room for Christ to
dwell in the soul, and the man can then love God in every such
soul, whether they have been connected with him by the kindred
ties of the flesh or not. God is no respecter of persons ; and those
who have the Spirit of God dwelling in them, will love those best
who possess the most of that spirit.

When therefore, this Important work is effected in the soul, by
subjection and obedience to the cross of Christ; when the soul has
gained a complete victory over that carnal, selfish nature, which
first led to a wife, and, in its effects, produced all those carnal con-
nexions which bound his affections to a carnal life ; then he has
obeyed the precept of Christ, and fully proved his hatred of that
life, with all its connexions, by renounciu^\l^xv^\x^K^€^\Nf^wss.«5K
it; and then also, is fulfilled toVuia, ^xi^ «i\v\ss!l^ ^'it v^ws\>asi^

7.


THE SEVEN MORAL FRI^'CIPU

Cbrist: " There is no man tliat hath left bouse, or brethren, or
* Miters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or laniia, for
« my sake and the gospel's, but he shall receive an handretl-fald
^ now In tiiiij tiipu, nouses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers,
" and children, and lands, with persecutions ; and in the world 10
" corae eternal life."*

Here then is the substance of the tnie virgin life ; and this a
its nromised reward. Hero is the hatred which constitutes a true
christian disciple, and the blessing which follows it. A full aniJ
final cross against the carnal nature of the flesh, and a hatred of
ihat life, with all those afl'eclions and lusts which have a natural
.tendency to indulge and gratify it. In the reward, the wife is not
.found ; but persecutions sup|)ly her place. Noibing will siMner
kindle the fire of persecution than a cross against this carnal life;
especially where a wife is unreconciled lo hear a part in the cross
which her husband has conscientiously taken up for Christ^ saki
and the gospel's.

But, replies the objector, it cannot be that wives are to be hated
andforwiKen; Ibr the apostle Paul says, "Husbands, low your
wi^-es." A very weak objection truly, after what has already been
said on the subject. But objectors generally oinil the mnst impw
tent part of this passage, which shows in what manner tb« apiMlk
lauglit the married christians, of thai day, to love their wives ; KG
will thereforetakelbeliberty to transcribe the passage iaconnectieiii
Bud let modern chrisdans see whether they live up to the npoiriA
Instructions. " Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved
*< the churcli and gave himself for it; that he might sBncitfyaDd
"cleanse it; — that he might present it to himself a glorious eburcit,

not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing-, but that it should
^' be holy, and without blemish : So ought men to love their wives
*• as their own bodies. "t Christ's love to the church, accordii^
lo this testimony, does not lead him to defde it, but to sanctify and
cleanse it, that it may be holy, and without hlemisli. "So oaghx
fcentolove their wives;" not with a com al love, but with the sane

Iiure virgin love j not defiling themselves and their wives with tte
mpure gratificaljons of lust; but in living lives of continency — in
inainiaining a virgin life.

5. The same apostle also says, in another place, " I am jeal-
" ous over you with a godly jealousy : for 1 have espoused you to
'■ onehusband, that Imay present you as aehaste virgm to Christ, "j
It was as a chaste virgin that they were to be presented to Christ;
and he would accept them in no other character. Knowing this,
the holy seal of the apostle was stirred up to admonish these Co.
finthian christians; lest their minds should he led away from tbe
■ity and simpUcty of tiie gos^l,so that they would not preserve


CHAP. II.] OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 279

their t)0(iies " in sanctificatioD and honor," by following the prin-
ciples of purity and holiness, by living as Christ lived, and walk-
ing as he walked, which was evidently in a life of continence and
chastity, — in a virgin life. If then, this principle of a virgin life
were of the world, the world would undoubtedly love its own. But
the very nature of man is wholly opposed to it, which is a sufficient
evidence that it is not of the world, but of a superior origin.

6. But the most plain and pointed testimony of the apostle, in fa-
vor of a virgin life, is given in the seventh chapter of his first epistle
to the Corinthians, by which hie clearly shows the wide difference
between virgin purity, and sexual indulgence ; and in which he
prophetically points to a day of more perfect purity, when all such
indulgences must come to an end. And all the attempts of mod-
ern christians to draw from the apostle'is doctrine any licence to
indulge their lascivious propensities, are but so many evidences of
the depraved state of their own minds, and their ignorance of the
true nature of that gospel purity which the apostle is so careful to
impress upon the minds of the Corinthian christians.

" Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me,'' saith
the apostle; ^^It is good for a man not to touch a womanJ^
Having laid down this principle at the beginning of the chapter, he
could not reverse it without involving, himself in a contradiction.
*^ For," as he said on another occasion, ^< if I build again the things
*^ which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor."* Nor Is
there the least evidence to be found, in any of his writings, that
he ever ceased to give the preference to a virgin life; altho the
time was not then come for a full manifestation of the truth on this
subject.

^' It is good for a man not to touch a wife. But because of the
^^ fornications f let every man have his own wifj, and let every
^< woman have her own husband."t This is the extent of the
apostle's toleration ; and he affirms that he spoke this by permis-
sion, and not of commandment. And why this permission ? Ev-
idently because of the uncontrollable passions of many among these
Corinthians, whom the apostle calls carnal, and who, previous to
their conversion to Christianity, had been accustomed to a plurality
of wives, and whose licentious habits, even after their conversion,
could hardly be controlled within the bounds of moral decency,

* Oal ii. 18.

f The reader will perceive that the Italic words in this quotation^ do
not agree with our common translation ; but they accord with the literal
meaning of the original Greek, in which the apostle wrote, rvvtuxe^y
the word translated woman in the Ist verse, means «//J», and is the same
as that translated vtife in the 2d, 3d and 4th verses. The 2d verse in
the Greek begins with these words ; Ati, h th^ is-ofuis^^ wMcH are
literally rendered thus ; But 6ecaase of tKc JoTiucat\w«. 'W^ ni«^^^
avMis not in the Greek, bvit was \vv8ctUA.\)v SSafc vc«M^^<stV


rSEVEN MORAL I>R1NCIPLES

■liolwitliaUnduig hU llie npostle^ permissions and indulgences. Bui

r^ll ilipse indulgences, whicli tnujem clirixiiana io readily arrogate

r.wihenisclvei, lojiutify their lascivious practices, cannot alter the

-natun.' of Ituliness, nur lessen our obligations lu follow Christ's

exumple.

h is conleniled by many, lliat liie ajmstle gave his instniclions
in favor of a virgin life Ijy permission osiy j bni the (act is direeiljr
tfarrcvcrxc^ uor is there any deviation, in all his writings, from
Ihe principle laid ilown in llifi first \erse of this chapter ; aid every
. Indul^ncc permitted to llie Curinlliians, was eviclenily on account
■ " r Iheir n-eatEneas. Il would have been very eiiraordinary indired,
ir the apostle to recommend continence and virgin piirity by per-
lissioo, or grant it as an indulgence, wheneveryleeling of the ca^
■Hal nature of man was wholly opposed loit. Nor would ten thousand
' h i>eriais»ions ever induce one carnally minded soul lo take ap
b il cross; nor would he overtake it up so long as he could liod
e least hope of salvation without it. The apostle's permisMVQ
Ifaere tore, was not in behalf of those who were willing to lake Up
their crosses; but in behalfof those who cliose rather to indulge the
fie«h than lo cross it. And the pliun reason why these permissions
Mid indulgences were suffered in that day, was, that the day of full
redemption was not then come; and therefore a full and final cron
n^Hinsi those indulgences, could not then be absolutely required-
£ut liie iipoBtlif tuld them plainly what was the best w»y; and
(hose who had spiritual discernment enough to priae a life of purity^
(bllowed Ihe apostle's ndvice.

• Afjain it is sniil that, " the present distress," mentioned by the
fcpoitlc, o!lu(ic;l lo oDlwai-d alllictions, occnsioned by persecution.
1 1 this is not true; nor can any evidence be produced, «hhn'
int sncrcd or^rofaqe history, to warrant such n conclusion ; but
jon the contrary, the time when ilie apostle wrote this epistle, ap-
pears to have been a lime of ilie greatest tranquillity the primitive
^hurch ever enjoyed ; nor has the apostle given the least him that
[lersecution was the cause of that precept. Tlie real cause was
the uncontrollable passions of these carnal jirefessnrs, which the
apostle strove to keep within some bounils, by certuiii permissioDs
■lind indulgences, in a lawful way; otherwise they would have been
ensnared by the deyil and their own lusts, and led into furnicatio*
and ailoliery. That lliis was the real state of many among lhe«v.
Corinthians, will appear very evident on examining the third, fliUi
and sixth cliaptera of this same epistle. Yettliat there were aoine
among them who were spiritually minded, appears evident by their
writing to the apostle on this sultject; and his answer is a clear
proof Uiat many evils liad got In among them.

We do not diaaeree wilh l\\c vi\nffllle, tliat diose who caano^ or
"■/// not abstain Irom fovnkttlion, -flovvXi ii^V-avet voTO^t^wA


CHAP. II.] OP THE CHURCH OP CHRIST. 281

confine themselves to one wife, and become orderly members of
civil society, than to continue in the practice of prombcuous de-
bauchery. But a thousand indulgences to carnal men and women,
can never purify the nature of lust, nor purge it out of the soul.
The marriage of the world still belongs to the first Adam, and not
to the second; to the kingdoms of this world, and not to the King-
dom of Christ. This appears evident from the apostle's own tes-
timony in this same discourse, froni which carnal christians draw
so much indulgence to please the flesh. Why do they not see the
distinction ?

" He that is married, careth for the things that are of the world,
" how he may please his wife.'' Also, " she that is married, car-
" eth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband."
But the unmarried, or those who live a virgin life,* "care for the
" things of the Loid, how they may be holy, both in body and in
" spirit." Here we see the principle of a holy life directly pointed
out; therefore let those who desire holiness, follow it. " I would
that all men were even as I myself," says the apostle, who himself
was not married. ^< I say therefore to the unmarried and widows.
It is good for them if they abide even as I."

7* But after all the apostle's permissions and indulgences to the
Corinthians, whom he declares to be " carnal," he points them to
a future day in which all these indulgences must cease; when
carnal gratifications, separate possessions, and whatever else among
chrisitans pertained to the customs and manners of a selfish world,
must be done away in the church of Christ ; and a more inward
and spiritual work be wrought in the soul, and a new order of things
succeed in the church.

" But this I say, brethren. The time is short. It remaineth,
" that both they that have wives, be as tho they had none ; and
" they that weep, as tho they wept not ; and they that rejoice, as
" tho they rejoiced not ; and they that buy, as tho they possessed
"not; and they that use this world as Jiot abusing it^ for the
" fashion of this world passeth away."

Some have supposed that the apostle alluded to a state beyond
the grave ; but a little reflection will show the inconsistency of this
supposition. To make it consistent, they must also suppose that
the practice of buying and using this world is likewise to be car-
ried beyond the grave. But this they themselves would hardly
believe. The truth is, that passage points directly to the second
coming of Christ, and the established order of hb Kingdom on
earth, in which the apostle evidently foresaw that a final cross
against the carnal indulgence of the flesh, would put an end to that
use which had hitherto been made of wives : That those who has!

* It ii evident that the apostle here alluded lo VYio«e N»\k|^ t* AVj \vit^ ^ "Tv^^6x^\&^^^s«■
.phn$t*8$akeaMd the gospt}% aadnot \« Vhoae "wYio "«w inftt«V| >a«B»»rtv*'^^ «^^^\Vbs*.^
iA eturaai iaduJgeaoew,


T, vrould enjoy them as fiiEters in Ciirist, and not as vi\ve» in
1 Adam: Thai tne churcl) of Christ, by being separated fropi the
I world, and united in spirit, winild possess a unil^ intereslf whii-b
I Voul<i preclude all buying and selling for iiidividual and selUsh
I .purposes : and that thereby a. right use ol* properly would take
' place in the church, where the things of this world would be used
[' without abuse: And thaij in this period, beltevers, under the ope-
i ration of an iowaid, spiritual work of God upon the soul, would
I both weep nnd rejoice in spirit, without discovering the feelings
I and c.^eruses uftnctr souls to the view of an unbelieving world.
Having seen, felt and experienced all these things, we are able
testify that no other meaning can, with any cniMisleocy, be ap-
I plied to the BpDSlle^s prediction. So clearly indeed has he pointed
out the millennial Church, in that short passage, that its fuiih and
order coultl. not be more completely described, in so few words,
notwithstanding the work has actually taken place. And we bless
God that we have lived to see the day in nhich it is so clearly and

Ianiply fulfilled ; that the true virgin life h made manifest in this
our day, and we are called to be partakers of H ; ihut we can
" po&sess this world as tho we possessed it not ;" for we know that
"the fashion of this world is passed uiea;/," as it respects the lives
wiiich we live in it.
8. " And I looked, and In .' a Lamb stood on the mount Sion,
f< and with him a hundred forty and four thousand, liaving his
" Father's name written in their foreheads.'"* This is not a mere
Mteriial name, consisting of significant letters or chatw:ten -, but
the pure nature of God being formed in them, the very image of
purity and holiness shines forth in their countenances, and displays
itself in all their words and actions. But who are these hundred
and forly-four thousand P " These are they which were not defiled
^lli' women; for they are virgins,"
Some suppose this lo include that particular number only, who-
vill attain to that honor. Be this as it may,it is a striking evidence
diat none but those who live a virgin life can obtain so great B
privilege ; and therefore such a life must not only he the most ac-
ceptable in the sight of God and the Lamb, Uui is that alone whiciv
can stand with li^ Lamb on Mount Zion.

"Theseare they whicli follow the Lamb whithersoever he goetlv,"
That is, they walk in perfect obedience lo the law of Christ, and
fellow his example in all purity and holiness; not defiling them-
selves with women, nor living in any uncleanness, or in any sellub
1 gratification whatever.
"Tbttse were redeemed from among men, being the first-frulw
onto Godf and to the Lamb." Having followed Christ in the.
^■■^uerafios;- tJiat ia,ii^ving %eAa\ifco(Nw^w S""ty,


CHAP. lU] OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 283

example, by taking up their crosses against all those carnal indul-
gences of the flesh which pertain to the works of generation, they
were redeemed from that nature by the regenerating power of the
Holy Spirit.

" And in their mouth was found no guile : for they are without
fault before the throne of Crod.'' They have taken up their crosses
against all sin, and every evil word and work ; and by their obedi-
ence to the law of Christ, have obtained a victory over the very
nature of evil: for how could they otherwise be without fault?
Such, and such only, are with the Lamb.* And the song which
they sing, is a song of praise and thanksgiving to God for their
redemption, and which cannot be sung except by those who,
through a life of virgin purity, have obtained complete redemption
from the lost nature of the flesh.

In this vision of John, is a prophetic display of the true charac-
ter of the work of God on earth, in the great millennial day of
Christ, which is, as it were, but just commenced. . And these
virgin characters above described, are the subjects of it : and none
will finally be able to stand the test of this great day, without be-
coming the subjects of this work, and attaining to tliis character.
Thus we have John's vision of the appearance of the Lamb on
Mount Zion and the character of those with him ; then follows his
vision of the everlasting gospel.

" And I saw another angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having
" the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
" earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people."

Here we find that the gospel is preached, after the appearance
o^ the Lamb on Mount Zion. This is an evidence, not only that
the gospel is to be preached after the second coming of Christ,
but also that those to whom it is to be preached had no previous
knowledge of his having made his appearance ; but are yet to be
informed of it by the testimony of the preacher. After this suc-
ceeds the fall of Babylon, and the judgment of God upon those
who worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark.

These things show that, after the second coming of Christ, the
gospel will be preached to all nations, kindreds and tongues ; and
that those who refuse to obey it, and still continue in the course
and practice of the world, will inevitably fall under the judgment
of God, both in this world and that which is to come. For the
loud voice of the angel alludes to the preaching of the gospel to a
sinful world, by ministers sent of God, with angelic or heavenly
power and authority. After this follows the harvest of the world.

* Those who live in sio, tho they may call themselves christians, they cannot be •• uithoat
fault before the throne of God/' and therefore cannot belong to this class: And tho theif
roay " name the name of Christ ;" yet if they do not •• def atl ^toxiv i^\'-~-~;njaiiT ''^^ ^^T^
religious professions, forms and ceremomes axebuXvi^Vb^K^^tfCivKt \ NJc^ns'^'s*!^^*^*'^"''^
of guile, fall efliet and hypocrisy.


ittU CONCERffl!

" And 1 looked, and heboid, a while cloud, and upon Wie cleud
< one sat like unto ihe Son uCmHii, liiiving on lib head tSeoIdai
1, and in his band a sliar)) sickle. And another an geV came
•• out of the temple, crying with n loud voice to liini ibal sal on
" the cloud, Tliniat in thy sickle, and reap ; for ihe time is come
P for thre ro reap ; for the harvest of the earth is ripe,"
T It will be proper to remark here, that ihe work ot'harvest, wbicli
I a pnigressive work, is a striking figure of the work of Chrisi'*
bcond appearing, which Js called The harvest of the leorld. As
^field of wheal is not cut down wiih one siroke of the sickle; btU
il which is ihe ripest is first cut down and gathered, and the
taping continued, as the grain becomes rijie, till all is cut down,
tparaied and gathered into the barn ; so is the harvest of the
borld, in the day of Christ's second nppeuring.

The while cloud represents a cloud or multitude of pure witoes-
s, those who stand on Mount Zion with the Lamb. The Sjiirit
it in these witnesses, is the sharp sickle, whicli goes forth
Jr the word of their testimony, through the preaching of the ever-
Uting Kospel, whicli cuts olT and separates souls from the life of
be world ; and thus they are harvested out of the world ; so (hat
Bleir lift h no longer of the world, but of Christ. Thus the prin-
Aple of a virgin life is implanted in them: "for they are virgins,"
|1ierefoie they can, henceforth, no more propagate a natural otl^
Bring than Ihe grain that ia gathered into the barn, and devoted
O be made into bread, for the use of the owner, can be again sbivo
b the earth and bring forth fruit.

[ The progress of the work here described will fulfil the pre-
Hction of Chrisi ; '< This gospel of the Kingdom shall be preaclied
pin all the world, for a witness unto all nations : and th« "'
F the end come."*


CHAPTER ni.

Concerning Obedience. —

The first duty which God requires of man, and in which it

lumprehended alt other duties, is obedience. This is essentially

I necessary for the fulfilment of the whole law of Christ, and indeed

L of every manifestation of God to man. " Behold, to obey is bet-

E ter then sacrilice, and to hearken titan the h\ of rams.''^ This is

»fte whole end and design of the law of nature, the law of Moses,

tod the law of Christ. Thus said Moses) " Keep therefore the

Fwords of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all

■ that ye do, "J And thus said Jesus ; " Not every one thai saith

\into mCf^otd, Lord, shall eti\et mto \\ie Ivtn^dom of Heaven ;

tf he that doeih the will o£ mj ¥a.\\vM «\i\0n>a'v&%w)W6.'>\\


CHAP. 111.] CONCERNING OBEDIENCE. 285

Hence it is evident that obedience is the only line of promise.
A man may believe all the law and the prophets ; he may also be-
lieve the truth of the gospel^ he may assent to all its doctrines, and
to every principle of the law of Christ ; and he may not only have
full faith in the divine mission of Christ, and call him Lord and
Master, and acknowledge him as the only Savior; but he may also
openly profess the name of Christ, and declare his full belief in all
his divine precepts, and acknowledge his life and example to be
the only rule of a christian ; and yet after all, if he does not truly
and sincerely obey the revealed will of God, given to him, all his
faith and all his professions will profit him nothing. Obedience
therefore comprehends the whole duty of man.

But it may be asked. Where is the true object of obedience to be
found ? to whom, and to what shall we yield" obedience ? and by
what rule shall it be regulated ? To which we answer : The Spirit
ef Christ is the true and real object of ^obedience : and its visible
manifestation is found in his body, which is his true Church.
There he has placed his name, and there is found the only power
ef salvation ; because therein his Spirit operates and governs the
whole body : hence the only true source and object of obedience
is in the Church of Christ ; and the obedience of every faithful soul
will center there.

Christ said to his disciples, *' I am the vine, ye are the branch*
es."* It is well known that the branch^ of the vinej-rf of a tree,
are subject, in all their opei^tions and productions, to the direc-
tions of that life which proceeds from the body. This supports
and regulates them : and no branch can bear fruit, nor even receive
any support from the life of the tree, when it is separated from it,
or has by any means lost its connection with the life of the body.
For tho a branch that is withered may continue to hang on the
tree for a time; yet if it cannot receive the sap, which is the life of
the tree, it must finally fall ofi*; because it is no longer subject to
the life of the body, and therefore that life can no longer circulate
in it. So it is also with the members of the humai> body, which
are supported by its life, and regulated and governed by the head,
as the leading influence of the whole body. No member, when
cut ofi* from the body, can retain its life, nor its subjection to the ^
head ; but having lost its union and subjection to the life of the
body, it must die.

Here then, is the most perfect figure of visible obedience, tho
proceeding from an invisible source. And shall we suppose that
the body of Christ can be less perfect, in its system of obedience,
than the vine or the tree, or even the members of the human body ?
Jesus Christ, when on earth, taught the will of his Father ; this
constituted the pure principles of the ^os^^V\ ^asA Vnr ^"^^sjSss^ir^


^Beej


eONtERNING OBEDIEKCE.

principles by his living example. Bwt llicse principles
eot obeyed by lliose who did nol belong. to bis visible body ; nor
bad lie any leading indueoce nny where but in bis body, and in
tiiose mrinbtrs who irompoied his body. "Now ye are the Irady
or Christ, and meniben in particular," salth the apostle.*

Thus the body of Christ is made up of visible members, and
bis Intiaible Spirit ia their life. This Spirit cannot direct the
. members to disagree one with another, or to be separated from
their union to each other. Hence it is evident that clashing opin-
ions, Jairing nystems, and opposite conduct do not belong to the
body of Christ, nor have they any part ia K. If Christ has a
church on eartli, then thai church must be his visible body;
therefore his invisible Spirit must be the life of that body, and of
course, must regulate and govern it. Hence we may see the great
aiistake of those who suppose that they can belong to the body of
Christ, or that they can partake of his Spirit, which is its life, and
yei have no union with his church, his only visible bodj. It is
«tierly impossible for any one, in such a state, to partake of the
Lfc of Christ. As well might the branches of the vine or tree, or
even the members of the human body, when cut off and seperoted,
still partake of the life of the body.

Many objections have been raised against ihe system of obedl-
^Ciice taught and practised in the United Society ; l^ul to the candid
mind, Ji IhUe reflection will ehow those objections to be very ud-
will doubtless tie readily acknowledged, thai in
every well regulated society or institution, tiiere must be a vidbU
bead, or leaditiET influence, by which the society or institution b
governed and directed, and to which each member must yield
obedience; otherwise there could be no order nor regulaiiun io
such a society; for a body without a head, can have neither lift
nor power, but must soon fall and be dissolved. But wliere there
is a leading influence, which stands as a center of union, the ord«r,
onion and harmony of the institution is easily preserved, by the
obedience of the members to that head or leading influence.

In a regular army of soldiers, perfect obedience is found essetK
tially necessary for the preservation of order, and the protection of
Ihe army. And as order and discipline is the strength of the army:
40 obedience is the very life of order and discipDne. Every soldict
is required to yield implicit olwdience to his immediate comnittnc^
er, and every officer must be subject tothe command of bis superior
ofhcer. This order of subjection extends, in regulnr gradation,
from the conimtm soldier to the liighest officer in an army; and
thus the whole army is ted and governed by ilie commander in
chief. Without this subjection, the largest army would

Jls strength and power, ami latcot&e an eaay conqu«
lemy.

" • VCot iVi.Tl


mm under in

Id™™ to


^^HAP.III.] CONCERNING OBEDIENCE. 28T

There is, however^ this essential difference between the dessola-
ting armies of blood-shedding warriors, and the harmless followers
of the Prince of Feaqe. The former are governed by the compul-
sion of arbitrary power, and the severity of military laws ; while
the latter are led and governed by the law of Christ, under the
mild and gentle, yet powerful influence of the spirit of peace and
love ; and by the infusion of that divine spirit into all the members,
it becomes tiie delight of all to be united in their obedience to that
divine law, which is implanted in the heart of every honest and
faithful leader, and by which the whole body is led and governed
in the most perfect harmony.

It is for the want of this united spirit, this oneness of heart and
mind, to govern and direct an army of contending warriors, that its
strength and power must be supported, and its order and discipline
maintained by the severity of arbitrary power. Consequently the
soldier whose heart is not devoted to the cause in which he is en-
gaged, who can feel no delight in the life of a soldier, so as to ren-
der a willing obedience to his commanding officer, becomes the
slave of arbitrary power under a tyrannical leader, and is under
the dire necessity of living a life of wretchedness in the army,
where he is liable to be compelled to acts which he abhors, or
hazard his life by his disobedience ; and yet even his obedience
cannot secure him from a violent and untimely death. But not so
in the Church of Christ, where every faithful member- is of one
heart and one soul, and where one spirit leads and governs the
whole body. Here no compulsion, no arbitrary power is found
necessary.

Again : The order of nature requires that children should be
obedient to their parents j that the younger children should respect
and conform to the elder.* Without this, there can be no well
regulated family ; confusion must necessarily ensue,"and '^ a house
divided against itself cannot stand.'' The Church of Christ is a
spiritual family; and as it is composed of visible members, there

* Thousands of children run the road to ruin in consequence of beings
brought up in disobedience to their parents. This ftiult generally lies
wiih tlie parents, or with those who have the charge of their earliest
years ; either because they are not governed by the principles of moral-
ity, in their instruclvjns, or because they do not implant the principle
of obedience in the minds of their children. Children who are not
taught obedience ^ their parents, from their infancy, according to the
order of nature, and do not practice it, are generally found to be more
unwilling than others, to yield obedience ti> the calls of tlie gospel, and
the spiritual work of God in riper years, even tho they should be fully
convinced of the necessity of it Such children, being left to follow their
own corrupt inclinations, are apt to become regardless of all law and
.nil government, except the government of their perverse wilU \ ^^<i-
therefore will neither be subject to the l&vrs o^ oJa wot \ssasv^ vi^:^i^sa^3^-
shsolute compujsion.


COhCtaMM. t)BLIJlE.\CL.


pusl be n visible head, to slanU as Ibe center of iafluence or lead-
gpow«riii I liy| family. As llie lentlJng power of the visible
iurcli is vested in Ihe Alini:>try, as llie visible lieaii; so in each
feparate fiunily of tite Socieiy, wliich is considert'ii us a branch of
me church, ilie leading power is vested in the elders who arc con-
fiilered Bs the \ieads of (heu- respective families. And so long as
visible tirad or leaders o( aay family conduct themselves in a
r woriliy of tliis trust, tl h necessary that tliey should bs
}beyed by till the members uf the family. Without this obt-dience
' o regulation, order nor harmony in the family.

is required to yield obedience to any thing contrary

the cslaltlished principles of the gospel, as revealed by tlie pre.

Eepts anrl exam|)le of Jesus Christ; but obedience is requlied in

Donformily to those principles only. This is agreeable to the doc-

^hrine taught by Mother Ann. " Vou ought to have your fuilli

■f* grounded in ihe power of God ;" said she ; " for that abtdetb

^< forever. Rut if your faith ii only in creatures, and tliey stioold

t^ fail, you are liable to come under loss.*' True taill) leads to obe-


Wence.

Many will profoss
t-Christ, and yet objec
^ooleing for Christ i


9 great union and submission to the Spirit of
a vbible leadeJ' in the church. Tliey aie
?veal liiniself, as an invisible guide and
eacher, to every individual, in a separate capacity, without any
lepondeoce upon the union of the body ; and expect to be guided
Ky the invisible spirit of Clirist, in iheir ono souls, separatdy, and
idependent of any visible leader. Bui tiiis doctrine is contrary
Bo every manifestation of the dealings of God with man, and is cal-
'fUlated !»)■ destroy the union and harmony of tiie church, by ren-
lering every individual independent of the body.

But no person can be united to Christ, and yet be at variance
with the members of lib body. And while the true members of
Christ's church are governed by his Spirit, they can have no ob-
jections against visible leaders: "For God is not the author of
I .^confusion, but of peace." Therefore, if the Spirit of Christ rules
W, }tl his church, (which cannot reasonably be denied,) that S^l
K will bring forward those who are the most suhable for leaders, Hid
remove them when they can be no longer useful, and supply iheir
places with others better qualified for tiiai duty. Obedience a
therefore always safe as well as necessary.

But the great and common objection against visible spirittial

leaders in the chutch of Christ, to whom all ilie nitmbers must V

subject, appears to be this ; " That Ihe scriptures of the Old and

I ' New Testament contain all the necessary instructions for the diri$>

lian'a conduct through life, and are the only rule of faith and

I _ practice." If this be so, we would ask why are spiritual tcachcrtf

appointed in almost every reWgiou&sutieVij'? VJeMeV^ivJiiat.tUij

>s necessary in order to opci\ and cx^'tua \Ve MLiX-^raei, 'iiA %\>w


CHAP. HI.] CONCERNING OBEDIENCE. 289

the people a right understanding of them, and to exhort them to
obedience, not to the teachers, but to the scriptures. But why
tlien do these scripture expositors differ so much from each other
in their sentiments ? and why have their discordant opinions pro-
duced so many jarring systems of religion throughout the world ?
In order to be able expositors of the scriptures, they ought to pos-
sess a goodly portion of that Spirit which dictated the scriptures ;
otherwise they explaia to no good purpose.

If these expositors were in real possession of the Spirit of Christ,
they would not disagree about the meaning of the scriptures, nor
concerning the duty of christians ; but they would be of one heart
and one mind, and would, of course, minister the same oneness of
spirit to all those members of their church who faithfully adhered
to their instructions. And hence there could be but one faith and
one baptism among them, namely, the faith of Christ, and the bap-
tism of. the Holy Spirit ; and this would unite them together, as
one body, led and governed by one spirit. Then every faithful
member of their church would feel the necessity of obedience, and
would readily practice it from a principle of love and duty to tliat
Divine Spirit which would then appear visible in the lives of their
teachers. And these teachers, being the true ministers of Christ,
would then teach them that one faith, and baptize them with that
one baptism, which is the very life of the body of Christ.

But the truth is, while they profess to teach others, they them-
selves have need to be taught the first principles of the law of Christ,
which necessarily includes obedience. Hence it is, that in their
attempts to explain the scriptures, they have no spiritual guide ;
but are led by the dictates of human reason and human wisdom,
which they themselves will acknowledge to be fallible ; of course,
all their instructions must be fallible. And hence also, they are
at all times liable to put wrong interpretations upon the scriptures;
and that this has long been practiced among them, their numerous
systems of religion afibrd a very striking proof.

Many will plead, that the obedience of Christ is sufficient for
all; and will quote the apostle's words: "For as by one man's
" disobedience, many were made sinners ; so, by the obedience of
" one, shall many be made righteous." But if they rightly under-
stood this passage, they would find it to be n^ argument in favor of
their plea. It is by following Adam's example of disobedience,
that many are made sinners ; and so also, by following Christ's
example of obedience, many are made righteous. By the disobe-
dience of the first Adam, he received a corrupt seed, and this
corrupt seed, which contained the evil influence of the wicked one^
has been communicated to his posterity by natural generations "^iscA.
they, by obeying this evil influence) beeovftft «vcvoKr&* "^^^O^^ "^^^^^
obedience of Jesus Christ, the second kd«a\, \\^\«r5£\n^^'^^^'^'

Aa


«f etema] life from Godj and this leed, wlilch contains the povpr

[ ef aalvniion, h carnmunicated by spiriiiial regon era lion, ta all who

•re willing to receive it; and ilicy, by olK^yingUieinfloenre of that \

■t, received througli faiih, berome rightcoux. Thus the apos-

^upression is TeriRed ; and thus n-e may see tfaat^ in order lo

[ be made righteous, we must be obedient, even as he was.

'.s man first fe)I from a slate of rectitude, and lost his

;ion to God, by disobedience ; so he must rise from his lost

■, and find his union and relation lo Christ, 6y obedSmce.

■1 of this, no soul will ever find salvation, and seeu " '""^^

bince in the Kingdom of Heaven.


CHAPTER IV.

7%€ Confctsiott of Sill. ,

s man, in his fallen state, is in tlie kingdom of darkness, and

r the government of the prince of this world, who is a pnncr

l^fdarkness; so his introduction into the Kingdom of Christ, which

I is a kingdom of light, must depend on his coining to the ligiil, and

I Knouncing all the works of darkness. And as all sin, and all

lanner of wickedness, are the works or deeds of darkness ; m> tbt

rststep towards walking in the light, is to bring these deeda (o

le light* And the only manner in which these evil deetfa eon

.le brought to the light and truly made manifest, is bj^ conression.

The open confession of sin lo the witnesses of Christ, was prao

F ticed in the primirive church, and was considered as the (irst fte>

\ eessary step for the admission of the sinner to the privileges of the

Vospel, and the only door of entrance into the church of Cbrist.

But the subsequent innovations and scandalous abuses of this doc

' ' le, in the church of Rome, have rendered it obnoxious in lh«

sofall theprotestant sectaries. And when these innuvatiom

knd abuses are duly considered, it cannot be a matter of surprise

[nat ibe doctrine was rejected ; for who could reasonably suppose

ibat Jesus Christ or his apostles could ever authorize or sanction

' SQcb abominations r Besides, the money exacted by the pnpal

I Glergy,'for the pretended pardon of sins, was a heavy tax upon the

Eople, who found it much cheaper, as well as much more agreea-
i to their feelings, to conceal their iniquities, than lo confess tlKm
o great an expense.
Hence the rejection of this doctrine by the proteslant reformers,
Tiet the popular feeling ; and a^eneral belief soon iirevailed, that
'« doctrine itself was the invention of the Romish church, and
.JS parposeJy designed to draw money fiom ihe people.
I^ef still prevails; andsosUoD6»ft«V"=V^^'*%^'^ "

'' "S«J«hi)iii. 19, SO.Sl.


lie- 'ttifr.i


CHAP, re.] THE CONFESSION OF SIN. 291

trine, that among all classes of protestant professors, wherever it
is mentioned, the general cry is, This is rank popery — I donH
believe in confessing sins to man — We must confess our sins to
God aloney mid not to man. And indeed, such scandalous abuses
of a divine principle, given in tender mercy to lost man, were suffix
cient to destroy the faith of the multitude, and create unbelief in
the principle, wherever these abuses were known.

But the abuse of a divine institution proves nothing against the
institution itself. In this case, it ought to be considered as an
evidence of its divine origin : for it was evidently a knowledge
that this was an institution maintained in the primitive chui^ch^
that enabled the catholic clergy to support its authority, after they
had so basely corrupted it. For no man, in his rational senses,
could be brought to believe that his sins could be pardoned for
money, if he were not first led into a full belief, founded on
something more than human authority, that the practice of confess-
ing sin before the witnesses of God, was an institution of Divine
appointment ; and therefore supposed he must do it, even if he was
obliged, on account of clerical avarice, to pay out his money for
the privilege.*

But this gracious principle, tho it had been so much and so long
abused in the church of Antichrist, was renewed in all its purity,
in the very commencement of the work of> God which gave rise to
the United Society. And it was followed by such evident displays
of Divine Power, as to carry the most powerful conviction in favor
of its divine origin. And all who received faith in the testimony,
and honestly confessed their sins, were blessed, in their obedience,
with an overcoming power over all sin, and felt a living witness in
their own souls, that this testimony was, in very deed, the testimo-
ny of God. They, did not feel as tho they were confessing their
sins to man, but to God, in the presence of his witnesses : and they
were fully convinced that they could not find access to God in any
other way. And this testimony has been maintained to this day,
as the first principle of obedience to the law of Christ. It was a
doctrine continually enjoined by our first parents in the gospel ;
and often, when people came to confess their sins, they were re-
minded of the sense they ought to have of it, in the following words :
^' Remember, if you confess your sins, you must confess them to
*^ God : we are but his witnesses."

That sinners are required to confess their sins in the presence
of God's witnesses, in order to find the forgiveness of God; and
that this is both scriptural and rational, and the only true order of
confession, will appear evident from the following considerations.

* Just so maox, at the present day, feel it their duty to attend the anemhlU.'^ fk< vV^sqak.
who profess to worship God on the sabbath> beca«M \\Nir^% wu'vo&i^XsSCvwci «»V ^^ -i^vvtow^v*^
ehuroh. even ibo, in its present corrupted 8\a^A, \tee^ ax* o>q.V\^^^ Va Y**^*'^'"'^^*^^^^^^
and pny out their money to a Mr^itlg prcwher, wh» pr»f CUtt t« ^tO^ <* 1^^ ^*««^
JMT w$Jif^ and withnit price !


^^s


THE CONFESSION OF SIN'.

' 1. We presume it will not be denied that all mankind are bom
^tu the wurlii with a sinful nature. And it j» equally iruc lliat all
Tive at (he a|^ ol maturity, and are capable or discerning
D good and evil, find that this nature brings fonh, in tbem,
its or actual sin. Hence it is generally admitted by alt pro-
of religinn, that a confession of sin, of some sort, is necex-
■y, in order to liiid fofgiveiiess and acceptance with God. Bui
(is a vide difference of opinion respecting the manner in whlcfi
confession might lo be made. Many contend for a secret
ifessioii to Gad aloni-. fiut we would ask, where is the sinner's
lurance that he can lind God in the secret chamber, and make
ifnsion to his acceptance ? We read that "The sacrifice of lh»
^wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of tlie
liprif;hl is Iris delight," Again: "The Loid is far from the
wickej ; but he heareth the prayer oftherighieous."* And again;
If I regard iniquity in my heart,'' saith David, " the LArd (rill
not hear me.'t

We find that, in all ages of the world, the established order of
God's intercourse with man, has been through the agency of man.
And altho, in many instances, there have been occasional manifes*
laiions of the Divine Spirit (o individuals, revealed ui various inttn*
lers; yet none could ever be brought into covenant relatioti with
lod's chosen people, without living i^ents, selected for that pur-
Wilness the case of Saul ofTarsus, Cornelius the eenlurioii,
id others, who, tho they were called by a manifestation of Divine
jhl, could not be brought into fellowshi|> with the body of Ood'a
ichosen jieople, without the agency of Uving witnesses belonging ta
ilhat body.

Nor do we find that God ever held any immediate intercourse
ith mankind, at large, or with any body of people, as such ; but
has always revealed himself through the agency of certain indi-
^duals, whom he had chosen as messengers of his will to others}
id the people were always required to leai-n the will of God front
fiiese individuals, as agents or witnesses of God, and lo find accesi
to God llirougli them. And it is worthy of particular remtirk,
that God has always chosen his agents from among the most lion-
et and upright, or those who have come the nearest to him in the
works of righteousness. Witness Noah, .\braham, IMoses, Satnuel
and tlie prophets, who were all chosen as the agents of God, to Aa
his work and reveal his will, and to stand between him and the
people.

We find also, that wherever God has had a covenant petite,
who have walked in his statutes, and have kepi themselves from
ibose pollutions in which the rest of mankind have lived, there,
" placed his name, and xHieie be l\a?> liceii found, and

Pntr. IV all 19. 1 ?».\\<i.i^.


CHAP. IVr] THE CONFCSSIOH OF SIN. 293

must always be found, if any where; because there is his true and
onJy habitation on earth; and there he has placed the only trea-
sures of Heaven that ever were, or ever can be found on earth by
^en man. And all souls who ever find access to God, and obtain
an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, must obtain it through
such a medium.

The power of salvation and eternal life is too precious to be
scattered promiscuously, in every direction, and aiiiong all sorts of
people, without regard to their state and situation, and other cir-
cumstances. It was purchased by Jesus Christ, at a great price ;
and he never could have purchased it, with all the sufferings he
passed through, had he not lived a perfectly sinless life in the mean
time. Therefore it is a treasure infinitely precious in the sight of
God ; and ahho, rjs the apostle saith, ^< we have this treasure in
earthen vessels;^' yet these vessels must be pure and clean; nor
can it ever be conveyed to mankind in any other. Nor indeed
can any one ever obtain this treasure, without first casting out all
the Devil's treasure out of his soul, (that is, all his sins,) by an hon-
est and free confession, and thereby purifying himself from all un-
cleanness, tliat he may become a fit vessel to receive this treasure.

2. As all the secret actions of men are open and known to God;
•therefore a confession made in secret, tho professedly made to

God, can bring nothing to the light ; and the sinner may, perhaps,
have as litde fear of God, in confessing his sins in this manner, as
he had In committing them. And as nothing is brought to the
light by confessing his sins in this manner, he feels no cross in it;
nor does he thereby find any mortification to that carnal nature
which first led him into sin ; and is therefore as liable to run again
into the same acts of sin, as he was before his confession.

But let the sinner appear in the presence of a §dthful servant of
Christ, and there confess, honestly, his every secret sin, one by
one, of whatever nature or name, and faithfully lay open his whole
life, without any covering or disguise ; and he will then feel a hu-
miliating sense of himself, in the presence of God, in a manner
which he never experienced before. He will then, in very deed,
find a mortifying cross to his carnal nature, and feel the crucifijLion
of his lust and pride where he never did before. He will then
]>erceive the essential difference between confessing his sins in the
dark, where no mortal ear can hear him, and actually bringing his
evil deeds to the light of one individual child of God ; and he will
then be convinced that a confession made before the light of God,
in one of his true witnesses, can bring upon him a more awful
sense of his accountability, both to God and man, than all his con-
fessions in darkness had ever done.

3. It must appear obvious to every 4^reftec\\\\^ xcC\\v^^ "^^s^. '^^
spirit which leads the sinner to convtmx €\t\,^xv\Vs«^\\. ^^'^^^^^^%


■ ' THE C


TESSiO.N OF SIX.


k directly conlrary Id ibat which le»t)a liim lo confeHtl. Amlif

liqimlly ohvioue ihal the sinnrr, if be mi)8l cimfess hit sma, wmdd

tci miher confess limn in secret, to an unknown God, whom he

P'Mmn>-L'l'unt, IwcEtuae he does not knun him, than to contcas them

e 11 fdlow being, wlicitu he beUeves In be a Inie and faithful ser-

If-vani uf titxl. Thus ihe s1nn«r can family imiT^ with ihf spirh of

'■rkncM, which cnncenls liis sins, wliile he frcls ii conscious dread

f the Kuii'it (if light which exposes them. And lierein we find a

iwnm evidence, thai the BpiiU of wicliedness in men, liatw an

Mn cMifMiKJun of nil], whije it u willing to subniit to n aocrct rnie.

".t must nbo be adm'dlvd, that no pi?rsi>n C'luld ever be induc«il

T before a real child of God, and lliere make un lKinL*st a

n confession of nil bis sins, but from a principle a( ujiti^htneu

d sjnceriiy. And under the inllticnce of sueli a principle, be

'd not conceal any, not even those whicli were the most mfa-

is and debusing to his character ; for such a principle is totally

ipposilelo that which would induce him to keep his sins conun-

And ns it is th^inalure and disposition of all wicked penjide,

n of ibe most abandoned charartcrs, to keep their wickedness

iceated from the righteous ; so we may judge froio thence, whicb

[iciple is the most consistent with tlie pure Hgt« of God, and

si agreeable lo rigbleousness and truth, that which leads tn an

I Imnesi confession, or that which leads la concealment, anti en-

ikavora to plead justification in making secret confensions to GuJ

, ^nc.

. Il is well known tliat many people, when under a deep con-
tktion of sin, in consetiuence of ibe intolerabte burden of tlieir si
e anxious lo find some kind and conlidentia) friend, who i
>dly person, to whom they can freely unhurllien their minds.
.t sucli times, a fecret confession cannot satisfy tJiem; they a
iltcxirous to make an honest and full confession of their sins to son
cme wliom they belierc to be a faithful aerviint of God. And tl
more wmfidence iliey can feel that sueb a one is a true witneas oT
Mod, tlie greater wiil be their hope of relief-
Many persons uii tlieir dcatiibeds, feeling sensible that Xb^y
iDusldie,and knowing that they have lived without hope and wilt-
out God in the world, txtve been greatly alarmed at th«ir sitonftx^
nnd ivith an awful sense of llieir sins staring them io the face, tbejr
have been constrained Io potir out their wicked lives, by confesaa^
their «n» lo any one that would hear ibem. Many criiainnls ntat
Vhose crimes have brought thtm to Uie end of Ibeir wicked enna
seeing Ibat ibey were just abotit to enter the etem^ worhl, widMH
any hope of pardon, hnve been suddenly awakened to a feeling sent
of the just judgnieut and condenmation before lliem : atKi under a .
(B (ocelli hie load of guilt, h^eheeiviead^ to cry out and confess thelir
tvifAoiit lh« least resWavti*; bcSoteVW vuioOT.SMxq^m-iJSWid*.


CHAF. lY.] THE CONFGSSiON Or SIN. 2d5

These things are the evident effects of the spirit of judgment
from God; operating upon the souL And while they present to^
mankind a figurative display of the awful situation of souls in des-
pair, under the guilt and condemnation of their sins, tliey ' " the
same time, point out the only means of deliverance from sin.
And would mankind but seriously attend to such awful monitions
as these, they might thence learn what sort of a confession God re-
quires of sinners, and be thereby induced to confess their sins to
his witnesses, while the day of grace endures.

5. The law of Moses contains a clear testimony of the true
order of confession which God required of sinners in that day. By
that law they were required to confess their particular sins before
the priest or elders of the people. ^ If a soul sin, and commit any
'^ of these things which are forbidden to be done by the command-
^^ ments of the Lord, he is guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. — And
'^ it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he
^^ shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing. And he shall
^' bring his trespass-offering unto the Lord, for his sin which he hath
^' sinned ; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning
" his sin."* These offerings were so particularly specified that, in
many cases, the offering itself pointed out the particular sin which
had been committed.

Hence it appears that, according to the law, every sin was to be
made manifest to the elders of the people. And can it be consis-
tent for christians, under the light of the gospel, to keep their sins
more covered in the dark than the Jews were allowed to do under
the law ? If so, how can they ^' walk in the light as Christ is in
the light?" Or how can they " have fellowship one with another ?"t

6. The order of confession which God requires of sinners, under
the light of the gospel, was clearly pointed out by the case of
Achan, in the time of Joshua. When Achan had transgressed in
'^ the accursed thing," and was taken by lot, Joshua said to him,
*' My son, give I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
^' make confession unto him, and tell me now what tbou bast done;
*^ hide it not from me."j:

Joshua was a type of Jesus Christ, and then stood as the visible
elder of Israel ; he was therefore the proper person to hear Achan's
confession. By the means of this confession the sin was put away
from the camp, and the favor of God was restored to Israel.
The place of this transaction was ever after called ^^ The valley of
Achor ;" that is. The valley oftrouble.W The promise afterward^
given by the prophet Hosea, that '^the valley of Achor" should be
'^ a door of hope," had a direct allusion to this transaction, which
was a iigure designed to show the true order of the confession of

♦ Ler, V. 17. and 5, 6. ' \ See l3oVvn\,n. \^«*ficux^-V^-

il Ackfr in Hebrew »\sQV&e«tr«\ii!bU*


lin undpr the ^:ospel ilispensailon, and Icc^ches ua ihst when soala,
hy tlio conviction of liieJr sins, are broiiglit into lh« valley of
Imubk, a Joor of hope is there Ojiened to ihein, by an honest con-
fession of their sins; and die nuBoner of ihls confession was, ia the
valley of \chor, plainly pointed out.

Achiin's transgression waa brought to light by his confession,
iiDd i}ie sin wa<i jiureed out of tlie cnmp o( Israel. 13ut as the (li»>
pviisatjun of the Inw was not the tlispensation of mercy, but of
judgmeni, it rcquirt^il the immedinte execution of the oflVnUer, or
an ei|iiivaleiil sitcrifice, as the only means of utunemeut for sin.
And as .\chitn's transgression woi of an extraordinary nature, no
uivalcnt sacrifice could be found ; therefore judgment was wie-
Ird upon bim, nnd his body was destroyed.* This was a figti-
ntive representation of the body of sin, which, under the gospel
dispeii«ation, is to be brought to light by confession, and destroyed
by the operation of ilie [aw of Christ.

The lot by which Achan was taken and convicted, was figura-
the of the power of conviction, which awakens soids, and casts
the lot of condemnation upon them, and as it were, arraigns tbem
before llie bar of judgment, where they must feel the just judgment
and condemnation of their own consciences, until they are willing
to confess their sins before the witnesses of God, as Achon did.
Tho Achan was discovered as a transgressor by the lot; yet the
■in which he had committed was brought to li^t, with all its cir-
cumstances, by his own confession. This was a figurative display
nf tlial sin-searching work in the gospel, which trill continue until
llie final cleansing and separation of all sin from the camp of (he
•KiniH, the true Israel of God, according to his promise ; "I will
search .lerusalem with candles."?

7* Among other striking figures which had reference to the coo-

ssion of sin, or to that work of judgment which was to purify

luls from sin, and cleanse tliem irom evil, we shall notice the

iver Jordan, and some remarkable circumstances connected willi

The name Jordan signifies lUver of Judgment, or DencemUng

iver, as some have interpreted it.|: And it is woriJiy of partici^

lar remark, that the situation of this river, and the peculiar vurit

of God that took place in it, at different limes, typified Ilie manner

ia which man must descend into the work of Judgment, and tbft

■absolutL- necessity of such a work ; as will appear from the foUcw

iog circumstances.

■ '• The River Jordan was the boundary of the land of CattaaOf
■on the side towards the wilderness, through which the Israelilea


[chap IV. THE CONFESSION OF SIN. 297

travelled to the promised land ; and they could not enter into the
promised land, without descending into this river and passing
through it. By this it w^s clearly typified, that man must descend
into the work of judgment, and pass through that work,, before he
can enter and take possession of the promised inheritance of the
saints.

2 When John the Baptist was sent to prepare the way for the
ushering in of the work of tlie Messiah, "to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord," the people who received his mission, came^
" and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." This
evidently pointed out the manner in which souls must be brought
to judgment, in order to prepare them to enter into the work of
Christ's Kingdom; that is, by honestly confessing their sins, and
passing through the baptism of repentance. This work is the
river of judgment through which souls must pass, and without
which they can no more enter the true spiritual Canaan, the pro-
mised inheritance of the saints, than the Israelites could enter the
land of Canaan without descending and passing through the River
Jordan.

^ The* case o^Naaman the Syrian, who was cleansed from his
leprosy by washing in the River Jordan, was a striking figure of
the manner in which souls were to be cleansed from the guilt of
sin. The plague of leprosy was considered, under the law, as the
most unclean disease of any that could come upon any person; and
was therefore a particular figure of the polluted and unclean state
ofa soul spotted with sin. When Naaman came to the prophet
Elisha to^ be cleansed from his leprosy, the prophet sent a messen-
ger to him, saying, " Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy
fiesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean."* But this
message was offensive to Naaman's proud and exalted feelings : he
had rather wash in the rivers of his own country. Yet he could
not be cleansed till he was obedient; and therefore, when he had
humbled himself, and washed as he was directed, ^' his flesh came
again like unto the flesh of a litde child." Thus he received the
promise and was cleansed. \

Herein was plainly prefigured the message which God sends to
sinners : Go wash in the river of judgment; Jhat is, confess your
sins and be baptized with repentance, and ye shall become as little
children, and be clean. But how contrary is this message to the
exalted nature of man ! He had much rather seek religion among
the formal professors of his own land, where this duty is not re-
quired; where they confess their sins in the dark, and wash in
their own rivers, or in other words, chuse their own ways of mak-
ing themselves christians. But debasing as it may feel to high-
minded and self-sufficient souls to become ^^i V\NS\r. ^3k\^^»>% "^^^
«

*9KwgiT.l9,


^98


THE CONFESSION OF SIN.


come iJowti to ihe real work of judgment, by confessing ibpir sio*
fo tlie tnie iviiiiesses of Gud; yet they can no more Ik cli^aitscd
fnim bin without pHssliig through tim work, than Naaman couU
be cleansed from liis leprosy without t\'ashing in Jordan.

S. We liDd the open confession of sin evidently enjoined and
plainly supported by many pas^gesof scripture. " He that etri^
~^nclh his »hi3 shall not prosper j but whoso eonfessetli and fop-
mketh ihem shall have mercy."* !So one will pretend thai he
' his sins from the All-seeing eye of God ; ye\ here a i
ivering spoken of, wliifh evidently alludes to concealing iIkid
ptu ihe witnesses of God, whom he haih sent to proclaim tlie
^1 nf the glorioi» gospel, "and preaph the baptism of reponiunce
i the remission of sins ''t

I Agreeable lo the icslimiiny of Christ, " There is nothing ^ove^

fed that sliull not be revealed; neither hid, that shall nui be

l."J It is certain ihat nothing can be revealed fnlhoul

■ting brought lo the light. But where is the light, and what is tt^

JThis was plainly revealed by Chiist, when he said to his disciples,

I Ye sire me light of the world. "|| If the followers of Chrisiare

le light of the world, then those who walk in darkness must come

I those whom Christ has declared to be tlie light of the worU,

■ Ihey ever expect to lind the light of truth, or be beuefitted by iL

y " VVlialsuever dolh make manifest, is lighi.'l) All sin is ilia

nk of darkness, and while it remains in darkucM, it is concealed;

tt when li U brought to the liglii. it then appears as it is. And

mly way for sinners to bring their evil deeds to the light, is to

iveal them, by confession, to those who are declared lo be the

^hl of the world. Here they must be uncovered and brought lo

« light : for a thousand conlessions made in secret, (in the dark,}

fill never bring one sin to the light ; and if the evil deeds of sio-

rs are not brought to the light, they never can be put awa/.

^ lierefore he who is not willing to confess his sins to the fulloweia

^Christ, who are the light oflbe world, need never expect to gH

d of them, nor flnd the forgiveness of God. In this manner iwjr

f to the light in Christ's first appearing. In the begimuis

hey came to John, " confessing their sins."*" In the apostle^

lays, "Many that believed came, and confessed, and showed thair

peds."tt

Again : " If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to Itn^

e us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."f(,t(

n is required of God to confess his sins in secret only, or U

leknowledge himself a sinner, without bringing his evil deedi (P

e light, we would ask, why are not those who practice tliis m

ST of confession, cleansed from all unrighteousness? Is Godun^

_ - J'm. 13. iMiiiVi 4 fcl.L^\K a, \\ijMv:


duBfitii^


CHAP. IV.] THE CONFESSION OF SIN. 299

ful to his promise ? or did the apostle declare a lie? No one will
pretend to answer these questions in the affirmative. What then is
the matter ? " All unrighteousness is sin," as the same apostle de-
clares.* But they go on, continually confessing in the same man-
ner, and are as continually committing sin, according to their con-
fessions. Hence they are witnesses against themselves, that they
are still unrighteous; therefore it is evident that they do not con-
fess their sins to Grod's acceptance ; and this is the true and only
reason why they do not receive the promise.

9. No truth is more clearly established in the sacred writings
than this; that God always had his witnesses, who acted as agents
between God and man ; sometimes to plead the cause of man be-
fore God, as mediators; and sometimes to communiciite the will
of Grod to man, as messengers. And it is equally true that God
always required man to receive these witnesses in his name, and
to render implicit obedience to them ; nor could mankind ever find
acceptance with God in any other way. The testimonies of Jesus
Christ are very plain on this subject : "Verily, verily, I say unto
" you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send,receiveth me; and he
" that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me."t And again :
" Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
" brethren, ye have done it unto me."f Since then, we are re-
quired to receive Christ through his witnesses, or those whom he
sends, and since what we do to them, we do to him, it necessarily
follows that, if we confess our sins to them, or in their presence,
as his witnesses, we really do it to Christ ; nor can we be accepted
short of this.

We readily admit that no man, of himself, hath power to forgive
sin; that power must proceed from God. The forgiveness of sin,
•ifter confession, must be wrought by the operation of the Spirit of
' jrod. But the promise of God is sure ; and, ^^the Son of man hath
lM>wer on earth to forgive sins."|| Therefore, if the sinner, on his
part, is honest and faithful in his confession, he can iiave no cause
to distrust the mercy of God, and he soon finds the proof of it in
his own soul, by a sensible manifestation of that Invisible power
which removes every feeling of condemnation which he before felt,
and (ills his soul with comfort and peace. And this power is an
evident proof to him that his confession is acceptable to God.

But it is proper to remark here, that this power must necessarily
come through some medium, either through the witness to whom
the confession was made, or some other person who had before re-
ceived it, and who, by his spiritual travel, stands in a nearer rela-
tion to God than the sinner can do in that situation. Besides^ a&
before observed, God always dispenses the ^otiw o^ ^s^s-asCvcysv \»
kttan through the agency of man ; and ther^^ot^ ^^ ^q^«^ <a^ ^^'^^


I


THE CONFESSION OF SIN*.

givmess which souls receive fivim God, must rom^ through lh«
Wltnessts or strvonls ol' God, who stand in thnt tut, oa agents or
tn^dialorn between God and man. The sinner may indeed receive
n refleciioi) of divine liglit, which may give him some view of hii
situatian, and produce cnnviciion of sin ; and it may point him to
(he (rue light, and thus enable him In corae to it. But as certaini}'
as he cumea to the true light, he must make manifest his evil deeds;
and he never can receive the abiding treasures of salvation in anj

Certain it is thai man, in his fallen state, can never come iin-
mediaiely to God ; hut whatever he receives from God, of a spirit-
ual nature, must either come to him through ministering sphiia, or
he communicated througl) living witnesses on earth. Therefore,
tlio a person under the powerful conviction nf sin, not knowing
the true order of God for the confession and forgiveness of sb,
may cry to God for deliverance, and may have his burden of con-
demnation removed or suspended, for a time, by the operation ol
some ministering spirit, and feel his soul comforted for a season ;

-yet, as the treasures of the gospel, for fallen man, are committed
to " earthen vessels," and as "the Son of man hath placed pown
on earth to forgive sins;" therefore sin cannot finally betaken away
Irom any soul, without a confession in the order of God's appoml-
nent, to his living wiinessea. This doctrine may appear new and
strange to many of our readers; but it is agreeable to the lestitnony
of Etbrnal Truth.

Jesus Christ, alier his resurrection, appeared to his disciples,
and said, " Peace be unto you j as my Father haih sent me, eWn
" so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on
them, and saith unto them. Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Wm-
•' soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them ; and whose-
" ever sins ye relaiti, tliey are retained."* Thus he commissioned
them to preach the gospel of peace, and gave them power |o remit
and retain sins. But tliis power was contained in (lie Holy Spjiit
wliich they received. And thus the apostles and elders of th«
churcli all had that power committed to them ; and so it is in t^
day.

Without lliis Divine power, neither the apostles nor any olhen
could ever remit or retain tlic sins of those who came to make con-
fession : hence they were dependent upon the will of God, inafli-
fested in this Holy Sph-ii which they had received ; and therefon'i
in ail iheir ministraiions, they were directed by the gift of God.
Thii* is agreeable In the testimony of Jesus ; " 1 do nothing of ray-
" self; but as my Father halh taught me, [ speak these things^—

^Jle (hat beiievelh on me, the works that I do, shall he do alsov-*

Jslruxi 51, M. 9!.


CHAP. IV.] THE CONFESSION OF 81N. 301

f' And whatsoever ye shall ask in ray name, that will I do, that
f' the Father may be glorified in the Son."*

. So it is in the present day : every leader and elder in the church
of Christ, is as much dependent on the gift of God, in all his spiri-
tual ministrations, as a child is dependent on its parents ; nor do
they ever pretend otherwise. Therefore, tho they are the agents,
or earthen vessels, (as the apostle expresses it,) to whom this trea-
sure is committed ; yet should they attempt to act of themselves,
in this holy vocation, without looking to God, and feeling their de-
pendence on his holy Spirit, they would soon lose cdl their spiritual
power, and be as destitute as Sampson was of natural power after
his head was shorn.

It appears by the preceding observations, that the law of Moses
enjoined the confession of sin to the priests and elders of the peo«
pie ; that the manner and order of confession was plainly pointed
out under the law ; and that the figures of the law, on this point,
evidently alluded to the manner in which it was to be practiced
under the gospel. It also appears that the operations of the Spirit
of God, in the work of conviction, clearly teaches that confessions
ought to be made before the witnesses of God ; that reason teaches
the propriety and consistency of it ; that Jesus Christ taught it; and
that it was practiced under the ministration of John the Baptist, and
in the primitive church until the falling away. And this doctrine of
auricular confession (as it is called) was well known to the catholic
fathers, and was practiced by them ; and that it was th^n, or shortly
after, wielded ly corrupted in the Catholic church ; so that its bles-
sed efiects were entirely lost many hundreds of years before the
reformation from popery took place.

But man is not required to confess his sins before the wicked ;
for this would be like bringing darkness to darkness, which would
naturally produce an increase of darkness upon the soul. Yet if
any one have wronged any of his fellow creatures, he is bound
to confess the wrong, and make restitution to the injured person,
as far as possible, according to the strict demands of justice ; other-
wise he can never find a just relation to the work of God. But
the true order of confession requires the sinner to come before one
or more of the real witnesses of truth, who possess the Spirit of
Christ, and there honestly confess, as in the presence of God, the
particulars of all his transgressions.

As light makes manifest, and truth reveals the real state of souls,
so this doctrine proceeds from the attribute of light in God, and is
supported by Divine Truth ; and in it is displayed tlie virtues of
humility and honesty. And thus a true principle of light is plant-
ed in man, by which soub find forgiveness of their sins and accep-
tance with God ^ and this b the only niea\v& oi^ vc^t^^!d!eC\<c^\v vcns^

*Joha rJii. 38 and sir. \% 13


[


' S02 THE RESURBECTIOS.

the kingdom of light. Hence lliis doctrine is revived, and fully I

establbtied in lliis dny of Christ's second appearing, as l'
door of liope for Ihe fallen race of man, and theonly entra
ibe Kingdom of Christ.


CHAPTER V.
The Resurrection.
The Besuireelion is a doctrine generally believed by all who
profess a belief in the chrisiiiin religion. But what constitutes the
real nature and substance of ihe resurrection, seems to be a subject
|Df dispute among many. The most general and popular belief is,
that tlie natural body of man, consisting of flesh and blood and
bones, after being divested of the spirit or living soul, and consign-
ed to the grave, will, at a certain future period of time, be raiKd
from the dust of the earth, with which it had lieen blended by dis-
solution, and be reanimated with ilje same living spirit, and ar-
traigned before tlic jutlgment seat of Christ, there to be judged and
consigned to a stale of everlasting happiness or misery. Tiiis doc-
irine is generally believed to accord strictly with the testimony of
the scriptures, and therefoi« supposed to be well founded. To
eradicate iliese long established impressions, and convince man-
xind that itiey are erroneous and a nti christian, and not taught by
divine revelation, is a task of no small magnitude.
" That there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just
and unjust ,"• is a truth which all most acknowledge; for Jesus
Christ hiniself plainly testified it, and also his apostles after bim:
ftlid without it, the hope of the christian is vain, and his faith vain.
Jhus Christ testified, saying, " The hour is coming, and note ii,
** when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God ; and they
** that hear shall live." And again ; " Marvel not at this : for the
<* hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves,t shall
f M)>^>*if >. e. monsimcntt or placet iif remembrana. Much strm
ii Uid upon vhc word gravei, as eiidenre that Christ alluded pu-liciilar-
ly to the natural body; but the originul word wliicli is translated frovn,
Vas used by llie tncient Greeks la siEnify placet ofremcmbraita, called
by tlie Homans manumenta, in Engljali moimmtnu, wliich is a more cor-
rect translation iban grava. But if those only who liuve monuments
creeled 10 their memory are lobe raised.the number must be very small
in proporlion to the whole human race ; for a vast portion have never

tcven had tiie hanor of being put into grawa. Jesus evidently used Ibe
' expression in a li^retlve sense, to show that the time was approacbin^
hi which til the fallen race, in tbelr various places and orders, vould be
hroii^t to a remembTmu ov conitiferatfan oftlieir lost state, and of what
they had done i »tld that liieir paB\V«ea,^\'liv aWWtw €m» -simld come
■nto nmembrance and be cVearly \ai4 oyen w ^^a ''N** ■. «\4\^w.^


CHAP, v.] THE RESURRECTION. 303

^^ hear his voice, and shall come forth ; they that have done good,
^< unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto
^^ the resurrection of damnation."* Many other passages might
be added in proof of the resurrection of the soul ; but all this has
no reference to the natural body, except as a figure. This will
appear evident from the following considerations.

1. Jesus Christ, when on earth, declared himself to be the resur-
rectio'h : ^^ I am the resurrection and the life : he that beUeveth in
" me, tho he were dead, yet shall he live : and whosoever liveth,
" and believeth in me, shall never die."t If then, Christ is the
resurrection and the life, it necessarily follows, that all who are in
Christ, are in the resurrection, whether their bodies be dead or
living. And also, if he that believeth in Christ, shall live, tho his
body be dead ; then it must be the soul to which Christ had refer-
ence : for the dead body of a man cannot believe, any more than
the dead carcass of any other animal. And again : If by the ex-
pression, " Whosoever liveth, and believeth in me, shall never die,"
Chiist alluded to the animal body, his promise has certainly fail<»
ed : for the bodies of all christians do die. Therefore Christ must
have had particular reference to the soul, and not to the body.

Hence it is clearly evident that the reanimation of the natural
body, after its return to the dust, is not necessary to constitute that
kind of resurrection to which Christ alluded. He evidently meant
that in him was that spiritual life which constitutes the true resur-
rection ; and that those who believe in him, and receive his life,
are made partakers of his resurrection : for it is the power of eter-
nal life, dwelling in him, which in truth constitutes the resurrec-
tion.

2. The apostle Paul plainly testifies that, ^< Flesh and blood
<^ cannot inherit the Kingdom of God ; neither doth corruption
<^ inherit incorruption."t Therefore the natural body, which i^
composed of flesh and blood, and returns to corruption, can never
be admitted into Heaven, even upon the supposition that it could
be raised firom the dust and be reanimated. Of course it must
either remain upon the earth or go to hell ; and therefore its resur-
rection can be of no benefit to tlie believer, seeing that, according
to the apostle's doctrine, it must necessarily be excluded from the
Kingdom of Heaven. << Neither doth corruption inherit incorrup-
tion." The natural body of man is corruptible. If then, as some
say, it is to be so transformed as to become incorruptible, then cor-

waked up to a sense of feeling, by the sound of the everlasting gospel,
which it the voice of the Son of God, they would either come to the
resurrection of life, by honestly confessing their sins, and obeying the
gospel i or to the resurrection of damnation, by obstinately refusing to
comply with the calls of the gospel ; as many are now doing, contrary
to their own Kght and conviction.


Mgtp,


BBption must inbcrit incorruption j which b contrary to tW^^^H
U^s express declaration. ^^^H

F But (istyt the objccior) the some apostle testifies, in thclflj^^
Inapter thai, " The Aend sbalf be raised in corruptible." Very trlK f
[wt vrhal dead ? Siirely the spoatle cou)d not mean the dead bodies
uf men and wguieoi for tliese are made up of tiesh and blood, and
■Bve returned to corruption ; and certainly he would not contradki
^Pniseir, and ihal in the same chapter too. The apostle here allu-
Ned lo dead souls, those who were dead in tiespusses and sins.
WAa in Adaiu all dii^, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."
Hbe sound of the gospel Irumpet wakes up souls who are dead in
Bte work4 of Adam, and raises them to llie tifcofChrbt ; andlhua
Key come into llie resurrection, according to the testimony of
Khrist to Martha; "lam ihe resurreLCion, aL>d die life: he ihal
Etolieveth in me, tho he were dead, yet shall he live."
i But the apostle says, " This corrupiihle must put on incorrup-
raon, and this mortal rausi put on immorlality." This is also true;
Biit ill what sense? It U impossible for corruption itself (o put oD
Htcorrvption ; and ii is equally impossible for mortality to put on
KnraoriHlJty. tl^uch a transformation can no more take place than
Hn can be transformed into holiness. Yel a soul lost in a corrupt
^^lure, and clotiied with a comipdble body, may put on incorrup>
B>n- Bui then all that corruptible stuff wliich it possesses, wheth-
Hr of bmly or spirit, must be put off: for corruption and incorrup-
Hon can never dwell together. So ailso a soul who possesses a
Riorlal body, may put on immorlalily; but that immortality can
ftoever render the body immortal. Nor can any soul he completely
' bappy in ils immortality, until it is divested of its mortal body,
Mfliid of e\'ery ihing else which is either mortal or corruptible.
|M)ien this takes place, then " Death is swallowed up in victory."
B ^Some have attempted to support the absurd notion, that the
jMural body is to be transformed into a spiritual body. But no
Bansformation whatever can everchange matter into spiriL "That
P* which is bomof the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of (he
E" spirit, is spirit.'' And tho thelivmg spirit may be enclosed in a
[body of flesh ; yet they cannot be so blended together as lo be-
come one in essence. The one is natural, temporal and morlalf
and must perish, like all other material substances; and the other,
being ofa spiritual and eternal substance, must exist forever. But
even admitting the supposition, that the natural body could be
transformed into a spiritual body, its original maleriab, being com-
posed of flesh and blood, must necessarily be excluded from the
Kingdnm of Heaven.

3. It is universally acknowledged thai, " God is a Spirit i" thai
tbe Almighty Creator anj Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, doea
'^' possess ti nutiiral body ot fteahani UiaaA. \{tftTOv>nA toso.^,


CflAP.V.j THE RESf^RRECTIOX. 305

and It IS also admitted that he is infinitely more great and glorious
in all his Divine perfections than any created being whatever; con-
sequently he needs no natural body to complete his glory. It
then follows, that the natural body is not necessary to complete
the happiness of man: for if man really needs a natural body to
complete his happiness, then he must need something more than
his Creator possesses, in order to be completely happy, which is a
complete absurdity.

But if the natural body of man is not necessary to complete his
happiness, then why should it be raised again ? In its present state,
it is considered as a clog to the soul ; and if the soul of man is to
be clogged with a natural body to the endless ages of eternity,
while the angels and ministering spirits have no such clog^ how
can he ever be made equal to the angels ? He must, upon this
principle, forever remain inferior, without the most distant hope
of ever becoming equal; yet according to the testimony of Jesus
Christ, ** they are equal unto the angels;" and, "Know ye not,'*
saith the apostle Paul, " that we shall judge angels ?"* Thus the
doctrine of a natural resurrection appears altogether inconsistent
and unreasonable.

4. Every discerning person will doubtless acknowledge that the
flesh is a clog to the spirit, or in other words, that the body is a
clog to the soul. And tho the body is given as a temporal taber-
nacle for the soul to act in, and prove its obedience and subjection
to the will of Gody in a state of humiliation ; yet it was intended
from the beginning, that the soul should, in due time, be released
from it, and enjoy a state of greater freedom than it was capable
of enjoying in it. And as the righteous are capable of enjoying
more happiness when released from the body, than they can possi-
bly enjoy in it; so the wicked are capable of suffering more mise-
ry in a separate state, than they can possibly suffer in the body
without destroying the life of the body. Hence a separate state is
indispensibly necessary for both the righteous and the wicked
that both may be able to feel and sensibly realize the due reward of
their deeds. But they never can return again to their earthly
tabernacles.

5. The resurrection, in its fulness^ is the highest state of glory
ever expected by the saints. But according to the doctrine of a
carnal resurrection, the highest state of glory to be obtained by tbe
righteous, cannot be realized short of raising up that dead and dis-
organized matter which once constituted the soul's earthly taberna-
cle. And if the soul must again be confined in this, and clogged
with it, in order to be- made perfect in glory, it must be because
this dead matter, which was originally composed of the elements
of the natural world, is of a nature su^tvbit Vi ^^ v*SS.^ ^NsL^S^svNa.

*LtA§ zf 96. aad t Cor. ti. 3.


npmfd of ihe elemrnts of the spirilnal wor\d: Iiow else couM
isibly increase the glorj of the soul by being reunited with il f
t is obvious tliat in iliis case, lite body niusi be first in view,
nnd iherefore must forever eclipse tiie glory of the soul. But tins
absurd docirine would, if Inie, wliolly reverse lite estftblishcO order
of God's CTeaiiufi, in which the eanlily part whs formed as a mere
temporary sh^ow, 10 represent that spiritual and eternal sLibstanc«,
which was to succeed.

€. The work of Gotl in the new creation, is a splriluat work,
and not nuturol. " That was ikol first which is sjiirilual, bul that
i natural, and afterward that which is spu'ltual.-'* The
sent world with all that pertains to it, is nalunil and tenipora),
Ing created for lime; and as before staled, ii is but a shadow or
^re of (he spiritual world. And iho lite slmdow or figure cf a
ing may represent the substance ; yet every one knows thai it
fiCui never be transformed into the substance which it is deai^Tied
O represent. The picture of a tree can never be transfurmed into
ptteol tree, nor can the shadow of a man, ever become a hving

The great object and d.-sign of the resurrection is to. raise souls
'B of their natural, fallen and depraved state, into asjtirilual and
nvenly slate ; il imisl theiefore be a spiritual, and not a natural
^k. To suppose it a natm^l work, df^lgncd to operate npon
tural bodies, ho as to transrorm them from sordid dust to a lieav-
y asd eternal slate of existence, is to remter the »pirifiial erea»
n of God subservient to natural and material substances, nnd
'lependent on such for its accomplishment; or else It Hitist suppose
the natural to be superior to the spiritual. In either case, k must
also Buppcse the natural bodies of men to be eternal, as well as
their souls, since they are to be raised up and eternally reunited
to the soul. Such absurdities are too glaring to obtain the aeSit
•tf any enlightened souL

But (replies the objector) it Js to be raised a spiritual body, m '

Eith Ihe apostle ; '• li is sown a natural body, it is raised a splri-
Kl body." Very good ; this is agreeable to our faith ; this point
ice granted, and iIk dispute is at an end. But ifii is to be r»ised
spiritual body, it cannot be made up of the materials wj-jch com*
pose thenatural body; for it would then be anatural body allllf
mid must be seen by the natural eye ; whereas a spiritual body
•cannot be discerned by tlie natural eye. " The natural man re-
-■ ceiveth not tlie things of the Spirit of God; fur they ore foolishness
" unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
" discerned."t Yet when thenatural man hears of theresurreettODf
itf readily applies it tothereHnimalion of the animal body, fully h
Jieving that la be its true meatung. Ti\aW\*«'uleasQf it a


CHAP, v.] THE RESURIU5CTION. 397

then he receives and understands the highest spiritt:^ work of God
that will ever be revealed on earth, by the gospel. If tins be so,
it entirely falsifies the apostle's declaration. As the new creation
of God, in the spiritual world, with all that pertains to it, is spiri*
tual, and not natund ; so nothing which is natural can be admitted
into it. Therefore the natural body of man, with all those mate-
rials of which it is composed, must be forever excluded from it.

7. The apostle Paul, in his speech before king Agrippa, ex-
presses himself as follows : ^^ Having therefore obtained help of
^' God, I continue unto this day,, witnessing both to small and great,
^^ saying none other things than those which the prophets and Mo-
^^ ses did say should come ; that Christ should suffer, and that he
^^ should be the^r«/ that should rise from the dead, and should shew
" light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.'^*

If then, by the rising from the dead, we are to understand the
reanimation of the natural body, Christ was not ihte first who rose:
for, according to the testimony of the scriptures, there bad been no
less than six dead bodies reanimated and raised up, before Christ
arose, three of which he himself had raised. Perhaps it will be said,
that he was the first who rose in that extraordinary manner.t Let
this be granted ; but if it be still contended that his natural body
was reanimated, and that this was his real resurrection to which the
apostle had reference, let the manner be never so extraordinary,
this does not alter the case; it was not the first dead body that had
been raised, and of course, not consistent with the testimony of the
apostle. Hence the apostle must have had reference to a spiritual '
resurrection, or Christ could not have been the first that rose from
the dead.

The resurrection of the natural body of man, is strongly argued
from the supposed resurrection of the natural body of Jesus Christ,
which is thought to be established beyond dispute, by the fact that
it was not found in the sepulcher where it was laid, and by several
particular circumstances connected with his appearance to his dis*

* Acts xtyi 33, 23. See also 1 Cor xy. SO. Col. i. 18 & Rev. i 5

t The resurrection of Jesus Christ was indeed more extraordinary than the natural mair
can hav&any conception of; because it was a spiritual resurrection, the first and the gpreat-
est that ever did or erer can take place on earth. But if it had been nothing more than the
reanimafion or rising of his earthly tabernacle or natural body, it could not have been sa
extraordinary as that of Lazarus, who rose in open sight of many of the Jews, after he had
been in the grave four days, and was seen personally alive, probably by thousands who were
open enemies ; whereas Jesus could not have been dead much over thirty six hours, having
expired about the niuth hour, which, according to our computation, was 3 o*clock in the
afternoon, on the 6th. day of the week, and rose very early on the morning of the first,
(which wan the 3d. day after his crucifixion,) pix^bably before 4 o'clock; for the womei^
were at the sepulcher very early, *• when it was yet dark," and the sen, at that season of
the year, must have risen before six, (it beinff in April.) and the day must then have dawned
soon after 4 o'clock. Besides, no one saw him rise, nor do we learn that any one saw him
after he had risen, except his own disciples, and those that believed on him. But even if
he had been seen to roll away the stone himself, and come out alive, in the open view of as
many people as saw Lazarus rise, taking all circumstances into consideration, it could not.
have been so wonderful to the Qatuntl buo as the ce8(iCt«c\JLWCi ^llA'^iM^Ukv^V^'^Wkji-^^K^^'*^
the gra ve four dajs.


I


ciplM urter Ilis resun-pciioit ; siieh as the following^ "Andtlwy
'* eaiM and held liim by tbe feel and worshipped htm. — Gehuld
" my handa and my (t^, that il U I myself: handle me and see ;
" for a Euirit hath not flfsh and bonea, as ye see me have. And
" when he had thus si)uken, he showed theiu liis hands and his
" feet. — And aficr eighl days, again his disciples were wilhtn, and
" Thomas with ibem : ihen came Jesus, the doors being shut, and
" stood in the inidsl, and said, Peace be unto yoii. Then satih he
tu Thomas, Knich hiiher thy finger, and behold my hands ; and
reach hillier ihy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not
** laUhWs, but believing,"*

These passages have been carefully examined and fully answer-
«d by Br. John Dimlavy. of Kentucky ,+ and therefore it is less ne-
cessary to enlarge upon the subject here. But it may not be im-
proper to make a few remarks for the reader's consideration.

1. It is readily granted that the natural body of Jesus was raised
from the sepulcher and taken away. This was necessary, not
only for the conviction of his disciples who, before they received
the Holy Ghost, were but natural men, and had not ibemsetves
received any understanding of the true nature of the resurrection,
but &lso for the conviction of others who might aflerwards receive
theirieGtimony; that the disciples, after being convinced themselves,
might be able to convince a lost world, whose carnal sense nnd
underalan dings rendered it very dilficutt for them to believe spiri-
tnal truths, unless they were confirmed by circumstantial evMejice^
which they could not overthrow. For, as their ideas of a resurrec-
tion were natural, it would have been very diflicult to persuade
them that Christ had risen from the dead, in any manner, so long
as they could see his dend body still lying in the sepulcher.

2. His appearing to his disciples in the manner he did, aai
owing his liands and his feet, and his wounded side, his eating
:fore them, and speaking lo them as lie did, were circumstances
idenily designed lo calm their fears and make them conversible,

' 'le might be able, in a free and familiar manner, to gain Ih^r
and confidence, and enlighten their understandings, by de*
, concerning the nature of that spiritual work into whicb ihw
soon to enter, and which they were not able to understaml m
their (hen present situation. Hence it was necessary that the ideas
of a natural resuriection should first be represented to their mitids,
as a figure of the spiritual, before the real nature of ilie spiritual
could be received. It was doubtless for the same cause tliat LaEa>
rus, and others were raised again to natural life ; nacnely, to show
forth by these natural figures, the certainty of a future resurrection}

■JfjII IlWii e. LuVetlii'. SS.V). JliIiiiii 3G.3r


CHAP, v.] THE RESURRECTION. 309

but that it was to be a spiritual resurrection, could be revealed only
by the Spirit.

It may be objected that, if it was not the natural body of Jesus
Christ which appeared; ^e must have deceived his disciples, by
persuading them that it was in reality his natural body, and not
his Spirit, while in fact there was no natural body there. This
does not follow : his appearing to them in different characters, as
that of a gardner, a stranger, and the like, is liable to the same ob-
jections. He could not deceive them by talking with them con-
cerning his natural body, which was but the figure of himself, and
the only medium by which he could represent to them the reality
of his resurrection, while they were altogether unable to compre-
hend the substance. Had he endeavored to persuade them that
there was no substance in the case, that it was all a figure, he would
have deceived them ; but this he did not do. He gave them as
much light as they, at that time, were able to receive, and convey-
ed it in a manner the best adapted to their understandings ^ and
what could he do more?

His expression, ^^ A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me
have,'' is no evidence that he then really possessed a body of flesh
and bones, any more than his appearing to John as a ^^ Lamb, hav-
ing seven horns and seven eyes,'' was a proof that he was in reality
such a creature. The truth is, he appeared to Ms disciples in the
natural form and figure which he had when with them, as a man
having flesh and bones, and not as a glorified spirit ; and thb is
the true import of his words in the original.

3. Jesus testified to Nicodemus, saying, ^^No man hath ascend-
^^ ed up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even
" the Son of man who is in Heaven."* Hence it is evident that,
as the natural body of Jesus never came down from Heaven, tnit
was <^made of a woman," it could not be that which ascended up
to Heaven. ^^ That which is bom of the flesh, is flesh ; and that
which is bom of the Spirit, is spirit." And according to the tes-
timony of the apostle Paul, before cited, ^^ Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God." None will pretend to deny that
the natural body of Jesus was made of flesh and blood^ like that of
any other man; therefore his natural body could not enter and
inherit the Kingdom of God in Heaven.

But even admitting that it was indeed the natural body of Jesus,
the same that was crucified and pierced with a spear, which ap-
peared to his disciples, we would ask. Why were the WQunds still
left in the body ? Was not €rod who raised him from the dead, able
to heal his wounds ? Or was it necessary that lie should forever
bear in his body the marks of Jewish ^barbarity ? If so, how can it
ever be a glorious body^ as it is called ? B«ftvS»&^\^CiVK>sfi^^>:«^

*Johoiu. i3.


I


iURRECTlON.

I b to be forever disfigured with the cruel wounds infficted on It by
rhis perseciiiors, then the bodies n( bis faithful martyrs, who have
guOeiod all manner of abuse on ilieir bodW, for his sake, must re-
e condition, or tliey caitiiut be like iheirraaster:
and if this is to be the case, what a grotesque figure musi they mftke
in Heaven .'

4. It must appear quite inconsistent with the established laws
I of living animal bodies to be capable of iransrormalinn, so as to
appear, tit will, in diflerent fomis, and to pass through material
t substances willinut making any breach, and to vanish iastontly
1 from tlte natural sight. This power is generally believed tote
7 peculiar to spiiilual bodies only. Yet it is evident that Jesus Christ
I not only appeared to his disciples in a variety of characters, such
f as a gardner, a travelling stranger, an unbodied spirit, in bis naiu-
I ral appearance when with iheiu, and with his wounded side and
I other marks o( his crucifixion ; but he also appeared suddenly in
^Ihe midst of them, while the doors were shut, and as suddenly van-
> Ished fj'om their sight. He also appeai'ed to John us " a Lamb
having seven horns and seven eyes."* All these dilTerent appear-
ances are evidently far more consistent with the doctrine nf a spui-
tuat body, than with that of a natural one, and afford a conclusive
f evidence that there was no natural budy there.

. The declamtion of the Almighty to Adam, concerning the
L forbidden fruit, was positive : " In the day that thou catest thereof
thou shalt surely die.'' All must admit that this death was spirJluafi
and not natural ; for, according to the record, Adam lived to the
advanced age of nine hundred and thirty years. And it will doubt-
leas he admitted also, that Christ is the resurrection, according to
{lis own testimony; and that he came to redeem man from the
death of the fall, from that deiith which he suffered by transgres-
sion ; to raise him from a death of sin to a life of righteousness;,
hence this resurrection must of necessity be spiritual, and not nntu-
iral. What authority then have we to believe that the natural
hody of man will ever have any share in this resurrection i*

We have the authority of Job, replies an objector. Job evfi,
" Tho after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in niy Jlah
** shall I see God."t But it is well known that ihb translatMn is
dbpDled by those who are acquainted with the Hebrew original.
They say the particle there translated in is more properly readeied
viit of or from. And we find in the mai^Jn of some of our large
Bibles, that ibe whole verse is thns translated ; " Alter [ shall
ike, tho this body be destroyed, yet out of m>ffle»h sliall I
God." The translators of the Bible doubtless had the same
ideas of a carnal resurrection which so generally prevail at the pre-
Meal day; and therefore tt wiim%van.\ (oc i.hem to translate thi»

JttV.y.S. \Ia'6.:M.1


CHAP, v.] THE RESURRECTION. 311

passage according to their own belief and understanding, in prefer-
ence to giving it a difierent sense, especially as the words were
susceptible of different constructions, and the real meaning might
have appeared dubious to them.

6. The established order and progressive growth, maturity,
decay and dissolution of all things in the natural creation, is a con-
tinual and striking proof that nothing which becomes old and de-
cays or dies, can ever revive and be renewed again. Altho the
old creation, with all its established order, is to be superseded by
the new ; yet God never designed that the order of the new should
be- established on principles contrary to the established order of
the old ; Jbecause this would at once defeat the object and design
of the old, which was to be a figurative representation of the new,
and from the spiritual substance of the old, the new was to rise.
But if the old natural body is to be raised up again from the dust^
and established in its original form, in the new creation, it must
be on principles directly contrary to the established order of the
old creation, and must therefore defeat its original design. This
would render God's plans inconsistent with each other, which
cannot be ; because €rod is a consistent Being, and all his plans
are perfectly consistent with each other.

Let us suppose, for instance, that instead of raising up a new
oak from an acorn, which is the natural seed of the old, God should
raise up the old oak, which had fallen down and rotted, and min-
gled with the dust of the earth, and should establish it again a liv-
ing tree ; would not such a resurrection of the old be directly con*
trary to the original order and laws of nature ? And would such a
manner of operation bear the least shadow of comparison with any
of the works of God ? Yet a new and beautiful oak may be raised
from the seed or acorn, which is the only living remains of the old ;
and it may also be formed, by the hand of cultivation, into a far
more beautiful tree than the old ; and be fitted and prepared for a
more exalted station than the old tree ever had, or ever could have,
without the same care and operation. The same observations
will apply to any other tree or plant whatever, as well as to many
other things : for the whole of the old creation, in its natural state,
is filled with figurative representations of things in the new and
spiritual creation of God.

Altho the language of the apostle Paul is very clear and explicit
•n this subject, yet it seems that the generality of professing chris-
tians are so far prepossessed in fevor of a reanimation of the same
material bodv, that they really suppose the apostle is supporting
tliat principle, when in truth he is arguing against it. '< Thou
sowest not that body that shall be.'' It is generally, but errone-
ously supposed that the apostle here had refereuce-tAA.^^V$«!ora&k.^
a dead corpse in the grave 5 but e\«iv TaL^m\Vca\^^^\^\*^^s»'*^***'


^^^^ THE RESURRECTION. [pART VI,

iog, it seeDis Strang*^ that nnji one should imagine thai llje aposlle
meant to say the same body shouitl rise again, when his words sii
plainly imply tlie contrary. *' Tliou honest not that body liial shall
be." Had he oaiilted the negative adverb not, and said, '* Thou
sowest that body that shall be," we might then suppose that) in this
expression, he advocated the resurrection of the same body j but
■hen he must have contradicted himself; because in other parts of
the chapter he talks very differently.

Bui the tniih is, the apostle, in this espression, had particular
reference to the act ef depositing seed in the eurih, as a figure to
ibow the nature of the resurrection. For as it is with seed wbidi
ft put into the ground, having a prindple of life in itself, and being
quickened by the power of vegetation, the body of it died and rots
in the earth, before a new body of the same species can rise from
ft, and come to maturity; so it is with the natural roan wheu-tami
in the gospel field, his spirit must be quickened by the renovation
ifower of Christ, and all that belongs to tlial earthly nature in wbirfi
be was born and brought up, must die in him ; and the soul miist
fle renewed and grow up into the heavenly nature of Christ, who
js the resurrection and the life. When it is thus raised, it is fit foi
the Kingdom of Heaven, but not before.

Again: "Some will say. How are the dead raised up, and wiih
'* what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowcsl is
f not quickened eicept it die." If we are to understand by ihls
,^wing, the at:t of putting the dead body into the grave, as some
suppose, then we must also understand that tin Head body dies

Sfterit U put into the grave, which is a most glaring absurdity,
ut if this DC not granted, then the dead body can have no pari in
Ifae resurrection : "for that which tliou sowest is not quickened
iexcept it die."

"It is sown a natural body." The apostle, in this expression,
evidently alluded to ihe sowing of the seed of man, which produces
a mortal being, in which is a spiritual substance clothed with a
IDortal body, composed of the elements of this world, and id a
fallen, depraved, corrupled and feeble slate, subject to death and
exposed to sin and misery. And this spiritual substance Is lliat
which constitutes the real man, which, as the apostle says, "is sown
*'in corruption and raised in incorruption — is sown in dishonor,
^' and raised in glory — is sown in weakness, and raised in power —
" is sown a natural body (that is, in a natural body) and raised a
" spiritual body ;" for it is evident, and well understood, that wbile
the soul is in a fallen state, it is considered and accounted natural-
Its life is natural ; and this Ufe must die before it can tie raised to
^ heavenly life. Thus it is plain thai, " there is a natural
^ind there is a spiritual bodj."

"It is sown a natural haiy, \\.'\% rivx^ -a. v^v


CHAP. YI.] THE DAT OF JUDGMENT. 313

te iowing alludes to the introduction of the natural roan into the
Mtoral world by generation ; so the raising alludes to the rising of
the loal into the heavenly world by regeneration, and thus it be-
'eomet a spiritual body. Hence it is not the natural, but the spir-
iliiBl body which is the subject of the resurrection. This may be
dLeoxfy seen and understood in the close of the apostle's discourse
on tliJS subject, where he respectively points out the descent and
onler of the natural man from the first Adam^ who was ^^ of the
^eutfiy earthy;" and the descent and order of the spiritual man
fiom the second Adamy who was ^' the Lord from Heaven, a quick-
cnngspirit."*

■• ^ There are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial," saith the
Vjpostle; ^^ but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the
tnqptrial is another." The terrestrial bocties of men and women,
like the terrestrial bodies of other animals, are composed of the
temporal elements, and are created for time. But the celestial or
spintual bodies of mankind are composed of spiritual elements,
md are created for eternity. The true glory of the former con-
sists in their operating in their proper places and order, in doing the
work required of them in this terrestrial world ; while the true
glory of the latter consists in their operating in their proper places;
•and order, in doing the work required of them in the heavenly
world.

- Thus we may see that the true resurrection consists in the rising
of the spiritual part of mdxifrom the terrestrial elements, into which
it has been sown by generation, to the celestial. By the operation
of the Spirit of Chnst, in the work of the regeneration, it is formed
into a celestial and heavenly body, endowed with immortality and
eternal life, and thus it becomes an everlasting inhabitant of the
celestial world; and thus it is that, <<this corruptible puts on in-
oorruption, and this mortal puts on immortality." This glorious
work of the resurrection has commenced, and will continue with
increasing power and progress, until all souls shall have experien-
ced its effects, either by coming forth to the resurrection of life, or
to the resurrection of damnation .


CHAPTER VI.

The Day of Judgment.

The Day of Judgment is inseparably connected with the Resur-
rection; andtho the belief in both is probably as extensive and
universal as the profession of the christian religion ; vet mankind
appear to be as much in the dark with respect to the former as the
latter. But tliat << God hath appointed a day in which he wil)

* See i Cor. xr» 4&, fte* *


lUB DAV or JCMUtKHT. [PABTVl I

B,' mai rtada imputlai jintii

« «M ftuHwu**y aftMM to, bj tli'> :'

■t^ ^ ^MbBl a^ of ike wwU ; ana

_v ortfamd and naCtiBnl by ov umi] J

■ H"1^— ladttd sncka jvd^Mcut is iDfisper,~

an Ar vo^ aaUfc ef i^bLoataat aad jnsikv in G.ki.

B«*hai Mdntdijaf judgseat? smIm «hal nxuiinn- n it t«

? TkK ate (iMMiaai of w> small caoeen W

'iDf to ibewvliopnAntiK christian ral^wi,

K^TcscbriMtaBt, are &m and conitdem ia ibt

^, tlitf tke dij of j w^itH t b a csiaia appoinml daf, ya

n, n mHA Ibe wmc creatMe wiD be piM io tbe most UnMt

modaa; wbtn tlie Lixd Jtsa* Cbrist will suddenlj dcmrf

B bejvmA ibe Hanr r^ioos, and penoaaSlj appear in tbenfr

doneals at cloadi and ffaming firr, surrounded nnth inifllW

F takoi and aoerii, and with b vmte surpas^ag len tboHni

'en, win call up all die d«id bodies of Adam's race from (bar

I, and their soub from the eternal irorid, and cause tJiem h

.V, soul and body, in full forin and stature, and in all tbdrAV'

T life and sensation, before his awful throne in the skies, ibrre

' to receive tbm final and irrevocable sentence of salfatioo or daoh

nation.

But we would ask, how these ideas of the day of judgment can

be reconciled with tlie opinion generall}' enlerUiined, bj tbeae same

son of climtjans, that the final and everlasting fitte of tlie soul is

decided at the hour of death? If the soul of a mao w woman wbo

fidls a victim to the grim messenger of deslh, is thenceforth imin^

dialely adjudged and consigned to eternal happiness or m'lseiy,

J vithoul the pos^bjlity of a reversal, why should it be called op

kil^ain to receive a second sentence, which, upon these principM,'

EjDUst necessarily he the same as the former? If the day of ptxAB-

lion ends at death, and the fate of tlic soul is then unalterably fixed,

Kcording to the opinion of these christians, what can be the abject

)f a day of judgmi. :il of the preceding description ? Such a naat-

a'lon would undoubtedly alTord a miraculous display of power to

e view of the natural man; but if those who were thus raised

,.n till' dead Iiad already received their final sentence, what Bd-

■ yantage is to be derived from such a day of judgment ? The resar>

lieciion may be needful to answer their plan ; but of what use U

[the judgment, since their fate is already decided?

iJut we view the day of judgment in a very diflerent light rroin

all this. We view it as a work which has already commenced j a

woik whith we ourselves have seen and felt, and cun therefore

^Jesiify from our own expetiente, that it is a work wiiich, tho tm-

■ceil by the natural man, lateaXaviA sito^ijivcCAii-, aTA*\ft^iA\ia\


CHAP. VI.] THE DAY OP JUDGMENT. 315

and progressive in its operations, it is certain and elTectual ; and
will continue to increase in power, till a full and final sepai'ation
shall be made between good and evil. This work will be accom-
plished, both by the order and course of God's providence, and by
the operations of the Spirit of Christ in his chosen witnesses, agree-
able to ancient prediction : " Behold, the Lord cometh in ten thou-
^< sands of his saints,* to execute judgment upon all, and to con-
^^ vince all that are ungodly among them, of all tdeir ungodly deeds
^^ which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
^^ speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him."t

Here is a true description of the work of the judgment day.
First, to separate between the principles of good and evil, and to
convince souls of their ungodliness ; and secondly, to render im-
partial justice to all souls, according to their works, after giving
them a free and fair choice between good and evil. The same
work is also alluded to, in the visions of the prophet Daniel. '< The
^^ kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
^ the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of
^^ the Most High ^" and ^^ the judgment was set, and the books
" were opened.'^J

That the saints are to judge the world, is a doctrine which was
taught in the primitive church. Thus saith Paul to the. Corinthi-
ans; ^^ Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world ?"tt
And again ; ^^ Some men's sins are opened beforehand, going b^
fore to judgment; and some men they follow after." Hence it Is
evident that all sin must be brought to judgment ; and this work of
judgment commences by bringing souls to an honest confession of
their sins. Here a door is set open, and a free offer is made for
all souls to enter in, and bring their sins to judgment by confession.
And those who honesdy do this, will have their sins separated
from them by the spirit of judgment, and the purifying fire of the
gospel : and thus the soul will be justified. But those who refuse
to come to this equitable and righteous judgment of Christ, their
sins will follow after them to thejudgment of condemnation. "For
if we would j udge ourselves, we should not be j udged."fl That is ;
if we try ourselves by the righteous judgment of God, and condemn
all evil, and" separate ourselves from it, and cleave only to that
which is good, we shs^ll not be judged to condemnation. But if
we do not judge ourselves in this manner, we shall be ju(^ed un*
worthy of any portion with the righteous.

This Day of Judgment has now commenced, and God has be-
^un to judge the nations of the earth, who have long been erring
in judgment, and straying from the paths of justice and tmtb; and

***lnmyrkui» of his saints.** acoording to the oripnal: the Greek pwfeeiUoalv
fif nifies in, an4 ought to be so traoslated.


WhM

I villii


*3!6 THE DAY OF JUDCMEKT. [pART VI.

this righteous judgment wilt naver cesse until the work of Cud
ihnll be fully acrompliabed. It will prove efficacious in hs opcT*-
lions, and will be made manifest in the convrition of evil attnrj
descriplioD, and in the full develnpement of error of ever; kinlt
whether in jadgment, opinion or pratlice. It will produce in tire
willing and obedient, the f Ifeclual destruelion of all kinds of me
" d rmmoralitj, and every piinciple of evil. It will enlighitn
inkind in the knowledge of the trulb, and widely extend the L>«-
;« principles of peace and good-will to man. It will greatly
irease tbe pmcticEd dafiea of humanity, benevolence and dinritj'r
and produce a universal diffusion of divine light, nrid the kno«l>
edge of salvation ; and in the end, it will effect the final decinap
and termination of the probationary state of all souls.

This Day of Judgment will be gradual and prt^ressive, but es>
lain and effectual ; and it will conlinue till a full and final stpam-
rion iball be made between good and evil. Then shnll the (^
leoiis no longer suffer under the oppressive hands of the wid^l;
nor shall the wicked any more shelter himself under the bnona)
oftherigliteous; but each shall reap the reward of his own dtuifflk)
wheilier ihej be good or evil ; for God will search llie heart ani

Sihe reins of every creature. Tlien shall the covering be Iak<n
from all people, and the veil be removed from all faces- Thetl
shall AniichrisI no longer b^uile mankind with the mere name of
religion in which there is no reality ; nor his ininislers any iii<ir«
deceive souls with the hope of salvation la (heir siiia. Fraud
';uid violence, theft and robbery, pride and amtiiiioii, nukUee and
i-nvy, falsehood and deception, and every »]>ecie» of wickedness
will be completely uncovered, and appear In all their naked de-
ibrmily ; nor will it be in the power of man to conceal the smallest
rrime : for every secret sin will be brought fully to view. Then
shall he accomplished the testimony of the Lord Jesus; "There
is nothing covered tliat shall not be revealed; neither hid that shall
-not be known."*

All these things will be efiectually accomplished by the unerring
idgment of God. The judgment is already set, and the bookc
opening, and all Renh shall be judged according to the deed)
; in the body. The book of life will be displayed, in doe
, before the face of every human being, and every secret ao-
._.. will be brought to light, and it will be seen and known whst
ind of lives all have lived. Good and evil will llien be mada
'■lanifest to nil, and in all ; and that which was long ago spoken by
tbe prophet Malnchi, will then be clearly known and understood :
" But who may abide the day of his coming ? and who shall stand
" when he appeareth ? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's
■*' soap. And be ahall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: ■"* *"


>


I


CHAP. VI.] THE DAY OF JUDGMENT* 31%^

^* shall purify the sons of Levi^ and pui^ them as gold and silvery:#lfe '
^^ that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in nghteouqpess/'*
Tlicn shall righteousness reign triumphant oyer iniquity, ^^ and all
shall know the Lord^ from the least to the greatest.^'

This work having already commenced, will continue its pro*-
gressive influence till all souls shall have seen and felt its purifying
effects ; or, through wilful disobedience shall have rejected their
day of trial, because of the cross, and numbered themselves with
the impenitent and rebellious, as vessels of wrath fitted for destruc-
tion. But this day of judgment is yet in its beginning ; it is yet
like die little stone, spoken of by the prophet Daniel, emd which
pointed to this very work. It will yet grow and increase till it
shall break in pieces the mighty image; the pride of human nature,
and the power of Antichrist shall fall before it, and become ^^ like
the chaff of the summer threshing-floors," and be driven away with
the wind ; while the little unseen, tho powerful agent, shall increase
and grow, till, like a mountain of righteousness, it shall fill the
whole earth.t

This work, tho powerful and effective in its operations, will at
the same time, be so apparently slow in its pn^ress, and so much
out of sight of the natural man, that those who, through impenitence
and hardness of heart, chuse to put far awa^tthe evil day, will be
so blinded by wilful unbelief, that they will not be aware of the
danger to which they are exposed, until, like the inhabitants of the
old world, they shall be finally overwhelmed in the deluge of de*
stnictioa which it will occasion. ^' Then shall no man be able to
save him tliat is destroyed, nor ta oppress him that hath gotten the
victory.'' The final and everlasting state of all souls will then be
decid^, not by the stroke of death, but by the unerring judgment
of God. ^^ Then shall the righteous shine forth- as the sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father." They shall increase from glory to
glory, and from one degree of perfection to another, through eter-
nal ages.

But alas ! what will become of the wicked ? The Judge of the
living and the dead hath decided the question : ^ These shall go
away into everlasting punishment, prepared for thct devil and his
angels; where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched*''
A solemn and awful consideration !

How vain and inconsiderate are the pursuits of the great mass
of mankind ! How tittle do the generality of MOple consider theix*
awful responsibility to their Creator I Regardtiess of eternal reali-
ties, theu: whole attention seems to be engrossed with the things
that belong to the short span of human life, as tho they were to
live forever in this world. The Day of Judgment they put far
away from their thoughts, as a matter of no concern, little con«d*

♦ Mai. Hi. %9- ' \ Dm. Vi, ^^&.


i


i]ft THE DAT OF JDDGMENT. T^JB^^H

lering that they are conliDiially increasing the black catalogue of
their sins, for which tliey musl finally be brought into judgment

Many flatter themselves that repentance and conversian, ac'
cording to the general understanding of the terms, will some thne
or other, release them from any further trouble or respon»ilHlJty
for their MOi, and then all will be well. Relying on tliia Tsin hope,
IhiM delusive snare of the devil, they willingly deceive themsrives
till death unexpectedly closes the scene upon them. Such peo[)le
ought to consider thai the infinite diRerence between Heaven and
hell, does not depend on the small change generally acca^oi]«d lij
what is commonly called conviction and conversion, where there
is no railical change of life and pursuit in the creature. The all
important decision between eternal happiness and endless misery,
is not weighed in such a slender balance ; nor is it settled on sua
easy conditions.

SuuU who are thus deceiving themselves, ought tn remenkr
and consider well this unalieruble decree of the Almighty; ""Pa
loul tliat sinneth, it shall die." -And let them know of a certainly)
lliBi this death the sinner cannot cscupc; and remember thatevoj
repealed act of sin is still increasing the power of Ibis death upu
them ; still separating them at a greater distance from Ctod, and

Ciging ihejn slill rieeper into the gulf of spiritual darkness and
. And every soul that ever rises from that death, must rise
through sufferings, and in perfect subjection and obedience to the
cross. If mankind would but seriously reflect that the more sh)
they commit, the deeper they sink from God, aud lire heavier mast
be their judgment, and the greatw their sufferings to rise from their
lost state and gain their redemption, they would dread sin as the
greatest plague that could possibly come upon them. Therefore,
let no one who kaowingly and willingly commits sin, ever flatieT
himself with the vain ho|ie that he can escape the righteous jud^
ment of God against sin, and let all be assured " that the unrighl*
eous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God."

Let nil lay aside the false doctrines of Antichrist, and consider
and rightly appreciate this important truth ; That man is a frei
agent, capable of thinking, believing and acting for himself; and
therefore he is accountable to God for the use and improvement he
makes of his free agency, and must be judged and rewarded ac-
cording to his works. The important period is fast approaching
when the dividing line must be fully drawn, when the decisive sen*
tence must be pronounced; "He tliat is unjust, let him be unjust
" still ; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still ; and he that H
" righteous, let him be righteous still ; and he that is holy, let him
" be holy still. And behold I come quickly; and my rewiird is
" tritb me, to give every man according as Iiis work shall be."


«


GHAP.'YII.} COKGBRNIK& PERFEOriON. SAA^jl

CHAPTER Vn.

A few Remarkg concerning the true nature of Perfeetilh.

-Mamt controversies, have been excited and maintained among
llie professors of Christianity^ concerning the doctrine of christian
perfection ; and modem professors of religion have most generally
rejected the doctrine as unreasonable and unscriptural. Hence
. nothing seems to excite contempt and opposition sooner than to
talk of -attaining to a state of perfection in this life. This opposi-
tpm evidendy proceeds from two causes ; first, a wrong conception
of the true nature of perfection ; and second, the impossibility of
attaining to it while living in any known sin, as has been fully
proved by the general experience of professed christians. And
indeed, if it be impossible to live without' sin, as many suppose, .
then surely it must be impossible to be perfect christians.

But those who profess to believe the Bible to be the word of
God, ought to acknowledge the testinaony of Jesus. Christ which is
contained in the Bible ; for surely that cannot be unscriptural.
^ Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect."* Would Christ require any thing impossible or un-
reasonable of his people ? Certainly not. Then perfection must
bb attainable; for Christ does positively require it.

The doctrine so frequently taught, and so extensively believed
among mankind ; ^< That no one can be perfect in this lite,'' origi-
nated in the dark kingdom of Antichrbt, and is admirably calcula-
ted to ease the conscience, and encourage slothfulness and indiffer-
^^ence in the duties of religion : for who will seek after that which
be believes to be unattainable ? But a little attention to this subject
will show the inconsistency of such a belief.

1. Grod who is infinite in righteousness and goodness, can never
require impossibilities of any oC his* creatures. If then, perfection
were not attainable in this life, God never would require it. Yet
he does require it. He required it of Abraham : ^' Walk before
me, and be thou perfect.'^t He requu^d'it of the Israelites under
Ibe law : " Ye shall be holy ; for I am holy.'^J Perfection is
therefore attainable.
\^ 2. It has been attained. God declared Job to be ^^apeffect
'■■• and upright manJ'\\ Noah was also declared to be << a just man, •
juid perfect in his generations.'lj The apostle Paul saith, "We
speik wisdom to them that are perfect J^ And again ; " Let as
many as be perfect y be thus mihded."** Hence it is evident that
there were those in his day, who were perfect, according to the
work of that day. Perfection has therefore been attained in this
life.

•Matt. T 48 fGen. xvu. 1, \\**\'.x\,V^ vcA.'»a.,'V.

JB Job. i. 8. and II S, II Gen. vv. 9. ** \Cw ."\\, ^. ^V'^Xi^.Hvk.'e*.


COKCERSINO PEBFEtTIOJi, ^l-ART

3. Any (lungni]iy,wtlh strict propriety, be oUeilfier/'er/, irliiii
perli^etly answers ihe purpose for wliich it was designed. A ciw'
mity' be calkd a perfect circle, wlien it is pwfeetly round; i
apple may be caHal perfect, when it is perfectly sound, having i
d^rl in It;, snd sn of a thousand other things. A child wlio
perfectly obedient to all the requirements of its piirent>(, is, in iha
rwpect, a truly perfeet rhild : for what more can justly be required
of it ! Yet lliBt same child, vhen grown to manhood, would be
capable of doing much more than he could du in hischildiiood
and of course, mure would be required of him. So when a duh
comes up to all the requirements of God, he then stands perfectly^
jusiilicd in the sight of tiod, aud is, in that sense, aperfect man,
and walks before Gud with a peifcct heart- Hence we Diaywr
thni perfection, in this sense, (which is all that can be required,}
insiirad of being unsltHinable, is perfectly eaay.

Theideawliichmosipcoplehaveofperfeciion, isa state larlueh
there can be no increase for the better. Thb is a mistaken tAni
such a state never will be attaioed, neither in time noreteinllfC
for the very life of nil ibtngB which have life, whether vege[ald<U
animal or spiritual, consists in an increasing growth of some IriiB
or irther. Stop that increase or growth in any thing, and its life
will immediately 4i^n to decay, and it must at length die. SoU
is with the scAil of every true christian;, if the increase and growth
of the soul in the knowledge and nature of Godliness, ceases, ii
spiritual life must begin to decrease and die. Therefoi-e, tho
soul in the progreM of faithful obedience to th^ increasing light
and work of God, may become divested of ^ sinful desires — '
propensities ; yet his life and happiness must and will consii
a further and progressive growth in the knowledge and nature of
\ir»i, to the endless s^es of eternity. And yet a soul who is per*
feclly obedient to the revealed wilt of God, is equally perfect be-
h-nr God, in evety step of his travel, according to his capacity and
God's requirement.

Thus the real nature of perfection, when applied to a chrislisn
!ife, consists in nothing more nor less than in doing what God K-
quires o£ as, which is to improve all our faculties in doing good,
according to the best of our understanding and capacity : and
in so doing every person who sincerely desires and rightly pursues
>, may attain to perfection.


THE END.


*;*
