Prometheus Unbound (Percy Bysshe Shelley, 1820)
===============================================
Shelley's lyrical drama of the unbound Titan — Romanticism's cosmic optimism. Public domain. Internet Archive (1898 reprint of 1820 text).

THE TEMPLE DRAMATISTS


Shelley’s PROMETHEUS UNBOUND


aie See TRE


Eigenfum
der Siadi Bamberg
Gruppe:
Zaht:


Introduction.


The Text. The text of the Prometheus Unbound, as of all
Shelley’s works, presents peculiar difficulties to an editor. ‘The
sources are (1) an imperfect MS,, preserved at Boscombe, (2)-the
first edition, of 1820. This does not appear to have been

_ corrected for the press by the poet himself, and we have his
own authority that it contained numerous errata. (3) Mrs
Shelley’s first. edition of 1839, The importance of this edition
is that it embodied Shelley’s own list of corrections to the edition
of 1820. But it is impossible to say what unauthorised altera-
tions may have been introduced by Mrs Shelley herself, or what
new misprints may have crept in. ‘The net result is that an
editor is left very much to his own judgment in choosing between
various possible readings. ‘The variants are all given fully in Mr
Buxton Forman’s edition. which is thus invaluable to all students
of the text. In this edition, I have thought it sufficient to give,
in the notes, those variants only, whether in the punctuation or
in the actual words of the text, which affect the sense in some
important way. The final choice among them must always, in
some instances, be a matter of uncertainty. My own judgment,
as was to be expected, has not agreed throughout with that of
any former editor; but the reader will find, as I have indicated,
the materials for reviewing it given in the notes, Reference may
be made here to an article by Miss Blind in the Westminster
Review, July 1870, giving some readings from the MS. ; and to

v


Introduction. <= Prometheus Unbound


Mr Swinburne’s ‘ Notes on the Text of Shelley’ in his Essays and
Studies.


The Composition of the Drama. The Prometheus
Unbound was published in 1820, Shelley being then twenty-eight
years old. Included in the same volume were the following
poems:—The Sensitive Plant, A Vision of the Sea, Ode to
Heaven, An Exhortation, Ode to the West Wind, An Ode,
written October 1819, before the Spaniards had recovered their
Liberty, The Cloud, To a Skylark, Ode to Liberty. The
Prometheus was originally designed in three acts, which were
composed at Rome, under circumstances described by Shelley
himself in his ‘Preface’ printed below. The fourth act was
added later, at Florence. Shelley regarded the work at the time
as the most perfect of my productions,” “ the best thing I ever
wrote ;” and certainly it is the completest expression we have of
his philosophy of life, and contains some of his finest poetry.


The Myth of Prometheus. The Greek myth which
suggested the subject of Shelley’s drama is treated as follows in
the Prometheus Bound of Aeschylus.—In the battle between the
Gods and the Titans, Prometheus sided with the former, and by
his counsels secured them the victory. Zeus (Jupiter) being
thus established in power, determined to destroy mankind, and
create in their stead a new race. Prometheus intervened to save
them, mercifully closed their eyes to the future, gave them hope
for their comfort, and instructed them in the arts of life. To
punish him for this, Zeus chained him to a rock in Scythia.
But Prometheus had still a hold on his enemy; he knew the
secret on which his fate depended. Should Zeus make a certain
marriage, he would be overthrown by the child born of it ; but what

vi


Prometheus Unbound = Introduction.


the marriage was, no one knew but Prometheus. As he was
boasting of this knowledge, Zeus sent down his messenger Hermes
to demand the disclosure of the secret; Prometheus refused, and
Zeus, in retaliation, hurled him down to Tartarus, At this point
the Prometheus Bound ends; but Aeschylus wrote also a Prometheus
Unbound, of which however only a few fragments are preserved,
and these insufficient to indicate in detail how he treated the theme.
In the Prometheus Bound, we are told that after a long lapse
of time, Prometheus was to be restored to the upper air, there to
be preyed upon by an eagle, as represented in Shelley’s drama (I.,
34). Of his deliverance two versions are suggested, which appear
to be mutually inconsistent. According to the one, his punish-
ment was to endure until some god should volunteer to take his
place in Hades, a prophecy which is said to have been fulfilled
by Cheiron. According to the other, which was the one adopted
by Aeschylus in his Prometheus Unbound, and after him by Shelley,
the deliverance was to be effected by Hercules, who was to kill the
eagle and unbind the captive. In the drama of Aeschylus, it
appears that the deliverance was preceded by a reconciliation of
Prometheus with Zeus. Prometheus, it seems, purchased his
release by informing Zeus that the marriage which would prove
fatal to his power would be a marriage with Thetis. What
Shelley thought of this solution is indicated in his ‘ Preface ’:—
‘1 was averse,” he says, “from a catastrophe so feeble as
that of reconciling the Champion with the Oppressor of man-
kind. The moral interest of the fable, which is so power-
fully sustained by the sufferings and endurance of Prometheus,
would be annihilated if we could conceive of him as unsaying
his high language and quailing before his successful and perfidious
adversary,” In his drama, accordingly, the secret is unrevealed ;
vii


Introduction. < Prometheus Unbound


the marriage with Thetis is consummated, and Zeus is over-
thrown,

From this brief sketch it will be seen that the plot of Shelley’s
drama is based upon a modification of the ancient legend; but
the story, as he treats it, has lost all solidity and verisimilitude.
To Aeschylus the myth was the true structure of his tragedy,
an architecture which he adorned but never obscured by symbolic
decorations ; in Shelley’s hands it becomes a mere framework for
the luxuriant growth of his metaphysical imagination. Zeus
and Prometheus, as he conceives them, are unembodied Spirits,
the one of Evil and the other of Good; the Power that over-
throws the tyrant is a formless symbol of Eternity ; even Hercules
is something less than a shadow. The whole legend, in short,
is so transfigured and refined in the crucible of the poet’s genius
that the fragments of the ancient story yet remaining unfused
show like uncouth blocks of solid marble hung in a radiant palace
of air and fire. It is the meaning of the myth, not the myth
itself, that is important in Shelley’s drama; and the structure of
his plot is as wavering and weak as the colour and atmosphere
with which it is clothed are dazzling and superb.


The Personages of the Drama. Of the personages of
the drama little need be said. Most of them are familiar figures of
classical mythology. Asia is represented by the Ancients some-
times as the mother, sometimes (as here) as the wife of Pro-
metheus ; she is also identified with Venus, and thus with the
productive spirit of nature; and it is so that Shelley conceives
her in this drama. The Earth is introduced by the poet under
two distinct impersonations; the one is the ancient goddess of
the Greeks; the other (first presented in Act III., sc. iv.) is

viii


Prometheus Unbound = Introduction.


one of Shelley’s own characteristic creations, ‘the delicate spirit
that guides the earth through heaven”; and it is this spirit
that appears in the fourth act.

Demogorgon is a more obscure conception. W. G. Hort in his
New Pantheon} has the following account of him :—

‘“‘ This allegorical Divinity was the genius of the earth. Such
fear and veneration did his name inspire, that no one durst pro-
nounce it aloud. Philosophers regarded this Deity as the spirit of
heat, the life and support of plants, but he was reverenced, by the
people at large, as a real being. His figure was that of a dirty
old man, pale and disfigured, covered with moss, and residing in
the bowels of the earth.

“Weary and disgusted with his dismal abode, Demogorgon
formed a ball, seated himself upon it, and rising into the air,
fixed the limits of the earth, and created the heavens. Passing
over the Acroceraunian mountains which emitted fire, he took
from them some flaming matter, with which he made the sun ;
he then placed it in the heavens to illumine the earth. From
him proceeded Tartarus and Nox.”

This account appears to be based on the ‘ Genealogia deorum’
of Boccacio,? and is not found in any extant classical author. The
earliest mention of the name Demogorgon occurs in a commenta-
tor on the Latin poet Statius. ‘The poet speaks of ‘ the supreme


1 Ed. 1854, p- 83.

2 See especially book i., chapters i., vi, and vii. Boccacio refers to an
authority, Theodontius, who in his turn professes to have his account from
Pronapides, said to be the teacher of Homer. No such authors are extant.
And Boccacio does not profess himself to have read Theodontius, but to
have borrowed his statements from a book by Paulus Perusinus, librarian
to Robert, King of Jerusalem and Sicily, which book is not extant. See
Boccacio 74., book xv., chapter vi.

ix


Introduction. <= Prometheus Unbound


Power of the triple world whom it is impious to know ” ; and
his commentator explains, “he refers to the supreme god,
Demogorgon, whose name may not be known.”! This god
he describes as the father of the sun and the moon; referring
to Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato. Demogorgon is accordingly
supposed by some to be a corruption of Demiurgus, the
creator of the world, of whom these philosophers spoke. ‘The
name occurs not seldom in modern literature; in Spencer, for
example :—
“ Downe in the bottom of the deepe Abysse,

Where Demogorgon in dul] darknesse pent

Farre from the view of gods and heavenes bliss

The hideous Chaos keepes.” 2
and in Milton :—

‘“* Orcus and Ades and the dreaded name

Of Demogorgon,’”’8
In Shelley’s representation, Demogorgon is the ultimate Power,
behind and above all things that are, even the gods them-
selves. It is he that is the agent of Jupiter’s fall, of which the
marriage with Thetis (Act III., sc. i.), is merely the occasion.
This marriage, in fact, in Shelley’s drama, is a rather otiose sur-
vival of the ancient myth, according to which the overthrow of
Jupiter was to be brought about by the offspring of the union in
question.

The Philosophy of the Drama. Of the philosophy of
the drama it is hardly necessary to speak here, still less to offer
any criticism. But it may be worth while to cite the following
passage from Mrs Shelley’s notes on the Prometheus as a succinct


1 Lactantius on Statius, 7%ed., I1., 516.
2 Faery Queene, 1V., 2, 47; cf 1.,5, 223 I. 37-
3 Paradise Lost, I1., 964.

x


Prometheus Unbound =& Introduction.


exposition of the poet’s views:—‘The prominent feature ot
Shelley’s theory of the destiny of the human species was, that
evil is not inherent in the system of the creation, but an accident
that might be expelled. ‘This also forms a portion of Christi-
anity; God made earth and man perfect, till he, by his fall,
‘Brought death into the world, and all our woe.’

Shelley believed that mankind had only to will that there shall
be no evil, and there would be none. It is not my part in these
notes to notice the arguments that have been urged against this
opinion, but to mention the fact that he entertained it, and was
indeed attached to it with fervent enthusiasm. That man could
be so perfectionised as to be able to expel evil from his own
nature, and from the greater part of the creation, was the cardinal
point of his system. And the subject he loved best to dwell on
was the image of One warring with the Evil Principle, oppressed
not only by it, but by all, even the good, who were deluded into
considering evil a necessary portion of humanity; a victim, full
of fortitude and hope, and the spirit of triumph emanating from
a reliance in the ultimate omnipotence of good.” Such a victim
is Prometheus, who, as we are further informed by Mrs Shelley,
typifies Humanity suffering under “the tortures generated by
evil done or suffered.” On his liberation Nature (personified as
Asia) “resumes the beauty of her prime, and is united to her
husband, the emblem of the human race, in perfect and happy
union.”

The tracing, in detail, of this ideal significance of the drama,
I must leave to the reader’s own ingenuity and taste. But it may
be useful to refer to a study by Mr W. Rossetti entitled ‘ Shelley’s
Prometheus Unbound: A study of its meaning and personages.”
(London, printed for private circulation, 1886.)

xi


DRAMATIS PERSONZE


PROMETHEUs.

Democorcon.

JuPpITER.

Tue Earta.

Ocean.

APOLLO.

Mercury,

Hercutes.

ASIA,

PANTHEA, Oceanides,
Ione.

Tue Puantasm or Jurirer.
Tue Spirit oF THE Eartu.
‘Tue Spirit or THE Moon.
Spirits or THE Hours.
Spirits,

Ecuoes.

Fauns.

Fortgs,


xii


Preface.


Tue Greek tragic writers, in selecting as their subject
any portion of their national history or mythology,
employed in their treatment of it a certain arbitrary dis-
cretion. They by no means conceived themselves bound
to adhere to the common interpretation or to imitate in
story as in title their rivals and predecessors. Such a
system would have amounted to a resignation of those
claims to preference over their competitors which incited
the composition. The Agamemnonian story was ex-
hibited on the Athenian theatre with as many variations
as dramas.

I have presumed to employ a similar licence. The
Prometheus Unbound of Aeschylus supposed the re-
conciliation of Jupiter with his victim as the price of
the disclosure of the danger threatened to his empire
by the consummation of his marriage with Thetis.
Thetis, according to this view of the subject, was given
in marriage to Peleus, and Prometheus, by the permission
of Jupiter, delivered from his captivity by Hercules.


xiii


Preface. <= Prometheus Unbound


Had I framed my story on this model, I should have
done no more than have attempted to restore the lost
drama of Aeschylus; an ambition, which, if my prefer-
ence to this mode of treating the subject had incited
me to cherish, the recollection of the high comparison
such an attempt would challenge might well abate. But,
in truth, I was averse from a catastrophe so feeble as
that of reconciling the Champion with the Oppressor
of mankind. The moral interest of the fable, which
is so powerfully sustained by the sufferings and endurance
of Prometheus, would be annihilated if we could con-
ceive of him as unsaying his high language and quailing
before his successful and perfidious adversary. The only
imaginary being resembling in any degree Prometheus,
is Satan; and Prometheus is, in my judgment, a more
poetical character than Satan, because, in addition to
courage, and majesty, and firm and patient opposition
to omnipotent force, he is susceptible of being described
as exempt from the taints of ambition, envy, revenge,
and a desire for personal aggrandizement, which, in the
Hero of Paradise Lost, interfere with the interest. The
character of Satan engenders in the mind a pernicious
casuistry which leads us to weigh his faults with his
wrongs, and to excuse the former because the latter


exceed all measure. In the minds of those who con-
xiv


Prometheus Unbound = Preface.


sider that magnificent fiction with a religious feeling it
engenders something worse. But Prometheus is, as it
were, the type of the highest perfection of moral and
intellectual nature, impelled by the purest and the truest
motives, to the best and noblest ends.

This poem was chiefly written upon the mountainous
ruins of the Baths of Caracalla, among the flowery glades,
and thickets of odoriferous blossoming trees, which are
extended in ever winding labyrinths upon its immense
platforms and dizzy arches suspended in the air. The
bright blue sky of Rome, and the effect of the vigorous
awakening spring in that divinest climate, and the new
life with which it drenches the spirits even to intoxica-
tion, were the inspiration of this drama.

The imagery which I have employed will be found,
in many instances, to have been drawn from the operations
of the human mind, or from those external actions by
which they are expressed. This is unusual in modern
poetry, although Dante and Shakespeare are full of
instances of the same kind: Dante indeed more than
any other poet, and with greater success. But the Greek
poets, as writers to whom no resource of awakening the
sympathy of their contemporaries was unknown, were in
the habitual use of this power; and it is the study of their
works (since a higher merit would probably be denied


XV


Preface. «= Prometheus Unbound


me), to which I am willing that my readers should im-
pute this singularity.

One word is due in candour to the degree in which
the study of contemporary writings may have tinged my
composition, for such has been a topic of censure with
regard to poems, far more popular, and indeed more
deservedly popular, than mine. It is impossible that any
one who inhabits the same age with such writers as those
who stand in the foremost ranks of our own, can con-
scientiously assure himself that his language and tone of
thought may not have been modified by the study of the
productions of those extraordinary intellects. It is true,
that, not the spirit of their genius, but the forms in which
it has manifested itself, are due less to the peculiarities of
their own minds than to the peculiarity of the moral and
intellectual condition of the minds among which they have
been produced. Thus a number of writers possess the
form, whilst they want the spirit of those whom, it is
alleged, they imitate; because the former is the endow-
ment of the age in which they live, and the latter must
be the uncommunicated lightning of their own mind.

The peculiar style of intense and comprehensive imagery
which distinguishes the modern literature of England, has
not been, as a general power, the product of the imitation


of any particular writer. The mass of capabilities remains
xvi


Prometheus Unbound = Preface.


at every period materially the same; the circumstances
which awaken it to action perpetually change. If England
were divided into forty republics, each equal in population
and extent to Athens, there is no reason to suppose but
that, under institutions not more perfect than those of
Athens, each would produce philosophers and poets equal
to those who (if we except Shakespeare) have never been
surpassed. We owe the great writers of the golden.age
of our literature to that fervid awakening of the public
mind which shook to dust the oldest and most oppressive
form of the Christian religion. We owe Milton to the
progress and development of the same spirit: the sacred
Milton was, let it ever be remembered, a republican, and
a bold inquirer into morals and religion. The great
writers of our own age are, we have reason to suppose,
the companions and forerunners of some unimagined change
in our social condition or the opinions which cement it.
The cloud of mind is discharging its collected lightning,
and the equilibrium between institutions and opinions is
now restoring, or is about to be restored.

As to imitation, poetry is a mimetic art. It creates;
but it creates by combination and representation. Poetical
abstractions are beautiful and new, not because the portions
of which they are composed had no previous existence


in the mind of man or in nature, but because the whole
XVii


Preface. <= Prometheus Unbound


produced by their combination has some intelligible
and beautiful analogy with those sources of emotion
and thought, and with the contemporary condition of
them: one great poet is a masterpiece of nature which
another not only ought to study but must study. He
might as wisely and as easily determine that his mind
should no longer be the mirror of all that is lovely in
the visible universe, as exclude from his contemplation
the beautiful which exists in the writings of a great
contemporary. The pretence of doing it would be a
presumption in any but the greatest; the effect, even in
him, would be strained, unnatural, and ineffectual. A
poet is the combined product of such internal powers
as modify the nature of others; and of such external
influences as excite and sustain these powers; he is not
one, but both. Every man’s mind is, in this respect,
modified by all the objects of nature and art; by every
word and every suggestion which he ever admitted to
act upon his consciousness; it is the mirror upon which
all forms are reflected, and in which they compose one
form. Poets, not otherwise than philosophers, painters,
sculptors, and musicians, are, in one sense, the creators,
and, in another, the creations, of their age. From this
subjection the loftiest do not escape. There is a similarity


between Homer and Hesiod, between Aeschylus and
xviii


Prometheus Unbound = Preface.


Euripides, between Virgil and Horace, between Dante
and Petrarch, between Shakespeare and Fletcher, between
Dryden and Pope; each has a generic resemblance under
which their specific distinctions are arranged. If this
similarity be the result of imitation, I am willing to
confess that I have imitated.

Let this opportunity be conceded to me of acknow-
ledging that I have, what a Scotch philosopher char-
acteristically terms, ‘‘a passion for reforming the world; ”
what passion incited him to write and publish his book,
he omits to explain. For my part I had rather be
damned with Plato and Lord Bacon, than go to
Heaven with Paley and Malthus. But it is a mistake
to suppose that I dedicate my poetical compositions solely
to the direct enforcement of reform, or that I consider
them in any degree as containing a reasoned system on
the theory of human life. Didactic poetry is my ab-
horrence ; nothing can be equally well expressed in prose
that is not tedious and supererogatory in verse. My
purpose has hitherto been simply to familiarize the highly
refined imagination of the more select classes of poetical
readers with beautiful idealisms of moral excellence;
aware that until the mind can love, and admire, and
trust, and hope, and endure, reasoned principles of moral


conduct are seeds cast upon the highway of life which the
xix


Preface. <= Prometheus Unbound


unconscious passenger tramples into dust, although they
would bear the harvest of his happiness. Should I live
to accomplish what I purpose, that is, produce a systemati-
cal history of what appear to me to be the genuine ele-
ments of human society, let not the advocates of injustice
and superstition flatter themselves that I should take
Aeschylus rather than Plato as my model.

The having spoken of myself with unaffected freedom
will need little apology with the candid; and let the un-
candid consider that they injure me less than their own
hearts and minds by misrepresentation. Whatever talents
a person may possess to amuse and instruct others, be they
ever so inconsiderable, he is yet bound to exert them: if
his attempt be ineffectual, let the punishment of an un-
accomplished purpose have been sufficient; let none trouble
themselves to heap the dust of oblivion upon his efforts ;
the pile they raise will betray his grave which might other-
wise have been unknown.


xX


PROMETHEUS UNBOUND


A LYRICAL DRAMA


Prometheus Unbound.
A Lyrical Drama.


Act First.
Scene,—A Ravine of Icy Rocks in the Indian Caucasus.


Prometheus is discovered bound to the Precipice. Panthea
and Ione are seated at his feet. Time, Night. Dur-
ing the scene, Morning slowly breaks.


Pro. Monarch of Gods and Demons, and all Spirits
But One, who throng those bright and rolling worlds
Which Thou and I alone of living things
Behold with sleepless eyes! regard this Earth
Made multitudinous with thy slaves, whom thou
Requitest for knee-worship, prayer, and praise,

And toil, and hecatombs of broken hearts,
3


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


With fear and self-contempt and barren hope.
Whilst me, who am thy foe, eyeless in hate,
Hast thou made reign and triumph, to thy scorn, 10
O’er mine own misery and thy vain revenge.
Three thousand years of sleep-unsheltered hours,
And moments aye divided by keen pangs

Till they seemed years, torture and solitude,
Scorn and despair,—these are mine empire.

More glorious far than that which thou surveyest
From thine unenvied throne, O Mighty God!
Almighty, had I deigned to share the shame

Of thine ill tyranny, and hung not here

Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffing mountain, 20
Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured ; without herb,
Insect, or beast, or shape or sound of life.

Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever !


No change, no pause, no hope! Yet I endure.
I ask the Earth, have not the mountains felt ?

I ask yon Heaven, the all-beholding Sun,

Has it not seen? The Sea, in storm or calm,
Heaven’s ever-changing Shadow, spread below,
Have its deaf waves not heard my agony?

Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever ! 30


The crawling glaciers pierce me with the spears
4


| Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Of their moon-freezing crystals; the bright chains
Eat with their burning cold into my bones.
Heaven’s wingéd hound, polluting from thy lips
His beak in poison not his own, tears up
My heart; and shapeless sights come wandering by,
The ghastly people of the realm of dream,
Mocking me: and the Earthquake-fiends are charged
To wrench the rivets from my quivering wounds
When the rocks split and close again behind: 40
While from their loud abysses howling throng
The genii of the storm, urging the rage
Of whirlwind, and afflict me with keen hail.
And yet to me welcome is day and night,
Whether one breaks the hoar frost of the morn,
Or starry, dim, and slow, the other climbs
The leaden-coloured east ; for then they lead
The wingless, crawling hours, one among whom—
As some dark Priest hales the reluctant victim—
Shall drag thee, cruel King, to kiss the blood 50
From these pale feet, which then might trample thee
If they disdained not such a prostrate slave.
Disdain! Ah no! I pity thee. What ruin
Will hunt thee undefended through the wide Heaven!
How will thy soul, cloven to its depth with terror,
Gape like a hell within! I speak in grief,

5


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


Not exultation, for I hate no more,

As then ere misery made me wise. The curse

Once breathed on thee I would recall. Ye Moun-
tains,

Whose many-voicéd Echoes, through the mist 60

Of cataracts, flung the thunder of that spell !

Ye icy Springs, stagnant with wrinkling frost,

Which vibrated to hear me, and then crept

Shuddering through India! Thou serenest Air,

Through which the sun walks burning without
beams!

And ye swift Whirlwinds, who on poiséd wings

Hung mute and moveless o’er yon hushed abyss,

As thunder, louder than your own, made rock

The orbéd world! If then my words had power,

Though I am changed so that aught evil wish 70

Is dead within ; although no memory be

Of what is hate, let them not lose it now !

What was that curse? for ye all heard me speak.


First Voice: from the Mountains,


Thrice three hundred thousand years
O’er the Earthquake’s couch we stood :
Oft, as men convulsed with fears,


We trembled in our multitude.
6


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Sconp Voice: from the Springs.
Thunderbolts had parched our water,
We had been stained with bitter blood,
And had run mute, ’mid shrieks of slaughter, 80
Through a city and a solitude.


Tuirp Voice: from the Air.
I had clothed, since Earth uprose,
Its wastes in colours not their own,
And oft had my serene repose
Been cloyen by many a rending groan.


Fourtu Voice: from the Whirlwinds.


We had soared beneath these mountains
Unresting ages; nor had thunder,

Nor yon volcano’s flaming fountains,
Nor any power above or under
Eyer made us mute with wonder. go


First Voice.


But never bowed our snowy crest
As at the voice of thine unrest.


Srconp VoIcE.
Never such a sound before


T’o the Indian waves we bore.
7


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


—


A pilot asleep on the howling sea

Leaped up from the deck in agony,

And heard, and cried, ‘* Ah, woe is me! ”?
And died as mad as the wild waves be.


Tarp Vorce.


By such dread words from Earth to Heaven

My still realm was never riven: 100
When its wound was closed, there stood
Darkness o’er the day like blood.


Fourts Voice.


And we shrank back: for dreams of ruin
To frozen caves our flights pursuing
Made us keep silence—thus—and thus—
Though silence is a hell to us.


The Earth. The tongueless Caverns of the craggy hills
Cried, “‘Misery!”’ then; the hollow Heaven replied,
‘¢ Misery !’” And the Ocean’s purple waves,
Climbing the land, howled to the lashing winds, 110
And the pale nations heard it, “ Misery ! ”

Pro. I hear a sound of voices: not the voice
Which I gave forth. Mother, thy sons and thou


Scorn him, without whose all-enduring will
8


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Beneath the fierce omnipotence of Jove,
Both they and thou had vanished, like thin mist
Unrolled on the morning wind. Know ye not me,
The Titan? He who made his agony
The barrier to your else all-conquering foe?
Oh, rock-embosomed lawns, and snow-fed streams,
Now seen athwart frore vapours, deep below, 121
Through whose o’ershadowing woods I wandered
once
With Asia, drinking life from her loved eyes ;
Why scorns the spirit which informs ye, now
To commune with me? me alone, who checked,
As one who checks a fiend-drawn charioteer,
The falsehood and the force of him who reigns
Supreme, and with the groans of pining slaves
Fills your dim glens and liquid wildernesses :
Why answer ye not, still? Brethren!
The Earth. They dare not. 130
Pro. Who dares? for I would hear that curse again.
Ha, what an awful whisper rises up !
’Tis scarce like sound: it tingles through the frame
As lightning tingles, hovering ere it strike.
Speak, Spirit! from thine inorganic voice
I only know that thou art moving near
And love. How cursed I him?
9


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


The Earth. How canst thou hear
Who knowest not the language of the dead ?

Pro. Thou art a living spirit: speak as they.

The Earth. I dare not speak like life, lest Heaven’s fell

King 140
Should hear, and link me to some wheel of pain
More torturing than the one whereon I roll.

Subtle thou art and good; and though the Gods
Hear not this voice, yet thou art more than God
Being wise and kind: earnestly hearken now.

Pro. Obscurely through my brain, like shadows dim,
Sweep awful thoughts, rapid and thick. I feel
Faint, like one mingled in entwining love ;

Yet ’tis not pleasure.
The Earth. No, thou canst not hear :
Thou art immortal, and this tongue is known 1 5°
Only to those who die.
Pro. And what art thou,
O melancholy Voice?
The Earth. I am the Earth,
Thy mother ; she within whose stony veins,
To the last fibre of the loftiest tree
Whose thin leaves trembled in the frozen air,
Joy ran, as blood within a living frame,
When thou didst from her bosom, like a cloud


10


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Of glory, arise, a spirit of keen joy!

And at thy voice her pining sons uplifted

Their prostrate brows from the polluting dust, 160

And our almighty Tyrant with fierce dread

Grew pale, until his thunder chained thee here.

Then, see those million worlds which burn and roll

Around us: their inhabitants beheld

My spheréd light wane in wide Heaven; the sea

Was lifted by strange tempest, and new fire

From earthquake-rifted mountains of bright snow

Shook its portentous hair beneath Heaven’s frown ;

Lightning and Inundation vexed the plains ;

Blue thistles bloomed in cities ; foodless toads 170

Within voluptuous chambers panting crawled :

When Plague had fallen on man, and beast, and
worm,

And Famine; and black blight on herb and tree ;

And in the corn, and vines, and meadow-grass,

Teemed ineradicable poisonous weeds

Draining their growth, for my wan breast was dry

With grief; and the thin air, my breath, was stained

With the contagion of a mother’s hate

Breathed on her child’s destroyer ; ay, I heard

Thy curse, the which, if thou rememberest not,


Yet my innumerable seas and streams, 181
qr


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


Mountains, and caves, and winds, and yon wide air,
And the inarticulate people of the dead,
Preserve, a treasured spell. We meditate
In secret joy and hope those dreadful words
But dare not speak them.
Pro. Venerable mother !
All else who live and suffer take from thee
Some comfort; flowers, and fruits, and happy
sounds,
And love, though fleeting ; these may not be mine.
But mine own words, I pray, deny me not. 190
The Earth. They shall be told. Ere Babylon was
dust,
The Magus Zoroaster, my dead child,
Met his own image walking in the garden.
That apparition, sole of men, he saw.
For know there are two worlds of life and death :
One that which thou beholdest ; but the other
Is underneath the grave, where do inhabit
The shadows of all forms that think and live
Till death unite them and they part no more ;
Dreams and the light imaginings of men, 200
And all that faith creates or love desires,
Terrible, strange, sublime and beauteous shapes.
There thou art, and dost hang, a writhing shade,


12


Prometheus Unbound = Act 1.


Pro.


*Mid whirlwind-peopled mountains ; all the gods
Are there, and all the powers of nameless worlds,
Vast, sceptred phantoms; heroes, men, and beasts ;
And Demogorgon, a tremendous gloom ;
And he, the supreme Tyrant, on his throne
Of burning gold. Son, one of these shall utter
The curse which all remember. Call at will 210
Thine own ghost, or the ghost of Jupiter,
Hades or Typhon, or what mightier Gods
From all-prolific Evil, since thy ruin,
Have sprung, and trampled on my prostrate sons.
Ask, and they must reply: so the revenge
Of the Supreme may sweep through vacant shades,
As rainy wind through the abandoned gate
Of a fallen palace.

Mother, let not aught
Of that which may be evil, pass again
My lips, or those of aught resembling me. 220
Phantasm of Jupiter, arise, appear !


Tone.


My wings are folded o’er mine ears:
My wings are crosséd o’er mine eyes:
Yet through their silver shade appears,
And through their lulling plumes arise,
13


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


A Shape, a throng of sounds ;
May it be no ill to thee
O thou of many wounds!
Near whom, for our sweet sister’s sake,
Ever thus we watch and wake. 230


PANTHEA.


The sound is of whirlwind underground,
Earthquake, and fire, and mountains cloven ;
The shape is awful like the sound,
Clothed in dark purple, star-inwoven.
A sceptre of pale gold
To stay steps proud, o’er the slow cloud
His veinéd hand doth hold.
Cruel he looks, but calm and strong,
Like one who does, not suffers wrong.


Phantasm of Jupiter. Why have the secret powers of this
strange world 240
Driven me, a frail and empty phantom, hither
On direst storms? What unaccustomed sounds
Are hovering on my lips, unlike the voice
With which our pallid race hold ghastly talk
In darkness? And, proud sufferer, who art thou?
Pro. Tremendous Image, as thou art must be
14


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


He whom thou shadowest forth. I am his foe,
The Titan. Speak the words which I would hear,
Although no thought inform thine empty voice.

The Earth. Listen! And though your echoes must be

mute, 250

Grey mountains, and old woods, and haunted springs,
Prophetic caves, and isle-surrounding streams,
Rejoice to hear what yet ye cannot speak.

Phan. A spirit seizes me and speaks within :
It tears me as fire tears a thunder-cloud.

Pan. See, how he lifts his mighty looks! the Heaven
Darkens above.

Lone. He speaks! O shelter me!

Pro. J see the curse on gestures proud and cold,
And looks of firm defiance, and calm hate,
And such despair as mocks itself with smiles, 260
Written as on a scroll: yet speak! Oh, speak !


PHANTASM.

Fiend, I defy thee! with a calm, fixed mind,
All that thou canst inflict I bid thee do;
Foul Tyrant both of Gods and Human-kind,

One only being shalt thou not subdue.
Rain then thy plagues upon me here,
Ghastly disease, and frenzying fear ;

15


Act I. < Prometheus Unbound


And let alternate frost and fire

Eat into me, and be thine ire
Lightning, and cutting hail, and legioned forms 270
Of furies, driving by upon the wounding storms.


Ay, do thy worst! Thou art omnipotent.
O’erall things but thyself I gave thee power,
And my own will. Be thy swift mischiefs sent
To blast mankind, from yon aetherial tower.
Let thy malignant spirit move
In darkness over those I love:
On me and mine I imprecate
The utmost torture of thy hate ;
And thus devote to sleepless agony 280
This undeclining head, while thou must reign on high.


But thou, who art the God and Lord: O, thou
Who fillest with thy soul this world of woe,
To whom all things of Earth and Heaven do bow
In fear and worship: all-prevailing foe !
I curse thee! let a sufferer’s curse
Clasp thee, his torturer, like remorse ;
Till thine Infinity shall be
A robe of envenomed agony ;
And thine Omnipotence a crown of pain, 290
To cling like burning gold round thy dissolving brain.
x6


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Heap on thy soul, by virtue of this curse,
Ill deeds, then be thou damned, beholding good ;
Both infinite as is the universe,
And thou, and thy self-torturing solitude.
An awful image of calm power
Though now thou sittest, let the hour
Come, when thou must appear to be
That which thou art internally ;


And after many a false and fruitless crime 300
Scorn track thy lagging fall through boundless space
and time.


Pro. Were these my words, O Parent?

The Earth. They were thine.
Pro. It doth repent me: words are quick and vain ;
Grief for awhile is blind, and so was mine.

I wish no living thing to suffer pain.


Tue Eartu.
Misery, Oh, misery to me,
That Jove at length should vanquish thee.
Wail, howl aloud, Land and Sea,
The Earth’s rent heart shall answer ye.
Howl, Spirits of the living and the dead! 310
Your refuge, your defence lies fallen and van-
quished !
b 7


Act I. e= Prometheus Unbound


First Ecuo.
Lies fallen and vanquishéd !


Seconp Ecuo.
Fallen and vanquishéd !


Tone.
Fear not: "tis but some passing spasm ;
The Titan is unvanquished still.
But see, where through the azure chasm
Of yon forked and snowy hill
Trampling the slant winds on high
With golden-sandalled feet, that glow
Under plumes of purple dye, 320
Like rose-ensanguined ivory,
A Shape comes now,
Stretching on high from his right hand
A serpent-cinctured wand.


Pan. ’Tis Jove’s world-wandering herald, Mercury.


Tone.
And who are those with hydra tresses
And iron wings that climb the wind,
Whom the frowning God represses
Like vapours steaming up behind,


Clanging loud, an endless crowd ? 330
18


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


PANTHEA.


These are Jove’s tempest-walking hounds,
Whom he gluts with groans and blood,
When charioted on sulphurous cloud

He bursts Heaven’s bounds.


Tone.


Are they now led, from the thin dead
On new pangs to be fed?


Pan. The Titan looks as ever, firm, not proud.
First Fury. Ha! I scent life!
Second Fury, Let me but look into his eyes !
Third Fury. The hope of torturing him smells like a heap
Of corpses, to a death-bird after battle. 340
First Fury. Darest thou delay, O Herald? take cheer,
Hounds
Of Hell! what if the Son of Maia soon
Should make us food and sport—who can please
long
The Omnipotent ?


Mer. Back to your towers of iron,
And gnash, beside the streams of fire and wail,
Your foodless teeth. Geryon, arise! and Gorgon,
19


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


Chimera, and thou Sphinx, subtlest of fiends
Who ministered to Thebes Heaven’s poisoned wine,
Unnatural love, and more unnatural hate :
These shall perform your task.
First Fury. Oh, mercy! mercy!
We die with our desire: drive us not back! 351
Mer. Crouch then in silence.
Awful Sufferer !
To thee unwilling, most unwillingly
I come, by the great Father’s will driven down,
To execute a doom of new revenge.
Alas! I pity thee, and hate myself
That I can do no more: aye from thy sight
Returning, for a season, Heaven seems Hell,
So thy worn form pursues me night and day,
Smiling reproach. Wise art thou, firm and good,
But vainly wouldst stand forth alone in strife 361
Against the Omnipotent; as yon clear lamps
That measure and divide the weary years
From which there is no refuge, long have taught
And long must teach. Even now thy Torturer
arms
With the strange might of unimagined pains
The powers who scheme slow agonies in Hell,


And my commission is to lead them here,
20


Prometheus Unbound =&


Pro.


Or what more subtle, foul, or savage fiends


People the abyss, and leave them to their task.


Be it not so! there is a secret known
To thee, and to none else of living things,


Act I.


37°


Which may transfer the sceptre of wide Heaven,


The fear of which perplexes the Supreme.
Clothe it in words, and bid it clasp his throne
In intercession ; bend thy soul in prayer,
And like a suppliant in some gorgeous fane,
Let the will kneel within thy haughty heart :
For benefits and meek submission tame
The fiercest and the mightiest.

Evil minds
Change good to their own nature. I gave all
He has; and in return he chains me here
Years, ages, night and day: whether the Sun
Split my parched skin, or in the moony night


380


The crystal-wingéd snow cling round my hair :


Whilst my belovéd race is trampled down
By his thought-executing ministers.

Such is the tyrant’s recompense: ’tis just:
He who is evil can receive no good ;

And for a world bestowed, or a friend lost,


He can feel hate, fear, shame ; not gratitude :


He but requites me for his own misdeed.
ai


39°


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


Kindness to such is keen reproach, which breaks
With bitter stings the light sleep of Revenge.
Submission, thou dost know I cannot try :
For what submission but that fatal word,
The death-seal of mankind’s captivity,
Like the Sicilian’s hair-suspended sword,
Which trembles o’er his crown, would he accept,
Or could I yield? Which yet I will not yield. 400
Let others flatter Crime, where it sits throned
In brief Omnipotence: secure are they:
For Justice, when triumphant,’ will weep down
Pity, not punishment, on her own wrongs,
Too much avenged by those who err. I wait,
Enduring thus, the retributive hour
Which since we spake is even nearer now.
But hark, the hell-hounds clamour: fear delay :
Behold! Heaven lowers under thy Father’s frown.
Mer. Oh, that we might be spared, I to inflict 410
And thou to suffer! Once more answer me:
Thou knowest not the period of Jove’s power?
Pro. I know but this, that it must come.
Mer. Alas!
Thou canst not count thy years to come of pain ?
Pro. They last while Jove must reign: nor more, nor less


Do I desire or fear.
22


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Mer. Yet pause, and plunge
Into Eternity, where recorded time,
Even all that we imagine, age on age,
Seems but a point, and the reluctant mind
Flags wearily in its unending flight, 420
Till it sink, dizzy, blind, lost, shelterless ;
Perchance it has not numbered the slow years
Which thou must spend in torture, unreprieved ?
Pro. Perchance no thought can count them: yet they
pass.
Mer. If thou might’st dwell among the Gods the while
Lapped in voluptuous joy ?
Pro. I would not quit
This bleak ravine, these unrepentant pains.
Mer. Alas! I wonder at, yet pity thee.
Pro. Pity the self-despising slaves of Heaven,
Not me, within whose mind sits peace serene, 430
As light in the sun, throned. How vain is talk !
Call up the fiends.
Lone. O, sister, look! White fire
Has cloven to the roots yon huge snow-loaded
cedar ;
How fearfully God’s thunder howls behind !
Mer. I must obey his words and thine: alas!
Most heavily remorse hangs at my heart!
23


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


Pan. See where the child of Heaven, with wingéd feet,
Runs down the slanted sunlight of the dawn.

Lone. Dear sister, close thy plumes over thine eyes
Lest thou behold and die! they come, they come 440
Blackening the birth of day with countless wings,
And hollow underneath, like death.


First Fury. Prometheus !
Second Fury. Immortal Titan !
Third Fury. Champion of Heaven’s slaves !


Pro. He whom some dreadful voice invokes is here,
Prometheus, the chained Titan. Horrible forms,
What and who are ye? Never yet there came
Phantasms so foul through monster-teeming Hell
From the all-miscreative brain of Jove.
Whilst I behold such execrable shapes,
Methinks I grow like what I contemplate, 450
And laugh and stare in loathsome sympathy.

First Fury. We are the ministers of pain, and fear,
And disappointment, and mistrust, and hate,
And clinging crime ; and as lean dogs pursue
Through wood and lake some struck and sobbing

fawn,

We track all things that weep, and bleed, and live,
When the great King betrays them to our will.


Pro. O many fearful natures in one name,
24


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


I know ye; and these lakes and echoes know
The darkness and the clangour of your wings. 460
But why more hideous than your loathéd selves
Gather ye up in legions from the deep?
Second Fury. We knew not that: Sisters, rejoice,
rejoice !
Pro. Can aught exult in its deformity ?
Second Fury. The beauty of delight makes lovers glad,
Gazing on one another: so are we.
As from the rose which the pale priestess kneels
To gather for her festal crown of flowers
The aérial crimson falls, flushing her cheek,
So from our victim’s destined agony 470
The shade which is our form invests us round ;
Else we are shapeless as our mother Night.
Pro. I laugh your power, and his who sent you here,
To lowest scorn. Pour forth the cup of pain.
First Fury. Thou thinkest we will rend thee bone from
bone,
And nerve from nerve, working like fire within?
Pro, Pain is my element, as hate is thine ;
Ye rend me now: I care not.
Second Fury. Dost imagine
We will but laugh into thy lidless eyes?
Pro. I weigh not what ye do, but what ye suffer, 480
25


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


Being evil. Cruel was the power which called
You, or aught else so wretched, into light.


Third Fury. Thou think’st we will live through thee, one


Pro.


by one,

Like animal life, and though we can obscure not
The soul which burns within, that we will dwell
Beside it, like a vain loud multitude
Vexing the self-content of wisest men :
That we will be dread thought beneath thy brain,
And foul desire round thine astonished heart,
And blood within thy labyrinthine veins 49°
Crawling like agony ?

Why, ye are thus now ;
Yet am I king over myself, and rule
The torturing and conflicting throngs within,
As Jove rules you when Hell grows mutinous.


Cuorus oF Furies.
From the ends of the earth, from the ends of the
earth,
Where the night has its grave and the morning its
birth,
Come, come, come!
O ye who shake hills with the scream of your mirth,


When cities sink howling in ruin; and ye
26


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Who with wingless footsteps trample the sea, 500
And close upon Shipwreck and Famine’s track,
Sit chattering with joy on the foodless wreck ;
Come, come, come!
Leave the bed, low, cold, and red,
Strewed beneath a nation dead ;
Leave the hatred, as in ashes
Fire is left for future burning :
Tt will burst in bloodier flashes
When ye stir it, soon returning : 510
Leave the self-contempt implanted
In young spirits, sense-enchanted,
Misery’s yet unkindled fuel :
Leave Hell’s secrets half unchanted
To the maniac dreamer ; cruel
More than ye can be with hate
Is he with fear.
Come, come, come !
We are steaming up from Hell’s wide gate
And we burthen the blasts of the atmosphere,
But vainly we toil till ye come here. 520
Lone. Sister, I hear the thunder of new wings.
Pan. These solid mountains quiver with the sound
Even as the tremulous air: their shadows make
The space within my plumes more black than night.
27


Act I. «<= Prometheus Unbound


First Fury.
Your call was as a wingéd car
Driven on whirlwinds fast and far
It rapt us from red gulfs of war.
Srconp Fury.


From wide cities, famine-wasted ;


Tuirp Fury.
Groans half heard, and blood untasted ;


Fourtu Fury.


Kingly conclaves stern and cold, 530
Where blood with gold is bought and sold ;


Friern Fury.


From the furnace, white and hot,
In which—


A Fury.


Speak not! whisper not!
I know all that ye would tell,
But to speak might break the spell
Which must bend the Invincible,
The stern of thought ;
He yet defies the deepest power of Hell.
28


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Fury.
‘Tear the veil !


ANOTHER Fury.
It is torn.


Cuorus.


The pale stars of the morn
Shine on a misery, dire to be borne. 540
Dost thou faint, mighty Titan? We laugh thee to
scorn.
Dost thou boast the clear knowledge thou waken’dst
for man?
Then was kindled within him a thirst which outran
Those perishing waters ; a thirst of fierce fever,
Hope, love, doubt, desire, which consume him for
ever.
One came forth of gentle worth
Smiling on the sanguine earth ;
His words outlived him, like swift poison
Withering up truth, peace, and pity.
Look! where round the wide horizon 550
Many a million-peopled city
Vomits smoke in the bright air.
Mark that outcry of despair !
29


Act I. <= Prometheus Unbound


Tis his mild and gentle ghost
Wailing for the faith he kindled.
Look again, the flames almost
To a glow-worm’s lamp have dwindled:
The survivors round the embers
Gather in dread.
Joy, joy, joy! 560
Past ages crowd on thee, but each one remembers,
And the future is dark, and the present is spread
Like a pillow of thorns for thy slumberless head.


Semicuorus I.
Drops of bloody agony flow
From his white and quivering brow ;
Grant a little respite now.
See a disenchanted nation
Springs like day from desolation ;
To Truth its state is dedicate,
And Freedom leads it forth, her mate ; 570
A legioned band of linkéd brothers
Whom Love calls children—
SemicHorus II.
Tis another’s !
See how kindred murder kin:


Tis the vintage-time for death and sin:
30


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Blood, like new wine, bubbles within :
Till Despair smothers
The struggling world, which slaves and tyrants win.
[All the Furies vanish, except one.
Tone. Hark, sister! what a low yet dreadful groan
Quite unsuppressed is tearing up the heart
Of the good Titan, as storms tear the deep, 580
And beasts hear the sea moan in inland caves.
Darest thou observe how the fiends torture him?
Pan. Alas! I looked forth twice, but will no more.
Tone. What didst thou see ?
Pan. A woeful sight! A youth
With patient looks nailed to a crucifix.
Tone. What next ?
Pan. The heaven around, the earth below
Was peopled with thick shapes of human death,
All horrible, and wrought by human hands ;
And some appeared the work of human hearts,
For men were slowly killed by frowns and smiles :
And other sights too foul to speak and live 59!
Were wandering by. Let us not tempt worse fear
By looking forth: those groans are grief enough.
Fury. Behold an emblem: those who do endure
Deep wrongs for man, and scorn, and chains, but heap
Thousandfold torment on themselves and him.
3r


Act I. < Prometheus Unbound


Pro. Remit the anguish of that lighted stare ;
Close those wan lips; let that thorn-wounded brow
Stream not with blood ; it mingles with thy tears !
Fix, fix those tortured orbs in peace and death, 600
So thy sick throes shake not that crucifix,
So those pale fingers play not with thy gore.
O horrible! Thy name I will not speak ;
It hath become a curse. I see, I see
The wise, the mild, the lofty, and the just,
Whom thy slaves hate for being like to thee,
Some hunted by foul lies from their heart’s home,
An early-chosen, late-lamented home,
As hooded ounces cling to the driven hind ;
Some linked to corpses in unwholesome cells; 610
Some—hear I not the multitude laugh loud ?—
Impaled in lingering fire; and mighty realms
Float by my feet, like sea-uprooted isles,
Whose sons are kneaded down in common blood
By the red light of their own burning homes.

Fury. Blood thou canst see, and fire, and canst hear

groans ;

Worse things, unheard, unseen, remain behind.

Pro. Worse?

Fury. In each human heart terror survives
The ruin it has gorged: the loftiest fear

32


Prometheus Unbound = Act .1


Pro.


All that they would disdain to think were true :

Hypocrisy and custom make their minds 621

The fanes of many a worship, now outworn.

They dare not devise good for man’s estate,

And yet they know not that they do not dare.

The good want power, but to weep barren tears.

The powerful goodness want: worse need for them.

The wise want love; and those who love want
wisdom ;

And all best things are thus confused to ill.

Many are strong and rich, and would be just,

But live among their suffering fellow-men 630

As if none felt: they know not what they do.

Thy words are like a cloud of wingéd snakes ;

And yet I pity those they torture not.


Fury. Thou pitiest them? I speak no more!


Pro.


[Vanishes.
Ah woe!
Ah woe! Alas! pain, pain ever, for ever!
I close my tearless eyes, but see more clear
Thy works within my woe-illuméd mind,
Thou subtle tyrant! Peace is in the grave.
The grave hides all things beautiful and good :
I am a God and cannot find it there, 640
Nor would I seek it: for, though dread revenge,


fa 33


Act I. e= Prometheus Unbound


This is defeat, fierce king! not victory.
The sights with which thou torturest gird my soul
With new endurance, till the hour arrives
When they shall be no types of things which are.
Pan. Alas! what sawest thou?
Pro. There are two woes ;
To speak, and to behold; thou spare me one.
Names are there, Nature’s sacred watchwords, they
Were borne aloft in bright emblazonry ;
The nations thronged around, and cried aloud, 650
As with one voice, Truth, Liberty, and Love!
Suddenly fierce confusion fell from heaven
Among them: there was strife, deceit, and fear :
Tyrants rushed in, and did divide the spoil.
This was the shadow of the truth I saw.
The Earth. 1 felt thy torture, son, with such mixed
joy
As pain and virtue give. ‘T'o cheer thy state
I bid ascend those subtle and fair spirits,
Whose homes are the dim caves of human thought,
And who inhabit, as birds wing the wind, 660
Its world-surrounding aether: they behold
Beyond that twilight realm, as in a glass,
The future; may they speak comfort to thee!
Pan. Look, sister, where a troop of spirits gather,
34


Prometheus Unbound = Act 1.


Like flocks of clouds in spring’s delightful weather,
Thronging in the blue air !
Lone. And see! more come,
Like fountain-vapours when the winds are dumb,
That climb up the ravine in scattered lines.
And, hark! is it the music of the pines?
Is it the lake? Is it the waterfall ? 670
Pan. ’Tis something sadder, sweeter far than all.


Cuorus oF Spirits.


From unremembered ages we
Gentle guides and guardians be
Of heaven-oppressed mortality ;
And we breathe, and sicken not,
The atmosphere of human thought :
Be it dim, and dank, and grey,
Like a storm-extinguished day,
Travelled o’er by dying gleams ;
Be it bright as all between 680
Cloudless skies and windless streams,
Silent, liquid, and serene ;
As the birds within the wind,
As the fish within the wave,
As the thoughts of man’s own mind
Float through all above the grave ;
35


Act I.


<= Prometheus Unbound


We make there our liquid lair,

Voyaging cloudlike and unpent

Through the boundless element :

Thence we bear the prophecy 690
Which begins and ends in thee!


Tone. More yet come, one by one: the air around


them


Looks radiant as the air around a star.


First Spirit.


On a battle-trumpet’s blast
I fled hither, fast, fast, fast,
?Mid the darkness upward cast.
From the dust of creeds outworn,
From the tyrant’s banner torn,
Gathering round me, onward borne,
There was mingled many a cry— 700
Freedom! Hope! Death! Victory!
Till they faded through the sky ;
And one sound, above, around,
One sound beneath, around, above,
Was moving; ’twas the soul of love ;
T'was the hope, the prophecy,
Which begins and ends in thee.

36


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Seconp Spirit.


A rainbow’s arch stood on the sea,

Which rocked beneath, immovably ;

And the triumphant storm did flee, 410
Like a conqueror, swift and proud,

Between, with many a captive cloud,

A shapeless, dark and rapid crowd,

Each by lightning riven in half:

I heard the thunder hoarsely laugh :

Mighty fleets were strewn like chaff

And spread beneath a hell of death

O’er the white waters. I alit

On a great ship lightning-split,

And speeded hither on the sigh 720
Of one who gave an enemy

His plank, then plunged aside to die.


Tuirp Spirit.


I sat beside a sage’s bed,
And the lamp was burning red
Near the book where he had fed,
When a Dream with plumes of flame,
To his pillow hovering came,
And I knew it was the same

37


Act I.


eS Prometheus Unbound


Which had kindled long ago

Pity, eloquence, and woe ; 730
And the world awhile below

Wore the shade, its lustre made.

It has borne me here as fleet

As Desire’s lightning feet :

I must ride it back ere morrow,

Or the sage will wake in sorrow.


FourtH Spirit.


On a poet’s lips I slept
Dreaming like a love-adept
In the sound his breathing kept ;
Nor seeks nor finds he mortal blisses, 740
But feeds on the aérial kisses
Of shapes that haunt thought’s wildernesses.
He will watch from dawn to gloom
The lake-reflected sun illume
The yellow bees in the ivy-bloom,
Nor heed nor see, what things they be;
But from these create he can
Forms more real than living man,
Nurslings of immortality !
One of these awakened me, 750
And I sped to succour thee.
38


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


Tone.


Pan.


Tone.


Behold’st thou not two shapes from the east and west
Come, as two doves to one beloved nest,
Twin nurslings of the all-sustaining air,

On swift still wings glide down the atmosphere ?
And, hark! their sweet, sad voices! ’tis despair
Mingled with love and then dissolved in sound.
Canst thou speak, sister? All my words are


drowned.
Their beauty gives me voice. See how they float
On their sustaining wings of skiey grain, 760


Orange and azure deepening into gold:
Their soft smiles light the air like a star’s fire.


Cuorus oF Spirits.
Hast thou beheld the form of Love ?
Firrx Spirit.
As over wide dominions
I sped, like some swift cloud that wings the wide
air’s wildernesses,
That planet-crested shape swept by on lightning-
braided pinions,
Scattering the liquid joy of life from his ambrosial
tresses :
His footsteps paved the world with light; but as I
passed ’twas fading,
39


Act I. e= Prometheus Unbound

And hollow Ruin yawned behind: great sages
bound in madness,

And headless patriots, and pale youths who perished,
unupbraiding,

Gleamed in the night. I wandered o’er, till thou,
O King of sadness, 77°

Turned by thy smile the worst I saw to recollected
gladness.

Sixtu Spirit.

Ah, Sister! Desolation is a delicate thing :

It walks not on the earth, it floats not on the
air,

But treads with killing 2 footstep, and fans with silent
wing

The tender hopes which in their hearts the best and
gentlest bear ;

Who, soothed to false repose by the fanning plumes
above

And the musicestirring motion of its soft and busy
feet,

Dream visions of aérial joy, and call the monster,
Love,

And wake, and find the shadow Pain, as he whom


now we greet.
40


Prometheus Unbound =& Act I.


Cuorus.

Though Ruin now Love’s shadow be, 780
Following him, destroyingly,

On Death’s white and wingéd steed,
Which the fleetest cannot flee,
Trampling down both flower and weed,
Man and beast, and foul and fair,
Like a tempest through the air ;
Thou shalt quell this horseman grim,
Woundless though in heart or limb.


PRomMETHEUS.
Spirits! how know ye this shall be?


Cuorus.

In the atmosphere we breathe, 790
As buds grow red when the snowstorms flee,

From spring gathering up beneath,
Whose mild winds shake the elder brake,
And the wandering herdsmen know
That the white-thorn soon will blow :
Wisdom, Justice, Love, and Peace,
When they struggle to increase,
Are to us as soft winds be
To shepherd boys, the prophecy
Which begins and ends in thee. 800

41


Act I. «= Prometheus Unbound


Tone.


Pan.


Pro.


Pan.


Where are the Spirits fled ?
Only a sense

Remains of them, like the omnipotence
Of music, when the inspired voice and lute
Languish, ere yet the responses are mute,
Which through the deep and labyrinthine soul,
Like echoes through long caverns, wind and

roll.


How fair these air-born shapes! and yet I feel
Most vain all hope but love; and thou art far,
Asia! who, when my being overflowed,
Wert like a golden chalice to bright wine 810
Which else had sunk into the thirsty dust.
All things are still. Alas! how heavily
This quiet morning weighs upon my heart
Though I should dream I could even sleep with
grief
If slumber were denied not. I would fain
Be what it is my destiny to be,
The saviour and the strength of suffering man,
Or sink into the original gulf of things :
There is no agony, and no solace left ; 819
Earth can console, Heaven can torment no more.
Hast thou forgotten one who watches thee
42


Prometheus Unbound = Act I.


The cold dark night, and never sleeps but when
The shadow of thy spirit falls on her?
Pro. I said all hope was vain but love: thou lovest.
Pan. Deeply in truth; but the eastern star looks white,
And Asia waits in that far Indian vale
The scene of her sad exile ; rugged once
And desolate and frozen, like this ravine ;
But now invested with fair flowers and herbs,
And haunted by sweet airs and sounds, which
flow 830
Among the woods and waters, from the aether
Of her transforming presence, which would fade
If it were mingled not with thine. Farewell !


Supe t


43


Act II. Sc. i. <= Prometheus Unbound


Act Second,
Scene I.


Morning. A lovely Vale in the Indian Caucasus.
Asia alone.


Asia, From all the blasts of Heaven thou hast descended :
Yes, like a spirit, like a thought, which makes
Unwonted tears throng to the horny eyes,

And beatings haunt the desolated heart,

Which should have learnt repose: thou hast
descended

Cradled in tempests ; thou dost wake, O spring !

O child of many winds! As suddenly

Thou comest as the memory of a dream,

Which now is sad because it hath been sweet ;

Like genius, or like joy which riseth up 10

As from the earth, clothing with golden clouds

The desert of our life.

This is the season, this the day, the hour ;

At sunrise thou shouldst come, sweet sister mine,

Too long desired, too long delaying, come!

How like death-worms the wingless moments crawl !

44


Prometheus Unbound = Act Il. Se. i.


Pan.


The point of one white star is quivering still

Deep in the orange light of widening morn

Beyond the purple mountains: through a chasm

Of wind-divided mist the darker lake 20
Reflects it: now it wanes: it gleams again

As the waves fade, and as the burning threads

Of woven cloud unravel in pale air :

?Tis lost! and through yon peaks of cloudlike

snow

The roseate sunlight quivers: hear I not

The /Eolian music of her sea-green plumes
Winnowing the crimson dawn?

Panthea enters.
I feel, I see
Those eyes which burn through smiles that fade in
tears,

Like stars half quenched in mists of silver dew.
Belovéd and most beautiful, who wearest 30
The shadow of that soul by which I live,

How late thou art! the spheréd sun had climbed
The sea; my heart was sick with hope, before
The printless air felt thy belated plumes.

Pardon, great sister! but my wings were faint
With the delight of a remembered dream,


As are the noontide plumes of summer winds
45


Act IL. Se. i. <= Prometheus Unbound


Satiate with sweet flowers. I was wont to sleep
Peacefully, and awake refreshed and calm,
Before the sacred Titan’s fall and thy 40
Unhappy love had made, through use and pity,
Both love and woe familiar to my heart
As they had grown to thine: erewhile I slept
Under the glaucous caverns of old Ocean
Within dim bowers of green and purple moss,
Our young Ione’s soft and milky arms
Locked then, as now, behind my dark, moist hair,
While my shut eyes and cheek were pressed within
The folded depth of her life-breathing bosom :
But not as now, since I am made the wind 50
Which fails beneath the music that I bear
Of thy most wordless converse; since dissolved
Into the sense with which love talks, my rest
Was troubled and yet sweet; my waking hours
Too full of care and pain.

Asia. Lift up thine eyes,
And let me read thy dream.

Pan. As I have said,
With our sea-sister at his feet I slept.
The mountain mists, condensing at our voice
Under the moon, had spread their snowy flakes,


From the keen ice shielding our linkéd sleep. 60
46


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. i.


Then two dreams came. One, I remember not.
But in the other his pale wound-worn limbs
Fell from Prometheus, and the azure night
Grew radiant with the glory of that form
Which lives unchanged within, and his voice fell
Like music which makes giddy the dim brain,
Faint with intoxication of keen joy:
“¢ Sister of her whose footsteps pave the world
With loveliness—more fair than aught but her,
Whose shadow thou art—lift thine eyes on me.’ 70
I lifted them: the overpowering light
Of that immortal shape was shadowed o’er
By love; which, from his soft and flowing limbs,
And passion-parted lips, and keen, faint eyes,
Steamed forth like vaporous fire ; an atmosphere
Which wrapped me in its all-dissolving power,
As the warm aether of the morning sun
Wraps ere it drinks some cloud of wandering dew.
I saw not, heard not, moved not, only felt
His presence flow and mingle through my blood 80
Till it became his life, and his grew mine,
And I was thus absorbed, until it passed,
And like the vapours when the sun sinks down,
Gathering again in drops upon the pines,
And tremulous as they, in the deep night

47


Act II. Se. i. «= Prometheus Unbound


My being was condensed; and as the rays

Of thought were slowly gathered, I could hear

His voice, whose accents lingered ere they died

Like footsteps of weak melody : thy name

Among the many sounds alone I heard go

Of what might be articulate; though still

I listened through the night when sound was
none.

Tone wakened then, and said to me:

“ Canst thou divine what troubles me to-night ?

I always knew what I desired before,

Nor ever found delight to wish in vain.

But now I cannot tell thee what I seek ;

I know not; something sweet, since it is sweet

Even to desire; it is thy sport, false sister ;

Thou hast discovered some enchantment old, 100

Whose spells have stolen my spirit as I slept

And mingled it with thine: for when just now

We kissed, I felt within thy parted lips

The sweet air that sustained me, and the warmth

Of the life-blood, for loss of which I faint,

Quivered between our intertwining arms.”

I answered not, for the Eastern star grew pale,

But fled to thee.


Asia. Thou speakest, but thy words
48


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. i.


Are as the air: I feel them not: O lift
Thine eyes, that I may read his written soul! 110
Pan. I lift them, though they droop beneath the load
Of that they would express: what canst thou
see
But thine own fairest shadow imaged there?
Asia. Thine eyes are like the deep, blue, boundless heaven
Contracted to two circles underneath
Their long, fine lashes; dark, far, measureless,
Orb within orb, and line through line inwoven.
Pan. Why lookest thou as if a spirit passed ?
Asia, There is a change: beyond their inmost depth
I see a shade, a shape: ’tis He, arrayed 120
In the soft light of his own smiles, which spread
Like radiance from the cloud-surrounded moon.
Prometheus, it is thine! depart not yet!
Say not those smiles that we shall meet again
Within that bright pavilion which their beams
Shall build on the waste world? The dream is
told.
What shape is that between us? Its rude hair
Roughens the wind that lifts it, its regard
Is wild and quick, yet ’tis a thing of air,
For through its grey robe gleams the golden dew 130
Whose stars the noon has quenched not.
d 49


Act II. Sc. i. <= Prometheus Unbound


Dream.
Follow! Follow!

Pan. It is mine other dream.

Asia. It disappears.

Pan. It passes now into my mind. Methought
As we sate here, the flower-infolding buds
Burst on yon lightning-blasted almond tree,
When swift from the white Scythian wilderness
A wind swept forth wrinkling the Earth with frost :
T looked, and all the blossoms were blown down ;
But on each leaf was stamped, as the bluebells
Of Hyacinth tell Apollo’s written grief, 140
O, FoLLow, FoLLow !

Asia. As you speak, your words
Fill, pause by pause, my own forgotten sleep
With shapes. Methought among the lawns together
We wandered, underneath the young grey dawn,
And multitudes of dense white fleecy clouds
Were wandering in thick flocks along the mountains
Shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind ;
And the white dew on the new-bladed grass,
Just piercing the dark earth, hung silently :
And there was more which I remember not: 150
But on the shadows of the morning clouds,


Athwart the purple mountain slope, was written
5°


‘Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. i.


Foutow, O, rotrow! as they vanished by ;

And on each herb, from which Heaven’s dew had
fallen,

The like was stamped, as with a withering fire.

A wind arose among the pines ; it shook

The clinging music from their boughs, and then

Low, sweet, faint sounds, like the farewell of ghosts,

Were heard: Ou, rottow, FoLLow, FOLLOW ME !

And then I said: ‘ Panthea, look on me.”’ 160

But in the depth of those belovéd eyes

Still I saw, rotuow, rottow !


Ecxo.
Follow, Follow!
Pan. The crags, this clear spring morning, mock our voices
As they were spirit-tongued.
Asia. It is some being
Around the crags. What fine clear sounds! O,
list !
Ecuors (unseen).
Echoes we: listen !
We cannot stay :
As dew-stars glisten
Then fade away—


Child of Ocean! 170
51


Act II. Se. i. <= Prometheus Unbound


Asia. Hark! Spirits speak. The liquid responses
Of their a€rial tongues yet sound.
Pan. I hear.


Ecuoks.


O, follow, follow,
As our voice recedeth
Through the caverns hollow
Where the forest spreadeth ;


(More distant.)


O, follow, follow !
Through the caverns hollow,
As the song floats thou pursue,
Where the wild bee never flew, 180
Through the noontide darkness deep,
By the odour-breathing sleep
Of faint night flowers, and the waves
At the fountain-lighted caves,
While our music, wild and sweet,
Mocks thy gently-falling feet,
Child of Ocean !
Asia, Shall we pursue the sound? It grows more faint
And distant.


Pan. List! the strain floats nearer now.
52


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. i.


Ecuoes.


In the world unknown
Sleeps a voice unspoken ;
By thy step alone
Can its rest be broken ;


Child of Ocean !


Asia. How the notes sink upon the ebbing wind !


Ecuoers.


O, follow, follow !

Through the caverns hollow,
As the song floats thou pursue,
By the woodland noontide dew ;
By the forests, lakes, and fountains
Through the many-folded mountains ;
To the rents, and gulfs, and chasms,
Where the earth reposed from spasms,
On the day when he and thou
Parted, to commingle now ;

Child of Ocean !


Asia, Come, sweet Panthea, link thy hand in mine,
And follow, ere the voices fade away.
53


190


200


Act II. Se. ii. <= Prometheus Unbound


Scene II.


A Forest, intermingled with Rocks and Caverns.


Asia and Panthea pass into it. Two young Fauns
are sitting on a Rock, listening.


Semicuorus I. or Spirits.


The path through which that lovely twain
Have passed by cedar, pine, and yew,
And each dark tree that ever grew,

Is curtained out from Heaven’s wide blue ;
Nor sun, nor moon, nor wind, nor rain,

Can pierce its interwoven bowers,

Nor aught, save where some cloud of dew,
Drifted along the earth-creeping breeze,
Between the trunks of the hoar trees,

Hangs each a pearl in the pale flowers 10

Of the green laurel, blown anew ;

And bends, and then fades silently,

One frail and fair anemone:

Or when some star of many a one

That climbs and wanders through steep night,

Has found the cleft through which alone

Beams fall from high those depths upon

54


Prometheus Unbound = Act Il. Se. ii.


Ere it is borne away, away,

By the swift Heavens that cannot stay,

It scatters drops of golden light, 20
Like lines of rain that ne’er unite :

And the gloom divine is all around ;

And underneath is the mossy ground.


Semicuorus II.


There the voluptuous nightingales
Are awake through all the broad noonday :
When one with bliss or sadness fails,
And through the windless ivy-boughs,
Sick with sweet love, droops dying away
On its mate’s music-panting bosom ;
Another from the swinging blossom, 30
Watching to catch the languid close
Of the last strain, then lifts on high
The wings of the weak melody,
Till some new strain of feeling bear
The song, and all the woods are mute ;
When there is heard through the dim air
The rush of wings, and rising there
Like many a lake-surrounded * flute
Sounds overflow the listener’s brain
So sweet, that joy is almost pain. 40
55


Act Il. Se. ii. <= Prometheus Unbound


Semicuorus I.


There those enchanted eddies play
Of echoes, music-tongued, which draw,
By Demogorgon’s mighty law,
With melting rapture, or sweet awe,
All spirits on that secret way ;
As inland boats are driven to Ocean
Down streams made strong with mountain-thaw :
And first there comes a gentle sound
To those in talk or slumber bound,
And wakes the destined *: soft emotion, 50
Attracts, impels them: those who saw
Say from the breathing earth behind
There steams a plume-uplifting wind
Which drives them on their path, while they
Believe their own swift wings and feet
The sweet desires within obey :
And so they float upon their way,
Until, still sweet, but loud and strong,
The storm of sound is driven along,
Sucked up and hurrying 2: as they fleet,3 60
Behind its gathering billows meet
And to the fatal mountain bear


Like clouds amid the yielding air.
56


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. ii.


First Faun. Canst thou imagine where those spirits live
Which make such delicate music in the woods?
We haunt within the least frequented caves
And closest coverts, and we know these wilds,
Yet never meet them, though we hear them oft:
Where may they hide themselves ?

Second Faun. Tis hard to tell :
I have heard those more skilled in spirits say, 70
The bubbles, which the enchantment of the sun
Sucks from the pale faint water-flowers that pave
The oozy bottom of clear lakes and pools,
Are the pavilions where such dwell and float
Under the green and golden atmosphere
Which noontide kindles through the woven leaves ;
And when these burst, and the thin fiery air,
The which they breathed within those lucent domes,
Ascends to flow like meteors through the night,
They ride on them, and rein their headlong speed, 80
And bow their burning crests, and glide in fire,
Under the waters of the earth again.

First Faun. Tf such live thus, have others other lives,
Under pink blossoms or within the bells
Of meadow flowers, or folded violets deep,
Or on their dying odours, when they die,
Or in the sunlight of the spheréd dew?

57


Act II. Se. iii. <= Prometheus Unbound


Second Faun. Ay, many more which we may well divine.


Pan.


7


But should we stay to speak, noontide would come,
And thwart Silenus find his goats undrawn, go
And grudge to sing those wise and lovely songs

Of Fate, and Chance, and God, and Chaos old,
And Love, and the chained Titan’s woful doom,
And how he shall be loosed, and make the earth
One brotherhood: delightful strains which cheer
Our solitary twilights, and which charm

To silence the unenvying nightingales.


Scene III.
A Pinnacle of Rock among Mountains.
Asia and Panthea.


Hither the sound has borne us—to the realm
Of Demogorgon, and the mighty portal,
Like a volcano’s meteor-breathing chasm,
Whence the oracular vapour is hurled up
Which lonely men drink wandering in their youth,
And call truth, virtue, love, genius, or joy,
That maddening wine of life, whose dregs they
drain


To deep intoxication ; and uplift,
58


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. iii.


Like Mznads who cry loud, Evoe! Evoe!

The voice which is contagion to the world. 10
Asia. Fit throne for such a Power! Magnificent!

How glorious art thou, Earth! And if thou be

The shadow of some spirit lovelier still,

Though evil stain its work, and it should be

Like its creation, weak yet beautiful,

I could fall down and worship that and thee.

Even now my heart adoreth. Wonderful !

Look, sister, ere the vapour dim thy brain :

Beneath is a wide plain of billowy mist,

As a lake, paving in the morning sky, 20

With azure waves which burst in silver light,

Some Indian vale. Behold it, rolling on

Under the curdling winds, and islanding

The peak whereon we stand, midway, around,

Encinctured by the dark and blooming forests,

Dim twilight-lawns and stream-illumined caves,

And wind-enchanted shapes of wandering mist ;

And far on high the keen sky-cleaving mountains

From icy spires of sun-like radiance fling

The dawn, as lifted Ocean’s dazzling spray, 30

From some Atlantic islet scattered up,

Spangles the wind with lamp-like water-drops.

The vale is girdled with their walls, a howl

59


Act I. Se. iii. <= Prometheus Unbound


Of cataracts from their thaw-cloven ravines

Satiates the listening wind, continuous, vast,

Awful as silence. Hark! the rushing snow!

The sun-awakened avalanche! whose mass,

Thrice sifted by the storm, had gathered there

Flake after flake, in heaven-defying minds

As thought by thought is piled, till some great truth

Is loosened, and the nations echo round, 41

Shaken to their roots, as do the mountains now.
Pan. Look how the gusty sea of mist is breaking

In crimson foam, even at our feet! it rises

As Ocean at the enchantment of the moon

Round foodless men wrecked on some oozy isle.
Asia. The fragments of the clouds are scattered up ;

The wind that lifts them disentwines my hair ;

Its billows now sweep o’er mine eyes; my brain

Grows dizzy; I see thin shapes within the mist. 50
Pan. A countenance with beckoning smiles: there burns

An azure fire within its golden locks!

Another and another: hark! they speak !


Sonc oF Spirits.


To the deep, to the deep,
Down, down!


Through the shade of sleep,
60


Prometheus Unbound =& Act Il. Sc. iii.


Through the cloudy strife
Of Death and of Life;
Through the veil and the bar
OF things which seem and are, 60
Even to the steps of the remotest throne,
Down, down!


While the sound whirls around,
Down, down!

As the fawn draws the hound,

As the lightning the vapour,

As a weak moth the taper ;

Death, despair ; love, sorrow ;

Time both; to-day, to-morrow ;

As steel obeys the spirit of the stone, 79
Down, down!


Through the grey, void abysm,
Down, down !
Where the air is no prism,
And the moon and stars are not,
And the cavern-crags wear not
The radiance of Heaven,
Nor the gloom to Earth given,
Where there is one pervading, one alone,


Down, down! 80
61


Act II. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


In the depth of the deep
Down, down !

Like veiled lightning asleep,

Like the spark nursed in embers,

The last look Love remembers,

Like a diamond, which shines

On the dark wealth of mines,

A spell is treasured but for thee alone.
Down, down !


We have bound thee, we guide thee; go
Down, down!

With the bright form beside thee ;

Resist not the weakness,

Such strength is in meekness

That the Eternal, the Immortal,

Must unloose through life’s portal


The snake-like Doom coiled underneath his throne,
By that alone.


Scene IV.
The Cave of Demogorgon.
Asia and Panthea.


Pan. What veiléd form sits on that ebon throne ?


Asia. The veil has fallen.
62


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Sc. iv.


Pan. I see a mighty darkness
Filling the seat of power, and rays of gloom
Dart round, as light from the meridian sun,
Ungazed upon and shapeless ; neither limb,
Nor form, nor outline ; yet we feel it is
A living spirit.


Dem. Ask what thou wouldst know.
Asia. What canst thou tell ?

Dem. All things thou dar’st demand.
Asia. Who made the living world ?

Dem. God.

Asia. Who made all


That it contains? thought, passion, reason, will, to
Imagination ?
Dem. God: Almighty God.
Asia. Who made that sense which, when the winds of
spring
In rarest visitation, or the voice
Of one belovéd heard in youth alone,
Fills the faint eyes with falling tears which dim
The radiant looks of unbewailing flowers,
And leaves this peopled earth a solitude
When it returns no more?
Dem. Merciful God.


Asia. And who made terror, madness, crime, remorse,
63


Act II. Se. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


Dem


Which from the links of the great chain of things,
To every thought within the mind of man, 21
Sway and drag heavily, and each one reels
Under the load towards the pit of death ;
Abandoned hope, and love that turns to hate ;
And self-contempt, bitterer to drink than blood ;
Pain, whose unheeded and familiar speech
Is howling, and keen shrieks, day after day ;
And Hell, or the sharp fear of Hell ?

He reigns.


Asia. Utter his name: a world pining in pain


Asks but his name: curses shall drag him down. 30


Dem. He reigns.
Asia. I feel, I know it: who?
Dem. He reigns.
Asia. Who reigns? There was the Heaven and Earth
at first,
And Light and Love; then Saturn, from whose
throne


Time fell, an envious shadow: such the state
Of the earth’s primal spirits beneath his sway,
As the calm joy of flowers and living leaves
Before the wind or sun has withered them,
And semivital worms; but he refused


The birthright of their being, knowledge, power,
64


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Sc. iv.


The skill which wields the elements, the thought
Which pierces this dim universe like light, 41
Self-empire, and the majesty of love ;

For thirst of which they fainted. Then Prometheus
Gaye wisdom, which is strength, to Jupiter,

And with this law alone, ‘¢ Let man be free,”
Clothed him with the dominion of wide Heaven.
To know no faith, nor love, nor law, to be
Omnipotent but friendless, is to reign ;

And Jove now reigned ; for on the race of man
First famine, and then toil, and then disease, 50
Strife, wounds, and ghastly death unseen before,
Fell; and the unseasonable seasons drove

With alternating shafts of frost and fire,

Their shelterless, pale tribes to mountain caves;
And in their desert hearts fierce wants he sent,
And mad disquietudes, and shadows idle

Of unreal good, which levied mutual war,

So ruining the lair wherein they raged.

Prometheus saw, and waked the legioned hopes
Which sleep within folded Elysian flowers, 60
Nepenthe, Moly, Amaranth, fadeless blooms,

That they might hide with thin and rainbow wings
The shape of Death; and Love he sent to bind
The disunited tendrils of that vine


e 65


Act II. Se. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


Which bears the wine of life, the human heart ;

And he tamed fire which, like some beast of prey,

Most terrible, but lovely, played beneath

The frown of man; and tortured to his will

Iron and gold, the slaves and signs of power,

And gems and poisons, and all subtlest forms 70

Hidden beneath the mountains and the waves.

He gave man speech, and speech created thought,

Which is the measure of the universe ;

And Science struck the thrones of earth and heaven,

Which shook but fell not; and the harmonious
mind,

Poured itself forth in all-prophetic song ;

And music lifted up the listening spirit

Until it walked, exempt from mortal care,

Godlike, o’er the clear billows of sweet sound ;

And human hands first mimicked and then mocked,

With moulded limbs more lovely than its own, 81

The human form, till marble grew divine ;

And mothers, gazing, drank the love men see

Reflected in their race, behold, and perish.

He told the hidden power of herbs and springs,

And Disease drank and slept. Death grew like sleep.

He taught the implicated orbits woven


Of the wide-wandering stars ; and how the sun
66


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Sc. iv.


Changes his lair, and by what secret spell
The pale moon is transformed, when her broad eye
Gazes not on the interlunar sea. gi
He taught to rule, as life directs the limbs,
The tempest-wingéd chariots of the Ocean,
And the Celt knew the Indian. Cities then
Were built, and through their snowlike columns
flowed
The warm winds, and the azure aether shone,
And the blue sea and shadowy hills were seen.
Such, the alleviations of his state,
Prometheus gave to man, for which he hangs
Withering in destined pain: but who reigns down 100
Evil, the immedicable plague, which, while
Man looks on his creation like a God
And sees that it is glorious, drives him on
The wreck of his own will, the scorn of earth,
The outcast, the abandoned, the alone?
Not Jove: while yet his frown shook heaven, ay
when
His adversary from adamantine chains
Cursed him, he trembled like a slave. Declare
Who is his master? Is he too a slave?
Dem. All spirits are enslaved which serve things evil: 110


Thou knowest if Jupiter be such or no.
67


Act II. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


Asia. Whom called’st thou God?
Dem. I spoke but as ye speak,
For Jove is the supreme of living things.
Asia. Who is the master of the slave?
Dem. If the abysm
Could vomit forth its secrets—but a voice
Is wanting, the deep truth is imageless ;
For what would it avail to bid thee gaze
On the revolving world? What to bid speak
Fate, Time, Occasion, Chance and Change? To
these
All things are subject but eternal Love. 120
Asia. So much I asked before, and my heart gave
The response thou hast given; and of such truths
Each to itself must be the oracle.
One more demand; and do thou answer me
As my own soul would answer, did it know
That which I ask. Prometheus shall arise
Henceforth the sun of this rejoicing world:
When shall the destined hour arrive ?


Dem. Behold !
Asia. The rocks are cloven, and through the purple
night
I see cars drawn by rainbow-wingéd steeds 130


Which trample the dim winds: in each there stands
68


Prometheus Unbound = ActIl. Sc. iv.


A wild-eyed charioteer urging their flight.
Some look behind, as fiends pursued them there,
And yet I see no shapes but the keen stars:
Others, with burning eyes, lean forth, and drink
With eager lips the wind of their own speed,
As if the thing they loved fled on before,
And now, even now, they clasped it. Their bright
locks
Stream like a comet’s flashing hair: they all
Sweep onward.
Dem. These are the immortal Hours, 140
Of whom thou didst demand. One waits for thee.
Asia. A spirit with a dreadful countenance
Checks its dark chariot by the craggy gulf.
Unlike thy brethren, ghastly charioteer,
Who art thou? Whither wouldst thou bear me?
Speak !
Spirit. I am the shadow of a destiny
More dread than is my aspect: ere yon planet
Has set, the darkness which ascends with me
Shall wrap in lasting night heaven’s kingless throne.
Asia. What meanest thou?
Pan. That terrible shadow floats 150
Up from its throne, as may the lurid smoke
Of earthquake-ruined cities o’er the sea.
69


Act II. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


Lo! it ascends the car; the coursers fly
Terrified: watch its path among the stars
Blackening the night!
Asia. Thus I am answered: strange!
Pan. See, near the verge, another chariot stays ;
An ivory shell inlaid with crimson fire,
Which comes and goes within its sculptured rim
Of delicate strange tracery ; the young spirit
That guides it has the dove-like eyes of hope; 160
How its soft smiles attract the soul! as light
Lures wingéd insects through the Jampless air.


Spirit.
My coursers are fed with the lightning,
They drink of the whirlwind’s stream,
And when the red morning is bright’ning
They bathe in the fresh sunbeam ;
They have strength for their swiftness I deem,
Then ascend with me, daughter of Ocean.


I desire: and their speed makes night kindle ;
I fear: they outstrip the Typhoon ; 170
Ere the cloud piled on Atlas can dwindle
We encircle the earth and the moon:
We shall rest from long labours at noon :
Then ascend with me, daughter of Ocean.
7o


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Sc. v.


Scene V.


The Car pauses within a Cloud on the Top of a
snowy Mountain.
Asia, Panthea, and the Spirit of the Hour.


Spirit.
On the brink of the night and the morning
My coursers are wont to respire ;
But the Earth has just whispered a warning
That their flight must be swifter than fire :
They shall drink the hot speed of desire !


Asia. Thou breathest on their nostrils, but my breath
Would give them swifter speed.
Spirit. Alas! it could not.
Pan. Oh, Spirit! pause, and tell whence is the light
Which fills the cloud? The sun is yet unrisen.
Spirit. The sun will rise not until noon. Apollo 10
Is held in heaven by wonder ; and the light
Which fills this vapour, as the aérial hue
Of fountain-gazing roses fills the water,
Flows from thy mighty sister.
Pan. Yes, I feel—
Asia. What is it with thee, sister? Thou art pale.
7t


Act II. Se. v. <= Prometheus Unbound


Pan. How thou art changed! I dare not look on thee ;
T feel but see thee not. I scarce endure
The radiance of thy beauty. Some good change
Is working in the elements, which suffer
Thy presence thus unveiled. The Nereids tell 20
That on the day when the clear hyaline
Was cloven at thy uprise, and thou didst stand
Within a veinéd shell, which floated on
Over the calm floor of the crystal sea,
Among the /Egean isles, and by the shores
Which bear thy name,—love, like the atmosphere
Of the sun’s fire filling the living world,
Burst from thee, and illumined earth and heaven
And the deep ocean and the sunless caves,
And all that dwells within them ; till grief cast 30
Eclipse upon the soul from which it came:
Such art thou now; nor is it I alone,
Thy sister, thy companion, thine own chosen one,
But the whole world which seeks thy sympathy.
Hear’st thou not sounds i? the air which speak the
love
Of all articulate beings? Feel’st thou not
The inanimate winds enamoured of thee? List !
[ Music.
Asia. Thy words are sweeter than aught else but his
72


Prometheus Unbound =& Act II. Sc. v.


Pan.


Whose echoes they are: yet all love is sweet,
Given or returned. Common as light is love, 40
And its familiar voice wearies not ever.
Like the wide heaven, the all-sustaining air,
It makes the reptile equal to the God:
They who inspire it most are fortunate,
As I am now; but those who feel it most
Are happier still, after long sufferings,
As I shall soon become.
List! Spirits speak.


Voice in the ir, singing.
Life of Life! thy lips enkindle
With their love the breath between them ;
And thy smiles before they dwindle 50
Make the cold air fire; then screen them
In those looks, where whoso gazes
Faints, entangled in their mazes.


Child of Light! thy limbs? are burning
Through the vest which seems to hide them ;
As the radiant lines of morning
Through the clouds ere they divide them ;
And this atmosphere divinest
Shrouds thee wheresoe’er thou shinest.
73


Act Il. Sc. v: <= Prometheus Unbound


Fair are others; none beholds thee, 60
But thy voice sounds low and tender

Like the fairest, for it folds thee
From the sight, that liquid splendour,

And all feel, yet see thee never,

As I feel now, lost for ever !


Lamp of Earth! where’er thou movest
Its dim shapes are clad with brightness,
And the souls of whom thou lovest
Walk upon the winds with lightness,
Till they fail, as I am failing, 70
Dizzy, lost, yet unbewailing !


AsIA.


My soul is an enchanted boat,
Which, like a sleeping swan, doth float
Upon the silver waves of thy sweet singing ;
And thine doth like an angel sit
Beside the helm conducting it,
Whilst all the winds with melody are ringing.
It seems to float ever, for ever,
Upon that many-winding river,
Between mountains, woods, abysses, 80
A paradise of wildernesses !
74


Prometheus Unbound = Act II. Se. v.


Till, like one in slumber bound,
Borne to the ocean, I float down, around,
Into a sea profound, of ever-spreading sound.


Meanwhile thy spirit lifts its pinions
In music’s most serene dominions,
Catching the winds that fan that happy heaven ;
And we sail on, away, afar,
Without a course, without a star,
But by the instinct of sweet music driven ; go
Till through Elysian garden islets
By thee, most beautiful of pilots,
Where never mortal pinnace glided,
The boat of my desire is guided :
Realms where the air we breathe is love,
Which in the winds and? on the waves doth move,
Harmonizing this earth with what we feel above.


We have passed Age’s icy caves,
And Manhood’s dark and tossing waves,
And Youth’s smooth ocean, smiling to betray: 100
Beyond the glassy gulfs we flee
Of shadow-peopled Infancy,
Through Death and Birth, to a diviner day ;
A paradise of vaulted bowers,
Lit by downward-gazing flowers,
75


Act III. Se. i. <= Prometheus Unbound


And watery paths that wind between

Wildernesses calm and green,

Peopled by shapes too bright to see,

And rest, having beheld—somewhat like thee—

Which walk upon the sea, and chant melo-
diously ! 110


Act Third.
Scene I.


Heaven. Jupiter on his Throne ; Thetis and the
other Deities assembled.


Jup. Ye congregated powers of heaven, who share
The glory and the strength of him ye serve,
Rejoice! henceforth I am omnipotent.
All else had been subdued to me; alone
The soul of man, like unextinguished fire,
Yet burns towards heaven with fierce reproach, and
doubt,
And lamentation, and reluctant prayer,
Hurling up insurrection, which might make
Our antique empire insecure, though built


On eldest faith, and hell’s coeval, fear ; 10
76


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Sc. i.


And though my curses through the pendulous
air,

Like snow on herbless peaks, fall flake by flake,

And cling to it; though under my wrath’s night?

It climbs the crags of life, step after step,

Which wound it, as ice wounds unsandalled feet,

It yet remains supreme o’er misery,

Aspiring, unrepressed, yet soon to fall :

Even now have I begotten a strange wonder,

That fatal child, the terror of the earth,

Who waits but till the destined? hour arrive, 20

Bearing from Demogorgon’s vacant throne

The dreadful might of ever-living limbs

Which clothed that awful spirit unbeheld,

To redescend and trample out the spark.


Pour forth heaven’s wine, Idean Ganymede,
And let it fill the Dedal cups like fire,
And from the flower-inwoven soil divine
Ye all-triumphant harmonies arise,
As dew from earth under the twilight stars :
Drink! be the nectar circling through your
veins 30
The soul of joy, ye ever-living Gods,
Till exultation burst in one wide voice
7


Act III. Se. i. «= Prometheus Unbound


Like music from Elysian winds.

And thou
Ascend beside me, veiléd in the light
Of the desire which makes thee one with me,
Thetis, bright image of eternity !
When thou didst cry, “ Insufferable might !
God! Spare me! I sustain not the quick flames,
The penetrating presence ; all my being,
Like him whom the Numidian seps did thaw 40
Into a dew with poison, is dissolved,
Sinking through its foundations :’’ even then
Two mighty spirits, mingling, made a third
Mightier than either, which, unbodied now,
Between us floats, felt, although unbeheld,
Waiting the incarnation, which ascends,
(Hear ye the thunder of the fiery wheels
Griding the winds?) from Demogorgon’s throne.
Victory! victory! Feelest thou not, O world,
The earthquake of his chariot thundering up 50
Olympus ?

[The car of the Hour arrives. Demo-
gorgon descends, and moves
towards the throne of Jupiter.

Awful shape, what art thou? Speak!


Dem. Eternity. Demand no direr name.
78


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Sc. i.


Jup.


Descend, and follow me down the abyss.
I am thy child, as thou wert Saturn’s child ;
Mightier than thee: and we must dwell together
Henceforth in darkness. Lift thy lightnings not.
The tyranny of heaven none may retain,
Or reassume, or hold, succeeding thee :
Yet if thou wilt, as ’tis the destiny
Of trodden worms to writhe till they are dead, 60
Put forth thy might.

Detested prodigy !
Even thus beneath the deep Titanian prisons
I trample thee! thou lingerest ?

Mercy! mercy!
No pity, no release, no respite! Oh,
That thou wouldst make mine enemy my judge,
Even where he hangs, seared by my long revenge,
On Caucasus! he would not doom me thus.
Gentle, and just, and dreadless, is he not
The monarch of the world? What then art thou ?
No refuge! no appeal !
Sink with me then, 70
We two will sink on the wide waves of ruin,
Even as a vulture and a snake outspent
Drop, twisted in inextricable fight,
Into a shoreless sea. Let hell unlock
79


Act III. Sc. ii. <= Prometheus Unbound


Its mounded oceans of tempestuous fire,
And whelm on them into the bottomless void
This desolated world, and thee, and me,
The conqueror and the conquered, and the wreck
Of that for which they combated.
Ai, Ai!
The elements obey me not. I sink 80
Dizzily down, ever, for ever down.
And, like a cloud, mine enemy above
Darkens my fall with victory! Ai, Ai!


Scene II.
The Mouth of a great River in the Island Atlantis.


Ocean is discovered reclining near the Shore ;


Apollo stands beside him.


Ocean. He fell, thou sayest, beneath his conqueror’s
frown ?
Apollo, Ay, when the strife was ended which made
dim
The orb I rule, and shook the solid stars,
The terrors of his eye illumined heaven
With sanguine light, through the thick ragged


‘skirts
80


Prometheus Unbound => Act III. Se. ii.


Of the victorious darkness, as he fell :
Like the last glare of day’s red agony,
Which, from a rent among the fiery clouds,
Burns far along the tempest-wrinkled deep.
Ocean. He sunk to the abyss? To the dark void? 10
Apollo. An eagle so, caught in some bursting cloud
On Caucasus, his thunder-bafed wings
Entangled in the whirlwind, and his eyes
Which gazed on the undazzling sun, now blinded
By the white lightning, while the ponderous hail
Beats on his struggling form, which sinks at length
Prone, and the aérial ice clings over it.
Ocean. Henceforth the fields of Heaven-reflecting sea,
Which are my realm, will heave, unstained with
blood,
Beneath the uplifting winds, like plains of corn 20
Swayed by the summer air; my streams will flow
Round many-peopled continents,t and round
Fortunate isles ; and from their glassy thrones
Blue Proteus and his humid nymphs shall mark
The shadow of fair ships, as mortals see
The floating bark of the light-laden moon
With that white star, its sightless pilot’s crest,
Borne down the rapid sunset’s ebbing sea ;
Tracking their path no more by blood and groans,


f 8x


Act III. Se. ii. <= Prometheus Unbound


And desolation, and the mingled voice 30
Of slavery and command ; but by the light

Of wave-reflected flowers, and floating odours,

And music soft, and mild, free, gentle voices,

That sweetest music, such as spirits love.

Apollo. And I shall gaze not on the deeds which make
My mind obscure with sorrow, as eclipse
Darkens the sphere I guide ; but list, I hear
The small, clear, silver lute of the young Spirit
That sits ont the morning star.

Ocean. Thou must away ;
Thy steeds will pause at even, till when farewell; 40
The loud deep calls me home even now to feed it
With azure calm out of the emerald urns
Which stand for ever full beside my throne.
Behold the Nereids, under the green sea,

Their wavering limbs borne on the wind-like
stream,

Their white arms lifted o’er their streaming hair
With garlands pied and starry sea-flower crowns,
Hastening to grace their mighty sister’s joy.

[A sound of waves is heard.
It is the unpastured sea hungering for calm.
Peace, monster; I come now. Farewell.


Apollo. Farewell. 50
82


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Sc. iii.


Scene III.


Caucasus.


Prometheus, Hercules, Tone, the Earth, Spirits. Asia and


Panthea, borne in the car with the Spirit of the Hour.
Hercules unbinds Prometheus, who descends.


Herc. Most glorious among spirits, thus doth strength


Pro.


To wisdom, courage, and long-suffering love
And thee, who art the form they animate,
Minister like a slave.

Thy gentle words
Are sweeter even than freedom long desired
And long delayed.

Asia, thou light of life,
Shadow of beauty unbeheld: and ye,
Fair sister nymphs, who made long years of pain
Sweet to remember, through your love and care:
Henceforth we will not part. There is a cave, 10
All overgrown with trailing odorous plants,
Which curtain out the day with leaves and flowers,
And paved with veinéd emerald; and a fountain
Leaps in the midst with an awakening sound.
From its curved roof the mountain’s frozen tears


Like snow or silver, or long diamond spires,
83


Act III. Sc. iii. «<= Prometheus Unbound


Hang downward, raining forth a doubtful light:
And there is heard the ever-moving air,

Whispering without from tree to tree, and birds,
And bees; and all around are mossy seats, 20
And the rough walls are clothed with long soft grass ;
A simple dwelling, which shall be our own ;

Where we will sit and talk of time and change,

As the world ebbs and flows, ourselves unchanged.
What can hide man from mutability ?

And if ye sigh, then I will smile; and thou,

Tone, shalt chant fragments of sea-music,

Until I weep, when ye shall smile away

The tears she brought, which yet were sweet to shed.
We will entangle buds and flowers and beams 30
Which twinkle on the fountain’s brim, and make
Strange combinations out of common things,

Like human babes in their brief innocence ;

And we will search, with looks and words of love,
For hidden thoughts, each lovelier than the last,
Our unexhausted spirits ; and like lutes

Touched by the skill of the enamoured wind,
Weave harmonies divine, yet ever new,

From difference sweet where discord cannot be ;
And hither come, sped on the charméd winds, 40


Which meet from all the points of heaven, as bees
84 ;


Prometheus Unbound & Act Ill. Sc. iii.


From every flower aérial Enna feeds,

At their own island-homes in Himera,

The echoes of the human world, which tell

Of the low voice of love, almost unheard,

And dove-eyed pity’s murmured pain, and music,

Itself the echo of the heart, and all

That tempers or improves man’s life, now free ;

And lovely apparitions, dim at first,

Then radiant, as the mind, arising bright 50

From the embrace of beauty, whence the forms

Of which these are the phantoms, casts on them

The gathered rays which are reality,

Shall visit us, the progeny immortal

Of Painting, Sculpture, and rapt Poesy,

And arts, though unimagined, yet to be.

The wandering voices and the shadows these

Of all that man becomes, the mediators

Of that best worship love, by him and us

Given and returned ; swift shapes and sounds, which
grow 60

More fair and soft as man grows wise and kind,

And veil by veil, evil and error fall:

Such virtue has the cave and place around.

[Turning to the Spirit of the Hour.


For thee, fair Spirit, one toil remains. Ione,
85


Act Il]. Sci. = Prometheus Unbound


Give her that curvéd shell, which Proteus old
Made Asia’s nuptial boon, breathing within it
A voice to be accomplished, and which thou
Didst hide in grass under the hollow rock.
Tone. Thou most desired Hour, more loved and lovely
Than all thy sisters, this is the mystic shell ; 70
See the pale azure fading into silver
Lining it with a soft yet glowing light :
Looks it not like lulled music sleeping there ?
Spirit. Tt seems in truth the fairest shell of Ocean:
Its sound must be at once both sweet and strange.
Pro. Go, borne over the cities of mankind
On whirlwind-footed coursers: once again
Outspeed the sun around the orbéd world ;
And as thy chariot cleaves the kindling air,
Thou breathe into the many-folded shell, 80
Loosening its mighty music; it shall be
As thunder mingled with clear echoes: then
Return ; and thou shalt dwell beside our cave.
And thou, O Mother Earth !—
The Earth. I hear, I feel;
Thy lips are on me, and thy touch runs down
Even to the adamantine central gloom
Along these marble nerves ; ’tis life, ’tis joy,
And through my withered, old, and icy frame
86


Prometheus Unbound =& Act III. Se. iii.


The warmth of an immortal youth shoots down
Circling. Henceforth the many children fair 90
Folded in my sustaining arms ; all plants,
And creeping forms, and insects rainbow-winged,
And birds, and beasts, and fish, and human shapes,
Which drew disease and pain from my wan bosom,
Draining the poison of despair, shall take
And interchange sweet nutriment; to me
Shall they become like sister-antelopes
By one fair dam, snow-white, and swift as wind,
Nursed among lilies near a brimming stream.
The dew-mists of my sunless sleep shall float 100
Under the stars like balm: night-folded flowers
Shall suck unwithering* hues in their repose:
And men and beasts in happy dreams shall gather
Strength for the coming day, and all its joy :
And death shall be the last embrace of her
Who takes the life she gave, even as a mother
Folding her child, says, ‘¢ Leave me not again.”
Asia. Oh, mother! wherefore speak the name of death?
Cease they to love, and move, and breathe, and
speak,
Who die ?
The Earth. It would avail not to reply: TIO


Thou art immortal, and this tongue is known
87


Act III. Sc. iii. = Prometheus Unbound


But to the uncommunicating dead.
Death is the veil which those who live call life ;
They sleep, and it is lifted: and meanwhile
In mild variety the seasons mild
With rainbow-skirted showers, and odorous winds,
And long blue meteors cleansing the dull night,
And the life-kindling shafts of the keen sun’s
All-piercing bow, and the dew-mingled rain
Of the calm moonbeams, a soft influence mild, 120
Shall clothe the forests and the fields, ay, even
The crag-built deserts of the barren deep,
With ever-living leaves, and fruits, and flowers.
And thou! There is a cavern where my spirit
Was panted forth in anguish whilst thy pain
Made my heart mad, and those who did inhale it
Became mad too, and built a temple there,
And spoke, and were oracular, and lured
The erring nations round to mutual war, 129
And faithless faith, such as Jove kept with thee ;
Which breath now rises, as amongst tall weeds
A violet’s exhalation, and it fills
With a serener light and crimson air
Intense, yet soft, the rocks and woods around ;
It feeds the quick growth of the serpent vine,
And the dark linkéd ivy tangling wild,

88


Prometheus Unbound = Act Ill. Se. iii.


And budding, blown, or odour-faded blooms
Which star the winds with points of coloured light,
As they rain through them, and bright golden globes
Of fruit, suspended in their own green heaven, 140
And through their veinéd leaves and amber stems
The flowers whose purple and translucid bowls
Stand ever mantling with aérial dew,
The drink of spirits; and it circles round,
Like the soft waving wings of noonday dreams,
Inspiring calm and happy thoughts, like mine,
Now thou art thus restored. This cave is thine.
Arise! appear !

[A Spirit rises in the likeness of a winged child.

This is my torch-bearer ;
Who let his lamp out in old time with gazing
On eyes from which he kindled it anew 150
With love, which is as fire, sweet daughter mine,
For such is that within thine own. Run, wayward,
And guide this company beyond the peak
Of Bacchic Nysa, Menad-haunted mountain,
And beyond Indus and its tribute rivers,
Trampling the torrent streams and glassy lakes
With feet unwet, unwearied, undelaying,
And up the green ravine, across the vale,
Beside the windless and crystalline pool,
89


Act III. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


Where ever lies, on unerasing waves, 160


The image of a temple, built above,
Distinct with column, arch, and architrave,
And palm-like capital, and over-wrought,
And populous most with living imagery,
Praxitelean shapes, whose marble smiles
Fill the hushed air with everlasting love.

It is deserted now, but once it bore

Thy name, Prometheus; there the emulous youths


Bore to thy honour through the divine gloom 169


The lamp which was thine emblem; even as those
Who bear the untransmitted torch of hope
Into the grave, across the night of life,

As thou hast borne it most triumphantly

To this far goal of Time. Depart, farewell.
Beside that temple is the destined cave.


Scene IV.


A Forest. In the background a Cave. Prometheus,
Asia, Panthea, Ione, and the Spirit of the Earth.


Tone. Sister, it is not earthly: how it glides
Under the leaves! how on its head there burns
A light, like a green star, whose emerald beams
Are twined with its fair hair! how, as it moves,
go


Prometheus Unbound = Act lll. Sc. iv.


Pan.


The splendour drops in flakes upon the grass !
Knowest thou it?

It is the delicate spirit
That guides the earth through heaven. From afar
The populous constellations call that light
The loveliest of the planets; and sometimes
It floats along the spray of the salt sea, 10
Or makes its chariot of a foggy cloud,
Or walks through fields or cities while men sleep,
Or o’er the mountain-tops, or down the rivers,
Or through the green waste wilderness, as now,
Wondering at all it sees. Before Jove reigned
It loved our sister Asia, and it came
Each leisure hour to drink the liquid light
Out of her eyes, for which it said it thirsted
As one bit by a dipsas, and with her
It made ite childish confidence, and told her 20
All it had known or seen, for it saw much,
Yet idly reasoned what it saw; and called her,
For whence it sprang it knew not, nor do I,
«¢ Mother, dear mother.””


Tue Spirit or THE Eartu (running to Asia).


Mother, dearest mother ;
May I then talk with thee as I was wont?
gt


Act III. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


May I then hide my eyes in thy soft arms,
After thy looks have made them tired of joy?
May I then play beside thee the long noons,
When work is none in the bright silent air?
Asia. I love thee, gentlest being, and henceforth 30
Can cherish thee unenvied: speak, I pray:
Thy simple talk once solaced, now delights.
Spirit of the Earth. Mother, I am grown wiser, though a
child
Cannot be wise like thee, within this day ;
And happier too; happier and wiser both.
Thou knowest that toads, and snakes, and loathly
worms,
And venomous and malicious beasts, and boughs
That bore ill berries in the woods, were ever
An hindrance to my walks o’er the green world :
And that, among the haunts of humankind, 40
Hard-featured men, or with proud, angry looks,
Or cold, staid gait, or false and hollow smiles,
Or the dull sneer of self-loved ignorance,
Or other such foul masks, with which ill thoughts
Hide that fair being whom we spirits call man ;
And women too, ugliest of all things evil,
(Though fair, even in a world where thou art fair,
When good and kind, free and sincere like thee, )
92


Prometheus Unbound => Act III. Sc. iv.


When false or frowning made me sick at heart
To pass them, though they slept, and I unseen. 50
Well, my path lately lay through a great city
Into the woody hills surrounding it :
A sentinel was sleeping at the gate:
When there was heard a sound, so loud, it shook
The towers amid the moonlight, yet more sweet
Than any voice but thine, sweetest of all ;
A long, long sound, as it would never end :
And all the inhabitants leapt suddenly
Out of their rest, and gathered in the streets,
Looking in wonder up to Heaven, while yet 60
The music pealed along. I hid myself
Within a fountain in the public square,
Where I lay like the reflex of the moon
Seen in a wave under green leaves ; and soon
Those ugly human shapes and visages
Of which I spoke as having wrought me pain,
Passed floating through the air, and fading still
Into the winds that scattered them; and those
From whom they passed seemed mild and lovely

forms
After some foul disguise had fallen, and all 70
Were somewhat changed, and after brief surprise
And greetings of delighted wonder, all

93


Act Ill. Sc.iv. = Prometheus Unbound


Went to their sleep again: and when the dawn
Came, wouldst thou think that toads, and snakes,
and efts,
Could e’er be beautiful? yet so they were,
And that with little change of shape or hue:
All things had put their evil nature off:
I cannot tell my joy, when o’er a lake
Upon a drooping bough with nightshade twined,
I saw two azure halcyons clinging downward 80
And thinning one bright bunch of amber berries,
With quick long beaks, and in the deep there
lay
Those lovely forms imaged as in a sky ;
So with my thoughts full of these happy changes,
We meet again, the happiest change of all.
Asia. And never will we part, till thy chaste sister,
Who guides the frozen and inconstant moon,
Will look on thy more warm and equal light
Till her heart thaw like flakes of April snow
And love thee.
Spirit of the Earth. What! as Asia loves Prometheus?
Asia. Peace, wanton, thou art yet not old enough. 91
Think ye by gazing on each other’s eyes
To multiply your lovely selves, and fill
With spheréd fires the interlunar air?
94


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Se. iv.


Spirit of the Earth, Nay, mother, while my sister trims
her lamp
Tis hard I should go darkling.
Asia. Listen ; look !


The Spirit of the Hour enters.


Pro, We feel what thou hast heard and seen: yet speak.
Spirit of the Hour. Soon as the sound had ceased whose
thunder filled
The abysses of the sky and the wide earth,
There was a change: the impalpable thin air 100
And the all-circling sunlight were transformed,
Ass if the sense of love, dissolved in them,
Had folded itself round the spheréd world.
My vision then grew clear, and I could see
Into the mysteries of the universe :
Dizzy as with delight I floated down,
Winnowing the lightsome air with languid plumes,
My coursers sought their birthplace in the sun,
Where they henceforth will live exempt from toil
Pasturing flowers of vegetable fire ; IIo
And where my moon-like car will stand within
A temple, gazed upon by Phidian forms
Of thee, and Asia, and the Earth, and me,
And you, fair nymphs, looking the love we feel, —
95 ‘


Act Ill. Sc.iv. «= Prometheus Unbound


In memory of the tidings it has borne, —
Beneath a dome fretted with graven flowers,
Poised on twelve columns of resplendent stone,
And open to the bright and liquid sky.
Yoked to it by an amphisbenic snake
The likeness of those wingéd steeds will mock 120
The flight from which they find repose. Alas,
Whither has wandered now my partial tongue
When all remains untold which ye would hear ?
As I have said, I floated to the earth :
It was, as it is still, the pain of bliss
To move, to breathe, to be; I wandering went
Among the haunts and dwellings of mankind,
And first was disappointed not to see
Such mighty change as I had felt within 129
Expressed in outward things ; but soon I looked,
And behold, thrones were kingless, and men walked
One with the other even as spirits do,
None fawned, none trampled ; hate, disdain, or fear,
Self-love, or self-contempt, on human brows
No more inscribed, as o’er the gate of hell,
«¢ All hope abandon ye who enter here ; ”’
None frowned, none trembled, none with eager fear
Gazed on another’s eye of cold command,
Until the subject of a tyrant’s will

96


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Se. iv.


Became, worse fate, the abject of his own, 140
Which spurred him, like an outspent horse, to death.
None wrought his lips in truth-entangling lines
Which smiled the lie his tongue disdained to speak ;
None, with firm sneer, trod out in his own heart
The sparks of love and hope till there remained
Those bitter ashes, a soul self-consumed,

And the wretch crept a vampire among men,
Infecting all with his own hideous ill ;

None talked that common, false, cold, hollow talk
Which makes the heart deny the “ yes”? it breathes,
Yet question that unmeant hypocrisy 151
With such a self-mistrust as has no name.

And women, too, frank, beautiful, and kind

As the free heaven which rains fresh light and dew
On the wide earth, passed; gentle radiant forms,
From custom’s evil taint exempt and pure ;
Speaking the wisdom once they could not think,
Looking emotions once they feared to feel,

And changed to all which once they dared not be,
Yet being now, made earth like heaven; nor pride,
Nor jealousy, nor envy, nor ill shame, 161
The bitterest of those drops of treasured gall,

Spoilt the sweet taste of the nepenthe, love.
Thrones, altars, judgment-seats, and prisons, wherein,


g 97
38


Act III. Sc. iv. <= Prometheus Unbound


And beside which, by wretched men were borne
Sceptres, tiaras, swords, and chains, and tomes
Of reasoned wrong, glozed on by ignorance,
Were like those monstrous and barbaric shapes,
The ghosts of a no more remembered fame,
Which, from their unworn obelisks, look forth


In triumph o’er the palaces and tombs 171
Of those who were their conquerors, mouldering
round?:


Those imaged to the pride of kings and priests,

A dark yet mighty faith, a power as wide

As is the world it wasted, and are now

But an astonishment ; even so the tools

And emblems of its last captivity,

Amid the dwellings of the peopled earth,

Stand, not o’erthrown, but unregarded now ;

And those foul shapes, abhorred by god and man,

Which, under many a name and many a form 181

Strange, savage, ghastly, dark, and execrable,

Were Jupiter, the tyrant of the world,

And which the nations, panic-stricken, served

With blood, and hearts broken by long hope, and
love

Dragged to his altars soiled and garlandless,


And slain among men’s unreclaiming tears,
98


Prometheus Unbound = Act III. Sc. iv.


Flattering the thing they feared, which fear was hate,

Frown, mouldering fast, o’er their abandoned
shrines.

The painted veil, by those who were, called life,

Which mimicked, as with colours idly spread, 191

All men believed and hoped, is torn aside ;

The loathsome mask has fallen, the man remains

Sceptreless, free, uncircumscribed, but man :

Equal, unclassed, tribeless, and nationless,

Exempt from awe, worship, degree, the king

Over himself ; just, gentle, wise, but man :

Passionless, no, yet free from guilt or pain,!

Which were, for his will made or suffered them,

Nor yet exempt, though ruling them like slaves,

From chance, and death, and mutability, 201

The clogs of that which else might oversoar

The loftiest star of unascended heaven,

Pinnacled dim in the intense inane.


Cr en


f Staatliche
setbtfotherk
“Samberg


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


Act Fourth.
Scene.
A Part of the Forest near the Cave of Prometheus.


Panthea and Ione are sleeping ; they awaken gradually
during the first Song.


Voice of unseen Spirits.
The pale stars are gone!
For the sun, their swift shepherd,
To the folds them compelling,
In the depths of the dawn,
Hastes, in meteor-eclipsing array, and they flee
Beyond his blue dwelling,
As fawns flee the leopard.
But where are ye?


A Train of dark Forms and Shadows passes by
confusedly, singing.
Here, oh, here !
We bear the bier ite)
Of the Father of many a cancelled year!
Spectres we
Of the Dead Hours be,


We bear Time to his tomb in eternity.
100


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Strew, oh, strew
Hair, not yew !
Wet the dusty pall with tears, not dew !
Be the faded flowers
Of Death’s bare bowers
Spread on the corpse of the King of Hours! 20


Haste, oh, haste!
As shades are chased,
Trembling, by day, from heaven’s blue waste.
We melt away,
Like dissolving spray,
From the children of a diviner day,
With the lullaby
Of winds that die
On the bosom of their own harmony !


Tone.


What dark forms were they ? 30


PANTHEA.


The past Hours weak and grey,
With the spoil which their toil
Raked together
From the conquest but One could foil.


tor


Act IV.


<= Prometheus Unbound


Tone.


Have they passed ?


PANTHEA.
They have passed ;
They outspeeded the blast, —
While ’tis said, they are fled :
Tone.
Whither, oh, whither ?


PANTHEA.
To the dark, to the past, to the dead.


Voice of unseen Spirits.


Bright clouds float in heaven, 40
Dew-stars gleam on earth,

Waves assemble on ocean,

They are gathered and driven


By the storm of delight, by the panic of glee!


They shake with emotion,
They dance in their mirth.
But where are ye?


The pine boughs are singing
Old songs with new gladness,


ro2


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


The billows and fountains 50
Fresh music are flinging,
Like the notes of a spirit from land and from sea ;
The storms mock the mountains
With the thunder of gladness.
But where are ye?


Tone. What charioteers are these ?
Pan. Where are their chariots ?


SemicHorus or Hours.
The voice of the Spirits of Air and of Earth
Has drawn back the figured curtain of sleep
Which covered our being and darkened our birth
In the deep.


A Voice.
In the deep?


Semicuorus II.
Oh, below the deep. 60
SemicHorus I.
An hundred ages we had been kept
Cradled in visions of hate and care,


And each one who waked as his brother slept,
Found the truth—


103


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


Semicuorus II.


Worse than his visions were !


Semicuorus 1.


We have heard the lute of Hope in sleep ;
We have known the voice of Love in dreams,
We have felt the wand of Power, and leap—


Semicuorus II.


As the billows leap in the morning beams !


Cuorus.


Weave the dance on the floor of the breeze,

Pierce with song heaven’s silent light, 70
Enchant the day that too swiftly flees,

To check its flight ere the cave of night.


Once the hungry Hours were hounds
Which chased the day like a bleeding deer,
And it limped and stumbled with many wounds,
Through the nightly dells of the desert year.


But now, oh weave the mystic measure
OF music, and dance, and shapes of light,
Let the Hours, and the spirits of might and pleasure,


Like the clouds and sunbeams, unite—
104


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


A Votce.
Unite ! 80
Pan. See, where the spirits of the human mind
Wrapped in sweet sounds, as in bright veils, approach.


Cuorus oF Spirits.
We join the throng
Of the dance and the song,
By the whirlwind of gladness borne along ;
As the flying-fish leap
From the Indian deep,
And mix with the sea-birds, half asleep.


Cuorus or Hours.
Whence come ye, so wild and so fleet,
For sandals of lightning are on your feet, go
And your wings are soft and swift as thought,
And your eyes are as love which is veiléd not ?


Cuorus oF Spirits.
We come from the mind
Of human kind
Which was late so dusk, and obscene, and blind,
Now ’tis an ocean
Of clear emotion,


A heaven of serene and mighty motion.
105


Act IV. s= Prometheus Unbound


From that deep abyss

Of wonder and bliss, 100
Whose caverns are crystal palaces ;

From those skiey towers

Where Thought’s crowned powers
Sit watching your dance, ye happy Hours!


From the dim recesses
Of woven caresses,
Where lovers catch ye by your loose tresses ;
From the azure isles,
Where sweet Wisdom smiles,
Delaying your ships with her siren wiles. +8 fo)


From the temples high
Of Man’s ear and eye,
Roofed over Sculpture and Poesy ;
From the murmurings
Of the unsealed springs
Where Science bedews his Dzdal wings.


Years after years,
Through blood, and tears,

And a thick hell of hatreds, and hopes, and fears ;
We waded and flew, 120
And the islets were few

Where the bud-blighted flowers of happiness grew.


106


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Our feet now, every palm,
Are sandalled with calm,
And the dew of our wings is a rain of balm ;
And, beyond our eyes,
The human love lies
Which makes all it gazes on Paradise.


Cuorus oF Spirits AND Hours.


Then weave the web of the mystic measure ;
From the depths of the sky and the ends of the earth,

Come, swift Spirits of might and of pleasure, 131
Fill the dance and the music of mirth,

As the waves of a thousand streams rush by

To an ocean of splendour and harmony !


Cuorus oF Spirits.
Our spoil is won,
Our task is done,
Weare free to dive, or soar, or run;
Beyond and around,
Or within the bound
Which clips the world with darkness round. 140


We'll pass the eyes
Of the starry skies


Into the hoar deep to colonize:
107


Act IV. «<= Prometheus Unbound


Death, Chaos, and Night,
From the sound of our flight,
Shall flee, like mist from a tempest’s might.


And Earth, Air, and Light,
And the Spirit of Might,

Which drives round the stars in their fiery flight ;
And Love, Thought, and Breath, 150
The powers that quell death,

Wherever we soar shall assemble beneath.


And our singing shall build
In the void’s loose field
A world for the Spirit of Wisdom to wield ;
We will take our plan
From the new world of man,
And our work shall be called the Promethean.


Cuorus oF Hours.


Break the dance, and scatter the song ;
Let some depart, and some remain. 160


Semicuorus I.
We, beyond heaven, are driven along:


Semicuorus II.


Us the enchantments of earth retain:
108


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Semicuorus I.
Ceaseless and rapid, and fierce, and free,
With the Spirits which build a new earth and sea,
And a heaven where yet heaven could never be.


Semicuorus II.
Solemn, and slow, and serene, and bright,
Leading the Day and outspeeding the Night,
With the powers of a world of perfect light.


Semicuorus I.
We whirl, singing loud, round the gathering sphere,
Till the trees, and the beasts, and the clouds appear
From its chaos made calm by love, not fear, 171


Semicuorus II.
We encircle the ocean and mountains of earth,
And the happy forms of its death and birth
Change to the music of our sweet mirth.


Cuorus of Hours AND Spirits.


Break the dance, and scatter the song,
Let some depart, and some remain,
Wherever we fly we lead along
In leashes, like star-beams, soft yet strong,
The clouds that are heavy with love’s sweet rain.
109


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


Pan. Ha! they are gone!

Lone. Yet feel you no delight 180
From the past sweetness ?

Pan. As the bare green hill
When some soft cloud vanishes into rain,
Laughs with a thousand drops of sunny water
To the unpavilioned sky !

Tone. Even whilst we speak
New notes arise. What is that awful sound?

Pan. ’Tis the deep music of the rolling world
Kindling within the strings of the waved air,
fEolian modulations.

Tone. Listen too,
How every pause is filled with under-notes,
Clear, silver, icy, keen awakening tones, 190
Which pierce the sense, and live within the soul,
As the sharp stars pierce winter’s crystal air
And gaze upon themselves within the sea.

Pan. But see where through two openings in the forest
Which hanging branches overcanopy,
And where two runnels of a rivulet,
Between the close moss violet-inwoven,
Have made their path of melody, like sisters
Who part with sighs that they may meet in smiles,


Turning their dear disunion to an isle 200
rio


Prometheus Unbound =& Act IV.


Tone.


Of lovely grief, a wood of sweet sad thoughts ;
Two visions of strange radiance float upon
The ocean-like enchantment of strong sound,
Which flows intenser, keener, deeper yet

Under the ground and through the windless air.

I see a chariot like that thinnest boat,

In which the mother of the months is borne

By ebbing night into her western cave,

When she upsprings from interlunar dreams,

O’er which is curved an orb-like canopy 210
Of gentle darkness, and the hills and woods
Distinctly seen through that dusk airy veil,

Regard like shapes in an enchanter’s glass ;

Its wheels are solid clouds, azure and gold,

Such as the genii of the thunder-storm

Pile on the floor of the illumined sea

When the sun rushes under it; they roll

And move and grow as with an inward wind ;
Within it sits a wingéd infant, white

Its countenance, like the whiteness of bright snow,
Its plumes are as feathers of sunny frost, 221
Its limbs gleam white through the wind-flowing

folds

Of its white robe, woof of ztherial pearl,

Its hair is white, the brightness of white light


Itt


Act IV. < Prometheus Unbound


Pan.


Scattered in strings; yet its two eyes are heavens
Of liquid darkness, which the Deity

Within seems pouring, as a storm is poured

From jagged clouds, out of their arrowy lashes,
Tempering the cold and radiant air around,

With fire that is not brightness; in its hand 230
It sways a quivering moonbeam, from whose point
A guiding power directs the chariot’s prow

Over its wheeléd clouds, which as they roll

Over the grass, and flowers, and waves, wake sounds,
Sweet as a singing rain of silver dew.

And from the other opening in the wood

Rushes, with loud and whirlwind harmony,

A sphere, which is as many thousand spheres,

Solid as crystal, yet through all its mass

Flow, as through empty space, music and light :
Ten thousand orbs involving and involved, 241
Purple and azure, white,* green, and golden,

Sphere within sphere ; and every space between
Peopled with unimaginable shapes,

Such as ghosts dream dwell in the lampless deep,
Yet each inter-transpicuous, and they whirl
Over each other with a thousand motions,

Upon a thousand sightless axles spinning,

And with the force of self-destroying swiftness,


112


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


I one,


Pan.


Intensely, slowly, solemnly roll on, 250
Kindling with mingled sounds, and many tones,
Intelligible words and music wild.

With mighty whirl the multitudinous orb

Grinds the bright brook into an azure mist

Of elemental subtlety, like light ;

And the wild odour of the forest flowers,

The music of the living grass and air,

The emerald light of leaf-entangled beams,

Round its intense yet self-conflicting speed

Seem kneaded into one aérial mass 260
Which drowns the sense. Within the orb itself,
Pillowed upon its alabaster arms,

Like to a child o’erwearied with sweet toil,

On its own folded wings and wavy hair

The Spirit of the Earth is laid asleep,

And you can see its little lips are moving,

Amid the changing light of their own smiles,

Like one who talks of what he loves in dream.

Tis only mocking the orb’s harmony.

And from a star upon its forehead shoot, 270
Like swords of azure fire, or golden spears

With tyrant-quelling myrtle overtwined,

Embleming heaven and earth united now,

Vast beams like spokes of some invisible wheel


h 113


Act‘IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


Which whirl as the orb whirls, swifter than thought,

Filling the abyss with sunlike lightnings,

And perpendicular now, and now transverse,

Pierce the dark soil, and as they pierce and pass,

Make bare the secrets of the earth’s deep heart ;

Infinite mine of adamant and gold, 280

Valueless stones, and unimagined gems,

And caverns on crystalline columns poised

With vegetable silver overspread ;

Wells of unfathomed fire, and water-springs

Whence the great sea, even as a child is fed,

Whose vapours clothe earth’s monarch mountain-
tops

With kingly, ermine snow. The beams flash on

And make appear the melancholy ruins

Of cancelled cycles; anchors, beaks of ships;

Planks turned to marble; quivers, helms, and spears,

And gorgon-headed targes, and the wheels 291

Of scythéd chariots, and the emblazonry

Of trophies, standards, and armorial beasts,

Round which death laughed, sepulchred emblems

Of dead destruction, ruin within ruin !

The wrecks beside of many a city vast,

Whose population which the earth grew over


Was mortal, but not human; see, they lie,
114


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Their monstrous works, and uncouth skeletons,
Their statues, homes and fanes; prodigious shapes
Huddled in grey annihilation, split, 301
Jammed in the hard, black deep ; and over these,
The anatomies of unknown wingéd things,

And fishes which were isles of living scale,

And serpents, bony chains, twisted around

The iron crags, or within heaps of dust

To which the tortuous strength of their last pangs
Had crushed the iron crags; and over these

The jaggéd alligator, and the might

Of earth-convulsing behemoth, which once 310
Were monarch beasts, and on the slimy shores,
And weed-overgrown continents of earth,

Increased and multiplied like summer worms

On an abandoned corpse, till the blue globe
Wrapped deluge round it like a cloke, and they
Yelled, gasped, and were abolished ; or some God
Whose throne was in a comet, passed, and cried,
Be not! And like my words they were no more.


Tue Eartu.


The joy, the triumph, the delight, the madness!
The boundless, overflowing, bursting gladness,


The vaporous exultation not to be confined! 3.21
115


Act IV. «= Prometheus Unbound


Ha! ha! the animation of delight
Which wraps me, like an atmosphere of light,
And bears me as a cloud is borne by its own wind.


Tue Moon.


Brother mine, calm wanderer,
Happy globe of land and air,
Some Spirit is darted like a beam from thee,
Which penetrates my frozen frame,
And passes with the warmth of flame,
With love, and odour, and deep melody 330
Through me, through me!


Tue Eartu.


Ha! ha! the caverns of my hollow mountains,
My cloven fire-crags, sound-exulting fountains,
Laugh with a vast and inextinguishable laughter.
The oceans, and the deserts, and the abysses,
And the deep air’s unmeasured wildernesses,
Answer from all their clouds and billows, echoing
after.


They cry aloud as I do :—Sceptred curse,
Who all our green and azure universe
Threatenedst to muffle round with black destruction,


sending : 340


Prometheus Unbound => Act IV.


A solid cloud to rain hot thunder-stones,
And splinter and knead down my children’s bones,
All I bring forth, to one void mass battering and
blending,


Until each crag-like tower, and storied column,
Palace, and obelisk, and temple solemn,
My imperial mountains crowned with cloud, and
snow, and fire ;
My sea-like forests, every blade and blossom
Which finds a grave or cradle in my bosom,
Were stamped by thy strong hate into a lifeless
mire :


How art thou sunk, withdrawn, covered, drunk up
By thirsty nothing, as the brackish cup 350
Drained by a desert-troop, a little drop for all ;
And from beneath, around, within, above,
Filling thy void annihilation, love
Bursts in like light on caves cloven by the thunder-
ball.


Tue Moon.


The snow upon my lifeless mountains
Is loosened into living fountains,


My solid oceans flow, and sing, and shine:
117


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


A spirit from my heart bursts forth,
It clothes with unexpected birth 360
My cold bare bosom: Oh! it must be thine
On mine, on mine!


Gazing on thee I feel, I know
Green stalks burst forth, and bright flowers grow,
And living shapes upon my bosom move:
Music is in the sea and air,
Wingéd clouds soar here and there,
Dark with the rain new buds are dreaming of :
Tis love, all love!


Tue Eartu.


It interpenetrates my granite mass, 370
Through tangled roots and trodden clay doth pass,
Into the utmost leaves and delicatest flowers ;
Upon the winds, among the clouds ’tis spread,
It wakes a life in the forgotten dead,
They breathe a spirit up from their obscurest
bowers.


And like a storm bursting its cloudy prison
With thunder, and with whirlwind, has arisen


Out of the lampless caves of unimagined being:
118


Prometheus Unbound => Act IV.


With earthquake shock and swiftness making
shiver
Thought’s stagnant chaos, unremoved for ever,
Till hate, and fear, and pain, light-vanquished
shadows, fleeing, 381


Leave Man, who was a many-sided mirror
Which could distort to many a shape of error
This true fair world of things, a sea reflecting

love ;

Which over all his kind as the sun’s heaven
Gliding o’er ocean, smooth, serene, and even,
Darting from starry depths radiance and life, doth

move ;


Leave Man, even as a leprous child is left,
Who follows a sick beast to some warm cleft
Of rocks, through which the might of healing
springs is poured ; 390
Then when it wanders home with rosy smile,
Unconscious, and its mother fears awhile
It is a spirit, then, weeps on her child restored :


Man, oh, not men! a chain of linkéd thought,
Of love and might to be divided not,
Compelling the elements with adamantine stress ;
119


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


As the sun rules, even with a tyrant’s gaze,
The unquiet republic of the maze
Of planets, struggling fierce towards heaven’s free
wilderness :


Man, one harmonious soul of many a soul, 400
Whose nature is its own divine control,
Where all things flow to all, as rivers to the sea ;
Familiar acts are beautiful through love ;
Labour, and pain, and grief, in life’s green grove
Sport like tame beasts,—none knew how gentle they
could be!


His will, with all mean passions, bad delights,
And selfish cares, its trembling satellites,
A spirit ill to guide, but mighty to obey,
Is as a tempest-wingéd ship, whose helm
Love rules, through waves which dare not over-
whelm, 410
Forcing life’s wildest shores to own its sovereign sway.


All things confess his strength. Through the
cold mass
Of marble and of colour his dreams pass ;
Bright threads whence mothers weave the robes their


children wear ;
tao


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Language is a perpetual Orphic song,
Which rules with Dedal harmony a throng
Of thoughts and forms, which else senseless and
shapeless were.


The lightning is his slave; heayen’s utmost deep
Gives up her stars, and like a flock of sheep
They pass before his eye, are numbered, and roll on!
The tempest is his steed, he strides the air; 421
And the abyss shouts from her depth laid bare,
Heaven, hast thou secrets? Man unveils me; I have
none.
Tue Moon.
The shadow of white death has passed
From my path in heaven at last,
A clinging shroud of solid frost and sleep ;
And through my newly-woven bowers,
Wander happy paramours,
Less mighty, but as mild as those who keep
Thy vales more deep. 430


Tue Earru.
As the dissolving warmth of dawn may fold
A half infrozent dew-globe, green, and gold,
And crystalline, till it becomes a wingéd mist,
And wanders up the vault of the blue day,


iat


Act IV. < Prometheus Unbound


Outlives the noon, and on the sun’s last ray
Hangs o’er the sea, a fleece of fire and amethyst.
Tue Moon.
Thou art folded, thou art lying
In the light which is undying
Of thine own joy, and heaven’s smile divine ;
All suns and constellations shower 440
On thee a light, a life, a power
Which doth array thy sphere ; thou pourest thine
On mine, on mine!
Tue Eartu.
I spin beneath my pyramid of night,
Which points into the heavens dreaming delight,
Murmuring victorious joy in my enchanted sleep ;
As a youth lulled in love-dreams faintly sighing,
Under the shadow of his beauty lying,
Which round his rest a watch of light and warmth
doth keep.
Tue Moon.
As in the soft and sweet eclipse, 450
When soul meets soul on lovers’ lips,
High hearts are calm, and brightest eyes are dull ;
So when thy shadow falls on me,
Then am I mute and still, by thee


rI22


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Covered; of thy love, orb most beautiful,
Full, oh, too full!


Thou art speeding round the sun
Brightest world of many a one;

Green and azure sphere which shinest
With a light which is divinest 460
Among all the lamps of Heaven

To whom life and light is given ;

I, thy crystal paramour,

Borne beside thee by a power

Like the polar Paradise,

Magnet-like, of lovers’ eyes ;

1, a most enamoured maiden

Whose weak brain is overladen

With the pleasure of her love,
Maniac-like around thee move 470
Gazing, an insatiate bride,

On thy form from every side,

Like a Mznad, round the cup

Which Agavé lifted up

In the weird Cadmzan forest.

Brother, wheresoe’er thou soarest

I must hurry, whirl and follow
Through the heavens wide and hollow,


123


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


Sheltered by the warm embrace
Of thy soul from hungry space, 480
Drinking from thy sense and sight
Beauty, majesty, and might,
As a lover or a chameleon
Grows like what it looks upon,
As a violet’s gentle eye
Gazes on the azure sky
Until its hue grows like what it beholds,
As a grey and watery mist
Glows like solid amethyst
Athwart the western mountain it enfolds, 490
When the sunset sleeps
Upon its snow.


Tue Eartu.
And the weak day weeps
That it should be so.
O gentle Moon, the voice of thy delight
Falls on me like thy clear and tender light
Soothing the seaman, borne the summer night,
Through isles for ever calm ;
O gentle Moon, thy crystal accents pierce
The caverns of my pride’s deep universe, 500
Charming the tiger joy, whose tramplings fierce
Made wounds which need thy balm.


124


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


Pan. I rise as from a bath of sparkling water,
A bath of azure light, among dark rocks,
Out of the stream of sound.

Tone. Ah me! sweet sister,
The stream of sound has ebbed away from us,
And you pretend to rise out of its wave,
Because your words fall like the clear, soft dew
Shaken from a bathing wood-nymph’s limbs and


hair.
Pan. Peace! peace! A mighty power, which is as
darkness, 510


Is rising out of Earth, and from the sky
Is showered like night, and from within the air
Bursts, like eclipse which had been gathered up
Into the pores of sunlight: the bright visions,
Wherein the singing spirits rode and shone,
Gleam like pale meteors through a watery night.
Tone. There is a sense of words upon mine ear.
Pan. An universal sound like words: Oh, list !


Democorcon.


Thou, Earth, calm empire of a happy soul,

Sphere of divinest shapes and harmonies, 520
Beautiful orb! gathering as thou dost roll

The love which paves thy path along the skies ;


125


Act IV. «= Prometheus Unbound


Tue Eartu.
I hear: I am as a drop of dew that dies.


Democorcon.
Thou Moon, which gazest on the nightly Earth
With wonder, as it gazes upon thee ;
Whilst each to men, and beasts, and the swift birth
Of birds, is beauty, love, calm, harmony:


Tue Moon.
I hear: I am a leaf shaken by thee!


DeEmocorcon.


Ye kings of suns and stars, Demons and Gods,
ZEtherial Dominations, who possess 530
Elysian, windless, fortunate abodes
Beyond Heaven’s constellated wilderness :


A Voice from above.


Our great Republic hears, we are bless’d, and bless.


Democorcon.


Ye happy dead, whom beams of brightest verse
Are clouds to hide, not colours to portray,
Whether your nature is that universe


Which once ye saw and suffered —
126


Prometheus Unbound = Act IV.


A Voice from beneath.
Or as they
Whom we have left, we change and pass away.
Democoreon.

Ye elemental Genii, who have homes 539

From man’s high mind even to the central stone
Of sullen lead ; from Heaven’s star-fretted domes

To the dull weed some sea-worm battens on:

A Conrusep Voice.
We hear: thy words waken Oblivion.


Democorcon.
Spirits, whose homes are flesh: ye beasts and birds,
Ye worms, and fish ; ye living leaves and buds ;
Lightning, and wind ; and ye untameable herds,
Meteors and mists, which throng air’s solitudes :


A Voice.


Thy voice to us is wind among still woods.


DeEmocorcon.
Man, who wert once a despot and a slave ;
A dupe and a deceiver ; a decay ; 550
A traveller from the cradle to the grave
Through the dim night of the immortal day :


127


Act IV. <= Prometheus Unbound


ALL.


Speak: thy strong words may never pass away.


DemocorcGon.


This is the day, which down the void abysm
At the Earth-born’s spell yawns for Heaven’s
despotism,
And Conquest is dragged captive through the
deep :
Love, from its awful throne of patient power
In the wise heart, from the last giddy hour
OF dead? endurance, from the slippery, steep,
And narrow verge of crag-like agony, springs 560
And folds over the world its healing wings.
Gentleness, Virtue, Wisdom, and Endurance,
These are the seals of that most firm assurance,
Which bars the pit over Destruction’s strength ;
And if, with infirm hand, Eternity,
Mother of many acts and hours, should free
The serpent that would clasp her with his length ;
These are the spells by which to re-assume
An empire o’er the disentangled doom.


To suffer woes which Hope thinks infinite ; 570


To forgive wrongs darker than death or night ;
128


Prometheus Unbound =& Act IV.


To defy Power, which seems omnipotent ;,
To love, and bear; to hope till Hope creates
From its own wreck the thing it contemplates ;

Neither to change, nor falter, nor repent ;
This, like thy glory, Titan, is to be
Good, great and joyous, beautiful and free ;
This is alone Life, Joy, Empire, and Victory.


Notes. ’


I. 352. In the original edition there are no commas in this line,
which leaves open the possibility of taking ‘wail’ as a verb.
The punctuation in the text is that adopted by Mr Buxton Forman,
after the MS. It is, I think, almost certainly correct; the refer-
ence being to the two rivers af Hell, Phlegethon and Cocytus.

I, 770. I have ventured here to adopt the suggestion of Mr
Buxton Forman, and remove the full stop after ‘night’ which
appears in the first edition.

I. 774. ‘Killing footstep.’ Soin the MS.; the first edition

as ‘silent.’

IL. ii. 38. ‘ Lake-surrounded.” So in the MS. and in Mrs
Shelley’s edition; the first edition has ‘ /ake-surrounding.’

II, ii. 50. In the first edition there is no stop after ‘ destined’;
in the MS., a full stop ; in Mrs Shelley’s edition, a colon.

II. ii, 60. In the first edition there is no stop after ‘ hurrying’;
Mrs Shelley inserted the colon. In this line I have ventured to
insert a comma after ‘fleet,’ removing it from after ‘ behind,’ in
the next line. It seems to be clear that the ‘ storm of sound’
is supposed to drive the spirits on from behind.

Il. ii, 100. Reigns down. This is the reading of the first
edition, and is retained by Mr Buxton Forman, meaning, of
course, ‘by reigning destroys.’ Mrs Shelley’s edition has rains,

130


Prometheus Unbound = Notes.


possibly from Shelley’s list of errata; and this is retained in Mr
G. E. Woodberry’s ‘Centenary Edition.’ Taking the sense of
the whole passage into account, I find it hard to choose between
these readings, neither of which seems to me to give very good
sense,

Il. v. 54. Limbs. So in Mrs Shelley’s edition; in the first
edition, Jips.

II. v. 86. And. This ‘and’ does not appear in the first
edition, nor in Mrs Shelley’s. Its insertion is an emendation by
Mr Rossetti, which I regard, with Mr Buxton Forman, as ‘ abso-
lutely certain,’ for metrical reasons.

III. i. 13. Might. So in Mrs Shelley’s edition; in the first
edition, might.

Ill. i. 20, Destined. So in Mrs Shelley’s edition; in the first
edition, distant.

IL. ii, 22. Many-peopled. So Mr Buxton Forman after the
MS. Previous editions have many peopled.

Ill. ii. 39. Oz. So in the first edition; in Mrs Shelley’s
edition, 7’.

Ill. iii. 102. Unwithering. So in Mrs Shelley’s edition; in the
first edition, unwitting.

IIL. iv. 172. With some hesitation, I have placed the colon
here at the end of the line, instead of after conquerors where it
stands in the first edition. This change is supported by Mr
Rossetti, but condemned by Mr Swinburne and Mr Buxton
Forman.

Ill. iv. 198. In the first edition this passage is punctuated
as follows :—

‘© The loathsome mask has fallen, the man remains


Sceptreless, free, uncircumscribed, but man
131


Notes. <= Prometheus Unbound


Equal, unclassed, tribeless, and nationless,
Exempt from awe, worship, degree, the king
Over himself; just, gentle, wise : but man
Passionless ; no, yet free from guilt or pain,” &c.


This reading is retained by Mr Buxton Forman; but to me
the passage so written is simply unintelligible, and I have adopted,
with unimportant modifications, Mr Rossetti’s punctuation.

IV. 242. I have printed this line as it stands in the first
edition. Mr Rossetti, and, after him, Mr Buxton Forman,
insert and after white.

IV. 387. Life. So Mr Buxton Forman after the MS. The
earlier editions have /ight.

IV. 432. Infrozen. So in the first edition; in Mrs Shelley’s
edition, unfrozen.

IV. 559. Dead. So in the first edition; in Mrs Shelley’s
edition, dread.

IV. 575. Falter. So in Mrs Shelley’s edition; in the first
edition, flatter.


See wea
Vo ltothes
NE amberg


TURNBULL AND SPEARS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH. .


Lea MDZ PiatcseunysZentrun
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek


Shelley, Percy Bysshe,


Prometheus unbound a lyrical drama in four acts,


London 1898


Bamberg, Staatsbibliothek ~ 30.1429
urn:nbn:de-bvb:12-bsb11827557-6
