The She King; or, The Book of Poetry (James Legge (trans.), 1876)
==========================================================
The Book of Odes — the 305 songs and hymns of the Shih Ching — in James Legge's complete 1876 translation with the Chinese text, prolegomena and notes (The Chinese Classics, Vol. III, revised edition). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.78208).

0010


t THE
® ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY
® Town Hall, Bombay.


boeeeoceceseceoeoeeecese


Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 18 July, 2018


THE CHINESE CLASSICS:


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH,


WITH


PRELIMINARY ESSAYS AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.


(REVISED AND REPRODUCED FROM THE AUTHOR'S WORK wh)


CONTAINING THE ORIGINAL TEXT, &.) ee rr. eH EY
<yomap AY
es


BY


JAMES LEGGE, D.D., LLD.,


PROFESSOR OF CHINESE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
FORMERLY OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.


VOL. IIL


THE SKE KING; OR, THE BOOK OF POETRY.:


LONDON:
TRUBNER & CO., 57 & 59, LUDGATE HILL. .


1876. ,
[AU Rights reserved.]


00048230


ail nny
JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.


THE SHE KING;


OR,


THE BOOK OF ANCIENT POETRY,


TRANSLATED IN ENGLISH VERSE,


WITH ESSAYS AND NOTES.


BY


JAMES LEGGE, D.D, LL.D,


RROFESSOR OF CHINESE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
FORMERLY OF THE LONDON MISSIONARY SOCIETY.


ex g 5”


LONDON:
TRUBNER & CO., 57 & 59, LUDGATE HILL.


1876. ‘
[4u Rights reserved.]


c


ee
JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS.


PREFACE.


In the third chapter of the Prolegomena the author has endeavoured to
state clearly the principles on which the metrical version of the Book of
China’s ancient poetry, published in the present volume, has been made,
and Will only repeat here that his readers will find in it, in an English
dress, the Chinese poems themselves, and not others compesed by para~
phrase from them. It remains for him to relate how he came to undertake
the work, and the assistance that he has received in completing it,

While preparing his larger and critical work on the She, published at
Hong-Kong in 1871, though, as he has = in the chapter referred to, he
did not think that the collection as 4’whole was worth the trouble of
versifying, it often occurred to him that not a few of the pieces were well
worth that trouble ; and if he had had the time to spare, he would then
have undertaken it. Occupied with other Chinese classics, the subject of
versifying any portion of the She passed from his mind until he received
in the spring of 1874, from his nephew, the Rev. John Legge, M.A, of
Brighton in Victoria, Australia, a suggestion that he should bring out a
metrical version of the whole Book. To encourage him to, do so, his
nephew promised his own assistance, and that of his brother, the Rev. ,
James Legge, M.A., of Hanley, Staffordshire, while another helper might
be found in the Rev, Alexander Cran, M.A.; of Fairfield, near Manchester.

A plan for the versification of all the pieces was drawn out in harmony
with this suggestion, and the principles on which the versions should be
made were laid down. Various causes, however, operated to prevent each
of his helpers from doing all the portion that had been assigned to him,
and many of the versions which were sent had to be altogether set aside.
Fully three-fourths of the volume are the author’s own, while he had much
to do in revising the other fourth. To all his three associates he ténders his
most cordial thanks. Many of the pieces have a beauty which they
would not have possessed but, for them ; and several of them—of those
especially from Australia—as they came to him, glowed with more of the
fire of poetry than they now show.


.


Iv PREFACE.


To another gentleman he has also to acknowledge his great obligation.
When he was beginning to see the end of his task, he asked his old Hong-
Kong friend, W. T. Mercer, Esq., M.A. Oxford, to read and revise his

‘manuscript before it went to the press, H@ knew he could not havea kinder
critic, nor an abler,-—as all will say who are acquainted with Mr Mercer’s

_ Own volume of “ Under the Peak ; or, Jottings in Verse, during a length-
ened residence in the Colony of Hong-Kong,” published in 1869.

_Mr Mercer kindly acceded to the request, and wait over every one of
the pieces, pruning, correcting, and smoothing the versification, and
making otherwise various suggestions. He recast some of the pieces in
the first Part. The author has appended two of his recastings to his own
versions, and I, ii, V. should have been mentioned as entirely his, In
other cases it was found advisable to remake the pieces. To Mr Mercer
also the Work is indebted, as the reader wiil perceive, for Latin‘ versions
of some of the pieces,

Two metrical versions in German of the old Chinese poems have existed
for a good many years, The one was published at Altona, in 1833, with
the title :—“ Schi-King, Chinesisches Liederbuch, gesammelt yon Confu-
olus, dem Deutschen, angeeignet von Friedrich Rickert;” the other at
Crefeld, in 1844, with the titlk—« Schi-King, oder Chinesische Lieder,
gesammelt von Confucius. Neu und frei nach P, La Charme’s lateinischer
Uebertragung bearbeitet, Fiir’s deutsche Volk herausgegeben von Johann
Cramer.” Of these the former by Riickert has much the greater merit,

,and the second translator had it constantly before him, The present
version, however, is under no obligation to either, nor can a comparison
be instituted between it and them, Cramer says that his ‘version was
“freely ” made from Lacharme’s Latin translation ; nor had Rickert any
other original. Of the character of Lacharme’s translation the author has
spoken in the preface to his larger Work.


122, King Henry’s Road, London,
April, 1876,


CONTENTS.


PROLEGOMENA.
CHAPTER I.
‘THE EARLY HISTORY AND THE PRESENT TEXT OF THE BOOK OF PORPRY.
SECTION *
I. THE BOOK BEFORB CONFUCIUS; AND WHAT, IF ANY, WERE
HIS LABOURS UPON IT .. re ce oe oe
Il, THE BOOK PROM THE TIME OF CONFUCIUS TILL THE GENERAL
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE PRESENT TEX? we os
CHAPTER #1.


THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION; THRIR INTER-
PRETATION AND AUTHORS ; THE PREFACES AND THEIR AU-


THORITY oe oe oe oe oe
APPENDIX. CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE PIECES .. we


’


CHAPTER IIL


THE RHYME AND METRE OF THE PIECES; THEIR YOETICAL
VALUE; PRINCIPLE ON WHICH THE PRESENT VERSION OF
THEM HAS BEEN MADE}; CERTAIN PECULIARITIES 3N THEIR


STRUCTURE .. + o o oa +e ay
CHAPTER IV.


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY, CONSIDERED IN RELA-
TION TO THE EXTENT OF ITS TERRITORY, ITS POLITICAL


STATE, ITS RELIGION, AND IPS SOCIAL CONDITION... oe
THE POEMS.
I cs :
PART I.—LESSONS FROM THE STATES.
BOOK * .
1. THE ODES OF CHOW AND THE SOUTH ¥ a fs ll


zI, or +. SHAOU AND THE SOUTH . oe


oe oe,


PAGE


“13
259


31


4i


58
67


CONTENTS.


BOOK . PACE
IIL THE ODES OF P‘EI.. + ne ‘“ . Id 76
IV, see ve YUNG i ath a « 10 9

Vesela. WEE “ e-. Pe - 10 102
VE... «sess FHE ROYAL DOMAIN... ss »~ 10 Ul

VI... +. CHING ws re ar . «21 119

VI... . TSE ., ee oe 168 oe . Ll 182
4X6. ss +. WEL. a ay een see 140

Ke. ee +.) RANG ea “ 9% 2. 12 WAT
KR ow. + «6©T8IN 4.7 rn . 10 187

XI, +. +. CHIN .. Se < oe -- 10 167

xm .. +. KWEI.. ao sis a oe 4 173
XV. +. ‘TS'aoU ee as a ea 4 176
xv... +. BIN 4. ar ae ie a 7 180


PART IL.—MINOR ODES OF THE KINGDOM.
“ 189


1. PECADE OF LUH MENG se ee oa as sé
se +. PIR HWA ss és ae o se 203
We .. -» TUNG KUNG ., os és a's “e 208
We oe +> K®-Foo + a Se. Ks 33 +. = 219
Warsi «+ SEAOU MIN ® ve 6 oe) aS 232
VI. +» PIH SHAN o as ie <s oa 247
WI... ++ SANG HOO S« oe srr es ae 261
VR .. +s 00 JIN 8ZB .. Ss ua ae oe 274
. PART IH.—GREATER ODES OF THE KINGDOM.
1. DECADE OF KING WAN a oe ee o oe 284
;) 4. SHANG MIN 4. oo oo “ oP 302
: 8 1 821


OUI oe +. TANG ss sale v7


PART IV.{ODES OF THE TEMPLE AND THE ALTAR.


1, SACRIFICEAL ODES OF CHOW ar ii oe ae 350

SECTION I.DECADE OF TS'4NG MEAOU és ee vs 350

If. ss +. SHIN KUNG ae ee . . 3857

Tl, .. > «. MIN YU SEAOU TSZE oe 11 364

#1, PRAISE-ODES OF £00 8 ie os hase 4° 378

II. SACRIFICIAL ODES OF SHANG oe +e oy 5 384
INDEXES.

I. INDEX OF SUBJECTS a “-, -@ re .- | 892

428


> Crary oe PROPER lay oe oe oe oe


PROLEGOMENA,


CHAPTER I.


THE EARLY HISTORY AND THE PRESENT TEXT OF THE
BOOK OF POETRY.


SECTION I.


THE BOOK BEFORE CONFUCIUS; AND WHAT, IF ANY, WERE
HIS LABOURS URN IT.


1. Szz-ma Ts‘éen, in his memoir of Confucius, says :-—
“The old poems amounted to more than 3000. Confu-
cius, removed those which were only repetitions of others,
and‘selected those which would be serviceable _ statements of
for the inculcation of propriety and rightcous- Conese scholars.
ness. Aseending as high as Séeh and How-tseih, and
descending through the prosperous eras of Yin and Chow
to the times of decadence under kings Yéw and Le, he
selected in all 305 pieces, which he sang over to his lute,
to bring them into accordance with the musical style of the
Shaou, the Woo, the Ya, and the Sung.” This is, the first
notice which we have of any compilation of the ancient
poems by Confucius, and from it mainly are derived all
the subsequent-statements on the subject.

In the History of the Classical Books in the Records
of the Suy dynasty (a.D. 589-—-618), it is said :-—‘ When
odes ceased to be made and collected, Che, the Grand
music-master of Loo, arranged in order those which were
existing, and made a’copy of them. Then Confucius
expurgated them ; ,and going up to the Shang dynasty,
and coming down to the State of Loo, he compiled alto-
gether 300 pieces.” °


VOL. Wf. 1


2 THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE SHE.


Gow-yang Séw (a.p. 1006—1071) endeavours to state
particularly what the work of expurgation performed by -
Confucius was. ‘Not only,’ says he, “did the sage
reject whole poems, but from ®thers he rejected one or
more stanzas ; from stanzas he rejected one or more lines;
and from lines he rejected one or more characters.’””

Choo He (a.p. 1180—»1200), whose own classical Work
on the Book of Poetry appeared in a.p.4178, declined to
express himself positively on the question of the expurg-
ation of the odes, but summed up his view of what Con-
fucius did for them in the following words:—“ Poems had
ceased to be made and collected, and those which were
extant were full of errors and wanting in arrangement.
When Confucius returned from Wei to Loo, he brought
with him the odes which he had gotten in other States,
and digested them, along with those which were to be
found in Loo, into a collection of 300 pieces.”

I have not been able to find evidence sustaining these
representations, and propose now to submit to the reader

These state. the considyrations which prevent me from
ments not sup- concurring in them, and have brought me
Jonee’ Thoview 0 the conclusions that, before the birth of
of the author. ~~ Confucius, the Book of Poetry existed sub-
stantially the same as it was at his death. and that, while
he may have somewhat altered the arrangement of its
Books and odes, the principal service which he rendered
to it was not that of compilatiou, but the impulse to the’
study of it which he communicated to his disciples. The
discrepancy in the number of the odes as given in the
above statements wil} be touched on im a note.

2. If we place Ts‘éen’s composition of the memoir of
Confucius in 8.c, 100, nearly four hundred years will thus
have elapsed between the death of the sage and any

The ground- statement to the effect that he expurgated a
peeangn teers previous collection of poems, or compiled
ations. that which we now have, consisting of a few
over 800 pieces ; and no writer in the interval, so far as we
know, had affirmed or implied any suck facts. But inde
pendently of this consideration, there is ample evidence to
prove, first, that the poems current before Confucius were
not by any means so numerous as Sze-ma T's‘éen says, and,
secondly, that the collection of 300 pieces or thereabouts,


THE SHE BEFORE CONFUCIUS. 3


digested under the same divisions as in the present Classic,
existed before the sage’s time. z

3. [i] It would not be surprising, if, floating about and
current among the peopl of China, in the 6th century
before Christ, there had been even more than oe Beets
3000 pieces of poetry. The marvel is that ous.
such was not the case. But in the “ Narratives of the
States,” a Worle attributed by some to Tso K‘éw-ming,!
there occur quotations from 81 poems, made by statesmen
and others, all anterior to Confucius; and of those poems
it cannot be pleaded that more than two are not in the
present Classic, while of those two one is an ode of it.
quoted under another name. Further, in the Tso Chuen,
certainly the work of Tso K‘éw-ming, and a most valuable
supplement to Confucius’ own Work of the Ch‘un Ts‘éw,
we have quotations from not fewer than 219 poems ; and of
these only thirteen are not found in the Classic. ‘Thus of
250 poems current in China before the supposed compila-
. tion of the Book of Poetry, 236 are found in it, and only
14 are absent. ‘To use the wordgof Chaou. Yih, a scholar
of the present dynasty, of the-period K*éen-lung (A.D.
1736—1795), “If the poems existing in Confucius’ time
had been more than 3000, the quotations found in these
two Books of poems now lost should have been ten times
as numerous as the quotations from the 305 pieces said to
have been preserved by him, whereas they are only be-
tween a twenty-first and twenty-second part of those from
the existing pieces. This is sufficient to show that Ts‘éen’s
statement is not worthy of credit.” Ihave made the widest
possible induction from all existing Records in which there
are quotations of poems made anterior te Confucius, and
the conclusion to which I have been brought is altogether
confirmatory of that deduced from the Works of Tso
K‘éw-ming. If Confucius did make any compilation of
poems, he had no such work of rejection and expurgation
to do as is commonly imagined.

[ii.] But I believe myself that he did no work at. all
to which the name of compilation can properly be applied,
but simply adopted an existing collection of poems con-
sisting of 305, or Jat most of 311 pieces. Of the ex-


1 Wylie’s Notes on Chinese Literature, 3 6. Tso K‘éw-ming was not
far removed from the era of Confucius.
1 *


4 THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE SHE.


Proofs of the istence of the She, or Book of Poetry, before
existenes of the Confucius, digested under four divisions, and
before the time much in the same order as at present, there
of Confucius. may be advanced tRe following proofs :—

First, in the “ Official Book of Chow,” we are told that
it. belonged to the grand-master “ to teach the six classes
of poems,—the Fung, with their descriptive, metaphorical,
and allusive pieces, the Ya, and the Sif.” Mr Wylie
says that the question of the genuineness of the Official
Book may be considered as set at rest since the inquiry
into it by Choo He, and that it is to be accepted as a work
of the duke of Chow, or some other sage of the Chow
dynasty.! Without committing myself to any opinion on
this point, as I find the passage just quoted in the Preface
to the She {of which I shall treat in the next chapter), I
cannot but accept i¢ as having been current before Con-
fucius; and thus we have a distinct reference to a collec-
tion of poems, earlier than his time, with the same
division into Parts, and the same classification of the
pieces in those Parts. &

Second, in Part II. of the She, Book vi., Ode IX.,—an
ode assigned to the time of king Yéw, B.c. 780—770, we
have the words,


“They sing the Ya and the Nan,
Dancing to their flutes without error,”


So early then as the 8th century before our era, there was
a collection of poems, of which some bore the name of
the Nan, which there is nothing to forbid our supposing
to have been the Chow-nan and the Shaou-nan, forming
the first two Books of the first Part of the present
classic, often spoken of together as the Nan; and of
which others bore the name of the Ya, being probably
the earlier pieces which now compose a large portion of
the second and third Parts. ..
Third, in the narratives of Tso K‘ew-ming, under the
29th year of duke Séang, b.c. 543, when Confucius was
only 8 or 9 years old, we have an account of a visit to the
court of Leo by an envoy from Woo, an eminent ‘states-
man of the time, and of great learnjng. We are told


! Notes on ©hinese Literature, p. 4.


c


THE SHE BEFORE CONFUCIUS. 5


that, as he wished to hear the music of Chow, which he
could do better in Loo than in any other State, they sang
to him the odes of the Chajv-nan and the Shaou-nan ; those
of P‘ei, Yung, and Wei; of the Royal domain; of Ching ;
of Ts‘e; of Pin; of Ts‘ in; of Wei; of Tang ; of Ch‘in 3
of ‘Kwei; and of Ts‘aou. They sang to him atso the odes
of the Minor Ya and the Greater Ya; and they sang
finally the pieces of the Sung. We have here existing in
the boyhood of Confucius, before he had set his mind on
learning,’ what we may call the present Book of Poetry,
with its Fung, its Ya, and itsSung. The odes of the Fung
were in 15 Books as now, with merely some slight differ-
ences in the order of their arrangement ;—the odes of
Pin forming the 9th Book instead of the "15th, those of
Ts‘in the 10th instead of the 11th, those of Wei the llth
instead of the 9th, and those of Tang the 12th instead of
the 10th. In other respects the She, existing in Loo when
Confucius was a mere boy, appears to have been the same
as that of which the compilation hgs been ascribed to him.

Fourth, in this matter we ma appeal to the words of
Confucius himself. Twice in the Analects he speaks of
the odes as a collection consisting of 300 pieces? ‘That
Work not being made on any principle of chronological
order, we cannot positively assign those sayings to any
particular periods of Confucius’ hfe; but itis, | may say,
the unanimous opinion of the critics that they were spoken
before the time to which Sze-ma T's‘een and Choo He refer
his special labour on the Book of Poetry. The reader
may be left, with the evidence which has been set before
him, to form his own opinion on the questions discussed.
To my own mind that evidence is decisive on the points.
—The Book of Poetry, arranged very much as we now
have it, was current in China long before the sage; and
its pieces were in the mouths of statesmen and scholars,
constantly quoted by them on festive and other occasions.
Poems not included in it there doubtless were, but they -
were comparatively few. Confucius may have made a
copy for the use of himself and his disciples ; ‘but it does
not appear that he rejected any pieces which had been
previously received, or admitted any which had not peer
viously found a place i in the collegtion.


' Confucian Analects, Il. iv.1.  ? Confucian Analects, II. ii.;. XII v.


6 THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE SHE.


4.-Having come to the above conclusions, it seems
Further errors Superfluous to make any further observations
in ibe ate” on the statements aédduced in the first para-
frst paragraph. graph. If Confucius expurgated no previous
Book, it is vain to try and specify the nature of his ex-
purgation as Gow-yang Séw did. From Sze-ma Ts‘éen
we should suppose that there were no odegin the She later
‘than the time of king Le, whereas there are 12 of the
time of king Hwuy, 13 of that of king Séang, and 2 of
the time of king Ting. Even the Sung of Loo which are
referred to by the Suy writer and Choo He are not the
latest pieces in the Book. The statement of the former
that the odes were arranged in order and copied by Che,
the music-master of Loo,” rests on no authority but his
own ;—more than a thousand years after the time of Con-
fucius. I shall refer to it again, however, in the next
chapter.

5. The question arises now of what Confucius really did
for the Book of Poetry,if, indeed, he did anything ait all.
The only thing from which we can hazard the slightest

Did Confucius Opinionon, the point we have from his own lips.
thon. doanything Tn the Analects, IX. xiv., he tells us:—“I
Poetry? returned from Wei to Loo, and then the music
was reformed, aud the pieces in the Ya and the Sung all
found their proper places.” The return from Wei to Loo
took place when the sage was in his 69th year, only five
yeays before hisdeath. He ceased from that time to take
an active part in political affairs, and solaced himself with
music, the study of the Classics, the writing of the
Ch‘an Ts‘éw, and familiar intercourse with those of his
disciples who still kept about him. He reformed the
music,—that to which the poems were sung; but wherein
the reformation consisted we cannot tell. And he gave
to: the pieces of the Ya and the Sung their proper places.
The present order of the Books in the Fung, slightly
differing, we have seen, from that which was common in
his boyhood, may also have now been determined by him.


' Every instance pleaded by Séw in support of his expurgation of
stanzas, lines, and characters has been disposed of by various scholars.

? When this Che lived is much disputed. From the references to him
in Ana. VIII. xv., XVIII. ix..eve naturally suppose him to have been a
contemporary of Confucius,


THE SHE BEFORE CONFUCIUS. 7


As to the arrangement of the odes in the other Parts of
the Work, we cannot ‘say of what extent it was. What
are now called the correct Ya precede the pieces called the
Ya of a changed character or of a degenerate age; but
there is no chronological order in their following one an-
other, and it will be seen, from the notes on the separate
odes, that there gare not a few of the latter class, which
are illustrations of a good reign and of the observance
of propriety, as much as any of the former. In the
Books of the Sung again, the occurrence of the Praise-
songs of Loo between the sacrificial odes of Chow and
Shang is an anomaly for which we try in vain to discover
a reasonable explanation.

6. While we cannot discover, therefore, any peculiar
labours of Confucius on the Book.of Poetry, and we have
it now, as will be shown in the next section, substantially
as he found it already compiled to his hand, the subse-
quent preservation of it may reasonably be _ Confucius’ser-
attributed to the admiration whjch he ex- vee in tee im-
pressed for it, and the enthusiasm for it with prs ttuay
which he sought to inspire his disciples. It of it.
was one of the themes on which he delighted to gonverse
withthem.! He taught that it is from the odes that the
mind receives its best stimulus? A man ignorant of them
was, in his opinion, like one who stands with his face to-
wards a wall, limited in his views, and unable to advance.®
Of the two things which his son could specify as particular.
ly enjoined on him by the sage, the first was that he should
learn the odes. In this way Confucius, probably, contri-
buted largely to the subsequent preservation of the Book of
Poetry ;—the preservation of the tablets on which the
odes were inscribed, and the preservation of .it in the
memories of all who venerated his authority, and looked -
up to him as their master.


? Analects, VII. xvii, ? Ana, VIII. viii.; XVII. ix.
* Ana. XVIL x. * Ana., XVI. xiii,


8 THE SHE AFTER CONFUCIUS.


SECTION IL


THE BOOK OF POETRY FROM THE TIME OF CONFUCIUS TILL
THE GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THR, PRESENT TEXT.


wth vee Lote OE the attention paid to the study of the
cius to the dy- Book of Poetry from the death of Confucius
nasty of Ts'in. to the rise of the Ts‘in dynasty, we have
abundant evidence in the writings of his grandson Tsze-
sze, of Mencius, and of Seun K‘ing. One of the acknow-
ledged distinctions ‘of Mencius is his acquaintance with


‘the odes, of which his canon for the study of them pre-


fixed to ‘my larger volumes is a proof; and.Seun K‘ing
survived the extinction of the Chow dynasty, and lived on
into the times of Ts‘in.

2. The Poems shared in the calamity which all the
other classical Works, ¥xcepting the Yih, suffered, when
the tyrant of Ts‘in issued his edict ‘for their destruction.
But I have shown, in the prolegomena to vol. I., that only

The  Pooms a few years elapsed between the execution of
were elt rpeover, his decree and the establishment of the Han
of Ts'in, dynasty, which distinguished itself by its
labours to restore the monuments of ancient literature,
The odes were all, or very nearly all, recovered ;' and the
reason assigned for. this is, that their preservation de-
pended on the memory of scholars more than on their
inscription upon tablets and silk. We shall find reason
to accept this statement.

3. Three different texts of the odes made their appear-

Three differ. ance early in the Han dynasty, known as the
ent texts. She of Loo, of Ts‘e, and of Han; that is, the


* In the last section reference was made to the number of the odes,
given by Confucius himself as 300. He might mention the round number,
not thinking it worth while to say that they were 305 or 311. The
Classic now contains the text of 305 pieces, and the titles of other 6. It
is contended by Choo and many other scholars, that in Confucius’ time
the text of those six was already lost, or rather that the titles were names
of tunes only, More likely is the view that the text of these pieces was
lost after Confucius’ death, @ :


THREE DIFFERENT TEXTS. 9


Book of Poetry was recovered from three different
quarters.

[i.] Léw Hin’s catalogue? of the Works in the imperial
library of the earlier Han ynasty commences, on the She
King, with a Collection of the three Texts in 28 chapters, .
which is followed by two Works of commentary on the
Text of Loo. The former of them was by. & The Text of
Shin P‘ei, of whém we have some account in Lee:
the Literary Biographies of Han. He was a native of
Loo, and had received his own knowledge of the odes from
a scholar of Ts‘e, called Fow K‘éw-pih. He was resorted
to by many disciples, whom he taught to repeat the odes,
but without entering into discussion with them on their
interpretation. When the first emperor of the Han
dynasty was passing through Loo, Shin followed him to
the capital of that State, and had an interview with him.
The emperor Woo, in the beginning of his reign (8.0. 189),
sent for him to court when he was more than 80 years
old; and he appears to have survived a considerable
number of years beyond that advanced age. The names
of ten of his disciples are given, all men ef eminence, and
among them K‘ung Gan-kwoh. A little later, the most
noted adherent of the school of Loo was a Wei Héen, who
arrived at the dignity of prime minister, and published
* the She of Loo in Stanzas and Lines.” Upand down in
the Books of Han and Wei are to be found quotations of
the odes, which must have been taken from the professors
of the Loo recension; but neither the text nor the
writings on it long survived. They are said to have,
perished during the Tsin dynasty (a.p.265—419). When
the catalogue of the Suy library was made, none of them _.
were existing.

[ii.] The Han catalogue mentions five different wworks on
the She of Ts‘e. This text was from a Yuen Koo, a
native of Ts‘e, about whom we learn, from the ge yoxt of
same chapter of Literary Biographies, that he Te.
was one of the Great scholars of the court in the time of
the emperor King (B.c. 155—142), a favourite with him,
and specially distinguished for his knowledge of the odes
and his advocacy of orthodox Confucian doctrine. He
died in the next reign of Woo, more than 90 years old ;


4 Proleg., Vol. L p. 4.


10 THE SHE AFTER CONFUCIUS.


and we are told that all the scholars of Ts‘e who got a
name in those days for their acquaintance with the She
sprang from his school. Amorg his disciples is the well-
known name of Héa-how Ch‘e-ch‘ang, who communicated
his acquisitions to How Ts‘ang, a native of the present
Shan-tung province, and author of two of the Works in
the Han catalogue. How had three disciples of eminence,
—Yihb Fung, Séaou Wang-che, and K‘wang Hing. From
them the Text of Ts‘e was transmitted to others, whose
names, with quotations from their writings, are scattered
through the Books of Han. Neither text nor comment-
aries, however, had a better fate than the She of Loo.
There is no mention of them in the catalogue of Suy.
They are said to have perished even before the rise of the
Tsin dynasty.
ii.] The Text of Han was somewhat more fortunate.
The Han catalogue contains the titles of four works, all
The text of by Han Ying, whose surname is thus perpetu-
Han Ying. ated in the text of the She which emanated
from him. His biograBhy follows that of How Ts‘ang.
He was a native, we are told, of the province of Yen, and
a “Great scholar” in the time of the emperor Win (s.c.
178-—156), and on into the reigns of King and Woo.
“ He laboured,” it is said, “to unfold the meaning of the
odes, and published an ‘ Explanation of the Text,’ and
‘ Illustrations of the She,’ containing several myriads of
characters. His text was somewhat different from the
texts of the She of Loo and Ts‘e, but substantially of the
same meaning.’ Of course Han founded a school; but
while almost all the writings of his followers soon perished,
both the Works just mentioned continued on through the
various dynasties to the time of Sung. The Suy catalogue
contains the titles of his text and two Works on it; the
Tang those of his text and his Ilustrations ; but when
we come to the catalogue of Sung, published in the time
of the Yuen dynasty, we find only the Illustrations, in 10
Books or chapters ; and Gow-yang Séw tells us that in his
time this was all of Han that remained. It continues,
entire or nearly so, to the present day.
4. But while these three different vecensions of the
She all disappeared, wit) the exception of a single frag-
ment, their unhappy fate was owing not more to tho


\


THE TEXT OF MAOU. 11


convulsions by which the empire was often rent, and the
consequent destruction of literary monuments, such as
we have witnessed in our gwn day in China, than to the
appearance of a fourth Text which displaced them by its
superior correctness, and the ability with 4 gurthrext;
which it was advocated and commented on, that of Maou.
This was what isgcalled the “Text of Maou.” It came
into the field later than the others; but the Han cata-
logue contains the She of Maou in 29 chapters, and a
commentary on the text in 30. According to Ch‘ing
K‘ang-shing, the author of this commentary was a native
of Loo, known as Maou Hing or the Greater Maou, who
was a disciple, we are told by Luh Tih-ming, of Seun
K‘ing. The Work is lost. He had communicated his
knowledge of the She, however, to another Maou,—Maouw
Chang, or the Lesser Maou,—who was “a Great scholar”
at the court of king Héen of Ho-kéen.’_ This king Héen
was one of the most diligent labourers in the recovery of
the ancient Books, and presented Maou’s text and the
Work of Hing at the court of the emperor King,—pro-
bably in 3c. 129. Chang himself published his ‘‘ Ex-
planations of the She,” in 29 chapters, which still re-
main; but it was not till the reign of the emperor P‘ing
(a.p. 1—5) that Maou’s recension was received into the
imperial college, and took its place along with those of
Loo, Ts‘e, and Han. .

The Chinese critics have carefully traced the line of
scholars who had charge of Maou’s text and explanations
down to the reign of P‘ing ;—Kwan Ch‘ang-k‘ing, Héae
Yen-néen, and Seu Gaou. To Seu Gaou succeeded Ch‘in
Kéah, who was in office at the court of the usurper Wang
Mang (a.p. 9—22). He transmitted his treasures to
Séay Man-k‘ing,.who himself commented on the She;
and from him they passed to the well-known Wei King-
chung or Wei Hwang, of whom I shall have to speak in
the next chapter. From this time the most fameus
scholars addicted themselves to Maou’s text. Kéa Kwei
(a.p. 25—-101) published a Work on the “ Meaning and
Difficulties of Maou’s She,” having previously compiled a

1 The petty kingdom of Ho-kéen embraced three of the districts in


the present department of the same name@n Chih-le, and one of the two
districts of Shin Chow, King Héen’s name was Tih,


12 THE SHE AFTER CONFUCIUS.


digest of the differences between its text and those of the
other three recensions, at the command of the emperor
Ming (a.p. 58—75). Ma Yung (a.p. 69—165) followed
with another commentary ;—and we arrive at Ch‘ing
Heuen, or Ch‘ing K‘ang-shing, who wrote his “ Supple-
mentary Commentary to the She of Maou,” and his
“Chronological Introduction to the She.” The former
of these two Works complete, and portfons of the latter,
are still extant. That the former has great defects as
well as: great merits, there can be no question; but it
took possession of the literary world of China, and aftér
the time of Ch‘ing the other three texts were little heard
of, while the names of the commentators on Maou’s text
’ and his explanations of it speedily become very numerous.
Maou’s grave is still shown near the village of Tsun-fuh,
in the departmental district of Ho-kéen.

5. Returning now to what I said in the 2nd paragraph,
it will be granted that the appearance of three different
and independent texts, immediately after the rise of the
Han dynasty, affords the most satisfactory evidence of

qhe different the recovery of the Book of Poetry, ag it had
texts gusrantee continued from the time of Confucius. Un-
the recovered fortunately only fragments of them remain
me now; but we have seen that they were dili-
gently compared by competent scholars with one another,
and with the fourth text of Maou, which subsequently
got the field to itself. In the body of the larger Work
attention is called to many of their peculiar readings;

Thetextswere and it is clear to me that their variations
all taken down from ene another and from Maou’s text arose
citation. from the alleged fact that the preservation
of the odes was owing to their being transmitted by re-
citation. The rhyme helped the memory to retain them, ,
and while wood, bamboo, and silk were all consumed by
the flames of T's‘in, when the time of repression ceased
scholars would be eager to rehearse their stores. It
was Inevitable that the same sounds, when taken down by
different writers, should in many cases be represented by
different characters. Accepting the text as it exists, we
have no reason to doubt that it is a near approximation
to that which was current in the time of Confucius.


THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION. 13


CHAPTER ILI.


THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION; THEIR
INTERPRETATION AND AUTHORS; THE PREFACES
AND THEIR AUTHORITY.


APPENDIX—~A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE .ODES.


1. Ir has been shown in the first section of last chapter
that the Book of Poetry existed .as a collection of odes
before the time of Confucius. It becomes a question of
some interest whether we can ascertain how the collection
came to be formed, and account for the gaps that now
exist in it,—how there are no, poetical memorials. at
all of several of the reigns of the Chow kings, How were the
and how the first Part embraces only a por- Oe tae et
tion of the States of which the kingdom was How is the col
composed. ° incomplete?

2. Sir Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun tells us the opinion
of “a very wise man,” that ‘if a man were permitted to
make all the ballads of a nation, he need not care who
should make its jaws.”! The theory of Chinese scholars ©
is, that it was the duty of the kings to make themselves
acquainted with all the odes and songs current in the
ditterent States, and to judge from them of The theory of
the character of the rule exercised by their ee ee
several princes, so that they might minister {ir of the oe
praise or blame, reward or punishment, ac- al purposes.
cordingly.

* See Fletcher’s account of “a Conversation on Governments.”’ Sir
John Davis (The Poetry of the Chinese, p. 35) adduces the remark of a
writer in the Spectator (No. 502) :—“I have heard that a minister of
State in the reign of Queen Elizabeth had all manner of books and
ballads brought to him, of what kind soever, and took great notice how
much they took with he people ; upon which he would, and certainly

‘ might, very well judge of their present dispositions, and of the most
proper way of applying them according to“bis own purposes.”


14 THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION.


3. The one classical passage which is referred to in
support of this theory is in the Le Ke, V. ii., parr. 13,
The classical 14.:——“‘ Every fifth year, the son of Heaven
rretsthetke, Made a progress through the kingdom, when
ory. the Grand music-master was commanded to
lay before him the poems collected in the States of the
several quarters, as an exhibition of the manners of the
people.” Unfortunately, this Book of the Le Ke, the
“ Royal Ordinances,” was only compiled in the reign of
the emperor Wan of the Han dynasty (B.c. 179—155).
The scholars entrusted with the work did their best, we
may suppose, with the materials at theircommand. They
made much use, it is evident, of Mencius, and of the H
Le. The Chow Le, or the “ Official Book of Chow,’ had
. not then been recovered. But neither in Mencius, nor
in the E Le, do we meet with any authority for the state-
ment before us. The Shoo mentions that Shun every fifth
year made a tour of imspection through his empire; but
there were then no odes for him to examine, as to him
and his minister Kaougyaou is attributed the first rudi-
mentary attempt at the poetic art. Of the progresses of
the sovereigns of ‘the Héa and Yin dynasties we have no
information ; and those of the kings of Chow were made,
we know, only once in twelve years. ‘The above state-
ment in the Le Ke, therefore, was probably based only
on tradition, and is erroneous in the frequency of the
royal progresses which it asserts.
Notwithstanding the difficulties which beset the text
of the Le Ke, however, I am not disposed to reject it al-
“together. It derives a certain amount of confirmation
- from the passage quoted in the last chapter, p. 4, from the
“ Official Book of Chow,” showing that in the Chow dy-
nasty there was a collection of poems, under the divisions
of the Fung, the Ya, and the Sung, whieh it was the busi-
ness of the Grand music-master to teach the musicians
and the éléves of the royal school. It may be granted
then, that the duke of Chow, in legislating for his dynasty,
enacted that the poems produced in the different feudal
States should be collected on the occasions:‘of the royal
progresses, and lodged thereafter among the archives of
the bureau of music at the royal court® The same thing,


THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION. 15


e
we may presume a fortiori, would be dene with those
produced within the royal domain itself. ~

4. But the feudal States were modelled after the pattern
of the royal State. Theyealso had their music-masters,
their musicians, and their historiographers. The kings
in their progresses did not visit aon particu- The music.
lar State, so that their music-masters could Ere wend ee
have an opportumity to collect the odes in it te, odes of each
for themselves. They met, at well-known musie-master.
points, the marquises, earls, barons, &c., of the different
quarters of the kingdom; there gave them audience; ad-
judicated upon their merits; and issued to them their
orders. We are obliged to suppose that the princes
would be attended to the places of rendezvous by their
music-masters, carrying with them the poetical composi-
tions collected in their several regions, to present them
to their superior of the royal court.

5. By means of the above arrangement, we can under-
stand how the poems of the whole kingdom were accumu-
lated and arranged among the grehives of the capital.
‘Was there any provision for disseminating thence the
poems of one State among all the others? ‘There is suf-
ficient evidence that this dissemination was yw the cok
in some way effected. Throughout the lected |. poems
“ Narratives of the States”? and the details ated throughout
of Tso K‘éw-ming on the history of the Ch‘un ™* S**°*
Ts‘éw, the officers of the States generally are. presented
to us as familiar not only with the odes of their particular
States, but with those of other States as well. They ap-
pear equally well acquainted with all the Parts and Books
of our present collection ; and we saw in Chapter L., p. 5,
how the whole of the present She was sung over to Ke-
chah of Woo when he visited the court of Leo. My
opinion is that there was a regular communication from
the royal court to the courts of the various States of the
poetical pieces, which for one reason or another were
thought worthy of preservation. This is nowhere ex-
pressly stated ; but it may be argued by analogy from
the account which we have in the “ Official Book of Chow ”
of the duties of the historiographers, or recorders, of the
Exterior :—‘ They® had charge of the Histories of all the


16 THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION.


States; of the Books of the three Angust [rulers] and of
the five emperors. They communicated to all parts of.
the kingdom the writings [in their charge].”! For want
of fuller information it is nof Gasy to give a thoroughly
satisfactory account of the Histories and the Books refer-
red to in these brief sentences ; but I quote them merely
to establish the fact that, according to the constitution of
the kingdom under the dynasty of Choa, not only were
the literary monuments of the feudal States collected for
the satisfaction of the kings, but they were again sent
forth to the courts of the different princes, and became
the common possession of the cultivated classes through-
out the whole country. The documentary evidence of
the fact is scanty, owing to the imperfect condition in
which the Books of Chow were recovered during the Han
dynasty, and so we have no special mention made of the
odes in the passages of the “ Official Book,” which I have
adduced; but that they, as well as the other writings
which are vaguely specified, were made known to Loo,
Ts‘e, Tsin, and all the other States, seems to have the
evidence of analogy in its favour, and to be necessary to
account for the general familiarity with them which, we
know, prevailed.

6. But if the poems produced in the several States
were thus collected in the capital, and thence again dis-
seminated throughout the kingdom, we might conclude
that the collection would have been far more extensive
and complete than we have it now. The smallness of it

How the col- is to be accounted for by the disorder and
notin ana a confusion into which the kingdom fell after
complete. the lapse of a few reigns from king Woo.
Royal progresses ceased when royal government fell into


' These Histories, it is held, related to everything about the feudal
States, and the outlying barbarous tribes, the history of their princes and
chiefs, their origin and boundaries, their tributes, their ceremonies, music,
customs, &c. We try in vain to diseever what the Bocks of the three
August ones were. The second sentence is the most important for my
argument. I cannot accept the interpretation of “ the writings,” in which

" many acquiesce, as simply = the names of the written characters. Biot
gives fcr the whole :—“ Ils sont chargés de propager les noms écrits, ow
les signes de I‘écriture, dans les quatre parties de l’empire.” I believe
that T have given the sense correctly.


THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION. 17


decay, and then the odes were no longer collected. We
have no account of any progress of the kings during the
period of the Ch‘un Ts‘éyv, But, before that period,
there is a long gap of 145 years between kings Ch‘in

and H, covering the reigns of K‘ang, Ch‘aou, Muh, an

Kung, of which we have no poetic memorials, if we ex-
cept two doubtful pieces among the sacrificial odes of
Chow. ‘The reigh of Héaou who succeeded to E is simi-
larly uncommemorated, and the latest odes are of the time
of ‘Tiug, when a hundred years of the Ch‘un Ts‘éw had
still to run theircourse. J cannot suppose but that many
odes were made and collected during the 148 years after
king Ch‘ing. The probability is that they perished
during the feeble and disturbed reigns of E, Héaou, E,
and Le. Of the reign of the first of these we have only
five pieces, of alltof which Choo considers the date to he
uncertain ; of that of the second, as has been observed
above, we have no memorials at all; of that of the third
we have only one piece, which Choo, for apparently good
reasons, would assign to a considefably later date. ‘Then
follow four pieces, the date of which is quite uncertain,
and eleven, assigned to the reign of Le,—some of them
with evident error. To Le’s succeeded the long and
vigorous reign of Seuen (3.c. 828-781), when we may
suppose that the ancient custom of collecting the poems
was revived. Subsequently to him, all was in the main
decadence and disorder. It was probably in the latter
part of his reign that Ch‘ing-k‘aou-foo, an ancestor of
Confucius, obtained from the Grand music-master of the


court of Chow twelve of the sacrificial odes of the previous .


dynasty, with which he returned to Sung which was held
by representatives of the House of Shang. They were
used there in sacrificing to the old kings of Shang, and
were probably taken with them to Loo when the K‘ung
family subsequently sought refuge in that State. Yet of
the twelve odes seven were lost by the time of Confucius.

The general conclusion to which we come is, that the
existing Book of Poetry is the fragment of various col-
lections made during the early reigns of the kings of


Chow, and added $0 at intervals, especially on the oc-


} See Mencius, LV, ii, &XT1.
VOL, I, 2


18 THE SOURCES OF THE ODES AS A COLLECTION.
e

currence of a prosperous rule, in accordance with the
regulation which has been preserved in the Le Ke. How
it is that we have in Part I. odes of not more than a
dozen of the States into which*the kingdom was divided,
and that the odes of those States extend only over a
short period of their history :—for these things we can-
not account further than by saying that such were the
ravages of time and the results of dfsorder. We can
only accept.the collection as it is, and be thankful for it.
It was well that Confucius was a native of Loo, for such
was the position of that State among the others, and so
close its relations with the royal court, that the. odes
preserved m it were probably more numerous and com-
plete than anywhere else. Yet we cannot accept the
statement of the editor of the Suy catalogue adduced on
page 2, that the existing pieces had been copied out
and arranged by Che, the music-master of Loo, unless,
indeed, Che had been in office during the boyhood of
Confucius, when, as we have seen, the collection was to
be found there, substamtially the same as it is now.

7. The conclusions which I have sought to establish in
the above paragraphs, concerning the sources of the She
as a collection, have an important bearing on the inter-
pretation of many of the odes. The remark of Sze-ma

Bearing of the L8‘éen, that “Confucius selected those
Byers aut the pieces which would be serviceable for the

nterpretution of illustration ef propriety and righteousness,”
particular pieces. -

is. as erroneous as the other, that the sage
selected 305 pieces out of 3000. Confucius merely
studied and taught the pieces which he found existing,
and the collection necessarily contained odes illustrative
of bad government as well as of good, of licentiousness
as well as of a pure morality. Nothing has been such a
stumbling-block im the way of the reception of Choo He’s
interpretation of the pieces as the readiness with which he
attributes a licentious meaning to those of Book vii., Part
I. But the reason why the kings im their progresses had
the odes of the different States collected and presented
to them, was “ that they might judge from them of the


e d
' I might say not quite a dozen, for Books iii, iv. and v., all belong to
Wei, and probably also xiii.Pas well as x., to Tsin.


THE AUTHORS OF THE ODES. 19


manners of .the people,” and so come to a decision re-~
garding the government and morals of their rulers. A.
student and translator of the odes has simply to allow
them to speak for themsefves, and‘has no more reason
to be surprised ‘at the language of vice in some of them
than at the langnage of virtue in many others. The
enigmatic saying of Confucius himself, that the whole of
“ the three hundi€d odes may be summed up in one sen-
tence,—Thought without depravity,” 1 must be understood
in the meaning which I have given toit.in the translation
of the Analects. It may very well be said, in harmony
with all that I have here advanced, that the odes were
collected and preserved for the -promotion of good
government and virtuous manners. The merit attaching
to them is that they give us faithful pictures of what was
good and what was bad in the political State of the
country, and in the social habits of the people.

8. The pieces in the collection were of course made by in-
dividuals who possessed the gift, or thought that they pos-
sessed the gift, of poetical composition. Who ne writers of
they were we could tell only on the authority the odes.
of the odes themselves, or of credible historical accounts
contemporaneous with them or nearly so. They would
in general be individuals of some literary culture, for the
arts of reading and writing even could not be widely
diffused during the Chow dynasty. It is not worth our
while to question the opinion of the Chinese critics, who
attribute many pieces to the duke of Chow, though we
have independent testimony only to his composition of a
single ode,—the second of Book xv., Part 1* We may
assign to him also the Ist and 3rd odes of the same
Book; the first 22 of Part IL; the first 18 of Part IIL;
and with two doubtful exceptions, all the sacrificial Songs
of Chow.

Of the 160 pieces in Pt I. only the authorship of the
2nd of Book xv., which has just been referred to, can be
assigned with certainty. Some of the others, of which
the historical interpretation may be considered as suffi-
ciently fixed, as the complaints of Chwang Keang, in Books
lii., iv., v.,,are written in the first person; but the author


1 See the-Ana. Il.di.
? See the Shoo, V, vi. 15,
2 *


20 THE PREFACE TO THE SHE.


may be personating his subject. In Pt II., the 7th
ode of Book iv. was made by a Kéa-foo, a noble of the
royal State, but we know. nothing more about him; the
6th of Book vi., by a eunuch styled’ Mang-tsze ; and the
6th of Book vii., from a concurrence of external testi-
monies, may be ascribed to duke Woo of Wei.

In Pt IIL., Book iii., the 2nd piece was composed by
the same duke Woo; the 8rd by an @arl of Juy in the
royal domain; the 4th must have been made by one of
Seuen’s ministers, to express the king’s feelings under
the drought. which was exhausting the kingdom; and
the 5th and 6th claim to be the work of Yin Keih-foo,
one of Seuen’s principal officers.

9. In the preface which appeared along with Maou’s
text of the She, the occasion and authorship of many
more of the odes are given; but I am not inclined to
allow much weight to its testimony. The
substance of it will be found im the notes pre-
fixed to the pieces of the several Books, where I have
shown in a multitude*of cases the unsatisfactoriness of
the view which it would oblige us to take of particular
odes. There are few western Sinologues, I apprehend,
who will not cordially concur with me in the principle of
Choo He, that we must find the meaning of the odes in
the odes themselves, instead of accepting the interpreta-
tion of them given by we know not whom, and to follow
which would reduce many of them to absurd enigmas.

From the large space which the discussion of the Pre-
face generally occupies, it is necessary that 1 should
attempt a sammary of what is said upon it ;—on no sub-
ject are the views of native scholars more divided.

According to Ch‘ing K‘ang-shing, what is now called
“the Great preface” was made by Confucius’ disciple
Tsze-héa, and what is called “‘the Little preface’? was
made also by Tsze-héa, but afterwards supplemented by
Maou. In Maou, however, there is no distinction made
between a Great and a Little preface. As the odes came
down to him, the Preface was an additional document by
itself, and when he published his commentary, he divided
it into portions, prefixing to every odg the portion which
gave an account of it.. In this way, however, the preface
to the Kwan ts‘eu, or*the first ode of the collection, was


The Preface.


THE PREFACE TO THE SHE. 2]


of a disproportionate length ; and very early, this portion
was separated from the rest, and called the Great Preface.
But the division of the ogiginal preface thus made was
evidently unnatural and inartistic; and Choo He showed
his truer critical ability by detaching only certain por-
tions of the preface to the Kwan ts‘eu, and dignifying
them with the sgme name of the Great Preface. This
gives us some account of the nature and origin of poetry
in general, and of the different Parts which compose the
She. But Choo should have gone farther. In what is
left of the preface to the Kwan ts‘eu, we have not only
an account of that ode, but also what may be regarded’
as a second introduction to Part I., and especially to the
first and second Books of it. To maintain the symmetry
of the prefaces there ought to be corresponding sentences
at the commencement of the introductory notices to the
first odes of the other Parts. But there is nothing of the
sort ; and this want of symmetry in the preface as a whole
is a sufficient proof to me that jt did not all proceed
from one hand.

In Section II. of last chapter I have traced the trans- .
mission of Maou’s text from its first appearance until it
got possession of the literary world of China. vow it is at-
Scholars try to trace it up to Tsze-héa, and fempted to trace
consequently through him to Confucius ; but Tsze-héa.
the evidence is not of an equally satisfactory character,
The first witness is Seu Ching, an officer of the State or
Kingdom of Woo in the period of “ the Three Kingdoms
(A.D. 229—264),” who says, as reported by Luh Tih-
ming :—‘‘ T'sze-héa handed down the She [which he had
received from Confucius] to Kaou Hitng-tsze; Hang-tsze
to Seeh Ts‘ang-tsze ; T’s‘ang-tsze to Méen Méaon-tsze ;
and Méaou-tsze to the elder Maou.” Luh Tih-ming gives
also another account of the connection between Maou and
T'sze-héa :—‘ Tsze-héa handed down the She to Tsing
Shin ; Tsing Shin to Le Kh; Le K‘ih to Ming Chung-
tsze ; Ming Chung-tsze to Kin Mow-tsze; Kin Mow-tsze
to Seun K‘ing; and Seun K‘ing to the elder Maou.”
There is no attempt made, so far as I know, on the part
of Chinese critics,¢to reconcile these two genealogies of
of Maou’s She; but there is no ae that, during the
Han dynasties, the school of Maou did trace their master’s


22 THE PREFACE TO THE SHE.


text up to Tsze-héa. Yen Sze-koo states it positively in
his note appended to Léw Hin’s catalogue of the copies
of the She and hence, as th®text and the preface came
to Maou together, there arose the view that the latter
was made by that disciple of the sage. It became current,
indeed, under his name, and was published separately
from the. odes, so that, in the catalogue of the T‘ang
dynasty, we find “‘ The Preface to the She by Puh Shang,
in two Books,” as a distinct Work.
. But there is another account of the origin of the Pre--
face which seems to conflict with this. In par. 4 of the
2nd section of last chapter I have made mention of Wei
Different ao King-chung or Wei Hwang, one of the great
count of the or’ Han scholars who adopted the text of Maou.
face. He serves as a connecting link between the
western and eastern dynasties of Han ; and in the account
of him in the “ Literary Biographies ” we are told that
“Hwang became the pupil of Séay Man-k‘ing, who was
famous for his knowledge of Maou’s She; and he after-
wards made the Preface to it, remarkable for the accuracy
with which it gives the meaning of the pieces in the Fung
and the Ya, and which is now current in the world.” A
testimony like this cannot be gainsayed. If we allow
that, when Maou first made public his text, there were
prefatory notes accompanying it, yet Hwang must have
made large additions to these, as Maou himself, in the
opinion of Ch‘ing K‘ang-shing, had previously done.
Since the time of Choo He, many eminent scholars,
such as Yen T's‘an in the Sung dynasty, and Kéang Ping-
chang im the present, adopt the first sentence in the
introduction to each ode as what constituted the original
preface, and which they do not feel at liberty to dispute.
They think that so much was prefixed to the odes by-the
historiographers of the kingdom or of the States, when
they were first collected, and they would maintain like-
wise, I suppose, that it bore the stamp of Tsze-héa.
Kéang calls these brief sentences “the Old preface”
and “ the Great preface,” and the fuller explanation which
is often appended to them, and which he feels at ‘liberty
to question, he calls “the Appended ‘preface,” and “ the
Little preface.” e = -
_ After long and extensive investigation of the subject;


THE PREFACE TO THE SHE: 23.


1 have no hesitation in adopting the freer ante. vet
views of Choo He, with a condensed account views on the
of which I conclude this chapter :— pee

“Opinions of scholars are much divided as to the
authorship of the Preface. Someascribe it to Confacins ;+ -
some to T'sze-héa; and some to the historiographers of
the States. In she absence of clear testimony it is im-
possible to decide the point; but the notice about Wei
Hwang, in the literary Biographies of the Han dynasties,?
would seem to make it clear that the Preface was his
work. Wemust take into account, however, on the other
hand, the statement of. Ching Heuen,’ that the Preface
existed as a separate document when Maou appeared with
his text, and that he broke it up, prefixing to each ode
the portion belonging to it. The natural conclusion is
that the Preface had come down from a remote period,
and that Hwang merely added to it and rounded it off.
In accordance with this, scholars generally hold that the
first sentences in the introductary notices formed the
original Preface which Maou distributed, and that the-
following ‘portions were subsequently added.

“This view may appear reasonable ; but when we ex-
amine those first sentences themselves, we find some of
them which do not agree with the obvious meaning of
the odes to which they are prefixed, and give merely the
rash and baseless expositions of the writers. Evidently,
from the first, the Preface was made up of ‘private specu-
lations and conjectures as to the subject-matter of the
odes, and constituted a document by itself, separately ap-
pended to the text. Then on its first appearance there

"were current the explanations of the odes which were
given in connection with the texts of Ts‘e, Loo, and Han,
so.that readers could know that it was the work of later


1 This is too broadly stated. No one has affirmed that the Preface as
a whole was from the hand of Confucius.- Ch‘ing E-ch‘uen (A.D, 1033—-
1107) held that the Great preface was made by him. The style, he sys,
is like that of the appendixes to the Yih, and the ideas are beyond what
Tsze-héa could have enunciated. Wang Tih-shin (later on in the Sung
dynasty) ascribed to Confucius the first sentence of all the introductory,
notices, and called them the Great preface.

? Adduced above. > Also adduced above,


24 THE PREFACE TO THE SHE.


hands, and not give entire credit toit.1 But when Maou
no longer published the Preface as a separate document,
but, each ode appeared with the introductory notice as a
portion of the text, this seemed to give to it the authority
of the text itself. Then after the other texts disappeared
and Maou’s had the field to itself, this means of testing
the accuracy of its prefatory notices np longer existed.
They appeared as if they were the production of the
poets themselves, and the odes seemed to be made from
them as so many themes. Scholars handed down a faith
in them from one to another, and no one ventured to
express a doubt of their authority. The text was twisted
and chiseled to brings it into accordance with them, and
nobody would undertake to say plainly that they were
the work of the scholars of the Han dynasty.”


' That the other texts, as Maow’s, all had their prefaces, often differing
from the views of the odes given in that, is a very important fact,


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODES. 25


APPENDIX.


_——


3 A TABLE
OF THE PIZCES IN THE SHE CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED.


I, BELONGING TO THE SHANG DYNASTY ,,, B.C. 1763—1122.


Five pieces ;—the Sacrificial odes of Shang. Of the
Na (1.), the Leeh tsoo (11.), and the Ch‘ang fah (IV.),
the date of the composition is uncertain, I think that
Ode IV. is the oldest, and may have been made any time
after B.C, 1719.

The Heuen neaow (IU) and the Yin woo (V.) were
made after B.c. 1264. Ode V. should be referred, pro-
bably, to the reign of Te-yih, B.c. 1190—1154,


II. BELONGING TO THE TIME OF KING WAN ,, 1184-1134,


Thirty-four or thirty-five pieces, These are com-
monly included in the three hundred and six pieces of
the Chow dynasty ; but we can only date the commence
ment of that from the reign of Wan’s son, king Woo,
The composition, or the collection at least, of most of
the Odes relating to Wan and his affairs, is attributed
to his son Tan, the duke of Chow, and must be referred ,
to the reigns of kings Woo and Ching a ves gy: 1121-1076,

These pieces embrace :—

In Part L, all the 11 pieces of Book i, :—the Kwan
ts‘eu, the Koh tan, the Keuen urh, the Kew muh, the
Chung-sze, the T'aou yaou, the Too tseu, the Fow e, the
Han kwang, the Joo fun, and the Lin che che ; and
12, or perhaps 13 pieces, of Book ii.:—the 7s‘eoh ch‘aou,
the Zs‘ae fan, the Zs‘aow ch‘ung, the Ts‘ae pin, the
Hing loo, the Kaou yang, the Yin k‘e luy, the P‘eaou
yew mei, the Seaou sing, the Yay yew sce keun, the
Keang yer sxe, and the Tsow yu, with perhaps also the '

_ Kan tiang (V.)

In Part IL, 8 pieces of Book i. :—the Zuh ming, the
Sze mow, the Hwang-hwang chay hwa, the Fah muh,
the Z'cen paou, the Ts‘ae we, the Ch'uh heu, and the
Te too.

In Part IET., 3 pieces of Book i,-—the Yih p‘oh, the
Han luh, and the Ling ga.


III, BELONGING TO THE CHOW DY¥ASTY.
(i.] Of the time of king Woo... oon vee gg 2121-1115,


'


‘26 . CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODES.


In all 8 or 9 pieces, viz.—

In Part I., Book ii, the Ho pe nung ce, and perhaps
the Kan t‘ang. . ,

In Part I, the Wan hae of Book® ; the Pih hia,
the Hwa shoo, and the Yu le, of Book ii., though the
date of these pieces if not certain. ,

In Part IL, the Alcen, the Sze chae, and the Hrang e,
all in Book i, ;

fii.] Of the time of king Ch‘ing ee. BG, LLL4—1076.

In all 60 pieces, viz.— ;

In Part L, all the seven pieces of Book xv., the
Ts'ih yueh, the Ch‘e-heaou, the Zung shan, the P'o foo,
the Hah ho, the Kew yih,and the Lang poh. All these
are assigned to the duke of Chow in the reign of Ch‘ing.

In Part IT., ten pieces :—the Chang te, of Book i, ;
the Yew kdng, the Nan yc% hea-yu, the Sung ken, the
Nan shan yew tae, the Yew e, the Luh seaow, and the
Chan loo, of Book ii. ; the Z*ung hung, and the Zs‘ing-
ts‘ing chay ngo, of Book iti. Of these ten pieces, :

‘however, Choo He thinks that the date of all but the
first is uncertain. .

In Part IIL, twelve pieces :—the Win wang, the Za
sing, the Hea woo, and the Win wang yew shing, of
Book i; the Sdng min, the “Hang wei, the Ke tsuy, the

Hoo ¢, the Kea loh, the Kung Lew, the Heung choh,
and the Keven 0, of Book ii,

In Part IV. thirty-one pieces, viz.—all the pieces of
Book i. [i] :—the Zs%ng meaou, the Wei Leen che
ming, the Wei ts‘ing, the Lech wdn, the Teen tsoh, the
Haow Leen yew ching ming (assigned by Choe He to the
time of king K‘ang), the Go tseang, the She mae (as-
signed by Choo to the time of king Woo), the Chih
king (assigned by Choo to.the time of king Ch‘aou), and
the Sze wan ; 21) the pieces of Book i. [1i.] :—the Shin
hung, the I he (assigned by Choo to the time of king
K‘ang), the Chin loo, the Fung neen, the Yew hoo, the
Ls‘een, the Yung (assigned by Choo to the time of king
Woo), the Zsae heen, the Yew hth, and the Woo; and
all the pieces of Book i. [iii.] :—the Alin yw seaou tsze,
the Zang leh, the King che, the Seaouw pe, the Tsae
shoo, the Leang sze, the Sze e, the Choh, the Hwan, the
Lae, and the Pan.

[iv.] Of the time of kingE GRP)... 983—009.

Five piecés, all in Part I. Book viii.:—the Ke ming,
the Seuen, the Choo, the Tung fang che jih, and the
Tung fang we ming, All these are supposed tq belong
to duke Gae of Ts‘e or his times, but Choo He considers
their date uncertain. 7


[v.] Of the time of keg EYP)... 893-878.
.- One piece, the Pik chow of Part 1,, Book iii., assigned


‘CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODES.


to the time of duke K‘ing of Wei ; but Choo He would
place it Jater in the time of king Ping.


(vi Of the time of the shorgking E, or of king ©


Le

Four pieces, all "those of Part ea , Book xiii, ‘but Choo
considers them to be of uncertain date :—the Kaou ken,
the Soo kwan, the Sih yew ch‘ang ts‘oo, and the Fe
Sung. e
[vii.] Of the time of king Le .., rc sie

In all, eleven pieces, viz.—

Two in Part L, Book xii.:—the Yuen k‘ew, and the
Lung mun che fun, Choo considers both these as of
uncertain date.

Your pieces in Part II.:—the Shih yueh che heaou


_ (correctly assigned by Choo to the time of king Yew),


and the Yu woo ching (Choo would also assign a later
date to this), in Book iv.; the Seaou min, and the
Seaow yuen, both considered by Choo to be of uncertain
date, in Book y.


Five pieces in Part III. :—the fin laou, and the’


Pan, of Book ii.; the Zung, the Yih (correctly assigned
by Choo to the time of king P*ing) ; and the Saag yew
of Book iii. yy

{viii,] Of the period Kung-ho ...

One piece, the Sih tsuh of “Part L, Book x, but
Choo consider’ the date to be uncertain.

{ix.] Of the time of king Seuen Saar > Gos

Twenty-five pieces, viz.—

In Part I. five pieces :—the Pih chow of Book iv. ;
the Keu lin of Book xi, (according to Choo uncertain) ;
and the Hiding Min, the Fung mun che che, and the
Tung man che yang, of Book xii., all according to Choo
uncertain.

In Part IT., fourteen pieces, viz.—

In Book iit, the Luk yueh, the Ts'ae he, the Keu
kung, the Keih: Sih, the Hung yen, the Ping leaou
(according to Choo uncertain), the een shnruy ‘y (ace. to

Choo uncertain), and the Hoh ming (acc. to Choo un-
certain); in Book iv., the Ke foo, the Pih heu, the
Fhvang neaou, the Go hdng k’e yay, the Sze kan, and
the Woo yang, all according to Choo of uncertain ‘date,

In Part IIT., six pieces, viz.—

The Yur ham, the Sung kaou, the Ching min, the Han
yih, the Keang-han, and the Chang woo, all in Book iii.,


and all admitted by Choo but the Han yih, of which,


he considers the date uncertain,
[x.] Of the time of king Yew oes nee

In all forty-two pieces, viz.—
Of Part II. 40 pieces ~in Book iv., the Tech nan
shan, and the Ching yuck (Choo considers tye date of
this uncertain, but there is some internal evidence for


B.C. 893—841.


‘99


”


”?


”


877-841,


8490—827,


826—78k.


: 780-— 770,


28 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODES.


its being of the time of king Yew); in Book v., the
Seaou pwan, the Keaou yen, the Ho jin sze, the Heang
pih, the Kuh fung, the Luh go, the “’ tung, and the
Sze yueh, the date of all of which is4with Choo uncer-
tain; in Book vi., the Pik shan, the Woo tscang ta heu,
the Seaew ming, the Koa chung, the Zs‘vo ts‘ze, the Sin
nam shan, the Foo teen, the Ya t‘een, the Chen pe Loh e,
and the Shang-shang chay haa, of all which Choo
denies the assigned date, excepting in the case of t&e Koa
chung ; in Book vii., the Sang hoo, the Yuen yang, the
Kwei pecn, the Keu heah, the Ts‘ing ying, the Pin che
tsoo,yen, the Yu ts‘aou, the Ts‘ae shuh, the Keoh hung,
anf the Yuh lew,—but of these Choo allows only the Pin
che tsoo yen tobe capable of determinate reference to the
time of Yew ; and in Book viii., the Zoo jin sze, the Ts‘ae
deh, the Shoo meaou (referred by Choo to the time of
king Seuen), the Sth song, the Pik hiva, the Meen man,
the Hoo yeh, the Ts‘cen tseen che shih, the T‘eaou che
hea, and the Ho ts‘aou pah hwang, but Choo only agrees
in assigning the Pih jwva and the Ho ts‘aou puh hwang
to Yew’s reign.

In Part IIL, Book iii, two, pieces ;--the Chen jang
and the Shaou min.

{xi.] Of the time of Bing Ping a an

In all 28 pieces, viz.—

in Part L., 4 in Book iii,—the Zuhe; 3 in Book v.,—
the Ke yuh, the Kaou pran, and the Shih jin, but
Choo considers the date of the K‘aou pwan to be uncer-
tain; 6 in Book vi,—the Shoo le, the Keun-tsze yu
yih, the Keun-tsze yang-yang, the Yang che shiwuy, the
Chung huh yer tuy, and the Xoh lay, of which Choo
agrees in the assignment of ene only, the Yang che
shavuy ; 7 in Book vii.—the Tsze e, the Tseang chang-
tsze, the Shwit yu t'cen, the Fa shuh yu tcen, the Kaou
kew, the Tsun ta loo, and the New yuch he ming, of


which Choo allows the assignment of the %sze e, the ©


Shuh yu teen, and the Za shuh ys teen ; Tin Book x.,.—
the Shan yew ch‘oo, the Yang che shruy, the Lscaow


decaou, the Chow mon, the Le too, the Kaou k‘ew, and.


the Paou yu, of which Choo agrees in the assignment
onty of the Yang che shwvuy and the Tseaou leaou 4 in
Book xi.,—the Sze t‘ech, the Seaou jung, the Keen hea,
and the Chung nat, Choo allowing only the Seaou jung,
€xii.} In the reign ef king Ping, or king Hwan
Seven pieces, all of Part I., Book ix., and all, accord-
ing to Choo, of uncertain date ;—the Koh keu, the Hivun
tsou joo, the Yuen yew t‘aou, the Chih hoo, the Shik
mow che heen, the Kah t‘an, and the Shih shoo,
Exiii.} In the reign of king Hwan Ene - 4a6
Thirty-two pieces, all of Part I., viz.—


17 in Book iii. :—the Pen yen, the Jih yueh, the .


Chung fung, the Keih hoo, the Kae fung, the Heung che,


B.C. 769-719.


» %69—696.


4 T18—696.


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODEs.


the P‘aou yew k‘oo yeh, the Kuh fung, the Shih we, the
Maou k‘en, the Keen he, the Zs‘euen shwuy, the Pih
mun, the Pih fung, the Tsing neu, the Sin tae, and the
Urh tsze shing chow, of which C allows only the
date assigned to the Yen yen, the Sih y yueh, the Chung
Swng, and the Keih koo;. 4 in Book iv.,—the TZs‘eang
yew tsze, the Keun-tsze keae laou, the Sang chung, and
the Shun che pun pun, in regard to all of which but the
Sang chung Choo coincgles ; 5 in Book v.,—the Ifdng,
the Chuh kan, the Hwan lan, the Pih he, and the Yew
hoo, all acc, to Choo of uncertain date; 3 in Book vi,
—the Z'oo yuen, the Ts‘ae koh, and the Ta keu, also of
uncertain date with Choo ; 2 in Book vii.,—the Yew neu”
tung keu, and the Keen shang, with him uncertain ; and
1 in Book xii.,—the Jfoo mun, whose date Choo in the
same way does not think can he determined. ;
({xiv.] Of the time of king Chwang... +i
Fifteen pieces, all in Part I., viz.— °
1 in Book vi.,—the K‘ew chung yew ma, with Choo
uncertain ; 8 in Book vii., all with Choo uncertain,—
the Shan yew foo soo, the Toh he, the Keaou t‘ung, the
Fung, the Tung mun che shen, the Fung yu, the Tsze
kin, and the Yang che shwuy ; and 6 in Book viii. the
date and occasion of the 2nd and 3rd of whiqh only are
deemed uncertain by Choo,—the Nan shan, the Foo
teen, the Loo ling, the Pe kow, the Tkae k‘eu, and the
EE tseay.


[xv.] Of the time of king Le Gf == af

Five pieces, all in Part L, viz.—

8 in Book vii., all with Choo uncertain,—the Ch‘uh hie
tung mun, the Yay yew man ts‘aou, and the Tsin wei ;
2 in Book x., the date assigned to the former of which
isadmitted by Choo, the Woo e, and the Yeiv te che too

{xvi.] Of the time of king Hwuy ais e

Twelve pieces, afl in Part I., viz.—


5 in Book iv., all admitted by Choo,—the Zing che


Sang chung, the Te tung, the Seang shoo, the Kan maou,
and the Ysae ch‘e; Lin Book v., with Choo uncertain,
—the Muh kwa ; 1 in Book vii., admjtted by Choo, the
Ts‘ ing jin; 2 in Book x. with Choo uncertain,—the
Koh sdng and the Zs‘ae ling s 2 in Book xii., with Choo
uncertain,—the Fang yew ts‘eoh ch‘aou, and the Yueh
-eh‘uh ; and 1 in Book xiv., also with Choo uncertain,—
the How yen.
[xvii.] Of the time of king Séang ose
In all thirteen pieces, of which 9 are in Part I., viz.—
1 in Book v., admitted by Choo,—the Ho hwang ; 3
in Book xi., of which Choo admits only the first a
fourth,—the Hwang ne&du, the Shin-fung, the Woo e,
the Wei yang, and the Keuen yu; 3 in Book xiv., of


B.C.


”


29 -


695—681.


680-—676.


675—651.


650—618,


30 CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE ODES.


which Choo accepts only the first,--the How-jin, the
She-hew, and the Hea ts‘euen.
In Part IV., the 4 pieces of Book ii., in the occasion
assigned for the first and last of whig@h Choo agrees,—
the Keung, the Yew peih, the Pwan-shwuy, and the Pei
kung. .
(Xviii.] Of the time of king Ting iv’ we «BC. 605—3585,
Two pieces in Part L, viz.— ’
the Choo lin, admitted by Choo, and the Zsih v? in
Book xii, *


The editors of the imperial edition of the present dynasty say:

“The dates of the composition of the odes it was found difficult to
examine thoroughly after the fires of Ts‘in, and so we find them variously
assigned by the writers.of the Han, Tang, and other dynasties,

“But the old Preface made its appearance along with the text of the
Poems, and Maou, Ch‘ing, and K‘ung Ying-tah maintained and defended
the dates assigned in it, to which there belongs what authority may be
derived from its antiquity, —

“When Choo He took the She in hand, the text of the poems was
considered by him to afford the only evidence of their occasion and date,
and where there was nothing decisive in it, and no evidence afforded by
other classical Books, he peonounced these points uncertain ;—thus de-
ciding according to the exercise of his own reason on the several pieces.

“ Gow-yang Sew followed the introductory notices of Ch‘ing, but dis-
puted and reasoned on the subject at the same time. Heu K‘éen, and-
Léw Kin foltowed the authority of Choo, now and then slightly differing
from him. :

“Tn the Ming dynasty appeared the ‘Old meanings of the text of the
She,’ chronologically arranged by Ho K‘eae, adducing abundance of
testimonies, but with many erroneous views. We have in this werk
collected the ofd assignments of the Preface, supported by Maou, Ch‘ing,
and K‘ung, and given due place to the decisions of Choo. The opinions
of others we have preserved, bué have not entered on any discussion of
them,”


THE RHYME AND METRE OF THE PIECES., ‘81


CHAP'BER III.


THE RHYME AND METRE OF THE PYECES; THETR POET-
ICAL VALUE; PRINCIPLE ON WHICH THE PRESENT
VERSION OF THEM HAS BEEN MADE; CERTAIN
PECULIARITIES IN THEIR STRUCTURE.


1. I nave written at length on the Prosody of the
Book of Poetry in my larger work. In this volume, in-
tended for English readers, it is not necessary to say
much about it.

Rhyme has always been a characteristic of verse in
China; and all the earliest attempts at poetical composi-
tion were of the, same form,—in lines con- 4fetre and
sisting of four words, forming, from the Payme.
nature of the language, four syllables. Wherever there
is any marked deviation from this type, the genuineness
of the piece as a relic of antiquity becomes lable to sus-
picion.

This line of four words is the normal measure of the
She, but it is not invariably adhered to.. We have in one
ode, according to the judgment of many native scholars,
a line of only one word in each of its stanaas. Lines of
two, of three, of five, of six, of seven, and even of eight
characters, occasionally occur. When the poet once de-
parts from the normal law of the metre, he often con-
tinues his innovation for two or three more lines, and
then relapses into the usual form., He is evidently
aware of his deviation from that, and the stahzas where it
takes place are m general found to be symmetrically
constructed and balanced.

2. The pieces, as printed, appear divided into stanzas ;
—and properly so, though the Han scholars say that
such division was first made by Maou Chang.
He did ‘his work well, guided mainly by the
rhyme, and by the character of the piece as narrative,
allusive, or metaph®rical.

In most pieces the stanzas. are 0§ uniform length, and


Stanzas,


32 THE RHYME AND METRE OF THE PIECES.


frequently quatrains ; but the authors allowed themselves
as much liberty in the length of the stanza as in that of
the line. Stanzas of two lings are very rare; and those
of three lines, or triplets, (= only less so. One ode
occurs, made up of stanzas of two lines, and in another
three such stanzas follow three quatrains. We have three
. odes made up of triplets, and this stanza is occasionally
introduced among others of greater Mngth. Stanzas of
five lines occur, but not often. They sometimes form the
structure of whole pieces, and are sometimes intermixed
with others. Stanzas of six lines, of eight, of ten, and of
twelve are frequently met with. Some are found extend-
ing to fourteen lines, and even to sixteen and seventeen.
Those of seven lines, of nine, and of eleven, are all un-
usual. Generally speaking, stanzas with an even num-
ber of lines greatly outnumber those with an odd...

In the present metrical version, wherever I could con-
veniently attain to it, I have made the stanzas of the
same length as in the original Chinese. Some expansion,
however, has frequeatly seemed to be necessary ; con-
dénsation has seldom been possible.

3. The manner in which the rhymes are disposed has

Disposition of Teceived much attention from the Chinese
the Rhymes. critics; and the following cases, among
others, have been pointed out :—

{i.} Where lines rhyme in succession ; two, three, four
lines, &c., occasionally up to twelve.

{ii.] Where the rhyming lines are interrupted by one or
more lines intervening, which do not rhyme with them;
those intervening lines rhyming differently together, or
not rhyming at all.

iil.| Where the stanza contains only one rhyme.

iv. | Where the stanza contains two or more rhymes.

v.| Where the different rhymes alternate, with more
or less of regularity. Some pieces are made up of
quatrains proper, the first and third lines rhyming to-
gether, and the second and fourth. In stanzas of five
lines, ‘the first and third will sometimes rhyme, and_ then
the second, fourth, and fifth. In others of six lines, the
first and third will rhyme, and thenythe second, fourth,
fifth, and sixth. The regularities, or rather irregularities,
of this kind are very fumerous.


THE RHYME AND METRE OF THE PIECES. 33


[vi.] Where one ‘or more lines at the commencement
of the different stanzas of a piece, or their concluding
lines, rhyme with one anqther. In all the instances
adduced to illustrate this tase, however, we have not
merely a concord of the rhymes, but the repetition of the
whole lines.

[vii.] What we call medial rhymes occur occasionally ;
and in a few inst&nces the members of different lites
rhyme in this way at the cesural pause.

Without specifying other characteristics, IT may say
that there are throughout the pieces multitudes of lines,
sometimes one, and sometimes more, which do not rhyme
with any others in the same stanza. The pieces of Part
IV. have several peculiarities. Many of them do not
admit of a stanzaic arrangement; and there are at least
eight in which there is no attempt at rhyme. We may
consider such disregard of rhyme as an approach fo the
structure of blank verse; but while every other irregu-
larity in the ancient odes has found imitator s, I am not
aware that this has received any fav8ur. So far from the
Chinese having any contempt for rhyming, such as
Milton expressed when he called it “a jingling sound of
like endings,” “a troublesome bondage,” they consider
it essential to poetry.

In the present version, as in the prose one of my larger
work, I have made no attempt to adhere to the length of
the original lines, or to adopt their rhymes. The dif.
ferent attributes of the Chinese and English languages
made it impossible to do so. In passing from this sub-
ject, I will venture to say that the nature of Chinese is
at the best but ill adapted for the purpose of agreeable
rhyme. It does not admit the variety that is found in an
alphabetical language, and which is to us one of the

_charms of: poetical composition. The single rhyming
endings in English are about 360; and if we add to them
the double and triple rhymes, where the accent falls on
the penultimate syllables, they cannot come short of 400.
In Chinese, on the other hand, the rhyming endings are
very few. Those of the Book of Poetry are under twenty.
There is, indeed, in Chinese a greater number of words
or characters to any “one ending than in other languages,
and scholars have produced compditions in which “the

Vou. TL, 3


8th THEIR POETICAL VALUE.


same ending occurs a hundred times:and more. Mullti-
tudes of the rhymes, however, are to a foreign ear
merely assonancés, and the gifect is that of a prolonged
monotony. ‘

4. In the Treatise on the antiquity of the Chinese, with
which the “ Memoires concernant les Chinois’? commence,
it is said, “The poetry of the She King is so beautiful

The yoeticat 22d harmonious, the lovey and sublime tone
value of ite of antiquity rules in it so continually, its pic-

oetry. <5 .

tures of manners are so naive and minute,

that all these characteristics give sufficient attestation of
its authenticity. The less can this be held in doubt that
in the foltowmg ages we find nothing, I will not say
equal to these ancient odes, but nothing worthy to be
compared with them. We are not sufficient connoisseurs
to pronounce between the She King on the one side and
Pindar and Homer on the other; but we are not afraid to
say that it yields only to the Psalms of David in speaking
of the Divinity, of Providence, of virtue, &c., with a
magnificence of expressions and an elevation of ideas
which make the passions cold with terror, ravish the
spirit, and draw the soul from the sphere of the senses.”

Such language is extravagant, and the comparison of
the compositions in the “ Book of Poetry ” to the Psalms
of David is peculiarly unfortunate. They are not reli-
gious poems. ‘The ‘“ Praise Sengs,’”’ which constitute a
small part of them, and may be described as “‘ religious,”
have for their principal themes the heroic founders of the
House of Chow and the worship which was paid to them.
In these, and in many of the other pieces, God often ap-
pears as the righteous and sovereign Lord of Providence ;
but the writers never make Him their theme for what He:
is in Himself, and do not rise to the conception of Him
as “over all,” China and other nations, ‘blessed for
ever.”

But it woud be wrong to deny to the Chinese odes
a very considerable amount of poetical merit. It is true
that many of them, as Sir John Davis has said in his
“Treatise on the Poetry of the Chinese,”! do not rise above


4 .
' The Poetry of the Chinese, p, 35 (Londow 1870). This interesting
Treatise was first published nearly fifty years ago. It had the merit of
introducing the subject of @hinese poetry to the English public ; and may


.


PRINCIPLE ON WHICH PRESENT VERSION IS MADE. 395
, e

the most primitive simplicity, and that the principal
interest which the collection possesses arises from its
pictures of manners ; but thgre are not a few pieces which
may be read with pleasure from the pathos of their de-
scriptions, their expressions of natural fecling, and the
boldness and frequency of their figures.

I expressed myself to the above effect in writing about
the poetical value® of the She in 1871, and I have now
to re-affirm the judgment with a greater emphasis, and a *
wider application to the pieces. The critical labour neces-
sary to secure accuracy of translation in my larger work
kept me from being sufficiently alive to their beauty. The

‘renewed study which every poem has received, and the
endeavour to give an adequate rendering of it in English
verse, have resulted in the perception of many beauties
which I did not previously appreciate. I shall be dis-'
appointed if my readers do not agree with me in think-
ing that in China’s ancient Odes, Ballads, Songs, and
Bardic Effusions there is much poetry of a high order.

5. Sir John Davis contends, in t®e Treatise xeferred to
above, that “ verse must be the shape into which Chinese,
as well as other poetry, must be converted, in order to do
it mere justice,” adding that he himself, while giving
now a prose translation, now a faithful metrical version,

_ and now an avowed paraphrase, has deferred more than
his judgment and inclinations approved to the prejudices
of those who are partial to the literal side of the ques-
tion. When I had resolved to publish the present
volume, I had no hesitation in deciding that Principte on
the rendering of every piece should be a Mat persion nes
faithful metrical version of the original. J been made
thought at first of re-publishing, side by side with each
piece, the prose translation in my larger work ; but this
plan was abandoned, as it would have made the book
larger than was desirable, and would only have distracted
the attention of the majority of the readers for whom it
was intended. They may rest assured, however, that
they have here no paraphrase, but the poems of the


well stand side by side wjth the author’s two volumes on “ The Chinese,”
published in the “ Library of Entertaining Knowledge” in 1836. Yuller
descriptions of China and the Chinese have sgnce appeared, but none with
‘the same literary finish which we find in these volumes, :


86 PRINCIPLE ON WHICH PRESENT VERSION IS MADE.
®

Chinese writers presented to them faithfully, with as
little introduction of ideas of my own or of my helpers as
it was possible to attain tq Rhyme is often a hard
master, and as it was our endeavour to give the pieces
in as good English verse as the nature of the case would
permit, it was necessary to employ occasionally epithets
which are not found in the Chinese text, but this has
been done sparingly. While much amplification would
have been a misrepresentation of the original, a bad
translation would often have been mere doggerel. And
not only so; it would also have been unfaithful. There
is more in the words of the text than meets the ear;
it might be more correct to say, from the peculiar nature’
of the Chinese characters, than meets the eye. Apart
even from the satirical pieces, and the allusive pieces on
which I shall presently touch, in translating Chinese
poetry one has constantly to regard what was in the
mind of the writer. It was my object to bring this out
in the notes in my larger work ; and what was brought
out there-had to be“transferred to the stanzas of the
present version. But this also has been done only so
far as seemed indispensable.

I had some difficulty in getting my nephews, of whose
valuable assistance I have spoken in the Preface, to
enter fully into my views of what their versions should
be; and occasionally I had to re-cast their versions, the
result being pieces inferior in poetical merit to what
they had produced, but which I thought better repre-
sented the original Chinese. A correspondent in Hong-
Kong, having himself no little of the poetical faculty,
and condemning the adherence to the letter of the text
even to the extent for which I contend, referred to the
words of Horace in his De Arte Poetica,


Et que
Desperat tractata nitescere posse, relinguit.


Horace, however, is giving his view of the course
which an original poet should pursue, and I agree in the
counsel which he suggests. But I was intending to
come before the public not as an original poet, but as a
trenslator in English verse of what Chinese poets wrote
between two and thfee thousand years ago. If they


PECULIARITIES IN THEIR STRUCTURE. | 37
dealt with themes which they could not make to shine,
it was still my duty to show how they had treated them.
Nor did it appear to me tat there was anything in the
She, which might make me take warning from that other
advice of Horace, touching me more nearly,


Nee desilies imitator in arctum,
Unde pedem proferre pudor vetet, aut operis lex,


There are, indeed, pieces in it which no treatment
could make to “shine,” and others which might. be
described as narrow and cramping, entrance into which
is difficult and graceful exit from them all but impos-
sible. My friend and others, seeing this, advised that
I should publish a selection of the pieces, and not the
whole of them. But this was forbidden by “the law
of the work,” as a reproduction in English verse of the
translation of the Book of Poetry. And as I pursued
my task, even the poorer odes became clothed with an
attractiveness which I did not previously perceive. I
would not now say,as I did in 187f, that “ the collection
as a whole is not worth the trouble of versifying.”” The
versification, no doubt, might have been executed better
than I and my coadjutors have succeeded in doing ; but
our labours, such as they are, will, I hope, satisfy my
readers, that these ancient Chinese poems have, as a
whole, not a little poetical merit. At any rate they have
those poems, and not others made by paraphrase from
‘them. If the dress be English, the voice is always
Chinese ; while much may be learned from them of the
mind and manners of feudal China.

6. Nothing could be more simple than the structure of
the bulk of the odes in the first Part of the She. -The
different stanzas of a piece often convey substantially the

. same idea, which is repeated again and again 4g, iaritios
with little change in the language. ‘The in the structure
writer wishes to prolong his ditty, and he “°?**

effects his purpose by the substitution of a fresh rhyme,
the preceding stanza re-appearing with no other alter-
ation but what is rendered necessary by the new term.
There is an amusigg instance in the third ode of Book
xiv., where the poet is compelled by the necessities of
his rhyme to say that the young of the turtle-dove are


38 PECULIARITIES IN THEIR STRUCTURE.


seven in number. Some of the pieces in the other Parts
are marked by the same characteristic. In those Parts,
however, there are many othd&s which afford the best ex-
amples of Chinese poetry. The first piece of Part III.
is remarkable as being constructed, in Chinese, in the
same way as the 121st and other step Psalms, as they
have been called, the concluding line af one stanza form-
ing the commencing one of the next. In other pieces
there is an approximation to the same form.

Throughout the book the pieces are distinguished
among themselves as narrative, metaphorical, or allusive.

In a narrative piece the poet says what he has to say
right out, writing it down in a simple, straightforward
manner, without any hidden meaning reserved in his
mind. It is not to be supposed, however, because such
pieces are distinguished from the other two classes, that
the author does not, at his pleasure, use the metaphor
and other figures of speech in their composition. He uses
them as freely as des@iptive poets in any other language.

In a metaphorical piece the poet has under his Jan-
guage a, meaning different from what it expresses,—a
meaning which there should be nothing in the language
to indicate. Such a piece may be compared to the
Zfisopic fable; but while it is the object of the fable
to inculcate the virtues of morality and prudence, an
historical interpretation has to be sought for the meta-
phorical pieces of the She. Often, moreover,the moral
of the fable is subjoined to it, which never is done in the
case of these pieces. The best specimen of such a com-
position is the second. ode of Book xv., Part I., where
‘we hear. only the plaint of a bird, whose young, reared
by her with toil, have been destroyed by an owl, and who
is afraid that her nest will also be destroyed. We know,
however, from the Book of History, that the writer, the
duke of Chow, intended himself by the bird, and that he —
wished in the piece to vindicate the stérn course which
he had adopted to put down the rebellion of some of
his brothers.

The allusive pieces are more numerous than the me-
taphorical. They often -commence® with a couple of
lines which are repegted without change, or with slight
rhythmical changes, in all the stanzas. In other pieces


2


PECULIARITIES IN THEIR STRUCTURE. 39


each stanza has allusive lines peculiar to itself. These are
for the most part descriptive of some objector circumstance
in the animal or vegetable wrld, and after them the poet
proceeds to his proper subject. Generally, the allusive
lines convey a meaning harmonizing with the lines which
follow, as in I. i. IV., where an English poet would begin
the verses with Igke or As. They are in reality meta-
phorical, but the difference between an allusive and a
metaphorical piece is this,—that m the former the poet
proceeds to state the theme which he is occupied with,
while no such intimation is given in the latter. Some-
times, however, it is difficult to discover the metaphorical
element in the allusive lines, and we can only deal with
them as a sort of refrain, strangely placed at the begin-
ning of the verses. Chinesecritics do not scruple to say that
there are many cases in which it is impossible to find any
meaning in the allusive lines akin to what is subsequently
said. I cannot persuade myself, however, that the poets
ever wrote in such a random stylg; and the fresh and


careful study of each piece, required in preparing the ©


present volume, enabled me to see a good and suitable
meaning in many lines, of whose force I had previously
enjoyed but a dim and vague perception, and even in some
lines where the meaning had eluded all the critics. My
rule has been to bring out in the English verse the con-
nexion between the allusive lines and those that follow;
and this is the principal reason why my stanzas are
freqhently longer than those of the Chinese text. Occa-
sionally, where the connexion was sufficiently evident, I
have made no addition to show it. More rarely, I have
been obliged to leave the connexion in obscurity, as being
myself unable to perceive it.

In leaving this subject, it is only necessary to say
further that the allusive, the metaphorical, and the narra-
tive elements sometimes all occur in the same piece.

Chinese critics make a further distinction of the pieces,
especially in the first three Parts, into correct and changed,
or pieces of an age of good government, and pieces of a
degenerate age. Such a distinction was made at a very
early time; but it ms of little importance. Many pieces
ranked in the second and inferior cles are in their spirit
and style equal, and more than equal, to any in the other.


THE CHINA OF TRE BOOK OF POETRY. 41


CHAPTER IV.


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY, CONSIDERED IN
RELATION TO THE EXTENT OF ITS TERRITORY, AND
ITS POLITICAL STATE; ITS RELIGION; AND
SOCIAL CONDITION.


1. A crance at the map prefixed to this chapter will
give the reader an idea of the extent of the kingdom of
Chow,—of China as it was during the period to which
the Book of Poetry belongs. The China of ay, seritory
‘the present day, what we call China proper, of the kingdom
embracing the eighteen provinces, may be “°°”
described in general terms as lying between the 20th and
40th degrees of north latitude, and the 100th and 1218t
degrees of east longitude, and containing an area of about
1,300,000 square miles. The Chin% of the Chow dynasty
lay between the 33rd and 38th parallels of latitude, and
the 106th and 119th of longitude. The degrees of longi-
tude included in it were thus about two-thirds of the
present; and of the 20 degrees of latitude the territory
of Chow embraced no more than five. It extended nearly
to the limit of the present boundaries on the north and
west, because it was from the north, along the course of
the Yellow river, that the first Chinese settlers had come
into the country, and it was again from the west of the
Yellow river that the chiefs of the Chow family and their’
followers pushed their way to the east, and took posses-
sion of the tracts on both sides of that river, which had
been occupied, nearly to the sea, by the dynasties of Héa
and Shang. The position of the present departmental
city of Pin-chow, in which neighbourhood we find duke Léw
with his people emerging into notice, in the beginning of
the 18th century before our era, is given as in lat. 35°
4’, and long. 105° 46’.

The She says nothing of the division of the country
under the Chow dynasty into the nine Chow or provinces,
of which we read so much in the third Part of the Shoo,
in connection with the labours of Yu. Four times in the


42 THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


Books of Chow in the She that famous personage is men-
tioned with honour,! but the sphere in which his action is
referred to does not extendgbeyond the country in the
neighbourhood of the Ho before it turns to flow to the
east, and there is reason to believe that he did here ac-
complish a most meritorious work. ‘‘l'wice he is men-
tioned in the sacrificial odes of Shagg, and there the
predicates of him are on a larger scale, but without dis-
tinct specification ; but Tang, the founder of the dynasty,
is represented as receiving from God the “ nine regions,”?
and appointed to be a model to the “nine circles ’* of
the land. These nine regions and nine circles were
probably the nine Chow of the Shoo; and though no
similar language is found in the She respecting the first
kings of Chow, their dominion, according to the Official
book of the dynasty,‘ was divided into nine provinces,
seven of which bear the same names as those in the Shoo.
We have no Seu-chow, which extended along the sea on
the east from T's‘ing-chow to the Kéang river, and Chinese
scholars tell us, conti€ry to the evidence of the She and
of the Tso-chuen, that it was absorbed in the T's‘ing pro-
vance of Chow. In the same way they say that Yu’s
Léang-chow on the west, extending to his Yung-chow,
was absorbed in Chow’s Yung. The number of nine
provinces was kept up by dividing Yu’s K‘e-chow in the
north into three ;—K‘e to the east, Ping in the west, and
Yéw in the north and centre. The disappearance of Seu
and Léang sufficiently shows that the kings of Chow had
no real sway over the country embraced in them; and
though the names of Yang and King, extending south
from the Kéang, were retained, it was merely a retention
of the names, as indeed the dominion of China south of
the Kéang in earlier times had never been anything but
nominal. The last ode of the She, which is also the last
of ‘the Sacrificial odes of the Shang dynasty, makes men-
tion of the subjugation of the tribes of King, or King-.
ts‘oo, by king Woo-ting (B.c. 1823—12638); but, as I
have shown on that ode, its genuineness is open to sus-


1 See HL vi, VI. 1: ILL & X. 8; iii, Viel: EV. ii, IV. 1..
2 IV, iii TV. b; V. 3. 3 ¥V. iii, IEL 1.7 and lV. 3,
@ Ch. XXXL


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. : 43


picion. The 9th ode of Book iii., Part HI., relates, in a
manner full of military ardour, an expedition condueted
by king Seuen in person to reduce the States of the south
to order ; but it was all confined to the region of Seu, and’
in that to operations against the barbarous hordes north.
of the Hwae. The 8th ode of the same Book gives an
account of an expgdition, sent by the same king Seuen
under an earl of Shaou, to start from the point where the
Kéang and Han unite, to act against the tribes south of
the Hwae, between it and the Kéang, and to open up the
country and establish States in it after the model of the
king’s own State. All this was done “as far as the
southern Sea,” which did not extend therefore beyond
the mouth of the Kéang. Ode 5th, still of the same
Book, describes the appointment of an uncle of king
Seuen to be marquis of Shin, and the measures taken to
establish him there, with his chief town in what is now -
the department of Nan-yang, Ho-nan, as a bulwark
against the encroachments of the wild tribes of the south.
Now Seuen was a sovereign of extraéordinary vigour and
merit, and is celebrated as having restored the kmgdom
to its widest limits under Woo and Ch‘ing; and after his
death the process of decay went on more rapidly and
disastrously even than it had done during several reigns
that preceded his. During the period of the Ch‘un Ts‘éw,
the princes of Ts‘oo, Woo, and Yueh, to whom belonged
Yu’s provinces of Yang, King, and Léang, all claimed
the title of king, and aimed at the sovereignty of the
States of the north,—to wrest the sceptre from the kings
of Chow. The China ‘of Chaw did not extend beyond
the limits which I have assigned it, and which are indi- |
cated by the imperfect oval marked on the map, hardly
reaching half way from the Yellow river to what is now
called the Yang-tsze Kéang. The country held by the
kings themselves, often styled the royal State, lay along the
Wei and the Ho for about five degrees of longitude, but
it was not of so great extent from north to south.. It was,
moreover, bemg continually encroached upon by the
growing States of Ts‘oo on the south, Ts‘in on the west,
and Tsin on the nogth, till it was finally extinguished by
Ts‘in, which subdued also all the feudal States, changed
the feudal kingdom into a despotic’empire, and extended


Ad, THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


its boundaries to the south far beyond those of any
former period. _

2. In the prolegomena togthe Shoo I have mentioned
the extravagant statements of Chinese writers, that at
a great durbar held by Yu the feudal princes amounted
to 10,000 ; that, when the Shang dynasty superseded the
house of Yu, the princes were reduced to about 3000;
and that, when Shang was superseded in its turn by
Chow, they were only 1773. The absurdity of the
Jowest of these numbers cannot be exposed better than
by the fact that the districts into which the empire of
the present day, in all its eighteen provinces, is divided
are not quite 1300. But in the Book of Poetry, as has
been pointed out already, we have odes of only about a
dezen States; and all the States or territorial divisions,
mentioned in the Ch‘un T's‘éw and Tso-chuen, including
the outlying regions of Ts‘oo, Woo, and Yueh,. with
appanages in the royal domain, attached territories in
the larger States, and the barbarous tribes on the east,
west, north, and soffth, are only 198. In the “ Anna-
listic Tables of the successive dynasties,” published in
1803, the occurrences in the kingdom of Chow, from its

. commencement in B.c. 1121 down to 403, are arranged
under thirteen States, and from 402 down to its extinc-
tion in B.c. 225, under seven States. ‘

The principal States which come before as in the She
States mention- are T's‘in, lying west from the royal domain,
ed in the She considerable part of which was granted to
it in Bc. 759; Tsin, having the Ho on the west, and

‘lying to the north of the royal domain ; then to the east,
Wei,'on the north of the Ho, and Ch‘ing on the south
of it, with Hen and Ch‘in extending seuth from Ch‘ing.
East from Ch‘ing, and south of the Ho, was Sung, a
dukedom held by descendants of the royal family of the
Shang dynasty. North from Sung was the marquisate
of Ts‘aou; and north from it again was Loo, held by
the descendants of Tan, the famous duke of Chow, to
whose political wisdom, as much as to the warlike eniter-
prise of his brother king Woo, was due the establishment
of the dynasty. Conterminous with the northern border
of Loo, and extending te the waters of what is now
called the gulf of Pilfchih-le, was the powerful State of


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 45


Ts‘e. Yen, mentioned in IIT. iii. VII. 6, lay north and
east from Ts‘e. The subject of that ode is a a i
Han, who appears to have played a more noticeable part
in the time of king Seuen, than any of his family who
went before or came after him did. His principality was
on the west of the Ho, covering the present department
of T‘ung-chow, Shen-se, and perhaps some adjacent
territory. The odé commences with a reference to the
labours of Yu which made the country capable of cultiva-
tion, but much of it must still have been marsh and
forest in the time of king Seuen, for mention is made of
its large streams and meres, and of the multitudes of its
deer, wild-cats, bears, and tigers.

The princes of these States, distinguished among them-
selves by the titles of Kung, How, Pih, Tsze, and Nan,
which may most conveniently be expressed by duke,
marquis, earl, count or viscount, and baron, were mostly
Kes, offshoots from the royal stem of Chow. So # was
with those of Loo, Fs‘aou, Wei, Ch‘ing, Tin, Yen, and
Han. Sung, it has been stated, was*held by descendants
‘of the kings of Shang, who were therefore T'szes. The
first marquis of Ts‘e, was Shang-foo, a chief counsellor
and military leader under kings Win and Woo. He
was a Kéang, and would trace his lineage up to the chief
minister of Yaou, as did also the barons of Heu. The
marquises of Ch‘in were Kweis, claiming to be descended
from the ancient Shun. The earls of T's‘in were Yings,
and boasted for their ancestor Pih-yih, who appears in
the Shoo, II. i. 22, as forester to Shun. The sacrifices
to Yu, and his descendants, the sovereigns of the Héa
dynasty, were maintained by the lords of Ke, who were
i ad Szes, but that State is not mentioned in the

e. :

All these princes held their lands by royal grant at the
commencement of the dynasty, or subsequently. I have
touched slightly on the duties. which they owed to the
king of Chow as their suzerain in the prolegomena to
the Shoo, and I do not enter further on them here. A
more appropriate place for exhibiting them, and the re-
lations which the $tates maintained with one another,
will be in the prolegomena to the Chun Ts‘éw and the
Tso-chuen. *


46 THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


8. The Book of Poetry abundantly confirms the con-
clusion. drawn from the Shoo-king that the ancient
Chinese had some consideragle knowledge of God. The
names given to Him are ‘T& which we commonly trans-

late emperor or ruler, and Shang Te, the

Supreme Ruler. My own opinion, as I have
expressed and endeavoured to vindicate it in various pub-
lications on the term to be employefl in translating in
Chinese the Hebrew Elohim and Greek Theos, is that Te
corresponds exactly to them, and should be rendered in
English by God. He is also called in the She ‘the
great and sovereign God,’” and “the bright and’ glorious
God ;”? but, as in the Shoo, the personal appellation is
interchanged with Téen, Heaven ; Shang T*éen, Supreme
Heaven ; Haou T'éen, Great Heaven ; Hwang Téen, Great
or August Heaven ; and Min T*éen, Compassionate Heaven.
The two styles are sometimes combined, as in IIT. iii.
IV,, where we have the forms of Shang Te, Haow Téen,
and Haou T*éen Shang Te, which last seems to me to
mean—God dwelling%in the great heaven. °

God appears especially as the ruler of men and this
lower world.? He appomted grain for the nourishment
of allt He watches especialty over the conduet of kings,
whose most honourable designation is that of “Son of
Heaven.’”?> While they reverence Him, and administer
their high duties in His fear, and with reference to His
will, taking His ways as their pattern, He maintains them,
smells the sweet savour of their offerings, and blesses them '
and their people with abundance and general prosperity.®
When they become impious and negligent of their duties,
He punishes them, takes from them the throne, and
appoints others in their place.’ His appointments come
from His foré-knowledge arid fore-ordination.”

Sometimes he appears to array Himself in terrors, and
the course of His providence is altered? The evil in the
State is ascribed to Him. Heaven is called unpitying.®
But this is His strange work; in judgment; aud to call


Religious views,


1 IV. ii. IV. 3. 2 IV. [ii] I.
3 Bg. WI. i. VIL 1; Hi. 1.1. IV. i fi] X
> Bg, U. i. VII. 1, 3; IV. i®[i.] VIIL
ay $ ag, U. i. YL; WL i 1; VIL 7; IV. ii, IV.
HT j, vil. 1, 3. JIL, ii. X.; iii, 1.1; LL. iv. VIL; and-often.


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 47


men to repentance.1 He hates no one; and it is not He.
who really causes the evil time :—that is a consequence of
forsaking the old and vighy ways of government.” In
giving birth to the multitudts of the people, He gives to
them a good nature, but few are able.to keep it, and hold
out good to the end. In one ode, II. vii. X., a fickle
and oppressive king is called Shang Te in bitter irony.
While the ancidht Chinese thus believed in God, and
thus conceived of Him, they believed in other Spirits
under Him, some presiding over hills and rivers, and
others dwelling in the heavenly bodies. In fact there
was no object to which a tutelary Spirit might not at
times be ascribed, and no place where the approaches of
spiritual Beings might not be expected, and ought not to
be provided for by the careful keeping of the heart and
ordering of the conduct. In the legend of How-tseih
(III. ii. L.), we have a strange story of his mother’s ‘preg-
nancy being caused by her treading on a toe-print made
by God. In III. iii. V. a Spirit is said to have been-sent
down from the great mountains, an@ to have given birth
to the princes of Foo and Shin. In IV. i. [i.] VIII.
king Woo is celebrated as having attracted and given re-
pose to all spiritual Beings, even to the Spirits of the Ho
and the highest mountains. In II. v. IX., the writer,
when deploring the sufferings caused to the States of the
east by misgovernment and oppression, suddenly raises a
complaint of the host of heaven ;—the Milky way, the
Weaving sisters (three stars in Lyra), the Draught oxen
(some stars in Aquila), Lucifer, Hesperus, the Hyades,
the Sieve (part of Sagittarius), and the Ladle (also in
Sagittarius) :—all idly occupying their places, and giving
no help to the afflicted country. Inno other ode do we
have a similar exhibition of Sabian views. Mention is
made in ITT. iti. IV. 5 of the demon of drought; and we
find sacrifices offered to the Spirits of the ground and of
the four quarters of the sky,° to the Father of hus-
bandry,® the Father of war,’ and the Spirit of the path.®
These last three, however, were probably the Spirits of


1 TIL ii. X.8; andoften. — 2 TL. iv, VIET. 4 ; TIT. iii, T. 5, X. 5.
* TIL. iii. 101. 41K. iii, 1. 7. :
3 II, vi. VIL 2; et al. 6 Tf. vi, VIEL 2; et al.


7 TIL i. VIL 8, 8 PL. ii. 1.7, et al.


48 THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


departedmen. A belief in the continued existence of the
dead in a spirit-state, and in the duty of their descendants
to maintain by religious worghip a connection with them,
have been characteristics of the Chinese people from their
first appearance in history. The first and third Books of
the last Part of the She profess to consist of sacrificial
odes used in the temple services of the kings of Chow and
Shang. Some of them are songs of fraise and thanks-
giving; some are songs of supplication; and others relate
to the circumstances of the service, describing the occasion
of it, or the parties present and engaging in it. The
ancestors worshipped are invited to come and accept the
homage and offerings presented; and in one (IV. i. [i.]
VIL) it is said that “king Win, the Blesser,” has
descended, and accepted the offerings.

The first stanza of IIT. i. I. describes king Wan after
his death as being “on high, bright in heaven, ascending
and descending on the left and the right of God,” and
the 9th ode of the same Book affirms that’ Win, his father,
and grandfather, w&e associated in heaven. The early
Chinese, as I have just said, did not suppose that man
ceased all to be, when his mortal life terminated. We
know, indeed, from the Tso-chuen, that scepticism on this
pee had begun to spread among the higher classes

efore the time of Confucius, and we know that the sage
himself would neither affirm nor deny it; but that their
dead lived on in another state was certainly the belief of
the early ages with which we have now to do, as it is still
the belief of the great majority of the Chinese people.
But the She is as silent as the Shoo-king as to any puni-
tive retribution hereafter. There are rewards and dignity
for the good after death, but nothing is said of any
punishment for the bad. In one ode, indeed (II. v. VI.
6), a vague feeling betrays itself in the writer, that after
every other method to deal with proud slanderers had
failed, Heaven might execute justice upon them ;—but it
may be that he had only their temporal punishment in
view. The system of ancestral worship prevented the
development of a different view on this subject. The
tyrant-oppressor took his place in the temple, there to be
feasted, and worshipped, and prayed to, in his proper order,
as much as the great@st benefactor of his people. I have


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 49


pointed out, on IIT. iii. IV. 5, how king Seuen, in his
distress in consequence of the long-continued drought,
prays to his parents, though pis father king Le had been
notoriously wicked and wort&less; and how endeavours
have been made to explain away the simple text, from a
wish, probably, to escape from the honour which it would
seem to give to one so undeserving of it.

4, The odes do n&t speak of the worship which was paid

to God, unless it be incidentally. There were two grand
occasions on which it was rendered by the  Retigiouscere-
sovereign,—the summer and winter solstices. ™onies.
The winter sacrifice is often described as offered to Heaven,
and the summer one to earth ; but we have the testimony
of Confucius, in the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. XIX., that
the object of them both was to serve Shang Te. Of the
ceremonies used on those occasions I do not here speak,
as there is nothing said about them in the She. Whether
besides these two there were other sacrifices to God, at
stated periods in the course of the year, is a point on which
the opinions of the Chinese scholars themselves are very
much divided. I think that there were, and that we have
some intimationof two ofthem. IV.i. [i.] X. is addressed
to How-tseih, as having proved himself the correlate to
Heaven, in teaching men to cultivate the grain which God
appointed for the nourishment of all. This was appro-
priate to a sacrifice in spring, which was offered to God,
to seek His blessing on the agricultural labours of the
year, How-tseih, as the ancestor of the House of Chow,
and the great improver of agriculture, being associated
‘with Him in it. IV. i. [i.] VEL, again, was appropriate
to a sacrifice to God in autumn, in the Hall of Light, at
a great audience to the feudal princes, when king Win
was associated with Him, as being the founder of the
dynasty of Chow.

Of the ceremonies at the sacrifices in the royal temple
of ancestors, in the first months of the four seasons of
the year, we have much information in several odes.
They were preceded by fasting and various purifications
on the part of the king and the parties who were to
assist in the performance of them.’ There was a great
concourse of the feudal princes,? and much importance

1 TIL i L7. 2 IV. i FL, IV; et al.
VOL, Il, 4


50 THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


was attached to the presence among them of the repre-
sentatives of the former dynasties ;1 but the duties of
the occasion devolved mainjy on the princes of the same
surname as the royal Hduse. Libations of fragrant
spirits were made to attract the Spirits, and their pre-
sence was invoked by a functionary who took his place
inside the principal gate2 The principal victim, a red
bull, was killed by the king himselffusing for the pur-
pose a knife to the handle of which were attached small
belis.2 With this he laid bare the hair, to show that the
animal was of the required colour, inflicted the wound
of death, and cut away the fat, which was burned
along with southernwood, to increase the incense and
fragrance.? Other victims were numerous, and II. vi. V.
describes all engaged in the service as greatly exhausted
with what they had to do, flaying the carcases, boiling
the flesh, roasting it, broiling it, arranging it on trays
and stands, and setting it forth.t Ladies from the harem
are present, presiding and assisting; music peals; the
cup goes round.* “he description is as much that of a
feast as of a sacrifice; and in fact, those great seasonal
oceasions were what we might call grand family reunions,
where the dead an@ the living met, eating and drinking
together, where the living worshipped the dead, and the
dead blessed the living. . ;

This characteristic of these ceremonies appeared most
strikingly in the custom which required that the de-
parted ancestors should be represented by living indi-
viduals of the same surname, chosen according to certain
rules which the odes do not mention. They took for the
time the place of the dead, received the honours which
were due to them, and were supposed to be possessed by
their Spirits. They ate and drank as those whom they
personated would have done; aceepted for them the
homage rendered by their descendants ; communicated
their will to the principal in the sacrifice or feast, and
pronounced on him and his line their benediction, being
assisted in this point by a mediating priest, as we must
call him for want of a better term. On the next day,


LiL 4,5; IV. i [ii] OL °  *trwav.2
2 IL ii, BL 5. “IL vi. V.


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 51


after a summary repetition of the ceremonies of the
sacrifice, these personators. of the dead were specially
feasted, and so, as it is exigessed in IIL i, IV., “their
happiness and dignity were’ made complete.” We have
an allusion to this strange custom in Mencius (VI. Pt i.
V.), showing how a junior member of a family, when
chosen to represent at the sacrifice one of his ancestors,
was for the time ®xalted above his elders, and received
the demonstrations of reverence due to the ancestor.
This custom probably originated undér the Chow dynasty,
—one of the regulations made by the duke of Chow;
and subsequently to it, it fell into disuse.

When the sacrifice to ancestors was finished, the kin
feasted his uncles and younger brothers or cousins, that
is, all the princes and nobles of the same surname with
himself, in another apartment. The musicians who had
discoursed with instrument and voice during the worship
and entertainment of the ancestors, followed the con-
vivial party, “to give their soothing aid at the second
blessing.”+ The viands, which haf been provided, we
have seen, in great abundance, and on which little im-
pression could thus far have been made, were brought in
from the temple, and set forth ane®. The guests ate to
the fulland drank to the full; and at the conclusion they
all bowed their heads, while one of them declared the
satisfaction of the Spirits with the services rendered to
them, and assured the king of their favour to him and
his posterity, so long as they did not neglect those
observances." During the feast the king showed parti-
cular respect to those among his relatives who were aged, ©
filled their cups again and again, and desired that “ their
old age might be blessed, and their bright happiness
ever increased.” ?

The above sketch of the seasonal sacrifices to ancestors
shows that they were mainly designed to maintain the
unity of the family connection, and intimately related to
the duty of filial piety. Yet by means of them the
ancestors of the kings were raised to the position of the
Tutelary Spirits of the dynasty; and the ancestors of
- each family became its Tutelary Spirits. Several of the
pieces in Part IV., it is to be observed, are appropriate


1 IL vi V.6. 2 SI ii, Ht, 4.
4 *


52 THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


to sacrifices offered to some one monarch. They
would be celebrated on particular occasions connected
with his achievements in tke past, or when it was gup-
"posed that his help would Be specially valuable in con-
templated enterprises.

There were also other services performed in the temple
of ancestors which were of less frequent occurrence, and
all known by the name of te. That t&rm was applied in
a restricted sense to the annual sacrifice of the summer
season; but there were also “the fortunate te,’? when
the Spirit-tablet of a’ deceased monarch was solemnly
set up in its proper place in the temple, 25 months after
his death; and “the great te,” called also héah, cele-
brated once in five years, when all the ancestors of the
royal House were sacrificed to, beginning with the
mythical emperor Kuh, to whom their hneage was traced.
There is no description in the She of the ceremonies used
on those occasions.

With regard to all the ceremonies of the ancestral
temple, Confucius fives the following account of them
and the. purposes they were intended to serve in the
Doctrine of the Mean, ch. XIX. 4:—“ By means of them
they distinguished the royal kindred according to their
order of descent. By arranging those present according
to their rank, they distinguished the more noble and the
less. By the apportioning of duties at them, they made
a distinction of talents and worth. In the ceremony of
general pledging, the inferiors presented the cup to their
superiors, and thus something was given to the lowest to
do. At the [concluding] feast, places were given ac-
cording to the hair, and thus was marked the distinction
of .years.”’ .

5. The habits and manners of the ancient Chinese

Manners and generally, as they may be learned from the
Cree Cotte She, will be found set forth in a variety of

y. particulars in an essay by M. Edouard Biot,
whose early death was a great calamity to the cause of
Chinese study. It appeared in the Journal Asiatique
for November and December, 1843. It was not possible
for him in his circumstances, and depending so much as
he did on Lacharme’s translation of the odes, to avoid
falling into some m®&takes. The pioneers in a field of


THE CHINA’ OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 53


literature so extensive as the Chinese could not but fall
into many devious tracks. It is only by degrees that
Sinelogues are attaining t@ the proper accuracy in their
representations of the subjects which they take in hand.
On two or three points I subjoin some additional gbserv-
ations.

i. That filial piety or duty is the first of all virtues is
a well-known principle of Chinese moralists ; and at the
foundation of a well-ordered social State they place the
right regulation of the relation between husband and
wife. Pages might be filled with admirable sentiments
from them on this subject; but nowhere does a funda-
mental vice of the family and social constitution of the
nation appear more strikingly than in the She. In the
earliest pieces of it, as well as in the latest, a ie ace
we have abundant evidence of the low status of woman, and
which was theoretically accorded to woman, P¥8Y
and of the practice of polygamy. Biot has referred to
the evidence furnished by the last five stanzas of IT: iv.
VI. of the different way in which the birth of sons and
that of daughters was received ina family. The family
there, indeed, is the royal family, but the king to whom
the ode is believed to refer was one of excellent
character; and the theory of China is that the lower
classes are always conformed to the example of those
‘above them. The sentiments expressed in that ode are
those of every class of the Chinese, ancient and modern.
While the young princes would be splendidly dressed
and put to sleep on couches, the ground. to sleep on and
coarse wrappers suffice for the princesses. The former
would have sceptres to play with; the latter only tiles.
The former would be-—one of them the future king, the
others the princes of the land; the latter would go
beyond their province if they did wrong or if they did
right, all their work being confined to the kitchen and
the temple, and to causing no sorrow to their parents.
The line which says that it was for daughters neither to
do wrong nor to do good was translated by Dr Morrison
as if it said that “woman was incapable of good or
evil;”? but he subgoins from a commentary the correct
meaning,—that ‘a slavish submigsion is woman’s duty
and her highest praise.” She ought not to originate


5A THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


anything, but to be satisfied with doing in all loyal sub-
jection what is prescribed to her todo. InlLi.la
bride is compared to a dove, Rut the point of comparison
lies in the stupidity of the bird, whose nest consists of a
few sticks brought inartistically together. It is no un-
desirable thing for a wife to be stupid, whereas a wise
woman is more likely to be a eurse ia a family than a
blessing. As it is expressed in III. iii. X. 3,


“ A wise man builds up the wall [of a city],

But a wise woman overthrows it. |

Admirable may be the wise woman,

But she is no better than an owl,

A woman with a long tongue

Is [like] a stepping-stone to disorder.

Disorder does not come down from heaven ;—

It is produced by the woman,

Those from whom come no lessons, no instruction,

Are women and eunuchs.”

e
The marquis D’ Hervey Saint-Denys, in the introduc-

tion to his Poetry of the Tang dynasty, p. 19, gives a
different account of the status of the woman anciently in
China. He says :—


“The wife of the ancient poems is the companion of a spouse who
takes her counsels, and never speaks to her as a master. She chooses
freely the man with whose life she will associate her own, Nothing
shows us as yet polygamy in the Songs of the Kwok Fung, composed be-
tween the 12th and the 8th century before our era,' If tradition will
have it that Yaou gave his two daughters to Shun in choosing him to
succeed to the throne; if the Chow Le mentions a grand number of im-

" perial concubines independently of the empress proper ;—we may believe
that these were only royal exceptions, not in accordance with the popular
manners.”


That there was often a true affection between husband
and wife in China, in the times of the She-king, as there
is at the present day, is:a fact-to be acknowledged and‘
rejoiced in. Notwithstanding the low estimation in which
woman’s intellect and character were held, the mind of
the wife often was and is stronger than her husband’s,
and her virtue greater. Many wives in Chinese history
have entered into the ambition of their husbands, and
spurred them on in the path of noble enterprise; many


e
? Between the 12th century and the 6th.


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY. 55


more have sympathized with them in their trials and
poverty, and helped them to keep their little means to-
gether and to make them morg. [. ii. IIL.; v. VIII-; vi.
JI:, (IL; and V.; vii. VIII. and XVL; vii. I; x. V. and
XI., are among the odes of the She which give pleasant
pictures of witely affection and permanent attachment.
I believe also that gn those early days there was more
freedom of movement allowed to young women than there
is now, as there was more possibility of their availing
themselves of it so many centuries before the practice of
cramping their feet and crippling them had been intro-
duced. Buton' the other hand there are odes where the
wife, displaced from her proper place as the mistress of
the family, deplores her hard lot. There is no evidence
to show that honourable marriages ever took place with-
out the intervention of the go-between, and merely by
the preference and choice of the principal parties con-
cerned; and there can be no doubt that polygamy spre-
vailed from the earliest times, just gs it prevails now,
limited only by the means of the family. So far from
there being no intimations of it in the odes of Part I,
there are many. In ode IV. of Book i., the other ladies
of king Wiin’s harem sing the praises of T’ae-sze, his queen,
the paragon and model to all ages of female excellence,
because of her freedom from jealousy. The subject of
ode V. is similar. In ode X., Book ii., we see the ladies
of some prince’s harem repairing to his apartment, happy
in their lot, and acquiescing in the difference between it
and that of their mistress. Every feudal prince received
his bride and eight other ladies at once,—a yourger sister
of the bride and a cousin, and three ladies from each of
two great Houses of the same surname. The thing is
seen in detail in the narratives of the Fso-chuen. Nothing
could show more the degrading influence of polygamy
than the vaunted freedom from jealousy on the part of
the proper wife, and subordinately in her inferiors.

The consequences of this social State were such as might
be expected. Many of the odes have reference to the
deeds of atrocious licentiousness and horrible bloodshed
to which it gave riee. We wonder that, with such an
element of depravation and disorder working among the
people, the moral condition of the country, bad as it was,


wan


56 _ THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OF POETRY.


was not worse. That China now, with this thing in it,
can be heartily received into the comity of western nations
is a vain imagination. %

ii. The preserving salt of the kingdom was, I believe,
the filial piety, with the strong family affections of the
Chinese race, and their respect for the aged ;—virtues
certainly of eminent worth. All these are illustrated in

The filial piety MODY odes of the She; and yet there is a
and other vir- danger of misjudging from them the actual
tee Gotamaue. CONGition of the country. In this point the
atte somntry marquis D’ Hervey Saint-Denys has again
oe ae fallen into error. Starting from the 4th ode.

of Book ix., Part I., he institutes an eloquent
contrast between ancient Greece and ancient China (Intro-


duction, p. 15) :—


“ The Iliad,” says he, “ is the most ancient poem of the west, the only
one which can be of use to us by way of comparison in judging of the
two civilizations which developed parallelly under conditions so different
at the two extremities ofthe inhabited earth. On oneside are a warlike
life ; sieges without end ; combatants who challenge one another; the
sentiment of military glory which animates in the same degree the poet
and his heroes :—we feel ourselves in the midst of a eamp. On the
other side are regrets for the domestic hearth ; the home-sickness of a
young soldier who ascends a mountain to try and discern at a distance
the house of his father ; a mother whom Sparta would have rejected from
her walls; a brother who counsels the absent one not to make his race
illustrious, bat above all things to return home :—we feel ourselves in
another world, in I know not what atmosphere of quietude and of couutry
fife. The reason is simple. Three or four times conquered by the time
of Homer, Greece became warlike as her invaders, Uncontested mis-
tress of the most magnificent valleys of the globe, China behoved to.
remain pacific as her first colonists had been.”


But there are not a few odes which breathe a warlike
spirit of great ardour, such as IT. iii. III. and [V.: LT. i.
VIL; in, VIET and IX.: IV. ii. WIL; iii, IV. and V.
There is certainly in others an expression of dissatisfaction
with the toils and dangers of war,—complaints especially
of the separation entailed by it on the soldiers from their
families. What the speakers in II. iv. I. deplore most of
all is that their mothers were left alone at home to do alt
the cooking for themselves. It maf be allowed that the
natural tendency of ghe She as a whole is not to excite a
military spirit, but to dispose to habits of peace ; yet as


THE CHINA OF THE BOOK OB POETRY. 57


a matter of fact there has not been less of war in China
than in other lands. During the greater part of the Chow
dynasty a condition of intes@ne strife among the feudal
States was chronic. The State of Ts‘in fought its way to
empire through seas of blood. Probably there is no
country in the world which has drunk in so much blood
from its battles, sieves, and massacres as this.

ii. The 6th ode of Book xi., Part L., relates to a de-
plorable event, the burying of three men, brothers,
esteemed throughout the State of Ts‘in for their admirable
character, in the grave of duke Muh, and along with his
coffin. Altogether, according to the Tso-chuen, 177 in-
dividuals were immolated on that occasion. tmmolating
Following the authority of Sze-ma Ts‘éen, Me,, 2 the
who says that the cruel practice began with princes, or bury-
duke Ch‘ing, Muh’s elder brother and prede- in‘them.
cessor, at whose death 66 persons were buried alive, M.
Biot observes that, this bloody sacrifice had been recently
taken from the Tartars. Yen Ts‘an, of the Sung dynasty,
of whose commentary on the She I have made much use,
says that the State of Ts‘in, though at that time in pos-
session of the old territory of the House of Chow, had
brought with it the manners of the barbarous tribes
among whom its people had long dwelt. But in my mind
there is no doubt that the people of Ts‘in was made up
mainly of those barbarous tribes. This will appear plainly
when the Ch‘un Ts‘éw and Tso-chuen give occasion for us
to review the rise and progress of the three great States of
Ts‘in, T'sin, and Ts‘oo. The practice was probably of old
existence among the Chinese tribe.as well as other neigh-
bouring tribes. A: story of Tsze-k‘in, one of Confucius’
disciples, mentioned in a note on p. 119 of the Analects,
would indicate that it had not fallen into entire disuse,
even in the time of the sage, in the most polished States
of the kingdom. Among the Tartars so called it con-
tinues to the present day. Dr Williams states, on the
authority of De Guignes, that the emperor Shun-che, the
first of the present Manchéw dynasty, ordered thirty
ieee to be immolated at the funeral of his consort, but

‘ang-he, his son, ferbade four persons from sacrificing
themselves at the death of his’ ¢


1 The Middle Kingdom, vol, i., p. 267.


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


PART I,
LESSONS FROM THE STATES.


Boor I. The Odes of Chow and the South.


TITLE OF THE WHOLE WorK. This in Chinese is Sax Kine, “ The
Book' of Poetry,” or simply SHe, “The Poems.” By poetry, according
to Chinese scholays, is denoted the expression, in rhymed: words, of
thought impregnated wit feeling. In this collection there were origin-
ally 311 pieces, but of six of them there are only the titles remaining.
They are generally short; not one of them, indeed, is a long poem.
Father Lacharme, a Roman Catholic missionary who translated them
into Latin about a century and a half ago, calls the Book Liver Car.
minum; and with most English writers the ordinary designation of
them has. been “The Book of Odes.” Ode is a sufficiently correct
designation of mary of the pieces, understanding by that term a short
lyric poem. Some might better be termed songs ; some ballads ; and
others Bardic effusions, All come under the general name of Poems.

TITLE OF THE Part. This in Chinese is Knroh Fung, which I have
translated ‘ Lessons from the States." Sir John Davis translates the
“words by “‘ The manners of the States.”” Similarly the French Sinologues
render them by “Les meeurs des Royaumes.” Choo He, the foremost of
Chinese critics, says:—-“The pieces are called Fung, because they
owe their origin to, and are descriptive of, the influence produced by
superiors ; and the exhibition of this is again sufficient to affect men,
just as things give forth sound when moved by the wind, and their sound
is again sufficient: to move other things.” ‘“ Lessons from the States”
seems therefore to come nearer to the force of the Chinese terms than
“ Manners of ‘the States.”

The States aré these of Chow, Shaou, P‘ei, Yung, and the others, which
give their names to the severai Books. :

TITLE OF THE BooK.-—“The Odes of Chow and the South.” By
Chow is intended the’ Seat of the House or lords of Chow, trom the
time of “ the old duke T‘an-foo ” in B.C, 1325, tg king Wan. The chiefs
of Chow traced their lineage back to K‘e, better known as How-tseih,
Shun’s minister of Agricult@re, more than 2000 years B.c. His descend-
ants had withdrawn among the wild tribes of the west and north ;


Bs 1.1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 59


but one of them, called duke Léw, returned to China in B.c. 1796, and
made a settlement in Pin, the site of which is pointed out in the present
Pin Chow in Shen-se, There the famjly remained till T‘an-foo moved
still farther south in B.c, 1325, and sefiled in K‘e, in the present district
of K‘e-shan, department Fung-tséang. Thence his grandson Wan _
moved south and east again, across the Wei, to Fuug, south-west from
the present provincial city of Se-gan, When Wan took this step, he
separated the original Chow—K‘e-chow—into Chow and Shaou, which
he made the appanages of “his son Tan, and of Shih, one of his principal
supporters. The pieces in this Book are said to have been collected by
Tan in Chow, and the States lying south from it, along the Han and other
rivers,


I.


The Knran-ts‘eu ; mainly allusive. CELEBRATING THE VIRTUE OF
THE BRIDE OF KING WAN, HIS QUEST FOR HER, AND WELCOMING
HER TO HIS PALACE. :


This is the view of Choo He, and is so in accordance with the language
of the stanzas, that it is not worth while to diseuss the view of the
older school,—that the subject of the piece ig Wan’s queen, and that
it celebrates her freedom from jealousy, and her anxiety to fill his haypm
with virtuous ladies! I is, moreover, entirely feem’ tradition, that we
believe the subject to be the famous T‘ae-sse, Wan’s bride and queen.

I have given the Chinese name of the piece,—the Kwan-ts‘eu, two
characters in the first line. The names of most of the other pieces are
formed in the same way, and are not in themselves descriptive of their
subjects, They were attached to them, however, before the time of Con-
fucius, ;


‘1 Hark! from the islet in the stream the voice
Of the fish-hawks that o’er their nest rejoice !
From them our thoughts to that young lady go,
Modest and virtuous, loth herself to show.
Where could be found, to share our prince’s state,
So fair, so virtuous, and so fit a mate ?


2 See how the duckweed’s stalks, or short or long,
Sway left and right, as moves the current strong !
So hard it was for him the maid to find !

By day, by night, our prince with constant mind
Sought for her long, but all his search was vain.
Awake, asleep, he ever felt the pain

Of longing thought, as when on restless bed,
Tossing about, one turns his fevered head.


3 Here long, there short, afloat the guckweed lies ;
But caught at last, we seize the longed-for prize. _


.


60 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


The maiden modest, virtuous, coy, is found ;
Strike every lute, and joyous welcome sound.
Oars now, the duckwe§d from the stream we bear,
And cock to use with other viands rare.

He has the maiden, modest, virtuous, bright ;

Let bells and drums proclaim our great delight.


IL.


The Koh t‘an; narrative, CELEBRATING THE INDUSTRY AND DUTI-


FULNESS OF KING WAN’S QUEEN.


It is supposed to have been made, and however that was, it is to be read


as if it had been made, by the queen herself. The old interpreters held
that the piece was of T‘ae-sze in her virgin prime, intent on all woman’s
work, and they placed it among the allusive pieces, The first two stanzas
might be thus explained; but the third requires too much straining to
admit of a proleptical interpretation as to what the virgin would do in


1


’ the future when a married wife.


Sweet was the gcene. The spreading dolichos
Extended far, down to the valley’s depths,

With leaves luxuriant. The orioles

Fluttered around, and on the bushy trees

In throngs collected,—whence their pleasant notes
Resounded far in richest melody.


The spreading dolichos extended far,

Covering the valley’s sides, down to its depths,
With leaves luxuriant and dense. I cut

It down, then boiled, and from the fibres span
Of cloth, both fine and coarse, large store,

To wear, unwearied of such simple dress.


Now back to my old home, my parents dear

To see, I go. The matron I have told,

Who will announcement make. Meanwhile my clothes,
My private clothes I wash, and rinse my robes.
Which of them need be rinsed? and which need not?
My parents dear to visit, back I go.


\ Til.


The. K'euen-urh ; nargative. LAMENTING THE ABSENCE OF A CHER-


ISHED FRIEND, PROBABLY OF A HUSBAND.


Ba L ww] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 61


The old interpreters thought that this ode celebrated T‘ae-sze for being
earnestly bent on getting the court of Chow filled with worthy ministers,
for sympathizing with faithful officers in their toils on distant expeditions,
and for suggesting to king Wan to @ast them on their return. It is
astonishing that the imperial editors should still lean to this view; on
which the piece belongs to the allusive class, °

Choo ascribes the ode to T‘ae-sze, whose husband, “the man of her
heart,” is absent on some toilsome expedition, and for whose return she
longs in vain, I must drog the idea of T‘ae-sze altogether, and can make
nothing more of the piece than I have stated. We must read it as if it
were from the pencil of its subject, and narrative.


1 Though small my basket, all my toil
Filled it with mouse-ears but in part.
I set it on the path, and sighed
For the dear master of my heart.


2 My steeds, o’er-tasked, their progress stayed,
‘When midway up that rocky height,
Give me a cup from that gilt vase,—
When shall this longing end in sight ?


3 To mount that lofty ridge I drove?” ‘s
Until my steeds all changed their hue.
_ A cup from that rhinoceros’ horn
May help my longing to subdue.


4 Striving to reach that flat-topped hill,
My steeds, worn out, relaxed their strain ;
My driver also sank oppressed :—
Dll never see my lord again !


IV.


The Kéw-muh; allusive, CELEBRATING T‘AE-SZE’S FREEDOM FROM
JEALOUSY, AND OFFERING FERVENT WISHES FOR HER, HAPPENESS.


The piece is supposed to be from the ladies of king Wan’s harem, in
praise of T‘ae-sze, who was not jealous of them, but cherished them
rather, as the great tree does the creepers that twine round it.


1 In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
And droop in-such fashion that o’er their extent
All the dolichos’ creepers fast cling.
See our princely lady, from whom we have got
Rejoicing that’s endless! May her happy lot
And her honours repose evet bring!


62 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part I.
2 In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
And droop in such fashion that o’er their extent
All the dolichos’ greepers are spread.
’ See our princely lady, from whom we have got
Rejoicing that’s endless! Of her happy lot
And her honours the greatness ne’er fade !


3 In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
And droop in such fashion that o’er their extent
All the dolichos’ creepers entwine.

See our princely lady, from whom we have got
Rejoicing that’s endless. May her happy lot
And her honours complete ever shine!


v.


The Chung-ste ; metaphorical, THE FRUITFULNESS OF THE LOCUST ;
SUPPOSED TO CELEBRATE T‘AE-SZE’S FREEDOM FROM JEALOUSY,


The piece is purely metaphorical, Tae-sze not being mentioned in it.
The reference to h&r®xists only in the writer’s mind. This often dis-
tinguishes such piecés from those which are allusive.


1 Ye locusts, wingéd tribes,
Gather in concord fine ;
Well your descendants may
In numerous bright hosts shine !


2 Ye locusts, wingéd tribes,
Your wings in flight resound ;
Well your descendants may
In endless lines be found !


3 Ye locusts, wingéd tribés,
, Together cluster strong ;
Well your descendants may |
In swarms for ever throng |


VE


The Taou yaou; allusive. PRAISE OF A BRIDE.GOING TO HER
FUTURE HOME,


'
1 Graceful and young the peach tree stands ;
How rich fts flowers, all gleaming bright !


Bx I. viu.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 63:


This bride to her new home repairs ;
Chamber and house she’ll order right.


2 Graceful and young tle peach tree stands;
Large crops of fruit it soon will show.
This bride to her new home repairs ;
Chamber and house her sway shall know.


3 Graceful an? young the peach tree stands,
Its foliage clustering green and full.
This bride to her new home repairs ;
Her household will attest her rule.


VII.


The J*oo tseu ; allusive, or narrative, PRAISE OF A RABBIT-CATCHER
AS FIT TO BE A PRINCE’S MATE,


The generally accepted view of this piece is that it sets forth the in-
fluence of king Wan (according to Choo), or of T‘ae-sze ‘according to
Maou), as so powerful and beneficial, that individuals in the lowest rank
were made fit by it to occupy the highest positi@™ I prefer, however,
the view of others, who interpret it according to an old tradition that
two of Wan’s ministers had at one time actually been rabbit-catchers.


1 Careful he sets his rabbit-nets all round ;
Ching-chiéng his blows upon the pegs resound.
Stalwart the man and bold! his bearing all
Shows he might be his prince’s shield and wall.


2 Careful he is his rabbit-nets to place,
Where many paths of rabbits’ feet bear trace.
Stalwart the man and bold! ’tis plain to see
He to his prince companion good would be.


3 Careful he is his rabbit-nets to spread,
Where in the forest’s depth the trees give shade.
Stalwart the man and bold! fit his the part
Guide to his prince to be, and faithful heart.


vow.
The Fow e; tarrative, THE SONG OF THE PLANTAIN-GATHERERS.


°
We are supposed to have here a happy instance of the tranquillity of
the times of Wan, so that the women, their ho@sehold labours over, could


64 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


go out and gather the seeds of the plantain or rib-grass in cheerful con-
cert ;—for what purposes we are not told,


1 We gather and gagher the plantains ;
Come gather them anyhow.
Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
And here we have got them now.


2 We gather and gather the plantains ;
Now off the ears we must tear.
Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
And now the seeds are laid bare.


3 We gather and gather the plantains,

The seeds in our skirts are placed.

Yes, gather and gather the plantains.
Ho! safe in the girdled waist !


IX.


* The Han kwang :;Wmsive and metaphorical, THE VIRTUOUS MAN-
NERS OF THE YOUNG WOMEN ABOUT THE HAN AND KBANG RIVERS,
Through the influence of Wan the dissolute manners of the people, and


especially of the women, in the regions south from Chow, had undergone


a great transformation. The praise of the ladies in the piece, therefore,
"is to the praise of Wan.


1 High and compressed, the southern trees
No shelter from the sun afford.
The girls free ramble by the Han,
But will not hear enticing word.
Like the broad Han are they,
Through which one cannot dive ;
And like the Keang’s long stream,
* Wherewith no raft can strive.


2 Many the faggots bound and piled ;
The thorns I’d hew still more to make.
As brides, those girls their new homes seek ; -
Their colts to feed I’d undertake.
Like the broad Han are they,
Through which one cannot dive;
And like the Keang’s lofig stream,
Wherewith no raft can strive.


Br I. x1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 65


3 Many the faggots bound and piled ;
The southernwood I’d cut for more.
As brides, those girls $heir new homes seek ;
Food for their colts I’d bring large store.
Like the broad Han are they,
Through which one cannot dive ;
And like the Keang’s long stream,
Wherewith no raft can strive.


x


The Joo fun; mainly narrative. THE AFFECTION OF THE WIVES ON
THE JOO, AND THEIR SOLICITUDE ABOUT THEIR HUSBANDS’ HONOUR.


The royal House, in the last stanza, like a blazing fire, is supposed to
be that of Shang, under the tyranny of Show, its last monareh. The
piece therefore belongs to the closing time of that dynasty, when Wan was
consolidating his power and influence.


1 Along the raised banks of the Joo,
To hew slim stem and branchewrought,
My lord away, my husband true,
Like hunger-pang my troubled thought!


2 Along the raised banks of the Joo,
Branch and fresh shoot confessed my art.
I’ve seen my lord, my husband true,
And still he folds me in, his heart,


8 As the toiled bream makes red its tail,
Toil you, Sir, for the royal House,
Amidst its blazing fires, nor quail :~—
Your parents see you pay your vows.


XI.


The Zin che che; allusive. CELEBRATING THE GOODNESS OF THE
OFFSPRING AND DESCENDANTS OF KING WAN.


The lin is the female of the &‘¢, a fabulous animal, the symbol of all
goodness and benevolence ; having the body of a deer, the tail of an ox,
the hoofs of a horse, one horn, the scales of a fish, &c. Its feet do not
tread on any living ‘thing, not even on live grass; it docs not butt with
its forehead ; and the end of its horn is covered with flesh, to show that,
while able for war, it wills towhave | peace. The lin was supposed to appear,
inaugurating a golden age, but the poet finds a bgtter auspice of that in
the character of Wan’s family and kindred.

VOL, Tit. 5


66 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


1 As the feet of the lin, which avoid each living thing, °
So our prince’s noble sons no harm to men will bring.
They ae the lin! |


2 As the front of the lin, never forward thrust in wrath,
So our prince’s noble grandsons of love tread the path,
They are the lin ! !


3 As the how of the lin, flesh- dicspedl no wound to give,
So our prince’s noble kindred kindly with all live.
They are the lin !


THE BOOK OF POETRY. 67


BOOK II.
THE ODES OF SHAOU AND THE SOUTH.
.


Tr has been stated, on the title of the first Book, that king Wan, on
removing to Fung, divided the original Chow of his House into two por-
tions, which he settled on his son Tan, the duke of Chow, and on Shih,
one of his principal adherents, the duke of Shaou. The site of the city
of Shaou was in the present department of Fung-tsang, and probabiy
in the district of K‘e-shan. Shih was of the Chow surname of K‘e, but his
exact relationship to king Wan cannot be determined. On the overthrow.
of the Shung dynasty, he was invested by king Woo with the principality’
of Yen, or North Yen, having its capital in the present district of Ta-hing,
department of Shun-ten, Chih-le. There we can trace his descendants,
down to the Ts‘in dynasty ; ; but he himself, as-did Tan, remained at court, .
and we find them, in the Book of History, as the principal ministers of
king Ching. They were known as “the highest dukes,” and “the two
great chiefs,” Tan having charge of’ the eastern Pgpiien of the kingdom,
and Shih of the western,

The pieces in this Book are supposed to have been produced in Shaou
and the States south of it,—west from those that yielded the odes of the
last Book. :


L


The Zs‘toh ch‘aou; allusive. CELEBRATING THE MARRIAGE OF A
PRINCESS TO THE PRINCE OF ANOTHER STATE.


The critics will all have it, that the poet’s object was to set forth “ the
virtue of the lady ;” but I do not see that the writer wished to indicate
that at all. His attention was taken by the splendour of the nuptials,
Be that as it may, the virtue of the bride is supposed to be emblemed by
the stupidity and quietness of the dove, unable to make. a nest for
herself, or making a very simple, unartistic one. The dove is a favourite
emblem with all poets for a lady, but surely never, out of China, because
of its “stupidity.” One writer says, “The duties of a wife are few and
contined ;—there is no harm in her being stupid.” :

_ That the dove is found breeding in the magpie’s nest, as assumed in
the allusive lines, is a thing Loften looked out for in China, and never
saw. Some of the critics, however, vehemently assert it,


1 In the magpie’s nest
Dweljs the dove at rest.
This young bride goes to her future home;-
To mect her a hundred chario€s come.
Fs] *


68 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


2 Of the magpie’s nest
Is the dove possest.
This bride goes to her new home to live ;
And escort a hundred chariots give.


The nest magpie wove

Now filled by the dove.
This bride now takes to her h8me her way ;
Atd these numervus cars her state display.


3


IL.


The Zs'ae fan ; narrative. THE INDUSTRY AND REVERENCE OF A
PRINCE'S WIFE, ASSISTING HIM IN SACRIFICING,


We must suppose the ladies of a harem, in one of the States of the South,
admiring and praising the way in which their mistress discharged her
duties,


1 Around the pools, the islets o’er,
Fast slaxgplucks white southernwood,
To hetp the sacrificial store ;
And for our prince does service good.


2 Where streams among the valleys shine,
Of southernwoods she plucks the white;
And brings it to the sacred shrine,
‘Po aid our prinee in solemn rite.


3 In head.dress high, most reverent, she :
The temple seeks at early dawn.
The service o’er, the head-dress see
To her own chamber slow withdrawn.


TI.


The Ts‘aou-ch‘ung ; narrative. THE WIFE OF SOME GREAT OFFICER
BEWAILS HIS ABSENCE ON DUTY, AND LONGS FOR THE JOY OF HIS
RETURN, -


1 Shrill chirp the insects in the grass ;
All about the hoppers spripg.
While I my husband do not see,
Sorrow mu%t my bosom wring.


Br IT. 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 69


O to meet him!
O to greet him! ,
Then my heart would fest and sing.


2. Ascending high that southern hill,
Turtle ferns I strove to get.
While I my hiisband do not see,
Sorrow must my heart beset.

O to meet him !
O to greet him !
Then my heart would cease to fret.


3 Ascending high that southern hill,
Spinous ferns I sought to find.
While I my husband do not see,
Rankles sorrow in my mind.
O to meet him !
O to greet him!
‘In my heart would peace be shrited.


Iv.


The Zs‘ae pin; narrative. THE DILIGENCE AND REVERENCE OF THE ~
YOUNG WIFE OF AN OFFICER, DOING HER PART IN SACRIFICIAL OFFER-
INGS. -


1 She gathers fast the large duckweed,
From valley stream that southward flows ;
And for the pondweed to the pools
Left on the plains by floods she goes.


2 The plants, when closed her toil, she puts
- In baskets round and baskets square,
Then home she hies to cook her spoil,

In pans and tripods ready there.


8 In sacred chamber this she sets, .
_ Where the light*falls down through the wall.:
*Tis she, our lord’s young reveren¢ wife,
Who manages this service all.


70 THE BOOK OF POETRY. *. [Parr I.


The Kan tang; narrative. Ygre LOVE OF THE PEOPLE FOR THE
MEMORY OF THE DUKE OF SHAOU MAKES THEM LOVE THE TREES BE-
NEATH WHICH HE HAD RESTED.


The duke of Shaou is mentiuned in the preliminary note to this Book.
He is here called “the Chief of Shaou” as having been invested with
jurisdiction over atl the States of the west. ‘In the exercise of that, he
had won the hearts of the people, and his memory was somehow connect-
ed with the pear-trée which the poet had in his mind’s eye, who would
therefore make them, as the Chinesé often express it, “think of the man
‘and love the trée.”


1 O fell not that sweet pear tree!
See how its branches spread,
Spoil not its shade,
For Shaou’s chief laid
Beneath it his weary head.


2 O clip not that sweet pear tree! |
h twig and leaflet spare.
’Tis sacred now,
Since the lord of Shaou,
When weary, rested him there.


3 O touch not that sweet pear tree!
Bend not a twig of it now. |
There long ago,
As the stories show,
Oft hatted the chief of Shaou.


VIL


The Hing loo; narrative and allusive, A LADY RESISTS AN ATTEMPT
TO FORCE HER TO MARRY, AND ARGUES HER CAUSE.


It is thought that we have here a specimen of the cases that came be-
fore the duke of Shaou.—A lady of Shin was promised in marriage to
aman of Fung. The ceremonial offerings from his family, however,
were not so complete as the rules required ; and when he wished to meet
her and convey her to his house, she and her friends refused to carry out
the engagement, The case was brought to trial, and the lady made this
ode, asserting that, while a single rule of ceremony was not complied
with, she would not leave her parents’ houge.


1 The dew thick on the wet paths lay ;
Thither at early. dawn my way


Bx If. vu] THE BOOK OF POETRY. va


I might have ta’en; but I said, “ Nay.
“The dew is thick, at home J’Il stay.”


2 You say the sparrow has*s horn.—
How could it else bore through your house ?
You say this trial is a proof
That I exchanged betrothal vows.
But though you’v8 made me here appear in court,
Yet at betrothal what you did fell short.


8 You say the rat’s teeth are complete.—
How could it else bore through your wall f P
You say this trial proves my vows
Of plighted troth were perfect all.
But though to court you’ve forced me here to come,
My will is firm ;—I’'ll not with you go home.


VIL


The Kaouw yang ; narrative, THE EASY DIGN@S® OF THE OFFICERS
’ AT SOME COURT, ‘


1 Arrayed in skins of lamb or sheep, .- ,
With five silk braidings all of white, |
From court they go, to take their meal,
All self-possessed, with spirits light. ~


2 How on their skins of lamb or sheep
The five seams wrought with white silk show !
With easy steps, and self-possessed,
From court, to take their meal, they go.


8 Upon their skins of lamb or sheep
Shines the white silk the seams to link.


With easy steps and self-possessed,
They go from court to eat and drink.


VIIE.
The Yin ke luy; allusive. A LADY’S ADMRATION oF HER HUS-
BAND ABSENT ON PUBLIC papas AND HER LONGING FOR HIS RETURN,


1 Grand in ithe south the thupder rolls,
i that lofty hill.


2 : THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


-Why must he go, nor dare to stay
+ Brief space at rest and stili?
Absent my aoble§ord I mourn,
May he return ! may he return !


2 Grand in the south the thunder rolls
Along that mountain’s side.
Why must he go from thisfnor dare
Brief time at rest to bide ?
Absent my noble lord I mourn,
May he return! may he return !


8 Grand in the south the thunder rolls,
Around that mountain’s base.
Why must he go from this, nor dare
Indulge himself a space ?
Absent my noble lord I mourn,
May he return! may he return !


IX,


The P'éaou yéw mei; narrative. ANXIETY OF A YOUNG LADY TO
GET MARRIED. :


1 Ripe, the plums fall from the bough ;
Only seven tenths left there now !

‘ Ye whose hearts on me are set,
Now the time is fortunate !


2 Ripe, the plums fall from the bough;
Only three tenths left there now !
Ye who wish my love to gain,

‘Will not now apply in vain !


3 No more plums upon the bough !
All are in my fbaakes now !
Ye who me with ardour seek,
Need the word but freely speak !,


1 x


_ The Séaow sing; allusive. THE THANKRUL SUBMISSION TO THEIR
LOT OF THE INFERIOR MEMBERS OF A HAREM.


e :
We have here the description by one of the concubines of the lot of


i


/


Br II. x1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. ° 73


herself and her companions. It is the early dawn, and she is returning
from her visit to the prince’s chamber, which had been allowed her by
his wife, who alone could pass the whole night with her husband. ‘The
others were admitted only for a shor#time, and had to go and return in
the dark. But so had the influence of king Wan and T‘ae-sze wrought,
that throughout Shaou and the South the wives of the princes dealt kindly
with-their inferiors. They were not jealous, and the others were not en-
vious, Such is the interpretation given to this piece.
e


1 Behold those starlets small,
How three or five the east illume!
Swiftly we came when fell the gloom,
And now at dawn the hall
Of the harém we leave, nor dare gainsay
Our lot which grants us here no longer stay.


2 Behold those starlets small,
Orion and the Pleiads bright !
Swiftly we came as failed the light,
‘ And here brought to the hail
Our coverlets and sheets. Now ye return,
Nor our inferior lot presume to mourn.


XI,


| ‘Whe Ktang yéw sze; allusive. JEALOUSY CURED ; THE RESTORATION
OF GOOD FEELING IN A HAREM, ;


The bride of some prince in the south, we are told, had refused to allow
her cousins, who by rule should have accompanied her, to go with her to
the harém; but afterwards, coming under the influence of King Wan
and T‘ae-sze, she repented of her jealousy, sent for them, and was happy


with them. The lines agree tolerably well with this traditional inter-
pretation.


: ‘

1 See how the Keang’s great branches flow,
Here leave its stream, and there back go!

When first our lady came as bride,

She would not have us by her side.

She would not have us by her side;

But soon a better course she tried.


2 The islets part the Keang’s broad course,
Which soon rasumes its wonted force.
‘When first as bride our lady game,

To be with us she thought it shame.


74 THE BOOK OF POETRY. * [Parr I,


‘To be with us she thought it shame ;
_Ere long she knew she was to blame.


3 The T‘o streams, frotn the river led,
Flow devious, and rejoin its bed.
When first wé saw our lady here,

She would not deign us to come near.
She would not deign us to corte near ;
But to a song she changed her sneer.


XI,


The Yay yéw sze keun ; allusive and narrative.
LADY RESISTS THE ATTEMPS OF A SEDUCER,


A VIRTUOUS YOUNG


1 In the wild lies an antelope dead,
rapt up in a mat of white grass.
With her thoughts of the spring comes a maid,
Whom a treacherous fop watches pass.


2 Scrubby oaks grow the forest around ;
In the wild there lies stretched a dead deer,
Close and tight with the white matting bound,
As a gem see the maiden appear.


8 “ Hold thy hand, and beware, Sir,” she cries.
‘Be thou civil, and haste not to wrong.
Meddle not with my handkerchief’s ties.
Do not make my dog bark. Pass along.”


XII.


The Ho pe nung; allusive. TH MARRIAGE OF ONE OF THE ROYAL
PRINCESSES, :


J Of flowers in clusters large and gay,
How bright the sparrow-plum’s display !
In reverent harmony on glide
The chariots of the royal bride.


2 These flowers their clusters large and gay,
As of the peach or plum display.
This grand-child of the Peaceful king
Joy to the m&rquis’ son shall bring.


5


Bg II. xv.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. ais)


3 As threads of silk together twine,
To form the angler’s faithful line ;
So may the union cl@&e abide
Of gallant prince and royal bride !


- XIV,


_ The Tsow-yu ; narrative, CELEBRATING SOME PRINCE IN THE
SOUTH FOR HIS BENEVOLENCE,


This interpretation of the piece depends on the meaning of the words
Tsow-yu in the third line. Both Maou and Choo take these as the name
of a wild beast, “a righteous beast, a white tiger with black spots, which
does not tread on live grass, and does not eat any living thing, making
its appearance when a State is ruled by a prince of perfect benevolence
‘and sincerity.” This view of them has been called in question, but the
concluding ode of Book i. is decisive in favour of its substantial correct-
ness, :


1 Five boars collect where grow the rushes rank and
strong ; -
He only sends one arrow all the five among.
Oh! the Tsow-yu is he !


2 Five pigs collect where grows the mugwort rank and
strong ;
He only sends one arrow all the five among.
Oh! the Tsow-yu is he!


.


%% . THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


BOOK III.


THE ODES OF P‘EI.


OF P*ei which gives its name to this Book, and of Yung which gives
its name to the next, we hardly know anything. Long before the time of
Confucius, they had become incorporated with the State of Wei ; and it is
universally acknowledged that the odes of Books iii., iv., and v. are odes
of Wei. Why they should be divided into three parts, two of which are
assigned to P‘eiand Yung respectively, is a question which has baffled all
the critics, é

When king Woo overthrew the dynasty of Shang, the domain of its

‘kings was divided by him into three portions. That north of their capi-
tal was P‘ei; that south of it was Yung; and that east of it was Wei,
These were constituted into three principalities ; but who among his ad-
herents were invested with P‘eiand Yung has not been clearly ascertained.
The marquises of Wei, however, managed in course of time to add them
to their own territory,em

The first marquis of Wei was K‘ang-shuh, a brother of Woo, of whose
investiture we haye an account in the Beok of History. The first capital
of the State was on the north of the Ho, to the east of Ch‘aou-ko, the old
capital of Shang. There it continued till B.c. 659, when the State was
nearly extinguished by some northern hordes, and duke Tae removed
across the river to Ts‘aou; but in a couple of years, his successor, duke .
Wan, removed again to Ts‘oo-K éw,—in the present district of Shing-woo,
department of Ts‘aou-chow, Shan-tung,


L


The Pik chow ; mostly narrative. AN OFFICER OF WORTH BEWAILS °
THE NEGLECT AND CONTEMPT WITH WHICH HE WAS TREATED.


Such is the view taken of the piece by Maou, who refers it to the time
of duke K‘ing, B.c. 866—854. Choo He contends against him that we
have in it the complaint of Chwang Kéang, the wife of one of the mar-
quises of Wei; because of the neglect with which she was treated by her
husband. Mencius, however, VII. ii. XIX., sanctions the view of the
piece which regards it as the complaint of a worthy officer, neglected by
his ruler,-and tréated with contempt by a host of mean ereatures,


1 It floats about, that boat of cypress wood,
Now here, now there, as by the current: borne.
Nor rest nor sleep comes in my froubled mood ;
I suffer as whep painful wound has torn
The shrinking body. Thus I dwell forlorn,


Bx Il. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 77


_And aimless muse, my tlioughts of sorrow full.
I might with wine refresh my spirit worn ;
I might go forth, and, saantering try to cool
The fever of my heart ; but grief holds sullen rule.


2 My mind resembles not a mirror plate, -
Reflecting all th’ impressions it receives.
The good I lové, the bad regard with hate ;
I only cherish whom my heart believes.
Colleagues I have, but yet my spirit grieves,
That on their honour I cannot depend.
I speak, but my complaint no influence leaves”
Upon their hearts; with mine no feelings blend ;
With me in anger they, and fierce disdain contend.


8 My mind is fixed, and cannot, like a stone,

Be turned at will indifferently about ;

And what I think, to that, and that alone,
I utterance give, alike within, without ;
Nor can like mat be rolled and casried ‘out.

With dignity, in presence of them all,
My conduct marked, my goodness who shall scout P

My foes I boldly challenge, great and small,

If there be aught in me they can im question call,


4 How full of trouble is my anxious heart !

With hate the blatant herd of creatures mean

Ceaseless pursue. Of their attacks the smart
Keeps my mind in distress. Their venomed spleen
Aye vents itself; and with insulting mien

They vex my soul ; 3 and no one on my side
A word will speak. Silent, alone, unseen,

I think of my sad case; then opening wide

My eyes, as if from sleep, I beat my breast, sore-tried.


5 Thy disk, O sun, should ever be complete,
While thine,O changing moon, doth wax and wane.
But now our sun hath waned, weak and effete,
And moons are ever full. My heart with pain
Is firmly bound, and held in sorrow’s chain,
As to the body cleaves an unwashed dress,
' Silent I think ®f my sad case; in vain
: try to find relief from my distress.
Would I had wings to fly where ills no longer press !


78 THE BOOK OF POETRY [Part L.,


IL.
The Luh e, metaphorical-allusive. THE COMPLAINT, SAD BUT RE-
SIGNED, OF A NEGLECTED WIFE,


This ode is.interpreted as if it had been written by Chwang Kéang, a
marchioness of Wei. The marquis Yang, better known as duke Chwang,
married her, a. daughter of the House of Ts‘e, in B,C. 755, She was a
lady of admirable character; and, as she had no child, he took another
wife, a Kwei of the state of Ch‘in. She had a son who died early ; but
a cousin, called Tae Kwei, who had accempanied her to the harém, gave
birth to a son, Hwan, whom the marquis recognized as destined in due
time to succeed. Chwang Kéang brought up this child as her own, + But
another lady of the harém, of inferior rank, bore also a son, calfed Chow-
yu, who grew up #@ bold, dashing, unprincipled young man. The mar-
quis died in 734, and was succeeded by Hwan, who was murdered subse-
quently by Chow-yu,

Chow-yu’s mother is the concubine or favourite in the piece. Yellow is
one of the five “ correct” colours of the Chinese, while green is one of the,
“intermediate ” colours that are lessesteemed, Here we have the yellow
used merely as a lining to the green, or employed in the lower, or less
honourable part of the dress ;—an inversion of propriety, and intimating
how the concubine had got into the place of the rightful wife, and thrust
her down. ~


1 When the upper robe is green,
With a yellow lining seen,
‘There we have a certain token
Right is wronged and order broken.
How can sorrow from my heart
In a case like this depart ?


2 Colour green the robe displays ;
Lower garment yellow’s blaze.
Thus it is that favourite mean
In the place of wife is seen.
Vain the conflict with my grief ;
Memory denies relief.


3_ Yes, ’twas you the green who dyed,
You who fed the favourite’s pride.
Anger rises in my heart,

Pierces it as with a dart.

_ But on ancient rules lean I,

Lest to wrong my thoughts should fly.


4 Fine or coarse, if thin the dress,
Cold winds*always cause distress.


Bx If. 111] THE BOOK OF POETRY.. 79:


Hard my lot, my sorrow deep,
But my thoughts in check I keep.
Ancient story bringy to mind
Sufferers who were resigned.


Til.


e ,
The Yen-yen ; allusive and narrative. CHWANG KEANG RELATES HER
GRIEF AT THE DEPARTURE OF TAE Kweli, AND CELEBRATES THAT
LADY’S VIRTUE.


The introductory note to the last ode speaks both of Chwang Kéang
and Tae Kwei. When duke Hwan, the son of the latter, was murdered
by his half-brother, Chow-yu, in B.c. 718, she returned--was obliged,
probably, to return—-to her native state of Ch'in. Chwang Kéang, the
marchioness-dowager, continued in Wei, and here bewails the loss of her
virtuous friend and companion. ‘


1 With wings, not level, spread,
_About the swallows stir.
.Homeward the lady sped,
And I escorted her.
And when away from sight she passed,
Like rain, my tears came falling fast.


2 The swallows fly about,
-Now up, now down, they dart.
She to her home set out,
And I was loth to part.
Her form when distance from me kept,
Long time I stood, and silent wept.


3 Above, beneath, their cry
The flying swallows vent.
Homeward she passed, and I
Far with her southwards went.
Her form when distanee from me bore.
With bitter grief my heart was sore.


4 This lady Chung loved me
With feeling true and deep.
Docile and good was she,
Nor failed the right to keep.
Unworthy me her deed and word
Taught to respect our formet lord.


80 ) THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr J.


Iv.


The Jih yuch ; narrative. CHuwene KEANG COMPLAINS OF, AND AP-


PEALS AGAINST, THE BAD TREATMENT WHICH SHE RECEIVED FROM
BER HUSBAND,


See the introductory notes to the two last pieces.


1 Osun 50 bright, O moon & fair,
This lower earth that light,
Behold this man, so bold to dare
Transgress the ancient right.
How shall he fix his restless mind ?
Would he not then to me be kind?


2 Osun, O moon, whose shining vault
O’erspreads this earth below,
Behold this man, with wilful fault,
Kindness refuse to show.
His restless mind how shall he turn?
He could not then my fondness spurn.


3 Osun, O moon, in uppér sphere,
That from the east come forth,
This man speaks phrases sounding fair,
But all of little worth.
Were but his mind to goodness set,
He could not me so much forget.


. & Osun so bright, O moon so fair,
That from the east forth come ;
' © parents dear, whose tender care
Ne’er comes in this new home ;
If fixed his mind, ’gainst reason sage
He eould not thus my heart outrage.


v.


The Chung fung ; metaphorical-allusive, CHWANG KANG BEMOANS


THE SUPERCILIOUS TREATMENT WHICH SHE RECEIVED FROM HER HUS-
BAND, ;


1 Fierce is the wind and cold;
_ And suchis he. e
Smiling he looks, and bold
Speaks mockingly.


Bx III. vr.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 81
‘ Scornful and lewd his words,
Haughty his smile.
Bound is my hegrt with cords

In sorrow’s coil.


2 As cloud of dust wind-blown,

Just such is he.

Ready,he seems to own,
And come to me.

But he comes not nor goes,
Stands in his pride.

Long, long, with painful throes,
Grieved I abide.


8 Strong blew the wind; the cloud

-Hastened away.

Soon dark again, the shroud
Covers the day.

I wake, and sleep no more
Visits my eyes.

His course I sad deplore,
With heavy aia: :


4 Cloudy the sky, and dark ;

The thunders roll. -

Such outward signs well mark
My troubled soul.

I wake, and sleep no more
Comes to give rest.

' His course I sad deplore,
In anguished breast.


Vi. .


The Keih hoo; narrative. SOLDIERS OF WEI BEWAIL THEIR SEPARA-
TION FROM THEIR FAMILIES, AND ANTICIPATE THAT IT WILL, BE
FINAL. ;


In B.C. 718, Wei twice joined in an expedition against Chiing. Chow-
yu had just murdered duke Hwan, and the people were restless under his
rule, To divert their minds, and make himself acceptable to other
States, he attacked Ch‘ing; end having made an agreement with Sung,
Ch‘in, and Ts‘ae, a combined force marched against that State. This ex-
pedition did not last long, and a second was u@dertaken in autumn, in


VOL, Tit. 6


82 “THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


alliance with a force from Loo. It is supposed that it is to these opera-
‘tions that reference is made in the piece.


1 List to the thunder andtroll of the drum!
See how we spring and brandish the dart !
Some raise T's‘aou’s walls ; some do fieldwork at home ;
But we to the southward lonely depart.


- e
2 Our chief, Sun Tsze-chung, agreement has made,
Our forces to join with Chin and with Sung.
When shall we back from this service be led ?
Our hearts are all sad, our courage unstrung.


3: Here we are halting, and there we delay ;
Anon we soon lose our high-mettled steeds.
The forest’s gloom makes our steps go astray :
Each thicket of trees our searching misleads.


4. For death as for life, at home or abroad,
We pledged to our wives our faithfullest word.
Their hands clasped in ours, together we vowed,
We'd live to old age in sweetest accord.


5 This march to the south can end but ir ill ;
Oh! never shall we our wives again meet.
The word that we pledged we cannot fulfil ;
Us home returning they never will greet.


Vii.


The Kae fung ; métaphorical-allusive. SEVEN SONS OF SOME FAMILY
In WEI BLAME THEMSELVES FOR THE RESTLESS UNHAPPINESS OF THEIR
MOTHER.


The mother, it is supposed, would not rest in her widowhood, but
wanted to marry again ; and it is added, though the ode says nothing on
the point, that the sons, by laying the blame of her restlessness on them-
selves, recalled her to a sense of her duty.


1 On that jujube tree the wind,
From the south, blows soft and kind,
Till each twig, in inmost place,
Swells with life, and shines with grace.
O how great the toil and care
’Twas ourtnother’s lot to bear !
z ;


Bx III. vi.] = THE BOOK OF POETRY. 83


2 On that jujube tree the wind,
From the south, blows soft and kind,
Till its branches all aye seen
Bright and rich in living green.
Wise our mother is and good; -
Goodness we have never showed.


3 See that cooj and crystal spring,
How its waters comfort bring,
Welling forth the city near,

All who dwell in Tseun to cheer !
Pained our mother is and tried,
As if- help we seven denied.


4 In their yellow plumage bright,
Lovely gleam those birds to sight,
And their notes fall on the ear,
Rich and, oh! so sweet to hear.
Seven sons we, without the art
To compose our mother’s heart !


VIII.


‘
The Héung che; allusive and narrative, A WIFE DEPLOBES THR
ABSENCE OF HER HUSBAND, AND CELEBRATES HIS VIRTUE,


1 Away the startled pheasant flies,
With lazy movement of. his wings.
Borne was my heart’s lord from my eyes ;—
What pain the separation brings !


2 The pheasant, though no more in view,
His cry, below, above, forth sends.
Alas! my princely lord, ’tis you,—
Your absence, that my bosom rends.


3 At sun and moon I sit and gaze,
In converse with my troubled heart.
Far, far from me my husband stays !
When will he come to heal its smart ?


4 Ye princely men, who with him mate,
Say, mark ye not his virtuous way.
His rule is—covet nought, none hate ;—
How can his steps from goodiess stray ?
6 *


“St THE. BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


TX.


The Peaou yéw k'oo yeh; adlusive and narrative. AGAINST THE
LICENTIOUS MANNERS OF WEI.


The old school held that this piece was directed against duke Seuen,
who was distinguished for his licentiousness, and his wife also. Choo,
agreeing generally in the object of the piece, yet demurs to this particu-
lar reference. Some notice of Seuen may be given here, as several of
the odes that follow are interpreted of him and his doings.

His first wife was E Kéang, a, lady of his father’s harém, by an inces-
tuous connection with whom he had a son, called Keih-tsze, who became
his heir-apparent. By-and-by he contracted a marriage for this son
with a daughter of Ts‘e, known as Seuen Kéang; but on her arrival in
Wei, moved by her youth and beauty, he took her himself, and by her he
had two sons,~-Show and Soh. E Kéang hanged herself in vexation ;
and in course of time Seuen was prevailed on by Soh and his mother to .
consent to the death of Keih-tsze, Show persisting in a noble, but fruit-
less, attempt to preserve his life, In the next year, the duke died, and
was succeeded by Soh, when the court of Ts‘e insisted on Ch‘aou-peh,
another son of Seuen, marrying Seuen Kéang. From this connection
sprang two sens, who both became marquises of Wei, and two daughters,
who married the rulers of other States,

When such was the history of the court of Wei, we can well perceive
that licentiousness prevailed throughout the State ; and that connexions
of the kind which this piece condemns were being continually formed.


1 Its bitter leaves still hang upon the gourd ;
Deep is the water where we cross the ford.
Conditions these which well might make them pause,
But bent are they to break the heavenly laws !
“We'll cross,” they say, “if deep, clothes on go through ;
If shallow, holding up our clothes will do.”


2 To overflowing full the ford appears ;
The feinale pheasant’s cry salutes their ears.
Now will they pause, nor tempt the foaming stream.
In vain the warning ; more intent they seem.
“The depth,” they say: “ our axles will not wet,
** And by her cry the pheasant calls her mate.”.


3 In early morn, when ’gins to dawn the day,
In spring, the ice not yet dissolved away,
The gentleman, who home his wife would bring,
Presents the goose, whose notes harmonious ring.
Such is the rule, that virtue’s laW lays down;
And such the rwle which I will ever own.


Br IIT. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 85


-4, The boatman béckons, waving oft his hand ;
And with him others ‘cross, but I here stand.
Others may cross, but nofwith them I go;

I wait my friend, the proper time to show.
I dare not rush to gratify mere lust ;
By virtue’s law my lusts control I must.

» e ’


x,


The Kuh fung ; metaphorical, allusive, and narrative. THE PLAINT
OF A WIFE SUPPLANTED BY ANOTHER, AND REJECTED BY HER HUSBAND.


1 The east wind gently blows,
With cloudy skies and rain.

’Twixt man snd wife should ne’er be strife,
But harmony obtain.
Radish and mustard plants
Are used, though some be poor;

‘ While my good name is free from blame,

Don’t thrust me from your door.


2 Igo along the road,
Slow, with reluctant heart.
Your escort Jame to door but came,
There glad from me to part.
Sow-thistle, bitter called,
As shepherd’s purse is sweet ;
With your new mate you feast elate,
As joyous brothers meet.


3 Part clear, the stream of King
Is foul beside the Wei.

You feast elate with your new mate,
And take no heed of me.
Loose mate, avoid my dam,
Nor dare my basket move !

Person slighted, life all blighted,
What can the future prove?


4 The water deep, in boat,
Or raft-sus®ained, I’d go;

And where the stream did narrgw seem,
I dived or breasted through.


86


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


I laboured to increase
Our means, orggreat or small ;

When ’mong friends near death did appear,
On knees to help I’d crawl.


5 No cherishing you give,
I’m hostile in your eyes?


‘ As pedlar’s wares for which none cares,


My virtues you despise.
When poverty was nigh,
I strove our means to spare ;
You, now rich grown, me scorn to own;
To poison me compare.


6 The stores for winter piled

_ Are all unprized in spring.

So now, elate with your new mate,
Myself away you fling.
Your cool disdain for me
A bitter anguish hath.

The early time, our love’s sweet prime,
In you wakes only wrath,


XI.


The Shih wei; narrative, THE OFFICERS OF SOME STATE, WHO


WERE REFUGEES AND IN DISTRESS IN WEI, EXHORT THEIR RULER TO


RETURN WITH THEM. |


It is supposed that the speakers in these two verses were from Le, a
State adjoining Wei, in which they had taken refuge in the time of duke


Seuen.


1 At this low ebb! At this low ebb!
Why not, O prince, return to Le? =~
But for your sake, why bide we here,
Houseless beneath the dew to be?


2 At this low ebb’! At this low ebb!
Why not to Le go baék again?
But for your person, how should we
Here in the mire so long have lain ?


Bx IIT. x11.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 87


XI.


The Maou k‘é ; allusive and narrftive, THE REFUGEE MINISTERS
OF LE COMPLAIN OF THOSE OF WEI FOR NOT ASSISTING THEM.


1 On that high sloping mound,
With jgints now parted wide,
The plants of dolichos
Show here we Jong abide.
Wei’s nobles, whom we uncles style,
Why thus delay on us to smile ?


2 They rest and do not stir ;—
Do they allies expect ?
Wherefore protract the time ?
Why us so much neglect ?
Some reason they could surely plead
For conduct, strange in this our need.


3, In chariots of the west, _
Hither from danger borne,
In Wei we live depressed,
Our fox-furs frayed and worn.
Ye nobles, uncles, sooth to say,
For us no sympathy display. _ -


4 A remnant small of Le,
Driven from our proper home ;
Children dispersed, we hoped
That help from Wei would come.
Alas! though grand the robes you wear,
You stop your ears against our prayer.


XIII,


The Kéen he; narrative and_allusive. ' HALF IN SCORN, HALF IN
SORROW, AN OFFICER OF WEI TELLS OF THE MEAN SERVICES IN
WHICH HE WAS EMPLOYED. .


1 With mind indifferent, things I easy take.
In every dance I prompt appearance make :—
Then, when the sun is at his topmost height ;
There, in the place that courts the public sight.


88 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr L


2 With figure large I in the court-yard dance,
And the duke smiles, when he beholds me prance.
A tiger’s strength I hav®; the steeds swift bound ;
The reins as ribbons in my hands are found.


3 See how I hold the flute in my left hand ;.
In right the pheasant’s plume, waved like a wand;
With visage red, where rouge you think to trace,
While the duke pleased, sends down the cup of grace!


4 Hazels on hills; the ing in meadow damp;—
Each has its place, while I’m a slighted scamp.
My thoughts go back to th’ early days of Chow,
And muse upon its chiefs, not equalled now.

O noble chiefs, who then the west adorned,
Would ye have thus neglected me and scorned ?


XIV.


The Zs‘euen shwuy ; allusive and narrative. A DAUGHTER OF THE
House oF WEI, MARRIED IN ANOTHER STATE, EXPRESSES HER LONGING
TO REVISIT WEL. . :

It is not said who this princess was ; but her parents must have heen
dead. It would have been allowable for her to visit them at stated times.
if they were still alive,


1 As the streamlet from its spring
Flows into the river K‘e,
So my daily thoughts on wing
Fly, my native Wei, to thee;
For [ long with cousins there
Counsel sweet. and love to share.


2 For a night, at Tse I stayed;
Drank the cup to Ne when come;
Parents, brothers, farewell bade :—
Such the fate on leaving home.
Parents are not now alive;
Aunts and sister still survive.


3 Lo! I hasten home again.
Let the rushing charfot-wheel
. Pause a Kan, and part at Yen,
Pebbles flashing to its steel.


Bs III. xvz.] THE BOOK ‘OF POETRY. 89


Does my heart go far astray,
Panting for its native Wei?


4 By the Fei-ts‘euen’s winding stream
Daily sighing thought will stray.
Seu and T’s‘aou in memory gleam,
Broken glints of childhood’s day. —
Spring, my"horses! Speed, my wheels !
Gone the grief my bosom feels !


XY.


The Pik mun ; metaphorical and narrative. AN OFFICER OF WEI SETS
FORTH, RATHER JESTINGLY, HIS HARD LOT, AND HIS SILENCE UNDER IT
IN SUBMISSION TO HEAVEN.


1 My way leads forth by the gate on the north ;
My heart is full of woe.
T hav’n’t a cent, begged, stolen, or lent,
And friends. forget me so.
So let it be! ’tis Heaven’s decree.
What can I say,—a poor fellow like me?


- 2 The king has his throne, sans sorrow or moan ;
On me fall all his cares,
And when I come home, resolved not to roam,
Each one indignant stares,
So let it be! ’tis Heaven’s decree,
What can I say,—a poor fellow like me?


8 Hach thing of the king, and the fate of the State,
On me come more and more.
And when, sad and worn, I come back forlorn,
They thrust me from the doot.
So let it be! ’tis Heaven’s decree.
What can I say,—a poor fellow like me ?


t


XVL


‘ The Pik fung; wmetaphorical-narrative. ° Soi ONE OF WEI
PRESSES HIS FRIENDS TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY WITH HIM AT ONCE,
IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE PREVAILING OPPRESSION AND MISERY.


1 As when the north winds kegnly blow,
And all around fast falls the snow,


90 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


The source of pain and suffering great,
So now it is in Wei’s poor State.
Let us join handy and haste away,
My friends and lovers all.
*Tis not a time will brook delay ;
Things for prompt action call.


2. As when the north winds wfistle shrill,
And drifting snows each hollow fill,
The source of pain and suffering great,
So now it is in Wei’s poor State.

Let us join hands, and leave for aye,
My friends and lovers all,

Tis not a time will brook delay;
Things for prompt action call.


8 We look for red, and foxes meet ;
For black, and crows our vision greet.
The creatures, both of omen bad,
Well suit the state of Wei so sad.
Let us join hands and mount our cars,
My friends and lovers all. :
No time remains for wordy jars ;
Things for prompt action call.


#


XVII.


The Tsing new; narrative. A GENTLEMAN DEPLORES HIS DISAP-
POINTMENT IN NOT BEING MET BY A LADY ACCORDING TO ENGAGEMENT,
AND CELEBRATES HER GIFTS AND BEAUTY.


1 O sweet maiden, so fair and retiring,
At the corner I’m waiting for you;
And I’m scratching my head, and inquiring
What on earth it were best I should do.


2 Oh! the maiden, so handsome and coy,
- For a pledge gave 4 slim rosy reed.
Than the reed is she brighter, my joy ;
On her loveliness how my thoughts feed !


e
8 In the pastures a ¢’e blade she sought,
And she gave it, so elegant, rare.


Br TT. xix.j THE BOOK OF POETRY. 91


Oh! the grass does not dwell in my thought,
But the donor, more elegant, fair.
@


XVI.


The Sin t‘ae; allusive-narrative. SAaTIRIZING THE MARRIAGE OF
DUKE SEVEN anp Sxurny Keane.


In the introductory note to Ode IX., it has been stated how duke
Seuen took to himself the lady who had been contracted to marty his
son Keih-tsze. It is only necessary to add here, that to-accomplish his
purpose, he caused a tower to be built near the Ho, where he received the
lady on her way from Ts‘e, and detained her. We are not to suppose
that the duke was hump-backed or otherwise mis-shaped ;—the poet so
describes him, to express how he loathed his character.


1 The New tower, fresh and bright, they show,
Where its vast volume rolls the Ho ;—
¥or bride a palace rare.
To Wei she came, a mate to find ;
She’sought a husband young and kind,
But found this mis-shaped bear.


2 There stands the New tower grand and high,
Where with still stream the i flows by ;—
For bride a palace rare.
To Wei she came, a mate to find ;sx
She sought a husband young and kind,
But found this mis-shaped hear.


8 As when the net for fish they set,
And lo! a goose ensnared they get,
They stamp with sudden ire ;
So might she stamp who came to wed
The genial son, and in his stead
Got but the hump-backed sire.


XTX.


The Urh-tsze; narrative. SURMISES AS TO THE DEATH OF TWO
SONS OF DUKE SEUEN. ‘


It has been stated, on Odg TX., how Seuen Kéang and Sob had plotted
to clear the way for Soh’s succession to the State by getting rid of Keih.
taze, the proper heir. At last the duke was prevailed on to send him on
a mission to Ts‘e, having arranged that he should be waylaid by ruffians,


92 . THE BOOK OF .POETRY. [Parr I.


after he landed on the northern bank of the Ho. Show became aware
of the scheme, told Keih-tsze of it, and advised him to escape to another
State. Keih-tsze declining to do this, the other took his boat, personated
him, and was murdered by the riffians. When Keih-tsze awoke, and
found that Show was gone, he divined his object, took another boat, and
followed him ; erying out, as he drew near the ruffians, in language which
must always recall to a western reader the words of Nisus,


Me, me! adsum qui fect ; in me congertite ferrum,
It was too late, The ruffians, “ that they might make no mistake,” mur-


dered him also. The duke tried to conceal the facts, but the people here
intimate their suspicions of the truth, .


1 The two youths went into their boats,
Whose shadow on the water floats.
What evil to them came ?
Anxious and wondering, long we muse ;
Our hearts are tossed with tossing views.
Some one must be to blame.


2 Into their boats the’ two youths passed,
And on the stream were carried fast.
What was there to alarm ?
With longing thought we fain would trace,
The secret of their ill-starred race.
Did they not come to harm ?


Br IV. tJ: THE BOOK OF POETRY. 93


BOOK IV.


THE ODES OF YUNG.


THERE is little to be said here beyond what has been stated on the title
of the last Book, The statistical account of the present dynasty says
that the capital of Yung was in the north-east of the present district of
Keih, department Wei-hwey, Ho-nan.


L


The Peh chow; allusive. PROTEST OF A WIDOW AGAINST BEING
URGED TO MARRY AGAIN. ;


The piece, it is said, was made by Kung Kéang, the widow of Kung-
peh, son of the marquis He, B.c. 854—-813. Her husband dying an early
death, her parents, who must have been the marquis of Ts‘e and his wife,
or one of the ladies of his harem, wanted to force upon her a second
marriage j—against which she here protests. This reference of the piece ©
to Kung Kéang is not without historical difficulties but, no doubt, the
piece was preserved as an example of what the Chinese have always con-
sidered’ a great virtue,—the refusal of a widow to marry again, A
famous writer gives his opinion on the point thus :—“It may be asked
whether a widow left solitary and poor, with none to depend on, may not
marry again, to which I reply that such is the suggestion of subsequent
times through fear of want and starvation, But to die of want is a very


small matter, while the loss of chastity is‘a very great matter!” But
why should Chinese ‘moralists mete out different measures for the widow
and the widower ? 4


1 In the mid Ho that cypress boat floats free,
While friends a second marriage press on me.
I see my husband’s youthful forehead there,
And on it the twin tufts of falling hair.
Rather than wed again I’ll die, I swear! +
O mother dear, O Heaven supreme, why should
You not allow my vow, and aid my purpose good ?


2 Near to the bank that cypress boat floats free,
While friends a second marriage press on me.
He was my only one, with forehead fair,

And on it the twin tufts of falling hair.


*


94 THE-BOOK oF porrry. § _—_—‘[ Parr I.


Till death to shun the evil thing I swear !
O mother dear, O Heaven supreme, why should
You not allow my vow, ang aid my purpose good?


Il.


The Zs‘éang yéw ts‘ze ; allusive. THE THINGS DONR IN THE HAREM
OF THE Palace oF WEI WERE TOO SHAMEfUL TO BE TOLD.

The “ things done in the harem ” are supposed to refer to the connexion
between Ch‘aou-peh and Seuen K ang, which has been mentioned on the
9th ode of last Book. :


1 As grows on wall the tribulus,
And ’gainst the brush retains its hold ;
Se let what’s in the harem done
By us without remain untold.
What must be told would tongue defile
With things unfit for speech, and vile.


2 As grows on wall the tribulus,
Which vainly to remove we try ;
So let what’s in the harem done
By us without unspoken lie.
If on details we condescend,
The narrative would have no end.


8 As grows on wail the tribulus,
And cannot in the sheaf be tied ;
So let what’s in the harem done
By us without untouched abide.
If truth were in the tale laid bare,
How foul a scene were painted there !


III.
The Keun-tste héae laow; narrative, CONTRAST BETWEEN THE
BEAUTY AND SPLENDOUR OF StUEN KEANG AND HER VICIOUSNESS.


See again the note on the 9th ode of the last Book. The intention and
spirit of this piece only come out in the last two lines of the first stanza.


1 Pledged to her husband, his alone to be;
With head-dress high, cross pins, and jewels rare ;
Her movements graceful, elegant, and free ; .
As mountain @tately, with imposing air ;
aa


Bx IV. 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. | - 95


Majestic as a river, large and fair ;
Her robes the various figured forms display.

Fit seems it she such picgured robes should wear !
But, lady, vain is all your grand array ;
No claim to it can you, in virtue wanting, lay.


2 Her pheasant-figured robe resplendent shines,
Her hair, jet-black, clond-like surmounts her head ;°
Her own, no false locks with it she entwines.
Then see her ear-plugs, of the precious jade ;
Her comb-pin, of the finest ivory made ; _
And her high forehead, shining pure and white.
Like visitant come down from heaven, arrayed
In fashion thus, for sacrificial rite,—
Well may we goddess call her, and no earthly wight.


3 At court now see her, on occasions great,

To meet the ruler, or guests entertain !

As rich and splendid is her robe of state,
With muslin ’neath it of the finest grain,

Which takes the place of warmer garment plain.
Her eyes are clear, with forehead broad and high,
Which the full temples on each side sustain.’

With woman such as this how few can vie!
The beauty of the land, she charms the gazing eye!


Tv.


The Sang-chung 3 narrative, A GENTLEMAN BOASTS OF HIS INTIMACY
AND INTRIGUES WITH VARIOUS WOBLE LADIES.


The old school holds that this piece was intended as a satire on “ the
lewd customs of Wei.” Choo sees in it only a love song. As a new tady
comes up in every stanza, I think it may have been constructed te expes¢
the licentiousness which prevailed.


1 The gold-thread to gather I’m going,
Where in Wei it spreads over the tree ;
But my thoughts for ever are flowing
To the Beauty who captive holds me,—
To the eldest Keang. Yes, it is she !
Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
She would com8 to me here in Shang-kung,
And then company keep with meton to the Ke.
*


" 96 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


2 For the wheat about Wei I’m going
‘To the north where it grows in each part.
But my thoughts for ever are flowing
To the Beauty who rules in my heart,—
To the eldest Yih. ‘Yes, it is she !
Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
She would come to me here in Shang-kung,
And then company keep with fhe on to the K‘e,


3 For the mustard-plant I am going
Where in Wei it grows over the east.
But my thoughts for ever are flowing
To the Beauty on whose love I feast,— .
To the eldest Yung. Yes, it is she!
Freely did she agree in Sang-chung,
She would come to me here in Shang-kung,
And then company keep with me on to the K‘e.


SN;


The Shun che pun-pun; allusive. AGAINST SEVEN KEAanc AND
CH‘AOU PEH, as worse than beasts.


1 How bold the quails together rush,

Keach fighting for his mate !

How strong the magpies, battling fierce
Upon the same debate !

This man, without a trait that’s good,
Is stained by vicious crime ;

Yet him as brother I regard :-——
Alias! woe worth the time!


2 How strong the magpies, battling fierce,

Each one to keep his mate !-

How fierce the quails together rush,
Upon the same debate ! :

This woman, with no trait that’s good,
Is stained by vicious crime,

Yet her I hail as marchioness.:—
Alas! woe worth the time !


Vi.
The Ting che fang chung ; narrative. ‘Wik PRAISE OF DUKE WAN:


—HIS DILIGENCE, FORESIGHT, SYMPATHY WITH THE PEOPLE, AND
PROSPERITY. ;


Br IV. v1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 97


The Duke Hwuy of Wei died in 8.c. 668, and was. succeeded by his son
Ch‘ih, known as duke E, who perished in fighting with the Teih in B.c.
659, Wei was then reduced to extremity, and had nearly disappeared from
among the States of China. The people flestroyed all the family of Hwuy,
and, what we cannot but be surprised at, called to their head Shin, a son
of Seuen Kéang and Ch‘aou-pih. He was duke Tae, and crossed the Ho
with the shattered remnant of the people, with whom he camped in the
neighbourhood of Ts‘aou, He died that same year, and his brother Wei,
known as duke Woo, was cMled to his place, and became a sort of second
founder of the State. It is of him that this piece speaks.

Ting is a small space in the heavens, embracing two stars of Pegasus.
It culminated at this time in the 10th month of the year, counting from -
the first month of spring, at night-fall, and this was a signal that now the
labours of husbandry were over for the year, and that building operations
should be taken in hand. The urgency for the rearing of the new capi-
tal was great, but the marquis would not take it in hand till the proper
time for such a labour had arrived.


1 At dusk the Ting star passed on to the west,

And field-work for the year was laid to rest.

At Ts‘oo the duke his palace took in hand,

And by the sun fixed how its walls should stand.

All round about he planted many a tree,—

Hazels and chestnuts, t‘ung, and tsze, and e,

And varnish trees. The grove would yield ere long
Abundant wood for lutes, to aid the voice of song.


2 He climbed those ruined walls, thence to inspect
The site he wished for Ts‘oo-k‘ew to select.
His glance the land from Ts‘oo to T‘ang mapped out,
Noting the hills and smalter heights about.
He then came down, the mulberry trees to view,
And judged the soil, and learned its nature true.
These things once done, he asked the tortoise-shell,
Answer auspicious got,—and all succeeded well.


3 Thereafter, when there fell the copious showers,
He often called his groom, and in the hours
Of early dawn a-field by starlight drove
Among the labourers, and to cheer them strove.
And many ways he had, not this alone,
In which his character distinguished shone,
To duty bound, asstduous in his cares ;—
And blessing came,—three thousandgteeds and mares.


VoL. IIT. ; 7


98 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


VII.


The Ze tung; metaphorical qgnd narrative. AGAINST LEWD CoN.
NEXIONS.

A rainbow is regarded by the Chinese as the result of an improper
connexion between the yin and the yang, the dark and the light, the
feminine and masculine principles of nature ; and so it is an emblem of
improper connexions between men and wom&. To point to a rainbow
in the east is deemed unlucky,


1 A rainbow in the east invites the gaze,
But none a finger to it dares to raise.
All view if with dislike; but viler she,
Who hastes to marry ’gainst propriety !
When from their early homes young women go,
Parents and brothers they nigh cease to know.
Important rales for step like this are made,
And to such rules obedience should be paid.


2 When rainbows in the west at morn appear,
By morning’s close the sky from rain is clear;
So fleeting are the joys of lawless love ;
Licentious pleasures evanescent prove.
When from their early homes young women go,
Parents and brothers they nigh cease to know.
Important rules for step like this are made,
And to such rules obedience should be paid.


3 Ah! think of this young girl whose wilful heart
Is bent on marriage as her ouly part.
She wrongs herself, to the right course untrue,
Which every virtuous woman should pursue.
She blames her lot, and, wanton, will not own
Heaven’s ordering of it on the parents thrown.
For marriage ties the wisest rules are made,
And to such rules obedience should be paid.


VIII.


The Séang shoo; allusiye, A MAN WITHOUT PROPRIETY IS NOT
EQUAL TO A RAT. .


°
‘1 Behold a rat! Jts skin has glossy sheen ! *
Then mark thaf man’s demeanour, poor and mean !


Bx ‘IV. 3x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 99


Bearing of bearing void !—what means it? This:— —
’Twere better death than longer life were his !


2 Behold a rat! Its teeth can sharply bite!
Then mark deportment careless of what’s right!
Manners thus careless of what’s right declare
*Twere well the man himself for death prepare.


8 Behold a rat! How small its limbs, and fine!
Then mark the course that scorns the proper line !
Propriety’s neglect may well provoke
A wish the man would quickly court death’s stroke.


Ix,


The Kan maow; narrative. THE ZEAL OF THE OFFICERS OF Wer
TO WELCOME MEN OF WORTH. : ‘

According to Choo, who gives the only admissible explanation of this
piece, the first four lines of the stanzas describe the officers of Wei,
meeting in the neighbourhood of Tseun, a recluse, but a man of worth,
who comes from his obscurity, or a visitor to Wei from another State,


1 Where Tseun’s suburbs lie remote,
From the staffs the ox-tails float.
High the staffs, and each one bright
With its silken bandlets white !

-Four cars drawn by steeds of fire
Welcome guest whom.all desire.
Admirable, what will he
Give to meet such courtesy ?


2 In Tseun’s suburbs near the town,
Fly the falcon banners, blown
From the staffs that rise around,

-All with bands of white silk bound.
Five cars drawn by horses strong
Wait the guest who comes along.
Courteous, worthy,—what shall he
Pay for all this courtesy ?


8 Now the walls of Teun we see;
Feather’d streamers flutter free
From the flag staffs strong ang stout,
Girt by silken bands about.

7 *


100 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part I


Six cars drawn by steeds of fame
Well attest the guest’s high name.
Sage profound, vehat can he say
That such welcome will repay ?


xX,


The Zsae ch‘e ; narrative, THE BARONESS Mun or HeEv coMPLAINs
OF NOT BEING ALLOWED TO GO TO WEI TO CONDOLE WITH THE MAR-
QUIS ON THE DESOLATION OF HIs STATE, AND APPEAL TO SOME GREAT
PowERS ON ITS BEHALF.


The wife of the -baron of Heu was one of the daughters of Seuen
Kéang and Ch‘aou-pih Hwan (see on iii, IX,), and a sister consequently
of the dukes Tae and Wan of Wei. Sorry for the ruin which the Teih
had. brought on Wei, she had wished, while the remnant of the people
* was collected about Ts‘aou, to go and condole with her brother (probably
duke Wan), and consult with him as to what could be done in his
desperate case. It was contrary, however, to the rules of propriety for
a lady in her position to return to her native State, and she was not
allowed to do so, In this piece we have, it is supposed, her complaint,
and the vindication of her purpose.


1 I wished to urge my steeds, and drive
To Wei, to share my brother’s grief,
Not slacking till we should arrive
And halt at Ts‘aou, and find relief.
Another went, o’er hill, through stream, eross plain ;
Here in deep sorrow I must still remain.


2 What I wished fer you denied ;
Here in Heu I must abide.
And in your decision’s spite
I must hold nty purpose right.
You, unkind, my purpose spurn ;—~
Not to Wei can I return.
I must slight your views as nought,
For I cannot quench my thought.


8 T’lt climb the sides of that steep mound,
And pluck the lilies growing there.
Thoughts in my woman’s heart abound,

And every thought myzht blossom bear.
In Heu the pgople all my purpose blame; |
Their childish, hasty thoughts cause me no shame.


Bx IV..vin.] THE Book oF FOETRY. 101


‘4 I would through the land have gone,
Passed where fields of rich wheat shone,
Prayer have made torTs‘e’s great state,
Help have sought for Wei’s sore strait.
Nobles who o’er Wei preside,

Zeal like this you should not chide.
Hundreds age the plans you make;
Best the course I wished to take !


102 THE BOOK OF PORTRY. [Parr I.


BOOK V.


THE ODES OF WRI.


To what has been said of Wei in the introductory note to the third
‘Book, it may be added here that the State had a longer history under the
descendants of K‘ang-shuh than any of the other States of the Chow
dynasty. It outlasted that dynasty itself, and subsisted through a period
of 905 years, when the last prince of Wei was reduced to the ranks of
the people under the second of the emperors of Ts‘in. —


I.


The Ke yuh; allusive, THE PRAISE OF DUKE W00,--HIS ASSIDU-
OUS CULTIVATION OF HIMSEL# ; His DIGNITY ; HIS ACCOMPLISHMENTS.


All the critics agree to accept duke. Woo of Wei as the subject of this
piece. He had a very long rule,—of 55 years; and in his 42nd year,
when “the Dog Jung” killed king Yéw (B.c. 770), he led a body of
soldiers to the assistance of Chow, and did great service against the Jung,
so.that Yéw’s son, king P‘ing, appointed him “a duke of the Court.”


1 How rich the clumps of green bamboo,

Around each cove of K‘e!

They lead my thoughts to our duke Woo ;—
Of winning graceishe!

As knife and file make smooth the bone,

As jade by chisel wrought and stone,
Is stamp upon him set. °

Grave and of dignity serene ;

With force of will as plainly seen ;

Accomplished, elegant in mien ;
Him we can ne’er forget.


2 Strong grow the clumps of green bamboo,
Around each cove of Ke.
’ They lead my thoughts to our duke Woo ;—
Of winning grace is he!
His ear-plugs are of pebbles dine ;
- And gems likg stars bright glittering shine,
All o’er his cap of state.


Br V. 11] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 195


Grave ‘oil of dignity serene ;

With force of will-as plainly seen ;

Accomplished, elegant in Wnien 5
Him we can ne’er forget.


3 How thick the clumps of green bamboo,’

Around each gove of K‘e!

They lead my thoughts to our duke Woo ;——
Of winning grace is he!

Pure as the finest tin or gold,

And as the sceptre princes hold
So strong, while mild in mood !

See him in car with lofty side,

Magnanimous and free from pride.

His words to jest are oft allied,
But never are they rude.


IL
The Kaou pwan; narrative, A HAPPY RECLUSE.


1 By the stream in the vale his hut he has reared,
That man tall and stout, looking free from all cares,
He lives all alone ; he sleeps, wakes, and then talks ;—
And ne’er to ‘forget what he prizes, he swears.


2 In the bend of the mound his hut he has reared,
That man tall angl stout, gay and lightsome of heart.
‘He lives all alone; he sleeps, wakes, and then sings ;~—
He swears from this spot he will never depart.


8 There on that level height his hut he has reared,
That man tall and stout, who himself so contains.
He lives all alone; he sleeps, wakes, sleeps again ;—
He swears he’ll ne’er tell what in his mind reigns.


TIL,


The Shih jin ; narrative. CHWANG KANG AS SHE APPEARED ON
HER ARRIVAL IN WEI. HER GREAT CONNEXIONS; HER BEAUTY; HER
EQUIPAGE ; THE RICHES Of T's‘E.


s


The principat points in the history of ChwanggKéang, who is evidently
the subjeet of this piece, have been touched on in the notes to the second


104 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


and some other odes of Book iii. The only difficulty in translating or
versifying it is to determine whether the verbs are to be taken in the past
tense or in the present. I havegdeferred to the general opinion of the
‘Chinese critics, who take the piece to have been written after the lady
becamean object of commiseration through the behaviour of her husband,


1 The lady was of figure large and tall.
In broidered robe, hid ’neath a garment plain,
A bride, she came from T's‘e’s high palace hall,
In Wei, as wife of our great lord to reign.
’Gainst her of no inferior birth the stain .
Could be alleged, sister of Ts‘e’s great heir.
Of other grand alliances a train
She could display, for her two sisters fair
The highest dignity in Hing and T‘an did wear.


2 Like blades of white grass were her fingers fine ;
Her skin like purest ointment hard congealed ;
Her neck like larvee qn the tree which shine
So long and white. Her opening lips revealed
Her even teeth, behind their screen concealed,
Like melon seeds. Her front cicada-square,
Displayed her eyebrows curved upon its field,
Like horns of silkworm moth; and dimples rare,
With dark and lucid eyes, showed face beyond compare.


8 When, on her coming, near the city wall,
She halted in the cultured fields, each eye
Viewed with delight her figure large and tall.
Her team of mettled steeds their bits tossed high,
Round which was twined red cloth in rich supply.
Then in her carriage she went on in state,
Its pheasant-screens oft followed by the cry,
“ Harly retire from court, ye nobles great ;
The marquis leave untired, to cherish this fit mate.”


4 Where out of Ts‘e into our State she passed,
Its banks all green with rush and sedges rank,
Northwards the Ho rolled on the waters vast —~
Of its majestic stream, while in it sank
With plashing sound the nets, which dripping, dank,
The toiling fishers dropt into the wave,
*Mong shoals of sturgeon, both the large and lank.
Her sister ladies shene in dresses brave,
And martial looked the officers, who escort gave.


Bx V. 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 105


Iv,


: : F
The Afdng ; narrative, with ‘the other elements interspersed, A Wo-
MAN, WHO HAD FORMED AN IMPROPER. CONNEXION, NOW CAST OFF, |


RELATES AND BEMOANS HER SAD CASE,
a


In the 9th line of the Ist stanza the speaker refers to the practice in
China from the most anfent times of employing go-betweens or inter- ,
muneii to form the contract of marriage. The “shell and reeds” in lipe
lth of stanza 2nd are the tortoise-shell and the stalks of the achillew,
used for purposes of divination. .


1 A simple-looking lad you seemed,

When first you met my eye,

By most a travelling merchant deemed,
Raw silk for cloth to buy.

But your true aim was to propose
That I should go with you ;

And through the K‘e I went quite free,
Until we reached Tun-k‘ew.

*Twas then I said, “It is not I,
Who would the time delay ;

Your go-between I have not seen,
I must not run away.

I pray, Sir, do not angry be;
In autumn be the day.”


2 When autumn came, then climbed I oft
That ruined wall, and gazed
Towards Fuh-kwan, my heart ail soft,
With expectation raised.
When you came not, my hapless lot
With streams of tears I mourned.
At last your longed-for form I saw,
And tears to smiles were turned.
With words I strove to tell my leve, :
While you averment made
That shell and seeds good answer gave.
“*No more delay,” I said.
“Your carriage bring; Ill go at once,
My goods all in it laid.”


3 When on the ‘mulberry tree the leaves
All hang in glossy state,


106 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part I.


The sight is fair. O dove, beware ;
lts fruits intoxicate.

Ah! thou, young maiden, too wilt find
Cause for repentance deep,

If, by a lover’s arts seduced,
Thyself thou fail to keep.

A gentleman who hastes to*prove
The joys of lawless love,

For what is done may still atone;
To thee they’ll fatal prove.
Thouw’lt try in vain excuse to feign,

Lost like the foolish dove.


4 When sheds its leaves the mulberry tr ee,

All yellow on the ground,

And sear they-lie. Such fate have I
Through my rash conduct found.

Three years with you in poverty
And struggles hard I’ve passed ;

And now with carriage-curtains wet;
Through flooded Ke I haste.

I always was the same, but you
A. double mind have shown.

Tis you, Sir, base, the right eranearces 3
Your conduct I have known.
Aye changing with your moods of mind,

And reckless of my mean.


5 Three years of life I was your wife,
.And laboured in your house ;
I early rose, late sought repose,
And so fulfilled my vows.
I never did, one morning’s space,
My willing work suspend,
But me thus cruelly you treat,
And from your dwelling send.
All this my brothers will not own,
At me they'll only jeer,

And say I reap as I have sown ;
Reply they will not heam

In heart I groan, and sad bemoan
My fate with many & tear.


Bx V. v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 107-


6 Together were we to grow old ;—
Old now, you make me pine.
The K‘e aye flows witltin its banks,

Its shores the lake confine.
But you know neither bank nor shore,
Your passions ne’er denied,
Back to my happy girlhood’s time,
With hair in knot still tied,
I wildly go; I’ll never know
Its smiles and chat again.
To me you clearly swore the faith,
Which now to break you’re fain.
Could I foresee so false you’d be?
And now regret is vain.


Vv.


The Chuh han; narrative. A DAUGHTER OF THY HovUsE oF Wut, |
MARRIED IN ANOTHER STATE, EXPRESSES HER,LONGING TO REVISIT
WEI.

The argument of this ode is the same with that of iii. XIV.; but we
are not to suppose that the lady of the one is the same as that in the
other. :


1 With long and tapering rods,
You angle in the Ke. :
I think of you, dear friends,
Here far removed from Wei.


2 Ts‘euen-yuen upon the left,
Ke on the right I view.
But married far away,
To home I bade adieu.


8 Those streams, this on the right,
That on the left, appear.
The laugh that shows your teeth,
Your tinkling gems, I hear.


4. T watch the cedar oars
On Ke, gnd boats of pine.
O might I travel there,
And scothe this heart of “mine ! .


108 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr’ I.


VI.


The Hwan-lan; allusive. R{CTURE OF A CONCEITED YOUNG MAN
OF BANK,


It is of no use trying, as many Chinese critics do, to find a historical
application for the subject of this piece. The spike at the girdle was of
ivory, worn for the purpose of loostning knots. It belonged to the
equipment of grown-up men, and was supfosed to indicate their com-
petency for the management of business, however intricate, The archer’s
thimble was also made of ivory; it was placed on the thumb of the
right hand, to assist in drawing the bow. A ring of jade is now often
employed for thé same purpose.


1 Feeble as branch of sparrow-gourd, this youth,
Wears spike at girdle, as if he, forsooth, .
Were quite a man; but though the spike he wears,
He knows-not us at whom he proudly stares.
How easy and conceited is his mien! _
How drop his girdle-ends, full jaunty seen !


2 Like leaf of sparrow-gourd, that coxcomb young,
With archer’s thimble at his girdle hung !
He wears the thimble, but he’s not the Swell
To lord it over us who know him well.
How easy and conceited is his mien !
How drop his girdle-ends, full jaunty seen !


Vu,


The Ho wang; narrative. OTHER THINGS MORE DIFFICULT TO
OVERCOME THAN DISTANCE MAY KEEP ONE FROM A PLACE,


This little piece is referred to a daughter of Seuen Kéang (iii. EX.)
who was married to duke Hwan of Sung, After bearing a son, she was
divorced, and returned to Wei, By and by that son became duke of
Sung, and she wished to return to that State, but submitted to the rules
of propriety, which forbade her doing so ;-~intimating, however, her
maternal longing in these two verses, which are supposed to be greatly to
her honour. :


1 They tell me that the Hois wide;—
With a few reeds I could cross through.
They tell me Sung is distant far ;—
Rising on tiptoe Sung I view.


2 They tell me that the Ho ‘s wide ;—
A little oat it will not bear.


Bx V. 1x] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 109


They tell me Sung is distant far ;-—
Ere morning fades I might be there.


VIIL.


The Pih he; narrative, and metaphorical, A WIFE MOURNS OVER
THE PROTRACTED ABSENCE OF HER HUSBAND ON THE KING'S SERVICE,
; ;
1 How martial looks my noble man,
The hero of the land!
See him in chariot lead the van,
His halberd in his hand !


2 Since eastward on his course he sped,
My hair neglected flies.
I might anoint and wash my head,
But not to meet his eyes.


3 For rain, for rain, the people ery,
But brightly shines the sun ;
So for my absent lord tong I,
Head pained, and heart undone.


4 Where shall I Jethe’s lily find,
Behind my house to set ?
I think of him with aching mind,
For how can I forget ?


IX.


The Yéw hoo; metaphorical, A WOMAN EXPRESSES HER DESIRE FOR
A HUSBAND,


The woman certainly does so in a singular way ; but in this interpreta-
tion of the piece all the critics agree; while the older ones find in it a
condemnation of the government of Wel, which certainly does not appear
in it.

1 Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
At that dam cross the K‘e.
Like him that man, for whom I’m sad!
No lower dress has he. ‘


2 Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
' At that deep ford of K*e.
Like him that man, for whom Tp sad!
No girdle-sash has he !


110 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr J.


3 Lonely, suspicious, is that fox,
There, on the bank of K‘e.
Like him that man,,for whom I’m sad !
No clothes at ali has he!


x.


e
The Muh kwa; metaphorical, SMALL GIFTS OF KINDNESS SHOULD
BE RESPONDED TO WITH GREATER ; WHILE FRIENDSHIP IS MORE THAN
ANY GIFT. :


!


When Wei was nearly extinguished by the Teih, duke Hwan of Ts‘,
as the leading prince among the States, came grandly and munificently
to its help ; and Maou finds in this piece the grateful sentiments of the
people of Wei towards him. If this be the correct interpretation,
Hwan’s all but royal munificence and favour is strongly represented by
the insignificant present of a fruit. Choo compares the piece with iii.
XVIL, and thinks it may refer to an interchange of courtesies between

- a lover and his mistress. But we need not seek any particular interpret-
ation of it, What is metaphorically set forth may have a general ap-
plication. :


1 A tree-gourd they gave me in compliment,
And [Lin return gave a lovely keu-gem.
’T was not in return for the compliment ;—
I wished to make lasting my friendship with them.


2 A peach they presented in compliment,
And TF in return gave a lovely yaou-gem.
*Twas not in return for the compliment ;—
I wished to make lasting my friendship with them.


3 A plum they presented in compliment,.
And I in return gave a lovely kew-stone.
’Twas not in return for the compliment ;—
Onr friendship to knit was my motive alone.


Br VI. 1]. THE BOOK OF POETRY. | 11


BOOK VI.


THE ODESSOF THE ROYAL DOMAIN.


By the “ Royal Domain” we are to understand the territory attached
to Loh, or the eastern capital of Chow. At the beginning of that dynasty
king Wan occupied the city of Fung, in the present district of Hoo of
the department Se-gan, Shen-se, from which his son Woo moved the seat
of government a little further east to Haou, 30 /e south of the present
district city of Ch‘ang-gan, in the same depaytment. In the time of king
Chiing, a city was built near the present Loh-yang, Ho nan, and called
“ the eastern capital.” Mectings of the princes of the States assembled
there, but the court continued to be held at Haou, till the accession of
king P‘ing, who removed it to Loh in 8.c, 769. From this time the Chow
kings sank nearly to the level of the princes of the States, and the poems
collected in their domain were classed with “the Lessons of Manners,”
though still distinguished by the epithet of Royal, prefixed to them,


L


The Shoo le; narrative. AN OFFICER DESCRIBES HIS MELANCHOLY
AND REFLECTIONS ON SEEING THE DESOLATION OF THE OLD CAPITAL
oF CHoY.


1 Where the palaces rose grand,
When Chow nobly ruled the land,
‘Millets, some with drooping head,
Some, just coming into blade,

All around abundant grew.

Slow the fields I wandered through,
Moved in heart such sight to view.
Friends who knew me understood

What induced my’ saddened mood.

Those who did not know me said,

There I search for something made.

O thou azure Heaven, remote,

Who this desolation wrought ?


2 Where the palaces rose grand,
When Chow ngbly ruled the land,
Millets, drooping, heavy here, .
There just coming into ear,


112 _ ‘THE BOOK OF POETRY. é[Parr I.


All around abundant grew.

Slow the fields I wandered through,
Drunk with grief,such sights to view.
Friends who knew me understood .
What induced my saddened mood.
Those who did not know me said,
There I search for something made.
O thou azure Heaven, remote,

Who this desolation wrotght ?


8 Where the palaces rose grand, .
When Chow nobly ruled the land,
Millets, heavy, drooping low,

Some the bursting grain that show,
All around abundant grew.

Slow the fields I wandered through,
Breath nigh stopt such scene to view.
Friends who knew me understood
What induced my saddened mood.
Those who did not know me said,
There I search for something made.
O thou azure Heaven, remote,

Who this desolation wrought?


Il. Scoticé.
The Keun-tsze yu yih ; narrative. THE FEELINGS OF A WIFE ON


THE PROLONGED ABSENCE OF HER HUSBAND ON SERVICE, AND HEB
LONGING FOR HIS RETURN.


1 The gudeman’s awa, for to fecht wi’ the stranger,
An’ when he’ll be back, oh ! my hert canna tell.
The hens gae to reist, an’ the beests to their manger,
As hameward they wend fraé their park on the hill.
But hoo can I, thus left alane,
Help thinking o’ my man that’s gane?


2 The gudeman’s awa, for to fecht wi’ the stranger,
An’ lang will it be ere he see his fireside.
The hens gae to reist, an’ the beests to their manger,
As the slantin’ sunbeams throu the forest trees glide.
Heaven kens the lanesome things I think.
Heaven sené my man his meat an’ drink !


Bx VI. wf, THE Book oF POETRY. 113


IIL, Scotied,


The Keun-tsze yang-yang ; narrative THE HUSBAND 8 SATISFACTION,
AND THE WIFE’S JOY, ON HIS RETURN,


I have interpreted both this piece and the former after Choe He, He
thinks this is a sequel to the other ; and I do not think anything better
can be made of it.


1 The gudeman’s come hame, an’ his face weers a bloom,
His organ o’ reeds he hads in his left han’?;. , +
Aw’ his richt han’ ca’s me to come till his room :~
It’s siccan a joy ; it’s mair nor I can stan’. _
2 The gudeman’s come hame, an’ he’s pleesed I'll engage,
His gran’ fether screen he hads in his left han’ ;
An’ his richt han’ ca’s me to come till the stage :—
It’s siccan a joy ; it’s mair nor I can stan’,


For the following Latin version of these two verses I am indebted to
Mr Mercer.


Fronte vir grat’ meus appropinquat, .
In manu portat citharam sinistra ;
Allicit dextra thalamos inire.

Gaudia nobis !


Indicit letam faciem Maritus,

Fert et umbellam gracilem in sinistra ;

Invocat dextra penetrare scenam,
Gaudia nobis!


TV,


The Yang che shwuy; allusive. THE TROOPS OF CHOW, KEPT ON
DUTY IN SHIN, MURMUR AT THEIR SEPARATION FROM THEIR FAMILIES,


The mother of king P‘ing was a Kéang, a daughter of the house of
Shin. That State had suffered repeatedly from the attacks of Ts‘oo, and
the king, after removing to the eastern capital, sent his own people to
occupy and defend it, and kept them long absent on the service ; and this
piece contains the expression of their dissatisfaction in consequence. The
bearing of the two allusive liges in each stanza on the rest has not been
detected in a satisfactory way by any one.—-P‘co and Heu were small
States, confederate with Shin.

Vou. Wn 8


114 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


1 Fretted the waters seem,

Yet gently flows the stream ;—

Unable a faggot éo bear. .

Guarding Shin here we roam,
Wives and children at home,

All absent our toils who should share.
We think of them ever; :
Thought parts from Sink never 5-—

What month shall we homeward repair?


2 Fretted the waters seem,

Yet gently flows the stream ;—

A bundle of thorns ’twill not bear.
Guarding P‘oo here we roam,
Wives and children at home,

All absent our toils who should share.
We think of them ever;

Thought parts from them never ;—

What month shall we homeward repair ?


8 Fretted the waters seem,
Yet gently flows the stream ;—
The reed-bundle powerless to bear.
Guarding Heu here we roam,
Wives and children at home,
All absent our toils who should share.
We think of them ever;
Thought parts from them never ;—
What month shall we homeward repair?


Vv.


The Chung kuh; allusive. THE SAD CASE OF A WOMAN FORCED
TO SEPARATE FROM HER' HUSBAND BY THE PRESSURE OF FAMINE,


1 The valleys show the mother-wort,
Now scorched in each dry spot.
Behold a wife driven forth from home,
‘Beneath hard famine’s lot !
She sadly sighs, she sadly sighs,
From husband torn and dearest ties.


e
2 The valleys show the mother-wort, :
Now Scorched where tall it rose.


Bx VI. v1] THE BOOK OF POETRY.
~


Behold a wife driven forth from home,
By stern misfortune’s blows !

We hear her groans, wé hear her groans,

As she her hapless fate bemoans.


8 The valleys show the mother-wort,
Scorched ingach dampest place.
Behold a wife driven forth from home—
Bewail in vain her ease !
Her tears aye flow, her tears aye flow ;
Howe’er she grieve, ne’er ends her woe !


Vi.


115


The Zoo yuen; metaphorical. AN OFFICER OF CHOW DECLARES
His WEARINESS OF LIFE BECAUSE OF THE GROWING MISERIES OF THE
STATE, AND OF THE WAY IN WHICH MEN OF PRINCIPLE SUFFERED,


WHILE WORTHLESS MEN ESCAPED,


1 Caught is the pheasant in the net,
That vainly for the hare is set.
So those who duty promptly do
Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
While one whose ends are base and mean
Contrives from harm himself to screen.
‘When I was in my youthful prime,
Without commotion passed the timo ;
But since those happy days were o’er,
Numerous the ills that press us sore t=


I would that I might sleep, and rise no more!


2 Caught is the pheasant in the snare,
Avoided by the cautious hare.
So those who duty promptly do
Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
While one whose ends are base and mean
Contrives from harm himself to screen.
When I was in my youthful prime,
No strange events e’er marked the time ;
But now those days have passed away,
And sorrows meet us day by day :—


I would that I might sleep, and sle&p for aye!
; es


16 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


3 Into the trap the pheasant flies,
Which the hare shuns with cautious ‘eyes.
So those who dutyspromptly do
Find cause their loyal zeal to rue,
While one whose ends are base and mean
Contrives from harm himself to screen.
When I was in my youthfulerime,
No toilsome tasks distressed the time ;
But in these latter days of life,
Our miseries are waxen rife :—

O for the sleep unbroke by sound of strife!


VII.


The Koh lay; allusive. A WANDERER FROM CHOW, SEPARATED
FROM “HIS KIN, MOURNS OVER HIS LOT.


1 Around the creepers thickly spread,
On the borders of the Ho.
My native soil no more I tread ;

Into exile forth I go.
Far removed from kindred all,
Father I a stranger call.
Though so galled, he does not brook
Kindly upon me to look.


2 Around the creepers thickly spread,
On the green banks of the Ho.
My native soil no more I tread ;

Into exile forth I go.
Far removed from kindred all,
Mother I a stranger call.
Though so called, she does not'deign
Me as child to entertain.


3 Around the creepers thickly spread,
‘On the bank-lips of the Ho.
My native soil no more I tread ;

Into exile forth I go.
Far from all who bear my name,
Elder brother I would claiin
In a stranger, but he spurns
Suclf a claim, and from me turns.


Bx VI. 1x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 117


VIII.


The Ts‘ae koh; narrative. A LaDY LONGS FOR THE SOCIETY OF
THE OBJECT OF HER, AFFECTION,


1 He’s there, the dolichos among !
Only one day from sight away,—
To me it se€ms as three months long!


2 Ho’s there, among the southernwood !
Only one day from sight away,—
Tt. seems three seasons’ solitude !


3 Among the mugwort he appears !
Only one day from sight away,—
To me it seems as three full years !


x,


The 7a keu; narrative, THE INFLUENCE OF A SEVERE AND VIRTU-
OUS MAGISTRATE IN REPRESSING LICENTIOUSNESS,


1 He rolls along in carriage grand,
His robes are bright with green,—
His robes of rank, as on the bank
The tender sedge is seen.
Thinking [ always am of thee,
Thinking with fond desire. ;
But. dreading his severity,
I must, repress the fire,


2 With slow and heavy sound his car,—

‘His car of state, moves on.

O’er his dress spread, the colours red
Shine like carnation-stone.

Thinking I always am of thee ;
The fondest thoughts have I.

The fear of him alone holds me, .
Or to thine arms I’d fly.


8 Our fate may be, while still alive,
Always apart to dwell ;
But when we’re dead, we shajl be laid
In the same earthen cell.


118 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


If haply thou should’st say that I
Am not in this sincere,

I swear its truth ey that day’s eye,
Whose piercing glance I fear.


x,


The Kéw chung yéw ma; narrative. A WOMAN LONGS FOR THE
PRESENCE OF HER LOVERS, WHO, SHE THINKS, ARE DETAINED FROM
HER BY ANOTHER WOMAN,


This interpretation of the ode lies upon the surface of it, and is that
given by Choo He. The older interpreters refer the piece to the time of
king Chwang (B.c. 695—-679), who drove away from their employment
men of worth through his want of intelligence. The people, they say,
mourned the loss of such men, and expressed their desire for fheir return
in these verses, 7


1 Where the hemp grows on the mound,
There some one keeps Tsze-tseay ;
There some one keeps T'sze-tseay :—

Why comes not he to me with a bound ?


2 On the mound where grows the wheat,
There some one keeps T'sze-kwoh ;
There some one keeps ''sze-kwoh :+~

Why comes not he with me here to eat ?


3 On the mound plum trees have place.
There some one keeps those youths;
There some one keeps those youths :—

O for their kew-stones girdle to grace!


Bx VII. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 119


BOOK VII.
TH® ODES OF CHING.


THE State of Ch‘ing was not one of the oldest fiefs of the Chow dynasty.
In B,C. 805, king Seuen conferred on his brother Yéw the appanage of
Ch‘ing in the present Hwa Chow, department of T‘ung-chow, Shen-se.
Yéw, who is called duke Hwan in the list of the lords of Ching, acted as
minister of Instruction at the royal court, and was killed in 773, not long,
before the Jung hordes took the capital, and put the reigning sovereign
to death. His son, known as duke Woo, was of great service to king
P‘ing when he moved the ¢apital to the east, and succeeded to his father’s’
office ; and becoming possessed of the lands of Kih and K‘wel, south of
the Ho, north of the Ying, east of the Loh, and west of the Tse, he re-
moved there, and called his State New Ch‘ing (Sin Ch‘ing), which is still
the name of one of the districts of the department of K‘ae-fung, Ho-nan,
For further information about Ch‘ing, see the note on the title of Bk xiii,


I,


. : a
The Zszee; narrative. THE PEOPLE OF THE CAPITAL EXPRESS THEIR
ADMIRATION OF, AND REGARD FOR, DUKE Woo OF CH‘ING.


We have the authority of Confucius, in the Le Ke, for understanding
this piece ag expressive of the regard due to ability and virtue, The
subject of it is by all critics understood to be duke Woo, mentioned in.
the preceding note. Ministers of the court wore black robes,—not in the -
king’s court when having audience of him, but in their own courts or
offices, to which they proceeded after the morning audience to discharge
their several duties,


1 The black robes well your form befit;
When they are worn we'll make you new.
Now for your court! oh! there we’ll sit,
And watch how you your duties do,
And when we to our homes repair,
We'll send to you our richest fare,
Such is the love to you we bear !!


2 Those robes well with your virtue match ;
When they aresworn we'll make you new.
Now for your court! There will we watch,
Well pleased, how you your duties do.


120 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I


And when we to our homes repair,
We’ll send to you our richest fare,
Such is the love to ydt we bear!


3 These robes your character beseem ;
en they are worn we'll make you new.
Now for your court! oh! thene we deem
It pleasure great your form to view.
And when we to our homes repair,,
We’ll send to you our richest fare,
Such is the love to you we bear!


mt


The Zséang Chung-tsxe narrative, A LADY BEGS HER LOVER TO
LET HER ALONE, AND NOT EXCITE THE SUSPICIONS OF HER PARENTS


“ AND OTHERS.


1 My worthy Chung, I pray,
Do not in such a way |
Into my hamlet bound,
My willow trees to wound.
. For them I do not care,
But you my parents scare.
*Tis their words I fear.
You, Chung, have my heart;
But their words severe
‘Will cause me to smart.


2 My worthy Chung, I pray,
Do not in such a way
Come leaping o’er my wall,
And make the branches fall
From my mulberry tree.
That does not trouble me,
But my brothers all see.
?Tis their words I fear.
You, Chung, have my heart ;.
But their words severe
Will cause me to smart.


e
3 My worthy Chung, I pray,
Do not in such a way


Br VIL. 111.) = THE BOOK oF POETRY. 121


Into my garden jump,
My sandal trees to thump.
For them I do not Gre,
But people grow aware
What ’tis that brings you there. °
Tis their words I fear.
You, Chung, have my heart ;
But their words severe
Will cause me to. smart..


Tit,


The Shuk yu ten; narrative, THE ADMIRATION WITH WHICH
SHUH-TWAN, WAS REGARDED,


Duke Woo was succeeded by his son Woo-shang, known as duke Chwang,
ih B.C. 742, Yo this son his mothet had a great dislike, while a younger
brother (Shuh), named Twan, was her favourite; and the two plotted
together to get possession of the State, Shuh was a dashing young fel-
low; but his character otherwise was the reverse of being worthy of
admiration, and we must suppose that this ode and the next merely ex-
press the sentiments of his partisans.


1 To the hunt Shuh has gone,
And people there are none
Remaining in the street.
Perhaps a few you'll find ;
But none like Shuh so kind,
So graceful, will you meet.


2 To the chase Shuh has gone,
And people there are none
Left feasting in the street.
If find a few you could,
Yet none like Shuh so good,
So graceful, would you meet.


3 To the fields Shuh has gone,
And people there are none’
Careering through the street,
Some riders though you told,
Yet none like Shuh so bold,
So graceful, would you sheet.


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


IV.


The Ta Shuh yu ten; narrative, CELEBRATING THE CHARIOTEER-
ING, DARING, AND ARCHERY OF SHUH-TWAN,


1


bo


ow


Our Shuh a-hunting forth has gone;
In four-horsed chariot grarftl he shone.
As ribbon in his grasp each rein ;
With measured steps, like dancers twain,
The outside horses flew.
They now have reached the marshy ground ;
At once the flames break out around.
With naked arm and chest Shuh stands ;
A tiger fierce his nervous hands
Grapple and soon subdue.
He then presents it to the duke,
‘While all with wonder on him look.
But, Shuh, try not such sport again.
What grief were ours if you were slain !
Your daring we should rue.


Our Shuh a-hunting drove away,
His four steeds ail of colour bay.
The outsides followed close behind
The insides, finest of their kind,
Like wild geese on the wing.
They now have gained the marshy ground;
At once the flames blaze all around.
Few archers can with Shuh compare ;
A charioteer of cunning rare,
The steeds before him spring.
Now they dash on in course direct ;
Now they’re brought up and quickly checkt.
Forth flies the arrow, fleot and stark,
Nor faits to hit its proper mark,
His left hand foltowing.


Our Shuh a-hunting drove away,
His four steeds all of colour grey.
‘With heads in line the ingides sped ;
The outsides followed like thé head
Succdbded by the arms.


Br VII. v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 128
They now have reached the marshy ground ;
One blaze of flame wraps all around ;
Soon cease the hunts alarms.
Shuh’s steeds before him slowly move ;
His skill the arrows cease to prove.
- Straightway the quiver’s lid is closed,
And in its case the bow reposed.
How his finé bearing charms !


Vv.


The Zs‘ing jin ; narrative, THE USELESS MAN®UVRING OF AN ARMY
OF CHING ON THE FRONTIERS.


The Tso-chuen, on the sentences in the Ts‘éun-Ch‘ew, under the 2nd year
of duke Min, that “‘ The Teih entered Wei,” and “ Ch‘ing threw away its
army,’’ says that “the earl of Ch‘ing hated Kaou K‘ih, and sent him with
an army to the Ho to resist the Teih, where he was stationed for a long
time without being recalled. The troops dispersed, and returned to their
homes. Kaou K‘ih himself fled to Ch‘in; and the people of Ch‘ing,
with reference to the affair, made the Js‘ing jin.” The attack of Wei by
the Teib, which has been often referred to in Books iv. and v., took place
in B.C, 659. Pang, Séaou, and Chow were all cities near the Ho,
which flowed through both the States of Ch‘ing and Wei.


1 The men of Ts‘ing in P‘ang all idle lie.
The general’s chariot with its mail-cilad team
Moves restlessly, and, rising from it, gleam
The tasseled spears, one ’bove the other high.
So aimless roam the troops about the Ho!


2 The men of Ts‘ing all round in Seaou are spread,
Although the chariot, with its mail-clad team,
Looks martial-like, and, rising from it, gleam

The hookéd spears, one high, one low displayed ;
Yet aimless look they all about the Ho!


3 The men of Ts‘ing have moved to Chow. Proud pace
The mail-clad team, whose driver on the left
Wheels round the chariot, and the spearman deft

Displays his spear ; gween them the general’s face


Looks pleased ;—’tis mimic war upon the Ho !


124 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


VL


The Kaouw k‘éw ; narrative. CELEBRATING SOME OFFICER OF CH‘ING
FOR HIS ELEGANT APPEARANCE AND INTEGRITY.


1 How glossy is the lambkin’s fur,
Smooth to the touch, and fair to oad.
In it arrayed, that officee
Rests in his lot, to virtue true.


2 With leopard-cuffs, the lambkin’s fur
Seems made for wearer strong in fight.
It well becomes that. officer,
Whom none will see swerve from the right,


3 Splendid his robe of lambkin’s fur,
With its three decorations grand !
It well beseems that officer,
The pride and glory of our land.


Vit.


The Zsun ta loo; narrative, OLD FRIENDSHIP SHOULD NOT BE
HASTILY BROKEN OFF. :


I cannot venture on any further interpretation of these two verses.
Choo hears in them the werds of a woman entreating her lover not to
cast her off ; Maau, the words of the people, entreating good men not to
leave the State. 5


1 Along the great highway,
I hold you by the cuff.
O spurn me not, I pray,
or break old friendship off,


2 Along the highway worn,
E hold your hand in mine.
Do not as vile me scorn ;
Your love I can’t resign.


VIII. Seoticé,


The Neu yueh he ming ; narrative. .A PLEASANT PICTURE OF DO-
MESTIC LIFE. A WIFE SENDS HER HUgBAND FROM HER SIDE TO HIS
HUNTING, EXPRESSES HER AFFECTION, AND ENCOURAGES. HIM TO CUL-
TIVATE VIRTUOUS MRIENDSHIPS.


Bx VII. 1x.] = THE BOOK OF POETRY. 125


I might have modified the account of this piece a little, if I had had be-
fore me, when I wrote it, the version now subjoined, which was sent to me
by my nephew in Australia, Nothing could be ‘better than the first two
verses, which also are true to the origind?. The third is, perhaps, better
of its kind ; but that kind is of Scotland, rather than of China. It is
80 good, however, that I have made no attempt ¢o recast it; but give it
as I received it—with this note. ;


1 Says oor gudewife? “ The cock is crawin’,”
Quoth oor gudeman, “The day is dawin’.”
_ “Get up, gudeman, an’ tak a spy ;
' See gin the mornin’-star be high,
Syne tak a saunter roon’ aboot ;
There’s rowth o’ dyukes and geese to shoot.


2 “Lat flee, and bring them hame to me,
An’ sic a dish as ye sall pree.
In comin’ times as ower the strings
Your noddin’ heed in. rapture hings,
Supreme ower care, nor fasht wi’ fears,
We'll baith grow auld in worth and years.


8 “ An’ when we meet the friends ye like,
T’ll gie to each some little fyke ;—
The lasses beads, trocks to their brithers,
An’ auld-warld fairlies to their mithers.
Some nick«nack lovin’ hands will fin’,
To show the love that dwalls within,”


KX.


The Yew neu tung kew; narrative. THE PRAISE OF SOME LADY,
I can make nothing more out of the piece than this, though the old~
interpreters, as a matter of course, find a historical basis for if,


1 There by his side in chariot rideth she,
As lovely flower of the hibiscus tree,
So fair‘her face ; and when about they wheel,
Her girdle gems of keu themselves reveal.
For beauty all the House of Keang have fame;
Tis eldest daughter,—she beseems her name.


2 There on the path, Close by him, walketh she,
Bright as the blossom of hibiscus t#ee


126 THE BOOK OF POETRY: [Parr I.


And fair her face; and when around they flit,
Her girdle gems a tinkling sound emit.

Among the Keang she has distinguished place,
For virtuous fame renowned, and peerless grace.


x.


The Shan yew foo-soo; allusive. A LADY MOCKING HER LOVER.


1 On mountain grows the mulberry tree ;
The lotus flower in meadow damp.
‘ It is not T'sze-too that I see,
But only you, you foolish scamp !


2 Polygonums the damp meads cover;
‘The lofty pines on mountains view.
It is not T'sze-ch‘ung comes as lover ;
You ariful boy, ’tis only you !


xI.


The Zh he; metaphorical. AN APPEAL FROM THE INFERIOR
OFFICERS OF CH‘ING TO THEIR SUPERIORS ON THE SAD CONDITION
OF THE STATE,

Choo hears in this piece the words ef a bad woman, soliciting the ad-
vances of her lovers, and, offering to respond to them; but this by no
means appears on the surface of the verses ;—it is, in fact, imported into
them,


1* Ye withered leaves, ye withered leaves,
Blown by the wind away !
So tossed is Ch‘ing. My spirit grieves
To see its sad decay.
Ye uncles, nobles of the land,
Reform the State; we’ll by you stand !


2 Ye withered leaves, ye withered leaves,
By winds so wildly tossed !
What grief my mourning heart receives
From Ch‘ing thus foully lost !
Uncles, your starting note we wait ;
We'll folldW and reform the State.


,


Bx VII. ziv.] | THE BOOK OF POETRY. 127


XI.
The Kéaou tung ; narrative, A WOMAN SCORNING HER LOVER, \


1 O dear! that artful boy
Refuses me a word !
But, Sir, I shall enjoy
My food,*though you’re absurd !


2 O dear! that artful boy
My table will not share !
But, Sir, I shall enjoy
My rest, though you’re not there!


XI,


The Kéen chang ; narrative, A LADY’S DECLARATION OF HER AT-
TACHMENT TO HER LOVER, WHOM SHE ADDRESSES, HOWEVER, IN A
DEFIANT MANNER, :


1 If you, good Sir, continue to be kind,
Pll hold my garments up the T's‘in to cross.
If you prefer ’bout me to change your mind,
Is there no other to replace your loss?
Of all the foolish youths I’ve seen,
Most foolish you I well may ween.


2 If you, good Sir, continue to be kind,
Pll hold my garments up the Wei to cross,
If you prefer *bout me to change your mind,
Is there no other to replace your loss?
Of all the foolish youths I’ve seen,
Most foolish you I well may ween.


°


XIV.


The Fung ; narrative. A WOMAN REGRETS LOST OPPORTUNITIES, AND
WOULD WELCOME A FRESH SUITOR.


1 Handsome the suitor was and stout,
Who for me in éhe lane looked out :
I should have gone with him I doubt.


128 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


2 Can I that suitor’s form forget, -
Who for me in tke hall did wait ?
That I held off J now regret.


3 I’m here, my broidered upper robe
Concealed beneath a garment plain.
As lovely is my lower robe,
With the same guard ’gairfst travel-stain.
O Sir, O Sir, come and me hence convey ;
Your waiting chariot I shall not delay !


4 I’m here, my broidered lower robe
Concealed beneath a garment plain.
As lovely is my upper robe,
With the same guard ’gainst travel-stain.
O Sir, 0 Sir, if you would only come,
At once your chariot should convey me home!


XY.


The Zung mun che shen; narrative, A WOMAN THINKS OF HER
LOVER'S RESIDENCE, AND COMPLAINS THAT HE DOES NOT COME TO
HER,


1 By th’ eastern gate, flat lies the ground,
.And madder there grows on the slope.
Hard by my lover’s house is found ;+-
He keeps away, and mocks my hope.


2 Where chestnuts grow, ‘near th’ eastern gate,
There stands a row, where is your home,
My heart turns aye to you, its mate,
But ah! to me you never.come !


XVI.


Ny


“The Fung yu; narrative. A WIFE'IS CONSOLED, IN CIRCUMSTANCES
OF GLOOM, BY THE ARRIVAL OF HER HUSBAND,


1 Cold is the wind, fast falls the rain,
The cock. aye shrilly crows.
But I have seen my ldtd again ;—
Now must my heart repose.


Bx VIL. xviit.] THE BOOK oF POETRY. 129


2 Whistles the wind, patters the rain,
The cock’s crow far resounds.
But I have seen my losd again,
And healed are my heart’s wounds.


8 All’s dark amid the wind and rain,

Ceaseless the cock’s clear voice !

But I have sen my lord again ;—
Should not mv heart rejoice ?


XvVii.


The Tze Kin ; narrative. A LADY MOURNS THE INDIFFERENCE AND
ABSENCE OF HER STUDENT LOVER,


Up to the present dynasty, students wore a blue collar, and the phrase
“ Blue collar” is a designation of a graduate of the first degree.


1 You student, with the collar blue,
Long pines my heart with anxious pain.
Although I do not go to you,
Why from all word do you refrain ?


2 O you, with girdle strings of blue,
__ My thoughts to you for ever roam !
" Although 1 do not go to you,
Yet why to me should you not come ?


38 How reckless you, how light and wild,
* There by the tower upon the wail !
One day, from sight of you exiled,
As long as three long months I call.


XVIIT,


The Yang che shwuy ; allusive. "ONE PARTY ASSERTS GOOD FAITH
TO ANOTHER, AND PROTESTS AGAINST PEOPLE WHO WOULD MAKE
THEM DOUBT EACH OTHER,


1 Fretted its waters seem,
Yet gently flows the stream :—
A bundle of thorns twill not bear.
Our brethren so few; —
There are but Land you -—
Let nothing our friendship impaft.
VOL, TI, 9


130 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


People’s words don’t believe ;
They are meant to deceive :~+
Their purpose ig but to ensnare.


2 Fretted its waters seem,
Yet gently flows the stream :—

A bundle of wood ’twill not bear.
Our brethren are so few ;

There are only we two :—

Let nothing our friendship impair.
Trust not the people’s breath ;
They don’t deserve your faith :—

Their purpose is but to ensnare.


XIX,


The. Ch'uh h‘e tung mun ; narrative. A MAN’S PRAISE OF HIS OWN
POOR WIFE, CONTRASTED WiTH FLAUNTING BEAUTIES,


1 My path forth from the east gate lay,
Where cloud-like moved the girls at play.
Numerous are they, as clouds so bright,
But not on them my heart’s thoughts light.

Dressed in @ thin white silk, with coiffure gray,
Is she, my wife, my joy in life’s low way.


2 Forth by the covering wall’s high tower,
TI went, and saw, like rush in flower,
Each flaunting girl. Brilliant are they,
But not with them my heart’s thoughts stay.
In thin white silk, with head-dress nadder-dyed,
Is she, my sole delight, ’foretime my bride.


XX.


The Yay yéw man ts‘aou ; narrative and allusive. A LADY REJOICES
IN AN UNLAWFUL CONNEXION WHICH SHE HAD FORMED.


1 On the moor, where thickly grew
Creeping grass, bent down with dew,
There a handsome man drew nigh,
’Neath whose forehead, broad and high,
Gleamed his clear and piercing eye.
Twas by accident we*met ;

Glad was I my wish to get.


Br VII. xxi.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 131


2 Where the grass creeps o’er the moor,
With the dew all covered o’er,
There the finest meee I,
Bove whose clear and piercing eye,
Rose his forehead, broad and high.
Chance gave us a meeting rare,
And we both were happy there,


XXI.


The Zsin Wei; narrative. “A FESTIVITY oF CH‘ING, AND ADVAN-
TAGE TAKEN OF IT FOR LICENTIOUS ASSIGNATIONS.


Tsin and Wai were two rivers in Ch‘ing, which joined at a certain point,
and flowed afterwards in a common stream,


1 Of the Tsin and the Wei
Onward the broad stream pours.
‘Women and men go by,
With valerian flowers.
To gentleman a lady says,
“‘ Have you been there to see the plays? ”
“Tve been,” he says, and she replies,
“ Let’s go again, and feast our eyes.
The ground beyond the Wei you'll find
Large, and for pleasure well designed.”
0 gentlemen and ladies wend
heir way, in sport the day to spend,
And to each other oft small peonies extend.


2 Of Tsin and Wei along

The lucid waters flow,
And on their banks a throng

Of men and women go.
To gentleman a lady says,
“ Have you been there to see the plays ? ”
“T’ve been,” says he,.and she replies,
“ Let’s go again and feast our eyes.
The ground beyond the Wei you’ll find
Large, and for pleasure well designed.”
So gentlemen and ladies wend
Their way, in spgrt the day to spend,

And to each other oft small peonies extend.


9*


132 . THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


BOOK VIII.


THE ODES OF TSE.


Ts‘E was one of the great fiefs of the kingdom of Chow. On the over-
throw of the Shang dynasty, king Woo appointed Shang-foo, one of his -
principal ministers, known also as “ Grandfather Hope,” marquis of Ts‘e,
with his capital at Ying-k‘éw ;—in the present district of Lin-tsze, de-
partment Tsing-chow, Shan-tung. The State greatly increased in popu+
lation and territory, having the Ho on the west, the sea on the east, and
Loo on the south,

Shang-foo claimed to be descended from Yaou’s chief minister, hence the
family surname was Kéang. Sometimes we find the surname Leu taking
the place of Kéang, from 2 State so called in the Shang dynasty, of which
his ancestors had been chiefs. The Kéangs continued in Fs‘e for about
‘Six centuries and a half, Their last representative died in B.C. 378.


L


"The Ke ming; narrative. A MODEL MARCHIONESS STIMULATING HER
HUSBAND TO RISE EARLY, AND ATTEND TO HIS DUTIES AT COURT.


1 His lady to the marquis says,
“The cock has crowed; ’tis late.
Get up, my lord, and haste to court.
Tis full; for you they wait.”
She did not hear the coek’s shrill sound,
Only the blue flies buzzing round. ;


2 Again she wakes him with the words,
“ The east, my lord, is bright.
A crowded court your presence seeks ;
Get up, and hait the light,”
’Twas not the dawning light which shone,
But that which by the moon was thrown.


3 He sleeping still, once more she says,
“ The flies are buzzing loud.
To lie and dream here by your side
Were pleasant, but the growd
Of officers will soon retire ;
Draw not dt you and me their ire ! ”


Br VIII. u.] ‘THE BOOK OF POETRY. 183 °


Il-


The Seuen; narrative. FRIVOLO@S AND VAINGLORIOUS COMPLI-
MENTS INTERCHANGED BY THE HUNTERS OF Ts‘E.


. Naou was a hill in Ts‘e, not far from the capital.


1 “How agile you*are!” ’Twas thus that I spoke,
What time near to Naou together we drew.
Two boars three years old from cover then broke,
And we in our chariots after them flew.
The chase being over, you said with a bow,
“Tf agile am I, as active art thou! ”


2 “ How fine is your skill!” So said I to you;
’Twas when near te Naou we met on the way.
That moment two males attracted our view,
And at them we dashed, to make them our prey.
The chase being over, you said with a bow,
“Tf skilful am I,‘not less so art thou! ”


8 “How you know your art!” I said to you then,
When south of mount Naou together we came.
That moment two wolves came under our ken,
And hotly we drove, well pleased with the game.
The chase being over, you said with a bow,
“Tf I know my art, as artful art thou !”


III,


The Choo; narrative. A BRIDE DESCRIBES HER FIRST MEETING WITH
HER BRIDEGROOM,


The critics, old ahd new, suppose that this piece was directed against
the disuse of the practice which required the bridegroom, in person, to
meet his bride at her parents’ house, and conduct her to her future home.
This does not appear, however, in the piece itself; and, indeed, there is
nothing in it about a bride and bridegroom, though it is natural to sup-
pose that the speaker in it is a bride. Some think that we have three
brides in it, and as many bridegrooms ; but it is more in accordance
with the structure of many other pieces, to suppose that the places where
the parties meet, and the colour of the stones of the ear-stoppers, are
varied, simply to prolong the piece, and give new rhymes,

’


1 He waited ’tween the gate and screen,
With ear-plug strings of white silk seen.
The plugs themselves had hwa-stones’ sheen.


134 THE BOOK OF POETRY. , [Parr I.


2 He waited in the court and stood,
With ear-plug strings of silk green-hued.
The plugs themselves were yung stones good.


8 ‘There in the hall he stood and stayed.
Of yellow silk his plug-strings made.
The plugs of fine ying gems displayed.


IV.


The Tung fang che jih; narrative. THE LICENTIOUS INTERCOURSE
OF THE PEOPLE OF TS‘.


Such is the ordinary account given of this short piece; and I have
adopted it for want of a better.


1 When the sun is in the east,
That lovely girt I see.
In my chamber she appears ;
There fronting me is she.
She treads upon my footsteps,
And quickly comes to me.


2 When the moon is in the east,
That lovely girl I see.
*Twixt door and screen she passes ;
’*Twixt screen and door is she.
She treads upon my footsteps,
And hastes away from me.


v.


The Tung fang we ming ; narrative and metaphorical. THE IRREGU-
LARITY AND DISORDER OF THE COURT OF TS‘E; AS SEEN ESPECIALLY
IN THE TIME OF GIVING THE MORNING AUDIENCE.


1 I was putting my clothes on upside down,
Before the eastern sky was clear.
I was putting my clothes on upside down,
When a call to the court came here.


2 I was putting my clothes on upside down,
Ere showed the east the fising flame.

I was puttiag my clothes on upside down,
When from the court an order came.


Bs VIII, vi.] = rH BOOK oF POETRY. 135


3 On garden fence, made but of willow wands,
F’en reckless fellows look with fear.
Our prince can’t tell the night from dawn ;—
Too soon, or late, his calls appear !


Vi


The Nan shan; allusive. ON THE DISGRACEFUY, CONNEXION BE-
TWEEN WAN KEANG, THE MARCRIONESS OF LOO, AND HER BROTHER ;
—AGAINST SEANG oF Ts‘E AND HwaN oF Loe.


In B.c. 708, Kwei, the marquis of Loo, known as duke Hwan, mar-
ried a daughter of the House of Ts‘e, known as Wan Kéang, There was
»o improper affection between her and her brother ; and on his accession ©
10 Ts‘e, the couple visited him. The consequences were—incest between
tne brother and sister, the murder of her husband, and a disgraceful
connexion, long continued, between the guilty pair. The marquis of Ts‘e
is known in history as duke Séang. Stanzas 1 and 2 are to be taken as
directed against duke Séang, and the other two as against duke Hwan,


1 There where the South hill rises high and great,
A male fox sits, suspicious and alone.
Ts‘e’s daughter went to Loo, to wed her mate;
The pathway, plain and easy, is well known.
From you, her brother, thus away she went ;
Why further think of her, like fox intent ?,


2 The dolichos five kinds of shoes supplies,
_ Made always so that two shall form a pair.

On caps they match the strings that serve for ties,
The same in length, not differing a hair.

The road to Loo all plain and easy lies,
By which Ts‘e’s daughter joined her husband there,

Since she has travelled that way leaving you,

Why do you her continue to pursue?


3 Hemp seed to sow, this is the course we take,—
The acres lengthwise and across we dress.
Taking a wife, the thing at once we make
Known to our parents, and their leave possess. |
Since, prince of Loo,*T's‘e’s daughter thus you took ;—
Why on her evil ways indulgent look?


136 | |THE. BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr J,
: M te
4, How do we act when firewood we would split?
“Tis*through the axe in hand that we succeed.
Taking a wife, this for® we must admit,—
Without the go-between we cannot speed.
When you brought home your wife, all this was done ;—
Why let her now to such excesses run ?


vil.


The Foo t‘een; metaphorical. THE FOLLY OF PURSUING OBJECT:
BEYOND ONE’S STRENGTH.


1 The weeds will-but the ranker grow,
If fields too large you seek to till.
To try to gain men far awa;
With grief your toiling heart will fill.


-2 If fields too large you seek to till,
The weeds will only rise more strong.
To try to gain men far away
Will but your heart’s distress prolong.


3 Things grow the best when to themselves
Left, and to nature’s vigour rare.
How young and tender is the child,
With his twin tufts of falling hair !
But when you him ere long behold,
That child shall eap of manhood wear!


VII.


The Loo ling; narrative. THE ADMIRATION IN Ts‘E OF HOUNDS AND
HUNTERS.


1 Lin-lin go the hounds; Lin-lin the hounds go.
Their master is kindly and good, as we know.


2 With double rings furnished, on go the hounds;
_ In goodness and grace their master abounds.


3 Three rings at their necks, they rush to the chase ;
Their masters famous for power and for grace.


Br VIII. x.] _ ‘THE BOOK OF POETRE 137


t IX,


The Pe kow; metaphorical. THE SOLD LICENTIOUS FREEDOM OF
Win KEANG IN RETURNING TO TS‘E ;—-AGAINST DUKE CHWANG OF
Loo, HER SON.


The old and new schools alike understand ‘““Ts‘e’s daughter” of this
piece to be Wan Kéang ; but the preface speaks of it as directed against
her husband. This is altogether unlikely. See on ode VI.


1 Rent is the basket at the dam,

Where bream and kwan abound ;

As useless is the prince of Loe,
In vigour wanting found.

Ts‘e’s daughter now to Ts‘e comes back,
Her followers as a cloud ;

Her son should hold her fast in Loo,
Her wickedness to shroud.


2 Rent is the basket at the dam,

‘Where bream and tench abound ;

As useless is the prince of Loo,
In vigour wanting found.

Back comes Ts‘e’s daughter, with a shower -
Of followers at her side;

Her son should hold her fast in Loo,
Her wanton ways to hide.


3 Rent is the basket at the dam;

Fish in and out can go;

As useless is the prince of Loo,
_And vigour fails to show.

Back comes T's‘e’s daughter, with a stream
Of followers behind ;

Her son should hold her fast in Loo,
From such lewd ways confined.


xX


: a
The Tsae Meu; narrative. THE OPEN SHAMELESSNESS OF WAN
KEANG IN HER MEETINGS WITH HER BROTHER,


1 On comes her ‘chariot, fast and loud,
With screen of bamboos fir®ly wove,


138 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


And leather bright, vermilion-hued ;—
Ts‘e’s daughter hastes to lawless love.
To this from Loo the*road is smooth and plain ;
Twas but last night she started with her train.


2 Her four black steeds are beautiful ;
Soft are the reins the driver holds.
The road from Loo is smooth and plain ;—
Ts‘e’s daughter’s heart its joy unfolds.
Full of complacency is she; nor shame
Abashes her, nor fear of evil name.


3 Broad flow the waters of the Win,
And crowds of travellers go by.
The road from Loo is smooth and plain ;—
She looks around with careless eye.
That many see her gives her no concern ;
Her thoughts to her licentious fancy turn.


4 On sweep the waters of the Wan;
More numerous are the travellers now.
The road from Loo is smooth and plain ;—
Ts‘e’s daughter shows her brazen brow.
At ease and proud, she holds her onward way,
Careless of what all think of her display.


XI.


The # tseay; narrative. LAMENT OVER DUKE CHWANG OF LO0O,
NOTWITHSTANDING HIS BEAUTY OF PERSON, ELEGANCE OF MANNERS,
AND SKILL IN ARCHERY, 7


There underlies these verses a reference to the disgraceful conduct of
Chwang’s mother, x


1 A grand man is the prince of Loo,
‘With person large and high.
Lofty his front, and suited to
The fine glance of his eye !
Swift are his feet. In archery
What man with him caw vie?
With all these goodly qualities,
We see him and we sigh!


Br VIL. x1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


2 Renowned through all the land is he,

The nephew of our lord.

With clear and lovely eyes, his grace
May not be told by word.

All day at target practice,
He’ll never miss the bird.

Such is the prinete of Loo, and yet
With grief for him we’re stirred !


3 All grace and beauty he displays,
High forehead, and eyes bright.
And dancing choice! His arrows all
The target hit aright.


Straight through they go, and every one


Lights on the self-same spot.
Rebellion he could well withstand,
And yet we mourn his lot!


139


140 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


BOOK IX.


THE ODES OF WEI.


THE Wei here js quite a different character from that in the title of
Book, v., and the State indicated by it was far distant from the other,
though we are obliged to write the two names with the same English
letters. This was within the present Kéae-chow of Shan-se, but did not
. extend overall the territory now forming that department, It was thusa
small State, but the manners of the people were thrifty and industrious.

In B,C, 660, duke Héen of Tsin extinguished the State of Wei, and in-
corporated it with his own dominions, At the division of the kingdom,
after the subjugation of the Shang dynasty, Wei had been assigned to
some chief of the Ke stock ; but no details of its history have been pre-
served, In consequence of this, many critics are of opinion that these
odes of Wei are really odes of Tsin, and that they are prefixed to those
of Tang, just as those of P‘et and Yung are prefixed to the odes of that
other Wei, all really belonging to it.


I


_ The Koh heu; narrative. THE EXTREME PARSIMONIOUSNESS EVEN
OF WEALTHY MEN IN WEI.


1 Thin cloth of dolichos supplies the shoes,
‘ In which some have to brave the frost and cold.
A bride, when poor, her tender hands must use,
Her dress to make, and the sharp needle hold.
This man is wealthy, yet he makes his bride
Collars and waistbands for his robes provide.


2 Conscious of wealth, he moves with easy mien ;
Politely on the left he takes his place ;
The ivory pin is at his girdle seen ;
His dress and gait show gentlemanly grace.
Why do we brand him in our satire here ?
*Tis this,—his niggard soul provokes the snecr.


i.
e


The Hreun tseu-joo; allusive. AGAINST THE PARSTMONIOUSNESS OF
THE OFFICERS OF WI.


Br IX. m1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 141:


1 Where near the Hwun damp is the ground,
The sorrel-gatherers are found,
To eke their scanty fogd.
Such arts that officer displays,
(Whose elegance exceeds all praise ;)
In him they are not good.
Charged with the cays of State, we look to find
His conduct show a higher style of mind,


2 Op the Hwun’s: banks the poor are found,
Who pluck the mulberry leaves around,
-A little gain to make.
In grace and beauty like a flower,
‘That officer himself doth lower,
Such small mean ways to take.
The cars of State to marshal is his charge ;—
Strange such high post his mind should not enlarge !


3 Where the Hwun bends to join the Ho,
For ox-lip leaves the people go, _~
Some nourishment to find.
That officer we gem-like call,
Yet shrinks he not from ways as small,
To greed too much inclined.
The ruler’s kindred he has for his care ;-—
Should he not show a loftier character ?


t


Iii.


The Yuen yéw t‘aou,; allusive. AN OFFICER TELLS HIS GRIEF BE-
CAUSE OF THE MISGOVERNMENT OF THE STATE, AND HOW HE WAS
MISUNDERSTOOD. :


1 A fruit, small as the garden peach,

May still be used for food.

A State, though poor as ours, might thrive,
If but its rule were good.

Our rule is bad, our state is sad,
With mournfal heart I grieve. _

All can from instrument and voice
My mood of mind perceive.

Who know me not, with scornful thought,
Deem me a scholar proud. + ;


.


142 “THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


“Those men are right,”’ they fiercely say,
“What mean your words so loud ? ”

Deep ia my heart my sorrows lie,
And none the cause may know.

How should they know, who never try
To learn whence comes our woe? ©


2 The garden jujube, although“small,
May still be used for food.
A State, though poor as ours, might thrive,
If but its rule were good.
Our rule is bad, our state is sad,
With mournfut heart I grieve.
Methinks 1’! wander through the land,
My misery to relieve.
Who know me not, with scornful thought,
Deom that wild views I hold.
“ Those men are right,” they fiercely say,
. © What mean your words so bold?”
Deep in my heart my sorrows lie,
'__ And none the cause may know.
How can they know, who hever try
To learn whence comes our woe ?


IV.


The Chih hoo; narrative. A YOUNG SOLDIER ON SERVICE SOLACES
HIMSELF WITH THE THOUGHT OF HOME.


1 To the top of that tree-clad hill I go,

And towards my father I gaze,

Till with my mind’s eye his form I espy,
And my mind’s ear hears how he says :—

“ Alas for my son on service abroad !
He rests not’from morning till eve.

May he careful be, and come back to me!
While he is away, how I grieve!”


2 To the top of that barren hill I climb,
And towards my mother I gaze, .
Till with my mind’s eye het form I espy,
And my juind’s ear hears how she says :—


Br IX. vz.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 148


* Alas for my child on serviee abroad !
He never in sleep shuts an eye.
‘May he careful be, and come back to me!
‘ In the wild may his body not lie!”


3 Up the lofty ridge I, toiling, ascend,
And towards my brother I gaze,
’ Till with my mind's eye his form I espy,
And my mind’s ear hears how he says:
* Alas! my young brother, serving abroad,
All day with his comrades must roam.
May he careful be, and come back to me,
And die not away from his home! ”


¥.


The Shih mow che héen ; narrative. THE STRAITS OF THE PEASANTRY,
or WEI. ,

Jn versifying this short piece, I have followed the view of Choo, who
thinks that in the 3rd line of each verse a worthy officer, disgusted with the
irregularities of the court, proposes to a companion to withdraw to a quiet
life among the mulberry trees in the country.


1 Among their ten acres of mulberry trees,
The planters move idly about at their ease.
“Ho! back,” says a courtier, “ and let us join these! ”’


2 Beyond their ten acres of mulberry trees,
The planters move idly about at their ease.
“ Away,” says a courtier, “and join us with these! ”


VI.


The Fah tan; allusive. AGAINST THE IDLE AND GREEDY MINIS-
TERS GF THE STATE. CONTRAST BETWEEN THEM AND A STALWART
WOODMAN.


1 K’an-k‘an upon the sandal trees

The woodman’s strokes resound.

Then on the bank he lays the trunks
His axe brings to the ground ;

The while the stream goes rippling by,
Its waters cool and clear.

You work not so,O0 Wei’s great men,
From me the truth now hear. 5


144 THE BOOK OF POETRY. .  fPart I.


You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
Your soft hands take in charge ;

And yet each boasts three hundred farms,
And stores the produce large.

You never join the hunt’s halloo,
Nor dare to share its toils ;

Yet lo! your wide courtyards are seen
Hung round with badgers’ spoils.

I must conclude that woodman rude
A man of higher style.

To eat the bread ‘of idleness
He feels would stamp him vile.


2 K’an-k‘an upon the sandal wood

The woodman’s strokes resound,

Then by the river’s side he lays
What fit for spokes is found ;

The while the river onward flows,
lts waters clear and smooth.

You work not so, O Wei’s great men,
From me now hear the truth.—

You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
Your dainty fingers stain;

And yet each boasts three million sheaves ;—
Whence gets he all that grain ?

You never join the hunt’s halloo,
Nor brave its ventures bold ;

Yet lo! your wide courtyards display
Those boars of three years old.

I must conclude that woodman rude
A’ man of higher style.

To eat the bread of idleness
He feels would stamp him vile.


3 K’an-k‘an resound the woodman’s strokes

Upon the sandal wood ;

Then on the river’s lip he lays
What for his wheels is good }

The while the river onward flows,
Soft rippled by the wind.

That you don’t work, O Wei’s great men,
Is thus hrought to my mind.


Br IX. vu] THE BOOK OF POETRY. ' 145


You sow no seed; no harvest tasks
Your soft hands undertake ;

Yet grain each boasts, three hundred binns ;-—
Who his that grain did make ?

You never join the hunt’s halloo ;
Your feeble courage fails ;

Yet lo! your wide courtyards display
Large strings’of slanghtered quails.

I must conclude that woodman rude
A man of higher style.

To eat the bread of idleness
He feels would stamp him vile.


vil.


' The Shih shoo; metaphorical. AGAINST THE OPPRESSION AND EX-
‘TORTION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF WEI.


1


iw)


3


Large rats, large rats, let us entreat
That you our millet will not eat.

But the large rats we mean are you,
With whom three years we’ve had to do,
And all that time have never known

One look of kindness on us thrown.

We take our leave of Wei and you;
That happier land we long to view.

O happy land! O happy land!

There in our proper place we’ll stand.


Large rats, large rats, let us entreat
You'll not devour our crops of wheat.
But the large rats we mean are you,
With whom three years we’ve had to do;
And all that time you never wrought
One kindly act to cheer our lot.

To you and Wei we bid farewell,

Soon in that happier State to dwell,

O happy State! O happy State!

There shall we learn to bless our fate.


Large rats, large yats, let us entreat
Our springing grain you will not eat.
10


YOR, HI,


146 ©


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


But the large rats we mean are you,


With whom three years we’ve had to do.


From you there came not all that while
One word of comfért ’mid our toil.

We take our leave of you and Wei;
And to those happier coasts we flee.

O happy coasts, to you we wend !


There shall our groans and sorrows end.


[Parr I.


Bx X.1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. J47


BOOK X.


THE ODES OF TANG.


Tre odes of Tang were the odes of Tsin,—the greatest, perhaps, of the
fiefs of Chow, until the rise and growth of Ts‘in. King Ching, in B.c. 1406, -
invested his youngest brother, called Shuh-yu, with the territory where
Yaou was supposed to have ruled anciently as ¢he marquis ‘ef T'ang ;—
in the present department of T’ae-yuen, Shat-se, the fief retaining that
ancient name, In the south of the territory was theriver Tsin, and Shih.
foo, the son of Shuh-yu, gave its name to the marquisate. The -soil,
it is said, was thin and the people peor; but they were difigent, thrifty,
and plain in their ways, thinking deeply and forecasting. It is difficult to
say why the name of the State, which had: gone into disuse, should be
given to the collection of its poems. The State of Tsin developed greatly,
having the He as its boundary on the west, and extending nearly to it
on the south and east. .


I.


The Sih-tsuk; narrative. THE CHEERFULNESS AND DISCRETION OF
THE PEOPLE OF TSIN, AND THEIR TEMPERED ENJOYMENT AT FITTING
SEASONS,


1 ‘fhe cricket appears in the hail,
And towards its close draws the year.
Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
Ere the days and months disappear.
But duty should have our first thought ;
Indulgence we strictly must bound.
Take heed lest the joy our reason destray ;~+
The good man looks out and around.


2 ‘The cricket appears in the hall,

And the year is fast passing on.

Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
Ere the days and months shall be gone.

But some things our care still demand ;

Against all excess we must guard.

Take heed Jest the jey our reason destroy :-~
The good man thinks no toil tgo hard.

10 *


148 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part IL.


8 The cricket appears in the hall ;
The need for our carts is all o’er.
Then let us to-day to pleasure give way,
Ere the days and months be no more.
But first think of griefs that may come ;
Between the extremes keep the mean.
Take heed lest the joy our reason destroy :—
The good maz is calm and serene.


N


Ir.
The Shan yéw choo; allusive. THE FOLLY OF NOT ENJOYING THE


GOOD ‘VHINGS WHICH WE HAVE, AND LETTING DEATH PUT THEM INTO
THE HANDS OF OTHERS,


I The thorny elms on the mountains grow,

' And the white elms rise where the grounds are low.
You have suits of robes which you never wear ;
You have steeds and cars you are fain to spare.

All these another will have by and by,
For the time will come when you shall die.


2 The #’aou trees thrive on the mountain’s brow,
And the new trees rise where the grounds are low.
Unwatered your courts, your rooms are unswept ;
Your drums and your bells all silent are kept.

All these another shall have by and by,
For the time will come when you shall die.


3 The varnish trees on the mountains grow,
And the chestnuts rise where the grounds are low.
Why not, at the feast, your lute gaily play,
To add to your joy, and lengthen the day.
Another’s your house will be by and by,
For the time will come when you shall die.


III.


The Yang che shoouy } allusive. REBELLION PLOTTED AGAINST THE
MARQUIS OF TSIN BY THE CHIEF OF K‘SUH-YUH AND HIS PARDISANS,


At the beginning of his rule, the marquis Ch‘aoy (B.c. 744—-738) in-
vested his uncle, called Ching-sze and Hwan-shuh, with the great city of
Kééuh-yuh, thus weakening his own power ;, and from this proceeding there
resulted Jong disorder in the State of Tsin. A party was soon formed
to displace the marqujs, and raise Hwan-shuh in his reom.


Br X. w.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 149


This piece is to be taken as describing the plottings of: conspirators in
the capital of Tsin, and the person whom they address as an emissary
from Hwan-shuh. Kaou was a city in the territory of K‘éuh-yuh,


1 ’Midst the fretted waters
The white rocks grandly stand.
To Yuh we'll follow you,
With white silk robe in hand,
And collar of red hue,
Your master to invest,
And hail him lord of Tsin,
Of the whole State possest.
The sight of him, our princely lord,
Will joy to all our hearts afford.


2 ’Midst the fretted waters
The white rocks glist’ning stand,
To Kaou we'll follow you,
With white silk robe in hand,
And collar of red hue,
And broidered axes fine,
Your master to invest
As chief of T‘ang’s great line.
When him, our princely lord, we see,
From every pain we shall be free.


3 ’Midst the fretted waters
The white rocks grandly show. *
Your orders we have heard,
But not a single word
Shall any from us know.


Iv.


The Zséaou léaou ; allusive and metaphorical. SyprosED TO CELE-
BRATE THE POWER AND PROSPERITY OF HWAN-SHUH, AND TO PREDICT
THE GROWTH OF HIS FAMILY.


See the note to the last piece,


1 What clusters so rare
The pepper plants bear !
A measure, luxuriant and large, they would fill.
As much without peer
Is this hero here! /
Sing hey for the shoots of ‘the pepper iit still!


150 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I,


2 What clusters so rare
The pepper plants bear !
Luxuriant and large, Te both your hands they would Ail.
So generous and great
This chief of our State !
. And it’s hey for the deme pepper plant still!


Vv.


The Chem-mow; allusive, HusBaAND AND WIFE EXPRESS THEIR DE-
LIGHT AT THEIR UNEXPECTED UNION,

By “the Heart,” which in the original text is “the Three stars,” is
probably to be understood what is also called the constellation of Sin, or
“the Heart,” in Scorpio,


1 Round and round the faggots I’ve bound,
And the Heart in heaven shines clear.
Oh! that I such an evening have found !
_ ‘That this good man should be here !
Ome! Ome!
With a husband like this I have nothing to fear.


2 Round and round the grass we have bound ;
At the corner shines the Heart.
Strange that we such an evening have found !
Thus to meet and never to part!
QO joy! O joy!
That this meeting should come without scheming or art!


8 Round and round the thorns I have bound;
From the door the Heart I see.
Oh! that I such an evening have found !
That this Beaut, ty is come to me!
Ome! O me!
That this lady so lovely mine only should be!


VI.
The Ze too; allusive. LAMENT OF AN INDIVIDUAL BEREAVED OF HIS
BROTHERS AND RELATIVES, OR FORSAKEN BY THEM.


1 A russet pear tree rises all alone,
_ But rich the growth of leaves upon it shown !


Bx X. vit] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 151


I walk alone, without one brother left,

And thus of natural aid am I bereft.

Plenty of people there are all around,

But none like my own father’s sons aré found,
Ye travellers, who for ever hurry by,

Why on me turn the unsympathizing eye? .
No brother lives with whom my cause to. plead ;—
Why not perform for me the helping deed?


2 A russet pear tree rises all alone,
But rich with verdant foliage o’ergrown.
I walk alone, without one brother’s care,
To whom I might, amid my straits, repair.
Plenty of people there are all around,
But none like those of my own name are found.
Ye travellers, who for ever hurry by,
Why, on me turn the unsympathizing eye ?
No brother lives with whem my cause to plead ;—-
Why not perform for me the helping deed ?


VII,


The Kaow kw; narrative. THE PEOPLE OF SOME GREAT OFFICER °
COMPLAIN OF HIS HARD TREATMENT OF THEM, WHILE THEY DECLARE
THEIR LOYALTY.


Choo differs from the view of these verses given in the Preface, but


does not attempt to give any interpretation of them himéelf, I have fol«
lowed the Preface.


1 You, of the leopard’s cuff and lambkin’s fur,
To us have been a governor unkind; .
But we look back on many an ancestor,
And stay, when we another chief might find.


2 Unsympathizing, violent, aud rough
With us poor folks from day to day are you.
Man of the lambkin fur and leopard cuff,
What keeps us here but hearts that still beat true?


VIII. 4


°
The Paou yu ; allusive or metaphorical, THE MEN OF TSIN, CALLED
OUT TO WARFARE BY THE KLXG’S ORDER, MOURN OVER THE CONSE-
QUENT SUFFERING OF THEIR PARENTS, AND LONG FOR THEIR RETURN
TO THEIR ORDINARY AGRICULTURAL PURSUITS,


152 . THE BOOK OF POETRY. [ Parr I.


This piece is referred, we may presume correctly, to some time after
duke Ch‘aou, when, for more than fifty years, a struggle went on between
the ambitious chiefs of K‘éuh-yuh, and the marquises proper of Tsin.
The people were in the main loyal to Tsin, and one king and another sent
expeditions to support them. There was of course great trouble and
confusion in the State, and the work of agriculture was much interfered
with. ; :


1 The wild geese fly the bushy oaks- around,

- With clamour loud. Suh-suh their wings resound,
As for their feet poor resting-place is found.
The king’s affairs admit of no delay; .
Our millets still unsown, we haste away.
No food is left our parents to supply ;
When we are gone, on whom can they rely ?
O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,
‘When shall our homes receive us from the war?


2 The wild geese on the bushy jujube trees
Attempt to settle, and are ill at ease ;— ~
Suh-suh their wings go flapping in the breeze.
The king’s affairs admit of no delay ;

Our millets still unsown, we haste away.

How shall our parents their requirements get?
How in our absence shall their wants be met?
O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,

‘When shall our homes receive us from the war?


8 The bushy mulberry trees the geese in rows
Seek eager, and to rest around them close,—
Witk rustling loud, as disappointment grows.
The king’s affairs admit of no delay;

To plant our rice and maize we cannot stay.
How shall our parents find their wonted food ?
When we are gone, who will to them be good?
O azure Heaven, that shinest there afar,

When shall our homes receive us from the war?


IX,


The Woo e; narrative. A REQUEST TO THE KING’S ENVOY FOR THE
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF DUKE Woo as MARQUIS OF T'sIN.
: «


In B.C. 678 the struggle between the branches of the House of Tsin
was brought to a clése, and Ching, earl of K‘éuh-yuh, called after his


Bx X. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 153


death duke Woo, made himself master of the whole State, Ht was an’
act of spoliation, but the usurper bribed the reigning king He, and got
himself acknowledged as marquis of Tsin. In this piece we must: sup-
pose that application is made by one of Riis officers to an envoy from the
capital for the royal confirmation.

The different ranks in ancient China were marked by the number of
carriages, robes, &c., conferred by the king. The prince of a great State
had seven of the ten royal syybolic figures on his robes. Those had pre-
viously belonged to the marquises of I'sin, and Woo might have assumed -
them at once, but he wished to have the king’s sanctioh in doing so. ‘The
' prince of a State, when serving at court as a minister of the crown, was
held to be of lower rank by one degree; hence the seven symbols of
stanza 1 appear in 2 as only 6.


I State robes can he be suid to want ?
His robes the seven high symbols show.
But let him have them by your grant :—
That peace and fortune will bestow.


2 State rebes can he be said to want ?
The symbols six his robes display.
But let him have them by your grant,
And that will lasting peace convey.


xX.


The Yew te che too ; metaphorical, Some ONE REGRETS THE POVERTY
OF HIS CIRCUMSTANCES, WHICH PREVENTED HIM FROM GATHERING
AROUND HIM COMPANIONS WHOM HE ADMIRED.


1 On the left of the way, a russet pear tree
Stands there all alone,—a fii image of me. —
There is that prineely man! O that he would come,
And in my poor dwelling with me be at home !
In the core of my heart do I love him, but say,
Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day.


2 At the bead in the way a russet pear tree
Stands there all alone,—a fit image of me.
There is that princely man! O that he would come,
And rambling with me be himself here at home!
In the core of my hedrt I love him, but say,
Whence shall I procure him the wants of the day.


154 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


XL
€


The Koh sang ; allusive and narrative. A WIFE MOURNS THE DEATH
OF HER HUSBAND, REFUSING TO BE COMFORTED, AND WILL CHERISH
HIS MEMORY TILL HER OWN DEATH.

¢


1 The dolichos over the thorn tree grows ;
Its shoots o’er the waste the convolvulus throws :—
Thus finds its proper aid each plant.
He whom [I loved, my husband, from me gone,
I sadly mourn my lot, and dwell alone,
Doomed thus my heart’s support to want.


2 The dolichos twines round the jujube tree ;
The tombs with convolvulus covered we see :--
Each plant thrives in its proper place.
He whom I loved, the husband of my heart, «
Is here no more, and I remain apart,
Nor can my life’s strength now embrace.


8 Bright in our room was the pillow of horn,
And coverlet brojdered the couch to adorn,
When first in one was blent our fate.
The husband of my heart, whom I admired,
. Is here no more, and I must live retired,
And for each morning lonely. wait.


4 Each day a day of the long summer light,
Each night.as long as the dark winter night ;—
Shall I in solitude here pine.
A hundred years will seem their course to run
Ere of this mortal life the time is done,
And him within the tomb I join.


5 Each night as long as the dark winter night,
Each day a day of the long summer light ;—
_ To me no comfort e’er will come. .
My life will seem to last a hundred years,
Till in my death its welcome close appears,
And to his chamber I go home. ~~
‘


Bx X. xu] THE BOOK OF POETRY. -155


Another version. By W. T, Mercer.


1 The doliches grows and covers the thorn,
O’er the waste is the dragon-plant creeping.
The man of my heart is away, and I mourn.—
What home have,lI, lonely and weeping ?


2 Covering the jujubes the dolichos grows,
The graves many dragon-plants cover ;
But where is the man on whose breast I’d repose ?
o homé have I, having no lover !


3 Fair to see was the pillow of horn, .
And fair the bed-chamber’s adorning ;
But the man of my heart is not here, and I mourn
All alone, and wait for the morning.


4 While the long days of summer pass over my head,
And long winter nights leave their traces, .
I’m alone! Till a hundred of years shall have fled, -
And then I shall meet his embraces.


5 Through the long winter nights I am burdened with fears,
Through the long summer days I am lonély ;
But when Time shall have counted its hundred of years
I then shall be his—and his only !


XII.


The Zs‘ae ling; metaphorical. AGAINST GIVING EAR TO SLAN-
DERERS,


1 When told to Show-yang’s top to go,

The ling plants there to take,

The speaker false at once you’d know,
Nor heed the words he spake.

And so, when men their stories feign,
To credit them be slow.

Put them aside, put them aside ;
Belief should, slowly grow.

’Tis thus the stories told by men
Subside, nor farther go. r


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part I.


2 When told to search round Show-yang’s base,

Sow-thistles there to find,

The search you’d think a hopeless case,
Nor would the counsel mind.

And so, when men their stories feign,
Do not approve in haste.

Put them aside, put them aside ;
Assent should be repressed.

’Tis thus the stories told by men
Soon unregarded rest.


8 When told on th’ east of Show-yang hill
For mustard-plants to try,
You’d know the quest would speed but ill,
_ And let the words pass by.
“ And so, when men their stories feign,
‘No hearing to them lend.
Put them aside, put them aside,
Your faith loth to extend.
’Tis thus the stories told by men
Come shortly to an end.


Bx XI. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 157


BOOK Xt.
SY : :
‘JHE ODES OF TS‘IN.


THE State of Ts‘in took its name from its earliest principal city,—in
the present district of Ts‘ing-shwuy, department of Ts‘in-chow, Kan-+
suh. Its chiefs claimed to be descended from Yih, or Pib-yih, Shun’s
forester, and the assistant, in his labours on the deluge, of the great Yu,
from whom he received the clan name of Ying. Among his descendants,
we are told, there was a Chung-keneh, who resided among the wild
tribes of the west for the protection of the western borders of the king-
dom of Shang. The sixth in descené from him, called Ta-loh, had a’son,
Fej-tsze, who had charge of the herds of horses belonging to king Héaou
(B.c. 908894), and in consequence of his good services was invested

, With the small territory of Ts‘in asan attached State, His great-grandson,
called Ts‘in Chung, or Chung of Ts‘in, was made @ great officer of the
court by king Seuen, in B.c. 826; and his grandson again, known in
history as duke Séang, in consequence of his loyal services in 769, when
the capital of Chow was moved to the east, was raised to the dignity of an
earl, and took his place among the great feudal princes of the kingdom,
receiving a large portion of territory, which included the ancient capital
of the House of Chow.

Ts‘in in course of time,-as is well known, superseded the dynasty of
Chow, having gradually moved its capital more and more to the east, after
the example of Chow itself in earlier times, The people of Ts‘in were, no.
doubt, composed of the wild tribes of the west, though the ruling chiefs
may have come originally from the nore civilized China on the east, ©


f.


The Keu lin ; narrative and allusive, CELEBRATING THE GROWING
OPULENCE AND STYLE OF SOME LORD OF TS‘IN, AND THE PLEASURES
AND FREEDOM OF HIS COURT.


The Preface says the lord of Ts‘in here intended was Ts‘in-chung,
mentioned in the preceding note. The piece must have been made at an
early time, when the State was emerging from its obscurity and weakness.


1 His many chariots rush along,
Drawn by white-fronted steeds and strong.
When audience nbw we wish to gain,
His eunuchs’ aid we must obtain,


158 THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr I.


2 The varnish trees on hill-sides grow,
And chestnuts on the lands below.
When access to the prince we’ve found,
We sit and hear the lutes’ sweet sound.
If we seize not this joy to-day,

Old age will have us for its prey.


8 The mulberries on the hill-sides grow,

_' And willows where the grounds are low.
When to the prince our way we’ve made,
We sit and hear the organs played.

If we pass by this joy to-day,
Old age will bear us all away.


II.


The Sze t‘éch; narrative. CELEBRATING THE GROWING OPULENCE
OF THE LORDS OF TS‘IN, AS SEEN IN THEIR HUNTING,


1 Our ruler to the hunt proceeds ;
And black as iron are his steeds
That heed the charioteer’s command,
Who holds the six reins in his hand.
His favourites follow to the chase,
Rejoicing in his special grace.


2 The seasen’s males, alarmed, arise,— ~
The season’s mates, of wondrous size.
Driven by the beaters, forth they spring,
Soon caught within the hunters’ ring.

“ Drive on their left,” the ruler cries ;
And to its mark his arrow flies.


3 The hunting done, northward he goes ;
And in the park the driver shows
The horses’ points, and his own skill
That rules and guides them at his will.
Light cars, whose teams small bells display,
The long and short-mouthed dogs convey.


ul.


The Séaou jung ; narrative. THE LADY OF AN OFFICER ABSENT 0N
AN EXPEDITION AGAINST THE TRIBES OF THE WEST GIVES A GLOW-
ING DESCRIPTION OF HIS CHARIOT, AND PRAISES HIMSELF, EXPRESSING,
BUT WITHOUT MURAURING, HER REGRET AT HIS ABSENCE,


Bx XI. w.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 159


I Before my mind’s eye stands my lord’s short car,
’ In which he dares the risks of savage war :—-

Its pole, whose end turns upward, curving round,
And in five places shines, witlf leather bound ;
The slip rings and the side straps ; the masked place,
Where gilt rings to the front unite the trace;
The mat of tiger’s skin; the naves so long;
The steeds, with left ae white, and piebalds, strong.
Such my lord’s car! He rises in my mind,
Lovely and bland, like jade of richest kind ;
Yet there he lives, in his log hut apart :—
The very thought confuses all my heart.


2 The driver with the six reins guides along ~
The horses, with their shining coats, and strong :—,
One inside dappled, one bay with black inane ;
Black-mouthed and bay, and black, the outer twain.
Shields, dragon-figured, rise up side by side,
Shelter in front ’gainst missiles to provide,
Gilt buckles with the carriage front connect
The inner reins by which the insides are checkt.
I see my lord, thus in his carriage borne,
With his mild form the frontier towns adorn.
What time can be for his return assigned ?
Ah me! his figure ever fills my mind !


3 With measured steps move the mail-covered team.
The trident spears, with gilded shaft-ends gleam.
The feather-figured shield, of beauty rare,

He holds before him, all his foes to dare.

The bow-case, made of tiger’s skin, and bright
With metal plates, lies ready for the fight.

It holds two bows which bamboo frames secure,
And keep unhurt, to send the arrows sure.

To him thus busy all my thoughts are borne,

Both when I rest at night and rise at morn.

He, my good lord, is tranquil and serene,

His virtuous fame more prized, the more he’s seen.


Iv.


The Kéen kéa ; narrative. SOME ONE TELLS HOW HE SOUGHT AN-
OTHER, WHOM IT SEEMED EASY TO FIND, AND YET COULD NOT FIND
HIM. »


160_ / ‘RHE BOOK OF POETRY. | [Paer I.


e. a
This pieco reads very much like a riddle, and so it has proved to the
critics. No satisfactory historical explanation of it has been given. Choo
does not attempt a solution,


i Cc

1 Reed and rush are dark and green; .
As hoar-frost the white dew is seen.
Him, the man I have in mind,
By this water I should find.
Searching, up the stream I haste,
On a long and toilsome quest.
Downwards then I turn, and see!
In the mid-stream standeth he.
He is there but far removed ;
Vain has all my searching proved.


2 Reed and rush luxuriant rise ;

Still undried the white dew lies.
Him, the man I have in mind,

On the stream’s edge I should find.
Upwards first my course I keep,

_ Though the way is rough and steep.
Downwards then, and what to see?
In the mid-stream standeth he,

On the islet, far removed ;—
Vain has all my searching proved.


3 Reed and rush grow thick and tall;
Ceases not the dew to fall.
Him, the man J have in mind,
On the stream’s bank I should find.
Upwards first I go along,
But the hard path leads me wrong.
Downwards then my steps I turn,
And in mid-stream him discern,
On the island, far removed ;—
Vain has all my searching proved.


¥v.


The Chung-nan + allusive, CELEBRATING 'THE GROWING OPULENCE
OF SOME RULER OF TS‘IN, AND ADMONISHING, WHILE PRAISING, HIM.


Chung-nan was the most famous moun ain in the old demesne of Chow,
lying south of the old. capital of Haou,—in the present department of Se-


Br XI. vz] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 161


gan, in Shen-se. It came to belong to Ts‘in, when king P‘ing granted to
duke Seang the old possessions of Chow.

The double Xe on the lower robe was one of the symbols of rank, em-
broidered on the robes of the king and feudal lords. It was in the form of


on, or two Ke (2), and has been called “the symbol of distinction,” or
discrimination.


1 What trees grow on the Chung-nan hill?
The white fir and the plum.
In fur of fox, ’neath broidered robe,
Thither our prince is come.
His face glows with vermilion hue.
O may he prove a ruler true!


2 What find we on the Chung-nan hill?
Deep nook and open glade.
Our prince shows there the double Ke
On lower robe displayed.
His pendant holds each tinkling gem.
Long life be his, and deathless fame !


By W. T. Mercer, Esq. Latine,


1 Dic mihi que crescunt altis in montibus illis ?
Candida adest abies, multaque prunus adest.
Illuc advenit Rex noster! veste decorus
Preetextd, et vulpis vellere tectus adit ;
Tingitur et rubeo, minii velut, ora colore.
Justities custos sedulus ille regat !


2 Que nunc aspicimus longis in montibus illis ?
Cece sunt latebree, sunt et aperta loca.
Illuc accessit noster Rex; inferiore
Imperii signum veste ferente venit !
A zon resonant pendentes murmure gemma.
Illi sit senium, perpetuumque decus!


VI.


The Hwang néaou; allusive. LAMENT FOR THREE WORTHY BRO-
THERS OF TS‘IN WHO WERE BURIED ALIVE IN THE SAME GRAVE WiTH
DUKE MUH.


There is no difference or difficuAy about the historical interpretation
of this piece; and it brings us down to the year B.4, 620.. Then died
VOL, III. 11


162 THE BOOX OF POETRY. [Parr I.


duke Muh, after playimg an important part in the north-west of China for
89 years. The Tso-chuen, under the sixth year of duke Wan of Loo,
makes mention of Muh’s requiring the three officers here celebrated to be
buried with him, and of the composition of the piece in consequence.
The “ Historical Records” say that the barbarous practice began with
duke Ching, Muh’s predecessor, and that in all 170 individuals were
buried with Muh. The death of the last distinguished man of the Ts‘in
dynasty, the Emperor I., was subsequently celebrated by the entombment
with him.of alt the inmates of his harem‘


1 They flit about, the’ yellow birds,
And rest upon the jujubes find.
Who buried were in duke Muh’s grave,
Alive to awful death consigned ?


*Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
Twas sad the first, Yen-seih, to see.
He stood alone; a hundred men
Could show no other such as he.
When to the yawning grave he came,
Terror unnerved and shook his frame.


Why thus destroy our nublest men,
To thee we cry, O azure Heaven !

To save Yensseih from death, we would
A hundred lives have freely given.


2 They flit about, the yellow birds,
And on the mulberry trees rest find.
Who buried were in duke Muh’s grave,
Alive to awful death consigned ?


*Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
’Twas sad the next, Chung-hang, to seé.
When on him pressed a hundred men,
A match for all of them was he.
When to the yawning grave he came,
Terror unnerved and shook his frame.


Why thus destroy our noblest men,
To thee we cry, O azure Heaven! |

To save Chung-hang from death, we would
A hundred lives have freely given.


Br XI. v1.) THE BOOK OF POETRY. 163


3 They flit about, the yellow birds,
And rest upon the thorn ¢rees find.
Who buried were in duke Muh’s grave,
Alive to awful death consigned f


’Mong brothers three, who met that fate,
’Twas sad the third, K‘éen-foo, to see.

A hundred men in desperate fight
Successfully withstand could he.

When to the yawning grave he came, -

Terror unnerved and shook his frame.


Why thus destroy our noblest men,
To thee we cry, O azure Heaven !

To save K‘éen-foo from death, we would
A hundred lives have freely given.


Another version. By W.T. Mercer,


_1 The birds, the yellow birds, are rife,
And flit about the jujube bloom ;
Not so who doomed to death in life,
Must lie within the ducat tomb.
Yen was a man above all men,
He was more than a hundred brave ;
But scared was his look, °
And he trembled and shook,
When he came to the great man’s grave.
Why thus destroy our noblest men ?
To thee we cry, O azure Heaven !
For to redeem the life of Yen
‘A hundred lives we would have given.


2 The birds, the yellow birds, are rife,
And all the mulberry blossom stir ;
Not so, who, doomed to death in life,
Must lie in duke Muh’s sepulchre.
Chung was a man above all men,
! Ay—wmore than a hundred brave ;
But scared was his look,
And he trembled and shook,
As he stood by the great man’s grave.
Why send our higfest to the grave?
To thee we cry, thou azure Hea?en!
*


164 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


The life of gallant Chung to save
A, hundred livee we would have given.


3 The birds, the yellow birds, are rife,
And through the thorny branches fly.
Not so who doomed to death in life,
Musi fill the ducal cemetery.
K‘een was a man above all men,
And more than a hundred brave ;
But he trembled and shook,
And scared was his look,
When he stood by the prince’s grave.
Why thus destroy our good and great ?
To thee we cry, O azure Heaven !
If K‘een were living with us yet,
A hundred lives we would have given.


VII.


The Shin fung; allusive. A WIFE TELLS HER GRIEF BECAUSE OP
THE ABSENCE OF HER HUSBAND, AND HIS FORGETFULNESS OF HER,


1 The falcon swiftly seeks the north,
And forest gloom that sent it forth.
Sincé I no more my husband see,
My heart from grief is never free.
O how is it, I long to know,

That he, my lord, forgets me so ?


2 Bushy oaks on the mountain grow,
And six elms where the ground is low.
But I, my husband seen no more,

My sad and joyless fate deplore.
O how is it, I long to know,
That he, my lord, forgets me so?


The hills the bushy wild plums show,
And pear trees grace the ground below.
But, with my husband from me gone,
As drank with grief, I dwell alone.

0 how is it, I long to-know,
That he, my lord, forgets me so ?


[ew]


Br XI. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 165


VITi,


The Weo ¢; narrative. THE PEOPLE oF Ts‘EX DECLARE THEIR
READINESS, AND STIMULATE ONE ANOTHER, TO FIGHT IN THE KING’S
CAUSE.


Evidently this piece was made at a time when the people were being
called out in the service of Ghow, and the loyalty which they had felt,
when they were subjects of Chow, still asserted itself.


1 Say you you have no clothes to wear ?
My long robes let me with you share.
The king his armies has called out ;
Then let us hail the battle shout.

My lance and spear I will prepare,
And as your comrade with you fare.


2 Say you you have no clothes to wear ?
Come and my under-garments sharé.
The king his armies has called out ;
Then let us hail the battle shout.

My spear and lance I will prepare,
‘And to the field with you will fare,


3 Say you you have no clothes to wear ?
My lower clothing you shall share.
The king his armies has called out ;
Then let us hail the battle shout.

Buff coat Pll get, and weapons keen,
And with you on the march be seen.


’


IX,


The Wei yang; narrative, THE FEELINGS WITH WHICH DUKE
K‘ane OF Ts‘IN ESCORTED HIS UNCLE, DUKE WAN, TO TSIN, AND HIS
PARTING GIFTS.


_ Duke Héen of Tsin had a daughter who was married to duke Muh of
Ts‘in, and became the mother of his son, afterwards duke K‘ang, The
eldest sou and heir of Héen was driven to suicide by the machinations of
an unworthy favourite of his father, and his two other sons fled to other
States, One of them, Ch‘ung-urh, afterwards the famous duke Wan of
Tsin, took refuge finally in Ts‘in, and by the help of Muh was restored
to his native State, and became master of it after he had been a fugitive
for 19 years. K‘ang was theh the heir-apparent of Ts‘in, and escorted
his uncle into Tsin, when he undertook the, exyedition to recover it,


166 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


These verses are supposed to have been written to him at a subsequent
time, when he recalled the event with interest, .


1 I escorted my uncle to Tsin,
Till the Wei we crossed on the way.
Then I gave as I left
For his carriage a gift
Four steeds, and each steed was a bay.


2 Lescorted my uncle to Tsin,
And I thought of him much in my heart.
Pendant stones, and with them
Of fine jasper a gem,
I gave, and then saw him depart.


x,


The Kteuen yu; narrative. SOME PARTIES, PROBABLY REFUGEES,
COMPLAIN OF THE DIMINISHED RESPECT AND ATTENTION PAID TO
‘THEM.


. 1 He lodged us in a spacious house,
And plenteous was our fare.
But now at every frugal weal
There’s not a scrap to spare.
Alas! alas that this good man
Could not go on as he began !


2 Four dishes on the mat the grain
For every meal supplied.
The change is great, from every meal
We rise unsatisfied.
Alas! alas that this good man
Could not go on as he began!


Br XII. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 167


BOOK XII.


>
THE ODES OF CH‘IN.


Cx‘IN was one of the smaller feudal States of Chow, and its name
remains in the department of Ch‘in-chow, Ho-nan. It was a marquisate,
and its lords traced their lineage up to the earliest commencement of his-
toric times, and boasted of being descended from the famous emperor Shun,
so that they had the surname of Kwei. At the rise of the Chow dynasty, one
of Shun’s descendants, called Ngoh-foo, was potter-in-chief to king Woo,
who was so pleased with him that he gave his own eldest daughter to be
wife to his son Mwan, whom he invested with the principality of Ch‘in.
He is known as duke Hoo, and established his capital near the mound
called Yuen-k‘éw, in the present district of Hwae-ning, department of
Ch‘in-chow, His marchioness is said to have been fond of witches and
wizards, and of singing and dancing, and so to have affected badly the
manners and customs of the people of the State,

L

The Yuen-k‘éw ; narrative. THE DISSIPATION AND PLEASURE-SEEK-
ING OF THE OFFICERS OF CH‘IN.

Yuen-k‘éw has been explained in the preceding note. If not in the
city, it was near it, and a favourite resort of pleasure-seekers,

It has been mentioned, in the title of Book viii., that the surname of
the ruling House of the State of Ts‘e was Kéang. That of the lords of
Sung, as being descended from the kings of the Shang dynasty, was Tsze,


1 How gay and volatile you are,
When upon Yuen-k‘ew’s top you stand !
Kindly you are indeed, but want
All that would men’s respect command.


2 How at the foot of Yuen-k‘ew’s height
Your blows upon the drum resound !
In winter and in summer, there
With egret’s plume in hand you’re found.


83 To Yuen-k‘ew as you move along,
You beat your sounding earthenware.
In wittter and in st4mmer both,
Your fan of egret’s plumes you hear.


‘168 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


II,


The Tung mun che fun; narrative, WANTON ASSOCIATIONS OF THE
YOUNG PEOPLE OF CH‘IN.


1 The white elms by the east gate grow,
And clumps of oaks crown, Yuen-k‘ew’s head ;
There T'sze-chung’s daughter oft we see,
Dancing about beneath their shade.


2 On a bright morning they have fixed,
To seek the plain that southward hes.
Then from her task of twisting hemp,
See! dancing through the mart she hies.


8 The morning fair, young men and girls
Together go. You hear a youth
Say to his mate, “ O sunflower bright,
Pledge me with pepper-stalk your truth ! ”


TI,


The Héng min; narrative. THE CONTENTMENT AND HAPPINESS OF
_A POOR RECLUSE,


, 1 My only door some pieces of crossed’ wood,
Within it I can rest enjoy.
I drink the water wimpling from the spring ;
Nor hunger can my peace destroy.


2 Purged from ambition’s aims, I say, “For fish,
‘ We need not bream caught in the Ho;
Nor, to possess the sweets of love, require
To Ts‘e, to find a Keang, to go.


3 “ The man contented with his lot, a meal
Of fish without Ho carp can make ;
Nor needs, to rest in his domestic joy,
A Tsze of Sung as wife to take.”


IV.


The Tung min che ch‘e; allusive. THF PRAISE OF SOME VIRTUOUS
AND INTELLIGENT aa


Bre XII. vi] THE BOOK OF POETRY, 169


1 To steep your hemp, you seek the moat,
Where lies the pool, th’ east gate beyond.
I seek that lady, good and fair,
Who can to me in song respond.


2 To steep your grass-cloth plants, you seek
The pool that near the east gate les.
I seek that lady, good and fair,
Who can with me hold converse wise.


3 Out by the east gate, to the moat,
To steep your rope-rush, you repair.
Her pleasant converse to enjoy,
I seek that lady, good and fair.


v.


The Tung min che yang ; allusive, THE FAILURE OF AN ASSIGNA-
TION.


1 Where grow the willows near the eastern gate,
And ’neath their leafy shade we could recline,
She said at evening she would me await,
And brightly now I see the day star shine !


2 Here where the willows near the eastern gate
Grow, and their dense leaves make a shady gloom,
She said at evening she would me await.
See now the morning star the sky illume!


VI.


The Moo min; allusive. ON SOME EVIL PERSON WHO WAS GOING
ON OBSTINATELY TO HIS RUIN.


. This is the argument of these verses finally adopted by Choo He. The
Preface gives an historical interpretation of them which Cheo at one
time atcepted. They were directed, according to that, against T’o of
Ch'in, This T’o was a brother of duke Hwan (8.0. 743—706), upon
whose death he killed his eldest son and got possession of the State,——to
come to an untimely end himself the year after. The piece may have
been made against T‘o; but in itself it indicates nothing more than I
have stated. .


1 Where.through the gate in to the tombs we go,
Thick jujube trees, the axe requiring, grow.


170 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


Like them that man, who ill befits his place,
And through the State is reckoned a disgrace !
All know him bad, bat to his course he’ll hold,
So long to evil has the man been sold.


2 Where through the gate in to the tombs we turn,
Owls perched upon the plum-irees we discern.
Such omen well may to that man belong,

om to admonish I now sing this song.
No welcome will the admonition find ;
When overthrown, my words he’l!l call to mind.


VII,


The Fang yéw ts‘éoh ch‘aow; allusive, A LADY LAMENTS THE
ALIENATION OF HER LOVER BY MEANS OF EVIL TONGUES,


1 The magpies’ nests are on the bank ;
On heights the lovely pea grows rank ;
While withered my heart is and blank.

Who wiled my Love away?


2 The temple path its fine tiles shows ;
On heights the ribbon-plant bright grows ;
While my breast heaves with sorrow’s throes.
“Who led his heart astray ?


By W. T. Mercer. Latina.


1 Montibus incultis florescunt pisa decora,
In ripé nidum garrula pica facit ;
Delicias nostras quis nunc circumdedit arte ?
Labe notat nostras lachryma multa genas!


2 En! medium templi.caHem bene tegula condit.
En! monte in summo gramina pulchra virent.
Sed quis delicias nostras circumdedit arte ? ©
‘ Ah! nostras maculant flumina salsa genas |!


VITL,


The Yueh ch‘uh; allusive. A GENTLELIAN TELLS ALL THE EXCITE-
MENT OF HIS DESIRY FOR THE POSSESSION OF A BEAUTIFUL LADY,


Bx XII. 1x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 171


1 The moon comes forth, brignt in the sky ;
A lovelier sight to draw my eye
Is she, that lady fairs
She round my heart has fixed love’s chain,
But all my longings are in vain.
Tis hard the grief to bear.


2 The moon comes forth, a splendid sight ;
More winning far that lady bright,
Object of my desire !
Deep-seated is my anxious grief;
In vain I seek to find relief,
While glows the secret fire.


3 The rising moon shines mild and fair;
More bright is she, whose beauty rare
_My heart with longing fills.
With eager wish I pine in vain;
O for relief from constant pain,
Which through my bosom thrills!


Ix,


The Choo lin; narrative, THE INTRIGUE OF DUKE LING WITH THE
LADY OF CHOO-LIN. .


Choo observes that this is the only one of the odes of Ch‘in of which the
historical interpretation is certain. Fhe intrigue of duke Ling with Héa
Ke (8.c, 612—598) makes the filthiest narrative, perhaps, of all detailed
in the Tso-chuen. She was one of the vilest of women; and the duke
was killed by Héan Nan, her son, who was himself put to a horrible and
undeserved death, the year after, by one of the viscounts of Ts‘vo.


1 What to Choo-lin takes his car?
Hea Nan is the leading star.
Not for Choo-lin does he go;
Hea Nan ’tis who draws him so.


2 Oft his purpose to go there
At the court he will declare :—
«Yoke for me my goodly team ;
I to-night in Choo will dream.
With those colts my way I’ll make,
Morning meal at Choo to takey”


172 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


x.


The Tsih po; allusive. § GENTLEMAN’S ADMIRATION OF AND
LONGENG FOR A CERTAIN LADY,


1 There where its shores the marsh surround,
Rushes and lotus plants abound.
Their loveliness brings to my mind
The lovelier one that I would find.
In vain I try to ease the smart
Of wounded love that wrings my heart.
In waking thought and nightly dreams,
From every pore the water streams.


LNs)


Alt round the marsh’s shores are seen
Valerian flowers and rushes green.

But lovelier is that Beauty rare,
‘Hfandsonie and large, and tall, and fair.
I wish and long to call her mine,
Doomed with the longing still to pine.
Nor day nor night e’er brings relief ;
My inmost heart is full of grief.


8 Around the marsh, in rich display,
Grow rush and lotus flowers, all gay.
But not with her do they compare,
So tall and large, majestic, fair.

Both day and night, I nothing speed ;
Still clings to me the aching need.
On side, on back, on face, I lie,

But vain each change of posture try.


y
Bx XIII. 1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. ‘173


BOOK XIII.


THE ODES OF KWEI.


KwEt was originally a small State, in the present Ch‘ing Chow, depart-
ment K‘ae-fung, Ho-nan, or, as others think, in the district of Meih of
the same department. Its lords were Yuns, and claimed to be descended
from Chuh-yung, a minister of the pre-historic emperor Chuen-héuh,
Before the period of the Ch‘un-ts‘w, which begins about B.¢, 720, it had
been extinguished by one of the earls of Ch‘ing, the one, probably, whom
we have met with in Book vii. as duke Woo (B.C. 770—743), and had
become a portion of that State, Some of the critics think that the odes
of Kwei are really odes of Ch‘ing, just as those of P‘ei and Yung belonged


to Wei.


I


The Kaou k‘éw; narrative. SOME OFFICER OF KWEI LAMENTS OVER
THE FRIVOLOUS CHARACTER OF HIS RULER, FOND OF DISPLAYING HIS
ROBES, INSTEAD OF ATTENDING TO THE DUTIES OF GOVERNMENT,


1 In lamb’s-fur robe you lounge about,
Hold court in fox-fur clad.
Such habits wake my anxious thought ;-
My weary heart is sad.
When thus you slight each rule of dress,
Must not your rule be bad?”


2 Aimless you roam in lamb’s-fur robe,
In fox-fur grace the hall.
Such habits wake my anxious thought,
And fill my heart with gall, -
When thus you slight the laws of dress,
You’ heed no laws at all.


3 Your glossy lamb’s-fur in the sun
Gleams as with ointment’s sheen.
Tis this that wakes my anxious thought,
My heart’s core pierces keen.
That thus you slight the laws of dress,
Is sorry sign I ween.


174 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


if,


The Soo kwan; narrative, SOME ONE DEPLORES THE DECAY OF
FILIAL FEELING, AS SEEN IN TGIE NEGLECT OF THE MOURNING HABIT,


Both Maou and Choo quote, in illustration.of the sentiment of the
piece, various conversations of Confucius on the three years’ mourning for
parents ;—see the Analects, XVII. xxi. The white cap” spoken of was
one assumed by mourners for a parent at the end of two years. The
skirt, or lower robe, and the knee-covers were then also of plain white
silk,


1 O that I saw the mourning robe of white,
Assumed when two years from the death are o’er,
And earnest mourner’s form, to leanness worn !
Not seeing this, my heart with grief is sore.


2 O that I saw the lower robe to match
This cap of white! I’d with the wearer go,
And live with him, my heart eased of its smart,—.
Its sadness gone, such mourner true to know.


3 O that I saw the white knee-covers worn,
Suiting the cap and skirt! I should feel bound
To him whose lasting grief so sought relief.
The sympathy would heal my heart’s deep wound.


it.


The Sih yéw ch‘ang-ts‘co ; marrative. SOME ONE, GROANING UXDER
THE OPPRESSION OF THE QOVERNMENT, WISHES HE WERE AN UN-
CONSCIOUS TREE,


1 Where the grounds are wet and low,.
There the trees of goat-peach grow,
‘With their branches small and smooth,
Glossy in their tender youth.

Joy it were to me, O tree,
Consciousness to want like thee.


2 Where the grounds are wet and low,
There the trees of goat-peach grow.
Soft and fragrant are their flowers,
Glossy from the vernal showers.

Joy it were to me, O tye, |
Ties of home to want like thee.


U
Bx XIII. 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. . 175


8 Where the grounds are wet and low,
There the trees of goat-peach grow.
What delicious fruits they bear,
Glossy, soft, of beauty rare!

Joy it were to me, O tree,
Household cares to want like thee.


©
Iv.


The Feit fung ; narrative and allusive, SOME ONE TELLS HIS SORROW
FOR THE DRCAY OF THE POWER OF CHOW.

It is certainly 2 homely subject which the writer employs in the third
stanza to introduce the expression of his sympathy with the friends of
Chow. ‘


1 Not for the stormy wind,
Nor rushing chariots’ roar,
But when I view the road to Chow,—
I’m pained to my heart’s: core.


2 Not for the whirlwind’s sweep,
Nor car’s unsteady roll,

‘ But when I view the road to Chow,—
Deep sadness dulls my soul.


8 For one who fish can cook,
His boilers I would clear ;
So him whose heart beats westward true,
With these good words I cheer.


176 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I.


BOOK XIV.
THE ODES OF TS{AOU.


Ts‘aou was a small State, corresponding to the present department of
Ts‘aou-chow, Shan-tung; having for its chief city Taou-kéw,—in the
present district of Ting-t‘aou. Its lords were earls, the first of them,
Chin-toh, having been a younger brothér of king Woo, It continued for
646 years, when it was extinguished by the larger Sung.


I,


The Fow-yéw ; metaphorical, AGAINST SOME PARTIES IN THE STATE,
OCCUPIED WITH FRIVOLOUS PURSUITS, AND OBLIVIOUS OF IMPORTANT
MATTERS.


1 Like splendid robes appear the wings
Of the ephemeral fly ;
And such the pomp of those great men,
Which soon in dust shall lie!
I grieve! Would they but come to me!
To teach them I should try.


2 The wings of the ephemeral fly
Are robes of colours gay ;
And'such the glory of those men,
Soon crumbling to decay !
I grieve ! Would they but rest with me,
They’d learn.a better way !


3 The ephemeral fly bursts from its hole,
With gauzy wings like snow;
So quick the rise, so quiek the fall,
Of those great men we know!
I grieve! Would they but lodge with me,
Forth they would wiser go.


Ii,


The How-jin; allusive and metaphorical. LAMENT OVER THE FA.
VOUR SHOWN TO WORTHLESS OFFICERS ‘AT THE COURT OF TS‘AOU,
AND THE DISCOUNTEPANCE OF GOOD MEN.


Br XIV. 1] HE BOOK OF POETRY. 177


The Prefate refers this piece to the time of duke Kung (B.¢, 651—-617),
who was chargeable, no doubt, with the error that js here condemned, for
we are told in the Tso-chuen how, when duke Wan of Tsin entered
Ts‘aou in 8,¢. 631, he condemned its ruler for having’ about him “three
hundred” worthless and useless officers. It has been argued, however,
that, when duke Wan specified the number of three hundred, he was
speaking from this ode, previously in existence. But we may contend,
on the other hand, that it ha} only become current in the previous years
of Kung, , :


1 Each warden of the gates appears,
With lancers and, with halberdiers,
As well befits his place ;
But these three hundred men, who shine
Grand -in their red knee-covers fine,
Only the court disgrace.


2 Like pelicans, upon the dam
Which stand, and there their pouches cram,
Unwet the while their wings,
Are those who their rich dress display,
But no befitting service pay,
Intent on meanest things.


38 Like pelicans which eager watch
Upon the dam, their prey to catch,
And spare to wet the beak,
Are those who richest favours share,
But take no part in toil or care,
Nor the State’s welfare seek.


4 Like grass Juxuriant on its side,
While morning mists the south hill hide,
These creatures seem-to grow ;
But men of worth, like virtuous maid,
Lovely but poor, denied wealth’s aid,
No recognition know.


XN


Til.


_ The She-kéw; allusive. THE PRAISE OF SOME ONE, SOME EARL,
PROBABLY, OF TS‘AOU, UNIFORMLY OF VIRTUOUS CONDUCT AND OF,
EXTENSIVE INFLUENCE,


There is a difficulty, in this pidce, in the statement that the young ones
af the bird amount to “seven,” as the turtle dove, I*ke all other birds of-


Vou. IL, * 12


178 THE BOOK OF POETIY. [Parr I.


the same species, has only two young at atime. It is highly character-
istic of the Chinese critics, that the only one I have met with who touches
on this point is Maou K‘e-ling. He observes that we have the “ seven,”
or the Chinese character ts‘ih, Gecause it rhymes with the character yih,
translated in my larger work by “uniformly correct,” and are not to
understand the text as if it gave definitely the number of the turtle’s
young! Almost all the critics, moreover, supposing the “ seven ” to give
correctly the number of the young ones, fpllow “ the old Maou” in the
most absurd statements about the dove’s method in feeding its young,
from which they deduce the meaning of the piece.


1 See in the mulberry tree the turtle dove
Her seven young tending with untiring love.
’ Like her is he, our lord, whose virtuous aim
His movements, all to rule exact, proclaim.
His movements, all to rule exact, attest
His heart to virtue bound within his breast.


2 The mulberry tree still gives the dove to sight,
But to the plum her young have taken flight.
So is that princely man to virtue bound,

Who ever with his silken sash is found.
In silken girdle Ioves he to appear, ;
And bonnet made from skin of spotted deer.


3 Behold the dove upon the mulberry tree,
While on the jujube her seven young we see.
In soul so steadfast is that princely man,
Whose course for fault or flaw we vainly scan.
His movements without fault or flaw beget
Good order for his rule throughout the State.


4- See on the mulberry tree the dove still sit,
And on the hazel all her young ones flit.
So on his aim that princely man is set,
Who rectifies the people of our State.

His laws to all affairs such order give ;—
. Ten thousand years in vigour may he live!


IV.


The Héa-ts‘euen ; metaphorical-allusive. THE MISERY AND MIs-
GOVERNMENT OF Ts‘AOU MAKES THE WRITER THINK OF CHOW AND
OF ITS FORMER VIGOUR AND PROSPERITY,


Seun, mentioned in the last stanza, vas a small State, in the present
‘district of Lin-tsin, department P‘oo-chow, Shan-se, It was first con-


Br XIV. 1Vv.] fe BOOK OF POETRY. 179


ferred on 8 son of king W4n, one of whose descendants was the “ chief ”
in the text,—so called as presiding with vice-regal authority over a dis-
trict, embracing many States. We do not know when he lived,

e


1 Down from the spring the chilling waters pass,
And overflow the bushy wolf-tail grass ;—
Fit emblem of our state unblest.
' In the dark night? restless, I wake and sigh,
And to my thoughts Chow’s capital comes nigh,
When through its kings the land had rest.


2 The bushy southernwood is flooded o’er,
By the cold waters from that spring which pour ;—
Fit emblem of our state unblest.
In the dark night, restless, I wake and sigh,
And to my thoughts Chow’s capital comes nigh,
When through its kings the land had rest.


3 The bushy plants, whose stalks serve to divine
Beneath the waters of that cold spring pine ;—
Fit emblem of our state unblest.
In the dark night, restless, { wake and sigh,
And to my thoughts Chow’s capital comes nigh,
When through its kings the land had rest.


4 Of old there fell the fertilizing rains,
And brightly shone the millet on our plains ;—
The land knew no oppression hard,
The States the king’s authority obeyed,
And to each lord, for loyal service paid,
The chief of Seun dispensed reward.


12*


180 THE BOOK OF porn}. [Parr I.


BOOK XV.


e
THE ODES OF PIN,


EnovucH has been said about Pin in the note on the title of Book i.
There the chiefs of what was subsequently called the House of Chow
dwelt for nearly five centuries, from B.C. 1796 to 1825. The first piece
in this Book is accepted as a description by the famous duke of Chow of
the ways of the first settlers in Pin, and hence the name of Pin is given
to all the odes in it, though no other of them refers to anything that
took place in that region, They were all made by the duke of Chow
about matters in his own day, or they were made by others about him.


L


The Teth yueh ; narrative, LIFE IN PIN IN THE OLDEN TIME; THE
‘PROVIDENT ARRANGEMENTS THERE TO SECURE THE CONSTANT SUPPLY
OF FOOD AND RAIMENT,—WHATEVER WAS NECESSABY FOR THE SUP-
PORT AND COMFORT OF “THE PEOPLE,


. This universally accepted account of the ode is not without its diffi-
culties. Pin is not once mentioned in it. The note of time with which
the three first stanzas commence is not a little perplexing :—‘ In the
seventh month, the Ho or Firesstar, i.¢., the Heart in Scorpio, passes on ;”
that is, passes to the westward of the meridian at night-fall, It has been
urged that this could not have been the case if the year of Chow began
with our December ; but the critics meet this difficulty by saying that in
this piece, and indeed throughout the She, the specitication of the months
is according to the calendar of the Héa dynasty, and not that of Chow.
This may be granted ; but it only leads to another difficulty. Scorpio did
pass to the westward in August, or the seventh month of the Héa dynasty,
in the time of the duke of Chow,—say abou’ B.e, 1114; but it did not
do so in the time of duke Léw, or B.C. 1796. We are thus brought to
one of two conclusions :—that the piece does not describe life in Pin
about 700 years before the duke of Chow’s time; or that he supposed the
place of the sun in the heavens, in the time of duke Léw, to have been
the same as it was in his own days. I think we must adopt the latter
conclusion, nor need we be surprised at the lack of astronomical know-
ledge in the great statesman.

T adhere to the ordinary view of the ode, mainly iisciuad of the second
line in the stanzas already referred to,—that clothes were given out in the
ninth month, ‘n anticipation of the approaching winter. This must
evidently be in the ninth month of Héa, and not of Chow. Were the
author telling of what was done in his ovén time, we cannot conceive of
his thus expressing hipself. Why then should we not trauslate the piece


Bx XV.1.] |= BOOK OF POETRY. 181


in the past tense, as being a record of the past? I was inclined to do so.
The 9th and 10th lines of the first stanza determined me otherwise. The
speaker there must be an old farmer or ees of Pin, and the whole


must be conceived of as coming from .
At the same time, it will be noted that t there are two styles in the indi-


cation of the months. We have “the seventh month,” “the eighth
_ month,” &¢., and we have “the first month’s days,” “ the ‘second month’s
days,” &c. "The critics sayéhat the dates in the former style are to be
referred to the Héa calendar, and those in the latter, to that of Chow.
They are probably correct. At any rate, I have in the latter case
adhered literally to the text, or put in the pronoun “ our.”
This Jong note may be excused, because of the interest attaching to


the picture of life and manners in so distant an age.


1 The seventh month sees the Ho go down the sky,
And in the ninth, the stores warm clothes supply.
Our first month’s days, the wind blows cold and shrill ;
Our second’s days, winds hushed, the air is chill.

But for those clothes, and garments made of hair,

At the year’s end, how badly all would fare !

Our third month’s days, their ploughs in hand they take,
And all the fourth the fields their home they make.

I with my wife and children take my way,

And to, the southern acres food convey

For those who toil. Appears th’ Inspector then,
Surveys the fields, and cheers the working men.


2 The seventh month sees the Ho go down the sky,
‘And in the ninth, the stores warm clothes supply.
The warmth begins when come the days of spring,
And then their notes we hear the orioles sing.

See the young women, with their baskets high,

About the mulberry trees their labours ply!

The softest leaves, along the paths, they seek,

To feed their silk-worms, newly hatched and weak.

For such, as longer grow the days of spring,

In crowds they haste white southernwood to bring.

’Mongst them are some who grieve with wounded
heart ;—

To wed young lords, from parents soon they part! !


3 The seventh month sees the Ho down westward go ;
The eighth, the reeds and sedges thickly grow.
The months the silk-wdrms’ eggs are hatched, they break
The mulberry branches, thus their leaves to.talke ; oa


182 THE BOOK OF rorrnyf [Parr I.


And where those branches stretch out far and high,
Hatchets and axes on them boldly ply,

While younger trees-orsy their leaves supply.

In the seventh month, the shrike’s notes shrilly sound,
And on the eighth, twisting the hemp they’re found.
Their woven fabrics, dark or yellow dyed,

Are valued highly o’er a circle wide.

Our brilliant red, the triumph of our art,

For young lords’ lower robes is set apart.


4, In the fourth month, the snake-root bursts the ear;
The shrill cicadas in the fifth we hear.
When comes the eighth, the ripened grain they crop,
And in the tenth the leaves begin to drop.
In our first month for badgers quest they make;
The wild-cat also and the fox they take :—
These last the furs for young lords to supply.
Our second month, there comes the hunting high,
When great and small attend our ruler’s car,
And practise all the exercise of war.
The hunters get the younger boars they find ;
Those three years old are to the prince assigned.


5 The locust in the fifth month beats its thighs;
And in the sixth, its wings the spinner plies.
The next, we find the crickets in the field ;
Under our eaves, the eighth, they lie concealed; —.
The ninth, they come and near our door-ways keep;
The tenth, beneath our beds they slily creep.
‘The rats we smoke out; chinks we fill up tight ;—
And close each opening on the north for light,
And plaster wicker doors ; then each one says,
“QO wife and children, this year’s toiling days
Are’o’er, and soon another year will come;
Enter and dwell in this our cosy home.”


6 For food, the sixth month, plums and vines they spoil ;
The seventh, the beans and sunflower seeds they boil ;
"The eighth, they strike the jujube dates all down;
The tenth, they reap the paddy fully grown,
And with the grain make spirits ’gainst the spring,
Which to the bushy eyebrowsecomfort bring.
In the seventk month, their food the melons make ;


Br XV. 1] af BOOK OF POETRY, 183


And in the eighth, the bottle gourds they take.
The ninth, in soups hempseed they largely use,
Nor sonchus leaves do they fow these refuse.
Th’ ailanthus foul, for other use not good,

They fell, and then for fuel burn the wood :—
*Tis thus the labourer is supplied with food.

s *®


7 In the ninth month, the yards, now stript and bare,
They for the produce of the fields prepare.
The tenth month sees the carrying all complete, °
Of early millets and the late; the wheat,
The hemp, the pulse,—whatever grain we eat.
This labour done, the husbandmen all say,
“ Our harvest here is well secured. Away
To town, and see what for our houses there
We need to do, to put them in, repair !
The reeds we'll gather while we have the light,
And firmly twist them into ropes at night.
Up on the roofs we’ll haste with these in hand :—
Soon will the fields our time again demand.”


8 Our second month, they, with harmonious blows,
Hew out the ice,—housed ere our third month close.
The following month, and in the early dawn,

They ope the doors ;—forth now may ice be drawn ;—
A lamb being offered, after rites of old,

With scallions flanked, to him who rules the cold.
Tn the ninth month, the cold begins, with frost ;

The tenth their cornyards swept and clean they boast.
Good spirits, in two vessels kept, they take,

To help their joy, and this proposal make:—
“We'll kill both lambs and sheep,” they joyous say,
“ And to the ruler’s quickly take our way.

We'll mount his hall; the massive cup we'll raise,
Made of rhinoceros’ horn, and as we praise,

Wish him long life, the life of endless days.”


In


The Ch‘e-héaou ; metaphorical, THs DUKE of CHOW, IN THE PER-
SON OF A BIRD, WHOSE YOUNG ONES HAVE BEEN DESTROYED BY AN
OWE, VINDICATES THE DECISI¥E COURSE IE HAD TAKEN WITH RE-
BELLION, ®


184 THE BOOK OF ia : [Parr I.


We have an account of the composition of this piece in the Book of
History, V. vi. 15. Two of the duke of Chow’s brothers, who had been
associated with Woo-kang, the son of the dethroned king of Shang, in
the charge of the territory wittch had been left to him by king Woo,
joined him in rebellion, having first spread a rumour impeaching the
fidelity of the duke to his nephew, the young king Ch‘ing. He took the
field against them, put to death Woo-kang and one of his own brothers,
dealing also with’ the other according to ‘pe measure of his guilt. It is
supposed that some suspicions of him still remained in the mind of the
king, and he therefore made this ode to show how he had loved his
brothers, notwithstanding he had punished them, and that his course was
in consequence of his solicitude for the consolidation of the dynasty of


his family.


1 Owl,.O ow], hear my request,

And do not, owl, destroy my nest. .
You have taken my young,
Though I over them hung,

With the nursing of love and “of care.
Pity me, pity me! Hear my prayer.


2 Ere the clouds the sky had obscured,
The mulberry roots I secured.
Door and window around,
Them so firmly I bound,
That I said, casting downward my eyes,
‘Dare any of you my house despise ? ””


3 I tugged with my claws and I tore,
And my mouth and my claws were sore.
So the rushes I sought,
And all other things brought ;
For to perfect the house I was bent,
And I grudged no toil with this intent.


4 My wings are deplorably torn,
And my tail is much injured and worn.
Tossed about by the wind,
While the rain beats unkind,
Oh! my house is in peril of harm,
And this note I scream out in alarm.


HE


The Tung shan; narrative. THE DUKE oF CHOW TELLS OF THE
TOILS OF HIS SOLDIERS IN THEIR EXWEDITION TO THE EAST AND OF
‘THEIR RETURN, ANp THEIR JOY AT THE LAST.


Be XY. 11.) TE BOOK OF POETRY. 185


The piece nowhere says that it was made by the duke of Chow; but,
with Choo and the critics generally, I think it likely that it was made
by him,—in compliment to his men, :


1 To the hills of the east we went,
And long had we there to remain.
When the word of,recal} was sent,
Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
When told our return we should take,
Our héarts in the west were and sore ;
But there did they clothes for us make :—
They knew our hard service was o’er.
On the mulberry grounds in our sight
The largé caterpillars were creeping ;
Lonely and still we passed the night,
All under our carriages sleeping.


2 To the hills of the east we went,
And long had we there to remain.
When the word of recall was sent,
Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
The heavenly gourds rise to the eye, *
With their fruit hanging under the eave.
In our chambers the sowbug we spy ;
Their webs on our doors spiders weave.
Our paddocks seem crowded with deer,
With the glow-worm’s light all about.
Such thoughts, white they filled us with fear,
We tried, but m vain, to keep out.


3 To the hills of the east we went,
And long had we there to remain.
When the word of reeall was sent,
Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
On ant-hills screamed cranes with delight ;
In their rooms were our wives sighing sore.
Our homes they had swept and made tight :—
All at once we arrived at the door.
The bitter gourds hanging are seen,
From branches of chestnut trees high.
Three years of toil away we had been,
Since such a sigl#& greeted the eye.
8


186 ; THE BOOK OF POETHY. . [Parr I.


4 To the hills of the east we went,
And long had we there to remain.
When the word of recall was sent,
Thick and fast came the drizzling rain.
With its wings now here, and now there,
Is the oriole sporting in flight.
Those brides to their husbanels repair,
Their steeds red and bay, flecked with white.
Each mother has fitted each sasl?;
Their equipments are full and complete ;
But fresh unions, whatever their dash,
Can ne’er with reunions compete. -


: : IV.


The Fo foo; narrative. RESPONSIVE TO THE LAST ODE. His soL-
DIERS PRAISE THE DUKE OF CHOW FOR HIS MAGNANIMITY AND
SYMPATHY WITH THE PEOPLE,


1 We splintered our axes, and brought
Our hatchets all to the same plight. '
But the duke of Chow meant, when eastward he went,
What was wrong in those four States to right.
Oh! the pity was great
Which he felt for their state !


2, Our axes and chisels we broke
To pieces, and splintered and rent. :
But the duke of Chow meant, when eastward he went,
The four States all reformed to present.
Oh! the pity was good
That on them he bestowed !


8 Our axes we broke, and our clubs
To fragments were splintered and split.
But the duke of Chow meant, when ‘eastward he went,
The four States in close union to knit.
Oh! the pity was rare
That he showed for them there | ’


Vv.


The Fah ko; metaphorical WHILE THERE I8 A PROPER AND
NECESSARY WAY FOR EVERYTHING, ME® NEED NOT GO FAR TO FIND
WHAT IT Is,


Bx XV. v1] THY BOOK OF POETRY. 187


Confucius quotes the first two lines of the second stanza in “the Doc-
trine of the Mean,” xiii. 2, to illustrate the principle that the rule for
man’s way of life is in himself. Both the old interpreters and’ the new
say that the piece is in praise of the duke @f Chow, while they differ in
the ways which they take to make out the point. I am myself unable to
follow either school,

1 In hewing an axe-slfaft, how must you act ? -
Another axe take, or ‘you'll never succeed.
In taking a wife* be sure ’tis a fact,
That with no go-between you never can speed.


2 In hewing an axe-shaft, hewing a shaft,
For a copy you have the axe in your hand.
In choosing & wife, you follow the craft,
And forthwith on the mats the feast-vessels stand.


; VI ;

The Kéw yih; allusive aud narrative, THE PEOPLE OF THE BAST
EXPRESS THEIR ADMIRATION OF THE DUKE OF aud AND SORROW AT
HIS RETURNING TO THE WEST,


J have never seen a net with “nine enclosures,” or “nine bags,” as
J have rendered the original terms in my larger work, nor come across a
description of it in any Chinese book. Very probably, the net in question
wag woven or constructed—say of bamboo, with nine compartments ; or
nine “nets for small fish” may have been placed in the water near one
another,

The “dragon robe,” of “robe with dragons,’ was worn by the king,
with the blazonry of the “nine figures” on it. The “court dukes,” of
whom the duke of Chow was one, were also entitled to wear it, with a
slight difference in the blazonry. The royal robe showed two dragons
on it, “ one ascending and one descending ;” the ducal, a single dragon
descending,


1 The nine enclosures of the net
The rud and bream keep tight.
Our prince in dragon robe we see,
And skirt with figures bright.


2 The geese brief time fly round the isles ;
Home bends the duke his way.
’Twas only for two passing nights
He deigned with us to stay.


188 . THE BOOK OF POEGRY. [Parr I.


3 Back to the land now. fly the geese ;
The duke comes not again.
’Twas only for tyo passing nights
He could with us remain.


4 Short time the single dragon robe
Among us we have had
Our duke O take not to the west,
Nor bid our hearts be sadd


VIL


The Lang poh; allusive. THE PRAISE OF THE DUKE OF CHOW,
MORE DISTINGUISHED THROUGH HIS TRIALS.


The wolf in this piece is supposed to be an old one, in which the dew-
Jap and tail have grown to a very large size. He is further supposed to
be making frantic efforts to escape ;—all in vain, for his own dewlap and
tail are in his way. a


1 Dewlap o’ergrown and heavy tail
Th’ impatient wolf impede or trip.
But see the duke, humble while tried !
_ Along his red shoes quiet slip.


2 Tail heavy and dew-lap o’ergrown,
Th’ impatient wolf trip or impede.
But see the duke, humble while tried,
' His fame unflawed by hasty deed !


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


a


PART IL.
MINOR ODES OF THE KINGDOM.


Boox I. Decade of Luh Ming.


TITLE OF THE Part, This in Chinese is Séaow Ya, which I have ex-
pressed by “ Minor odes of the Kingdom.” “Odes of the Kingdom” is
not, indeed, a translation of Ya; but the phrase approximates to a de-
scription of what the pieces in this and the next Part are more nearly than
any other I could think of. Ya is explained as meaning—Uorrect ; and
Lacharme translates the title by “Parvum Rectum,” adding—“quia in hac
parte mores describuntur, recti illi quidem, qui tamen nonnihil a recto
deflectunt,” But the pieces in this Part, as descriptive of manners, are
not less correct, or less incorrect, as the case may be, than those in the
next. The difference between them is—that the pieces in Part III. were
appropriate to greater occasions, and those of Part II. to lesser. The
former, as Choo He says, were sung at festal entertainments in the court ;
the latter, at gatherings of the feudal princes, and at their appéarances
at the royal court, The names “small” and “ great,’ “ major” and
“minor,” may have had reference also to the length of the pieces taken
as a whole, and to the style of the music to which they were sung, which
is now lost; but we shall find that in the subject matter of the pieces
there is a sufficient ground for such a distinction. As the Fung, or the
compositions in the first Part, were produced in the different feudal States,
the Ya were produced in the royal territory. The first twenty-two pieces
of this Part are attributed, indeed, to the duke of Chow himself, and are
distinguished from those that follow, as the odes of “Chow and the
South” and of “Shaow and the South” are distinguished from those
in the other Books of Part I. As there were “the correct Pung’ and
the “ Fung degenerate,” so there are the “correct Ya” and the “ degener-
ate Ya;°’ but as I have observed in the prolegomena, this distinction is of
no importance. It was proper to sing the Ya only on great and solemn
occasions at-the royal court ;.in course of time they were used at the
feudal courts, and ¢ven by ministers of these, as in the services of the Ke
family in Loo, in the time of Confucius (Ana. ITI. ii.) ; but this was a
usurpation, a consequence of the*decay into which the House of Chow
fell. :


190 ‘THE BOOK OF POERRY. [Parr II.


TITLE OF THE Boox,—“ The decade of Yuh Ming.” The pieces of
Part I. are all arranged under the names of the States to which they be-
longed. In Parts II. and III., however, they are collected in tens, and
classified under the name of tee first piece in each Collection. The only
exception in respect to the number, is the third Book of Part III.—Ié will
not be necessary after this to say anything on the names of the different


Books.


I.


The Luh Ming; allusive. A FESTALODE, SANG AT ENTERTAINMENTS
TO THE KING’S MINISTERS, AND GUESTS FROM THE FEUDAL STATES,


In the piece we read of guests merely, and not of ministers or officers.
* But the ministers and high officers would become the king’s guests, when
feasted as the piece describes. It is referred, though not by Choo, to the


time of king Wan.


1 With sounds of happiness the deer

Browse on the celery of the meads,

A nobler feast is furnished here, ;
With guests renowned for noble deeds.

The lutes are struck ; the organ blows,
Till all its tongues in movement heave.

Each basket loaded stands,and shows
The precious gifts the guests receive.

They love me, and my mind will teach,

How duty’s highest aim to reach.


2 With sounds of happiness the deer
The southernwood crop in the meads.
What noble guests surround me here, ,
Distinguished for their worthy deeds !
From them my people learn to fly
Whate’er is mean ; to chiefs they give
A. model and.a pattern high ;—
They show the life they ought to live.
Then fill their cups with spirits rare,
Till each the banquet’s joy shall share.


3 With sounds of happiness the deer
The salsola crop in the fields.
What noble guests surround me here !
Each lute for them its music yields.
Sound, sound the lutes, or great or small,
The joy harmonious to rolong ;
0


Br I. u.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 191


And with my spirits rich crown all

The cups to cheer the festive throng.
Let each retire with gladdened heart,
In his own sphere to play his part.


iH.


The Sze mom ; narrative and allusive. A FESFAE @DE, COMPLIMENT-
ARY TO AN OFFICER ON HIS RETURN FROM AN EXPEDITION, CELE-
BRATING THE UNION IN HIM OF LOYAL DUTY AND FILIAL FEELING.


There is nothing in the ode itself to suggest its being composed for a
festal occasion, and to compliment the officer who narrates his story in
it. Both Maou and Choo, however, agree in the above account of it.
It was not written, they say, by the officer himself, but was put into his
mouth, as it were, to express the sympathy of his entertainer with him, and
the appreciation of his devotion to duty, There appear strikingly in it
the union of family affections and loyal duty, which we met with in
several of the pieces in Part I.; and the merit of king Wan, to whose
times it is assigned, shines out in the allowance which he makes for those
affections.


1 On dashed my four steeds, without halt, without stay,
Though toilsome and winding from Chow.was the way.
I wished to return,—but the monarch’s command
Forbade that his business be done with slack hand;
And my heart was with sadness oppressed.


2 On dashed my four steeds; I ne’er slackened the reins,
They snorted and panted,—all white, with black manes.
I wished tq return, but our sovereign’s command
Forbade that his business be done with slack hand ;
And I dared not to pause or to rest.


3 Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
Ascending, then sweeping swift down from.the height,
Now grouped on the oaks. The king’s high command
Forbade that his business be done with slack hand ;—

And my father I left, sore distressed.


4 Unresting the Filial doves speed in their flight,
Now fanning the air, and anon they alight
On the medlars thick grouped. But our monarch’s
command
Forbade that his busingss be done with slack hand ;~
‘Of my mother I thosght with sad breast.


192 THE BOOK OF ef [Parr IT.


5 My four steeds I harnessed, all white and black-maned,
Which straight on their way, fleet and emulous, strained.
I wished to return ; and now venture in song
The wish to express, and announce how I long
For my mother my care to attest.


Ii,


The Hwang-hitang chay hwa; allusive and narrative. An ODE Ar.
PROPRIATE TO THE DESPATCH OF AN ENVOY ; COMPLIMENTARY TO
HIM, AND SUGGESTING INSTRUCTIONS AS TO THE DISCHARGE OF HIS
DUTY. .


This pieee also is referred to the time of king Wan.


1 As the flower that blooms bright on the mountain or lea,
Ts the legate, whom charged with high mission we see.
With his suite, atl-alert and aye watchful he hies, °
That his hand may achieve what his heart shall devise.


2 “Fresh and young are my steeds,’’ so he sang as he
sped
“ And the six reins in hand look with ointment o’er-
spread.
So hurrah! my good horses, dash on at your best,
As now here, and now there, I am pushing my quest.


3 ‘ Many-spotted my coursers, whose hues finely blend,
And the six reins in hand, soft as silk, freely bend.
So hurrah! my good horses, strain tendons and thews,
As now here, and now there, I am searching for news.


4 “With black manes and white coats are the steeds of
my car, :
And the gleam of the six glossy reins shines afar.
So hurrah! my good. horses, ply muscle and leg,
As now here, and now there, for wise counsel I beg.


5 “ Dark, with white interspersed, are the coursers I drive;
’Gainst my hands, the reins grasping, in vain would they
strive. ;
So hurrah! my good horses, speed onwards and fly,
As now hore, and now there much inquiring I pry.”


Br I. w.] THE {BOOK OF POETRY. _ 198


Fv.


The Chang te; allusive and narrative. SETTING FORTH THE CLOSE ‘
RELATION AND AFFECTION THAT OUGHT to OBTAIN BETWEEN BRO-
THERS. .


The Preface assigns the composition of this piece to the duke of Chow»
saddened by the justice which ge had been obliged to execute on his
’ brothers, the lords of Kwan and Ts‘ae ;—as has been mentioned on I.
xv. II. The ode thuscame into use at entertainments given at the court
to princes of the same surname as the King.


’


1 With mass of gorgeous flowers
The cherry trees are crowned,
But none within this world of ours
Like brothers can be found.


2. When awful death comes near,
*Tis brothers sympathize.
When headlong flight fills plain and height,
To brother brother flies.


3 See how the wagtail’s head

Quick answers to its tail !

When hardships great befall our State, .
Friends are of no avail.
In times of urgent need,
We brothers’ help receive. .

Then friends, though good, of different blood,
Long sighs will only heave.


4 Brothers indoors may fight ;

But insults from without

Join them at once, and they unite
The common foe to rout.
In cases such as this,
Ja vain to friends we turn.

They may be true, but they’ll eschew
The danger they discern.


5 Deaths and disorder o’er,
”Mid peace and rest now cold,
Some men, alas! their brothers pass,
Nor them as friends will hold.


VOL, IL 18


194 THE BOOK OF we [Parr I.


6 With dishes in array,

The cup may oft go round ;

But only where brothers are there,

The feast i8 traly found.’

Tis when they all appear,
And each is in his place,

That child-like joy, witheut alloy,
Crowns harmony with grace.


7 Children and wife we love;
Union with them is sweet
As lute’s soft strain that soothes our pain.
* How joyous do we meet !
But brothers, more than they,
Can satisfy the heart.
*Tis their accord does peace afford,
And lasting joy impart.


8 For ordering of your homes,

For joy with child and wife,

Consider well the truth I tell ;—
This is the charm of life!


Vv.


The Fah muh; allusive. A FESTAL ODE, SUNG AT THE ENTERTAIN-
MENT OF FRIENDS; INTENDED TO CELEBRATE THE DUTY AND VALUE
OF FRIENDSHIP, EVEN TO THOSE OF THE HIGHEST RANK.


1 The woodmen’s blows responsive ring,

As on the trees they fall ;

And when the birds their sweet notes sing,
They to each other call.

From the dark valley comes a bird,”
And seeks the lofty tree.

Ying goes its voice, and thus it cries,
«Companion, come to me.”

The bird, although a creature small,
Upon its mates depends;

And shall we men, who rank o’er all,
Not seek to have pur friends ?


Bx L. v.] THE. BOOK OF POETRY. 195


All Spirits bre the friendly man,
And hearken to his prayer.

What harnigny and peace they can
Bestow, his lot shall share.


2 Hoo-hoo the woodmen all unite

To shout, as trees they fell.

They do their work with all their might ;—
What I have done I'll tell.

I’ve strained and made my spirits clear,
The fatted lambs I’ve killed.

, With friends who my own surname bear,

My hall I’ve largely filled.

Some may be absent, casually,
And leave a broken line ;

But better this than absence by
An oversight of mine.

My court I’ve sprinkled and swept clean,
Viands in order set.

Eight dishes loaded stand with grain ;
There’s store of fatted meat.

My mother’s kith and kin I wis
I’ve widely called by name..

That some be hindered better is
Than I give cause for blame.


3 On the hill-side the trees they fell,

-All working with good will.

LT labour too, with equal zeal,
And the host’s part fulfil.

Spirits P’ve set in order meet,
The dishes stand in rows.

The guests are here ; no vacant seat
A brother absent shows.

The loss of kindly feeling off

_- From slightest things shall grow,

Where all the fare is dry and spare,
Resentments fierce may glow.

My store of spirits is well strained.
If short prove the supply,

My messengers I straightway send,
And what is netded buy.

13 * ‘


|
196 THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr II.


I beat the drums, and in bo dance
Lead joyously the train.

Oh! good it is, when fallsghe chance,
The sparkling cup to drain.


VI.


The T*éen paou; narrative. AN ODE RESPONSIVE TO ANY OF THE
FIVE PRECEDING. HIS OFFICERS AND GUESTS, FEASTED BY THE KING,
CELEBRATE HIS PRAISES, AND DESIRE FOR HIM THE BLESSING OF
HEAVEN AND OF HIS ANCESTORS.


1 Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
It round thee fair has cast
Thy virtue pure.
Thus richest joy is thine ;—
Increase of corn and wine,
And every gift divine,
Abundant, sure.


2 Heaven shields and sets thee fast.
From it thou goodness hast ;
Right are thy ways.
Its choicest gifts ’twill pour,
That last for evermore,
Nor time exhaust the store
Through endless days.


3 Heaven shields and sets thee fast,
Makes thine endeavour last,
And prosper well.
Like hills and mountains high,
Whose masses touch the sky;
Like stream aye surging by ;
Thine increase swell!


4 With rite and auspice fair, .
Thino. offerings thou dost bear,
And son-like give,
The seasons round from spring,
To olden duke and king,
Whose words to thee we bring :—
“For ever live.”


Br I, vu.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 197


5 The Spirte of thy dead
Pour blessings on thy head,
Unnumbered, sweet.
Thy subjects, simple, good,
Enjoy their drink and food.
Our tribes of every blood
Follow thy feet.


6 Like moons that wax in light;
Or suns that scale the height ;
Or ageless hill;
Nor change, nor autumn know ;
As pine and cypress grow ;
The sons that from thee flow
Be lasting still !


vil.


The 7s‘ae we ; allusive and narrative. AN ODE ON THE DESPATCH
OF TROOPS TO GUARD THE FRONTIERS ON THE NORTH AGAINST THE
WILD TRIBES OF THE HEEN-YUN,


This and the next two pieces form a triad, having reference to the same
expedition; this being appropriate to its commencement, those to its
conclusion, Maou says the expedition was undertaken in the time of
king Win; when he was still only duke of Chow, in charge of all the’
regions of the west, and discharging his duty to the king of Shang. Choo
denies that the pieces are of so early an origin, and says that “the son of
Heaven” in the 8th ode must be one of the kings of Chow. I agree
with him in this, but the date of the composition cannot be determined
more particularly.

Though intended to encourage the departing troops, this piece is writ-
ten as if it were their own composition, giving their feelings on setting
out, and in the progress of the expedition, down to its close. Se far, the
structure may be compared with that of the second ode of this Book.

It is difficult to say who the Héen-yun, against whom the expedition
was directed, really were. Choo simply says that they were “ wild tribes
of the north.” Ch‘ing K‘ang-shing (about the end of our second cen-
tury) says that they were the same tribe that in his days went by the name
of Héung-noo. I suppose that both the names are imperfect phonetic
expressions Of ‘the same sound, which we also have adopted in Huns,
Wang Taou, whoassisted me in the preparation of my larger Work, holds
that the Héen-yun of Yin and Chow, the Héung-noo of Ts‘in and Han,
and the Tuh-keueh of Suy and Tung, all refer to the same tribes. Sze-
ma Ts‘€en, in his Record of the House of Chow, and of the Héung-noo, says
that in the time of king E (2.¢.933— 909), those northern tribes became
very troublesome, and refers to this ode as a composition of that time,


198 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IT.


1 Come pluck the ferns, the ferns sharp-pointed take ;
The curling fronds now their appearance make.
And now we march. O when shall we return ?
Till late next year we must in exile mourn.

So long the husband, parted from his wife,

Shall ’gainst the Heen-yun wage the deadly strife.
*Mid service hard all rest will*be denied ;—
Northwards we go, to quell the Heen-yun’s pride.


bo


Come pluck the ferns, the ferns sharp-pointed pull ;
Their fronds uncurled, they tender look and cool.
Onwards we march. O when shall we return?
Disconsolate, our hearts in sadness mourn.

Yes, sad our hearts! In sorrow forth we go,

To thirst and hunger and each pinching woe.
While serving thus the frontiers to defend,

“To those at home no message can we send.


3 Come pluck the ferns, their sharp points disregard ;
Some tinte has passed, and now their leaves are hard.
What is the date for our return assigned ?

Next year’s tenth month.—We keep it well in mind.
But the king’s work no grudging heart requires ;
Denied our rest, we fan our valour’s fires.

Home thoughts may often cause us weary hours,
But home we go not, till success is ours.


4 What gorgeous sight was that which fixed our gaze?
The mass of flowers the cherry iree displays.
But here a sight we see, as fair and grand ;—
Qur leader’s car, given by his sovereign’s hand.
It stands equipt, imposing in our sight,
With steeds all strong, and eager for the fight.
And shall not we the inspiration own ?
One month our arms with victories three shall crown.


5 Grand are those four steeds, harnessed to the car !
Conducted thus, we boldly dare the war.
With confidence.the general takes his seat ;
The men behind rejoice the foe to meet.
On move the steeds in step. The quiver made
Of seal-skin tough is to the view displayed,
And bow ug ivory ends,—the Heen-yun’s dread.


Bx I, vit.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 199


Daily each other’s aes we provoke,
And hope to end our service by a stroke. °


6 Ah! vain our efforts to assuage our grief!
None know our sadness ; nought can give relief.
Last year, when from our homes the field we took,
"Twas sweet on willows fresh and green to look,
When we return, ’twill be the winter stern,
And hard our path through snow-clouds to diseern.
Alas! how great the toilsome journoy’s length,
With thirst and hunger to exhaust our strength !


VIIL


The Ch'wh keu; narrative. AN ODE OF CONGRATULATION, ON THE
RETURN OF THE TROOPS FROM THE EXPEDITION AGAINST THE HEBN-
YUN,


The commander of the expedition appears here,—Nan Chung, a cadet
of the Nan family ; but we know nothing of him from any other source,
The Jung mentioned in stanza five would be another barbarous tribe,
lying more west than the Héen-yun.


1 Forth from the city in our cars we drove,
Until we halted at the pasture ground.
The general came, and there with ardour strove
A note of zeal throughout the host to sound.
“Direct from court I come, by orders bound
‘The march to hasten ;”—it was thus he spake.
Then with the carriage-officers around,
He strictly charged them quick dispatch to make :-~
“Urgent the king’s affairs, forthwith the field we take.”


2 While there we stopt, the second corps appeared,

And ’twixt us and the city took its place.

The guiding standard was on high upreared,
Where twining snakes the tortoises embrace,
While oxtails, crest-like, did the staffs top grace.

We watched the sheet unfolding grandly wave ;
Each flag around showed falcons on its face.

With anxious care looked on our leader brave ;

Watchful the carriage-officers appeared and grave.


200 THE BOOK OF POETRY, [Parr IT.


8 Nan Chung, our chief, had herd the royal call

To go where inroad by Heen-yuns was made,

And ’cross the frontier build a barrier wall.
Numerous his chariots, splendidly arrayed !
The standards—this where dragons were displayed,

And that where snakes round tortoises were coiled—
Terrific flew. “Northw&rd our host,” he said,

ss eee son sends forth to tame the Heen-yun

wild.”
Soon by this awful chief would all their tribes be foiled.


4, When first we took the field, and northward went,

The millets were in flower ;-~a prospect sweet.

Now when our weary steps are homeward bent,
The snow falls fast, the mire impedes our feet.
Many the hardships we were called to meet,

Ere the king’s orders we had all fulfilled.
No rest we had; often our friends to greet

The longing came; but vain regrets we stilled ;

By tablets stern our hearts with fresh resolve were thrilled.


5 “ Incessant chirp the insects in the grass ;
All round about the nimble hoppers spring.
From them our thoughts quick to our hasbands pass,
Although those thoughts our hearts with anguish


wring.
Oh! could we see them, what relief *twould bring!
Our hearts, rejoiced, at once would feel at rest.”
Thus did our wives, their case deploring, sing ;
The while our leader farther on had pressed,
And smitten with his power the wild Jung of the west.


6 The spring days now are lengthening out their light;
The plants and trees are dressed in living green; .
The orioles resting sing, or wing their flight ;
Our wives amid the southernwood are seen,
Which white they bring, to feed their silkworms
keen.
Our host, returned, sweeps onwards to the hall,
Where chiefs are questioned, shown, the captives
mean
Nan Chung; majestic, draws the gaze of all,
Proud o’er thegbarbarous foe his victories to recall.


Br I. rx.] THE BOOK OF POETRY 201


xX,


The Ze too; narrative. AN ODE OF CONGRATULATION, SPECIALLY
INTENDED FOR THE TROOPS, ON THE RETURN OF THE EXPEDITION
AGAINST THE HEEN-YUN.

The congratulation is given in a description of the anxiety and long-
ing of the soldiers’ wives forgtheir return. I have supposed that one
lady speaks throughout,


1 The russet pear tree stands there all alone ;
How bright the growth of fruit upon it shown !
The king’s affairs no stinting hands require,
And days prolonged still mock our fond desire.
But time has brought the tenth month of the year ;
My woman’s heart is torn with wound severe.
Surely my warrior lord might now appear !


2 The russet pear tree stands there all alone ;
How dense the leafy shade all o’er it thrown !
The king’s affairs require no slackening hand,
And our sad hearts their feelings can’t command.
The plants and trees in beauty shine ; ’tis spring.
From off my heart its gloom I fain would fling.
This season we my warrior home may bring !


3 I climbed that northern hill, and medlars sought ;
The spring nigh o’er, to ripeness they were brought.
“The king’s affairs cannot be slackly done : ”-—
Tis thus our parents mourn their absent son.

But now his sandal car must broken be ; ;
I seem his powerful steeds worn out to see.
Relief has gone! He can’t be far from me!


4 Alas! they can’t have marched ; they don’t arrive !
. More hard it grows with my distress to strive.
The time is passed, and still he is not here !
My sorrows multiply ; great is my fear.
But lo! by reeds and shell I have divined.
That he is near, they both assure my mind ;-—
Soon at my side my warrior I shall find !


The same, Latiné. By W. T. Mercer. |


Sola pyrus rubro, fructu se tollit in horto ;
(Regis solerti est res facienda modo.)


202 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.
Tempora labuntur. Nunc etfsol mense videtur
In decimo; in decimo mense Diana latet.
At nobis luctu muliebria corda moventur.
Ah, si heros noster posset adire domum !


Sola pyrus multis foliis se tollit in horto:
(Regis solerti est res fadienda modo.)

Quid. si per terram totam virgulta virescant,
Et patulis arbor luxuriosa comis,

Tristis ego! Ah, utinam vir noster sanus adesset, °
Abjectis calamis, enseque deposito !


Ascengu vici Borealis culmina montis,
Mespilus acceptas quai mihi pandit opes.

(Gnaviter at Regis nostri sunt res faciende,
Si doleant matres, tristitidque gemant.)

Deficit et currus, fessi sunt quadrijugesque.
Nonne miles noster nunc prope tendit iter?


Attamen haud veniunt; animos spes Iudit inanes,
Sollicito nec mens gra dolore vacat.

Tempora labuntur ; luctus augentur in illis:
Infelix adsum ! noster amicus abest !

Ah, nunc testudo canneque loquuntur, et ille
Hac possit forsan nocte redire domum !


xX


The Wan hae. This is one of the six odes which are commonly spoken
of as having been lost. Choo, however, contends that they were only the
names of tunes, played on the organ, and never were intended to be sung.
But he can hardly be.correct in this, for we have notices in “ the Little
Preface” of the subjects of all the six. The subject of the Nan kae was:
—FILIAL SONS ADMONISHING ONE ANOTHER ON THE DUTY OF SUP-
PORTING THEIR PARENTS.


Bg II. m.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 2038


BOOK II.


THE DECADE OF PIH HWA.


I.


Text wanting.


a


The Pih-hwa. THE UNSULLIED PURITY OF FILIAL SONS,


II,
ext wanting,


The Hwa shoo, THE HARMONY OF THE SEASONS, AND THE ABUND-
ANCE OF THE HARVESTS, SEEN ESPECIALLY IN THE LARGE PRODUCE
OF THE MILLET CROPS, ‘


: Ir.


The Yu le; allusive and narrative. AN ODE USED AT DISTRICT EN-
TERTAINMENTS, CELEBRATING THE ABUNDANCE OF EVERYTHING, AND
THE PROSPERITY OF ‘THE TIMES,


The idea of the prosperity of the times is found by taking both parts
of the first three stanzas as allusive ;—which, J should have said my-
self, makes them metaphorical. That fish of so many different kinds
should be taken in a contrivance consisting only of a few bamboos inarti-
ficially put together, showed how good government produced an abund-
ance of all material resources ; the abundant supply of good spirits
was also a proof of the general prosperity,

The domain of the king was divided into six districts, of which the
more trusted and able officers were presented every third year to the king,
and feasted, the general superintendents of the districts presiding on the
occasion,


1 By means of simplest fish-trap that men make,
Sand-blowers small and yellow-jaws they take ;-—
Such the result good tule ensures.
And here our host his spirits forth has set,
Good and abundant; proof we now are met,
When ordered file large wealth secures.


204 | QHE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


2 In simplest fish-traps that might useless seem,
They take abundant store of tench and bream ;—
Such issue from our good rule springs.
And here our host his spirits forth has set,
Abundant, good ;—sure proof we now are met,
When ordered rule great riches brings.


3 Into the simplest fish-traps largely go
Mudfish and carp ;~+captures that clearly show
How with good rule the land is crowned.
And here our host his spirits forth has set,
Good and most ample ;—proof we here are met,
When ordered rule makes wealth abound.


4 The mats in great abundance viands show ;
And these of rarest quality we know.


5 The viands excellent are here revealed ;
Both land and sea their contributions yield.


6 Viands in ample store the feast displays ;
And all in season, all beyond our praise.


IV,
Text wanting.


The Yéw king, ALL THINGS PRODUCED ACCORDING TO THEIR NA-
TURE, :


Vv.


The Nan yéw héa yui ; allusive. A FESTAL ODE APPROPRIATE TO
THE ENTERTAINMENT OF WORTHY GUESTS, AND CELEBRATING THE
GENEROUS SYMPATHY OF THE ENTERTAINER,


1 The fishers of the south for barbel make
Sharp search, and many with their baskets take.
The host his noble guests has gathered here ;
They drink with him, and joyous share his cheer.


2 The barbel of the south are largely caught
In wicker nets, which then to land are brought.
The host has round him called each noble guest ;
They drink with him, delightéd with the feast.


Br II. vu.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 205


3 The southern treeswith drooping branches grow,
Round which the sweet gourds clasp and twine below.
His noble guests around the host we see ;

*They drink with him, and feast in cheerful glee,


4, About the Filial doves incessant fly ;
Flock follows flock, ig wheeling circles high,
The noble guests long at their cups remain ;
They freely drink, and then they drink again.


VIL
Text wanting.


The Sung k‘éw. How Aub THINGS ATTAINED THEIR GREATEST
HEIGHT AND SIZE,


vil.


The Nan shan yéw tae; allusive. A FESTAL ODE, WHERE THE
RULER, AS THE HOST, CELEBRATES THE VIRTUES OF HIS MINISTERS,
WHO ARE THE GUESTS, AND SUPPLICATES BLESSINGS ON THEM,


1 The southern hills the ¢‘ae plant show,
The northern yield the lae.
Your presence here, my noble guests,
Fills me with rapture high.
’*Tis on your strength that all my States depend ;
Myriads of years be yours, years without end !


2 On southern hills are mulberry trees,
On northern willows grow.
Your presence here, my noble guests,
Makes my joy overflow.
Your virtue’s rays through all my regions shine ;
Myriads of years be yours in boundless line !


3 On southern hiils the medlars thrive,
And plum-trees in the north.
Your presence here, my noble guests,
The richest joy calls forth.
Parental love ye for my pope show,
And may your virtuous fame decay ne’er know !


| 4 The southern hills the k‘aou display,
The northern hfve the new.


206 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part Il.


Here at our feast, my noble guests,
My heart rests glad in you.
The eyebrows of long life your foreheads crown ;
Still wider be your virtuous fame’s renown !


5 The honey trees on southern hills,
The yu on northern rises
Your presence here, my noble guests
Rare happiness supplies.
Gray hair and wrinkled face yours yet shall be:
May future times your sons as prosperous see!


VIII. °
Text wanting.


The Yéwe, How ALL THINGS WERE PRODUCED AND FLOURISHED
AS WAS NATURAL TO THEM,


.


Ix.


The Luh staou; allusive. A FESTAL ODE, ON OCCASION OF THE
KING’S ENTERTAINING THE FEUDAL PRINCES WHO HAVE COME TO
HIS COURT.


1 Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
On which the dew shines bright.
Now that my noble men I see, *
My anxious heart feels light.
We feast, while smiles and chat our joy proclaim ;
Such guests deserve prosperity and fame.


2 Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
On which thick hes the dew.
The presence of these noble men
Gives grace and glory too.
From error’s taint is their pure virtue free ;
Long may they live, and ne’er forgotten be !


3 Tall grows the fragrant southernwood,
With dew all over wet.
Joyful and unconstrained these guests
Share the rich feast here set.
In concord with their brothers may they dwell,
And happy age their virtue’s*praises tell !


Bx II. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. "207


4 Tall grows the fragrant anthierawood:
On which rich lies the dew.
The rein-ends of these noble men:
At once engaged my view,
As down they hung, while the bells tinkled sweet
From bar and bit. at good upon them meet!


x.


The Chan loo ; allusive, <A FESTAL ODE, APPROPRIATE TO THE CON-
VIVIAL ENTERTAINMENT OF THE FEUDAL PRINCES AT THE ROYAL
COURT.


1 The dew lies heavy all around,
Nor, till the sun shines, leaves he ground.
Far into night we feasting sit ;
We drink, and none his place may quit.


2 The dew lies heavy, and its gems
Stud the luxuriant, grassy stems.
1 The happy night with wassail rings ;
So feasted here the former kings.


3 The jujube and the willow tree
All fretted with the dew we see.
Each guest’s a ‘prince of noble line,
In whom the virtues all combine.


4, The tung and e their fruits display,
Pendent from every graceful spray.
My guests are joyous and serene,
No haggard eye, no ruffled mien.


908 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II,


BOOK ne


THE DECADE OF T‘UNG KUNG.


L


‘THE Zang kung; narrative. A FESTAE ODE, ON OCCASION OF A
FEAST GIVEN BY THE KING TO SOME PRINCE FOR THE MERIT HE HAD
ACHIEVED, AND THE CONFERRING ON HIM OF A RED BOW.

In the Book of History, V. xxviii. 4, we have an instance of the con-
ferring by king P‘ing on a marquis of Tsin of a red bow, and other gifts
which generally accompanied such a2 token of merit and of the royal fa-
vour. Red was the colour of rank ahd merit with the dynasty of Chow ;
a red bow was its highest testimonial of merit, and gave to the prince
who received it great prerogatives within the sphere of his jurisdiction.


1 The red bows unbent were received, and are kept
In store,—to reward service done for our land.
‘Lo! here is a prince whose great merit we own;
To him one I give from my heart with glad hand.
The bells and the drums all in order are placed ;—
T’ll feast the whole merning with this noble guest.


2 The red bows unbent were received, and are fixed
On frames,—to await service done for our States.
Lo! here is a prince who well merits the prize;
With joy my whole heart in his presence dilates.
The bells and the drums in good order all stand ;—
And this morning his place shall be on my right hand.


3 The red bows unbent were received, and are placed

In cages,—to show how we merit revere. .
Lo! here is a prince such reward who deserves ;

For him in my heart’s core the love is sincere.
With our bells and our drums the court shall resound,
While for him all the morning the pledge-cup goes

round.


Bx Il. ur] its’ Book: or porrry: 209°


IE.


The Ts‘ing-tsing chay ngo; allusive and metaphorical. An’ op,
CELEBRATING THE ATTENTION PAID BY THE EARLY KINGS or Cxow
TO THE EDUCATION OF TALENT. 4


This is the account of the piece‘given in the Preface and by all the:
school of Maou. Choo He at one &me adopted it, but he afterwards changed -
his mind ; and in his Work on ihe She he says that it isa festal ode about
the royal entertainment of guests. The K‘ang-he editors express them-
sélves rather in favour of the old view.—There is nothing, indeed, in the
piece to help us clearly to determine the subject of it; but the absence
of any mention of guests and their entertainment may be accepted against
Choo’s interpretation.


1 Bright grows the aster-southernwood,
Luxuriant on that spacious mound.
Our lord, renowned for courtesy,
Wakes in our hearts a joy profound.


2 The aster, clothing yonder isle,
Its colour throws o’er all the stream.
When we our noble lord behold,
Our hearts reflect his gladdening beam.


3.The aster on that lofty height
In beauteous state luxuriant grows.
An hundred sets of cowries bright
‘Our noble lord on us bestows.


4‘ Our youth were like the willow boat,
Sinking and rising on the tide.
Our noble lord now for them cares ;—
In him our resting hearts confide.


4
,


Til.


The Luk yueh ; narrative. CELEBRATING A SUCCESSFUL EXPEDITION
AGAINST THE H&EN-YUN, AND ESPECIALLY THE CHARACTER AND CON-
DUCT OF KEtH-ro0 WHO COMMANDED IN It.


With this piece commence what are called “the Ya odes of a changed
character.” The twenty-two pieces which precede are all, we saw, referred’
to the earlier and more prosperous times of the Chow dynasty. This and
the thirteen which follow are referred, by the critics of the old school, to
the time of king Seuen, a monarch of great merit, B.c. 826—781, in whose
titst year the expedition here confmemorated took place. ‘ Choo says

VOL, Hi, 14


210. THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IT.


“ After kings Ching and K‘ang, the House of,Chow fell into decay. Le,
the eighth king from K‘ang, was so oppressivé, that the people drove him
from his capital, when he took up his residence in Che (in Hoh Chow,
department P‘ing-yang, Shan-se). The Héen-yun took advantage of the
internal disorder, and invaded and ravaged the country, till on the king’s
death, his son Tsing, knoivn as king Seuen, succeeded to the throne, and —
despatched against them Yin Keih-foo, whose successful operations were
sung by the writer of this piece.”

The general Kejh-foo appears in Part itr . as the author of two of the
pieces in Book ili, which may be accepted as an illustration of what is
said in st. 5, that he was as great in peace as in war, He must have been
viscount of Yin, a territory in the royal domain,—in the present depart-
ment of Ho-nan, Ho-nan. Of the Chang Chung mentioned in the last
stanza nothing is known, though he must have been distinguished by his


character.
The Haou in st. 4 is probably the name of the capital. Tséaou,


Hwoh, and Fang can hardly be said to be identified ; but it is evident
that the Héen-yun had penetrated to the heart of the royaldomain. The
name of Tae-yuen in st. 5 remains in the department of Shan-se which


is still so called. : :
‘The sixth month is mentioned in st. 1, to show the urgency of the oc-


casion, it being contrary to rule and custom to undertake any military
expedition till the labours of the husbandman were over.


1 When the sixth month had come, the turmoil of war
Burst suddenly forth, and each quick-harnessed car
Stood ready to move, with its steeds keen and strong,
While heavier cars bore the baggage along.

Fierce blazing, the Heen-yun had mustered their men;
No recreant there, all was urgency then.
The king gave the word; we were mustered and gone,
To rescue from foemen the kingdom and throne.


2 Well matched in their strength were the horses, and
black,

And trained to the reins, as they tighten or slack.
Ere the sixth month was o’er, the field we could take;
No more preparation we needed to make.
With all our accoutrements fully complete,
Each day thirty le went our hurrying feet.
The king gave the word; we were mustered and gone,
With courage all ardent to help Heaven’s son.


3 Long and stout were*the steeds, attached to each car,
With broad heads that scented the battle afar.
We smote the Heen-yun, and great merit obtained,
Nor flagged in our efforts til? triumph was gained.


Bx III. wv.] ° tHe Book oF PorrRy. 211


The eye of our leadér was careful and stern,
Discharging his service, bright glory to earn ;
Determined the war to such issue to bring,
As would firmly establish the throne of the king.


‘4 For themselves badly judging, the Heen-yun go,
Bold to occupy Tseaou, and seize upon Hwoh.
Haou and Fang they o’erran, still-issuing forth,
Till, crossing the King, they pressed on to the north.
Our flags showed the falcons in blazonry bright,
And gaily their streamers all fluttered in white.
Ten chariots of war, all imposing and strong,
Led proudly the van of our conquering throng.


The workmen had laboured to perfect each car,

‘Well balanced, before and behind, for the war.

Its four steeds were mighty, unmatched in their strain,
And yielding at once to each touch of the rein. °

We smote the Heen-yun; ay, we conquered, and then
We pursued them in flight to the far T’ae-yuen.

As in peace, so in war, our Keih-foo is great,
Affording a pattern to all in each State.


or


[ors


And now at the banquet, forgotten all care,

He feasts with his friends, feeling happiness rare.
The tedious marches are all over now,—— :
The marches we travelled, returning from Haou.

To his friends the bright spirits his welcome convey ;
Minced carp and roast turtle the mats all display.
And who are the guests? There above every other
Sits Chang Chung, renowned as a son and a brother.


Iv.


The 7s‘ae hie; allusive and narrative. CELEBRATING Fane SHux,
AND HIS SUCCESSFUL CONDUCT OF A GRAND EXPEDITION AGAINST
THE TRIBES OF THE SOUTH.


Chinese chronologers assign this expedition to B.c, 825, the year fol-
lowing that against the Héen-yun, celebrated in the last piece, Of Fang
Shuh no farther atcount can be given. He may have been chief of the
territory of Fang, mentioned in III. 4; and from the concluding stanza
it is inferred that he had served against the Héen-yun, under Keih-foo.

The first three lines of the piec@give us 4 note of time, and are sup-
posed to indicate the prosperity of Seuen’s government, under which the


14 *
>


212 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


people were bringing the land into cultivatioy If the 3000 chariots in
the first stanza be not a poetical exaggeration, the whole force must have
amounted. to 390,000 men. Each war-chariot carried three mailed
warriors, and had attached to it seventy-two footmen, with twenty-five
men to look after the baggage-waggons, cooking, &c.;—altogether a
hundred men,

The wild tribes of the south went under the general name of Man.
King is the name by which the great andebarbarous state of Ts‘oo first
appears in Chinese history. See on IV, iii. V.


1 In those new fields, till the last year untilled,.
And acres which this year the grain first filled,.
White millet there they reaped with eager hand,
When Fang Shuh came, the army to command.
Three thousand chariots for his orders wait,
Surrounded by a host, well trained, elate, —

He led them on. His car four piebalds drew,
That moved like one great steed to human view. |
A royal gift, it shone in glittering red,

With bamboo chequered screen, and quiver made
Of seal-skin strong. The gilt hooks we could tell
On each steed’s breast; the rein-ends graceful fell,


2 Where toil last year had opened harvests new,
And where about the villages it grew,
White millet there they reaped with eager hand,
When Fang Shuh came, the army to command.
His carg three thousand ; on his banners shone
Snake, tortoise, dragon, as he led them on..

_ Gay was his yoke; his naves were lacquered red ;
Two tinkling bells hung from each horse’s head.
He wore the robes the king’s gift had bestowed ;
Beneath, the red knee-covers brightly glowed.
Rare gems upon his girdle-pendant hung, Ts
Flashed as they moved, and sounded as they swung.


3 Swift as the soaring falcon cleaves the sky, |
And wheels about in airy circles high,
Descending then, and lighting where it rose ;
So Fang Shuh led his troops against their foes. _
Round the war chariots, full three thousand strong,
Close marchect the men, a well-trained warrior throng.
The bells and drums his orders clear expressed,:


And then the marshalled forcts he addressed,
“Los : ue “


Br III. -v.] ‘THE BOOK OF POETRY. 213


And wise arranger&ents made. The ‘Battle’ raged,
While the drums rolled, inspiring all engaged.
Victory once gained, a lighter sound they gave,
_ The while he ordered back the victors brave.


4 The savage hordes of, King, made blind by fate,
Had madly dared to oppose our larger state.
Although Fang Shuh was ripe with growing years,
Yet in his plans a vigorous force appears.

Leading his troops, the hostile chiefs he bound
For question, with a captive crowd around.

' How numerous were his chariots in the fray,

Numerous, and all arrayed in grand array,

Like rattling thunder in assaulting speed !

Oh! grand in wisdom was he as in deed! .

The Heen-yun he had smitten to the ground; -
The awe-struck tribes of King his prowess owned.


Vv.
. ‘
The Keu kung; narrative, CELEBRATING A GREAT HUNTING, PRE-
SIDED OVER BY KING SEUEN, ON OCCASION OF HIS GIVING AUDIENCE
TO THE FEUDAL PRINCKS AT THE EASTERN CAPITAL OF Lon.


One of the great undertakings of the famous duke of Chow was the
building of Loh, a few miles from the present city of Loh-yang. King
Woo had intended to fix there the capital of his kingdom, but his imme-
diate successors did not carry out his idea. So long as the dynasty was
vigorous, however, the kings made progresses to Loh, and there gave
audiences to the lords of the States. This practice, which was fallen into
disuse, was revived by Seven, the more emboldened to do so through the
renown and strength acquired by the victories over the Héen-yun and the
Man. He met the lords at Loh, and took the opportunity to have wath
them a great hunting in that part of the country. .

Foo, in st. 2, was one of the eleven meres of the kingdom,—in the pre-
sent district of Chung-mow ; and Gaou, in st. 3, was a hill in the district
of Yung-yang both in the department of K‘ae-fung.


1 Our chariots were well built and firm,
Well matched our steeds, and fleet and strong.
Four, sleek and large, each chariot drew,
‘And eastward thus we drove along.


2 Our hunting cars ere light and good,
Each with its team of noble steeds.


214 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


Still farther east we took the, way -
To Foo-mere’s grassy plains that leads.


8 Loud-voiced, the masters of the chases
Arranged the huntsmen, high and low.
While banners streamed, and ox-tails flew,
We sought the prey on dlistant Gaon.


4 Each with full team, the princes came,
A lengthened train in bright array.
In gold-wrought slippers, knee-caps red,
They oeked as on an audience day.


5 Each right thumb wore the metal guard ;
On the left arm its shield was ‘bound.
In unison the arrows flew; .
The game lay piled upon the ground.


6 The leaders of the tawny teams
Sped on their course, direct and true.
The drivers perfect skill displayed ;
- Like blow well aimed each arrow flew.


7 Neighing and pleased, the steeds returned ;
The banneéred lines back slowly came.
No jostling rude disgraced the crowd ;
The king declined large share of game.


8 So did this famous hunt proceed !
So free it was from clamorous sound !
Well does our king become his-place,
And high the deeds his reign have crowned !


Vi.


The Keih jih; narrative. CELEBRATING A HUNTING EXPEDITION
BY Kine SEUEN ON A SMALLER SCALE, ATTENDED BY THE OFFICERS
OF THE COURT, AND WITHIN THE ROYAL DOMAIN,


The mention of the Ts‘eih and the Ts‘eu shows that the hunting was
conducted not far from the western capital. The former stream rises in
the district of Tcung-ngan, department Se-gan, and is joined by the Ts‘eu,
which has come from Luh-chow. ‘The united stream flows into the We,
in the district of Lin-t‘ung. e :


‘Bx II. vu.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. | ali


1 The day Mow-shtin was lucky found ;
Then to the Sire of steeds we prayed.
Our cars and teams and gear were good ;—
We scour the heights where wild game strayed.


2 And Kang-woo also lucky proved ;
We picked our Seeds, and chose our ground,—
Where stags and does by Ts‘eih and Ts‘eu
Made sport for him whom Heaven had crowned.


3 We viewed the plain where teeming game
’ Now shivering stand, now frantic run ;
Here two, there three. We charged along,
' Pleasure to yield to Heaven’s great Son.


4 We bend our bows; our shafts we grasp ;
. There lies the huge behemoth low,
And boars are pierced :—spoil for the guests,
At court, when wine-cups overflow.


VIL.


The Hung-yen; atltusive. ‘THE PEOPLE, REGATHERED INTO COM+
MUNITIES UNDER KING SEUEN, PRAISE THE OFFICERS BY WHOM THIS


- HAD BEEN ACCOMPLISHED.


1 With rustling wings the wild geese fly,
Round fields long strange to hand of toil.
Called by the officers in charge,
We labour on the desert soil.
Sad is our state, but sadder still
’ The hearts no wedded love can fill


2 The wild geese fly about, and light
Amid the marsh, where grain once shone.
We rear the walls as we are told ;—
Five thousand feet’ are quickly done.
Gréat is the toil, and sore the pain,
But peaceful homes will rise again.


3 The wild geese fly with plaintive note,
That sadly suits our weary sighs.
But those whose orders we obey,—
They see our pain; and they are wise.
If they had not bgen men of sense,
They had rebuked our insolence.


216 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part II.


VIII.


The Ting-léaou ; narrative, . DESCRIBING THE ANXIETY OF SOME
KING — SUPPOSED TO BE KING SEUEN-——NoT TO BH LATE aT HIS
MORNING LEVEE,

Each stanza is to be taken.as a soliloquy of the king, waking, now
and again, in his anxiety not to be late, “A large torch was kept burning
all tight (inside the entrance gate, leading to the hall of audience),
made of links or faggots bound together... That in the courtyard of the
king’s palace was composed of 100 faggots. The princes and nobles re-
paired to the hall of audience at early dawn, when the king would be
ready to receive them. He here judges of the time from what was, or
what he fancied must be, the state of the great torch.


1 How goes the night? For heavy morning sleep
Ill suits the king who men would loyal keep.
The courtyard, ruddy with the torch’s light,
Proclaims unspent the deepest hour of night.
Already near the gate my lords appear ;

Their tinkling bells salute my wakeful ear.


2 How goes the night? I may not slumber on.
Although not yet the night is wholly gone,
The paling torch-light ia the court below
Gives token that the hours swift-footed go.
Already at the gate my lords appear ;
Their.tinkling bells with measured sound draw near.


3 How goes the night? I may not slumber now.
' The darkness smiles with morning on its brow.
The courtyard torch no more gives forth its ray,
But heralds with its smoke the coming day.
My princes pass the gate, and gather there;
I see their banners floating in the air.


Ix,
The Méen shwuy; allusive. BEWAILING THE DISORDER OF THE


TIMES AND THE GENERAL INDIFFERENCE TO IT, AND TRACING IT TO
THE SLANDERERS ENCOURAGED BY MEN IN AUTHORITY,


1 The waters flow with volume vast,
Straight to the ocean’s mighty court ;
Swift fly the soaring falcogs past,
And to their resting-place resort,


Bx TIL.:-x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 217


But through thegland disorder wends,
And with it none will dare to cope.

‘Ye kinsmen near, ye honoured friends,
Ye people, why abandon hope?

Alas that you the struggle shun,

And leave your payents all undone!


2 Their bed the mighty waters leave,
And ruin spread the country o’er.
The sky on wing the falcons cleave ;—
High and yet higher still they soar.
So is it with the lawless crew,
Whose evil courses know no bound.
I think of them, and start to do.
Alas! I go but round and round,
Still in my heart fast dwells its grief’;
I vainly strive to find relief.


3 With volume vast the waters flow,
But still within their channel run,
And swiftly as the falcons go, _
The vault that copes the hill they shun.
And can we then no method find
To check the talk that fills the land ?
No means devise to curb or bind
The idle tongue and wanton hand?
Watch, friends, yourselves ; watch reverently,
And slanderous tongues will silent be !


x.


The Hoh ming; metaphorical. CERTAIN MORAL LESSONS FROM
NATURAL FACTS


Thé Chinese original does net give the moral lessons, and there is not
an agreement among the critics as to what they are. The version gives
them very much according to the views of Choo He,


1 All true words fly, as from yon reedy marsh’
The crane rings o’er the wild its screaming harsh.
Vainly you try reason in chains to keep ;-—
Freely it moves as fisly sweeps through the deep.


218 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr. II.


Hate follows love, as ’neath thoge sandal trees
The withered leaves the eager searcher sees.

The hurtful ne’er without some good was born ;—
The stones that mar ‘the hill will grind the corn.


2 All true words spread, as from the marsh’s eye
The crane’s sonorous note as@ends the sky.
Gcodness. throughout the widest sphere abides,
As fish round isle and through the ocean glides.
And lesser good near greater you shall see, '

As grows the paper shrub “neath sandal tree.
And good emerges from what man condemns ;—
Those stones that mar the hill will polish gems.


Be IV. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 219


BOOK IV.


THE DECADE OF K‘E-FOO.


I


THe Ke.foo; narrative. THE SOLDIERS OF THE ROYAL GUARD
COMPLAIN OF THE SERVICE IMPOSED ON THEM BY THE MINISTER OF
War.


This piece is to be referred to the concluding years of Seuen’s reign,
when both his character and administration had deteriorated. In his
39th year, B.c. 788, his army had sustained a great defeat from some of
the northern tribes, which he made preparations to avenge in the follow-
ing year, The regular levies for such a service being insufficient, he or-
dered his own guards, it is supposed, to join the force for the north; and
we have in the piece their complaint at being called to a duty which did
not belong to them ;—directed nominally against the minister of War,
but really against the king.


1 Hear, minister of War, the charge we bring!
We are the teeth and talons of the king ;
Close to his person is our place.,
Why have you sent us to’ this homeless life,
Where far from court we roam, "mid miseries rife ?
Why are we doomed to this disgrace ?


2 Hear, minister of War, the accusing word !
We are the taloned soldiers of our lord,
‘And near his person should have rest.
But you from court have sent us far away,
Where ceaselessly we toil from day to day,
‘ By constant misery oppressed.


3 Hear, minister of War, whose erring deed
Has paid our valour with a sorry meed,
When we should near the court reside.
Why have you sent us far to suffer grief,
And leave our mothers longing for relief,
With all their eooking labours tried ?


220 “THE “BOOK OF “POETRY. _ [Parr Il.


TI.


The Pik heu; narrative. THE WRITER EXPRESSES HIS REGRET AT
JHE ABANDONMENT OF PUBLIC LIFE BY AN OFFICER WHOM HE
ADMIRED.

6
1 Free let the brilliant white colt’ eat

The tenderest produce in my yard,
Secure it by the neck and feet ;—

And this morn’s pleasure safely guard.
Its owner, cherished in my heart,

Shall then with me at ease abide.
Alas that he should e’er depart,

An@ hermit-like his-merit hide! _


2 Free let the brilliant white colt éat

The bean-sprouts growing in my yard.
Secure it by the neck and feet,

This evening’s joy thus safely guard.
Its owner, cherished in my ‘heart,

Shall then be here, a guest admired.
0 could I wile him from the part

He wants to play, from men retired |!


3 O leave thy colt of britliant white!

If thou to me would’st blithely come,
As duke or marquis, honours bright, |

Thou should’st obtain, and in thy home
Find endless joy. ‘Try to restrain,

With strictest curb, thy roaming mind ;
And from the hermit-tife refrain,

To which thou art so much imclined.


4 ?Tis vain. The brilhant white colt view,

Deep in that empty valley stand,

Before it placed a biindle new
Of grass plucked by its master’s hand.

That master as a gem I hold.
0 that, relenting, he may send

What I'll prize more than gems or gold,—
News that he still,remains my friend !


Bx IV. 1v.] THE. BOOK. OF. POETRY. 221


Til:


“The Hwang néaou; metaphorical. SoME OFFICER, WHO HAD WITH-
DRAWN TO ANOTHER STATE, FINDS HIS EXPECTATIONS OF THE PEOPLE
THERE DISAPPOINTED, AND PROPOSES TO RETURN TO THE ROYAL BO-
MAIN,


1 Thou yellow-plumaged bird, O spare
The paper-shrubs and fields of grain!
For me these people show no care ;—
T long for kin and home again.
That we judged ill, when we came here,
Does from their cold neglect appear.


2 The mulberry trees and fields of maize,
Thou yellow-plumaged bird, eschew!
These people are a dullard race ;—+
I long my brethren’s face to view.
That we judged ill, when we came here,
Does from their cold neglect appear.


3 Thou yellow-plumaged bird, O fly:
Those oak-trees, nor’the millet eat !
From this bad land I back must hie ;— -
I long my father’s kin to greet.
That we judged ill, when we came here,
Does from their cold neglect appear.


Iv.


The Wo hing k‘e yay ; narrative. AN OFFICER, WHO HAD LEFT THE
ROYAL DOMAIN, AND SOUGHT FOR PROTECTION IN A STATE WHERE
HE HAD AFFINITIES BY MARRIAGE, RELATES HIS DISAPPOINTMENT,
AND THE UNWORTHY CAUSE OF IT.


1 All through the fields I travelled sad,’
Th’ ailanthus foul my only shade.
Through our relationship I came,
Shelter to find with you and aid.
But me you show no wish to entertain ;— .
Back to my State and clan I go again !


2 All through thé fields I travelled sad,
And for my foodsthe sheep’s-foot- cooked.


229 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


Through our relationship, t@you
For lodging for a time I looked.
But me you show no wish to entertain ;—
Back to my kindred now I go again !


8 All through the fields I went and tried
Hunger with pokeweed*to appease.
I came to you; your love is cold ;
And your new mate you seek to please.
Grant that your heart her riches have not won,—
Her: charms are new ; my relative’s are gone !


Vv.


The Sze han; narrative. ON THE COMPLETION OF A ROYAL PALACE;
D¥SCRIPTION OF IT, AND GOOD WISHES FOR THE BUJLDER AND HIS
POSTERITY.

The old interpreters all say that the builder of the palace here was
king Seuen. ‘The view is not unlikely, and we must refer the time of
the composition to the early part of his reign. The piece was probably
made for a, festival on the completion of the palace. 5

The two last stanzas set forth graphically the different estimates taken
in China of the value of sons and daughters in a family. As it was in
the days of king Seuen 2600 years ago, so it is now,


1 On yonder banks a palace, lo! upshoots,
The tender blue of southern hill behind ;
Firm-founded, like the bamboo’s clamping roots ;
Its roof made pine-like, to a point defined.
‘Fraternal love here bear its precious fruits,
And unfraternal schemes be ne’er designed !.


2 Ancestral sway is his. The walls they rear,
Five thousand cubits long ; and south and west
The doors are placed. Here will the king appear,
Here laugh, here talk, here sit him down and rest.


3 To mould the walls, the frames they firmly tie;
The toiling builders beat the earth and lime.
The walls shall vermin, storm, and bird defy ;—
Fit dwelling is it for his lordly prime.


4 Grand is the hall the noble lord ascends ;—
In height, like human form most reverent, grand ;
And straight, as flies the sha& when bow unbends;
Its tints, like hues when pheasant’s wings expand.
4 c


‘


Bx IV. vi] THE BOOK OF POETRY. . 228


5 High pillars rise tha level court around ;
The pleasant light the open chamber steeps ;
And deep recesses, wide alcoves, are found,
Where our good king in perfect quiet sleeps.


6 Laid is the bamboo mat on rush mat square ;-—
Here shall he sleep, 4nd, waking, say, “ Divine
“ What dreams are good ? For bear and grisly bear,
And snakes and cobras, haunt this couch of mine.”


7 Then shall the chief diviner glad reply,
- “The bears foreshow that Heaven will send you sons.
The snakes and cobras daughters prophesy.
These auguries are all auspicious ones.”


8 Sons shall be his,—on couches lulled to rest.
The little ones, enrobed, with sceptres play ;
Their infant cries are loud as stern behest;
Their knees the vermeil covers shall display.
As king hereafter one shall be addressed ;
The rest, our princes, all the States shall sway.


9 And daughters also to him shall be born.
They shall be placed upon the ground to sleep;
Their playthings tiles, their dress the simplest worn ;
Their part alike from good and ill to keep,
_And ne’er their parents’ hearts to cause to mourn ;
To cook the food, and spirit-malt to steep.


VIL.


The Woo yang ; nartative. SUPPOSED TO CELEBRATE THE LARGE+
NESS AND CONDITION OF KING SEUEN’S FLOCKS AND HERDS; WITH
AN AUSPICE OF THE PROSPERITY OF THE KINGDOM, :


1 Who dares to say your sheep are few ?
The flocks are all three hundred strong.
Who dares despise your cattle too ?
There ninety, black-lipped, press along.
Though horned the sheep, yet peaceful each appears ;
The cattle come, with moist and flapping ears.


2 These climb the heights, those drink the pool ;
Some lie at rest,ewhile others roam.


294, . THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


With rain-coats, and thin splint hats cool, -
And bearing food, your hérdsmen come. ,
In thirties, ranged by hues, the creatures stand ;
Fit victims they will yield at your command..


3 Your herdsmen twigs and faggots bring, .
‘With prey of birds andtbeasts for food.
Your sheep, untouched by evil thing,
Approach, their health and vigour good.
The herdsman’s waving hand they all behold,
And docile come, and pass into the fold.


4 Your herdsmen dream ;—fish take the place
Of men ; on banners falcons fly,
Displacing snakes and tortoises.
The augur tells his prophecy :—~
“ The first betoken plenteous years; the change
Of banners shows of homes a widening range.” |


VII.


The Zsteh nan shan ; allusive and narrative. A LAMENTATION OVER
THE MISERABLE STATE OF THE KINGDOM, DENOUNCING THE INJUSTICE
AND CARELESSNESS OF THE GRAND-MASTER YIN AS THE CAUSE OF

LIT, AND THE CONDUCT OF THE KENG.


This piece, and all that follow to the end of the Part, are assigned by
the old interpreters to the reign of king Yéw (B.c, 780—770), though the
evidence for assigning to them such a date is only sufficient in the case
of a few of them. Yéw was son to king Seuen, but was worse than the
father in the days of his decline, and resembled him in none of the
higher qualities which ennobled the earlier period of his reign. His
comparatively short reign ended in his violent death, and immediately
after there .took, place the removal of the royal residence to the eastern
capital,—the great event in the history of the Chow dynasty. ,

Keih-foo, the hero of the third ode of the third Book, was a Yin, and
the minister against whom this piece is directed was, probably, his son
or grandson. He is styled “Grand-master,” and was thus one of “the
three Kuzg,”’ the highest ministers at the court of Chow ;—see the Book
of History, V. xx. 3, We must believe, indeed, that he was the chief of
the three, the principal administrator of the government.

A Kéa-foo is twice mentioned in the Ch‘un Ts‘éw, in the time of duke
Hwan of Loo, as coming on messages from the royal court to Loo Hi
would be a son or grandson of the writer of this piece. ‘


1 That southtrn hill; sublime, uprears its craggy height ;
Such thou, Grand-master Yin before the nation’s sight!


Br IV. vu] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 225


Burning with inward grief, none name thee even in jest ;
Ruin impends, but thou delay’st the needed quest.


2 Sublime that southern hill, with vegetation grand !
More awful thou, great Yin, whom as unjust we brand.
With pestilence and death, Heaven aids disorder’s sway;
A silent nation frowns thou changest not thy way !


8 On Yin our Chow depends. By justice he should bind
Our many States in one, with no disloyal mind,
And guide the people right, thus helpful to the king.

- Ocruel Heaven, that he such woes on all should bring !


4 In him, himself inert, the people put no trust.

t He, treacherous, from place and council keeps the just.
Mean men, unfairly screened, the common weal destroy,
And his vile relatives the highest posts enjoy.


5 Great Heaven, unjust, the land exhausts with all these

‘Great Heaven, unkind, these woes upon it ceaseless

Oh! wore the good in power men’s hearts would be at

And v noath impartial rule, our wranglings soon would
cease.


6 O great unpitying Heaven, our troubles have no close!
With every month they grow; men’s minds know no
repose. ;
My heart with grief is drunk. What weak hand holds
the reins ?
’Tis Yin’s supineness that augments the people’s pains.


7 I yoke my steeds long-necked, and through the land I


» hie.
saa the distress on every side vain the attempt to
ly !


8 Here evil rampant. bares the spear ;~—they fight with


, rage,
Then pacified and friends, in revel they engage.


9 This is from Heaven unjust. Our king has no repose.
Infatuate Yin rejects all eounsellors as foes.
VOL. IIL. 15


226 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IT.


- 10 This song by me, Kea-foo, the king’s sad case relates.
Would he but change his hearf, and nurse the myriad
States !


VIII. ry


The Ching yueh ; narrative, allusive and metaphorical. A LAMENTA-
TION OVER THE MISERIES OF THE KINGDOM, AND THE RUIN COMING
ON IT, ALL £HROUGH THE KING’S EMPLOYMENT OF WORTHLESS
CREATURES, AND HIS INDULGENCE OF HIS FAVOURITE Paov S25.


The mention of Paou Sze in stanza 8th determines the date of this
composition as belonging to the reign of king Yéw. This lady Sze of
Paou was Yéw’s favourite concubine, raised in the end to be his wife,
For her sake ‘he degraded his proper queen ; and his besotted attachment
to her was the cause of his own death, and of the greatest miseries to the


kingdom.


1 On the brow of the summer the hoar-frost abounds ;

Sorrow’s wound rankles deep in my heart,

And calumnies base, that the people perplex,
Daily waxing, inflict sharper smart. .

All alone I am placed, none by me to stand ;
Griefs intense more and more fill my breast.

Cares increase and disturb my sorrowful mind ;
Both in body and soul I’m distressed.


2 O father and mother who bore me, your son,
Was it only to suffer such woe ?

Why was I not born ere these evils arrived?
Or why came they ere I am laid low ?

I hear their good words, which are but from the lip,
And their bad words have no deeper seat. .
So shallow those men! And the more that I grieve,

With their fiercer contempt do I meet.


3 With the pang of great misery wringing my heart,

Dwell I thus on this comfortless time ;

For the multitudes all will with me be brought

“ To base servitude, guiltless of crime.

And alas for us all in positions more high !
From what lord shall I now get support ?

No more can I tell than,—-see yonder a crow |
Can I tell to whose house ’twill resort.


Bx IV. vin.] = YHE BOOK OF POETRY. 227
4 Where the forest once grew, we look, and behold!
Faggots only and twiglets are left.
To Heaven ’midst their perils, the people all look,
And lo! Heaven seems of reason bereft.
But is Heaven so dark ? When its purpose is fixed,
_ To its will oppositign is vain. :
And good is the Ruler supreme, the great God !
He hates none of the children of men.


5 ’Tis only fools say that the mountains are low ;-

*Gainst such words each high ridge would protest.

‘And as baseless the talk that is uttered by men,
But the king lets it fly unrepressed.

To ministers old and diviners of dreams
For advice he repairs, but they say,

“We are wise; but of crows which is female, which male,

. To pronounce who can tell you the way ?”


6 That the heavens are lofty who is there but knows?

Yet beneath them I bow my head low,

And that thick is the earth who is there but feels?
Yet with dainty steps on it I go. .

For thus speaking and acting good reason I have,
In the conduct of many around,

Who originate all those calumnies base,
Like the cobra or eft fatal found.


7 Where the fields are rugged and stony, the grain

Yet luxuriantly rises and grows.

Heaven fights against me as if I were its match,
Moves and shakes me, and then overthrows,

As if I were hidden, they sought me at first,
At the court for a pattern to shine.

"Tis with hatred intense they scowl now on me,
And my services curtly decline.


8 With its sorrow my heart is deeply oppressed ;
Tis as if with tight string it were bound.
Now-a-days those who rule no kindness display ;
Fierce oppression prevails all around.
Blazing flames that spread wide, and terror inspire,
May perhaps still be quenched at their height.
But our city august, where Chow holds its state,
Through this vile Sze 8f Paou sinks to night,
15 *


928 THE BOOK OF POETRY. ~ [Parr II.


9 That such issue will come is evey my thought ;

And moreover, O king, let me say,

Like a waggoner you, and fast falls the rain!
Heavy load suits but ill miry clay.

Wheel-aids you may have, but if these you neglect,
And the hands that would gelp you are spurned,

You soon will be crying, “ O sir, give me aid,”
When the car of the State is o’erturned.


10 If your wheel-aids you keep, and get them well plied,

That their help they shall give to each spoke,

And keep on the driver a vigilant eye,
Then your carriage will travel unbroke.

Your load will be safe, and your journey will come,
Though most rugged and hard, to its end ;

But these things seem trifles, as looked upon now ;
To the peril you will not attend.


11 Shallow ponds on the fish small pleasure bestow ;

To the bottom they dive, and there lie.

But the fisherman sharp them clearly perceives,
And a prey to his cunning they die. .

And so, men of worth, in this kingdom oppressed,
Little pleasure can ever possess ;

For hatred pursues them, where’er they may hide. ,
How such things fill my heart with distress !


12 Clear sparkle the spirits, set forth at their feasts,

_ And the mats with fine viands are crowned.

Neighbours there and their kindred in numbers appear,
And the halls with their praises resound.

So is it with those, the unworthy and base ; |
Such reward by their flattery they gain ;

While here I am left, and in solitude pine,
Struggling hard with my grief and my pain.


13 Though mean, they are gifted with houses and lands;

Abjects vile, they their salaries draw ;

But the people endure a hard, famished lot,

_ And are dealt with by Heaven’s sternest law.

Rich men may succeed in a time so severe ;
With their wealth and their stores they can live.

But alas for the poor, alone, without help !
Should the king not’ deliverance give? .


Bx IV. rx] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 229


Ix,


The Shik yuch che héaow; narrative. LAMENTATION OF AN OFFICER
OVER PRODIGIES, CELESTIAL AND TERRESTRIAL, BETOKENING THE RUIN
or CHow. HE EXPOUNDS THE TRUE CAUSES OF THESE AND THE
ABOUNDING MISERY; NAMES THE CHIEF CULPRITS, AND DECLARES
HIS OWN DETERMINATION T@ REMAIN AT HIS POST OF DUTY.


The first three lines of this piece give us a certain date for its compo-
sition, and determine it as belonging to the 6th year of Yéw, The eclipse
spoken of is verified by calculation, as having occurred 6n August 29,
B.C. 775, or 776, if A.D. be itself counted 1, the very day and month
assigned to it in the text, according to the calendar of Chow.—We have
here the earliest date in Chinese history about which there can be no
dispute. :

Of the various ministers and officers in stanza 4, no details can be
given, The wife was the Paou Sze spoken Of in the note to the last piece.


1 The sun and moon met in the upper sphere,
The day Sin-maouw, the tenth month of the year.
The moon was new, as she should re-appear,
And then the sun, eclipsed, showed evils near.
The moon eclipsed before, and now the sun!
Alas! we men below shall be undone.


2 These bodies, erring, what is bad make known ;—
Good men neglected ; order all o’erthrown.
The moon eclipsed was what full oft takes place ;
The sun’s eclipse portends a sadder case.


3 And flashing levin shows the want of rest,
With troubled streams, and tumbling mountain’s crest.
Large heights subside to vales; deep vales grow hills.
Alas! how does the king not stop these ills?


4 Among the ministers great Hwang presides ;
In all their duties Fan the people guides ;
Kéa-pih administers ; Chung-yun is cook;
Ihe king’s decrees Tsow enters in his book ;
K‘wei regulates the stud; the guards Yu’s sphere;
The wife, in beauty blazing, has no fear.


5 Great Hwang, determined, his own course pursues,
Demands our service, nor enquires our views ;
Unroofs our homes; our fields makes moor or marsh ;
And “Tis the law,” he says, “I am. not harsh,”


230 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IT.


6 Far-seeing Hwang has built himgelf a town.
Three ministers are there of wealth o’ergrown.
No single chief he left to guard our king,
While all its streets with hoof and chariot ring.


7 I dare not my own services report; ;
But slanderous tongues my piimeloss life distort.
Our ills come not from Heaven, but fawning words

And hidden hate, which schemers wield like swords.


8 Far off my village, great my lack of peace,
And elsewhere I might go to seek for ease.
Others retire, but I shall not be driven
From this my post, though dark the way of Heaven.


ry


x.


The Yu woo ching ; narrative. A GROOM OF THE CHAMBERS MOURNS

OVER THE MISERABLE STATE OF THE KINGDOM, THE INCORRIGIBLE

“COURSE OF THE KING, AND THE RETIREMENT FROM OFFICE AND
RESPONSIBILITY OF MANY, WHILE HE ALONE HOLDS TO HIS POST,


1 O vast and mighty Heaven, why shrinks thy love?
Thy kindness, erst so great, no more we prove,
Sent from above by thine afflicting hand,

Famine and death now stalk throughout the land.
O pitying Heaven,.in terrors now arrayed,

No care, no forethought in thy course displayed,
Of criminals I do not think ;—they bear

The suffering which their deeds of guilt prepare.
But there are many, innocent of crime,
O’erwhelmed by ruin in this evil time !


2 The honoured name of Chow fades inthe past,
And, still augmenting, these sore troubles last.
Their posts the Heads of offices all leave,

While I toil on, none knowing how I grieve!

The three great chiefs, and those whom they direct,
At dawn and dusk, their businesses neglect. ;
Nor morn ‘beholds at court, nor evening late,

The absent lord of each neglected State.

If thou would’st turn to good, and banish itl,—
But, hapless king, thou sink@st lower still.


i


Br IV. x] THE BOOK.OF POETRY. 231


8 O glorious Heaven, thy gift the listening ear,
Why justest words Will not our monarch hear ?
Like traveller, from the right path gone astray,
He knows not whither leads his devious way.
Ye officers, this should your zeal inspire,

And fan of duty the egpiring fire.
Of one another you should stand in awe.—
Alas ! you heed not Heaven’s o’er-ruling law!


4 Deaf to war’s lessons, bad he still remains ;
To famine blind, from good he still refrains.
‘Groom of the Chambers I, and nothing more,
Our sad estate I cease not to deplore.
Ye officers, coward-like, your duty shun,
And to the king the truth will not make known.
Whene’er he questions, you give brief reply ;
When touched by slander, from the court you fly.


©) Bad is the time! Right words awaken hate,
Who with his tongue what’s in his heart will state
Is sure to suffer, while pernicious lies
Are gladly heard, and fulsome flatteries.
The artful speech flows freely like a stream ;
Ai ease the speakers bask ’neath fortune’s beam.


6 And difficult the time! Risks manifold
Surround the man who office dares to hold.
. Speak what the king impossible shall deem,
And straight his countenance shows angry gleam.
Speak what he likes and fain would carry out,
And straight your friends look on with scorn and doubt.


7 I say, “Ye officers, come back to court,”
«We have no houses there,” is your retort.
My heart is pierced; ensanguined are my tears ;
My words but rouse the wrath of him who hears.
But let mo ask, “ When homes elsewhere you reared,
Who then gave help against the ills you feared ? ”


232 THE BOOK OF POETRY. ' [Parr II.


BOOK V.


THE DECADE OF Seaou MIN.


I,


The Séaou min; narrative. A LAMENTATION OVER THE RECKLESS-
NEss AND INCAPACITY OF THE KING’S PLANS AND OF HIS COUNSEL-
LORS.

The Preface reters the piece to the time of king Yéw; and the refer-
ence is very likely.


1 Oh! pitying Heaven grows black with frown,
That darkens far this lower sphere,
For crooked schemes mislead the crown ;
Nor halts the king in his career !
All counsels good and wise he spurns ;
_To counsels bad he eager turns.
I mark his ways with pain and fear.


2 His creatures, impotent and vain,
Now chime, now chafe, in rival mood.
The case deserves our saddest strain !
If one proposes aught that’s good,
Against it all are firmly bound ;
If bad, then all will rally round.
Where will it end ?—I sadly brood.


3 Our wearied oracles are dumb,
And silence keep when we consult.
Our counsellors still thronging come,
With counsels barren of result.
Though full the court, none dares to do;
We plan the way we ne’er pursue,
And halting, helpless still we halt.


4 Ah me! the men who lead the State,
Forsake the wisdom of the past.
Unruled by maxims wise and great,
They veer with every fitful blast.


Br V. 1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 233


They cannot on themselves rely.
Builders, they ask each passer-by,
And leave their work undone at last.


5 Unsettled though the land we see,

The many fooligh, some are wise ;
And scanty though the people be,

Yet some can see, and some devise.
Some gravely think, and some have tact ;
Yet borne upon the cataract,

We sink in ruin, ne’er to rise.


6 Who dares unarmed the tiger faco ?
Who boatless dares to tempt the Ho?
Hen their small wits see such a case,
‘But nothing greater do they know.
With fear and caution should we tread,
Like men above some torrent’s bed,
Or those upon thin ice who go.


a IL


The Séaow yuen ; narrative and allusive. SOME OFFICER, IN A TIME
OF DISORDER AND MISGOVERNMENT, URGES ON HIS BROTHERS THE
DUTY OF MAINTAINING THEIR OWN VIRTUE, AND OF OBSERVING THE
GREATEST CAUTION, ;


This piece is refered also to the time of king Yéw,

In the 3rd stanza, there is an allusion to a-vulgar notion, that the
young of a small green insect, found frequently on the mulberry tree,
were carried off by the sphex or solitary wasp, and cared for by it in its
own hole, where they were changed into wasps. The greenbeak in st, 5
is probably one of the ¢entirostres. It is also called “the grease-thief,”
from its fondness for all fatty matters, The bill is slightly hooked. In-
sects and flesh are said to be its natural food, but it is here represented
as picking up the grain ;—with reference to the struggle for life in conse
quence of the prevailing misgovernment. The Jast two lines in the same
stanza refer to a custom on which we have not much information,—that
of spreading some finely ground rice on the ground, as a sort of thank-
offering, and in connexion with prayer, .


1 The dove coos gently in the bush,
Then wings to heaven its flight.
My heart that broods o’er sorrow’s wound,
Thinks of our fathers bright.
When early dawnunseals my eyes,
Before my mind our parents rise.


234 THE BOOK OF POETRY. =~ [Parr II.


-2 Men grave and wise a cup may take,
‘And reason hold her sway.
But men benighted taste, and grow
More set on drink each day.
Let all deportment good maintain ;
Heaven’s gift once lost we ne’er regain.


8 All o’er the plain they gather beans,
Which they will sow again.
The grubs hatched on the mulberry tree
The sphex bears off to train.
Teach carefully your sons at home,
And good as you they will become.


4 Look atthe wagtails! Quick they leap,
And twitter as they fly. |
Let us as active be, for days
And months go swiftly by.
Rise early, and go late to sleep ;
The name you bear in honour keep.


5°The greenbeaks, driven by pinching want,
Frequent the yards for grain.
Alas for poor and lonely folks,
Whom prison walls restrain }.
Isprinkle rice around my door,
And to be geod, Heaven’s aid implore.


6 We must be meek, and cautious move,
-As we were perched on trees.
We must be anxious; and take care,
As near a precipice.
We must put down our feet as nice,
As if we trod on thinnest ice.


I.


The Séaou pwan; allusive and narrative. THE ELDEST SON AND
HEIR-APPARENT OF KING YEW BEWAILS HIS DEGRADATION, AND THE
EASE WITH WHICH THE KING WAS LED AWAY BY SLANDERERS,


The queen of king Yéw was a princess of the State of Shin, and their
eldest son, E-k‘éw, had been declared heir to the throne, When Yéw
became enamoured of Paou Sze, the qugen was degraded, and E-k‘éw
banished to Shin, while it was announced that a child by the favourite


Br V. UL THE BOOK OF POETRY. 235


would be the king’s successor ; and in reference to these events it is sup-
posed that E-kéw made'thit piece. See the remarks of Mercius on its
character in his Works, VI. ii, ITT.


1 To the trees that are their home,
Flying slow, thg crows all come.
Other men can ‘happy be ;

Ne’er am I from misery free.

Have I Heaven offended sore ?
Surely guilt lies at my door.
Homeless thus, oppressed with grief,
Nowhere can I find relief.


2 Once the road was clear to Chow,
O’er it the rank grass grows now.
On my heart is sorrow’s blight ;
Ache my limbs as after fight.
Through the night, still dressed, I sigh ;
Ere its time, old age comes nigh.
Homeless thus, I find no rest,
Head and heart alike distressed.


3 Men with reverence always view
Trees that round their homesteads grew.
On their fathers all depend,
In their mothers have a friend. .
From my father’s loins I sprung,
On my mother’s breast I hung ;
Yet did Heaven my being give,
’Neath a baleful star to live.


4 Where cicadas’ voices ring, *
Willow trees luxuriant spring.
Deep the waters of that pool,
Fringed with reeds and rushes cool ! °
But like boat adrift ’m borne,
Aimless, tossed about, forlorn.
Sad my heart! I try in vain
Briefest rest from thought to gain.


_5 Mark the stag’s reluctant feet
Slowly from the herd retreat.
Crows thé pheasant at the dawn,
And his mate iso him drawn.


236 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


Stript of branch and leaf, that tree
Is the image true of mef

Sad my heart! I’m left alone,
Unbefriended and unknown.


6 See the hare for mercy crave !
One steps in its life to¥save.
When a corpse unburied lies,
Some one straight a grave supplies.
Callous monarch, all our woes
Ne’er wake thy compunction’s throes.
Sad my heart beneath thy frown,
And my tears fall ceaseless down !


7 Slanders vile the king believes ;

Them as pledge-cup he receives.

Truthful judgment he denies,

And to stifle kindness tries.

Trees are felled where helps the strain,
_ Faggots cleft along the grain.

Leaves our king the guilty free,

While he guilt imputes to me.


. 8 Men will climb the greatest height ;
Deepest springs their search invite.
O’er his words the king should watch ;
Ears are set each word to catch.
Leave my dam, ye slanderers base ;
Move not basket from its place.
Vainly thus, despised, I moan ;

Dark my future, though unknown !


a


Iv.

The Kéaou yen ; narrative, and allusive, with the metaphorical element
perhaps here and there. SOME ONE, SUFFERING FROM THE KING
THROUGH SLANDER, APPEALS TO HLEAVEN, DWELLS ON THE NATURE
AND EVIL OF SLANDER, AND EXPRESSES HIS DETESTATION OF AND
CONTEMPT FOR THE SLANDERERS,


“ Covenants (st. 8)” were very common in the period of Chinese his-
tory to which all these odes refer. Great men in the same State, and of
different States, made covenants together, for ,the sake of peace and
friendship, and the pursuit of common objects. Here we have the king
covenanting, as if he were not more poWerful than his princes,


Br V.1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 287


‘ From the tast stanza it would appear that the writer had some par-
ticular persons, living proba&ly near thé Ho, in view ; uhless 1], 1—4 be


taken metaphorically.


1 O vast and distant Heaven, whom we
Father and mother call, on thee
Tery. Say why these ills on me

Excessive fall.
Oppressive, vast, my misery,
Though guiltless all!


2 The first small lie contains the rest.
When slanders fill our monarch’s breast,
Ills grow, and never are redressed.
Would he but trust
The good, wrongs soon must be redressed.
I know they must.


8 His frequent covenants show him weak.
Wrongs grow from cozening words they speak.
He trusts the rogues that lie and sneak,

And make things worse.
Their duties shirked, their words so meek
Prove but a curse.


4 With the great work of some great mind ;—
A temple by true king designed,
Or plans by sagest men outlined,

Vm ima fog.
Round common schemes my way I wind,
Like hare and dog.


5 As timber soft in carver’s hand.
Assumes the shape he may command,
So common speech to understand,

I well may claim.
Those talkers, flowing, artful, grand,
Are sons of shame. __


6 And who are they? On yonder stream ~
They dwell; and void of strength they seem.
From men so bloated who would dream

Of martial force ?
Both they and theirs may madly scheme,
And fare the worse !


238 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


Vv. \


The Ho jun sce ; narrative. SOME NOBLE SUFFERING FROM SLANDER,
AND SUSPECTING THAT THE SLANDERER WAS AN OLD FRIEND, IN-
TIMATES THE GROUNDS OF HIS SUSPICION, AND LAMENTS HIS CASE,
WHILE HE WOULD WELCOME THE REQORATION OF THEIR FORMER
RELATIONS,


§

The Preface assigns this piece to a duke of Soo, who had been slan-
dered by a duke of Paou. There can be no doubt there was a State of
Soo within the royal domain, corresponding to the present ‘district of
Wun, department Hwae-k‘ing, Ho-nan, the lords of which, viscounts,
were often in the highest positions at court, with the title of Kung, or
duke; and there was probably also a State of Paou. The character
which we read Paou here, however, is different from that which is the
name of the State from which Sze, king Yéw’s favourite lady, came,


J I ask what man came here.
With treacherous schemes his mind o’erflows.
Why to my dam.came he so close,
Nor to the gate drew near ?
Whom does he follow as his lord ?
It must be Paou, I'll pledge my word.


2 Companions close are they.
Which was it caused me my disgrace?
Why shunned he at the dam my face,
Nor kindly word would say ?
Once were we bound with friendship’s ties,
While now to stand aloof he tries.


3 I ask what man is he.
Inside my gate, before my hall,
He stood. I heard his footstep’s fall,
Though him I could not see.
Unblushingly he breaks man’s law,
Nor yet of Heaven stands he in awe.


4 What man behaved so ill?
Wild as a hurricane his ways!
Or north, or south, he comes as sways
The impulse of his will.
Why to my dam approached he so,
My mind in such distresyto throw ?


BE VY. v1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


5 “Too slow!’ is your appeal.
* Too slow,”+nd yet you could not stop!
“In haste,” you say.—I saw you drop
The reins, and grease your wheel.
If you would come to me but once!
Why keep me wating, eyes askance ?


6 Then upon your return
You came not. If you had done so,
My strong desire would no more glow;
My heart would cease to burn.
O come but once! Vain your excuse !
Why to relieve me thus refuse ?


7 Beads on one string we hung.
If you the earthen whistle blew,
I played the flute of pierced bamboo.
If still you doubt my tongue,
Here are the creatures three, whose blood
Shall seal the oath I take as good !


8 Were you an imp of air,
Or. water, you’d be out of reach.
But face to face we stand, and each
Is to the other bare.
In this good song I’ve freely told
Your changeful ways, now hot, now cold.


VIL


239


The Héang pik ; metaphorical, narrative, and allusive. A EUNUCH
SUFFERING FROM SLANDER, COMPLAINS OF HIS FATE, AND WARN‘


AND DENOUNCES HIS ENEMIES,


1 A few fine lines, at random drawn,
Like the shell-pattern wrought in lawn
To hasty glance will seem.
My trivial faults base slander’s slime
Distorted into foulest crime, .
And men me worthless deem.


2 A few small points, pricked down on wood,
May be made out a picture good
Of the bright, southern Sieve.


240 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr I]


Who planned, and helped those slanderers vile,
My name with base lies to gefile ?
Unpitied, here I grieve.


3 With babbling tongues you go about,
And only scheme how to quake out
The lies you scatter round.
Hear me.—Be careful what you say ;
People ere long your words will weigh,
And liars you’ll be found.


# Clever you are, with changeful schemes!
How else could all your evil dreams
And slanders work their way ?
Men now believe you; by and by,
The truth found out, each vicious le
Will ill for ill repay.


5 The proud rejoice ; the sufferer weeps.
O azure Heaven, from out thy deeps
Why look in silence down ?
Behold these proud men and rebuke ;
With pity on the sufferers look,
And on the evil frown.


6 Those slanderers I would gladly take,
With all who help their schemes to make,
_ And to the tigers throw.

If wolves and tigers such should spare, °

I'd hurl them ’midst the freezing air,
Where the keen north winds blow.

And should the north compassion feel

Td fling them to great Heaven, to deal
On them its direst woe.


7 As on the acred heights you dwell,
My place is in the willow dell,
.One is the other near.
Before you, officers, I spread
These lines by me, poor eunuch, made,
Think not Mang-tsze severe.


Br. V. vur.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 241


gy Vu.


The Kuh fung; allusive, SOME ONE COMPLAINS OF THE ALIENA-
TION FROM HIM OF AN OLD FRIEND, PRODUCED BY THE CHANGE FOR
THE BETTER IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE LATTER, .


@
1 Gently and soft the east wind blows,
And then there falls the pelting rain.
When anxious fears pressed round you close,
Then linked together were we twain.
Now happy, and your mind at rest,
You turn and cast me from your breast.


2 Gently and soft the east wind blows,
And then there comes the whirlwind wild.
When anxious fears pressed round you close,
Your bosom held me as a child.
Now happy, and in peaceful state,
You throw me off and quite forget.


3 Gently and soft the east wind blows,
Then round the rocky height it storms.
Each plant its leaves all dying shows ;
The trees display their withered forms.
My virtues great forgotten all,
You keep in mind my faults, though small.


Vir.


The Luh ngo; metapnorical, narrative, and allusive. A SON DEPLORES
HIS HARD FATE IN BEING PREVENTED FROM RENDERING THE LAST
SERVICES TO HIS PARENTS, AND ENLARGES ON THE PARENTAL CLAIM.


It is clear from the piece that the parents of the writer were dead, and
that he had been prevented from paying to them the last duties of af-
fection by the exigencies of the public service. The ngo, the haou, and .
the wei are all species of southernwood,—easily enough distinguished
ordinarily ; but the writer represents himself as so blinded by his grief
that he could not tell the one from the other,


1 Long and large the ngo plants grow.
Haow plants surely I should know !
How can J confound them so?

VOL, Il. ; 16


242


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


: Grief has robbed my eyes of sight,
Almost plunging me in hight.
Others’ hands laid in the grave,
Those whose pain my being gave !


2 Long and large the ngo plants grow.
Wet plants surely I sfoutd know !
How can I confound them so? __
Grief has robbed my eyes of sight,
Almost plunging me in night.
Others’ hands laid in the earth,


Those whose suffering gave me birth.


8 Pitcher should be filled from vase ;
Where this fails, ’tis reckoned base.
Than to live as orphan left,

‘Better be of life bereft !

Father dead, on whom depend ?
Mother dead, where find a friend ?
I, abroad, this sad case know,
And, at heme, can nowhere go.


4 Father, from whose loins I sprung,
Mother, on whose breast I hung,
Tender were ye, and ye fed,

Now upheld, now gently led.
Eyes untiring watched my way ;
Often in your arms I lay.

How could I repay your love,
Vast as arch of heaven above ?


5 Cold and bleak that southern hill!
Tempests fierce with terror thrill.
All around is dark, but more
Dark the lot which I deplore !
Others all can happy be ;—

Why from grief am I not free?


& Hill so steep what foot can brave ?
Blustering winds around it rave. |
Fierce the winds! As fierce the fate,
Which pursues me desolate !

Happy all save me alone,
Thinking aye of du@s undone!


[Parr I


Br V. 1x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 243


TX.


The Za tung; allusive. AN OFFICER, OF ONE OF THE STATES OF
THE EAST, DEPLORES THE EXACTIONS MADE FROM THEM BY THE
GOVERNMENT; COMPLAINS OF, THE FAVOUR SHOWN TO THE WEST ;
CONTRASTS THE MISERY OF rH PRESENT WITH THE HAPPINESS OF
THE PAST; AND APPEALS TO THE STARS OF HEAVEN IDLY BEHOLDING
{THEIR CONDITION.


“The Weaving Sisters’? are three stars in Lyra, in the form of a tri-
angle. The stars seem to go round the circumference of the heavens in a
day and night, They would accomplish six of those in a whole day, but as
their motion is in advance of that of the sun, they have entered the
seventh space by the time he is up with them again. “The Draught
Oxen” is the name of some stars in the neck of Aquila. The writer
evidently took Lucifer and Hesperus to be two different stars. “The
Rabbit Net ” isa name forthe Hyades. The “Siéve” has occurred before
in VI. 2. Itis the name of one of the 28 constellations of the Zodiac,—.
part of the sign Sagittarius. It consists of four stars, two of which
are called “the Heels,” close together, and two more widely apart, called.
“the Mouth.” “The Ladle ” is also in Sagittarius, supposed to resemble
a ladle takiig spirits from a jar. ;


1 With millet filled, the dishes stood displayed ;
The spoons lay long and curved, of thornwood-made.
Smooth as a whetstone was the road to Chow,
And straight as shaft well fitted for the bow.
This road the common people gladly viewed ;
The officers on it their way pursued.
Thus back to former times my thoughts will go,
And down my cheeks the tears in’ streamlets flow.


. Now in the east, in States both large and small,
Shuttles unplied, the looms are empty all.
Thin cloth of dolichos supplies the shoes,
‘Which shivering travellers on the hoar frost use.
Young nobles, cultured, but too thin and spare,
Hurry along the road, all full of care.
They go, they come; weary they are and worn.
My heart aches for them, and I feel forlorn.


8 This firewood, cut and hewn with earnest toil,
I fear the waters from that spring will spoil:
Fit then as emblems they would be of those
Whose stern exactions grant us no repose.

16*


244 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II,


Tho firewood cut must homeward be conveyed ;—
Toil after toil is on the people Mid.

O that we could the needful rest but take !

Tired out we sleep, and sigh when we awake.


4 The east its noblest sons to gervice hard
Sees promptly called; but they get no reward.
There in the west sons of each noble line
Live idle, and in splendid dresses shine.
There also boatmen’s sons now proudly wear
. The glossy furs of which men spoil the bear.
* Sons of the poorest families, elate,
In public offices display their state.


5 Our choicest spirits humbly we present.
“ How can such stuff,” they say, “ our taste content ?”
Long girdle-pendants, well supplied with gems,
We give, and each the gift as short contemns.
Up to the Milky Way I turn my gaze ;—
Looks it not down to mark their evil ways ? *
There too the Weaving Sisters’ triple beam,
While they move on, might shed an angry gleam.


6 Nightly those Sisters through seven stages go,
But no bright work do they to ease our woe. ~
The stars we call Draught Oxen also shine,

But they no cart for us to draw combine.

The Morning ‘star appears in the dim east,

The Evening star oft twinkles in the west,

And long and curved the Rabbit Net is there :-—
Each fills its-place, but heeds not our despair.


7 Four stars to be the Southern Sieve have claim,
But nothing do they to make good the name.
Northwards the Ladlé sparkles in the sky,

But ladles nothing that may drink supply.
O Southern Sieve, thy mouth is idly shown,
For good come from it we have never known.

. And thou, O Ladle, shining in the north, __

Thy handle eastward vainly stretchest forth !.


x, : \
The Sze yueh; allusive and narrafive. AN OFFICER BITTERLY DE-
PLOBES THE OPPRESSION AND MISERY OF THE TIME.
€


Bx V.


x] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


1 In the fourth month summer shines;


2


In the sixth thetheat declines.
Nature thus grants men relief ;
Tyranny gives only grief.

Were not my ds wea men ?
Can my suffering &cape their ken ?


In the cold of autumn days,
Each plant shrivels and decays.
Nature then is hard and stern ;


_ Living things sad.lessons learn.


oo


a


or


for)


Friends dispersed, all order gone,
Place of refuge have I none.


Winter days are wild and fierce ;
Rapid gusts each crevice pierce.
Such is my unhappy lot,
Unbefriended and forgot!
Others all can happy be ;

I from misery ne’er am free.


On the mountains are fine trees ;
Chestnuts, plum trees, there one sees.
All the year their forms they show ;
Stately more and more they grow.
Noble turned to ravening thief !

What the cause? This stirs my grief.


Waters from that spring appear
Sometimes foul, and sometimes clear,
Changing oft, as falls the rain,

Or the sky grows bright again,

New misfortunes every day

Still befall me, misery’s prey.


Aid from mighty streams obtained,


Southern States are shaped and drained.
Thus the Keang and Han are thanked,


And as benefactors ranked.
Weary toil my vigour drains ;
All unnoticed it remains !


Hawks and eagles mount the sky ;
Sturgeons in deep waters lie.
3


245


246 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IT.


Out of reach, they safety get,
Arrow fear not, nor the’net.
Hiding-place for me there’s none ;
Here I stay, and make my moan.


8 Ferns upon the hills §bound ;
Ke and e in marshy ground.
Each can boast its proper place,
Where it grows for use or grace.
I can only sing the woe,

Which, ill-starred, I undergo.


Br VI. 1]. THE BOOK OF POETRY. _ 247


BOOK VIL


THE DECADE OF PIH SHAN.


I.


THE Pih shan; narrative. AN OFFICER COMPLAINS OF THE ARDU-
OUS AND CONTINUAL DUTIES UNEQUALLY IMPOSED UPON HIM, AND
KEEPING HIM AWAY FROM HIS PARENTS, WHILE OTHERS WERE LEFT
TO ENJOY THEIR EASE,


See the remarks of Mencius on the second stanza of this piece in his
Works, V. Pt i. IV. 2.


1 I climb that hill upon the north,
And gather medlars on its side.
Active and vigorous, I go forth,
And morn and night I walk or ride.
I serve the king with eager will; —-
But great the grief my parents feel !


2 Where’er their arch the heavens expand,
The king can claim the land below.
‘Within the sea-bounds of the land,
All at his summons come or go.
His ministers unfairly act ;
They praise me, but with toils distract.


' 3 Four ceaseless steeds my care engage ;
The king’s affairs no rest allow.
They say I bear no trace of age,
While few, they think, such vigour show.
While my backbone remains unbent,
In work my life must still be spent.
4 Some rest in careless ease, supine ;
Some for the State themselves wear out.
On softest couches some recline ;
Others, unhalting, march about,


248 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


5 Some never hear a clamorous sound ;
Others toil on ’midst rude alarms.
Some idle on their backs are found ;
And some bear loads with head and arms.


6 Some feast, and fearless geek new joys;
Some live in constant dread of blame.
Some the harsh critic’s work employs ;
Others their numerous duties claim.


Ik, ; Fe
The Woo tstéang ta keu; narrative. SOME OFFICER, OVER-LOADED


IN THE KING’S SERVICH, THINKS IT BETTER TO TRY AND DISMISS HIS
TROUBLES FROM HIS MIND, .


The Preface says that the writer here expresses his regret. for having
recommended unworthy persons—“litile men ”—to public employments ;—
regret which is in vain. This view is found in Seun K‘ing and in Han
Ying. Such a fact may have given its origin to the piece; but it is -
beter to take the homely lines in their most general reference,


1 Push not the cart you stand behind ;—
You'll only raise the dust. Nor dwell
On your anxieties of mind ;—
You'll only make yourself unwell.


2 Push not the cart you stand behind ;—
The dust will only blind your view. ¢
Dwell not on things that vex your mind ;—
You never thus can see them true.


3 Push not the cart you stand behind ;—
The dust will but becloud your eyes.
Heed not the troubles of your mind ;—
- *Twill weight you as you seek to rise.


TIL


The Séaou ming; narrative, AN OFFICER, KEPT LONG ABROAD ON
DISTANT SERVICE, DEPLORES THE HARDSHIPS OF HIS LOT, AND TEN-
DERS GOOD ADVICE TO HIS MORE FORTUNATE FRIENDS AT COURT.


“We must suppose that the speaker hére was an officer of high rank in
command of the expedition to which he refers, and that the expedition
was towards the north. This latter peint we infer from the mention


Br VI. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 249


made of winter, for we do not know where the wild country of K‘éw,
that appears in st. 1, was. gThe last line of the same stanza speaks of
the “net of crime,”—an expgession for justice strictly administered. The
same conception occurs in the Vedic hymns, ¢, g., that to Varuna, in the
Atharnaveda (IV, 16), ends :—“ May all thy fatal nooses, which stand
spread out seven by seven and, threefold,-catch the man whe tells a He ;
may they pass by him who telB the truth.” See Max Miiller’s Lecture
on the Vedas,


1 O Heaven above, before whose light
Revealed is every deed and thought,
To thee I cry.
Hither on toilsome service brought,
In this wild K‘ew I watch time’s flight,
And sadly sigh.
The second month had just begun,
When from the east we took our way.
Through summer hot
We passed, and many a wintry day.
Summer again its course has run.
O bitter lot!
There are my compeers, gay at court,
While here the tears my face begrime.
I'd fain return.
But there is that dread net for crime!
The fear of it the wish cuts short.
: In vain I burn!


2 Ere we the royal city left,

The sun and moon renewed the year.
We marched in hope.
Now to its close this year is near. '

Return deferred, of hope bereft,
All mourn and mope.
My lonesome state haunts aye my breast, |
While duties grow, and cares increase,
Too hard to bear.
Toils that oppress me never cease ;
Not for a moment dare I rest,
Nigh to despair.
I think with fond regard of those,
Who in their posts at court remain,
My friends of old.


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part II.


Fain would I be with them again,
But fierce reproof return w@uld cause.
This post I hdd.


3 When for the west I left my home,
The sun and moon both ohialy shone,
Our hearts to cheer.
We’d soon be back, our service done!
Alas! affairs more urgent come,
: And fix us here.
The year is hastening to expire.
We gather now the southernwood,
The beans we reap ;-—
That for its fragrance, theso for food.
Such things that constant care require
Me anxious keep.
Thinking of friends still at their posts,
I rise and pass the night outside,
. So vexed my mind.
But soon what changes may betide ?
I here wilt stay, whate’er it costs,
And be resigned.


4 My honoured friends, O do not deem

Your rest which seems secure from ill
Will ever last !

Your duties quietly fulfil,

And hold the upright in esteem,
With friendship fast.

So shall the Spirits hear your cry,

You virtuous make, and good supply,
In measure vast.


5 My honoured friends, O do not deem
Repose that seems secure from ill
Will lasting prove.
Your duties quietly fulfil,
And hold the upright in esteem,
With earnest love.
So shall the Spirits hear your prayer,
And on, you happiness confer,
Your hopes,above.


Br VI. 1w.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 251


Tv.


The Koo chung; narrativ§, SUPPOSED TO REFER TO AND DEPLORE
. SOME EXPEDITION OF KING Y¥W TO THE COUNTRY ABOUT THE HWAE,
WHERE HE ABANDONED HIMQELF TO THE DELIGHTS OF MUSIC.


There is no account anywhere of Yéw’s having undertaken an expedi-
tion to the country about the Hwae. ‘But it is quite conceivable that a
sovereign of his character should have proceeded to the Hwae to punish
the wild tribes of the region, and have amused himself as it is supposed
in this piece that he did. Such an expedition would be a historical
parallel to Caligula’s against Britain. The Hwae has been a famous
river of China since the earliest times. It rises in the district of T‘ung-
pih, department Nan-yang, Ho-nan, and after flowing through the pro-
vinces of Ngan-hwuy and Kéang-soo, reaches the sea, having had a
course of about 600 miles, ,


1 How peal the royal bells,

As the Hwae sweeps along to the main !
A tale their music tells,

Waking thoughts in my mind full of pain.
‘Before me back it sadly brings °
The memory of our virtuous kings ;

And they live in my fancy again !


2 Loud roll the royal drums,
As the Hwae rushes on to the deep.
A. vanished memory comes
Tn their sound which compels me to weep,—
The memory of our kings of old,
. Whose virtue flawless still we hold,
Though the kings in their sepulchres sleep.


8 Bells peal and drums resound,
As the Hwae its three islands displays.
They stir a grief profound
In my heart that no revel allays.
The virtue of our kings of yore
A stamp of truth and beauty bore,
Such as never we see now-a-days.


4 _K*in-k‘in the bells peal on,
And the lutes in the concert we hear.
Deep breathes the organ tone ;
Sounding stones goin their notes, rich and clear,


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


i)
Or
bo


The while through the vessel there ring
The Ya and the Nanfwhich they sing,
And the dancers with flutgs now appear.


Vo.


The Zs‘oo ts‘ze ; narrative, SACRIFICIAL AND FESTAL SERVICES IY
THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE ; AND THEIR CONNEXION WITH ATTENTION
TO HUSBANDRY.


This and the other pieces to the end of the Book are all ascribed to the
time of king Yéw, and said to have been directed against him ;—very
absurdly, so far as I can judge. They are out of place among the mass
of others belonging to a degenerate time, and deserve to be ranked with
the first eighteen pieces of this Part, which are ascribed to the duke of
Chow. ‘

Choo thinks this piece celebrates the services in the ancestral temple
of some noble landed proprietor.. I incline rather to the view that they
are those of the king’s ancestral temple, The “we” of the stanzas is
simply the poet’s identification of himself with the parties of whom he
sings, .
See what I have said on the services of the ancestral temple in the
last chapter of the prolegomena ;—particularly on the representation of
the deceased fathers sacrificed to. by individuals chosen from among their
descendants. The “ priest’? introduced here and there was merely “an
officer of prayer.” The proper sacrificer was the king, the noble, or the
chief of the Clan.


1 Here grew the tribulus around,
Till of its thorns they cleared the ground ;—
Of old this work was wrought.
Our fathers laboured for our good,
That millet we might plant for food,
And millet used in sacrifice,
Both yielding to us large supplies ;-—
So for us took they thought.
Now when our barns are filled with grain,
And myriad stacks in field remain,
Spirits and viands we prepare,
To use on grand occasions rare,
. In sacrificial rite.
The dead cannot in form be there,
But there are those their part who bear.
We lead them to the highest seat,
And beg that they will drink and eat.
So shall our sires our setvice own,


Bx VI. v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 253


And deign our happiness to crown,
With blesgings still more bright.


2 With reverent &r, in dress correct,
With sheep and \xen pure, select,
When autumn comes, and winter cold,
Our temple services we hold,

And offer sacrifice,
The victims slain some haste to flay ;
Some boil the flesh ; on stands some lay
The pieces boiled, which some dispose .
In order due, exact and close,
According to their size.
The while, the priest, inside the gate,”
Lest elsewhere welcome be too late,
Our sires asks to descend.
Complete and brilliant are our rites ;
They greadly come, as he invites.
Though hid from us in shadowy veil,
Our offerings with delight they hail,
And to our prayers attend.
Their filial son, our honoured lord,
Great blessing gets. They will reward
With myriad years his duty shown,
And sure maintain upon the throne
His sons till time shall end.


8 Before the fires some.reverent stand ;
Some take the mighty trays in hand ;
These with the roasted flesh they fill,
Those with the livers broiled. Then still
And reverent, the queen presides,
And every smaller dish provides, -

The pious feast to grace.

The guests and visitors draw near.
Divined for, now they all appear,

And take an honoured place.
?Tween those who personate our sires,
Our lord, and them, as rule requires,
Once and again the cup goes round.
Each word and smile just that is found,

Which word gnd smile should be,


254 “THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


The Spirits come in quiet state,

And answer give with blesgngs great.

Myriads of years—his due ffeward—

Shall show how they our lgrd regard,
And keep from evil f


4, Exhausted now we feel, but see

Our every rite from error‘ free.

The able priest has learned the will

Of the great Spirits. To fulfil

His part he hastes, and to our lord,

Standing before him, with grave word,
His message thus conveys :—

“Your sacrifice has filted the air

With fragrance. Both your spirits rare

And viands rich your sires enjoy.

Blessings not few, without alloy,

They give ;~~each all that you could hope,

Each sure as Jaw’s unerring scope.

Exact in form, without delay,

Due reverence you have striven to pay.

From error free, discharged with care,

Your ceremonies all declare

Your filiat heart. Your sires henceforth

Will favours grant of greatest worth,

For myriad years, and myriads more,

Nor time exhaust the boundless store.”
Tis this the wise priest says.


ao


The rites thus all performed exact,
The drums and belis announce the fact.
Our lord withdraws, and takes his way
Where parting guests their homage pay.

- Then comes the wise priest’s voice :—
“ The Spirits all are satisfied.”
No longer in their seats abide
Their representatives, but slow,
*Mid warning bells and drums, withdraw ;—

So ends the sacrifice.

The Spirits tranquilly ascend.
The queen and who the queen attend,
And all the servants, haste to clear


‘


Br VI. v1.} THE BOOK OF POETRY.. 255


The hall, that nothing may appear
Left from ghe sacred rites.
Those who arefpf the royal kin,
The old and yo&ng, abide within.
The surname of ¥he king they bear,
And to the speei4l feast repair,
To which his grace invites.


6 All the musicians follow fast,
Their special aid at this repast
The feasters shall’ not fail.
The mats the. viands rich display ;
No face looks sad, but all are gay.
They drink, they eat, with fullest zest ;
Dish after dish, well pleased they taste ;
. Great love and joy prevail.
At last they rise, and to their lord
First bow their heads with one accord ;
Then him they thus address :—
* Rich viands and your spirits rare,
All testified your pious care.-
The spirits of our sires partook ;
On you benignantly they look.
Your term of life they will-extend,
And favours give that ne’er shall end.
As through the year the seasons move,
Your pious feelings equal prove
Fully each sacrifice.to pay.
So may it be in future day,
And sons and grandsons of your line,
Observant of these rites divine,
The ceremony bless!”


VI.


The Sin nan shan; narrative. HUSBANDRY TRACED TO ITS FIRST .
AUTHOR ; DETAILS ABOUT IT, GOING ON TO THE SUBJECT OF SACBI-
FICES TO ANCESTORS.


There is a close connexion between this piece and the last. Both pro-
bably proceeded, as the critics suppose, from the same writer, this being
fuller on the subject of husbandry, and more concise on that of sacrifice.

In st. 1 there is the first of the few references in the She to the great
Yu, the real founder of the kingdom of China, extending the territory
of former elective chiefs, and opening up the country. ;


256 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


1 Yes, all about that southern hill,
Great Yu pursued his wondrous toil.
He drained the:plain, the mfirsh he dried ;
Our lord in fields laid ouf the soil.
Their boundaries we now fefine,
As south, or east, the fields ingline.


2 The wintry heavens, one arch of clouds,
Send down the flakes that fill the sky.
Then come the drizzling rains of spring,
That moisture, with the snow, supply,
To soak and fit the ground for use,
And in its season grain produce.


3 The plots, arranged in order fit,
The millets in abundance bear.
So shall our lord the harvest view ;
While food and spirits we prepare,
For those in whom our sires descend,
And guests who at the feast attend.


4 The central plot the huts contains,
While gourds each path and boundary line.
Their fruits preserved, aside we put,
Till ’mong the offerings they shall shine.
So through his sires our lord shall gain
Long life, and gifts from Heaven obtain.


5 The fragrant spirits first are poured ;
Then near the gate the bull is led ;—
So we invite our sires to come.
To show the victim pure and red,
The knife with bells slides through the hair.
Its blood and fat away we bear.


6 Then all our offerings we present,
Diffusing round a fragrance great.
How brilliant is the sacrifice !
Our ancestors in kingly state
Are there, unseen ; but they shall send
Blessing and life,—years without end !
e


Br VI. vit] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 257


Vit,

The P'oo tféen; narrativ¥l PICTURES OF HUSBANDRY AND SACRI-
FICES CONNECTED WITH IT. PPY UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE
PEOPLE AND THEIR SUPERIO :

The general rule in feadal China was that the sons of husbandmen
should continue husbandmen; but their superior might select those


among them in whom he saw promising abilities, and facilitate their ad-
vancement to the higher grade of officers. The concluding lines of st. 1


refer to this. P
The thanksgiving service in st. 2 probably was addressed to the Spirits


presiding over the productive energies of the land, ahd over the four
quarters of the sky, ruling all atmospherical influences. ‘The father of


husbandry ” is the mythical emperor Shin-nung.


1 Bright shine my wide-spread fields before the eye,
That yearly to the king a tithe supply.
From olden times the crops have plenteous been ;
Rach year has left to feed my husbandmen
Sufficient store. Now to the ground I go,
Where their rich soil the southern acres show,
Some weed; some gather earth around the roots ;
Each millet plant luxuriantly upshoots. =~
There I call round me in a spacious place
The brightest youths, with cheering words to grace,


2 Heaped in the vessels, bright the millet shone ;
Pure were the victim-rams. Last harvest done,
We thanked the Spirits of the land and air,

From whom the joyous husbandmen declare
The copious produce of the year had come.
Now with our lutes and the resounding drum,
To him who taught men tillage first we cry,
And ask for rain to help our husbandry.
. So shall our millets grow. Each field now thrives,
To bless our labourers, and bless their wives.


8 Our lord of long descent now comes this way,
Just as their wives and children food convey
To those who on the southern acres toil.

The Inspector of the fields appears meanwhile
Glad he looks on, and of the simple food
The dishes tastes, to seegf it be good.


VOL, Wil, 7


258 “THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Paxr II.


The hand of skill appears in every field ;
*Tis sure ere long luxuriant crop to yield.
Our lord complacent looks, andfin his view
The toilers feel their zeal inspffed anew.


!


The reapers soon the crops will take in hand,-

Which curving down, and thick as thatch, shall stand.
Lo! numerous stacks are built all o’er the grounds,
Rising like islands, seen from far like mounds.
Thousands of granaries must our lord prepare, —

And carts in myriads home their loads shall bear.
With radiant joy each husbandman surveys

The millets stored, the rice crop and the maize.

Then. all shall pray for blessing on our lord, ©

For myriad years.—Such shall be his reward !


VOT,


The Za ¢‘en ; narrative. FURTHER PICTURES OF HUSBANDRY AND
SACRIFICES CONNECTED WITH IT,


1 Various the toils which fields so large demand !
We choose the seed; we take our tools in hand.
In winter for our work we thus prepare ;
Then in the spring, bearing the sharpened share,
We to the acres go that south incline,
And to the earth the different seeds consign.
Soon, straight and large, upward each plant aspires ;—
All happens as our noble lord desires.


2 The plants will ear; ‘within their sheath confined,
The grajns will harden, and be good in kind.
Nor darnel these, nor wolf’s-tail grass infests ;
From core and leaf we pick the insect pests,
And pick we those that eat the joints and roots :—
So do we guard from harm the growing fruits.
May the great Spirit, whom each farmer names,
Those insects take, and cast them to the flames!


iv)


~The clouds o’erspread the sky in masses dense,
And gentle rain down to the earth dispense.
First may the public fields the blessing get,
And then with it our private fields we wet!


Br VI. 1x.) THE BOOK OF POETRY. 259


Patches of unripe grain the reaper leaves;
And here and there, nngathered are the sheaves.
Handfuls besides wefdrop upon the ground,

And ears untouched ® numbers lie around ;—- ~
These by the poor anQwidows shall be found.


4 When wives and children to the toilers come,
‘Bringing provisions from each separate home,
Our lord of long descent shall oft appear ;

The Inspector also, glad the men to cheer.
They too shall thank the Spirits of the air,
With sacrifices pure for all their care ;

Now red, now black, the victims that they slay,
As south or north the sacrifice they pay ;
While millet bright the altars always show ;—
And we shall thus still greater blessings know.


Ix.


The Chen pe Loh es narrative. THE FEUDAL PRINCES, MET AT
SOME GATHERING IN THE EASTERN CAPITAL, PRAISE THE KING AS HE
APPEARS AMONG THEM,


See on the 4th ode of Book iv.


1 Fitness for war, ’mid peace, we here acquire,
Around the Loh, whose waters, broad and deep,
Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,

Of happiness and dignities the fount.
His red knee-covers, madder-dyed, shine bright ;—
So his six hosts to battle he would lead.


2 Fitness for war, ’mid peace, we here acquire,
Around the Loh, whose waters, broad and deep,
Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,
With gems far gleaming round his scabbard’s mouth.
Long may he hve ;—-for myriads of years,

And still maintain the fortunes of his House!


3 Fitness for war, ’mid peace, we here acquire,
Around the Loh, whose waters, broad and deep
Flow swiftly on. Eastward our king has come,
Happy, and of all dignities possessed.

Long may he live ;—for myriads of years,
Preserving safe his many Clans and States !
i7*


.


260 THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr II.


x. i
The Shang-shang chay hwa ; altusive afi narrative. RESPONSIVE TO
THE FORMER ;—-THE KING CELEBRATES JHE PRAISES OF THE PRINCES,


1 Like the flowers which s$lendid shine,
Amidst the leaves that cluster dense,
Are these noble lords of mine,
On whom I look with joy intense.
All that my heart desires in them is met;
Praise and good fortune they deserve to get. |


2 Like the flowers that splendid shine,
Displaying yellow’s deepest hue,
Are these noble lords of mine,
In whom such elegance I view.
In all their words and manners is no flaw ;—
So to themselves all blessing shall they draw.


8 Like the flowers that splendid shine,
Some yellow, some of purest white,
Are these noble lords of mine,
Urging their steeds to rapid flight. .
White are the steeds they drive, but black their manos,
And soft and glossy in their hands the reins !


4 Left or right they wheel and move.
Each order given they straight obey.
Instant their skill and power they prove
Equal, as needed, to display.
Boundless resources in themselves there dwell ;
’Tis right their outward movements should excel!


Bx VII. 1.]  ° THe BOOK OF POETRY 261


BOOK VII.


DECADE OF SANG HOO.


I
Tue Sang-hoo; allusive and narrative. THE KING, ENTERTAINING


THE CHIEF AMONG THE FEUDAL PRINCES, EXPRESSES HIS ADMIRATION
OF THEM, AND GOOD WISHES FOR THEM,


1 Flitting round the greenbeaks see,
With their wings of brilliancy !
Birds they are that men admire ;
More those lords my soul inspire
With admiring joy and love.
Heaven will bless them from above!


bo


Here and there the greenbeaks light,
Showing necks with feathers bright.
Who but must the creatures prize?
But it more delights my eyes,

When these noble lords are seen,
Who my States from danger screen.


3 Screens they are, and bulwarks strong;
All the chiefs around them throng,
And on them as patterns gaze.
‘Self-restraint each hero lays
On himself,—from folly free ;—

Great their happiness must be!


4 See the mighty cup of horn,
Round their ranks in order borne!
Full of spirits soft and good,

It excites no conduct rude.
Surely blessings haste to greet
Lords of virtueso complete !


262 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II,


IL


The Yuen-yang; allasive. RESPONSIVJ TO THE LAST ODE ;~-THE
PRINCES EXPRESS THEIR PRAYERS AND MVISHES FOR THE KING.


Phis piece is one of the most remarkdOle cases in which it is difficult
to see the metaphorical connexion between the allusive lines and those
that follow. This the critics freely admit. “The Yellow duck ”’ is the
‘name by which the Anas galericulata, which we call “the Mandarin
duck,” is ordinarily called by the Chinese,—from the prevailing colour
of its variegated plumage, and the creature is perhaps the most beautiful
of all the duck tribe. Another name for it is—“the Faithful bird,” as
it is said to be a monogamist ; and if either of a pair die, the other does
not long survive. The male and female do show an extraordinary at+
.tachment, which is with the Chinese an emblem of conjugal fidelity,
They are said to sit or roost together, as the.second stanza says, with their
heads turned in opposite directions, while their left wings are folded up
so that they can lean on each other, while the right wings are left at
liberty to guard against any danger that may approach.


1 The Yellow ducks, full grown, take wing and fly ;
For them the men both hand and spread-nets ply ;--
So greatiy they their beauty prize.
May the king’s life ten thousand years extend,
While wealth and happiness that know no end
Heaven, as deserved, to him supplies !


2 The Yellow ducks upon the dam oft rest;
Each with its left wing ’gainst its neighbour’s pressed ;—
Their mutual fondness thus they show.
Heaven to the king ten thousand years assign !
And blessings lasting in unbroken line
Upon his merit great bestow !


3 The stables large the teams of steeds contain ;— , .
In peace with forage, and in war with grain,
Abundantly they are supplied.
May the king’s life extend ten thousand years,
While all that lengthened time no sign appears
Of wealth or happiness denied !


4 The stables large contain the numerous teams ;—
Forage they get in peace; in war there gleams
In every manger store of grain.
Ten thousand years may our great sovereign live,
And Heaven the wealth and blessing ever give,
Which shall his comforfing maintain !


Bx VIL. iv.] He Book OF POETRY. 263


JIl.


The Kwei péen; narrativg with allusive and metaphorical portions in
all the stanzas. CELEBRATQNG A FEAST GIVEN BY THE KING, AT
WHICH HE IS PRESENT HIMSELF, TO BIS RELATIVES BOTH BY CON-
SANGUINITY AND AFFINITY, ;


1 In their bonnets of deerskin, who are they that. haste ?
Who the spirits so good, ‘and such viands may taste ?
Not a stranger among them, but all of thy kin,—
Certes none but thy brethren such honour could win.
As the mosses and mistletoe cling to the tree,

So their hearts, O our sovereign, cling closely to thee.
While they see not thy face, they are restless and sad,.
But a smile from thy lips makes them happy and glad. .


2 In their bonnets of deerskin, who are they that haste?
Who such viands in season and spirits may taste ?
Not a stranger among them, thy brethren are here ;
Only they at such banquet with thee could appear.
As the mosses and mistletoe grow on the pine,
So their hearts, O our sovereign, around thee entwine. —
While they see not thy face, all is dark and forlorn,
Buta glance from thine eyes is to them as the morn.


3 In their bonnets of deerskin, adorning each head,

Now they quaff the clear spirits, and lordly are fed.

With thy brothers are kinsmen of every degree ;

Near or distant, they share the banquet with thee.

When the sleet first descends, weatherwise, we well
know,

Winter soon will be here with its garments of snow.

Death and mourning may come in our moments of glee;

’Tis not long, O ye guests, that each other you'll see.

O’er your cups now be glad, when the day-light has
ceased,

And do thou, O our sovereign, rejoice in the feast.


“Ty.


The Keu héah ; narrative and allusive. THE REJOICING OF A BRIDE-
GROOM OVER HIS YOUNG, BEAUTIFUL, AND VIRTUOUS BRIDE,


If we are to believe the Preface and the crities who follow it, we have
in these verses an officer, not rejgicing over the bride whom he had got for


264 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


himself, but drawing the picture of a lady whom he would rejoice to see
as the bride of king Yéw instead of the odious Paou Sze! With reason
does Chow discard the authority of the P§eface. The piece is a Jove
gong, somewhat stately, but admirable in igs way.


1 With axle creaking, all on fire I went,
To fetch my young and lovely bride.
No thirst or hunger pangs my bosom rent,—
I only longed to have her by my side. ,
I feast with her, whose virtue fame had told,
« Nor need we friends our rapture to behold.


2 The long-tailed pheasants surest covert find,
Amid the forest on the plain.
Here from my virtuous bride, of noble mind,
And person tall, I wisdom gain.
I praise her while we feast, and to her say, |
“'The love I bear you ne’er will know decay.


3 “ Poor we may be; spirits and viands fine
My humble means will not afford.
But what we have, we’ll taste and not repine ;
From us will.come no grumbling word.
And though to you no virtue I can add,
Yet we will sing and dance, in spirit glad.


4 “T oft ascend that lofty ridge with toil,
And hew large branches from the oaks ;
Then of their leafy glory them I spoil, .
And faggots form with vigorous strokes.
Returning tired, your matchless grace I see,
And my whole soul dissolves in ecstasy.


5 “To the high hills I looked, and urged each steed ;
The great road next was smooth and plain.
Up hill, o’er dale, I never slackened speed ;
Like lute-string sounded every rein.
I knew, my journey ended, I should come
To you, sweet bride, the comfort of my home.”


Vv.


The Ts‘ing ying ; metaphorical and allusive. AGAINST LISTENING
TO SLANDERERS.


Bs VI. v1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 265°


1 Like the blue flies buzzing round,
And on the fences lighting,
Ave the sons 2f slander found,
Who norer ase their biting.
O thou happy, Sourteous king,
To the winds their slanders fling.


2 Buzzing round the blue flies hear,
About the jujubes flocking !
So the slanderers appear,
Whose calumnies are shocking.
By no law or order bound,
All the kingdom they confound.


3 How they buzz, those odious flies,
Upon the hazels clust’ring!
And as odious are the lies
Of those slanderers blust ring. |
Hatred stirred between us two
Shows the evil they can do. |


VI.


The Pin che tsoo yen; narrative. AGAINST DRUNKENNESS, DRINK-
IN@ ACCORDING TO RULE, AND DRINKING TO ExcESS. A LIVELY
PICTURE OF THE LICENSE OF THE TIMES.


All the critics agree in thinking that the writer of the piece was duke
Woo of Wei ;—-whose praises are sung inI.v. I. Han Ying adds that
Woo made it, when repenting that he himself had fallen into the vice
which he so graphically describes and strongly condemns,

The general plan of the piece is plain enough. In stanzas 1 and 2 we
‘have two instances of the temperate use of spirits, and in 3—5 we have
the abuse of them on festive occasions. St. 1 is occupied with the
moderate use of them at trials of archery before the king, when no li-
cense was indulged in ; st. 2 shows the same thing on occasions of sacri-
fice. The riotous feast in st. 3—5 was, probably, the entertainment given
by the king to the princes of the same surname with himself at the con-
clusion of the seasonal sacrifices, ’ We can conceive of such a scene taking
place in the time of king Yéw.

There were various trials of skill in archery, of which the principal
was that here referred to, before the king, and called “the great
archery.” It was preceded not by a heavy feast, but by a slight enter-
tainment. The shooting took place in the open court, beneath the hall
where the entertainment took place. Three pairs were selected by the
ofiicers who had the direction of the trial. The others matched them-


266 _ HE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


selves.. The defeated competitors had to drink a cup of spirits as a
penalty.

Tn st, 2, the writer evidently had in view the seasonal sacrifices to an-
cestors. What he describes took place, I gappose, as the proper business
of the sacrifice was being completed. A


1 When to the mats the guests draw near,

Good order they observe.

Some moving to the left appear,
While to the right some swerve.

In rows the dishes stand arrayed ;-—

_ Of wood and bamboo featly made.

Sauces and kernels in them shine;

And tempered well the spirits fine :-—
The guests with reverence taste.

Now are the drums and bells set up ;

And round the circle goes the cup,
Without unseemly jest.

The royal target then they rear,

And bows and arrows soon appear,
Made ready for the game.

On different sides the archers stand ;

And one, his weapons in his hand,
Calls out another’s name,

“ Now shoot,” he says, “and show your skill.”

The other answers, ‘ Sheot I will,

And hit the mark ;—and when you miss,

Give you the penal cup to kiss.”


The drums loud sound, the organ swells ;
Their flutes the dancers wave.
The other instruments and bells |
Join in the concert grave.
Thus with our music blends the dance,
The solemn service to enhance,
Which to our sires is paid.
When rites, the greatest and the least,
Have been performed to grace the feast,
Then to our king ’tis said,
* Blessings on you your sires bestow.”
With joy his sons and grandsons glow ;
They feel inspired to show their care,
And reverently themseltes to bear.
‘


bo


Bx VIL. vi] ’ THe Book or Porrry, 267


The guests then come, in order led
By him who is their chief and head.
With those who represent the dead
They drink in reverent style.
Attendants wait their cups to fill,
But order rules ’midst their good will.
Our cups are only drunk to cheer ;
Our temple services are clear
From all excesses vile.


8 When to the mats the guests approach,

Mild harmony holds rule.

These dare not upon those encroach,
And no one plays the fool.

So long as in due bounds they keep,
Discreetly they behave ;

But when those bounds they overleap,
Then where are they,-—so grave ?

They leave' the mats, and prance about;
They caper round ae round,

Their caution all is put to rout;
Their wits fall to the ground.

Anon as stili more-drunk they grow,
On rudeness they are set.

The cups their reason overthrow,
And they themselves forget.


4 Yes, when the guests have drunk too much,

They shout aloud and brawl.

The dishes get no gentle touch ;
Disorder fills the hall.

They dance about, now fast, now slow,
Can hardly keep their feet.

What fools they are they do not know;
No one resumes his seat.

Each cap, awry, will hardly stay
Upon the giddy head ;

But they keep on in madness’ way,
And no exposure dread.

If, when their wits began to reel,
They left the room at once,

Both host and guests would happier feel,
Nor know thé sad mischance.


268 THE BOOK OF POETRY. . [Parr II


But holding on, themselves they harm.
The drinking feast is good
Only when guests their wills can arm
. Against misconduct rude.


5 Whene’er a drinking feast is set,
Some sober keep, some drunk will get.
One is appointed to preside,
With an assistant by his side,
Record to make, as they decide,
Who praise deserve, who blame.
But sots there are, in vice quite sunk,
Who, seeing some will not get drunk,
Say, “ We for you feel shame.”
These, if they could get in a word,
Might counsel to the rest afford.
To fright them from their wild excess,
Sternly they might them thus address :—
“‘ From such improper speech refrain ;
Not called to speak, your tongues restrain.
You're drunk; if but a word you say,
We'll send you out this very day,
To find a thing which nature scorns,—
A ram full grown, yet wanting horns.
Drink but three cups, your memory’s gone ;
How can you drinking still go on?”


VIL


\
The Yu ts‘aow; allusive, PRAISE OF THE KING BY THE PRINCES AT
SOME FEAST:—HIS QUIET HAPPINESS IN Haov.


Haou was the capital of king Woo ;—-30 Ze south of the present dis-
trict of Ch‘ang-gan, department Se-gan, Shen-se.


1 Fishes there among the pondweed lie;
From the bank their large heads we espy ;—
’ Fishes could not happier be.
Here in Haou resides our lord, the king ;
To him joy his festive pleasures bring.
Happy and at ease is he. ;
2 Fishes there among the pondweed glide;
From the bank their long tails are descried ;—
Fishes could not héppier be.


€


Bx VIL. vui.] tHe BooK oF POETRY. 269


Here in Haon resides the king, our lord ;
Festive pleasures joy to him afford.
Happy and at ease is he.


8 Fishes there among the pondweed live,
Shelter to them where the rushes give ;— °
Fishes could not happier be.
Here in Haou the king, our lord, resides ;
Safe and tranquil ever here he bides,
Happy and at ease is he.


VII.


The Ts‘ae shuh ; allusive and narrative, RESPONSIVE TO THE FORMER;
—CELEBRATING THE APPEARANCE OF THE FEUDAL PRINCES AT TRE
COURT, THE SPLENDOUR OF THEIR ARRAY, THE PROPRIETY OF THEIR
DEMEANOUR, AND THE FAVOUR CONFERRED ON THEM BY THE KING,


1 They pull the beans all o’er the ground,
To place in baskets square, and round.
So reap they what the fields produce,
For present and for future use.

When now themselves the princes show,

No stores have I gifts to bestow,
Befitting their great worth.

Yet a state-carriage and its team

Will well a feudal prince beseem ;—~
Let such be all brought forth.

And from the chambers let them bring
The robes that princes wear.

From duke to baron, I, the king,
On them will these confer.


2 The water bubbles from the spring,
And round it grows the cress.
So when the princes see the king,
' Their coming they express
In various ways. . Now here I seo
Their flags, with dragon blazonry,
All waving in the wind.
The gentle tinkling of their bells
Comes to my ear, and surely tells


270 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II,


They in their chariots, grandly drawn
By the four steeds of mighty brawn,
Cannot be far behind.


- 3 The king soon gets a nearer view.
The covers red he sees
Upon their knées, of brilliant hue,
And buskins ’neath the knees.
A grave demeanour all display ;
The Son of Heaven approves.
What to such princes can he say,
Whose presence rapture moves ?
In admiration and delight,
No grace can he withhold.
To some he grants new honours bright,
To some confirms the old. -


4 The oaks their branches wide extend,
With leaves thick coveréd o’er,
Which thus the roots and trunk defend,

And make them thrive the more.
So do these princes service do,
Throughout the land, while they pursue
The charges to them given.
The various regions well they guard,
Nor think they any labour hard,
To aid the Son of Heaven.
All blessings on their heads collect.
And now to court they’ve brought
Their ministers who nought neglect,
Strong both in act and thought.


5 The boat is by the rope held fast,
Lest it should float away ;
So round the princes there is cast
‘The king’s proteetive stay.
He looks on them with joy intense ;
He scans their merits to dispense
His favours and rewards.
He makes their happiness his charge ;
Their territories to enlarge,
As duty he regards.
&


Br VII. 1x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 271


To them it is a pleasure rare,
A happy, joyous time,

When from their States they here repair,
To see his court sublime, .


Ix,


The Kéch kung ; allusive, natrative, and metaphorical. AGAINS? THE
KING’S COLD TREATMENT OF HIS RELATIVES BY CONSANGUINITY AND
AFFINITY ; THE EXTENSIVE AND BANEFUL INFLUENCE OF HIS EX-
AMPLE ; THE, ENCOURAGEMENT GIVEN BY HIM TO CALUMNIATORS,


1 Whene’er we strongly bend a bow,
Both string and ends we near us bring ;
And when we let the tension go,
From us with quick recoil they spring. .
So when we show affection deep, .
Our kith and kin to us we draw ;
But when from them aloof we keep,
They shrink from us by nature’s law.


2 ‘When you, O king, to kin are cold,
Such coldness rules throughout the land.
You for their teacher all men hold;
To learn your ways needs no command.


8 Brethren whose virtue stands the test,
By bad example still unchanged,
Their generous feelings manifest,
Nor grow among themselves estranged.
But if their virtue weakly fails
The evil influence to withstand,
Then selfishness o’er love prevails,
And troubles rise on every hand,


4 When men in disputations fine
To hear their consciences refuse,
Then ’gainst each other they repine,
And each maintains his special views,
If one a place of rank obtain,
And scorn humility to show,
The others view him with disdain,
And, wrangling, all to ruin go.


»


272 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


5 A colt the old horse deems himself,
And vainly hastens to the race ;

So thinks the mean man, bent on pelf,
Himself fit. for the highest place.
Stuffed to the full, he still shall feed,
Nor own that he has had enough.
He drinks, and with insatiate greed,

Knows not the time for leaving off.


6 The monkeys by their nature know

The way to climb a tree, untaught.

We need no mud on him to throw,

+ Whom lying in the mud we’ve caught.

The nature of all meaner men
Leads them to follow and obey.

Nor right, nor wrong the millions ken,
But imitate the sovereign’s way.


7 The snow falls fast, and all the ground

Hides. with its masses, white and clear ;

But when the sunbeams play around,
It soon will melt and disappear.

This fact, O king, you don’t perceive ;
Those men who calumnies diffuse,

Not heeding, to themselves you leave,
And your indulgence they abuse.


8 Yes, though the snow lie drifted deep,
Away before the heat ’twill flow.
I for the king’s neglect must weep ;——
Like Man or Maou those men will grow.


x.


‘The Yuh léw ; metaphorical and allusive, SoME NOBLE TELLS HOW
IMPOSSIBLE IT WAS TO APPROACH OR BO ANYTHING FOR THE KING, °
AND WARNS THE OTHERS AGAINST DOING 80.


1 The willow trees luxuriant grow.
Who is not glad himself to throw
Beneath their shade to rest ?


Br VII. x] THE BOOK OF POETRY, == =, =—-28


And so to our great sovereign’s court
The feudal lords should oft resort,
' And feel supremely blessed.
But he whom we all deemed.a god
Is so uncertain in his nod,
That they his presence shun.
Near him alone I dare not go.
Were I at court myself to show,
And of his troubles take the charge,
His calls on me would be so large,
That I should be undone.


2 Luxuriant grow the willow trees ;
Beneath their shade one often sees
Large crowds at ease reclined.

So should the king his grace extend,
And to his court the princes bend
Their steps with willing mind.
But he, whom as a god we viewed,

Is so uncertain in his mood,
That they dare not appear. -
For me I should but court distress,
If I alone were to address
Myself to take his cares in hand ;
He would so much of me demand,
Pd live in constant fear.


3 The birds now on the trees alight,
’ Then spread their wings in sudden flight,
And soar aloft to heaven ;
So does the king his purpose change,
From one thing to another range,
As by his fancies driven.
His heart we cannot fathom well,
Nor can we any moment tell
- To what he will proceed.
The task why should I undertake,
And vainly the endeavour make,
His grievous troubles to redress ?
7T would only cause me sore distress,
And to my misery lead.


1
VOL, 11 18


274 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


BOOK VIII.


THE DECADE OF TOO JIN SZE.


L


THE Zoo jin ste; narrative. PRaIsE OF THE LADIES AND GENTLE-
MEN OF A FORMER TIME FOR THE SIMPLICITY OF THEIR DRESS, THE
CORRECTNESS OF THEIR DEPORTMENT, AND THE ELEGANCE OF THEIE
MANNERS.


The Preface does not assign any time for the composition of this piece,
but Choo says it was made “ after the confusion and dispersion.” I think
it should be referred to the period soon after the removal of the capital
to Loh, when things were all in disorder at the new seat of government.
It may be said that the officers and ladies of Haou, in Yéw’s reign, did
not deserve to be spoken of as the writer speaks ; but we need not sup-
pose that they are before his eye in anything deeper than their outward
seeming. If this be not thought to satisfy the demands of the piece, we
need only assume that the writer goes back to an earlier time than that
of Yéw. Yin and Keih were clan names of great families in the royal
domain, the ladies of which would be the leaders of fashion in the capital.


1 In the old capital they stood,
With yellow fox-furs plain,
Their manners all correct and good,
Speech free from vulgar siain.
‘Could we go back to Chow’s old days,
All would look up to them with praise.


2 In the old capital they wore
Tae hats and black caps small ;
And ladies, who famed surnames bore,
Their own thick hair let fall.
Such simple ways are seen no more,
And the changed manners I deplore.


3 Har-stoppers, made of sew-stones fine,
In the old days were worn.
Each lady of a noble line
A Yin or Keih seemed born.


€


Br VIII. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. | 275


Such officers and ladies now
I see not, and my sorrows grow.


4 With graceful sweep their girdles fell,
Then in the days of old. -

The ladies’ side-hair, with a swell,
Like scorpion’s tail, rose bold.
Such, if I saw them in these days,

I'd follow with admiring gaze.


5 So hung their girdles, not for show ;~
To their own length ’twas due.
’Twas not by art.the hair curled so ;—
By nature so it grew.
“I seek such manners now in vain,
And pine for them with longing pain,


II,


The Ts‘ae luk ; narrative. A WIFE TELLS HER SORROW AND INCA-
PaBILITY OF ATPENDING TO ANYTHING, IN THE PROLONGED ABSENCE
OF HER HUSBAND, TO WHOM SHE WAS FONDLY ATTACHED,


1 So full am I of anxious thought,
Though all the morn king-grass I’ve sought,
o fill my arms I fail. ©
Like wisp all-tangled is my hair !
To wash it let me home repair.
My lord soon may I hail !


2 Though ’mong the indigo I’ve wrought

The morning long, through anxious thought,
My skirt’s filled but in part.

Within five days he was to.appear.

The sixth has come, and he’s not here,
Oh! how this racks my heart!


j ‘


38 When here we dwelt in union sweet.
If the hunt called his eager feet,
His bow I cased for him.
Or if to fish he went away,
And would be absent all the day,
His line I put in trim.
: 18 *


’


276 , THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


4 What in his angling did he catch ?
Well worth the time it was to watch
How bream and tench he took.
‘ Men thronged upon the banks and gazed ;
At bream and tench they looked amazed,
The triumphs of his hook,


mt,


The Shoo méaou ; allusive and narrative. CELEBRATING THE SER-
VICE OF THE EARL OF SHAOU EN BUILDING THE CITY OF SEAY, AND
THE CHEERFUL ALACRITY OF HIS SOLDIERS UNDER HIS MANAGEMENT.


This piece and the fifth of Part IIL., Book iii., should be read together.
King Seuen (B.C. 826—781) established the marquisate of Shin, in the
present department of Nan-yang, Ho-nan, as a bulwark against the en-
creachiients of the tribes on the west and south, appointing its capital
at Séay, in the present Tang Chow of the same department, This piece
celebrates the expedition to which was entrusted the building of the city,
and the inauguration of the State. The name of the earl of Shaou, who
was entrusted with its command, was Hoo, known as duke Muh of Shaou.


1 As the young millet, by the genial rain
Enriched, shoots up luxuriant and tall,
So, when we southward marched with toil and pain,
The earl of Shaou cheered and inspired us all.


2 We pushed our barrows, and our burdens bore ;

We drove our waggons, and our oxen led.
“The work once done, our labour there is o’er,
And home we travel,’”’ to ourselves we said.


8 Close kept our footmen round the chariot track ;
Our eager host in close battalions sped.
‘¢ When once our work is done, then we go back,
Our labour over,”’ to themselves they said.


4 Hard was the work we had at Seay to do,
But Shaou’s great earl the city soon upreared.
The host its service gave with ardour true ;—
Such power in all the earl’s commands appeared !


¢


Be VIII. 1v.] rae BooK or POETRY. 277


5 We did on plains and low lands what was meet ;
We cleared the springs and streams, the land to
drain,
The earl of Shaou announced his work complete,
. And the king’s heart reposed, at rest again.


Iv.


The Sth sang ; allusive gnd narrative, THE WRITER TELLS HIS AD-
MIRATION AND LOVE FOR SOME MEN OF NOBLE CHARACTER,


There seems to benothing jn this piece to justify our regarding it as
satirical ; but the Preface and its supporters manage to find in it Yéw’s
keeping good men in obscurity, and the desire of the writer to see them
in office. Choo is of opinion that both this piece and the preceding are
out of their proper place, through some mistake, at-an early time, in the
arrangement of the pieces in this Part,


1 Where lies the ground both wet and low,
The mulberry trees in beauty grow ;—
’Tis sweet to see their clust’ring leaves.
Such pleasure in my bosom heaves,
When I the princely men desery ;—

-To tell the joy ’twere vain to try.


2 Where lies the ground both wet and lew,
The mulberry trees in beauty grow ;~—

- *Tis sweet to see their glossy leaves.
Such pleasure in my bosom heaves,
‘When I the princely men behold ;—
Then does my heart its joy unfold.


3 Where lies the ground both wet and low,
The mulberry trees in beauty grow ;-—
“Tis sweet to see their dark green leaves.
Such pleasure in my bosom heaves,
When lights upon those men my eye;—
At their grand fame my heart throbs high.


4 I cherish those men in my heart.—
Might not my words my love impart?
No ;—if the words were once but spoken,
The charm of love might then be broken.
The men shall dwell within my heart,
Nor thence with lapse of time depart.


’


278 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II.


Vv.


The Pih hwa; metaphorical. THE WIFE OF KING YEW COMPLAINS -
O¥ BEING DEGRADED AND FORSAKEN.


There is nothing in the piece itself to suggest this special reference of
it to the queen of king Yéw; but from the Han dynasty downwards all
the critics have concurred in this view of it.


1 The fibres of the white-flowered rush

Are with the white grass bound.

So do the two together go,
In closest union found.

And thus should man and wife abide,
The twain combined in one;

But this bad man sends me away,
And bids me dwell alone.


2 Both rush and grass from the bright clouds

The genial dew partake.

Kind and impartial, nature’s laws
No odious difference make.

But providence appears unkind ; -
Events are often hard.

This man, to principle untrue,
Denies me his regard.


8 Northward the pools their waters send,

To flood each paddy field ;

So get the fields the sap they need,
Their store of rice to yield.

But that great man no deed of grace
Deigns to bestow on me.

My songs are sighs. At thought of him.
My heart aches wearily.


4 The mulberry branches they collect,

And use their food to cook.

But I must use a furnace small,
That pot nor pan will brook.

So me that great man badly treats,
Nor uses as his wife,

Degrades me from my proper place,
And fills with grief roy life.


€


Br VII. v1.j THE BOOK OF POETRY. - 299


5 The bells and drums inside the court

Men stand without and hear ;

So should the feelings in my breast,
To him distinct appear.

All-sorrowful, I think of him,
Longing to move his love ;

But he vouchsafés no kind response ;
His thoughts far from me rove.


6 The marabow stands on the dam,

And to repletion feeds ;

The crane deep in the forest cries,
Nor finds the food it needs.

So in my roem the concubine
By the great man is placed;

While I with cruel banishment
Am cast out and disgraced.


7 The Yellow ducks sit on the dam,

With left wing gathered low ;

So on each other do they lean,
And their attachment show.

And love should thus the man and wife
In closest concord bind ;

But that man turns away from me,
And shows a fickle mind.


8 When one stands on a slab of stone,

No higher than the ground,

Nothing is added to his height ;—
Low with the stone he’s found.

So does the favourite’s mean estate
Render that great man mean,

While I by him, to distance sent,
Am pierced with sorrow keen.


VI.


The Méen man ; allusive. Some INFERIOR COMPLAINS OF His TOLL
IN AN EXPEDITION, AND OF THE NEGLECT WITH WHICH HE WAS
TREATED BY HIS SUPERIORS.


Choo regards the piece as all metaphorical. “ The whole case,” says a
critic, “is put into the mouth of an oriole, and the lines flow naturally


280 | THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IL.


and ‘easily ;—metaphorically, without the appearance of metaphor, ex-
pressing the object of the writer. We must not think that in the last
four ltnes we have a man longing for some one in whom he could trust
for ‘help ;~—they are the thoughts of the bird to that effect.” But if the
writer chose to put the expression of his sentiments into the mouth of a
bird, he would havo made it talk like a bird ;—-as in I. xv. II, Choo’s
better judgment here deserted him.

See the use Confucius makes of a couple of the lines in “ the Great
Learning,” Commentary, iii. 2,


1 ‘Twitters fast the oriole,

Where yonder bends the mound.

The happy little creature

Its resting place has found.
So have not I. The journey’s length
And weary toil o’ertask my strength.
Give me to eat; give me to drink ;
And teach my mind the way to think.
Then bid a baggage cart prepare
Along the route myself to bear.


2. Twitters fast the oriole,
Where shows its edge the mound :
The happy little creature
Its resting place has found.
So have not I. dae not shrink“
From the long way, but trembling think,
Unable to hold on, I'll sink.
Give me to drink ; and give me food ;
And teach my mind the thing that’s good.
. Then bid a baggage cart prepare
Along the route myself to bear.


3 Twitters fast the oriole,
Where spreads its side the mound.
The happy litile creature
dts resting place has found.
So have not I. I dare not shrink
From the long way, but trembling think,
Before we reach the end, I’ll sink.
Give me to drink ; to food invite ;
And tell my mind the thing that’s right.
Then bid a baggage cart prepare
Along the route myself to bear.


Bx VIII. vin.] me Book oF POETRY. 281


, vi


_ The Hoo yeh; narrative.e WHERE THE PROVISIONS ARE MOST FRU-
GAL, ALL THE RULES OF POLITE INTERCOURSE MAY YET BE PRESERVED.


Over the frugal meal described, the parties in the writer’s eye would be
as ceremonious as at a grand feast. First, the host pours outa cup of
his spirits, and tastes them to be assured they are good, Then he fills.a
cup, and presents it to the guésts. The guests drink, and have a cup
filled, which the host drinks. Lastly, the host has the cups of the guests
filled, and they cause his to be filled, and they all drink to one another,


1 A few gourd leaves that waved about
Cut down and boiled ;—the feast how spare !
But the good host his spirits takes,
Pours out a cup, and proves them rare.


°2 A single rabbit on the mat,
Or baked, or roast :—-how small the feast !
But the good host his spirits takes,
. And fills the cup of every guest.


3 A single rabbit on the mat, °
Reasted or broiled :—how poor the meal !
But the guests from the spirit vase
Fill their host’s cup, and drink his weal.


4 A sjngle rabbit on the mat,
Roasted or baked :—no feast we think !
But from the spirit vase they take,
Both host and guests, and joyous drink.


Vit,


The Zséen-tséen che shuh; narrative. COMMEMORATING THE HARD-
SHIPS OF A LONG AND DIFFICULT EXPEDITION TO THE EAST, AGGRA-
VATED BY GREAT RAINS,


1 How high those frowning rocks arisé !
With awe they fill the mind.
Our way through streams, o’er mountains lies ;
Toilsome the march we find. ;
Eastward our expedition goes,
Nor has our chief one hour’s repose


282 : THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr Il


2 Those frowning rocks the heights surmount,
And fill the mind with dread.
O’er hills, through streams, our steps we count ;—
When shall our march be sped ?
Our warrior hastens on the track,
Nor thinks he of our drawing back.


8 Look at the swine, with legs all white,
Washed by the pools from stain !
The moon wades through the Hyads bright,
Foretelling heavier rain.
He at whose word we eastward fare
No leisure has for other care.


IX.


The T‘éaow che hva; metaphorical, THE WRITER LAMENTS HIS
MISERY AMIDST AND IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE GENERAL DECAY OF ~
THE KINGDOM. :


1 Deep yellow are turned

The bignonia flowers ;

And my wounded heart
Its sorrow outpours.


2 The flowers are all gone;
But green leaves are seen.
Than this fate have known,
Better not to have been !


8 In fish traps but stars !
Ewes thin, with large head !
While some may have food,
Most languish, ill fed.


x.


The Ho ts‘aow puh hwang ; allusive and narrative. THE MISERY AND
MURMURING OF SOLDIERS CONSTANTLY EMPLOYED ON EXPEDITIONARY
SERVICES, AND TREATED WITHOUT ANY CONSIDERATION.


1 Yellow now is all the grass ;
All the days in marching pass.
On the move is every man ;
Hard work, far and rear, they plan.


Br VIII. x.] THE BOOK oF POETRY.


2 Black is every plant become;
Every man is torn from home. °
Kept on foot, our state is sad ;-—


As if we no feelings had !


8 Not rhinoceroses we !
Tigers do we care to be?
Fields like these so desolate
Are to us a hateful fate.


4 Long-tailed foxes pleased may hide
*Mong the grass, where they abide.
We, in box-carts slowly borne,


On the great roads plod and mourn.


283


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


PART ITI.
GREATER ODES OF THE KINGDOM.


Boox I. Decade of King Wan.


TITLE OF THE PART, Little needs to be added here to what I have
said on the title of Part II, The term “greater ” is given to the pieces
because of their greater length, and the themes of several of them being
of a more exalted kind,—the history and virtues of the ancestors of the
House of Chow, and of the founders of the dynasty. The first eighteen
pieces are “the correct Ya,” and are attributed to the duke of Chow.

TITLE OF THE Book. As in the last Part, the odes should be arranged
in tens ; and each Decade takes its name from that of the first ode in it.
In this Book Wan is mainly the subject of the first eight pieces, and
king Weo is more prominent in the other two,


L '


\ The Wén wang ; narrative, CELEBRATING KING WAN, DEAD AND
ALIVE, AS THE FOUNDER OF THE DYNASTY OF CHOW, SHOWING HOW
“HIS VIRTUES DREW TO HIM THE FAVOURING REGARD OF HEAVEN,
‘AND MADE HIM A BRIGHT PATTERN TO HIS DESCENDANTS AND THEIR
MINISTERS,


It is to be borne in mind that in this and other pieces Wan is spoken
of as “king Wan,” as having been hinged by the duke of Chow after
the subjugation of the Yin or Shang dynasty, when Woo, Wan’s son, in
his old age received the appointment to the throne ;—see “ The Doctriné
of the Mean,” XVIIE. 3. W4&n never assumed the title of king himself.
The appointment of Heaven lighted on him, but it took effect only when
his son Fah—king Woo—became the sovereign of China.-

The dynasty which Chow superseded is called indifferently Yin or
Shang, and sometimes Yin-shang, by a combination of these names.
The descendants of its kings, appearing at the court of Chow, assisted at
the sacrifices of the king in his ancestral temple, and continued to wear
the insignia of rank belonging to them cs of the royal House of Yin.


Br Lx] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


1 The royal Wan now rests on high,
Enshrined in brightness of the sky.
Chow as a state had long been known,
And Heaven’s deeree at last was shown.
Its lords had borne a glorious name ;

God kinged them when the season came.
King Wan ruled well when earth he trod ;
Now moves his spirit near to God.


2 A strong-willed, earnest king was Wan,
And still his fame rolls widening on.
The gifts that God bestowed on Chow
Belong to Wan’s descendants now. ’
Heaven blesses still with gifts divine
The hundred scions of his line;

And all the officers of Chow
‘From age to age more lustrous grow. -


8 More lustrous still from age to age,
All reverent plans their zeal engage ;
And brilliant statesmen qwe their birth
To this much-favoured spot of earth.
They spring like products of the land,—
The men by whom the realm doth stand.
Such aid their numerous bands supply,
That Wan rests tranquilly on high.


4 Deep were Wan’s thoughis, sustained his ways ;
His reverence lit its trembling rays. :
Resistless came great Heaven’s decree ;

The sons of Shang must bend the knee ;—~
The sons of Shang, each one a king,

In numbers beyond numbering.

Yet as God spoke, so must it be :—

The sons of Shang all bent the knee.


5 Now each tg Chow his homage pays,—
So dark and changing are Heaven’s ways.
When we pour our libations here,

The officers of Shang appear,

Quick and alert to give their aid ;—
Such is the service by them paid,

< >


285


286 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


While still, they do not cast aside

The cap and broidered axe,—their pride.
Ye servants of. our line of kings,
Remember him from whom it springs.


6 Remember him from whom it springs ;—

Let this give to your virtue wings.

Seek harmony with Heaven’s great mind ;——
, So shall you surest blessing find.

Ere Shang had lost the nation’s heart,

Its monarchs all with God had part

In sacrifice. From them you see

"Tis hard to keep high Heaven’s decree.


7 Tis hard to keep high Heaven’s decree !
O sin not, or you cease to be.
To add true lustre to your name,
See Shang expire in Heaven’s dread flame.
For Heaven’s high dealings are profound,
And far transcend all sense and sound.
From Wan your pattern you must draw,
And all the States will own your law.


II,


e
The Ta ming; narrative. How THE APPOINTMENT OF HEAVEN
RESTED ON KING WAN, AND DESCENDED TO HIS SON, KING Woo, WHO
OVERTHREW THE DYNASTY OF YIN oR SHANG ;—CELEBRATING ALSO
THE MOTHER AND THE WIFE OF WAN, :


Of Wan’s father I shall speak particularly on ode VII, He married,
as st. 2 here tells us, a Jin, the second daughter of the prince of Che, @
principality somewhere in the royal domain of Yin. Chinese writers
celebrate her—T‘ae-jin—in the highest terms, saying that her instruction
of Wan commenced while he was yet in her womb, “ Her eyes looked
on no improper sight ; her ears listened to no licentious sound ; and her
lips uttered no word of pride.”

Wan’s own wife was the famous T‘ae-sze, of the State of Sin, north
of the river Héah, in the present district of Hoh-yang, in T‘ung Chow,
Shen-se. The principal city must have been near the Wei.

The wild or plain of Muh, where the deciding battle between Chow
and Shang was fought, was in the present Ho-nan, not far from the capi-
tal of Shang. Of Shang-foo, who appears to have been Woo’s principal
officer and supporter on the occasion, I have spoken in the introductory
note to the Odes of Ts‘e, Part I, é


Be I.u.] ~—s- THE BOOK OF POETRY. e 287


1 Majestic Heaven from kings below,
That theycillustrious virtue show,
With strictest law requires.
They must not on its grace rely, -
Nor think that they can change defy.
The House of Yin long ruled the land,
Called to the throne by Heaven’s command.
But its last monarch, from it driven,
Lost by supreme decree of Heaven
The kingdom of his sires.


2 What time in Chow ruled our king Ke,
Among the princesses of Che,
In the domain of Yin,
The second daughter of her name
Had through the land a noble fame.
Her from her parents Ke had sought,
And to his capital he brought,
And wedded her, ‘I'‘ae-jin.
They both could perfect virtue claim,
No duty left undone.
A mother soon the wife became ;
The child was our king Wan.


8 This our king Wan in all his way

Did watchful reverence display,

With cloarest wisdom serving God,

Who, pleased to see the course he trod,

Him with great favour crowned.

His virtue no deflection knew,

But always to the right was true.

The States beheld, and all approved ;

With loyal ardour stirred and moved,
Wan as their Head they owned.


4 Throughout the land Heaven sent its glance ;
Whom should it to the throne advance ?
To Wan came the decree.
While he was still in early years,
By Heaven’s arranging there appears
She who his bride should be.


?


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr ITI.


North of the Heah, on Wei, she shone,
The child of a great Houses

Then Wan, to years of manhood grown,
Tendered to her his vows. :


5 Like a fair denizen of Heaven
‘Was she to whom those vows were given.
The gifts he sent were deemed complete,
And to the Wei, his bride to meet,
Our Wan in person went.
A bridge of boats across the stream
He made, as did her state beseem.
She crossed ; to Chow they held their way.
Great was the glory of the day,.
And glorious the event !


6 Heaven thus its grand appointment made,
And Wan to all the land displayed,
- ‘While still he ruled in Fung.
Sin’s eldest daughter was the wife,
Whom Heaven prepared to bless his life,
And take his virtuous mother’s place.
And Heaven soon gave them further grace ;
’Twas from them king Woo sprung.
’ Heaven kept and helped the child, until
His summons to him came.
- Then Woo marched forth to do its will,
Smote Yin, and won his fame.


7 Countless as forest leaves, Yin’s hosts,
Collected from its utmest coasts,
Were marshalled in Muh’s famous plain,

To meet king Woo ;—but all in vain.
Chow to the crisis rose. .
Woo viewed their multitudes with fear,
But Shang-foo’s words soon gave him cheer :—
“ With you is God ; your doubts dispel.
With Him as helper, we shall quell
The pride of all our foes,”


8 Vast was the plain. Eack'sandal car,
That brightly shone amidst the war,
Dashed rapidly along.


Br I. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 289


Each team of steeds, black-maned and bay,

Against all obstacles made way.

Like mighty eagle on the wing,

Shang-foo was ever near the king,
Whose heart was thus made strong.

At the first charge Yin’s troops gave way,
And: took to shameful flight. ,

That morn a long and brilliant day
Displaced the previous night.


TH.


The Méen ; metaphorical and narrative. THE SMALL BEGINNINGS
AND SUBSEQUENT GROWTH OF THE HovusE or Cuow. Is REMOVAL
FROM PIN UNDER T‘AN-FOO, AND SETTLEMENT IN CHOW, DOWN TO
THE .TIME OF KING Wan.


The gradual rise of the House of Chow has been adverted to in the notes
on the titleof Part I. Tan-foo, it is there stated, removed with his tribe
from Pin to the plain of Chow in B.c, 1325 ; and we have here an eloquent
“account of his labours in founding the new settlement. Duke Léw,
to whom is ascribed the previous settlement of the tribe in Pin, in B.¢,
1796, is celebrated in the second Book of this Part; but what we read
of T‘an-foo, in the first stanza of this piece, is not reconcileable with the
ome of his distant predecessor, nor with the sketch of life in Pin in

. xv. 1

Of the ciroumstarices in which T‘an-foo moved from Pin, see a graphic
account in Mencius, I. ii. XV. His wife was Kéang. She is. called
T‘ae-kéang, and also Chow kéang. Mount K‘e, called also “ Pillar of the
Sky,” is 10 le north-east from the district city of K‘e-shan, department
Fung-ts‘éang.

Stanzas 5 to 7 describe the processes and progress-in erecting the
buildings of the new settlement,-—under the direction of 3 Superintendent
of Works, and a Minister of Instruction. Out of these two appointments,
no doubt, grew the ministers whose functions are described in the Book of
History and the Ritual of Chow. It is interesting to observe that the
first public building taken in hand was the ancestral temple. The chief
would make a home for the Spirits of his fathers before he made a palace
for himself. i

Stanza 8 brings us to king Wan. The story of the chiefs of Joo and
Juy, two States on the east of the Ho, is this :—They had a quarrel about
some territory to which each of them laid claim, They went to lay the’
matter before the lord of Chow ; and ‘as soon as they entered his State,
they saw the ploughers readily yielding the furrow, and travellers yielding
the path, to one another, while men and women avoided one another on
the road, and none of the old people had burdens to carry. When they
got to his court, they bebeld the officers of each inferior grade giving place
to those above them, All this made them ashamed of their own quarrel.


VoL. Ii. Ad


290 HE BOOK OF POETRY. ' [Parr ITIL,


They agreed to let the disputed ground be an open territory, and they
-withdrew, witheut presuming to appear before Wan. When this affair
was noised abroad, it is said that more than forty States tendered their
submission to Chow.


1 As grow the gourds, with ever length’ning stem,
rom elder sires sprang ours, as we from them.
When first by Ts‘eu and Ts‘eih our people grew,
And o’er them ruled the ancient duke T“an-foo,
There kiln-like huts and caves for them he made,
Ere any house its walls and roof displayed.


2 The ancient duke T‘an-foo came with the morn, .
In car atong the western rivers borne,
Nor stayed his steeds, until he reached mount K“e.
The lady Keang came in his company. :
With eager eyes they travelled o’er the ground,
To find a site on which:a town to found.


[e~)


The platn of Chow, with violets o’erspread

And sonchus plants found sweet on such a bed,
Lay wide and rich. He asked his men their mind,
And by the scorchéd tortoise-shell divined.

‘Both answer gave :—‘‘ Now is the time and here!”
His followers straight their homes began to rear.


4 He cheered them on, and placed them on the land,
On left and right their different sites he,planned.
Divisions, large and small, soon marked the plain, |
And channels, or to irrigate or drain.

From east to west the acres he defined ;
Nought that was needed ’scaped his active mind,


5 He named two officers who should preside
O’er all these labours, and the people guide.
These to direct the building work he calls ;

‘, True to the plummet rise the many walls. .


They bind the frame-boards, till they stand aright,
‘ And rear th’ ancestral temple in its might.


6 With earth in baskets crowding workmen came,
Which then with shouts they cast into the frame.
There with responsive blows the earth they pound, |
And trim and pare until the wails are sound.


€


Br L iv.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 291


At oncé, five thousand cubits long, these rise,
The drum unheard amidst the toilers’ cries.


7 The palace next they built. Its outer gate
Arose with lofty and imposing state.
The inner portal of the court they reared,
With massive pomp. Anon, hard by, appeared:
The altar for the Spirits of the land,
Where the State’s greatest movements should be
planned.


8 Thus though his foeman’s rage he could not tame,
T‘an-foo preserved and left a noble fame.
In time the oaks and thorns were cleared away,
And roads for travellers opened to the day.
The savage hordes of Keun all disappeared,
Panting, and trembling at the name they feared.


9 Then came king Wan, and stirred to nobler life ‘
The chiefs of Joo and Juy, who ceased their strife.
Some sought our prince, whom yet they had not seen ;
Some, led by those who at his court had been ;
Some came who dreaded his avenging arm ;

And some, who knew he screened the weak from harm,


Iv.


s
The Yih p‘oh; allusive and narrative, IN PRAISE OF KING WAN,
CELEBRATING HIS ACTIVITY, INFLUENCE, AND CAPACITY TO RULE,


In st, 2 we have the lord of Chow, here called “prince and king,” in
his ancestral temple, assisted by his ministers in pouring out the libations
to the spirits of the departed. The handle of the king or lord’s libation
cup was a complete kwei, or obelisk-like symbol of jade; that of a
minister was the half of such a symbol, divided longitudinally.

The King is a famous river of Shen-se, flowing into the Wei in the
district of Kaou-ling ;—see I. iii, X. 8. “Six hosts” is an exaggeration,
and could not be properly used of the Head of the House of Chow before
king Woo :


1 Abundant grow the oaks, and round them rise:
A mass of shrubs, both yielding large supplies.
Of firewood, or to burn or store.
In grace and grandeur shone our prince and king ;
From left and right all haste, and to him cling,


As bent from him to part no more.
19 *


’


292 . THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr ITI.


2 In grace and grandeur shone our prince and king.
At sacrifice his ministers all bring
Their cups, each handle half a mace.
Solemn and grave, on left and right they stand,
And pour libations with a reverent hand ;-—
Well do such men the service grace !


3 Upon the King the"boats are borne along,
As to their oars the rowers bend, and strong
Impel them to their utmost speed.
So marched our king in his avenging wrath,
His six hosts swiftly following on his path ;—
How could his plans fail to succeed ?


4 The Milky way reveals its span on high,
With light and beauty bright’ning all the sky ;~—
Men view it with admiring gaze.
Long lived the king, and lasting influence shed
Throughout the land, where his great son displayed
The glorious issues of his ways.


5 The vessels, formed of metal and of jade,
By graver’s tools are still more precious made ;—
With grace their worth is thus combined.
Unceasing were the labours of our king ;
Hast, west, north, south, his laws and rules shall bring
The reverent homage of each mind.


Vv.


The Han luk; allusive and narrative, IN PRAISE OF THE VIRTUE °
OF KING WAN, BLESSED BY HIS ANCESTORS, AND RAISED TO THE
HIGHEST DIGNITY WITHOUT SEEKING OF HIS OWN,


“We know nothing of the situation of the Han hill. The connexion
generally between the allusive lines and the others is this :—that, as what
is predicated of the things spoken of was natural to them, so were Wan’s
natural qualities favourable to his distinction and advancement.


1 Round the foot of mount Hah
Grow the hazel and thorn.
Self-possession and ease
Did our monarch adorn.
Striving for his height of place,
These around him threw their grace.


€


Bx I. v1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 293


- 2 From the large cup of jade
Fragrant spirits down flow.
Self-possession and ease
Did our prince ever show.
_Could there but on him descend
Rank and blessing without end ?


8 Up to heaven flies the hawk ;
_ _ Fishes spring in the deep.
Self-possession and ease _

Did our prince ever keep.
Grand the influence he shed,
As those virtues he displayed !


4 In the vessel behold
. How his spirits shine clear !
The red bull is ready, -

Nor the knife views with fear.
Thus he paid the sacred rite,
Brighter blessing to invite!

d


5 Oaks and shrubs thickly grow,
Which for firewood men hew.
Self-possession and ease ;
In our prince all could view.
Spirits cheered him in his course,
lerving him with secret force.


6 How the creepers close twine
Round the branches and stems!
Self-possession and ease
' Robed our prince as with gems.
Happiness increased unsought,
Nor by crooked ways was bought.


VI.


The Sze-chae; narrative. Tae VIRTUE OF KING WAN AND ITs
WONDERFUL EFFECTS; WITH THE EXCELLENT CHARACTER OF HIS
MOTHER AND WIFE.


We are not to suppose that, T‘ae-sze had herself 100 sons. She had
ten, we are told; and her freedom from jealousy so encouraged the fruit-
fulness of the harem, that all the sons born in it are ascribed te her, See
on Li. ¥. :


294 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr ITI.


1 T*ae-jin was pure, of rev’rent life,
’ From whom our king Wan sprang.
Fit was she for his father’s wife,
And well she loved Chow Keang.
T*ae-sze inherited her fame ;
Through her an hundred sons there came.


2 Wan formed himself upon his sires,
Nor gave their Spirits pain.
Well pleased were they. -- Next he inspires
His wife. His brethren fain
To follow were. In every State
The chiefs on his example wait.


3 In palace see him,—bland, serene ;
In fane, with rev’rent fear.
Unseen by man, he felt still seon
By Spirits always near.
Unweariedly did he maintain
His virtue pure, and free from stain.


4 Some great calamities there came,
Which he could not control.
But none his generous aim might blame,
Nought darken his bright soul. ,
Untaught, the right he ever saw ;-
Reproof he needed not, nor law.


5 Grown men through him in virtue grew ;
Young men attainments made.
‘Aye to himself our prince was true,
Nor weariness displayed.
His officers acquired great fame ;
To him they owed their deathless name.


vi.


The Hivang e; narrative. SHOWING THE RISE OF THE HOUSE OF
CHOW TO THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE KINGDOM THROUGH THE FAVOUR
oF Gop. THE CASES: AND ACHIEVEMENTS OF KING T‘ak, KING KE,
AND €SPECIALLY OF KING Wan.


King T‘ae is T’an-foo, who was kinged under this style by the duke of
Chow, and stanzas 1 and 2 are descriptive of his settlement in K‘e-chow,
and labours in clearing the country. .Ke was T‘ae’s third son ;—that


¢


Bx I.viz.]  . THE BOOK OF PoETRY. 295.


is the meaning of Ke. There was an elder brother, known as T’aé-
pih, who ought to have succeeded to Tae. The old chief, however, was
so charmed with the precocious virtues of Ch‘ang-afterwards king
Wan-~-the young child of Ke, that he wished the State to fall to Ke, and
throngh him. by and by to Ch‘ang. This could not have been if Tne-pih
had remained in Chow. Ke, his younger brother, would never have con-
sented to take his place. T‘ae-pih on this, seeing their father’s wishes,
fled from Chow altogether, along with his second brother, and settled
among the rude people of what was afterwards the State of Woo, far
away in the south and east of the country. Thus the way was opened
for the purpose of God concerning Wan to take effect, and Ke so con-
ducted himself as to make the act of T’ae-pih appear in its true glory.

In st, 5 we come to Wan, who has now succeeded to his father as lord
of Chow. Meih was a State ruled by K‘eihs,—in the present Tsing-ning
Chow, department P‘ing-léang, Kan-suh, Yuen was a State adjacent to
Meih, and Kung must have been a place or district in it, P

It would appear that after the subjugation of Meih, Win made a tem-
porary changé of his principal dity, but the place to which he moyed.
could not be far from king T'ae’s first settlement in Chow.

Stanzas 7 and 8 describe his subjugation of Ts‘ung, the marquis of
which, we are told by Sze-ma4 Ts‘éen, had slandered’ him to the king of
Shang, who threw him into prison. By and by he was re-instated in his
position as president of the States of the West, with more than his former
powers, and proceeded to deal with the State of Ts‘ung as is here described.


4 .
1 Oh! great is God. His glance on earth He bent,
Scanning our regions with severe intent
For one whose rule the people should content.


The earlier lines of kings had practised ill,
And ruling, ruled not after God’s just will.
He therefore ’mong the States was searching still.


Searching for one in whom He could confide.
From the great States He westward turned aside,
And there a place did for our House provide.


2 Tae then was chief, who made wild nature trim,
And cleared the forest of the rotting limb.
Impervious tracts grew pervious by him.

- He felled and dressed the bosky clumps and rows ;,
He drained the marshes where thé willow grows ;
He thinned the mulberries, rising thick and close.
When this wise chieftain God to Chow had given,
The Kwan hordes fled away, by terror driven ;

And sons came from the wife Tae got from Heaven. ©


296 THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Part II.


8 God looked upon the hills where T‘ae the oak
And thorny shrubs had thinned, and Io! there broke
Paths through the firs, that human feet bespoke.


The State thus founded, God prepared the king, -
And he through T’ae-pih’s flight from Ke shall spring.
T‘ae’s son was Ke, whose praises now I sing.

A younger brother’s heart within him glowed ;

-He to his elder rendered all he owed,

And when he fled, a patriot’s heart Ke showed.


So through his course his brother’s flight appeared:
With glory crowned. Head of the name, Ke reared,
The throne to which Chow’s way ere long was cleared.


4 Gifted was Ke by God with wisdom high.
. His judgments true drew on him every eye ;
With silent growth his fame spread far and nigh.


Most keen, most wise, to yield or to command,
And sway to exercise throughout the land,
He was ’twixt king and chief a powerful band.


His son, king Wan, could all his honours claim,
With virtue pure, beyond the reach of blame.
On him and on his sons God’s blessing came.


ox


God spake to Wan, “ Be thow not like to those,
‘Whose aim now flies to this, to that now goes,
Whose facile wills obey each wind that blows,”


So grandly clomb he to fair virtue’s height.
When rebel Meih dared to dispate his might,
And dared to challenge this great land to fight;


They entered Yuen, and against Kung conspire.
Then rose the king, majestic in his ire,

And sent his troops to make the foe retire ;

His power, as all expected, to display,

And, strength’ning Chow, a deep foundation lay,
On which might rise an universal sway.


for)


Calm in his capital, the king abode.
His troops from utmost Yuen held on their road ;
O’er lofty hills right valiantly they strode,


€


Bx I. vi.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. ‘ 997


The foe could plant no forces on our hills,

Or high or low, nor drink our springs and rills,
Nor touch the pools that trickling brooklet fills.
South of the K‘e, and near the Wei, Wan saw
Large plains, to which the masses he could draw.
There now he dwelt, and to the States gave law.


7 God spake to Wan, “I love your virtue wise
Not blatant-tongued, nor flashed before men’s eyes,
Not seeking fickle change, or rude emprize.
All unpremeditate, and free from art,
It leads you to enact the noblest part,
A pattern king,—according to God’s heart,”
God spake to Wan, “ Straight with your brethren go ;
And ladders take, and engines to bring low
The walls of Ts‘ung, and there defeat the foe.”


8 The warlike engines gently first they ply,
Against the wails of Ts‘ung, walls broad and high,
Hoping the foe would not their power defy.
Captives for question, one by one, were brought ;
The left ears of the slain were slowly sought :-—
So would they wake the foe’s relenting thought.
With the same object,—human life to spare,

‘ To God, and to war’s Sire, Wan sought by prayer
And sacrifice, "Who should resistance dare ?
But Ts‘ung held out. The engines moved along
With all their force against its bulwarks strong,
At which the troops were hurled, one eager throng.
‘Wan razed its walls, and quenched its rites in blood.
The eye could scarcely tell where once it stood.
Throughout the land, all feared his wrathful mood.


VIII.
The Ling tae; narrative. THE JOY OF THE PEOPLE IN THE GROW-
ING OPULENCE AND DIGNITY OF KING WAN,


This piece must be referred to the time when the lord of Chow had
moved his capital to Fung, after the overthrow of Ts‘ung, 2.¢., to B,C, 1133,


’


298 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part IT:


according to the common Chinese chronology. ‘ The wondrous tower,
‘“‘the wondrous park,” and “ the wondrous pond,” are all famous in Ch
nese books ;—see what Mencius says about them, I. i. II.


1 When Wan to build his wondrous tower began,
Of all its plan a scheme he drew.
To do the work, in crowds the people ran,
And as by magic, lo! it grew.
“ Be not in haste : ”—-so kindly said the king,
But all as to a father help would bring.


2 The king was walking in his wondrous park,
Where lay the does; all sleek and clean.
*"Twas sweet to him their restfulness to mark,
And see the white birds’ glistening sheen.
Then to his wondrous pond he took his way,
To view the fish their bounding life display.


3 Right in the middle of a circling pool,
is hall, the place of joy, he reared.
For music there he made provision full.
*Twixt pillars finely carved appeared
Face-boards, with tops of finest tracery,
Neath which large drums and belts were hanging free.


4 On these the blind musicians did their part.
Of lizard skin the drums were made.
The eyeless men displayed consummate art ;
In perfect unison they played.
The music loud resounded through the hall.
What rapture did the festive throng enthral !


TX,


The Héa woo; narrative. IN PRAISE OF KING W00, WALKING IN
THE WAYS OF HIS FOREFATHERS, AND BY HIS FILIAL PIETY SECURING
THE THRONE TO HIMSELF AND HIS POSTERITY. ;


_ I Kings die in Chow, and others rise,
And in their footsteps tread.
Three had there been, and all were wise ;
And still they ruled, though dead.
Tae, Ke, and Wan were all in heaven,
When, Woo to follow them was given.


€


Bx I. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. . 299


2 Yes, Woo to follow them was given.
To imitate his sires,
And to obey the will of Heaven,
He ardently desires.
Through all his course this aim endured,
And this the people’s trust secured.


3 Yes, Woo secured the people’s faith,
And gave to all the law
Of filial duty, which titl death
Shining in him they saw.
Such piety possessed his mind ;
Such pattern did he leave behind.


4 Thus the ene man was Woo,—the One,
The king, whom all did love.
They saw in him the pattern son ;
Such sons to be they strove.
The filial aim in him bright shone ;
Tn him were seen the dead and gone.


5 In Woo his sires were thus brought back.
The kings that from him spring,
Continuing in his steps to walk,
Upon themselves shall bring,
Through myriad years, to Chow still given,
The blessing of impartial Heaven.


6 Ah! yes, Heaven’s blessing will descend,
And men their names shall bless.
Thousands from Chow’s remotest end,
Their praises shall express.
Their sway through myriad years shall last,
Nor helpers fail, strong friends and fast.


x,


The Win wang yéw shing ; narrative to the last stanza, which is allu-
sive. THE PRAISE OF KING WAN AND KING W00:—- HOW THE
FORMER DISPLAYED. HIS MILITARY PROWESS ONLY TO SECURE THE
TRANQUILLITY OF THE PEOPLE; HOW THIS APPEARED IN THE
BUILDING OF FUNG AS HIS CAPITAL CITY; AND HOW THE LATTER
ENTERED, IN HIS CAPITAL OF HAOU, INTO THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE
KINGDOM WITH THR SINCERE GOOD WILL"OF ALL THE PEOPLE,


300 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


Wan’s capital of Fung was, probably, what had been the chief city of
the State of Ts‘ung, mentioned in ode VII. The Fung water lay between
Fung and Woo’s capital of Haou having the former on the west, and
the latter on the east. Haou was a new city, built by Woo, and hence ye
have the account of his divining about the site and the undertaking,
while nothing of the sort is related of Wan in regard to Fung.


1 Oh! the praise of king Wan
Shall for ever endure.
For the people he sought,
How their rest to make sure.
And his work he beheld
Made complete and secure ;
- And our Wan was a sovereign true!


2 ’Twas the gift of high Heaven
That the throne did bestow.:
What success Wan achieved,
When great T's‘ung was laid low!
Fung he called it, and moved
There, his grand state to show ;
And our Wan was a sovereign true !


_ 3 He repaired its old walls,
And the old moat he cleared.
As his sires had oft done,
So his new seat he reared.
Not in haste did he build, —
And the son more appeared ;
And our prince was a sovereign true !


4 Oh! how brightly those walls
Did his merit display !
From all quarters they came,
_ And would not be said nay. .
For to Fung they repaired,
Their true homage to pay ;
And our prince was a sovereign true !


.


5 East from Fung flowed the stream
That the same name did bear.
*Twas the work of great Yu
Made the water flow:there.


Br I. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


And to Fung the States came,
Woo their king to declare ;
And our king was a sovereign true !


6 Then to Haow Woo removed,
And the pool-circled hall
There he built, and received
The submission of all.
East, west, north, and south,
- Him their monarch they call ;
And our king was a sovereign true !,


7 Having thought of the site,
By the shell Woo divined.
As the shell answer gave,
So the site was assigned.
Thus king Woo dwelt m Haou,
Where his city we find;
And our Woo was a sovereign true!


8 Where, the Fung water flows,
_ Is the white millet grown.
In the men Woo employed
How his merit was shown !
- To his sons he would leave
_ . His wise plans and his throne ;
And our Woo was a sovereign true !


301


302 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


BOOK II.


DECADE OF SHANG MIN.


I


The Shang min; narrative. THE LEGEND OF How-rTsETH :—uIs
CONCEPTION ; HIS BIRTH; THE PERILS OF HIS INFANCY; HIS BOYISH
HABITS OF AGRICULEURE ; HIS SUBSEQUENT TEACHING OF AGRICUL-
TURE, AND HIS FOUNDING OF SACRIFICES; THE HONOURS OF SACRI-
FICE PAID TO-HIM BY THR House oF CHow.


" Evidently this piece was designed to do honour to How-tsejh, as the
founder to whom thé princes of the House of Chow traced their lineage ;
+—see the note to I,i.I. After they obtained the sovereignty of the
kingdom, hé was made “the assessor of Heaven’? at the border sacrifice,
as being the one man by whom the benevolent intention of the Supreme
Power for the nourishment of the people by means of the fruits of the
earth had been realized ; and of course he had his*place at certain times
in the seasonal sacrifices.

We really know nothing more about Kéang Yuen than what we are told
in the She. It is assumed that she was a daughter of the House of Tae;
but who her husband was we cannot say; though as the Chow surname
was Ke, he must have been one of the descendants of Hwang-te. What
is said about the circumstances of How-tseih’s conception—-the toe-print
of God, &c.,—is merely the legend intimating that How-tseih’s conception
was preternataral. How-tseih’s name was K‘e, though the two-fold de-
nomjnation, which did not belong to him, till he had grown up, and was
appointed minister of agriculture and lord of Tae, is really equivalent to
a name, and that by which he is known,

Who exposed the child in the manner described in st. 3 we cannot tell,
nor for what reasons he was so exposed. Tae was a principality in the
present district of Woo-kung,. K‘éen Chow, Shen-se, Howetseih would
be invested with it by Yaou, whose minister of agriculture he had become,
about 2300 years B.c.


1 ’Tis to the famed Keang Yuen we trace
The earliest of our favoured race ;
And how this happened, let my verse
The ancient story now rehearse.
With offering pure and sacrifice,
And look directed to the skies,
She prayed that Heaven would take away


c


Bk Il.1] | THE BOOK OF POETRY. 303


The deep reproach that on her lay
Of childless womb ; and then she trod
Upon a toe-print made by God.
Straight, as she rested, she was moved,
And, pregnant now, retirement loved.
A son, How-iseih, ere long appeared,

: Whom with a mother’s care she reared.


bo


Lo! when her carrying time was done,
Came like a lamb this first-born son.
No pains of labour suffered she,—

No hurt, no strain, no injury.

With omen of his future part ;
Did God thus cheer the mother’s heart.
He had accepted in the skies

Her offering and her sacrifice ;—-

And thus it was she bore her son,

And of birth-pangs had suffered none.


3 Once in a narrow lane exposed,
The sheep and oxen round him closed,
And sheltered with their loving care.
Again the woodman found him, where
‘In a wide forest he was placed,
And bore him from. the darksome waste.
On the cold ice exposed once more,
A bird, beneath the child and o’er,
Stretched its great wings. When it took flight,
How-tseih began to wail in fright ; -
And loud and long his cries resound,
Filling the airy region round.


4 When he could only creep, his face
With glance of wisdom beamed, and grace.
When he could feed himself, then fain.
Was he to sow large beans and grain.
His beans with fine luxuriance grow ;
His rows of rice rare beauty show ;
His hemp and wheat adorn the field ;
His gourds abundant produce yield.


5 In husbandry this was his course :-—
Wisely to aid kind nature’s force.
>


»


304 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


He cleared the grass, and ploughed the land,
Where yellow grain should waving stand.
The living germ with care was nurst,

Till from its sheath it nearly burst.

*Twas then as seed Jaid in the ground :—

It sprang, and soon in ear was found.

Strong grew the plant, and fine, and sweet,
Hung down anon, each grain complete.—
Tae’s State to rule for him was meet.


6 There he gave out the beauteous grains :—
Millets,—the black, and. what contains
Two kernels, and tall red, and white.
Largely they planted with delight
The double-kernelled, and the black,
Which, as they reap, they quickly stack.
The red and white their labour share,
But these, when reaped, they homeward bear,
And for the solemn rites prepare.


7 And still those rites we here maintain.
Some in the mortar hull the grain ;
Some take it thence ; then sift it some;
The while fresh treaders constant come.
Washed in the dish with rattling sound,
It is distilled ; the steam floats round.
We fix the day, and then with prayer
And fasting for the rites prepare.

Upon the burning fat we lay Ms
The southerniood, and next essay,
With ram, the Spirit of the way

To please. Fiesh boiled or roast

For representatives we boast.

We with these rites How-tseth revere,
And welcome in the opening year. -


8 The stands of wood and earthenware
Grand store of various offerings bear.
Soon as their fragrant odours rise,

God, pleased, accepts the sacrifice.
Fragrant it is, and timely paid ;—

?Twas How-tseih its foundation laid.
Chow’s lords and kings, down to this time,
Have duly kept the rite sublime. .


Bx I. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 305


The preceding version of this piece, substantially as I have given it,
was sent to me by my nephew in Staffordshire. After I had written it
out, there came another version ,from his brother in Australia, not so
closely adhering to the original text, but otherwise interesting, and
with so many happy touches, that I am glad to append it. ‘


1 The first, born of our people
From the famed Keang Yuen sprang.
“ Rehearse to us her story now,

As ancient poets sang.”

With holy rites and offerings,
She prayed for children dear.

She trod the prints that God had made,
And, resting, felt Him near,

Life’s mystery was kindled,
And'men’s haunts she did shun.

The hero in due time she hore, °
Our How-tseih, her great son.


2 Her circling months completed,

He gently entered life.

She felt no throe nor pang, to mark
Existence’ opening strife.

Thus God foreshowed the wonder,

___ And gave the mother joy.

He had approved her sacrifice,

And sent the gentle boy.


8 Once in a narrow alley,
Before the trampling herd,
They set him, but all-warily
Nor sheep nor oxen stirred.
They placed him in a forest,
But woodmen found him there.
An eagle caught him from the ice,
And bore him through the air.
The gentle bird departed,
How-tseih began to wail.
His cry was loud and long, and rang
Along the forest trail.


4 Majestic, thoughtful aspect,
Marked him ere he could stand.
While other children eat their beans,
With his he sowed the land.
320


4


' VOL, WI,


306:


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part IIL


The beans shot up luxuriant ;
His rice plots graceful sprung ;

His hemp and wheat grew close and strong;
His gourds all heavy hung.


How-tseih, with art sagacious,
Aimed to give nature play.

He only sowed the golden grain,
When weeds were cleared away.

And as it throve, he tilled it,
Till, bursting from the ear,

He ‘cast it ia the ground as seed,
To spring another year.


It sprang with heavy fruitage ;


It waxed both strong and good ;
And then it drooped, each grain complete.—
Soon lord of Tae he stood.


He gave the people millets,—
Single, and double-grained.


_ They sowed it all, red, white, and black,


wv


Till not a seed remained.
The black and double-kernelled
Were stacked where they were grown.
The red and white they homeward bore,
For rites How-tseih made known.


“ Now tell me of the offerings,
In honour to him made.”
Some clean the grain; some pound and sift:
And some upon it tread.
It rattles in the vessels ;
It trickles from the still.
The fragrant steam floats far around,
And all the air doth fill.


_ We ask the mystic oracle ;


O’er night we fast and pray.

Fat burnt with herbs, a ram bleeds for
The Spirit of the way.

The victims’ flesh then roasted,
Or broiled, we reverent dress ;

And thus we hail the coming year,
And God and How-tseih bless.


Bx II. 1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY, 807°
8 We crown the stands with-offerings,—
_ Stands made of earth or wood.
The fragrance rises, floats, ascends,
A savour sweet to God.
Fragrant it is, and timely ;—
_ T'was‘ How-tseih showed the way.
No pious soul has found it vain,
Dowz to this distant day.


TL,


The Hing wei ; allusive and narrative. A FESTAL ODE, CELEBRATING
SOME ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY THE KING TO HIS RELATIVES, WITH
THE TRIAL OF ARCHERY AFTER THE FEAST; CELEBRATING ESPEC]-
ALLY THE HONOUR DONE ON SUCH OCCASIONS TO THE AGED.


1 See how the rushes sprin
Thickly along the way !
Ye browsing herds, no foot
‘Upon those rushes lay !
Grown to their height ere long,
They soft and.rich shall shine.
Close as the rushes grow,
Should brethren all combine.
Let all at feast appear, —-
None absent, none thought mean.
Mats for the young be spread !
On stools let elders lean !


2 Lo! double mats are spread, -
And stools are featly set.
Servants in waiting stand ;
See host and guests are met.
He pledges them ; they him ;
He drinks ; again they fill,
Sauces and pickles come,
Roast meat and broiled; and stil .
Palates and tripe are brought.
Then lutes and drums appear.
Singers fine concord make ;-——
The joyous feasters hear.


308 > THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


8 The feasting o’er, from bow,
Lacquered and strong and bright,
Four well-poised shafts each sends,
That in the target light.
The guests are ranged as they
_ The mark have nearest hit.
They shoot again; the shafts
Are fairly lodged in it.
Their bearing then is judged ;
Each takes his final place,
‘As mild propriety ;
Fas round him thrown its grace.


4 The long-descended king
Prosiies, and ends the feast.
With spirits sweet and strong
From vase he cheers each guest.
And for the old he prays,
While all with rapture glow,
That they the wrinkled back
And whitening hair may show ;
Striving with mutual help
In virtue’s onward ways,
And brightest happiness
Thus crown their latest days.


Til,


The Ke tsuy ; narrative. RESPONSIVE TO THE LAST ;—THE UNCLES
AND BROTHERS OF THE KING EXPRESS THEIR SENSE OF HIS KIND-
NESS, AND THEIR WISHES FOR HIS HAPPINESS, MOSTLY IN THE WORDS
IN WHICH THE PERSONATORS OF THE DEAD HAD CONVEYED THE
SATISFACTION OF HIS ANCESTORS WITH THE SACRIFICE OFFERED TO
THEM AND PROMISED TO HIM THEIR BLESSING,


1 You gave us of the brimming cup,
And crowned us with your grace.
Great king, for ever may you live
With brightening happiness!


2 You gave us of the brimming cup,
And dainty viands spread.
May you, great king, for eyer live !
Your splendour neyer fade! ~


c


Beg IL 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 309


3. Yea, perfect may your wisdom be,.
Achieving its high aim !
“First ends in last ; last springs from first 5”
Revealed, that message came.


4, What said the message from your sires ?
“Vessels and gifts are clean ;
And all your friends, assisting you,
Behave with reverent mien.


5 “Most reverently you did your part,
And reverent by your side
Your son appeared. On you henceforth
Shall ceaseless blessings bide.


6 “ What shall the ceaseless blessing be ?”
That in your palace high
For myriad years you dwell i in peace,
Rich in posterity.


“What of the sons shall from you flow ?
Through you, thus blessed of Heaven,
Those myriad years of royal sway
Shall to your sons be given.


8 “ And whence shall come that lustrous race ?
From your heroic wife.

_ From her shall come the line of sons
To live again your life.”


Vv.


The Hoo ¢; allusive, AN ODE, APPROPRIATE TO THE FEAST GIVEN
TO THE PERSONATORS OF THE DEPARTED, ON THE DAY AFTER THE
‘SACRIFICE IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE,


There was a supplementary repetition of the sacrifices on the day after
the more solemn service; and at the close, all the representatives or per-
sonators of the Spirits on the preceding day were feasted, as they had not
been at the feast with which its proceedings had been wound up. The
materials of the feast, Choo says, were the remains of the sacrifice of the
previous day, warmed up again.

The birds are spoken of as on the King, in consequence. of the nearness
of that river to the capital,


310 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr ITI,


1 How the flocks of the wild-ducks and widgeons play,
As they now skim the King, and now seek their prey!
How happy the birds! And not less joy inspires
Those who yesterday played the part of your sires.
Your viands are fragrant; your spirits are clear.
‘They feast and they drink ; and all happy appear.
Complete is the honour you render them here!


2 The wild-ducks and widgeons now see on the sand,
As along the King’s banks they move or they stand !
How happy the birds! And now here, as their due,
Those who sat,as your sires are feasted by you.
Abundant your’spirits, your viands are good.

They feast and they drink in their happiest mood.
Ne’er before on the summit of honour théy stood.


8 Round the islets the wild-ducks and widgeons fly,
And on the land settle with loud scream and cry.
How happy the birds! And with joy those are filled,
Who with fathers long gone were yesterday thrilled.

. Your viands are sliced, and your spirits are strained.
They feast and they drink, with new happiness gained
From this glory they now from you have obtained.


4 The wild-ducks and widgeons behold on the wing,
Where their tribute the streamlets pay to ‘the King! »
How happy the birds! And how honoured are those, ,
In whom your sires yesterday found their repose !
The feast in the ancestral temple is spread,

Where blessing and dignity most are conveyed,
Of each feaster what happiness now crowns the head!


5 Where the stream through the ‘rocks its way seems to

. forge, :
Many wild-ducks and widgeons rest in the gorge.
How happy the birds! As complacent are they,
Through whom your great fathers their will did convey.
Your exquisite spirits, your meat broiled and roast,
That they have partaken those feasters can boast.
Henceforth shall their minds by no troubles be tossed}


Bs IL. v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY, sli


“vy


The Kéa toh; narrative. IN PRAISE OF SOME KFNG,—-PERHAPS KING
CHING,—-WHOSE VIRTUE SECURED TO HIM THE FAVOUR OF HEAVEN;
AUSPICING FOR AIM ALL HAPPINESS, AND ESPHCIALLY A LINE OF DIS-
TINGUISHED POSTERITY. PROBABLY THE RESPONSE OF THE PERSONA-
TORS OF THE DEPARTED TO THE PRECEDING PIECE.


1 What brilliant virtue does our king,
Whom all admire and love, display !
People and officers all sing
The praise of his impartial sway.
Heaven to his sires the kingdom gave,
And him with equal favour views.
Heaven’s strength and aid will ever save
The throne whose grant it oft renews.


2 By virtue sought, fresh honours shine ;
All other pleases follow sure.
* Admired and.reverent, lo! his line
Through myriad ages shall endure.
From error free, to duty true,
They rule the States, they fill the throne.
Nor shall they fail with homage due
The olden statutes aye to own.


3 A bearing high and self-restrained ,

May they in all their conduct show !
And thus their virtuous fame unstained

With lapse of time still brighter grow !
From jealousies and envies free,

May they advance the good to place !
And blessings, boundless in degree,

Their rule through all our regions grace!


4, When so those sons of Heaven shall sway,

Nor greater cares their care withdraw

From smallest things, friends shall obey,

. And find repose beneath their law.

Love shall around them cast its chain,
Kings who not idly fill their seat.

The people restful peace shall gain,
And each king with their praises greet. .


812 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr II,


VI.


The Kung Léw ; narrative. THE STORY OF DUKE LEW :—HOW HE
MADE His FIRST SETTLEMENT IN PIN, BUILDING THERE, LAYING OUT
THE GROUND, FORMING ARMIES, ARRANGING FOR A REVENUE, TIL! EVEY
PIN BECAME TOO SMALL FOR ALL HIS PEOPLE.


I call this the story of duke Léw, instead of legend, as in the case of
what we are told about How-tseih in the first piece of this Book, because
the events reJated in it are not of the same marvellous character, There
is prokably an element of history in them ; but, when we compare what
is said here of his doings and of the growth of Pin with the intima-
tions as to the.condition of the settlement and the people in the time of
T‘an-foo, as we have them in the 8rd ode of the first Book, it is evident
that what we have here are mainly pictures of fancy. Who shall gather
out the grains of ore from the rubbish in which they are imbedded?

The composition of the piece is ascribed to duke K‘ang of Shaou,—the
famous Shih of the Shoo. He made it, we are told, for the young king
Ching, when he undertook the duties of the government, to remind him
of the devotion to the people, and to the business of the people, which
characterized his great ancestor.

Where did Léw come from to Pin? According to Maou, he was living
previously in T‘ae, the principality with which How-tseih was invested,
and was driven out of it at a time when the rule of Héa was in great
disorder. This is contrary to the generally received view, which I have
given on the title of Book i, Pt I. According to that, Puh-chueh, the
grandfather of Léw, was obliged to fly from the Héa, or middle kingdom
of that time, altogether, and take refuge among the wild tribes of the
north and west. Puh-chueh, again, is said to have been the son of How-
tseih, whose great-grandson Léw would thus be. This could not be, if
the standard chronology is anything nearly correct in fixing the settlement
of Pin in B.C. 1796. It places K‘e’s—How-tseih’s—investiture with Pae
in 8.0, 2276, so that from him to his great-grandson a period of 480 years
elapsed, during which there had been the reigns of Shun, and of Yu and
19 of his descendants, besides an interregnum of 40 years, I must be-
lieve—if belief a¢ all can be spoken of in such # case—that one of K'e’s
descendants had taken refuge among the uncivilized people in the west,
not far from Pin, and that Léw, one of his descendants again, came forth
from among them, moving in the direction of the east, towards the end
of the Héa dynasty.

The valleys of Hwang and Kwo I have not found exactly identified.
The Juy rises on the north-west of mount Woo, and flows east, till it joins
the King.


1 Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his people’s good alone inspired.
In their old seat no longer could he rest ;

Its narrow limits forced him from the west.
* The produce of the many fields he reaps ;
What can be spared, in store he safely keeps.


Bx If. vi.) THE BOOK OF POETRY. 318


Here in.the barn, there in the field, it lies ;

His forethought then wrapper and sack supplies,
This hoard of grain and dried meat to contain,
When they should move, a glorious fame to gain.
Then ready further with his weapons all,
Bows, atrows, shields, spears, axes great and small,
His people to the march he forth did call,


2 Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his people’s good atone inspired.
O’er all the plain he ranged with eager eye,
But could not space for thronging erowds descry.
In pity for the numbers thus confined,
He told to atl the measure in his mind.
Loth to abandon their much-loved repose,
At first, but not for long, their murmurs rose,
Each lofty hill-top now the duke ascends ;
Back to the plains he comes, and eastward bends
His course. Lo! at his girdle-pendant seen,
The jade, and gems of yaou, emit their sheen !

- Sheathed in its glittering scabbard hangs the sword,

That safety from the foeman shall afford.


3 Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his people’s good alone inspired.
To Pin now come, where gush the hundred springs,
His followers all about him there he brings.
Round him there lay the bright ¢nd ample plain ;
He climbs a ridge, a'wider view to gain.
Behold ! a spacious table-land he spies,

Where his new settlement may well arise.

For multitudes large space could be assigned,
And immigrants still room for booths would find.
Here then he dwelt, and would his plans unfold ;
Here counsel took, and heard what others told.


4, Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his people’s good alone inspired.
When on the height his rest he thus had found,
His officers aj] stand in state around.

The mats are spread, with stools upon them set ;
Both old and young, they here are joyous met.
’


O14 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


From herd-and pen the victims both are killed ;
Dried gourds for eups are with the spirits filled.
So does the duke his friends and chieftains feast;
Him as their lord and ruler hails each guest.


& Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his people’s good alone inspired.
When now his bounds extended far and wide,
He marked the shadows, thereby to decide
The east and west, the north and south, all round.
He clomb the ridges, and, observing, found
What tracts were in the light, what in the shade.
The springs and streams he carefully surveyed.
Three armies of defence were made.’ Each plain
And marsh was measured ; and to till the grain
An equal system framed: the farmers wrought,
And shared the produce, after they had brought
The fair proportion fer himself he sought.

West of the hills the land he also tilled,
And grandly Pin with men and wealth was filled.


6 Duke Lew we sing, with generous ardour fired,
Whose breast his peopte’s good alone inspired.
At first rude homes their purpose served in Pin;
Ere long the ‘Wei in boats he crossed, to win
Whetstones and iron. Dwellings now they rear,
And make-shift huts before them disappear.
The ‘houses good, their boundaries well defined,
The people multiply, and fortune kind
Attends their course. ‘The vale of Hwang taey fill
On either side. The Kwo vale then they till.
Still grow their numbers ; through'the Juy they go;
Tracts widely spread now Lew’s dominion know.


‘


VIL


The Héung choh; allusive, THE MOST UNLIKELY THINGS MAY BY
HUMAN INGENUITY BE MADE USEFUL; HOW MUCH MORE SHOULD 4
SOVEREIGN FULFIL THE DUTIES OF HIS POSITION! ©


This piece, like the last, and also the one that follows, are attributed to
the duke of Shgou,—made by him for the admonition of . king Ching,


€


Br II. viti.] THE BOOK OF POETRY 315


1 Bring water from the distant pool,
And let it settle in a jar.
Millet or rice ’twill steam—such use
May come from things that paltry are.
You are our happy, courteous king ;
On you.a noble duty lies.
Father and mother, joined in one,
With. all the people sympathize !


2 Bring water from the distant pool,
And let it settle in a jar.
A spirit-vase ’twill wash ;—such use
May come from things that paltry are.
You are our happy, courteous Lae
Born sabject to a noble law.
Like centre to which all should turn,
"$0 you the people ever draw.


3 Bring water from the distant pool,
And let it settle in a jar.
All things twill serve to cleanse ;-such use
May come from things that paltry are.
You are our happy, courteous king,
Set to fulfil a noble end.
The centre in,which all have rest,
‘The people’s hearts to you should tend.


VII.


The Keuen o; narrative, with allusive portions. ADDRESSED BY THE
DUKE OF SHAOU TO KING CHING, DESIRING FOR HIM LONG PROSPERITY,
AND CONGRATULATING HIM, IN ORDER TO ADMONISH HIM, ON THE
HAPPINESS OF HIS PEOPLE, AND THE NUMBER OF HIS ADMIRABLE
OFFICERS,


The phoenix is among birds what the Re-lin of I. i. XI, is among .
quadrupeds. a


1 The south wind swept across the hill;
lis whistling sound each nook did fill.
Our happy, courteous king
Was there, and, as he roamed about,
Tn tuneful notes his joy gave out.
Then I began to sing,


316


THE BOOK OF POETRY.. [Parr IIL


2.“ You roam, with jocund spirits blest,


lee)


And now, serene, at ease you rest,
O happy, courteous king !

May you your destined years fulfil,

And, like your noble fathers still,
Life to good issue bring !


“* How vast and glorious is your realm,
Where peace sits steadfast at the helm,
O happy; courteous lord !
May you your destined years complete,
While ever as their host you treat
All Spirits at your board !


“ Heaven to your sires assigned the crown,
To you ’mid greatest peace come down,

O happy, courteous king!
Through all your term of years, may joy
And happiness without alloy,

Their charm around you fling!


“Men filial proved, and virtuous, stand
Near to your throne on éither hand,
Wise guidance to afford.
Like wings they bear you up on high,
Where you their pattern all descry,
O happy, courteous lord !


“Like mace of jade, pure, clear, and strong,
What majesty and grace belong
To those, your helpers true !
The hope of all, their praise all sing.
Through them, O courteous, happy king,
The nation’s guide are you.


“See low the phenixes appear, .

And their wings rustle on the ear,
As now they settle down!

Such are those noble men who wait,

O happy king, upon your state,
The servants of your crown!


“The male and female phonix, lo!


With rustling wings about they go,
Then up to heaven they soar.


Bx IL. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. . - $17


Such are those noble men who stand,
Prompt to obey your least command ;~-
None love your people more.


9 “ Hark how the phcenixes emit
Their notes, as on that ridge they sit!
There the dryandras grow,
And on its eastern. slope they. rise
With richer growth; and thence the cries
Sweet and still sweeter flow !


10 “ Numerous your chariots! Fleet your steeds,
And trained! Your name for noble deeds
Shall be renowned for long.
O king, these verses I have made,
And humbly at your feet they’re laid, ‘
Inspired by your own song.”


TX,


The Afin laow; uarrative.” IN A TIME OF DISORDER AND SUFFERING,
SOME OFFICER OF DISTINCTION CALLS UPON HIS COLLEAGUES TO JOIN
WITH HIM TO EFFECT A REFORMATION IN THE CAPITAL, AND PUT
AWAY THE PARTIES, ESPECIALLY FLATTERING PARASITES, WHO WERE
THE CAUSE OF THE PREVAILING MISERY,


The Preface assigns the composition of the piece to duke Muh of
Shaou, a descendant of duke K‘ang, to whom the three preceding pieces
areascribed. It further says that he made it to reprehend king Le (B.c.
877-825). This then is the first of the “ Major Odes of the Kingdom,
Degenerate.” But the reprehending of the king is needlessly tacked on
toit. ~


1 Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
But we perchance may give them some relief.
This ig the nation’s heart.—-Show kindness here,
And through our regions peace will re-appear.
On wily flatterers look with angry frown,
Thus warning those who conscience do not own.
With fierce oppressors deal by strictest law,
Till of Heaven’s will they learn to stand in awe.
Gentle to men from far, assist those near ;—
So shall the king be strong, with nought to fear.


318. | THE BOOK OF POETRY. - {Parr IIL

2 Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,

But we perchance may give them some relief.
This is the nation’s heart.—Here kindness show,
And hither all will come with constant flow.

On wily flatterers look with angry scorn ;—

. Lo! noisy braggarts of their pride are shorn.
The fierce oppressors with strong hand repress ;-—
This course the people’s sufferings shall redress,
What service you have done, keep on to do ;—
So shall the king enjoy his rest through you.


3 Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
But we perchance may give them some relief.
Show kindness here.—This is the nation’s heart ;-—
Repose will spread from this to every part.
The indignant face to wily flatterers show,
Thus awing those whose deeds no limits know.
The fierce oppressors check with firmest will,
So hindering them from acting out their ill.
Then let us keep ourselves with reverent care,
And to the virtuous for their help repair.


4 Yes, burdened sore, the peopte live in grief,
But we perchance may give them some relief.
This is the nation’s heart.—Show kindness here,
And thus dispel the people’s anxious fear.
To wily flatterers no indulgence give,
‘Thus warning all who but for evil live.
The fierce oppressors with strong hand keep dows,
That so the right no more be overthrown.
As children, for such trust unfit are you,
But vast the service which you haye to do!


5 Yes, burdened sore, the people live in grief,
But we perchance may give them some relief.
Show kindness here.-—This is the nation’s heart ;—
So shall you soothe and heal the people’s smart.
View wily flatterers with indignant eye,
And from the court the parasites will fly.
’Gainst fierce oppressors wage determined fight,
And thus from vile reversal save the right.
The king us all as priceless jade would prize ;-~
Thus therefore I reprove you and advise.


c
c


Br Il. x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 319


xX,


The Pan; narrative. AN OFFICER OF EXPERIENCE MOURNS OVER
THE PREVAILING MISERY; COMPLAINS OF THE WANT OF SYMPATHY
WITH HIM SHOWN BY OTHER OFFICERS, ADMONISHES THEM, AND SETS
FORTH THE DUTY REQUIRED OF THEM, ESPECIALLY IN THE ANGRY
MOOD IN WHICH IT MIGHT BE: SUPPOSED THAT HEAVEN WAS, .


1 Reversed is now the providence of God ;—
The lower people groan beneath their load..
The words you speak,—how far from right are they !
The plans you form no reach of thought display.
“ Sages are not, no guidance have we here!” -
So say you, but your words are not sincere.
Through this your plans are narrow and confined ;—
' I therefore warn you, and speak out my mind.


2 Calamities Heaven now is sending down ;—~
Be not complacent, but the crisis own.
Such movements now does angry Heaven produce ;—
Be not indifferent and your trust abuse.
If in your counsels harmony were found,
The people’s hearts in union would be bound.
If to speak kind and gentle words you chose,
How soon would these their restless minds cqmpose !


3 You have your duties; mine are not the same.
King’s servants all,—such is our common name.
I come your comrade, with you to advise,
But you resent it, and my words despise.
Urgent the matters I would fain submit !
O think them not for laughter matters fit !
Remember what in days of old they spake :—
“With grass and fuel-gatherers counsel take.”


4, Heaven now exerts a fierce and cruel sway ;—
Is this a time your mockeries to display ?
I’m old, but speak with tongue that never lied,
While you, my juniors, are puffed up with pride.
Never a word of age have I expressed,
But saddest themes you make a theme for jest.
The troubles soon like blazing fires shall rage,

' Beyond our power to lessen or assuage.


320 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IIT.


5 Heaven now regards us with its blackest scowl ;—
Boast not yourselves, nor try men to cajole.
Good men who see your reason thus 0’ercome,
Like those who personate the dead, are dumb.
The land with sighs and groans the people fill, ,
Yet we dare not attempt to probe their il.
The wild disorder all their means devours,
But they know not one kindly act of ours.


6 You. hear the whistle ; straight the flute you hear ;—
Heaven’s slightest touch the people quick revere.
As one half mace you on the other lay ;

As something light you touch and bring away ;
An easier task you could not undertake :—
Think it not hard the people good to make.
Perversities they have, and not a few ;-—

* Perversity of yours let them not view.


7 Men of great virtue like a fence are found ;
The multitudes, as walls, the king surround.
Great States the kingdom from barbarians shield;
Great families, as bulwarks, safety yield.
The cherishing of virtue gives repose ;
The king, by brethren guarded, laughs at foes.
Let not the strong wall crumble in the dust ;
Let not our king have none in whom to trust.


8 The wrath of Heaven revere with trembling awe ;—
From it let no vain sport your thoughts withdraw.
Revere Heaven’s changing moods with fear profound, .
And, thoughtful, fly from pleasure’s whirling round.
Great Heaven on you its clearest glance directs,
And all your doings carefully inspects.

Far sees great Heaven with its all-piercing eye ;—
And watches you amid your revelry.


Be IIL 1) THE BOOK OF POETRY. 321


BOOK III.


. DECADE OF TANG,


THIs Book is caled a decade like the others, but it really contains
eleven pieces, The Chinese critics say nothing, so far as 1 know, on this
anomaly,


IL


The Tang ; narrative. WARNINGS ADDRESSED TO KING LE ON THE
ISSUES OF THE COURSE WHICH HE WAS PURSUING, SHOWING THAT
THE MISERIES OF THE TIME, AND THE IMMINENT DANGER OF RUIN,
WERE TO BE ATTRIBUTED, NOT TO HEAVEN, BUT TO HIMSELE AND
HIS MINISTERS. -


This piece, like the 9th of the last Book, is assigned to duke Muh of
Shaou, ‘The structure of it is peculiar, for, after the first stanza, we have
king Wan introduced, delivering his warnings to Show, the last king of
the Shang or Yin dynasty. The matter of the piece suits only Le and
Yéw of all the kings of Chow within the period embraced in the She.
Le, it was hoped, would transfer the figure of Show to himself, and alter
his course, so ag to avoid a similar ruin.

The sovereign of Héain the last stanza is the tyrant Kéeh (3.0, 1847—
1764). King Le was to look to Show as his beacon, as Show might
have looked to Kéeh, :

What the “demon lands” in st, 6 were we cannot tell, The same
phrase occurs in the Yih King. So early had the Chinese begun to
apply this opprobrious name to countries beyond their own.


1 How great is God, who ruleth men below !
In awful terrors now arrayed,
His dealings seem a recklessness to show,
From which we shuddering shrink, dismayed.
But men at first from Heaven their beng drew,
With nature liable to change.
All hearts in infancy are good and true,
But time and things those hearts derange.


2 Thus to the tyrant Show our king Wan said :—
“Alas! alas! O king of Yin,
To you the proud oppressors give their aid,
And ’gainst you fierce exactors sin !


VOL, II. 7 921 ’


322 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr If.


Why call such men your offices to hold ?
O’er your affairs why such men set ?
* Heaven made them thus, so insolent and bold!’
But ’tis from you their strength they get.”


8 Thus to the tyrant Show our king Wan said :—

« Alas! alas! Yin’s king so great,

You honour not the good, but in their stead
Oppressors whom the people hate.

To you with baseless stories they reply,
And thieves and robbers by them stand.

Their oaths and maledictions fiercely fly,
Ceaseless and deep, throughout the land.”


4 Thus to the tyrant Show our king Wan said :—

“ Alas! alas! O king of Yin,

Fierce is your will, here in the court displayed,
And only hatred thus you win.

Your proper virtue you have never sought,
And thus none good surround your throne.

Of what true virtue is you take no thought,
Hence are your nobles worthless known.”


5 Thus to the tyrant Show our king Wan said :—

“ Alas! alas! Yin’s king so yreat,

‘Not Heaven, but spirits, flush your face with red,
That evil thus you imitate.

You do in all your conduct what is wrong.
Darkness to you the same as light,

Your noisy feasts and revels you prolong; |

And day through you is black as night.”


6 Thus to the tyrant Show our king Wan said :—

“Alas! alas! O king of Yin,

Round you it is as if cicadas made,
And bubbling soup, their ceaseless din.

Things, great and small, fast to perdition go,
While you pursue your reckless game.

Our Middle States with indignation glow;
The Demon lands as loudly blame.”


7 Thus to the tyrant Show. our king Wan said :—
* Alas! alas! O Yin’s great king,


€


Bx Il. 1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 823


’Tis Yin, not God, has caused this time of dread,
Yin that old ways away would fling.

Old men and wise may not give you their trust,
But statutes and old laws remain.

Now is Yin’s fortune crumbling to the dust,
Because obedience you disdain.”


8 Thus to the tyrant Show king Wan did speak :—

“ Alas! alas! O king of Yin,

For Yin its beacon was not far to seek ;—~
In Hea’s last king its light was seen.

True is the lesson in the saying taught :-—
‘While leaf and branch still vigorous grow,

A treo may fall. And what that fall has wrought ?
Its roots uptorn the cause will show.’ ”


Ir


The Yih; narrative, excepting st. 9, which is allusive. CONTAINING .
VARIOUS COUNSELS WHICH DUKE Woo oF WEI MADE TO ADMONISH
HIMSELF, WHEN HE WAS OVER HIS NINETIETH YEAR ;—ESPECIALLY
ON THE DUTY OF A RULER TO BE CAREFUL OF HIS OUTWARD DE-
MEANOUR, AND TO RECEIVE WITH DOCILITY INSTRUCTIONS DELIVERED
TO HIM.


Ode VI. in the 7th Book of last Part is also attributed, we saw, to the
same duke Woo, and there is a remarkable similarity in the structure
of the two pieces and in many of the phrases. Especially do there ap-
pear in both the duty of attending to the outward deportment, and the
way in which that is liable to be disordered by drunkenness. The
authority for attributing the composition of the piece to duke Woo is the
statement of the Preface, and an article in the “ Narratives of the States,”
--a Work often ascribed to the author of the Tso-chuen. This article
relates how Woo, at the age of 95, insisted on his ministers and. officers
being instant, in season and out of season, to admonish him on his con-
duet ; and concludes by saying that “he made the warnings of the Z to
admonish himself.” The ZH is taken, correctly, I believe, to be only
another name for the Yih.

Thus the speaker throughout the piece is Woo, and the ‘ young son,”
whom he sometimes addresses, is himself also. The conception of the
writer in taking such a method to admonish himself is almost unique ;
and the execution of it is successful.


1 Outward demeanour, cool and grave,
Reveals who inward virtue have.
People in common parlance say,

* Wise men stupidity display.”
y * 2s


3


2


4,


2


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IIT.


Not so. For dulness where you find,
*Fis from defect within the mind ;
And if a wise man dull appear,

He wrongs his native character.


What’s mightiest is—the man to be.
This powerful everywhere we see.


‘Where from true virtue actions spring,


All their obedient homage bring.

Whose views are great, and fixed his aims ;
Who in due time his will proclaims ;

Whose plans reach far; whose reverent care
His outward bearing shall declare :—

Him a true chief the people call,

And hailed his pattern is by all.


Look at the present state of things !
Your conduct only chaos brings.
Low in the dust your virtue lies,

A drunken sot whom men despise
You seize.the joy before you brought,
And give not to the past a thought,
Oh! bear in mind the kings of old,
And strive their statutes fast to hold.


See whom great Heaven condemns! As flow
The waters from their spring, they go

To ruin all—This lesson know.

Rise early, and go late to sleep ;

Sprinkled and swept your court-yard keep ;—
Thus to your people pattern be.

Well to your steeds and chariots see ;

Aud bows and shafts, and weapons all,

Have ready at a moment’s call.

So shall you stand prepared for war,.

And keep the southern hordes afar.


What officers and people need,

Give to them, both by word and deed.
Your princely duties do with care ;
Of dangers unforeseen beware.


Bx IIT. w] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


for)


7


foo)


Be circumspect in all you say,

And reverent bearing still display,

From censure free of man or child,
Attractive ever, ever mild.

A flaw in mace of white jade may

By patient toil be ground away.

But for a flaw we make in speech
What,can be done? ’Tis past our reach.


Words are your own. To speak be slow.
Say not, “’Tis but a word.” No, no!


There’s none for you your tongue can guard.


O’er it yourself keep watch and ward.
Answers to every word will leap ; av
Good deeds their recompense shall reap
If friends from you with kindness meet,
And subjects as your sons you treat,
Your line from age to age shall live,
And subjects strict obedience give.


When mingling with superior men,

In friendly intercourse, oh! then

How mild your face! what harmony!
All wrong and error how you flee!
When in your chamber, ‘neath its light,


Your conscience keep as pure and bright.


Say’ not, ‘“ No one ¢an see me here;
The place is secret.” Be in fear.

The Spirits come, but when and where
No one beforehand can declare.

The more should we not Spirits slight,
But ever feel as in their sight. ,


O prince, a virtuous course pursue,
In manner good, and fair, and true,


. Keep on your acts a watchful eye ;


Thus may you scrutiny defy!

Exceed not, break not, virtue’s lay ;—
So shall you men’s attention draw,
Their pattern prized, and free from flaw.
A peach one throws me; in return |

I give a plum. Please here discern


8


5


326 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IIt


Cause and effect together bound,

In certain sequence ever found.

Seek horns on lamb! It has not horns.
Your sense, my son, such seeking scorns.


9 When wood is tough, and full of spring,
It makes the bow with silken string.
Mildness and reverence base supply
For virtue’s structure, broad and high.
I tell the wise man what is good ;—
He-does it straight in docile mood. .

I tell the fool, and forthwith he
Denies its truth indignantly.

Such differences in men we find;
So wide apart is mind from mind !


10 Ere you knew right from wrong, my son,
I held your hand, and led you on,
Showing what things were good, what bad ;—
Such lessons from my lips you had. ,
And lest you should not clearly hear,
Theld you gently by the ear.
A son since then your arms has filled ;
And have you still a mind unskilled ?
Tis self-sufficiency deth hold
The early taught still dark when old.


11 Before great Heaven’s clear piercing eye

My life seems vain; its pleasures die.
Foolish and dark you still remain,

» Wringing my heart with constant pain.
I taught you well; I never tired ;—
My teaching but contempt inspired.
“Your teacher? No, I was your bore;
You only shrank from me the more.
Ah! still the truth you do not know, e
Though years have made your hair like snow.


12 My son, thus plainly have I told
What sages’ taught in days of old.
Give to my counsels reverent heed ;—
So shall you shun each guilty deed.
Lo! Heaven in anger seems to threat
With utter overthrow our State. ¢


C


Bx IIL. m1.) THE BOOK OF POETRY, 327


Not from a distance need we draw
The proofs of Heaven’s avenging law.
Great Heaven is far too wise to err.
If lower sink your character,

And virtue still the less you show,
Your people you will plunge in woe.


mL


The Sang yéw ; metaphorical, narrative, and allusive. THE EARL OF
JUY MOURNS OVER THE DISORDER AND MISERY OF THE TIMES, WITH
A VIEW TO REPREHEND THE MISGOVERNMENT OF KING LE,—ESPE-
CIALLY HIS OPPRESSIONS AND LISTENING TO BAD COUNSELLORS.


The composition of the piece is assigned to an earl of Juy, on the
authority of the Preface, and of the Tso-chuen, An earl of Juy is men-
tioned in the Book of Histery, V. xxii, and others occur subsequently in
history, Tso-she, under the first year of duke Wan, quotes the first line
of stanza 12, as from “the Ode of Léang-foo of Juy.”

In st, 7 we have a point of time indicated clearly enough,—in the
statement about “a kingless throne.” This ig explained by all the critics
of the dethronement (in effect) of Le in B,¢, 841, to which reference has
been made in a previous note.


1 See the luxuriant mulberry tree,

That threw far reund its leafy shade,

Now by rude hands—sad sight to see !
Stript of its leaves, a ruin made.

So on our multitudes descends
Oppression’s fierce and ruthless hand,

My heart beneath its sorrow bends.
Great Heaven, take pity on the land !


2 Eager and strong, the war-steeds prance ;
Falcon and other banners fly.
Bristles the land with spear and lance ;
Wasted and peeled our regions lie.
Disorder grows, and peace is fled ;
Where is the black-haired race of yore ?
Beneath the sky with ruin red
Chow’s kingdém sinks to rise no more.


3 Who can arrest the march of fate ?
Heaven nurtures not, but glows with ire.
No town presents a sheltering gate ;
Where can our hurrying feet retire ?
’
>


328 THE BOOK OF POETRY. > [Parr IT,


.When good men, sons of peace, bear sway,
‘" They smooth and knit the social state.
They are not here ;-«who paved the way
‘For those through whom come strife and hate ?


‘4 Sore anguish, dwells within my heart ;
I brood upon the country’s woes.“ _
‘ Why was I born to have my part ie

Now when great Heaven its anger shows ?

Throughout our coasts, from east to west,

. No quiet resting-place is found.

I wander, desolate, distressed,
And troubles rave, our borders round.


5 You plan, O king, and caution use?
___ Lo! growing ills, dismembered land!
Your great concern should be to choose
The best, around your throne to stand.
Be this your way! What burns and glows,
Ere used, you in the water cool.
How can your methods bring repose ?
Ruin awaits you, and your rule.


°6 One struggles on against the wind,

With breathless effort,—all in vain.

So they who fain would serve thee find
A baffling force, and hittle gain.

They till the fields who might have shone
High in official rank and power ;

For now, ambition’s impulse gone,
They sow and reap, and seek no more.


7 Heaven thus inflicts death and unrest ;
And lo! we see a kingless throne !
And still there comes the insect pest,
_ And farmers’ hopes are overthrown.
_ Woe! woe to our great central land !
For all in peril heaves my sigh.
Bereft of strength, I sadly stand,
And silent view the vault on high.


8 See here a ruler, firm and good,
‘Whom chiefs and people all revere !


Br II. ur] te «Boor oF roerry, 829


He keeps his heart ; his plans are shrewd ;
He seeks for helpers far and near.’ +

See there one of a different) kind,’ * ‘
Who thinks none b&t himself is wise

Within his narrow range confined,
His.actions only cause surprise. a


9 Lo! ’mongst the trees, the herds of deer
* _ In concord roam throughout the wood.
With us all friends are insincere ;

None cultivate the faithful mood.
* Advance! Retreat!” thus people say ;
“ There’s equal danger either way.”


10 Here is a sage! His views and speech
Ge far beyond the present time.
There is a fool! With narrow reach,
His smallest thoughts he counts sublime.
All this before I could have told.
Oh! why did fear my tongue withhold ?


11 The good man see! His way is barred ;
He pines unused, or dwells unsought.
See now the man whose heart is hard !
He’s courted, and to honour brought.
Such government disorder breeds ;
‘The people haste to evil deeds.


12 From the large valleys come the winds;
There they collect, and thence they blow.
And thus the virtuous man one finds
_ Doing what’s good ;—he must act so.
But he, whose nature scorns the right,
His nature vile, ’gainst good will fight.


18 By force of nature blows the wind ;
So men of greed will strive for pelf.
Would he but hear; I’d speak my mind ;—
As drunk, IT mutter to myself.
He will not use the good ; and I
Deplore his course with moan and sigh,


330 ‘THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IIT,


14 Ah! friends, these lines, I know full well,
Will only wake your angry thought ;
But random shot may sometimes tell,
And bird on wing be hit and caught.
Your good, and that alone, I seek,
Howe’er your anger you may wreak,


15 Those hypocrites, adepts in lies,
Produce the chaos of the land.
The more one’s weak, the more he plies
Whatever strength he can command.
The people hopelessly perverse !
Tis their vile work has wrought this curse.


16 The people show unrest,-because
Those artful villains on them prey.
They listen to you with applause ;
- Behind your back what’s bad they say.
Ah! friends, these charges you deny.
My song is true! It does not lie.


Iv,


The Yun Ham; narrative. Kise SEVEN, ON OCCASION OF A GREAT
DROUGHT, EXPOSTULATES WITH GoD AND ALL THE SPERITS, WHO MIGHT
BE EXPECTED TO ASSIST HIM AND HIS PEOPLE, ASKS THEM WHEREFORE
THEY WERE CONTENDING WITH HIM, AND DETAILS THE MEASURES HE
HAD TAKEN, AND WAS STILE TAKING, FOR THE REMOVAL OF PHE
CALAMITY,


King Seuen does not occur by name in the piece, though it is said, in
line 3 of st. 1, that the speaker in it was a king; and all the critics accept
the statement of the Preface, that it was made by Jing Shuh,—a great
officer of the court. It is said in the Ch‘un Ts‘éw, under the fifth year of
duke Hwan (8.¢. 706), that the king sent the son of Jing Shuh on a mis-
sion to the court of Lo; and this, it is supposed, was a son of the writer
of this piece ;—-which is just possible. At what year in Seuen’s reign the
famine prevailed, and also whether it extended over a series of years, are
points which must be left in uncertainty.

In the Book of History, V. vi., we have an instance of the use of jade
symbols in sacrificing ; and as all the objects so used were buried at the
conclusion of the sacrifice (st. 2), we can understand how Seuen should
speak of his store of such articles as being exhausted,

“The demon of drought ” (st. 5) is described as “‘a man, two or three
cubits in height, with the upper part of the body bare, and his eyes in the
top of his head. He moves with the speed of the wind, and is named
Poh.” That such was the conception of the demon, however, in the time


of king Seuen, we do not know.
c


Br III. w.] THE BOOK OF POETRY, 331


1 Grand shone the Milky way on high,
With brilliant span athwart the sky,
Nor promise gave of rain.
King Seuen long gazed ; then from him broke,
In anguished tones the words he spoke,
Well might he thus complain !
 O Heaven, what crimes have we to own,
That death and ruin still come down ?
Relentless famine fills our graves.
Pity the king who humbly craves! -
Our miseries never cease.
To every Spirit I have vowed ;
The choicest victim’s blood hag flowed.
’ As offerings I have freely paid -
My store of gems and purest jade.
Hear me, and give release !


2 “The drought consumes us. As on wing
Its fervours fly, and torment bring.
With purest mind and ceaseless care
My sacrifices I prepare.

At thine own border altars, Heaven,
And in my father’s fane, Pve given

What might relief have found.
What Powers above, below, have sway,
To all my precious gifts I pay,

Then bury in the ground.

Yes, every Spirit has received
Due honour, and, still unrelieved,

Our sufferings greater grow.
How-tseih can’t give the needed aid,
And help from God is still delayed !
The country lies a ruined waste.

O would that I alone might taste

This bitter cup of woe!


8 “The drought consumes us. Nor doI
’ To fix the blame on others try.
I quake with dread; the risk I feel,
As when I hear the thunder peal,
Or fear its sudden crash.


fuss


THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr’ IID.


_ Our black-haired race, a remnant now,

Will every one be swept from Chow,
As by the lightning’s flash.

Nor I myself will live alone.

God from His great and heavenly throne»
Will not spare even me.

O friends and officers, come, blend

our prayers with mine; come, lowly bend.

Chow’s dynasty will pass away ;

Its altars at no distant day
In ruins all shall be!


4 ‘The drought consumes us. It keeps on
Its fatal course. All hope is gone.
The air more fierce and fiery glows.
Where can I fly? Where seek repose?

Death marks me for its prey.
Above, no saving hand! Around,
No hope, no comfort, can be found.
The dukes and ministers of old
Give us no help. Can ye withhold
Your sympathy, who lately reigned ?
And parents, how are you restrained,

In this so dreadful day ?


5 “Phe drought consumes us. There on high
The hills are parched. The streams are dry.
Drought’s demon stalks abroad in ire,

And scatters wide his flames and fire.
Alas my woeftl heart !
The fires within its strength consume ;_
The heats without create a gloom
That from it will not part. _
The dukes and ministers bygone
Respond not to my prayer and moan.
God in great Heaven, permission give
That I may in retirement live, .
And try to heal my smart!


6 “The drought consumes us. Still I strive,
And will not leave while I survive.
» Duty to shun I fear.


Bx II[.1v.] . THE BOOK OF PorrRY. 833


wa


Why upon me has come this drought ?
Vainly [ try to search it out,
Vainly, with quest severe.
For a good harvest soon I prayed,
Nor late the rites I duly paid,
To Spirits-of the air and Jand.
There wanted noughi they could demand,
Their favour to secure.
God in great heaven, be just, be kind!
Thou dost not bear me m ‘Thy mind.
My cry, ye wisest Spirits, hear !
Ye whom I constantly revere,
Why do I this endure ?


“The drought consumes us. People fly,
And léave their homes. Each social tie
And bond of rule is snapt,


' The Heads of Boards are all perplexed ;


My premier’s mind is sorely vexed ;
In trouble all are wrapt.
The masters of my Horse and Guards ;
My cook, and men of different wards :-—
Not one has from the struggle shrunk.
Though feeling weak, they have not sunk,
But done their best to aid.


' To the great sky I look with pain ;—


co


Why do these grievous sorrows rain
On my devoted head ?


* Yes, at the mighty sky I gaze,
And lo! the stars pursue their maze,
And sparkle clear and bright.
Ah! Heaven nor helps, nor seems to ken.
Gréat officers and noble men,
With all your powers ye well have striven,
And reverently have sought from Heaven
Its aid in our great fight.
My death is near; but oh! keep on,
And do as thus far you have done,
Regard you only me? ,
No, for yourselves and all your friends,
On whom for rule the land depends,
You seek security.


834. THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


I turn my gaze to the great sky ;—
When shall this drought be done, and I
Quiet and restful be?”


“ - Vv. .


The Sung kaou; narrative, CELEBRATING THE APPOINTMENT BY
KING SEUEN OF A RELATIVE TO BE THE MARQUIS OF SHIN, AND DE-
FENDER OF THE SOUTHERN BORDER OF THE KINGDOM, WITH THE
ARRANGEMENTS MADE FOR HI$ ENTERING ON HIS CHARGE.


King Seuen is not named in the piece, but there can be no doubt as
to his béing the king intended in it, The writer of it was Yin Keih-foo,
who appears in Ii. jii. IIL, as the commander of an expedition against _
the tribes of the Héen-yun, in the beginning of Seven’s reign. Then in
II. viii, III. we have an account of the building of Séay as the capital of
the State, which is also a principal topic in this piece.

We must accept then the date assigned to the piece, and it gives us an
interesting instance of the way in which by colonization and military
occupanéy the kingdom of Chow—China—was extended towards the
south,

Shin, Heu, and Foo have all occurred in I, vi. IV. They were adjoin-
ing principalities, al] ruled by scions of the great family of Kéang, de-
scended. from the chief minister of Yaou, who is styled “Chief of the
four mountains.” With referencé to this it is said in st, 1 that “the
mountains sent down a Spirit (or Spirits) who gave birth to Foo and
Shin.” “This,” says @ critic, “is a personification of the poet’s fancy, to
show how High Heaven had @ mind to revive the fortunes of Chow, and
we need not trouble ourselves as to whether there were such Spirits or
not.”

The earl of Shaou, it is supposed, was Seuen’s Minister of Works, and”
on him devolved naturally such duties as are assigned to him in this
piece. On the early removal of the chief’s harem to Séay, mentioned in
st. 3, it is said, “ While his family was not removed to his new residence,
the chief could not enjoy his domestic bliss, and the king ordered his
principaf officer to convey the household to. Séay.” The name of Mei,
where the king gave the parting feast to the chief, remains in one of the
districts in the department of Fung-ts‘éang.

The movement which the ode celebrates with so much éclat did not
turn out happily. King Seuen’s son, Yéw, married a daughter of the
House of Shin, a daughter probably of the chief mentioned here, and
made her his queen. When he degraded her in consequence of his at-
tachment to Paou Sze, her father formed an alliance with the Dog Jung,
which issued in the death of Yéw, and the removal of the capital to Loh.
Subsequently, Shin proved but avery ineffectual barrier against the tribes
that were banded together under the rule of Ts‘oo, and it was extinguished
and absorbed by that growing State during the period of the Ch‘un Ts‘w.


1 How grand and high, with hugest bulk, arise
Those southern hills whose summits touch the skies !


Bx III. v.] THE BOUK OF POETRY. 335


bo


Down from them came a Spirit to the earth,

And to the sires of Foo and Shin gave birth.

In those two States out Chow a bulwark has,

O’er which the southern foemen dare not pass ;

And all its States they screen, and through them
. spread

Lessons of virtue, by themselves displayed.


Famed for his merit was Shin’s present chief.
The king with Seay planned to enlarge his fief.
There, as his sires elsewhere had been, should he
To all the southern States a pattern be.

The earl of Shaou got charge there to provide
The capital, where Shin’s chief should preside,
And o’er the south a powerful influence gain.
There too his sons that influence should maintain,


- 8 Thus to the chief the king gave his command :—


“A pattern be to all the southern land.

Your centre Seay, go from it onwards, till

Your merit all that southern sphere shall fill.”
Shaou’s earl was charged the new lands to define,
And by Chow’s rules fit revenue assign.
The master of Shin’s household orders got,

To move betimes the harem to the spot.


4 The earl of Shaou thus the foundation cleared,


On which the chief’s great merit should be reared.

The city’s walls he built, and then went on

To build the temple. This work grandly done,

The chief receives four steeds, a noble team,

Whose breast-hooks ’mid their trappings brightly
gleam.


5 Those steeds were with a car of state well matched,


And then the king from court the chief despatched.
“ Your residence,”’ he said, “ has been my care,
The south I chose. Quick thither now repair.

And take this noble mace, which I confer,

The symbol of your rank. Go, uncle, go;

Protect the southern lands from every foe.”


6 Soon now the chief his way took from the north.


The kine in Mei the parting feast set forth,


336 «THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.
uy,

Thencé, through the capital and southward bound,
The chief of Shin in Seay at last was found.
When Shaou’s earl the country had defined,

And by Chow’s rules the revenue assigned,
Stores of provisions had been laid aside,
_ For the chief’s rapid journey to provide.


7 Chariots and thronging footmen were arrayed ;
With martial pomp the chief his entrance made.
The States of Chow rejoice. They haste to bring
Their warm and joyous greetings to the king.

“Tn your great uncle,” thus they say, “ you’ve found
A bulwark strong. Grandly is Shin renowned !

In peace and war a pattern good will he,
Throughout our regions, to your chieftains be.”


8 With virtue clad, the chief of Shin shines bright ;—
Though mild, notweak; though strong, yet ever right.
Our myriad States his powerful sway shall own,
And with their praises his grand merit crown,
Keih-foo Nepean this song, well meant, well made, ;—
Accept, O chief, the tribute I have paid !


Vi


The Ching min ; narrative. CELEBRATING THE VIRTUES OF CHUNG
SHAN-FOO, WHO APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL
MENISTERS OF KING SEUEN, AND HIS DESPATCH TO THE EASi, TO
FORTIFY THE CAPITAL OF THE STATE oF Ts‘E,


Like the preceding ode, this also was made by Yin Keth-foo, to present
to his friend on his departure from the court.
Of the hero of the piece we know very little. He was a scion of the
great House of Chow, having the surname of course ‘of Ke, and was
‘styled Yu-chung. Seuen made him marquis of the principality of Fan,
when he appears to have adopted the Chuug of his style as his clan gyme.
Nor have we elsewhere any account of the king’s action on behalf of the
State of Ts‘e, which Chung Shan-foo superintended and conducted, There
must have been troubles in the State, and the walls of its capital yere in
need of repair.
The. lines of the first stanza are remarkable. Mencius, VIL Pt. i. VE 8,
quotes them in support of his doctrine of the goodness of human nature,
and adduces a remark of Confucius on them.


1 Heaven made the race of men, designed
With nature good and large ;+-


Br Til. vi.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. = 4 337
Functions of body, powers of mind,
Their duties to discharge.
All men this normal nature own,
Its normal virtue all men crown
With love sincere and true.
Heaven by our sovereign’s course was moved,
And to aid him, its son approved,
Gave birth to Chung Shan-foo.


2 Mild and admired, this chief displays _

Virtues that win the heart.

His air and looks a wondrous grace
To all his ways impart.

His rule of life the ancient law,

To bear himself unmarred by flaw -
With earnest mind he aims.

In sympathy with our great Head,.

Abroad the royal will to spread
His constant service claims.


3 The king gave charge to Chung Shan-foo :~~

“Hear now what I direct.

As served your fathers, so serve you,
And me, your king, protect.

Let all my lords your pattern see ;

Publish among them each decree ;
Speak freely in my stead.

Of what goes on inform my mind,

Through you let all my measures find
Obedience promptly paid.’’.


4 Great was the charge. Our hero hears,
@# And hastens to obey.
Among the princes he appears ;

Of each he marks the way.
Who good, who bad, throughout the land,
He clearly sees. With wisdom grand

He guards his life and fame.

Nor day nor night he idly rests ;
The king’s, the One man’s, high behests

His soul with zeal inflame.


VOL. Il. - 22
%


338 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IIL.


5 Among the people flies the word :—

“What’s soft men swallow fast ;

And what is for the teeth too hard
Out of their mouths they cast.”

But never yet did mortal trace

In Chung Shan such ignoble case ;—~
Nor soft nor hard he knows.

The strong and fierce he does not dread ;

And on the poor or widowed head
Insult he’ never throws.


6 Again the people often say :—

“ Virtue is very light,—

Light as a hair; yet few can bear
The burden of its weight.”

’Tis so; but Chung Shan, as I think,

Needs not from virtue’s weight to shrink,
That other men defies.

Aid from my love his strength rejects.

If the king’s measures have defects,
What’s needed he supplies.


7 He asks the Spirit of the path

His blessing to send down.

His steeds are strong ; each soldier hath
A bravery like his own.

Eastward they march; his charge is there.

That city’s bulwarks to repair,
How ardently he hies!

List to the tinkling of his bells !

Of his steeds’.constant tramp it tells ;—
The walls will soon arise.


8 Yes, on to Ts‘e the hero went,
With his four steeds so strong.
_ Their eight bells told his purpose bold ;~—
He’ll not be absent long!
I, Yin Keih foo, this song now sing.
Like gentle breeze, O may it bring
To his unresting mind,
?Mid all his toils and cares, some cheer!
Yes, may our great Chung Shan-find here
The comfort, I designed !


Br Il. viz] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 339


VH,


The Han yih; narrative. CELEBRATING THE MARQUIS OF Hawn :—
HIS INVESTITURE AND THE KING’S CHARGE TO BIM ; THE GIFTS HE
RECEIVED, AND THE PARTING FEAST ; HIS MARRIAGE; THE EXCEL«
LENCE OF HIS TERRITORY; AND HIS SWAY OVER THE REGIONS OF
THE NORTH.


This ode is also referred to the time of king Seuen. The Han which
is spoken of was a marquisate, held by Kes, sprung‘from one of the sons,
of king Woo, After the time of king Seuen, it was extinguished by the
State of Tsin, and assigned to one of the ministers of that growing dos
minion, who took the clansname of Han. It subsequently,on the break-
ing up of Tsin, after the Ch‘un Ts‘éw period, became one of the seven
great States into which the kingdom was divided,—of much larger di-
mensions than the original marquisate of Han.

Héen-foo, in st. 3, must have been some noble and high minister, dele-
gated by the king to preside at the parting feast to the marquis.

The king Fun, whose niece the marquis married, was Le, so styled from
the river Fun, which was near Che, where Le lived so long after he was
driven from the throne. Kwei-foo was a minister of the royal court, but
could hardly have been one of the feudal princes, for in that case his State
would have been mentioned. From the Chinese text of st. 5, we know
that his surname was K‘eih,—the name, according to tradition, of one of
the sons of the mythical Hwang-te,

The bride was accompanied by a younger sister and 2 cousin,—virgins
from the harem of her father. Then two Houses of the same surname
sent, each, a young lady with a similar suite, to accompany her, so that
a feudal prince was said to marry nine ladies at once.

Yen was the State to which Shih, the duke K‘ang of Shaou, was ap-
pointed ; and it would appear that he had been entrusted with the charge
to build and fortify the capital of the principality of Han, just as we have
seen his descendant appointed to do the same duty for the new State of
Shin. The maarquis of this piece had a wider jutisdiction given to him
over the regions of the north, to extend among them the authority ot the
dynasty of Chow.


1 Grand is the guardian hill of Han !
There the great Yu his work began,
The land from wreck to save.
Thence to the capital there leads
A noble road. See there the steeds
That draw Han’s lord, as he proceeds
Investiture to crave.
Called now his father’s seat to fill,
He goes to hear the royal will.
To him the ang etins said :—
,


’


340


iv)


THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr IIT.


“ As served your fathers, so serve you.
Be careful my commands to do.
Early and late show active zeal ;


‘With reverence seek the kingdom’s weal.


And thus your fealty paid
Shall strengthen the great fief I give ;—
Marquis of Han you long shall live.
What princes come not to my court
Deal with, until they here resort,

And thus your sovereign aid.”


Oh! noble was the marquis’ team.
Both long and large, the steeds beseem
His youthful state and port.
His mace of rank he with him brought,
When audience of the king he sought,
And bowed within his court.
The king his royal favour showed,
And on him princely gifts bestowed.
Those were—the dragon flag, whence streamed
Its pennon that with plumelets gleamed ;
The brilliant yoke; the bamboo screen ;
The robe with dragon on it seen;
Red slippers; and the hooks to shine
On his steeds’ breasts; the frontlets fine,
Whose carvings should their foreheads grace ;
The board across his car to place ;
The tiger’s skin, to throw around
That leaning board with leather bound.
Then last there came the rein-ends bright,
Tipt with gilt rmgs,—a splendid sight.


The court néw leaving, horne he hies ; -
But first he offers sacrifice,

And prays the Spirit of the way
Guidance to give. That night to stay
At Too he planned. The parting feast
Heen-foo there gives to speed the guest.
The court sends forth its many lords,
To taste the cheer the king affords.

An hundred vases stand around,

All with the choicest spirits crowned.


c


Bx IIT. vir.] THE BOOK OF POETRY, 341


The mats roast turtle and fresh fish

Present, and many a lordly dish.

And bamboo sprouts, and tender shoots,
- And sauces fine, and fragrant fruits,

With their rich perfume fill the air.

Oh! but it was a banquet rare !

It closed, and lo! before the gate,

With mighty steeds, a car of state !


4 Now back in Han, its lord must wed,.
And home a wife shall bring,
To Kwei-foo’s child his suit he paid,
. The niece of Fun, our king.
The union fixed, in grand array,
To Kwei-foo’s house he takes his way ;
An hundred cars attend.
.The tinkling music falls and swells,
Emitted by their numerous bells,
As on their course they wend.
The glory of that day was great.
Lo! round the bride in fairest state,
The virgins, her companions, stand,
Close following her on either hand.
As lovely clouds that slowly sail,
And the moon’s greater glory veil,
So beautiful were they.
The marquis looked, with rapture thrilled.
Never was gate with splendour filled,
As Kwei-foo’s gate that day.


5 Great fame Kwei-foo has got in war,
And every State has seen his car;
But through the land, where’er he went,
To settle his dear child intent,
No State like Han he saw.
Oh! pleasant is the State of Han!
Kwei saw the mighty streams that ran
Through all its length, and then the lakes,
With forests girt and tangled brakes,
That admiration draw.


342 THE BOOK OF POETRY. — [Parr ITI.


Big bream and tench the waters fill,
And in the glades on every hill
Are multitudes of deer.
In wilder. parts the grisly bear,
Tigers and wild cats, make their lair.
Hunters their prey find here.
Kwei saw, and pleasure filled his breast,
And here his child found joy and rest.


6 The multitudes of Yen had reared
: Han’s walls, and made them strong.
Its rulers then no foeman feared ;
There had they dwelt for long,
The first of them a charge had got,
From Han, as from a central spot,
To rule the tribes around.
The marquis now got wider charge,
His jurisdiction to enlarge
O’er all the northern ground.
The Chuy and Mih to curb and awe,
And bring to own Chow’s sovereign law,
Would his first care require.
Then stronger walls and deeper moat
Would silence each rebellious note,
' And all with fear inspire.
The fields too he must now define,
And the fixed revenue assign,
As in the king’s domain.
His bearers shall to court repair,
With skins stript from the tawny bear,
The white fox and the panther red,
In yearly course a tribute paid,
The king’s trust to maintain.


VIII.


The Kéang Han ; narrative. CELEBRATING AN EXPEDITION AGAINST
THE MORE SOUTHERN TRIBES OF THE HWaAsE, AND THE WORK DONE
FOR THE KING IN THEIR COUNTRY BY H00-RET; EARL OF ‘SHAOU,
With THE MANNER IN WHICH THE KING REWARDED HIM AND HE
RESPONDED TO THE ROYAL FAVOUR. :


€


Q


Bx IIT. vir.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 343


This is another of the pieces of king Seuen’s time, and the expedition
celebrated in it is assigned to the second year of his reign, B.C. 825 or
826. The earl of Shaou who commanded in it is the same whose services
at the formation-of the State of Shin are commemorated in ode 5.

The mention of the Kéang and Han together indicates to us their point
of junction at the present Han-kow. The first earl of Shaou, duke
K‘ang, recéived the principality of Yen, but a branch of the family had
remained in the royal domain, holding the appanage of Shaou; and it is
some increase of this, which is promised to earl Hoo,


1 On grandly flowed the Keang and Han;

As grandly moved our mighty force.

We rested not, nor idly strayed ;
Straight to the Hwae we held our course.

Forth all our cars of war had come;
Unfurled, our falcon banners flew.

We rested not, nor were remiss,—
Marshalled the Hwae tribes to subdue.


2 Again come to the mighty stream,

The troops in martial splendour shone.

Of the whole land to order brought
Announcement to the king had gone.

_ Peace through the hostile region reigned ;—

The king’s State breathed, and was at rest.

The battle-strife no longer raged,
And quiet filled the royal breast.


3 The king had charged our Hoo of Shaou,

Where the two streams their waters join :-—

“Go, open all the country up}
As law requires, its lands define.

I would not have those tribes distressed,
But this State must their model be.

Their lands, in small and larger squares,

- Must stand, far as the southern sea.”


4 And now thus says at court the king :-—

“Great lord, your work is nobly done.
Your ancestor was their support,

When Wan and Woo received the throne.
Compared with them, a child am I;

You are the great duke’s worthy heir.
Grand has your merit now appeared ;

Your happiness shall be my ¢are.


’


s


B44 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr Til.


5 This jade libation-cup, and jar

Of flavoured spirits, now receive.

For further grant of hills and streams,
I’ve asked our cultured founder’s leave.

More than your sire received in Shaou,
These in K‘e-chow to you I vive,”

Hoo, grateful, bowed his head, and said,
“ Great son of Heaven, for ever live | ””


6 He bowed, then rose, and loud proclaimed
. The gracious goodness of the king,
And vowed he still would do his best,
That through the land Shaou’s praise shquld ring.
“Yes, live for ever, son of Heaven,
Display thy wisdom, spread thy fame !
Thy civil virtues still go forth,.
‘bil all the realm shall bless thy name! ”


Ix.


The Chang woo; narrative. CELEBRATING AN EXPEDITION OF KING
SEUEN AGAINST THE MORE NORTHERN TRIBES OF THE Hwak,—iTs
IMPOSING PROGRESS AND COMPLETE SUCCESS.


The king accompanied this expedition in person, but entrusted the
actual command of the army to an officer of experience,~~a descendant
of Nan Chung, who is celebrated, in II. i, VII!., as doing good service
against the Héen-yun in the time of king Wan. He was styled Hwang-
foo, and a minister, with the same style, is mentioned, in II. iv. IX, asa
bad and dangerous man in the time of Yéw, Seuen’s son and successor.
He may have been a gon of the commander in this expedition.

“The chief of Yin” was Yin Keih-foo, with whem we are now
familiar. He appears here as “ Recorder of the Interior,” or secretary to
the king, and transmits his orders to Héw-foo, earl of Ch‘ing, a district
in the royal domain, who was Seuen’s minister of War, and would act in
the expedition under Hwang-foo as second in command.

Seu was one of the nine provinces into which Yu is said to have
divided the China of his time, covering nearly all the present Kéang-soo,
and portions of Shan-tung and Ngan-hwuy. Thé land of Seu, where the
tribes against which this expedition was directed were found, would only
occupy @ small part of the province,—probably what is still called Seu
Chow in Kéang-soo. :


1 Nan Chung’s descendant, Hwang the Great,
Grand-master, now draws near
Before the king, and to him straight 9
The king’s charge, loud and clear,


¢


Bx IIE. 1x.] THE BOOK OF roRTRY..


Comes thus :—“¢ My armies six forth call; ~
What war requires make ready all ;.
South we our course direct.
Your duties reverently fulfil,
And wary be lest our good will
Those southern States reject.”


2 Next to the chiof of Yin ’twas said :—

“Charge Hew-foo, earl of Ch‘ing,

The ranks to range, and warning dread
Make through the host to ring.

Our march along the Hwae’s bank lies ;

Against Seu must our enterprise
Rapid and sure be made.

Delay we brook not, nor to hold

The land we take, lest the threefold
Work in the fields be stayed.”


8 The son of Heaven calm, trustful was,
Majestic in his strength.
His troops advanced, no crowded mass,
Nor lines of broken length.
, From stage to stage, as on they went,
The land of Seu with terror rent,
Its people all unmanned.
As when men hear the thunder’s roll,
Or sudden crash, and quake in soul,
So now shook all the land.


4 The king aroused his martial might,
As he were moved with rage.
His tiger-chiefs he sent to fight ;
And eager to engage
Well named were they! Along Hwae’s banks
Soon grandly moved the royal ranks,
A captive crowd was held.
Securely kept the country round,
No rebel hosts a passage found,
Succour to Seu to yield.


5 Numerous the legions, moving fleet,
As if on wings they flew;
Grand as the Keang and Han, when meet
Their mingled streams the view.
’


846 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr ITI.


Solid as mountain mass they seemed,
And brightly as the river gleamed,
Whose waters ceaseless rush.
Continuous, in order sure,
Inscrutable, success secure,
- They marched revolt to crush.


6 The king’s plans truthful and sincere,

Sen’s tribes at once sought peace.

Its chiefs assembled all; their prayer
Was for the royal grace.

And quickly by the son of Heaven.

Was order to the country given ;
In selemn court he shone.

Before him came the chiefs, and swore

That they would break their faith no more.
“The war,” he said, “is done.”


x.


The Chen jang; narrative, and allusive in the last stanza, THE
WRITER PEPLORES THE MISERY AND OPPRESSION THAT PREVAILED, AND
INTIMATES THAT THEY WERE CAUSED BY THE INTERFERENCE OF
WOMEN AND EUNUCHS IN THE GOVERNMENT.


This piece will not suit the reign of any other king but Yéw, and stt.
3 and 4 were, no doubt, directed specially against Paou Sze and her
creatures in the palace. The form in which the writer expresses his sen-
timent, however, is teo general, and not sufficiently guarded,


‘1 To Heaven I look with longing eye,

But only meet its angry frown.

In restless trouble long we lie,
And great afflictions still come down.

Throughout the realm is nothing firm;
Both high and low are in distress.

In palace and in court they swarm,
Whose ravages the land oppress.

Wrapt in the net of crime we groan ;,

Nor peace nor cure comes to our moan,


2 You now, O king, possess the lands,
' ‘Which as their own men once could claim ;
And chiefs, who led their faithful bands,
Are stript of wealth, and brought to shame.


¢


Bx IIL. x.]: THE BOOK OF POETRY. 347


Men blameless, free from slightest taint,
Within that fearful net are snared ;

While others walk without restraint,
Whose guilt is openly declared.


3 A wise man builds the city wall ;
But a wise woman throws it down.
Wise is ske ? Good you may her call ;—
She is an owl we should disown !

To woman’s tongue let length be given,
And step by step to harm it leads.
Disorder does not come from Heaven ;

Tis woman’s tongue disorder breeds.
Women and eunuchs! Never came
Lesson or warning word from them! °


4 Hurtful and false, their spite they wreak ;

And when exposed their falsehood lies,

The wrong they do not own, but sneak,
And say, ‘‘ No harm did we devise.”

Thrice eent. per cent.! Why that is trade,
And would the wise man but disgrace.

Public affairs to wife and maid :
Must not silk-worms and looms displace.


5 Why is it Heaven thus sends reproof?
Why have the Spirits ceased to bless ?
From the wild Teih you keep aloof,
And me would in your wrath oppress,
Omens of ill you slight, though rife ;
Nor for your outward bearing care.
The good fly from the scene of strife ;
Ruin impends, and blank despair. .


6 Heaven’s awful net o’erhangs the land,

Full of more woes than tongue can tell

The good retire on every hand. ,
What sorrows in my bosom swell!

Near and more near the net of Heaven!
Soon will its meshes all enfold.

Good men are from their duties driven,
And how can grief of mine be told ?


348 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr III.


7 The waters bubbling up make known
How deep and strong the spring below ;
And long the inward grief has grown,
From which my words of sorrow flow.
Why came not this ere I was born?
Why happened it ere I was dead ?
Yet still the sorrowing and forlorn
Great and mysterious Heaven can aid.
O king, your sires no more disgrace !
So may you save your future race.


XI.


The Shaow min ; narrative, all but st. 6, which is metaphorical. TuE
WRITER BEMOANS THE MISERY AND RUIN WHICH WERE GOING ON,
4&ND SHOWS HOW THEY WERE OWING TO THE KING'S EMPLOYMENT OF
MEAN AND WORTHLESS CHARACTERS.


The subject and style of this piece lead us to assign the same author-
ship to it as to the preceding one. ‘The writer,’ says one of the critics,
“saw that nothing now could be done for the kingdom, and that the
honoured capital of Chow was near destruction; butin his loyal and right-
eous heart he could not cease to hope concerning his sovereign. In the
former ode he expresses his wish that the king would not disgrace his an-
cestors, and here that he would use such ministers as the duke of Shaou,
A filial son will not refrain from giving medicine to his father, though he
knows that his disease is incurable, and a loyal minister will still give
good advice to his sovereign, though he knows that the kingdom is on
the verge of ruin.”


1 O pitying Heaven, why see we thee
- In terrors thus arrayed ?
Famine has come. The people flee,
And homeless roam, dismayed.
In setiled spots, and far and near,
Our regions all lie waste and drear.


a


2 See o’er the land Heaven’s net of crime!
And lo! in place appear
Men idle, knowing not the time,
Locusts looked at with fear,
Oppressive, perverse, fond of strife !—
Can such as thgse bring peace and life?


3 Slanderers and insolent, the king
Yet sees in them no il.


Br ITI. xa.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 349


Us to dread peril’s brink they bring;
Our minds with care they fill.

Not for a moment dare we rest,

Degraded oft, and sore opprest.


4 As when the dry parched grass we see
Wither for want of rain ;
As water-plants graft on a tree
Cannot their life retain ;
So all things now te ruin haste.
Who can their fatal course arrest ?


5 "Twas merit once that riches gained ;

The case how different now !

Troubles through all our time have reigned,
And greater still they grow.

Like grain unhulled those men in place!

Like fine rice these who find no grace!

Ye villains, of yourselves retire!

Why thus prolong my grief and ire ?


6 Now empty stands and dry the pool ;—.

No streams into it flow.

The spring is idle, once so full;
Unfed now from below ! ,

So for those evils all around

Sufficient causes could be found;

But they increase my anxious care,

Lest I be caught in evil snare.


7 When our first kings the throne received,

Such ministers they had

As Shaou’s great chief, whom all believed.
In one day he would add

A thousand le, from States which came

Our king’s protecting care to claim.

Now in one day that space is lost!

Can none the ancient virtue boast ?


THE BOOK OF POETRY.


PART IV.


ODES OF THE TEMPLE AND THE ALTAR,
Boox I, Sacrificial Odes of Chow.


Ssction I, Ducapsr or Ts‘ina Mxaov.


TITLE OF THE PART, This is simply in Chinese Sung ;—meaning,
according to the Preface, “ pieces in admiration of the embodied mani-
festation of complete virtue, announcing to Spiritual Beings their achieve
ment thereof.” Two other definitions are—“ Songs for the music of the
ancestral temple,” and “ Songs for the music at sacrifices.” I have com-
bined these two aceounts of the pieces, though there are a few whose
only claim to have anything to do with sacrifices is that they are found
here, Of the pieces in the Second Book I will speak when we come to them,
It has been mentioned in the prolegomena that some of the pieces do
not rhyme. This is probably the reason why they have not in this Book
been divided into stanzas and numbered,

TITLE OF THE Book. The pieces in this were all appropriate to the
temple services of the kings of Chow ; and they are arranged in sections,
two-of which contain ten pieces each, and the third, like the third Book
of last Part, eleven, Yet all the sections are called Decades, Choocon-
tends, in opposition to the older interpreters, and correctly in my opinion,
that of the thirty-one pieces in the Sung of Chow, while most were made
(or fixed) by the duke of Chow, there are some among them belonging to
the reign of king K‘ang (B.C. 1077-1050), and even of a iater date,


’


L


The Tsing méaou; narrative. CELEBRATING THE REVERENTIAL
MANNER IN WHICH A SACRIFICE TO KING WAN WAS PERFORMED, AND
FURTHER PRAISING HIM.


Choo agrees with the Preface in assigning the composition of this piece
to the time of the sacrifice mentioned in the Book of History, V. xiii. 29,
when, the building of Loh being completed, king Chirig came to the new
city, and offered a red bull to Wan and the same to Woo.


€
«


Bx I. 1.) THE BOOK OF POEPRY. 2 ddl


Solemn and pure the ancestral temple stands.
The princes aiding in the service move
With reverent harmony. The numerous bands
Of officers their rapt devotion prove.
All these the virtues of king Wan pursue ;
And while they think of him on high in heaven,
With grace and dignity they haste to do
The duties to them in his temple given.
Glory and honour follow Wan’s great name,
And ne’er will men be weary of -his fame.


Ti,


The Wei Téen che ming ; narrative. CELRBRATING THE VIRTUE OF
KING WAN AS COMPARABLE TO THAT OF HEAVEN; AND LOOKING TO
HIM FOR BLESSING IN THE FUTURE.


The Preface says that in this piece there isan announcement of the °
realization of complete peace throughout the kingdom ; and the old in-
terpreters referred it to a sacrifice to Wan by the duke of Chow, when he
had completed his Statutes for the new dynasty in the sixth year of his
regency after the death of Woo. But neither the piece nor any ancient
testimony authorizes a more definite argument of the contents than that
waich I have given, ‘


Heaven by a deep and ceaseless law
Orders its ways with man.

Pure shone, without a single flaw,
The virtue of king Wan.

To us he shows his kindness still.
As all our powers we strain

To be in concord with his will,
His favour we shall gain.

So may the last his throne to fill
His love and grace retain !


Latiné, By W. T. Mercer,


Jussa profunda manent magni mandataque Cceli,
Et’Regis probitas undique mira fait.

Qua ratione petit Rex nunc monstrare favorem? -
Sit satis; et nobis munera grata fluant:

Nos inter Regemque bonum concordia regnet,
Hi mentem similem secla futara colant.


352, THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


U1.


The Wei ts‘ing; narrative. APPROPRIATE AT SOME SACRIFICE T0
KING WaN, AND CELEBRATING HIS STATUTES.


According to the Preface, these lines were sung to accompany the dance
of king Woo, called Séang. That dance consisted in going through s
number of movements, intended to illustrate the style of fighting intro-
duced by Woo, and supposed to be described in the Book of History, V.
ii, 7,8. But, as Choo observes, there is ne reference jn the piece to the
dance, and -the imperial editors allow this, while at the same time they
are, unwilling te give up the old view, and accumulate authorities in sup-
port of it, But we can say nothing more about it than I have done above.
The piece, moreover, has the appearance of a fragment.


The statutes of king Wan are pure aitd clear;
Them we must guard, and in our lives revere.
Since first we sacrificed to him till now

When all the States obedience yield to Chow,
The fortune of our House’comes from his laws,
Its happy omen first, and then its cause.


fy.


.


The Léeh win; narrative. A SONG IN PRAISE OF THE PRINCES
WHO HAVE ASSISTED AT A SACRIFICE.


The Preface says that this piece was made on the occasion of king
Ching’s accession to the government, when he thus addressed the princes
who had assisted him in the ancestral temple. Choo views it as @ piece
for general use in the ancestral temple when the king presented a cup to
his assisting guests after they had thrice presented the cup to the repre-
sentatives of the.dead. .


Ye brilliant and accomplished lords,

Who with your help my worship crown,
The favours that your grace affords

My sons in future reigns shall own.
Ever in your own States eschew

Alike all greed and wastefulness ;
So shall the king still honour you;

And when your present services
He calls to mind, your sons shall know
New honours he will oft bestow.


Bx I. §1, vi] rae Boox oF Porrry. . 353


Let each be strong, and play the man ;—
So shall your influence be great.
Ever in virtue lead the van ;—
' All chiefs your course will imitate.
‘The former kings in mind still bear ;
at glory can with theirs compare?


Vv.


The Péen tsoh ; narrative. APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE 10 KING
Tak, as


For king T’ae’s history and achievements see the 3rd and 7th pieces in
’ the first Book of last: Part. :


*Twas Heaven that made the lofty hill,
And there king T‘aé his work began,
Labouring the land ail round to till.
Then in tranquillity king Wan
Pursued the work, till that mount K‘e,.
Rugged and craggy though it frowned,
- Was reached by the smooth roads we see.
Long be it by their offspring owned!


, VI.


The Haou Téen yéw shing ming; narrative, APPROPRIATE AT A
SACRIFICE TO KING CHING.


The fixed decree of mighty Heaven
Had long to Chow assigned the throne,
Which first to Wan and Woo was given.
Ching next to them as ruler shone.


Then the foundations of his power

Were made by Ching more deep and sure.
Through night and day no idle hour

He knew,—the reticent and pure.


His virtue wrought, and glorified
The heritage he had obtained ;
Nor were his heart’s best powers unplied,
‘Till o’er the land good order reigned,


VOL, III, » 23


’


354 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


. VIL


The Wo tséang ; narrative, AN ODE APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE
TO KING WAN, ASSOCIATED WITH HEAVEN, IN THE BRILLIANT HALL,


There is happily an agreement between the schools on the oecasion of
this piece. Into the controversies about what “the Brilliant hall” really
was, it is unnecessary to enter. Wan was associated with God in the
sacrifice; God being the fountain from which, and Wan the channel
through which, the sovereignty had come to Chow.


My offerings here are given,
A ram, a bull.
Accept them, mighty Heaven,

All-bountiful


‘Thy statutes, O great king,
I keep, I love; ;

So on the realm to bring
Peace from above.


From Wan comes blessing rich ;
Now on the right .

He owns those gifts to which
Him I invite,


Do I not night and day
Revere great Heaven,

That thus its favour may
To Chow be given ?:


VIII. ,


The She mae; narrative. APPROPRIATE TO KING W00’S SACRIFICING
TO HEAVEN, AND TO THE SPIRITS OF:ALL THE HILLS AND RIVERS,
ON A PROGRESS THROUGH THE KINGDOM, AFTER THE OVERTHROW OF
THE SHANG DYNASTY.


Here again there isan agreement between the schools. The Tso-chuen,
under the 12th year of duke Seuen, quotes ]. 11 4s from a Sung of king
Woo, and in “the Narratives of the States,” the piece is ascribed to the
duke of Chow. No doubt it was made by the duke, soon after the ac-
cession of Woo, for the purpose mentioned in the argument: and he
speaks in his own person in the conclusion.


Now through his many States rides Woo,
A royal progress making.


¢ ¢


Br I. §1. 1x%.] THE BOOK OF PorTRY. . 38


or


May Heaven its gracious favour show,
Him for its own son taking !


Most surely has the House of Chow
Been called to reign by Heaven.

To our Woo’s slightest nod by ail
Trembling response is given.


All Spirits to himself he draws,
O’er sacred rites presiding ;

Even the Spirits of the Ho,
And those on hills abiding.


Yes, he our sovereign lord is known
' As king supreme and glorious.
Our House of Chow distinguished is ;
"Tis brilliant and victorious.


Woo to each prince his rank assigns ;
And now sweet peace enjoying,

He casts the spear and shield aside,
The bow no more employing.


I will in ways of virtue walk,
And spread it through our regions.
Thus shall the king preserve the throne,
Without the aid of legions.


IX,


The Chih king; narrative, AN ODE APPROPRIATE IN SACRIFICING
TO THE KINGS Woo, CHING, AND K‘ana.


The arm of Woo was full of might ;
None could his fire withstand ;

And Ching and K‘ang stood forth to sight,
As _kinged by God’s own hand.


We err not when we call them sage.
How grandly they maintained
Their hold of all the heritage
That Wan and Woo had gained !
23 *


356 , THE BOOK OF POETRY. _ [Parr IV.


' As here we worship, they descend,

While bells and drums resound,
And stones and lutes their music blend.

With blessings we are crowned.


The rites correctly we discharge ;
The feast we freely share.

Those sires Chow’s glory will enlarge,
And ever for it care.


x,
The Sze win; narrative. CELEBRATING HOW-TSEIH ;-—AN ODE


APPROPRIATE TO THE BORDER SACRIFICE, WHEN HOW-TSEIH WAS
WORSHIPPED A8 THE CORRELATE OF GOD,


O thou, accemplished, great How-tseih,
To thee alone ’twas given

To be, by what we trace to thee,
-The correlate of Heaven.


_ On all who dwell within our land
 Grain-food didst thou bestow.
*Tis to thy wonder-working hand
This gracious boon we owe.


God had the wheat and barley meant
To nourish all mankind.

None would have fathomed His intent,
But for thy guiding mind.


Man’s social duties thou didst show
To every tribe and State.

From thee the polished manners flow
That stamp our land “ The Great.”


Br I. §u. .] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 357


BOOK I.


1


Szction II. Tue Decapge or Sain Kone.


L


TaE Shin kung; norrative. INstTRUCTIONS GIVEN TO THE OFFICERS
OF HUSBANDRY ;——-PROBABLY APTER THE SACRIFICE TO -GOD IN SPRING \
FoR A GOOD YEAR, ‘ :


Ho! ministers of husbandry, _
Your duties reverent care demand.
The king has given you perfect rules ;—
See that those rules ye understand.


Ho! ye who aid the mimisters,
The last month of our spring is here.
"Tis yours the new-sown fields to tend,
And manage those in their third year.
How fair each wheat and barley field,
That soon their waving crops shall yield !


Tn them the bright and glorious God
Will grant to us a plenteous year ;
Give pe a that, with spud and hoe
Provided well, your men appear.
Anon the stalks that rustling stand
Shall fall before the reaper’s hand.


I,


The # he; narrative. INSTRUCTIONS TO THE OFFICERS OF HUS-
BANDRY :—-PROBABLY LIKE THE PRECEDING ODE, AFTER A SACRIFICE
TO GOD FOR A GOOD YEAR, .

0 yes! the Spirit of king Ching,
en we inquired of him, drew nigh, -
And clearly told:‘us when to bring
The gifts that now before him lie,
> ’


358 THE BOOK OF POETRY. ~ [Part IV.


Lead forth your men, with energy
O’er their own fields to sow the grain.
‘Those, in each square of thirty le,
‘Ten thousand families can maintain.


‘Now let the ploughs turn up the soil,
The men attending, pair by pair.
The harvest will repay their toil ;—
e bounteous produce all shall share.


TIL.


The Chin loo; allusive, CELEBRATING THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
THE TWO FORMER DYNASTIES, WHO HAD COME TO COURT TO ASSIST
AT SACRIFICE :—MAY HAVE BEEN SUNG WHEN THE KING WAS DISs-
MISSING THEM IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE, ~


Round yonder marsh, there in the west,
A flock of egrets fly.
With graceful movement, like those birds,
My visitors came nigh, —_~
Their fathers reigned where I reign now,
But loyal are they to our Chow.


There in their own States are they loved,
Nor tired of are they here.

Their fame with lapse of time shall grow
Both day and night more clear.

Their fathers reigned where I reign now,

But loyal are they to our Chow.


Tv.


The Fung néen; nartative, AN ODE OF THANKSGIVING FOR A
PLENTIFUL YEAR.


The plenteous ear has given us large supply

Of rice and millet, and our granaries high
Hardly suffice the produce to contain,—

Millions of measures of the garnered grain!
From this distilled, shall spirits, strong and sweet,
Our sires and mothers with their fragrance greet,
When to their shrines each season we repair ;
And in all other rites their part shall bear.


Br I. §i1. vi] THE BOOK oF POETRY. 859


Blessings of every kind our land shall crown ;—
And all the Spirits our devotion own !


Vv.


The Yéw hoo; narrative. THE BLIND MUSICIANS OF CHOW; THE
INSTRUMENTS OF BMUSIC; AND THEIR HARMONY. PREPARED PRO-
BABLY FOR THE OCCASION OF THE DUKE OF CHOW’S COMPLETING
HIS INSTRUMENTS OF MUSIC, AND ANNOUNCING THE FACT AT A
GRAND PERFORMANCE IN THE TEMPLE OF KING WAN,


See the blind musicians here !
Sightless all, the men appear,
In the temple-court of Chow.
All is ready for them now,


Stand the music frames around,

On whose posts rich plumes abound,
While their face-boards, edged like teeth,
Show the drums that hang beneath.
Sounding-stones and hand-drums there
In the concert part shall bear.

Sée the ch‘uh to signalize

When the music shall arise ;

And the yu, whose harsher note

Hushes instrument and throat.


When the duke has thus prepared,
Soon the various notes are heard.
Organ’s swell and flutes’ soft voice,
Make the listening ears rejoice.


Sweet the harmony of sound,
Holding all in rapture bound !
When. such music shall be made,
Then our sires for whom ’tis played,
- And the visitors who come,
Welcomed to this sacred home,
Shall desire it to last long,
Thrilled with the melodious song.


VL


The Ts‘éen; narrative, SUNG EN 1HE FIRST MONTH OF WINTER,
AND IN SPRING, WHEN THE KING PRESENTED A FISH IN THE AN-
CESTRAL TEMPLE,


360 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


This is the argument of the piece given in ‘the Preface, and in which
the critics generalty concur. In the Le Ke, IV, vi. 49, it is mentioned
that the king, in the beginning of winter, gave erders to the ¢hief fisher
to commence his duties, and went himself to s¢e his operations. He par-
took of the first fish captured, but first presented one as an offering in
the back apartment of the temple ; and in the first month of the spring,
when the sturgeons began to make their appearance, he presented one in
the same place. On these notices thé argument in the Preface has been
constructed, . on
oe two rivers, the Ts‘eih and the Ts‘eu, have been spoken of on II.
iii, VIL '


In Ts‘eih and Ts‘eu, those streams of K‘e,
About the warrens fish abound. os

Large swarms of various kinds we see.
The mudfish and the carp are found,


The thryssa and the yellow-jaws,

And sturgeons, large and lank, are there,
Which we, observant of the laws,

Offer in sacrifice, with prayer,
That Chow may hold its brightening way,
Nor o’er its fortunes come decay. - °


VII,


The Yung; narrative. APPROPRIATE AT A. SACRIFICE BY KING
Woo TO HIS FATHER WAN. ;


The disputes as to what sacrifice this piece was made for are endless.
In the time of Confucius, the three great Families of Loo used it when
sacrificing in their ancestral temples,—to the great dissatisfaction of the
sage (Analects, ITI. ii.). They used it when the sacrificial vessels and
their contents were being removed, and it was probably made at first to
be sung at that time; and hence we find it called the Ch‘ch, with such
an indication, as well as the Yung.


The helping princes stand around,
With reverent air, in concord fine.

The king, Heaven’s son, with looks profound,
Thus prays before his father’s shrine :—


This noble bull I bring to thee,
And these assist me in the rite.

Father, august and great, on me,
Thy filiak son, pour down thy light!


Br I. § 1. 1x.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 361


“ All-sagely didst thou play the man,
Alike in peace and war a king.

Heaven rested in thee, O scat Wis;

- Who to thy sons still good dost bring.


“The eye-brows of long life to me, *

_ Great source of comfort, thou hast given.

Thou mak’st me great, for ’tis through thee
Come all the other gifts of Heaven.


“O thou, my meritorious sire,
And thou in whose fond breast T lay,
With power and grace your son inspire
His reveront sacrifice to pay.”


Vat,


The Trae héen; narrative. APPROPRIATE TO AN OCCASION WHEN
THE FEUDAL PRINCES WERE ASSISTING KING CHING AT A SAORIFICH
To KING Woo,


Before their sovereign king the lords appeared,
To seek the rules that he for them ordains.
Their banners bright with dragon blazonry
Waved grandly in the air, Upon their reins
Rings glittering shone, while on their broidered flags
And carriage fronts bells gave a tinkling sound.
Thus fall of majesty, they came to court,
' And splendid were their equipages found !


The king then led them on the left, and laid,
With filial heart, before his father’s shrine,
His offerings, that long life he might obtain,
And still preserve the honours of his line.
Favours he gets, both great and manifold.
’Tis from those brilliant and accomplished lords
They spring; and there shall long through them descend
Blessings unmixed and bright that Heaven affords.


Ix,


The Yéw kth; narrative. CELEBRATING THE DUKE OF SUNG ON
ONE OF HIS APPEARANCES AT THE CAPITAL TO ASSIST AT THE 8A-


> s


862 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


CRIFICE IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE OF CHOW ;-+SHOWING HOW HE
WAS ESTEEMED AND CHERISHED BY THE KING.


From ode 3 and other places we may conclude that’ the visitor here
celebrated was the representative of ene of the former dynasties ; and
the mention of his white horses sufficiently justifies the tradition in the
Preface that he was the famous viscount of Wei (See the Book of History,
IV. xi,), an elder brother, or an unele, of the last king of the Shang
dynasty, When the rebellion of that king’s son was put down, and the
son himself put to death, the viscount of Wei was made duke of Sung,
there to continue the sacrifices of the House of Shang. White had been
the esteemed or sacred colour with the dynasty of Yin or Shang, as red
was with that of Chow.


Behold our noble visitor,
The son of Shang’s high line.

His steeds, like those of his great sires,
All white and spotless shine.


The polished members of his train
Are with him come in state..
With reverence and dignity,
For his commands they wait.


Our noble visitor will stay :
But for one night or two.

Glad should we be if he would. think

. Two nights or four were due.


Bring forth the ropes to bind his steeds.
Alas! he will not bide.
To him be every comfort given !
A parting feast provide !


The greatest dignity is his.
: ’Tis right our noble guest
Should with their choicest favours be
By men and Spirits graced !


x.


The Woo; narrative. SUNG IN THE ANCESTRAL TEMPLE TO THE
MUSIC REGULATING THE DANCE IN HONOUR OF THE ACHIEVEMENTS
OF KING Woo


This account of the piece, given in the Preface, is variously corrobora-
ted, The dance was made by the duke of Chow, and was supposed in
some fay to represent the steps of Woo’s career,


©
r


Be I. § 1. %]_ THE BOOK. oF PorTRY. . 368


You were august and great, O royal Woo,

And showed your matchless strength in every plan.
Your father Wan, accomplished he and true,

Had on the road to triumph led the van.


The heritage you from your sire obtained,

And soon the oppressive rule of Yin was staid.
O’er all its hosts the victdry you gained,

And, firmly ’stablished, all the land you swayed.


364. THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


BOOK I.
Sxctioy ITI. Tae Decaps or Mm vu seaov -tsze.


L


THe Min yu séaou tsze; narrative. APPROPRIATE TO THE YOUNG
KING CHING, DECLARING HIS SENTIMENTS IN THE TEMPLE OF HIS
FATHER.


The Preface eays that wwe have here “the heir-son presenting himself
in the ancestral temple.’ Of course the “ heir-son ” was king Ching, who
was only a few years old on the death of king Woo, his father. Whether

- the piece was made for. him on his repairing to the temple when the
mourning for his father was expired, or after the expiration of the regency
of the duke of Chow, we cannot tell.


Alas for me, still but a child !
For all too soon I know’

The cares of the unsettled State.

' Too heavy will they grow.

I shrink in sorrow from the task ;
But, O my mighty sire,

To filial virtue, all thy life,
Thou ever didst aspire.


My great grandsire, though now enshrined,
To thee still living proved,
As if in court-yard and in hall
His royal person moved,
And I, the little child, will be
As reverent night and day.
To you, great kings, such homage I
Now on your throne will pay. -


II,


The Fang Woh; narrative. SEEMS TO BE A SEQUEL TO THE PRE-
‘CEDING PIECE. THE YOUNG KING TELLS OF HIS DIFFICULTIES AND


c
Gl


Br IL. § in. 1-] Tae BOOK oF PoETRY. 365


INCOMPETENCES ; ASKS FOR COUNSEL TO HELP TO COPY THE EXAMPLE :
OF HIS FATHER; STATES HOW HE MEANT TO DO SO; AND CONCLUDES
WITH AN APPEAL OR PRAYER TO Hi8 FATHER,


At the beginning of my sway,
Counsel I seek to know

How in my shrinéd father’s way
My feet may surely go.


Far-reaching were, his life proclaims,
The plans of his great mind ;

But how to carry ont his aims
T fail as yet to find. .


When most my powers I shall have tried
_ To reach to his grand height,
My steps will ever turn aside,

Or to the left or right.


I’m but a child, how can I hope
Aright my seat to fill,

Or with the many troubles cope’

- That bode disturbance stilt


O excellent and mighty sire,
To help thy son now deign !
With thy high wisdom me inspire,
And on thy throne maintain,


To thee, as ever near, I’ll try
My virtue true to prove.

In court, in house, before my eye,
Thy form shall always move.


Int.


The King che; narrative, THE YOUNG KING SHOWS HIS SENSE OF
WHAT WAS REQUIRED OF HIM TO PRESERVE THE FAVOUR OF HEAVEN,
A CONSTANT JUDGE; INTIMATES HIS GOOD PURPOSES; AND ASKS THE
HELP OF HIS MINISTERS TO BE ENABLED TO FULFIL THEM,


With reverence I will go
Where duty’s path is plain.


366 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


Heaven’s will I clearly know ;
Its favour to retain
Is hard. Let me not say
Heaven is remote on high,
Nor notices men’s way.
There in the starlit sky
It round about us moves,
Inspecting all we do,
And daily disapproves
What is not just and true.


Only a child am I.

Treading in duty’s way,
With effort vain I try

Due reverence to display.
Hach day throughout the year,

How slight the progress seems
But to the vision clear

TH pass from broken gleams.
Aid then my feeble yout

To bear the heavy crown.
Teach me the right and truth

Through all my life to own.


IV.


The Séaou pe; narrative. Kine CHING ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE
HAD ERRED, AND STATES HIS PURPOSE TO BE CAREFUL IN THE FUTURE ;
HE WILL GUARD AGAINST THE SLIGHT BEGINNINGS OF EVIL, AND IS
PENETRATED WITH A SENSE OF HIS OWN. INCOMPETENCES.


Evidently, I think, there is a reference in this piece to the king’s having
given a measure of credence at least to the rumours which were propa:
gated against the fidelity of the duke of Chow, when three brothers of
the duke joined the son of the last king of Yir against the new dynasty
of Chow. See what is said on this subject on I, xv. II.


When of the past I think, myself I blame ;

Vl guard in future ’gainst what caused me shame
I’ shun the wasp, nor do the foolish thing

By which I seemed to invite its painful sting.

Tt looked a wren, that I could hold unharmed ;

Ié grew to a fierce bird, with talons armed !
Uneasy is my head which wears the crown,

And bitter trials press me sorely down.


Br II. § m. v] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 367


I received from Staffordshire another version of this piece, which gives
it a more general character. It is not‘so-historically acourate as the above
version, but I think the reader will be pleaged to see it.


The past brings self-condemning thought.
Tn future let but good be wrought.

I will avoid the little thing

That first makes felt sin’s painful sting ;
For first the heart, when beni on sin,

Is like the startled, timid wren,

Which flutters with a trembling breast
Round him whose hands feel for its nesé.
But bolder grown, through habit long,
*Tis like a bird with pinion strong.

A throne’s temptations are too great,
And bitter evils on me wait. ;


Vv.


The Zsae shoo; narrative. THE CULTIVATION: OF THE GROUND,
FROM THE FIRST BREAKING OF IT UP TILL If YIELDS ABUNDANT
HARVESTS ;—-AVAILABLE SPECIALLY FOR SACRIFICES AND ON FESTIVE
OCCASIONS,

Whether this piece was intended to be sung on occasions of thanks-
giving, or in spring when praying for a good year, cannot be determined.
Opinions are divided on the point. It brings before us a series of pleasing
pictures of the husbandry of those early times, and has more interest for
the reader than many other pieces in the She, .


The toilers come to clear the ground,
Where grass and brushwood thick abound,
Where ploughshare never yet was found.


In thousands now they gather there ;
And side by side, and pair by pair,
The roots from out the soil they tear :—


Some in the marshes lying low ;
Some where the dry paths winding go ;
Some where the running waters flow.


The master see, inspecting all ;
His sons, responsive to his call ;
Their households also, great and small.


368 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IY.


With them are neighbours, strong and true,
Who come all helpful work to do ;
And servants hired are present too.


Hark ! how the merry feast goes round !
The husbands’ hearts with love abound ;
Their wives close by their sides are found.


Now they begin with patient care
The southern acres to prepare.
The soil is broken by the share.


They sow the various grains; each ear
With mystic life will soon appear,
When the young plants their heads uprear.


Behold in lines unbroken rise
The tender blades, whose lengthening size
Gains daily growth before our eyes!


Luxuriant is the sprouting grain, .
And through it goes a numerous train,
Who weed it o’er and o’er again.


Ere long their work the reapers ply,
The golden grain is piled on high ;
The stalks unnumbered multiply :—


Enough fo make the spirits sweet,
fo offer at our fathers’ feet ;
To furnish what for rites is meet;


Enough, when at the. fragrant board
Sit host and guest, for king and lord
The glorious banquet to afford ;


Enough, when now the feast is o’er,
* To satisfy the aged poor,
And cheer them from the unfailing store.


Nor now alone, but from of old,
And everywhere’s the story told,
Toil reaps from earth a thousand-fold.


Bs I. § 13. vi.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. . . 869


vi


The Léang se; natrative. MUCH AKIN TO THE PRECEDING :—-
PRESUMABLY AN ODE OF THANKSGIVING IN THE AUTUMN TO THE
SPIRITS OF THE LAND AND GRAIN, .


With sharp and well-shaped glittering share,
The toilers turn, with patient care,
The southern acres to prepare.


The different kinds of grain they sow,
Each seed, though hid the earth below,
Its form of life will quickly show.


Behold their wives and children there!
These the cooked millet to them bear,
Carried in baskets round and square.


Tn light splint hats their hoes they speed,
Clearing the ground for fruitful seed,
And rooting out the noisome weed.


The weeds, uprooted, die away, |
And feed the ground by their decay.
The millets grow from day to day.


And now the golden stalks and tall
Before the reapers, rustling, fall.
Straightway they’re built up like a wall.


High as a wall the sheaves are placed,.
- Like comb-teeth close, and interlaced.
Anon the grain is stored in haste.


Hundreds of houses hold the store ;
The wives and children fret no more ;
The labours of the year are o’er.


This black-lipped tawny bull we slay,
Whose horns the well-known curve display,
The rites of husbandry to pay.


Thus to the future hand we down
These rites long held in high renown,
Glad the ancestral ways to own.
VOL. 111. : » 2b


370 . THE BOOK OF POETRY. {Parr IV,


VI,


The Sze ¢; narrative, AN ODE, APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE AND
THE FEAST AFTER IT. F


The Preface says that this piece was appropriate to the entertainment
of the personators of the dead in connexion with the supplementary
sacrifice on the day after one of the great sacrifices in the ancestral
temple ;—see on IIE. ii. IV. This view, however, can hardly be correct.


In robes of silk, all bright and clean,
And temple cap, with reverent mien,
The officer walks from the hall
Straight to the porch, and looks at all
The sheep and oxén doomed to bleed.
Back he returns, and gives good heed
To tripods and the mighty horn

By the rhinoceros once borne. ;
No need for it! The feasters drink
The spirits good and mild, but shrink
From wanton revelry and pride.

By this an auspice is supplied

Of the long life which those shall reap
Who thus the rules of virtue keep.


VIII,


The Choh; narrative. AN ODE IN PRAISE OF KING Woo.


The Preface says that this, and some of the pieces that follow, were
made to announce at the shrine of king Woo the completion, by the duke
of Chow, of the Woo dance, intended to represent the achievements of
the king in the overthrow of Shang, and the establishment of the Vhow
dynasty. Perhaps all the pieces are fragments of a larger one which has
not been retained in- its integrity.


Oh! powerful was the mighty host,
By which the throne to Chow was given. -
Woo nursed it, while the time was dark,
Submissive to the will of Heaven.
But when the day propitious came,
He armed himself, and marched to fame,


And what the martial king achieved,
We have been favoured to obtain.


of


Br I. § 1. x] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 871


That we may rightly use the lot,

Which thou for us didst nobly gain,
Thy course, O king, we on our part
Will follow with sincerest heart.


TX,


The Hican; narrative, CELEBRATING THE MERIT AND SUCCESS OF
King Woo.


Throughout our myriad regions there is peace ;
Year after year the plenteous harvest brings.

Great Heaven in showing favours does not cease,
And will with blessing crown Chow’s line of kings.

The martial sovereign, Woo, the confidence
He won from all hig officers retained.

Their service would he through the realm dispense,
And for his house security thus gained.

Oh! glorious was he in the sight of Heaven,

By which to him the throne of Shang was given..


x.
The Lae; narrative, THE PRAISE OF KING WAN,


King Wan with earnest purpose toiled, .
And nothing left undone.

’Tis right his sons should now be styled
Lords of the realm he won. _


Abroad his virtue we will spread ;
Him in our hearts we'll shrine ;

Our aim that peace establishéd
May last while lasts our line.


‘Through him it was there came to Chow
Heaven’s favour and decree.

Him in our breasts we cherish now ;
Our pattern shall he be.


aa


$72 | THE BOOK OF POETRY. | [Parr IV.


+ XI


The Pan; narrative. THE GREATNESS OF CHOW, AND ITS FIRM
POSSESSION OF THE KINGDOM, AS SEEN IN THE PROGRESSES OF ITS
REIGNING SOVEREIGN.


Oh! great is now the house of Chow.
The lofty hills we climb,—

Both those whose ridges far extend,
And those with peaks sublime.


Along the Ho we watch the flow
Of its embankéd stream. _
Where’er o’erhead the sky is a
Me truly king men deem.


The princes all, both great and small,
My summons promptly own.

So by this. progress do I know
Chow stablished on the throne.


Br IL. 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. - 878


BOOK II.


THE PRAISE-ODES OF LOO.


As the pieces of Book I. are called the Sung of Chow, so those of this
Book are called the Sung of Loo. It is impossible, however, to render
Sung by the same term or terms in both cases, for we have not in this
Book “ Sacrificial odes”

Choo He says :—“ King Ching, because of the great services rendered
to the kingdom by the duke of Chow, granted to Pih-k‘in [the duke’s
eldest son, and the first marquis of Loo,] the privilege of using the royat
ceremonies and music, in consequence of which Loo had its Sung, which
were sung to the music in its ancestral temples. Afterwards they made
in Loo other odes in praise of their rulers, which they also called Sung.”
In this way it is endeavoured to account for there being such pieces as
the four in this Book in this Part of the She. Confucius found them,
we are to suppose, in Loo, bearing the name of Sung; and it was not
for him to do otherwise than simply edit them, as he did, and he thereby
did not commit himself to anything like an approval of their designation,
This is, perhaps, the best explanation of the name that can be given;
but it is not complimentary ¢o the disctimination of the sage.

It has often been asked why there’are no Fwxg of Loo in the Ist Part.
The question cannot be answered further than by saying that the pieces
of this Book are really Fung; but as they were wantonly called Sung,
we have them introduced here instead of being inserted in their proper
place. .

Loo was one of the States of the east, having its capital in K‘éuh-fow,
which is still the name of one of the districts in the department of Yen-
chow, Shan-tung. Choo says that king Ching appointed the duke of
Chow’s eldest son directly to it, Sze-ma Ts‘éen's account is rather .
different :—that the duke of Chow was himself appointed marquis of
Loo, but that, being unable to go there himself in consequence of his
duties at the court, he sent his eldest son instead ; and that the territory
was largely augmented after the termination of his regency, though he
still continued to remain at. court,


L


t a ‘
The Kéung ; narrative, CELEBRATING SOME MARQUIS OF LOO FoR
HIS CONSTANT AND ADMIRABLE THOUGHTFULNESS, ESPECIALLY AS
SEEN IN THE NUMBER AND QUALITY OF HIS HORSES,


The Preface says that the marquis was Shin, known as duke He (B.c.
658-4626). It refers, indeed, all the four pieces of the Book to him ;


a
3874 THE BOOK OF POETRY. -[Parr IV.


but it is only the fourth, of which it can be said with certainty that it
belonged to his time. y

Confucius, in the Analects, II, ii, says, “In the Book of Poetry are
three hundred pieces, but the design of all of them may be embraced in
that one sentence ;—-‘ Have no depraved thoughts.’’? “ That one sen-
tence” is the last line but one in this piece, the declaration about the
marquis who js celebrated being given by the sage as if it were a general
imperative injunction, That the sage should have selected a sentence
from such a piece as this to convey his Own idea as to the scope and
tendency of all these ancient poems is surprising. It is only less so, and
it is peculiarly Chinese, that this characteristic of the prince should be
referred to as the euuse of the serviceableness of his horses,


1 On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
' The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
There, sleek and large, they meet our sight ;
Some black, with their hind-quarters white ;
Pale yellow, some; some black; some bay :—
For carriage teams good horses they !
To the duke’s thoughts we can assign no bound ;
Turned to his steeds, lo! thus good are they found!


2 On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
Those stallions, sleek and large, are seen;
Some piebald,—white and flushed with green,
And others white, with yellow sheen ;
Some chestnuts; and some dapple gray :—
For carriage teams strong horses they !
To the duke’s thoughts no limit can we set ;
Turned to his steeds, such is the strength they get!


3 On the wide plains, our frontiers near,

‘The stallions, sleek.and large, appear.
Oh! sleek and large, those sprightly males !

Some that appear as flecked with scales ;
Some black, with manes of spotless white ;
Some white or red, manes dark as night :—
In carriage yoked, obedient quite !
The duke’s thoughts never cease and never tire ;
Turned to his steeds, lo! thus they rule their fire !


4 On the wide plains, our frontiers near,
The stallions, sleek and large, appear.
Oh! sleek and large, those stallions bright !
Cream-coloured, some ; some, red and white ;


Br IT, 1.] THE BOOK OF POETRY.


His


Thinks of his steeds, and such powers they evince!


Some, with white hairy legs; with eyes
Like those of fishes, some :—men prize
Such horses, grand in strength and size.
thoughts without depravity, our prince


TL


375


The Yéw peth; allusive. THE HAPPY INTERCOURSE OF SOME MAR-
Quis OF LOO WITH HIS MINISTERS AND OFFICERS ;—HOW THEY DE-
LIBERATED ON BUSINESS, FEASTED TOGETHER, AND THE MINISTERS


AND


1 How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,


tb


3


OFFICERS EXPRESSED THEIR GOOD WISHES.


Those chestnut teams that dash along!
Early to court they bring, and late,
Their masters, ministers of state,

In council wise, quick in debate.

As flock of egrets, circling round

Aloft, then lighting on the ground,
Those masters are, The drums resound ;
Having well drunk, they rise and dance,
And thus their mutual joy enhance.


How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,
Those stallion teams that dash along!

Karly and late their masters all

Are present in the palace hail,

And with the duke a-drinking fall.

As flock of egrets, circling round

Aloft, or wheeling ’bove the ground,

Are they. Anon the drums resound ;
Having well drunk, they homeward move ;
Pure is the mutual joy they prove.-


How sleek and strong, how sleek and strong,


. Those iron grays that dash along!


Early and late, their masters all

Are present in the palace hall,

And with the duke a-feasting fall.

At last their prayer they thus express :-—~
May fruitful years our marquis bless!
His goodness may he still maintain,

And leave to sonsin lengthening chain !
May such rejoicing long remain !


376 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV,


2
TH,


The Pran shwuy ; allusive and narrative. IN PRAISE OF SOME MAR-
QuIS oF LOO, CELEBRATING HIS INTEREST IN THE STATE COLLEGE,
WHICH PROBABLY HE HAD REPAIRED OR REBUILT, TESTIFYING His
VIRTUES, AND AUSPICING FOR HIM & COMPLETE TRIUMPH OVER THE
TRIBES OF THE Hwak, WHICH WOULD BE CELEBRATED IN THE
COLLEGE.


It.is not unlikely that the marquis in this piece was Shin, or duke He,
for we know that he was engaged in operations against the tribes of the
. Hwae. His part, indeed, was but a secondary one in them, and he was
only a follower of duke Hwan of Ts‘e, who had the supremacy among
the feudal States ; but it was not for a poet of Loo to dwell on the in-
ferior position to which his State and ruler were reduced. To Loo had
in the first place been assigned the regulation of the East; and in this
ode and the next the wriier, or the writers, would fain auspice a return
of its former glories. The immediate oceasion of its composition must
have been some opening or inauguration service in connexion with the
repair of the State college.

On IIT, i. VIST. we have seen that the royal college of Chow was built
in the middle of a circle of water ; each State had its grand college, with
a semi-cireular pool around it. There the officers of the State in autumn

_ learned ceremonies ; in winter, literary studies ; in spring and summer,
the use of arms; and in autumn and winter, dancing. There were cele-
brated trials of archery ; there the aged were feasted ; there the princes
held council with their ministers. The uses which it served were very
diverse, but all important. ?


1 Fair is the pool, half-circling round

The college of our land.

The plants of cress that there abound
We pluck with eager hand.

To it our prince of Loo draws nigh ;

We see his dragon banner fly,
Free waving in the wind.

And as he moves, his horses’ bells

Tinkle harmonious, and fast swells
The crowd that comes behind.


2 Fair is the pool, half-circling round
The college of our land.
The pond-weed plants that there abound
We pluck with cager hand.
Arrived is now our prince of Loo,
With team of steeds that grandly show,—
Steeds, each of highest worth.


Bx II. u1.] _ THE BOOK OF PORTRY. 377


His fame is great. With winning smile,
And blandest look, no haste the while,
His lessons he gives forth,


8 Fair is the pool, half-circling round
The college of our land.
The mallow plants that there ebound
We pluck with eager hand.
The college now our prince contains.
Joyous, the festive cup he drains,—
The cup of spirits good.
His be the strength that knows not age !
His be the noble course and sage, —
By which men are subdued !


4 Our prince of Loo has virtue rare ;
His reverence we see.
His every step he guards with care ;
The people’s mould is he.
In peace and war his powers are proved,
His mighty sires are deeply moved ;—
O’er him with love they bend.
Through filial duty ever paid,
‘And without farther effort made,
Blessings on him descend.


5 Our prince of Loo has wisdom great ;
, His virtue brighter grows.
This college, glory of the State,
To him its beauty owes.
The tribes of Hwae will own his sway ;
His tiger chiefs down here will lay
The ears cut from their foes.
His questioners, like Kaou Yaou wise,
Will here rehearse their enterprise,
And captive kerns expose.


6 His numerous officers, all true,
And of a virtuous mind,
Will haste with martial zeal to do
‘The part to them assigned ;—
Those tribes from south and east expel,
Then back their triumphs come to tell,
And here themselves report.


378 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


The duke no judge’s help will need,
As calm and truthful here they plead
Their claims before his court.


7 They draw their bows, with bone made strong.

How whiz the arrows fleet !

Their cars of war dash swift along,
Hager the foe to meet. ;

Drivers and footmen weary not,

Till o’er the tribes of Hwae is got
A victory entire,

Your plans, O prince, be firm and true!

So shall you all those tribes subdue,
And quench rebellion’s fire.


8 On wing they come, those owls, and rest

The college trees among.

Our mulberry fruits they eat with zest,
Grown birds of sweetest song,

So: shall the Hwae tribes change their minds,

And bring their tribute in all kinds
Of produce rich and rare ;—

The ivory tusks, the tortoise big,

The metals from their mines they dig ;—
Their fealty to declare. ‘


Iv.


The Peih hung; narrative. IN PRAISE OF DUKE Hx, AND AUSPI-
CING FOR HIM A MAGNIFICENT. CAREER OF SUCCESS, WHICH WOULD
MAKE L0O ALL THAT IT HAD EV. ER BEEN :~-WRITTEN, PROBABLY ON AN
OCCASION WHEN He HAD REPAIRED ON A GRAND SCALE THE TEMPLES
OF THE STATE, OF WHICH PIOUS ACT HIS ‘SUCCESS WOULD BE THE
REWARD,


There is no doubt that duke He is the hero of this piece, and the He-
sze mentioned in the last stanza as the architect under whose superin-
tendence the temples had been put into good repair was his brother,
whom we meet with elsewhere as “duke’s son, Yu.” The descriptions of
various sacrifices prove that the lords of Loo, whether permitted to use
royal ceremonies and sacrifices or not, did really do so.’ It was not for the
writer, a minister, probably, of Loo, to call into question the legality of
celebrations in which he took part and which he considered to be the
glory of the State. He was evidently in a poetic rapture as to what his
ruler was and. would do, The piece is a genuine bardic effusion.

The poet traces the lords of Loo to Kéang Yuen, and her son How-tseih,


Bx II. 1v.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 379


the legend about whom we have read already, in IH. ii. I. He then, in
the 2nd stanza, comes to the éstablishment of the Chow dynasty, and
under it of the marquisate of Loo. The next stanza brings him to duke
He, the son of duke Chwang (B.C, 692—661), and he dilates on his
sacrificial services, the military power of Loo, and the achievements
which He might be expected to accomplish in subjugating all the territory
lying to the east, and a long way south, of Loe.

Mount Tae is well known. Kwei and Mung were two other bills in
Loo ; as were also Hoo and Yih,—both of them in the present district of
Tsow. The Man and the Mih were properly the wild tribes of the south
and the north; but we can only understand by the terms here the wild
hordes south of the Mwae. Chang was a city with some adjacent terri-
tory, in the preseng district of T’4ng, which had been taken from Loo by
Ts‘e; and Heu, called in the Ch'un Ts‘éw, “the fields or lands of Heu,’’
lay west from Loo, originally a royal gift, but which had been parted
with to Ching in B.c. 710. ‘Tsoo-lae and Sin-foo were two hills in the
present department of T‘ae-gan. ;


1 Solemn the temples stand, and still,
Strong, built throughout with nicest skill.
From them our thoughts to Keang Yuen go,
The mother of our Chow and Loo.

She grandly shone with virtue rare

That nought could bend. So did she share
God’s favour, and How-tseih she bore,
Without a pang, or labour sore,

Just when her carrying days were o’er,

On How-tseih then ail blessings came.

That millets’ times were not the same,

This ripening quickly, and that slow,

He knew, and first the pulse to sow, .

And then the wheat, where each should grow.
Soon called a State, though small, to rule,
Ité under him became a school,

Where husbandry men learned to know,

To sow, to reap, to weed, to hoe.
Millets,—the early, black, and red,
,And rice that loves the watery bed ;—

All these through all the land were known,
And of Yu’s toils the worth was shown.


2 Long after How-tseih, in his line,
King T‘ae arose, quick to divine é
Heaven’s will, who eastward came and dwelt
South of mount K‘e, There first was felt


880 . THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


The power of Chow, and Shang’s fierce sway
Began to dwindle and decay.

From him we pass to Wan and Woo,
Continuing T‘ae’s great work to do,

Till in the plain of Muh ’twas given

To see th’ accomplished will of Heaven.
There met the hosts, both well arrayed,
And when Woo feared, his general said,
“Let not a doubt your mind possess !
With you is God, your arms to bless.”
The troops of Shang defeat sustained ;
Woo’s men, all fire, grand victory gained.
His son, king Ching, next wore the crown,
And said to Tan of wide renown,

Still as the duke of Chow well known,

* Your eldest son, O uncle great,

I will appoint to rule the State

Of Loo, and there on you bestow

A. territory that shall grow,

And help afford our House of Chow.”


38 Thus first did Loo a ruler get,
Who marquis in the east was set.
The lands and fields, each stream and hill,
Were granted to him, at his will
To hold, and many States attached,
Whose fealty jealously he watched. *
From him derived, our present chief,
Son of duke Chwang, now holds the fief.
With dragon banner raised aloft,

’ Grasping the pliant reins and soft,
Here comes he sacrifice.to pay.
In spring and autumn, no delay
He makes; but soon as dawns the day,
Correct his offerings appear ;—~
The victims, red and pure, are here :—
First for the great and sovereign Lord,
Then for How-tseih, our sire adored.
The victims these enjoy and own,
And send abundant blessings down.
Nor they alone, O prince, do so,
But from the duke of Chow gifts flow, .
And all your sires their grace bestow.


Bs Il. 1v.] —s THe BOOK oF PoETRY. 38}


4 In autumn comes th’ autumnal rite,

With bulls, whose horns in summer bright
Were capped with care :—one of them white,
For the great duke of Chow designed; ©
One red, for all our princes shrined.
And see! they set the goblet full,
In figure fashioned like a bull ;
The dishes of bamboo and «wood ;.
Sliced meat, roast pig, and pottage good:

_ And the large stand. Below the hal.

‘There wheel and move the dancers all.
O filial prince, your sires will bless, ,
And grant you glorious success. . .
Long life and goodness they’ll bestow
On you, to hold the State of Log,
And all the eastern land secure,
Like moon complete, like mountain sure.
No earthquake’s shock, no flood’s wild rage,
Shall e’er disturb your happy age. a8
And with your aged nobles three
Unbroken shall your friendship be,
In long and firm security.


5 A thousand are the cars of war.
Aloft on each, seen from afar,
Rise the two spears, with tassels red.
Tu each two bows in case are laid,
To frames with green strings firmly bound.
Guarding those cars, and all around,
March thirty thousand footmen bold,
And on their helmets can be told
The shells, strung on vermilion string :—
Such is the force our State can bring. |
We'll quell the tribes both west and north,
And against King and Shoo go forth.
O prince, the Spirits of your dead
With blaze of glory crown your head !
Give you long life, and riches great,
And round you trusty helpers set,
Of wrinkled back and hoary hair,
With counsel. wise for every care !


382 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Part IV.


You may those Spirits prosper thus,
And make your old age vigorous,

For thousands, myriads of years,
With bushy eyebrows, free from fears !


. 6 To us belongs T‘ae’s frowning height,
For all in Loo the grandest sight.
Both Kwei and Mung we safely keep ;
To farthest east our sway shall sweep,
Till all the States along the sea
To Loo obedient shall be.
The tribes of Hwae will own our might,
Proud to our prince their faith to plight.
Such the memorial he shall leave !
Such deeds our marquis shall achieve !


?% Both Hoo and Yih he shall maintain,
And victory over Seu shall gain,
Till all the States along the sea
To him obedient shall be.
The tribes of Hwae, the Mih whose home
Ts in the north, the Man who roam
The south, and tribes more southern still
Shall bow, submissive to his will.
Prompt they shall answer to his call,
And homage pay, his subjects all.


8 Oh1- Heaven our prince will greatly bless,
And he the eyebrows shall possess,
That show long life, and Loo maintain ;
Both Chang and Heu he shall regain.
Whatever land belonged of yore
To Tan, our prince shall soon restore.
Then shall his joy at feast be told
To his good wife, and mother old.
There too his chiefs, of virtue rare,
Each in his place, the joy shall share.
He thus shall all our region rule ;

His cup of blessing shall be full.
Like child’s his teeth shall still be seen,
With hoary hair,—an old age green !


9 The pines from Tsoo-lae’s hill were brought,
And cypresses on Sin-foo sought, ons


Bx IE. iv.] THE BOOK OF POETRY. © 383


The trees were felled, and hewn exact.
The workmen, with the nicest tact,
Using of various lengths the line,.

| Projected far the beams of pine,
While rose the inner chambers great.
Grand are those temples of the State,
New built, the work of He-sze skilled,
So wide, so deep, that all are filled .
With admiration of his art !
How well has He-sze done his part !


384 THE BOOK OF POETRY. [Parr IV.


BOOK IIt.


THE SACRIFICIAL ODES OF SHANG.


HERE the term Sung has again the same meaning as in Book i, Shang
was the name of the second of the three ancient dynasties, which ruled
over feudal China, and remains still in the small department of Shang
Chow in Shen-se, The ancestor of this dynasty was Séeh, who appears
in the Book of History as minister of Instruction to Shun; Whether he
received his investiture from Yaou or from Shun is a disputed point. In


' the 14th generation from Séeh was a T‘éen-yih, the celebrated T‘ang, who


’


overthrew the dynasty of Héa, and made himself master of the kingdom in
B.C. 1765, according to the common chronology. His descendants ruled
in China, down to B.C, 1120, when Chow or Show, the last sovereign, was
put to death by king Woo of the dynasty of Chow. Among them there
were‘three, more particularly distinguished :—T‘ang’s grandson and suc-
cessor, F‘ae-kéah, who received the title of T‘ae-tsung; T‘ae-mow (B.C.
1686—1560), known as Chung-tsung ; and Woo-ting (B.c, 1323—1263),
known as Kaou-tsung, The temples or shrines of these four sovereigns
maintained their place in the ancestral temple of the dynasty after
their first establishment; and if all its sacrificial odes had been pre-
served, they would nearly all have been in praise of one or other of them,
But at least all those of which T‘ae-tsung was the subject were lost. Of
the others we ‘have only a small portion,—five pieces in all.

Of how it is that we have these we have the following account. The
viscount of Wei, as has been stated on i. [ii.] IX., was made viscount of
Sung, there to continue the sacrifices of the House of Shang; but the
government of that State fell subsequently into disorder, and the memorials
of the Shang dynasty seem to have been lost. In the time of duke Tae
(B.C. 798—-765), ene of his ministers, a scion ef the ducal House, and an
ancestor of Confucius, styled Ching-k‘aou-foo, received from the Grand
Music-master at the court of Chow twelve of the sacrificial odes of Shang,
with which he returned to Sung; and they were used in sacrificing to
the old kings of the dynasty. As we have only five pieces in this Book,
it is supposed that seven of those twelve were lost during the rather more
than two centuries that elapsed between Ching-k‘aou-foo and his great
descendant, :


' I


The Na; narrative. APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE to TANG THE
SvUCcESSFUL, THE REAL FOUNDER OF THE SHANG DYNASTY,—DWELLING
ESPECIALLY ON THE MUSIC, AND ON THE REVERENCE WITH WHICH THE
SERVICE WAS PERFORMED. / ,


“Br IIL 1] THE BOOK OF POETRY. 385


By which of the sovereigns of Shang the sacrifice that the piece
describes was performed we cannot tell. The music is more prominent than
in most of the sacrificial odes of Chow, because during the Chow dynasty,

sacrifices commenced with libations of fragrant spirits, and under Shang
with music. “The departed Spirits,” it is said, “hover between heaven
and earth, and sound goes forth filling all the region of the air. Hence’
in sacrificing, the people of Yin (i.e, of Shang) commenced with a per-
formance of music, wishing thereby to call the attention of . the Spitits,
who, hearing it, would perhaps come to be present at the service, and to
enjoy j ” ‘ .


O grand! the drums, both large and for the hand,
Complete in number, here in order stand.

Their tones, though loud, harmoniously are blent,
And rise to greet our ancestor’s descent.


Him, the great T‘ang, of merit vast, our king
Asks by this music to descend, and bring

To us, the worshippers, the soothing sense
That he, the object of desire intense,

Is here. Deep are the sounds the drums emit,
And now we hear the flutes, which shrilly fit
Into the diapason :—concord great,
Which the sonorous gem doth regulate!
Majestic is our king of T‘ang’s great line,
Whose instruments such qualities combine.


Large bells we hear, which with the drums have place,
While in the court the dancers move with grace.
Scions of ancient kings the service view,

Pleased and delighted, guests of goodness true.
Such service we received from former days,

Down from our sires, who showed us virtue’s ways,—
How to be meek and mild, from morn to night,
‘And reverently discharge our parts aright.


May T‘ang accept the rites his son thus pays,
As round the summer comes, and autumn days!


I


The Léeh tsoo; narrative. APPROPRIATE, PROBABLY, LIKE THE LAST
PIECE, TO A SACRIFICE TO T‘ANG,--DWELLING ON THE SPIRITS, THE
SOUPS, AND THE GRAVITY OF THE SERVICE, AND ON THE ASSISTING
PRINCES.


VOL, U1, 25


386 | [HE BOOK OF POETRY. © [Parr IV.


+ Tis the view of Choo He that this piece was used at a sacrifice to T'ang,
and I am persuaded the view is correct. The Preface says that it was
sung in sacrificing to T‘ae-mow, the second of the Honoured Ones (Chung
Leung), mentioned in the note on the title of the Book, But it would be.
strange if we had 4 sacrifice to T‘ae-mow, and not a word in the hymn
used at it in praise of him, or that can in any way be fairly interpreted
of him. 4


Ah! from our sire, whose merit vast we own,
What blessings ever upon us come down,
Abiding, oft-repeated, deeds of grace!
“And you, O king, receive them in this place. .


-Here in our vessels shine the spirits clear,

And T‘ang himself, much wished for, shall appear.
Here too are set the soups of flavour rare,
Tempered, and mixed, with cunning and with care.
These offerings ave set forth, without a word,
Without contention, and with one accord,

To beg the presence of the honoured lord.

He wilt the eye-brows of long life confer,

And face of wrinkled age, and whitening hair.


With yokes adorned, and naves with leather bound,
While at the bits the eight bells tinkling sound,

The feudal princes come, to take their part

In all the offerings made with rev’rent heart.

To us the mighty sovereignty was given ;

And prosperous fortune long sent down from Heaven

Our fruitful harvests clearly prove. And now

Himself pleased with our service T‘ang will show,

And on us blessings without end bestow.


May Tang regard the rites his son thus pays,
As round the summer comes, and autumn days!


Lo MIL.


The Heuen néaou ; narrative, APPROPRIATE TO A SACRIFICE IN THE
’ ANCESTRAL TEMPLE OF SHANG :—INTENDED SPECIALLY TO DO HONOUR
TO THE KING W00-TING AND THE CELEBRATING MONARCH,


' Reference has been made to Séeh in the preliminary note. His mother,
it is said, belonged to the harem of the ancient emperor K‘uh, and was
named Kéenrteih. The legends about the manner of Séeh’s conception are

' various, According to Sze-ma Ts‘éen and others, Kéen-teih was bathing


Br IIE. tv.]. tae Book or porrry. 387


in an open place, when a swallow suddenly made its appearance and
dropt an egg, which she took and swallowed ; and from this came the
birth of Séeh. Compare the legend about How-tseih in III. ii, 1. The
imperial editors say that we need not believe the legends ;—the im-


portant point is to believe that the birth of Séeh was specially ordered by
Heaven.


King, towards the end of the piece, was the name, it is supposed, of a :
hill near the capita] of Shang, to which it served as a shelier and defence,


By Heaven sent down, the swallow came to earth,
And gave to our great Seeh his mystic birth. '
The sire of Shang, his children long abode

In Yin-land, waxing great. Thereafter God
Gave to the martial T‘ang His charge, that he
Should to each State assign its boundary.


Tang grandly thus possessed the regions nine, »
And to each quarter did its lords assign,
First lord of Shang, the sovereign power who swayed,
He got his charge, certain and stable niade.
Thus to our king the throne Woo-ting conveyed.


Woo-ting’s descendant is a martial king,

Whose powers, however taxed, still victory bring.
Ten lords, whose chariots dragon banners grace,
His millet dishes in due order place.


A thousand le extends the king’s domain, «

And there the people to repose are fain.

Lo! to the four seas thence our borders spread,
And from the space within there come to aid
Our temple service many chiefs arrayed.

Our hill of King for border has the Ho.
Twas right the sovereignty to Shang should go;
And from its ruler now all honours flow.


TV,


The Ch‘ang fah; narrative. CELEBRATING SEEH, THE ANCESTOR OF
THE House oF SHANG; SEANG-T‘00, HIS GRANDSON; T‘ANG, THE
FOUNDER OF THE DYNASTY; AND E_ YIN, T‘ANG’S CHIEF ADVISER.


Tt does not appear on occasion of what sacrifice this piece was made. The.
Preface says it was on occasion of the great Ze sacrifice, when the prin-
cipal object of honour would be the emperor Kuh, with Séeh as his cor-


25 *


388 THE BOOK OF POETRY. (Parr IY.


relate, and when all the previous kings of the dynasty and the early lords
of Shang, and their famous ministers and advisers, would be associated
In the service.

The mother of Séeh was a daughter of the State of ‘Sung; but this
Sung is not to be confounded with the dukedom of Sung under the Chow
dynasty. Where this earlier Sung (the name for it isa different Chinese
character) was, I do not know.

Séeh is “ the dark king” in st. 2, Why he was so styled is a mystery,
Perhaps there is an allusion to the legend about his birth, as the name
for the swallow in IIL, line 1, is “the dark bird.” “The small State ” with
which he was first charged would be Shang, which under him became

' © great.” Séang-t‘oo appears in the genealogical lists as Séeh’s grandson,
He would seem, from what is said here, to have been employed under the
Héa sovereigns, as a director or president of all the other princes,

From Séang-t‘od the poet hurries on to T‘ang. His chief opponent
was, of course, Kéeh, the last king of Héa, Kéeh’s three great helpers
were the princes of Wei (or Ch‘e-wei), Koo, and Keun-woo; but the
exact site of those principalities cannot be made out. Their lords aro
represented as being descended from Chuh-yung, a son of the ancient
Chuen-héuh.

On E yin, or A-hang, see the Shoo or Book of History, IV. iv.

What the shaking and peril which threatened Shang immediately
before T’ang were we do not know. ;


1 The lords of Shang wisdom profound had shown,
And omens of their greatness long were known.
When the great flood its waters spread around,
And Yu alone to curb its power was found,—
Yu who the regions of the land defined,
And to the great fiefs boundaries assigned,
Till o’er the realm was plainly marked each State
Even then the House of Sung ’gan to be great. .
God viewed its daughter’s son with favouring grace ;—
Hoe founded Shang; to him its kings their lineage trace.


2 He, the dark king, ruled with a powerful sway,
Success attendant on his glorious way. |
First with a small State charged, then with a large,
He failed not well his duties to discharge.
His rules of conduct he himself obeyed,
And prompt response all to his lessons made.
Next came Seang-t‘oo, the prince of ardent soul,
‘And from Hea’s centre, to the four seas’ goal,
Submissively all owned and bowed to his control.


3 God in His favour Shang’s House would not leave,
And then T‘ang rose that favour to receive.


Bx IL 1.] =. tHE BOOK OF PoETRY. . 389


T‘ang’s birth was not from Seek too far removed.

His sagely reverence daily greater proved.

For long to Heaven his brilliant influence rose,

And while his acts the fear of God disclose,
T‘ang as fit model God for the nine regions chose.


4 To him gave up the princes, great and small,
The ensigns of their rank ; on him they all,
Like to the pendants of a banner, hung :—~
So from indulgent Heaven his greatness sprung !
T‘ang used no violence, nor was he slow ;
Nor hard, nor soft, extremes he did not know.
His royal rules abroad were gently spread ;—
All dignities and wealth were gathered round his head.


5 To him from all the States their tribute flowed,
And like a strong steed, he sustained the load.
Such was the favour he reccived from Heaven! -
Proof of his valour through the realm was given.
His steadfast soul ’mid terrors never quailed ;

Nor wavered he by troublous doubts assailed ;—

On to the sovereign seat he struggled, and prevailed.


- 6 The martial king aloft his banner reared,
And in the field against his foes appeared.
He grasped his battle-axe with reverent hand;
*Gainst the attack his foes could make no stand.
His progress was like march of blazing fire ;

_ None could resist the torrent of his ire.

Like root with three shoots was the chiefest foe ;—
Advance none made he, and no growth could show.
Of the nine regions Tang possession got;
First with the lords of Wei and Koo he fought,

And then Keoun-woo’s strong chief, and Keeh of Hea he

smote. ;


7 In the mid time, between Seang-t‘oo and T“ang,
A shaking came, and peril threatened Shang. «
* But Heaven approved T‘ang as its chosen son,
And gave for minister the great E Yun,—
A-hang, who for the king a prosperous issue won.


390° THE BOOK OF POETRY. ‘Parr IV.


Ve


The Yin woo; narrative. CELEBRATING THE WAR OF W00-TING
AGAINST KING-TS‘00, ITS SUCCESS, AND THE GENERAL HAPPINESS AND
VIRTUE OF HIS REIGN ;—-MADE, PROBABLY, WHEN A SPECIAL AND’
PERMANENT TEMPLE WAS MADE FOR HIM AS THE Kou Tsuye, “THE
HieH AND HONOURED” KING OF SHANG.


After Woo-ting’s death, his Spirit-tablet would be shrined in the an-
céstral temple of Shang, ahd he tvould have his share in the seasonal
sacrifices ; but several reigns would elapse before there was a necessity
for any other arrangement to prevent his table from being removed and
his share in the sacrifices from being discontinued. Hence some critics
have referred the composition of the piece to the reign of Te-yih, the
last but one of the sovereigns of Shang.

To King-ts‘oo we have two names of the same State combined together,
just as we have occasion to notice the combination Yin-shang as the name
of the Shang or Yin dynasty. But the combination heré is more per-
plexing. Both the names of Yin and Shang were in common use long
before the time when their combination occurs in the She; we should say,
however, but for this ode, that the name of Ts‘oo wag not in use at all till
long after the Shang dynasty. The name King appears several times ia the
Ch‘un Ts‘éw in the annals of duke Chwang of Loo, and then it gives
place to the name Ts‘oo in the Ist year of duke He, and subsequently '
disappears itself altogether. The common opinion is that the name of
Ts‘oo did not come into use till between four and five centuries after the
overthrow of the Shang dynasty. If the ode before us be a genuine pro-
duction of the Shang dynasty, that opinion of course is incorrect. Some,
however, contend that it should be referred to the time of duke Séang of
Sung; and the balance of the argument seems to me to incline in favour
of that view.

“The Kéang of Te,” or “the Te-kéang,” still existed in the time of
the Han dynasty, occupying portions of the present Kan-suh. Woo-
ting’s reign, according to the common chronology, extended over fifty-
nine years, ;


1 Swift moved with martial force the king of Yin,
And King-ts‘oo he attacked, resolved to win.
Its dangerous passes fearlessly he sought, -
And then its multitudes together brought,
Soon was the country subject at his feet ;—
Such triumph proved him T‘ang’s descendant meet.


2 “Ye people,” thus to King-ts‘oo’s hosts he said,
“My kingdom’s southern part your home have made.
Of old, when the successful T‘ang bore sway,

The States made haste their offerings to pay.


Be III. v.]  - vHE Boor oF POETRY. $91.


The distant Keang of Te in homage came;

No chief then dared deny our sovereign claim.

Shall ye, who dwell much nearer than the Keang,
Transgress what long has been th’ unvaried rule of Shang?


-3 “’Dwas Heaven assigned to all the States their bounds ;
But where within the sphere of Yu’s grand rounds
Their capitals were placed, then every year,

As business galled, their princes did appear
Before our king, and to him humbly said,
‘Prepare not us to punish or upbraid,

For we the due regard to husbandry have paid. ”


4 When Heaven’s high glance this lower world surveys, -
Attention to the people first it pays.

_ Aware of this, our king impartial was,

‘Nor punished so as justice to o’erpass.
’Gainst idleness he took precaution sure ;—

« So o’er the States his rule did firm endure,

And all his life he made his happiness secure.


5 Well ordered was his capital, and grand,

: And served as model good to all the land.
Men recognized his energy as great ;

His glorious fame rang loud through every State.
Long was his life, and tranquil was his end ;

He blesses and protects us who from him descend.


6 Eager we climbed the King hill near at hand,
Where round and straight the pine and cypress stand.
We felled these to the ground, and hither brought,
And, reverent, hewed them to the shape we sought.

_ Long from the wall project the beanis of pine,
And numerous rise the pillars, large and fine ;—~

So have we built this house for Weo-ting’s peaceful shrine.


INDEXES.


INDEX I.


OF SUBJECTS.


Parts of the whole Book ave indicated by 1., IL, Se.3 separate Books
byi., ii.; Parts of a Book by (i.}, [ii], $e. 3 F the odes by L, IL, $e. ¢


and the stanzas by 1, 2, $e,


References to Parts are preceded by : : to Books of the sane Part, and


odes of the same Book, by ;


Abode, the tranquil (of the tablet of
Woo-ting), IV, iii. V. 6.
Absence of a friend, ene ae the, I,
i. HEE. 5 of a nusband, 1 ii. IFT. ;
VIE; iti. VEIL; v. VIL. ; vin
Ii; xi Mf; VIL: IL, viii. II, ;
of soldiers from their families, I, iii.
VI.; vi, TV.

Abundance and pros
HI. i. 1V.; tii. V.

Accomplished one, the (king Win),
IIL. iii, VIII. 5,

Ave parame of duke Wooof Wei,

vel.

Accoutrements, warlike, IT. #33. iit.

Acred height, the, Il. v. VI. 7.

Acres, I, viii. VI. 3: IL. vi. VI. 1
ten, I. ix. V.; south-lying, I. x
ie II. vi. VIL. 4, 3; VHI. 4:

- [iti] V5 A VI.; newly Salitvatee,

it a. FV. ; defi ining the, LIL. i. UL


Ree TY, ii, EEL.:


Address of Woo-ting to the people of
King-ts‘oo, III. iti. V. 2.

Admirable officers of king Ch‘ing, ITE.
ii. VILU.; how !, 1V. iii, 1.

Admiration of a husband, L. ii. VHL;
of a jady, I. xii. x; ot Shuh-twan,
I. vii. A11.; I'V.; of hounds and
hunting, L. viii. V UI. ; of the duke
of Chow, 1. xv. VI.; of princely
men, IL. viii. LV.

Admonition, an, I. xii. VI.; to king
Ching, III. ii. VIII. ; to fellows
officers, ILI. ii. IX. 5; -X.; duke
Woo’ 8 to himself, TIL. iii, IE. -


Advice, the bittenty ot of giving, toe
bad king, II. iv. X.; v. 1.

Adviser, the sovereign of Yin has 105

» IU. i. 1. 4,

Affinity, by marriage, Il. iv. EV.;
vii Lit. 38; IX. HE. 4.1.2, 35 th

Age, from age to, Pay C)
words of, LIL. ii. X. 4.

Aged men, II. iv. VIII. 6; honour
done to the, ILI. ii. LH. ; spirits give
comfort to the, Iv. i. [aii] V.
Longevity.

Agricultural pursuits, longing Ea IL.
x, VIIl.; described, I. ae 3 TL
vi. VIL: IV. i. ‘til. NL ;
~ pranerity of, IE. Hi. 1 ei ‘$; neg
lected, El. iv. EX. 5; and sacrifice,
U. vic Ve; VL; ‘VIL; VIL ;
of How-tseih, ITI. ii. 6: TV. i fil
X.;_ the threefold labours of, U1
iii, IX. a instructions in, ty, i,”

“ah I.; 11.5; attention to, IV. iii.


Ah! ant, Wii gee iii. II,

Alarm, a note of, v. IL. 3.

Alas! IIT. iii. L. ; as ivi 2; XI.72 Iv.
i. {ili} I.


Alienation of a lover, ¥. xii. VIE;
of an old friend, II. v. VIL.

Attar, the great, reared, UI. i. IIL, 7.

Altars, the border, IML, iii. 1V. 2.

Ancestor, think of your, III. i. ¥. 5,65
like your, III. ii. VIII. 2; of the
marquis of Han, IIE. ili, VII. 6;
of the earl of Shaou, ILI. iii, VIII.
5,6; How-tseib, the great, IV. ii,


INDEX I.


Ne 8; our meritorious, I'V. iii, I;


Ancestors, Win conformed to the ex~
ample of his, TEI. i: VI: ; the perr
sonator of, III. ii. INT. 3; IV. See
Dead; sacrifice to, IT. ‘ii. TV. 3.
See Sacrifice ; continuing the serv-
ices of, III. iii, VI. 3; VIL 1: IV.
i. [iii] VE. ; do not "disgrace your
great, ITT. ii, X. 73 ; mnsle and fe-
male, 1V.i. (ii.] TV. ; [iii.) V.; our,
will give car, 1V. i, (it) ¥ a3 meri«
torious, IV. ii, Ith. 4 3 Your, bless
you, EV. ii. TV. 3, 4

Aacestral chamber, . ii, TV. 35 tem-
ple, IL. v, FV.4: IIL LIL 8; VL


3; i IV.; i. IV. 2; V Vids IW
7, .) I. See Temple ; worship, I II, vi.
VL; vii, VI.2: IV. ii, TV.


ie rule, I, iii. IV. 1; saying,
ara ead, 3; statutes and faws, It.
iii
Ancients, thinking of the, I. iii, II. 3,
4; not taking the, as a pattern, in
y. 1, 4; example of the, IV. iii. 1.
Anger of Heaven, the, [HL ii. X. 8;
Hi. 111.4; XI, 1; moved with, LL
fii, IX. 4.


Angling, IL. ii, XII. ; vy. Vo 13 IL.


viii, FE. 3, 4.
Dianeneeh I have made, ITE. iii.


Announcements, timely, ITT. iii, II. 2;
of success, IIE, ii, VIEL. 2.
Bat every word finds its, FEL, iii.


Ant-hills, I. xv, TI, ad

Antelope, I. ii. XII,

Antiquity, the ica “of, Iii. iti. VI.
2; example of, 1V. iii. I.

Anxiety, the proper subjects of, III.
aii, LLL. 5.

ra do not think of all your, I.
vi, I1.; have no doubts nor, TV. ii.
1.3; 2; of Chung Shan-foo, III. iii.

TL,

Apparatus of war, FH. iii. IX. 1.

Apertment, the honoured, II. ii. X, 2.

Apartments, large inner, of temples in
Loo, LV. ii. TV. 9.

A poad against a bad husband, I. iii.
Wy. 3 from inferior Sass of Ching
to superior, I, vii.

Ap eres of God, the, I. i. 1.1

wv. iti, IIL; of Heaven, Hi. i. 1.
; I. AY. 1. [i] VI. ; iti. V3; the
hog acknowledged, IIL. ii. VILL. 4;
the great, IIT.i.1.6; iii. 1.7: IV
iii. 1.; the bright, TUL. ii. II. 1:
‘Wan and Wee received their, ne
iii. VIII. 4; former kings received


+O


OF SUBJECTS.


| Axes, I. viii. VI. 4; xii, Vi. ;


393


thelr, TIT. iii, X1.7; the King: Ag
preserve the, IV. i. gn Will.; i
Chow, IV. i. Si
first sovereign of Shang ie iw
iii, ILL. ; established, over the States,
IV. iti. Vv. 4,

Apron, IT. viii. H, 2.


‘Afcher s thimble, L. v. VIL2: I. iii.


8.
Archery, I. ii. XIV.; vii. [V.5 VIIL.;
viii cL; xi. Ih? i. iii. iv.; vit
VIL; viii, 1.3: UY, ii. etn


VL 1; iii, IT, 4: TV. ii, Til. 7.
Armies, I1i. ii. VL 5; iii. IX. 1;
the royal, Til. iii. Ix. 4, &.
Armoury, the king donned his grand,
IV. iii, [311] VII
Army, manouvring st an, I. vii. V. 5
marching of an, UE. viii. II, ; king
Woe’s, FV, 4, [iii.] VIII.
Anas of spirits and viands, Iv. 4. {ili.]


Arrival of Chwang Kéang ts Wei, I.
v. TIL
Arrow, an, flying
4; straight as an,
Arrows, the four, ITI, fi. ie 3: put
in cases, IV, 4. eae whizzing
forth, EV. ii. HI. 7. na
Arrow-thorn, the, HI, é V.1
Artemisia, I. ii. XIV.; v. VIL
Artful smiles, I. v. aI. a V. 3;
speech, Ik, iv. X. 5.
Ascending and descending, TIL i. L:
IV. iii. nhs II.; 111. See Heights,
Assignation, failure of an, 1. xii. 'V.
Assignations licentious, I. vii. X XI.
Assistants, at ancestral service, LY. i.
[i] I; ii, IL.; in husbandry, TV.


I.

Auonaeets of a lady, I. viii, EX.: IE.
iii, VII. of the feudal princes, II,
vii. ViI I, 4.

Aunts, I. iii. Ary. 2.

Autumn, plants decay in, FH. v. X. 2.

Autumnal sacrifice, I. vi. V.: IV.
ii, IV. 3,4; iti.

Awe, not standing in, of one another
or of Heaven, iI. iv. X. 3.

Awe-inspiring, Nan Chung, the, IT. i.
VUL ; Grand-master Yin, the, IE.

He Vil. ms oF king Woo, the, IY.


i fv
Axe- le, tole: I. xv. V. um
xv, Ls
IM. ii, VI. 1: IV. ii, IV. 6; we
broke our, I. xv. FV.
Axle, 1. iii, KIV.; -ends, If. vii. LV.
-| Azure vault, the, IIE. iii. ILL. 7,


Babbling, 1. v. VI. 3.
Badgers, 1. ix. VL; xv. I, 4,


mapas tL Il. eye Vv.


394


OF SUBJECTS,


INDEX 1:


Back of the aged, wrinkled, IIT. ii. II. | Bears and grisly bears, III. iii. VII.


4: IV. ii. IV. 5.
Back-bone, the, I. vi
Bags, eee i, ‘t VL I.
Bamboos, I. v.
Liv. V.1,


Bamboo frames for bows, I, xis oe


If. iii. I. 2; screens, I. viii.
IL iii, IV. 1: IIL iii. VII. 2; ar

“IL. iv. V1.2; flute, IL v. Y. 7
IIL. if. X. 6; sprouts, ‘TI, iti. VE.
3; a mat of fine, If. iv. V. 6;
dishes of, Il. vii. Vi. 1: IY. ii, OE
4: IV. ii. IV. 4.

Bands, green, IV. ii. IV. 5.

Banks, of the Joo, L.i, X.; of a stream
n the south, I, ii. IV. ; of the xe,
Lv. L.; of the Ho, I. vi. VEL. ; 0:

a river in Wei, I. re VI.; of i
Wei, Ij. i, IL. 4,
rivers, III. i, IIT. 3; of the Kéang
and Han, III. iii. VII. 33 of the

« Hewae, III. iii. IX. 2,4; the grace-
ful sweep of the, IL.’ iv. V. 1;
ayetite on the, of a river, II. v.


Banners, I. iv, IX.: IL iii, V.;
VUI.: IV. iii. IV. 6, with tortoises
and serpents, IT, i. VIII. 2, 33 it
IV. 2; iv. VE. 4: IID. iii "ELT. 2
falcon, IL. i. VIIL. 2; dragon, IT. i
peat 3; iti, FV. 2; HY, iii, ier

IV. i. fii VIIL. ; 3 ii, IIL. 1
TV. 8; Hi. IT.
patheriee foes, your gteat, ILI. iii, X.


Barbel, the, 11. ii. V. By "i


Barley, ye i. fi.) &
Barns, IL. Ae ee ed aT


Baponess "Muh of Heu, the, I. iv.

epeanest of Kéang Yuen, IIL. ti
iL

Baroy IE. viii TII. 2.


- Barter, I. v. TY. 1,
Becta i. iii, X. 3; viii. IX.: ID i
TI. 6; v. IIL. 8; ” shallow, f. i. ui


45 ii 1X. ; “square and round,
IV.: IL. vii, ae IV. i. fii]
VIL; deep, I. alle ; fish caughtin,
i. ii, 1; es of offerings, II.


idok

Battalions, II. viii. TEL. 3.

Beacon, look to Yin as a, (II. i. I. 6;
the, of Yin is not far distant, iam
iii. I. 8.

Pome of a temple, the, IV. iii. V.


hema, reaping, II. vi. III. 3
ing, TI. vii. VIII;
planting, III. ii, 1. 4.

Bean-sprouts, II, iv, IT. 2.


; gather-
aa


3 V. 13 a clump of,


5; of - western,


Birds, II, iv. V. 3,


5,6; dreaming about, I. iv. V. 6,
7; fars of, IT. v. IX. 4,
Beasts, worse than, I. iv. V.


See Antelope, Ewe, Pig,

adger, ‘ox, Rabbit,

ear, ont, amy,
Boar, wild, Hare, at,
Bull, Horse, Rhinoceros,
Cat, wild, Hound, Seal,

ow, amb, Sheep,
Deer, Leopard, Stag, |
Dog, Monkey, Stallion,
Doe, Ox, Tiger, . >
Elephant, Panther, Wolf.


Beautiful man, a, I. vii. XX. ;

Beauties, flaunting, I. vii. XIX.

Beauty, female, I. iii, XVIL ; iv. TV.;
v. II].; xii. WIII.; X: II. vii.
IV.; of duke Chwang, I. viii. XI. ;
and virtue of a lady, I, xii. IV.;
and vice of a.lady, L. iy. III,

Beds, crickets under, I.xv. 1.5. ~

Beginnings, small, of the House of
Chow, TIL. i. ILL; ; of evil, TV. i.


aoa IV.
ar x. II.; IJ. vii. VI.
I: FIM. i. VI. 3,4; winging of, JI.
vi. IV.; V.53 vii. VIL. 23 viii.
V.5: IV...


{i] IX.; iii. ri at
horses’ bits, I. xi, TI.: IU. fi. IX.
4; iii, IV. 2; VIII,: IV. ii. =
1; at the cross-board of a catria,

Al. ii. TX. 4; eight, of horses tink

ling, TL. tii. VE 7,8; VIL 4: IV.
ii, LIT. 1; attached to a sacrificial
knife, II. vi. VI. 5; attached to.
pene and front-boards, IV. i. [ii].

III.


Heecrolians of a prince celebrated.
the, I. ii.

Besotted by drink, TH. ig In3 0 3

Betrothal, 1 ii, VIL 2, 3 :

Bewailing his degradation, the eldest
son of king Seuen, II. v. 111s

Bignonia, the flowers of the, II. viii.


Bird, the duke of Chow compares him:
self to a, I. xv. Ti.; Yellow, Ii.
Il. 1; Hi, VIL.; xi. VL: II. iv.
IIi. ; a, flying up to heaven, II. vii.
X. 3; a, screened and supported
How-tseih, III, ii. I. 8; as a, on
the wing is hit, III. iii. Til. 14,

4; IV. i. [iii]

IV.; the ery of, If. i, V. 1; the

White, Jil. i. VIII. 2. :


See Cock,
Crane,


Crow,
Dove,


INDEX 1.
Duck, wild, Owl, .
Eagle, Pelican,
Egret, Pheasant,
Falcon, Quail,
Filial dove, Shrike,
Goose, wild, Sparrow,
Greensbeaks, Swallow,

‘ Hawk, Turtle dove,

: Magpie, Wagtail,
Marabou, Widgeon,
Otiole, Wren,
Osprey, Yellow Bird.


Birth, the, of king Wan, ITI, i. IT.
2; of Woo, 6; the first, of the
ople of Chow (How-tseih), III. ii.

1: IV. ii, EV. 1; of Foo and Shin,

, III. iii, V. 1; Heaven gave, to the
people, ITI. iii. I. ; VI. ; the, of the
- father of Shang, IV. iii. III.

Bits, I. xi, IL; IL. ii. IX. 4; iii. TV.

- 25 ornamented, I. v. III, 3.

Bitter gourds, I. xv. III. 3.

Black-hbajred race, the, II. i. VI. 5:

. IL. iii. LV. 3; heads, no, left, 111.
¢ di, TIL, 2.

Blade of grain, the, IV. iii. V.

Blesser, king Win the, III. i. VII.

Blessing, the great, IIT. i. 11. 3; of
God, ILI. i. VII. 4; without end,

- IIL ii. V. 3: IV. iit. IL; he seeks
- the, for himself, TV. ii. III. 4..

Blessings, on the king from ’Heaven
, and his ancestors, IT. i. VI.: III. ii.
. Ij.; the king supplicates, on his
- ministers, II, ii. VII. ; on the aged,
_ IIL. ii. I. 4; conferred by Heaven,
IL vi. VL 4; vii, Li: TI. i. 1X.
. 5,6: LV. ii. IV. 8; by Spirits, If.
vv. UI.5; V.; VI; VIL; vii. VI.
[Os TL i Wei eG GE.) TX; [ii]
-IV.; VL; 1X.; by king Tang, IV. iii.
. IL; manifold, IV. i. [ii.) VII. ;

VIIL.; ii. TV. 1, 3, 8.

Blind. ‘See Musicians,

Blood, weeping, II. iv. X. 7.

Blue, collar and_girdle-strings, I. vii.

. XVIL.; flies, I. viii. I.: 1. vii. V.

Boars, wild, I. ii, XIV.; viii, IL;

. xv. 0.4; 1. iii. VL. 4.
Boat, I. iii. X.4; XIX.; of cypress-
. wood, I. iii. I. 1; iv. I.; of pine, 1.
v. V. 4; of willow, II. iti. IL. 4;
vii, VIE 8; a little, I. v. VIL. 2;
. adrift, like a, IL. v. IIT. 4.

Boats, a bridge of, EII. i. II. 5; on the
King, II. i. IV. 3; crossing the
Wei in, IIL. ii. VI.6.

Boatman, I, iii. IX. 4. :

Boatmen’s sons, II, y. IX. 4.

Boehmeria, steeping the, I. xii. TV.

Boilers, I. xiii. IV.


OF SUBJECTS:


395


Boiling soup, III, iii. I. 6. =

Bonds of the State, superior men are
the, ITT. iii. 111. 3.

ana bows adorned with, IV. ii, IIT.


Booths for strangers, ITI. ii. VI. 3.

Bottle-gourds, 1. iii. IX.; xv. I. 6.

Bottles of spirits, two, I. xv. 1. 8.

Born, better not to have been, II. viii.
IX. 2; in an unhappy time, JIT. ji.
Ifi.4. See Birth.

Boundaries, reaching to the four Seas,
IV. iii. LIL.

Bow-case of tiger’s skin, I, xi. III. _

Bowing the head, III. jit, VIII. 5, 6.:

Bows put in a casé, I. xi. TI: I. iii.
1. 3; viii, 10.3: IV. i. [i] VILL;
with ivory ends, II. i. VII.5; red,
I, iti, 1°; adorned with horn, II.
vii, IX.; with bone, IV. ii, IIE. 7;
orhamented, ILI. ii. II. 3; two, in
each chariot, IV. ii, TV. 5; and
arrows, ILI. ii. VI. 1; iii, IL 4,
raggarts, nojsy, ILI. ii. IX.

Branches and stems, I. i. X. 1; III.i.


V. 6. :

Breakfasting at Choo, I. xii. TX.

Bream, the, I, i. X.; viii, IX.; xfi.
MIL; xv. VI. 1: If. ii. 111. 2;
viii. LL. 4: TIT. iii, VIL 5.

Breast, boating the, I. iii. I. 4.

Breast-bands for horses, II. iii. 1V,:
IN. iii. V. 4; VIL. 2.

Bride, the virtue of king Win’s, I. i.
L; U.; IV.; V.: WQLi. Tl; VI.
1; praise of a, I. i, VI; marriage
of a, 1. ii, I.; iii, IX.; and bride-
groom, first meeting of, I. viii, ITL.:
IL. vii. 1V.; the delicate fingers of
a, I. ix. I.; of the marquis of Han,
III. iii, VIL. 4.

Bridge of boats, a, ITT. i, 1. 5. :

Brother, a younger, abroad thinking of
his elder, I. ix. 1V.

Brothers, unfriendly, I. iii, I. 2; lov-
ing like, I. iii. X. 2; leaving, I. iti.
XIV. 2; iv. VIL.; v. V. 2; separ-
ation from, I. vi, Vil.; x. VE;
the words of, to be feared, I. vii. II.;
the close relation that should subsist
between, II. i. 1V.; ii. IX. 3; iv.
V.1: 10D. ii, 1. 1; cold treatment
of, by the king, II. vii. IX.

Brotherly duty of king Ke, IL. i.
VI, 3. z

Broussonetia. See Paper-mulberry.

Bubbling of boiling soup, like the, LIT.


iii. I. 6.
Buckles, gilt, I. xi. III.
Buff-coat, (. xi. VII. =)
Building houses, III. i. III. 3, 5; the
Marvellous tower, Ii, i, VIII. 1;


396


a palace, II, iv. V.; the city of
Seay, II. viii. III.: ITE. iii. V.;
temples, IV. ii. IV. 9; iii. V. 6;
walls, II. i. VIIL. 3; iii. VII, 2;
iv. V.: III, i. ITE. 6.

Bull, sacrificing a red, II, vi. VI. 5:
Ill. i. V. 4; @ white and a red, 1V.
ii. IV. 4; a biack-muzzied, tawny,
IV. iii. VI. ; a noble, IV. ii. VIL;
anda ram, a, EV. i. [i.] VEE.

Bull-figured goblet, TV. ii. IV. 4.

Burdens, earrying, IT. viii. [11. 2.

aries aig the people are heavily, LIZ.
ii i


Bury, some one will, a dead man, IT.
v. ILE. 6, é ;
Burying alive, barbarous practice of,
I. xi. VI.; sacrificial offerings, III.
Pe hers , a
ushes, clearing away, IV. i. [iit.] V.
Bushy clumps, JL. i, VII. aL }
Buskins, If. vii, VILL. 3.
Buttresses, the great families (feudal
chiefs) are, IL. vii, I: LIL it, X. 7.


Calabashes, used as cups, III. ij. VI. 4.
Cnty, reduced to ashes by, ITI. iii.


Calumnies, rife among the people, II. |:


iv. VIL. 1, 5; encouragement given
to, by the king, II. vii. IX. See
Slander. :

oer of duke Woo of Wei, I. v. I. 2;
the strings of a, iii .
wearing a, I. viii,
{iii.] VIL; ‘a white, L. xiii, II. ; of
spotted deor-skin, I, xiv. IIL.; a
leather, U1. vii. III. 1; peculiar, of
Yin, 111. i. 1. 5.

Caps on oné side, drunken men with,
II. vii. VI. 4.

Capital, the old of Chow, I. vi. I.; II.
viii. I. ; of Chow, I. xiv. LV,; IIL.
i. 1.5; W.2,6; IX.; X.; remove
to the royal, IT. iv. X. 7; the east-
ern, IL, vi. 1X. ; of the State of Shin,
ILL. iii. V. 2; of Shang, LV. iii. V.
5; need of reformation in the, III.
ii, IX.

Capitals, assigned within the sphere of
Yu’s labours, IV. iii. V. 3.

Captives, Il. iii, IV. 4: IL. i, VII.
8; lii, IX. 4. See Prisoners,

Carambola tree, L. xiii. ITI. ,

Careful as on the brink of a gulf, &e.,

- IL v. 1.6; IL 6; be, IIL. iii. 11.5.

Carnation-gem, I. vi. IX.

Carp, the, I. xii, III.: II. ii, IIT. 6:
IV. ii, VL

Carriago(s), Iii. Ly iii, UX.; MII.

°3; XVI. 3; iv. VI. 3; TX.; v.
TIL. 3,4; V.4; vii, IX.; XIV.


9


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX i.


ix. II.; x. IT.; xi. U1.; IUI.; xv.
Til. 2: TL. i. VILE. ; vii 1V.; viii.
VL; of. the king’s daughter, I. ii,
XIIi.; the great, I, vi. IX.; of -
State, I. xi. IX.: HH. vii. VIII. 1:
Hil iti. V. 5: VIL. 3; of a general,
IL i, VEE. 4; iti, IV.15; war-, U1,
fii, III,; loaded, If. iv. VIL. 9,
10; many, I. xi, To: UL. vi. VIL 4:
Tid. ii. VIII. 10. See Chariot.
Carriage-cover, IL. vi. VIL. 4.
Carriage-borses, splendid, 1V. ii. I.
See Horses,
Carriage-otlicers, II. i. VIII. 1,2.
Carts, I, x. I.; box-, IT. viii, X. 4.
Caterpillars, I. xv. III. 1. 2
Cats, wild, 1. xv. I. 4: IXD. iii, VIE. &
Cattle, herds of, II. iv. VI. ; and sheep,
Lif. i. I. 1.
Caution, exhortations to, ITI, iii. IT. 5
X. 1; you employ, Id. iii. HT. 5.
Caves made by T‘an-foo, before there
were houses, III, i, IIL.
Cedar, I. v. V. 4.
Celebrating, an officer, I. vii. VI.: IL
iii. JEI.; the king feasting with his
relatives, II. vii. I1I.; the serviced
of the earl of Shaou, II. viii, 111.5
rng van TIL. i. I. to VIL: IV. ‘
i) L.; ‘ «5 fii.
Gl the mother and wife of king
Wan, TIL. i. I; VIL 1; the ape
pointment of the chief of Shin, IIL.
iii. V.; | Chung Shan-foo, III. iii.
VI.; How-tseih, IIL. ii, L! IV. i,
[i] X.; ii, TV. 1; the representa
tives of two former dynasties, 1V. i,
ii.) III. ; the duke of Sung, IV. is
ii.] IX. ; a marguis of Loo, IV. ii.
-3 IL,; IL1,; duke He of Loo, IVs
ii. LV. ; Séeh, and his descendants,
IV. iti. IV. ; Woo-ting, IV. iii. V.;
king Woo, IV. i. (ii.] Xj iii] 1X.
Celery, II. i. 1. 1. =
Cent, per cent., three times, ITT. iii. X. 4.
Centre of attraction to the people, the
sovereign should be, TET. ti. VIL 2,
3; of the kingdom, the capital the,
II. i. VIL. 6; ii. TX.; iii. 1.4.
Cereals, Howrtscib sowed the ground
with yellow, III. ii. I. 5,
evemonies, provision for all, IV. iii


Chamber, a lovely girl in a, I. viii. IV.;
you should not be ashamed when
ee shines into your, IIL. iii,”

Changes of the seasons, I. xv. I.

Charge, king Seuen’s, to the earl of
Shaou, III. iii, V.; to Chung Shane
foo, Ii. iii. VI. 3, 4; to the mar«
quis of Han, ITI. iii. VII. ; to Hoa


“INDEX I,


\


OF SUBJECTS,


897


of Shaou, IIT. i a VIIL; to Hwang- | Clothes, a queen washing her own, I.


foo, FL. iii.

Ohariot(s), T iii. XIV. 38; v. 3

VIL 1; vii, IV.; V.; viii. 5a

xiii. 1V.: IL i. VIEL. 3; viii. IIL:
ILL, iii. Il. 4; Vil. 1; ; description
of, I, xi, Il; made of sandal-
wood, I. ix. VI.. If. i, 1X. 3: LEE.
j. IL. 8: ten large, war-, II. iii. IIL.
4; three thousand war-, II. iti. EV.;
hunting, Il. ii, IV.; VIL; and
horses, II, iv. TX. 6; a hundred,
Til, iii, VIE 4; a thousand, Iv:
ii. es 53 very ‘jarge war-, LY. ii.
IIL. 7. See Curriage.

Charioteer, I. xi. IL.; 11.

Charioteers, numerous, Til, iti. V. 7;
and footmen, IV. ii. ITL. 7.

Cheek, tripe and, II. ii. 11. 2.

(aerials of the people of Tsin, I.

Bee the -Shought of king Win,

iii,

Cherry tree, II. i IV. 1; Vil, 4.

Chestnut trees, I. iv. VI.1; ‘vii. XV.;
x. IL 3 xi. 0: xv. TIL 3: II, v. X.4.

Chief of Shaou, memory of the, L ii.
V.; of Seun, I. xiv. IV.; ‘of the
States of the north, III. iii. VII. 6;
an unkind, I. x ‘AL.

Chiefs of the savage tribes, IT. ifi.
IV. 4; of Joo and Juy, IIT. i. IT.
9; of the region of Seu, III. iii.


IX,
Child, a tender, f. viii. VII. 3; the
little (the king), IN. iii. VIIL 4:


IV. i. iti] 1.5 O15 Ti.
Child’s teeth, along with gray hair,
IV. ti. IV. 8.


Child-like joy, IL. i. IV. 6.

Children, the people served king Win
as his, II. 1, VIII, 1; though you
may be as, ITI. ii. 1X. 4; treat the
people as your, IIL, iii. IL. 6.

Chisel(s) and polisher, I. v. - 1; we
splintered our, I. xv. IV. 2

Chiseled ornaments, III. i. IV. 5.

Cicada, the, I. xv. I. 4: IL. v. III. 4;
like the ngise of the, ITI. iii. I. 6:
a lady’s forehead, like, I. v. TT. 2.

Circlet of water, a hall with a, IIL i.

Gin Hoe X. 6, :
ity, Hwang-fuo built a t, for
IMmself, It. iv. TX. 63 vor Wate,
fortifying the, IIL. iti. VI. 7,8.

Civil virtues of the king, III. fii.
VIII. 6; and martial qualities, IV.
ii, III. 4. See Peace.

wee e head of the Yin-, IEE iii.

TX. 2


i, II. 3; putting on, upside ae 1
viii. Vv; 3 a bride making, I. ix.

of mourners, I. xifi, If. See Gan
nients, Robes, & 1 iii. IX.; v. IX.;
vii. bee ; vee V.; x. 1; WD;
xi, V. 5

Cloud, Gag "ike a, beautiful, LIL.
iii. VIL. 4,

Clouds of girls, I. vil. XEX.; of at+
tendants, I, viij. IX. ; of snow, II.
i. VIL. 6; an arch of, TE. vi, VE. 2;
dense “masses of, IJ. vi. VIII. 3;
white, II. viii. V. 2%

Cloudy ‘weather, L. iii. Ve 5 X.

Clubs, I. xv. IV. 3.

Cobras and other se ents, dreaming ,
about, IL. iv. V. 6, 7; ‘and efts, Li,
iv. VITL. 6. -

Cokes I. vii, VIII. ; XVI. ; viii.


Coiffure, gray and madder-dyed, I. vii.


ona — from a spring, I. iff. VII,
3; xiv. IV.: IZ. v. IX. 3,

Cold of bby ‘the, r xv. L; oa heat,

passing through, II, vis I

Collar, a Seiten, Lx itl; 3; a blue,
I. vii. XVII

College of oe the state-, IV. ii, III.

Colours, significance of, I. iii, 11.

Colt, a brilliant white, il. iv. i.

Comb, ears of corn like the teeth of a,
TV. iii. VI.

Comb-pin of ivory, I. iv. HT. 2.

Commander of the guards, IIL. iii. TV.


Compassion. for the people, the duke of
Chow’s, I. xv. I¥.; have, ZI. iii.
HI. 1.

Compassionate Sere arrayed in
terrors, IL. iv. ;v LL

Complaint, a wife’ &, I. iti, 1V.5 X.5
of the ministers of Le, I. iii, XIL ;
of the baroness of Hen, I. iv. XS
of a woman, I. vii. XV.; of hard
treatment by a great officer, I. x,
YVII.; of a eunuch suffering from
slander, II. v. VE. ; of alienation of
an old friend, II.v. VIL; of an
officer onduty, If. wi. 1.5 1.; LIL;
of king Yéw’s queen, IL, viii, IV,;
of inferior against superiors, IT. viii.
VIL; of an officer against his fel-
lows, HI. ii. X. See Lament.

Compliments, frivolous and vainglori-
ous, I. viii. TI.

Confusion, breeders of, ITI. iii. XT. 2;
the country al¥ going to, III. iti.


XI. 4.
Cloth, fine and coarse, I. i, II, 2;—-v. | Congratulation of troops, IT. i. VIII;


ade


IX. ; of king Ching, III, ti, V lL.


"398


ere ais of the sun and moon, IT,


Conquest of Yin, TV. i. [ii] X.; of
King-ts‘00, 1¥. iii. V.

Conscience, people who have no, II.
vii.

‘Constantsocial ‘duties, ee Iv. Li] X.


Consteliation, II. v, VIL IX. 6, 6,
7; Vili. TV. 4.

Constellations and Stars.

See Draught Oxen, Orion,
Fire Star, : Pleiades,
Hesperus, ‘Rabbit Net,
Hyades, Sieve,
Ladle, Three Stars,
Lucifer, Ting,
Milky Way, Weaving Sisters.


Contempt shown to a worth 4 man, I.

_ iil, E; of instruction, UT. iti, ID.
lk.

Contrast of beauty with vice, I. iv.
IIL. ; of a man’s own poor wife with
flaunting beauties, I. vii. XIX.

Convivial entertainment, II. ii. X.

Convolvulus, I. x. XI.

a with a feast, IV. i. [ii]


Cook, the chief, IFT. tii. IV. 7.

Cooking fish, I. xiii, IV.

Correct and upright, ne Breit hearken
to the, HI. ii. Ti.

Couches, to sleep on, faye shall have,
II. iv. V. 8; lolling on, IL. vi.

Counsels and plans, bad followed, and
_ good rejected, IT. v. I.: TID. iii. IIL.;
duke Woo’s, 111. iii. II.

Counsellors, bad, YH, v. ¥.: TUL. iii. TIT.

Country, Chow was an old, GIli. I.
1; great, HG. i, VET. 4, 5; reduced
to-order, FIT. iii, VIE. 2,3; 1X. 6.

Courage, unprineipled men without,
I. v. IV. 6.


Court, the royal, I. i, K.; great
officers of a, I. ti. VII. ; of a duke,
I. vii. L. ; ; early, I. viii. L. ; 3 the open,


2 viii, IIL ; ; irregularity of a, I. viii.
V.; of the temple of Chow, IV. i.
ae iii.) I.; II.j; of Loo, IV.
i, TL. ; of sin, plensure and freedom
f, I. xi 1.3 of Yin, EEL. iii, £.;
rinces who do not come to, HF. iii.
: pen 2; the marquis of Han came to,
IU. iii. VIL. 1 ; the feudal princes
at, IT. ii, 1X, ; vii I.; IL; VIL;
. VII, ; holding, I. xiii. I.; think-
ing, of the officers at, II. vi. IED
Court-gate, ITE, i. TIE. 7.
Court-yard, 1. ix. VL; x. EE: Yi. iii.
II. 4; a ducal, I. ‘hii. Xiik. 2; a
torch blazing in the, II. iti, VEIT. ;
. of a palace, EI. iv. V. 5.


. OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX I.


Cousin, 1, xi. 1X. 5 note, IIT. iii. V. 5.

Cousias, I, iti. XIV.

Covetous men try to subvert their
peers, Tif. iii. TIT, 13.

Cowries, a hundred sets of, I. iii, H.
3.


Cows, I, vi. TI.

Cranes, U. xv. IIT. 3; the eer YY.
viii. V. 6; the ory of, II. iti. X&.
Creepers, the dolichos and other, Li.
IV.; vil VIL: TEL BY Me 6.

Creeping grass, I. vii.
aces water, II. vii. Vi ye
CalekotE. x. I.; xv. 1. 5.
Crime, what ismy ? EI. v. III, 1; the
net of, IIT. iii. X. 13 XI,
Criminals indeed suffering, but the
innocent also ruined, II. iv. X. 1.
Crepe good, IE. vi. VIL 3, 4. See


IV. ii.


Crassinad of a carriage, IL. ii. IX.


Coates, I. iii, KVI. 3: EH iv. VOL
3; v. IIE 1; raider the
male and female, M1. iv. VILL. 5.

Cruelties of Yin, IV. ii. X.

Cry, of birds, L1.-i. V. 1;-0f the oriole,
il. i. VILL 6; of wild eras IL. iii.
VIE. 3; of the crane, II. iii. X,; of
a male vhild, loud, IL. iv. V. 8; of
the infant. How-tseth, Vii. ii. I. 3.

Cubit-line, OV. ii, LV. >.

Cubits, five ene of walls, HI. iii,
VIL; iv. V.: i, TEL. 6.

Culmination of Sane ‘Liv. TV. 1;
xv. Lhe

Cultivation of the fields, the common,
IIL. ii. VI. 5. See Agricultural.

Cup(s), I. iii, XTIT, 3; XLV. 2,3:
IL. iti. VI. 4; vi. V. 3; viii. avis
of rhinoceros-horn, E.xv. 1.8: I
vii. B. 45 the pledge-, IE. v. i. 7;
vii. VI. 1; viti, VLE. 4, TEI. ii, Ii.
2; of rest, IT. vii. VI. 2; libation-,
Ui. i IV. 2; V.2; iii, VIIL 4;
ealabashes used as, IIL. ii. VI. 4.

Curses, oaths and, ILI, iii. 1. 3.

Cypress-wood, I. iti, I. 1; IL. i. VI.
6; vii. U7. 1: ‘a i. VIL. 3: IV.
ii, IV. 9;


Daily inspects us, Fkeaven, IV. i. [iii]


Dam in a stream, a, I, iii. X. ve
IX. 1; viii. IX.; xiv. IL: if v.
IIL. 8; bel iii. V. 6, 7.

Dancers, IV. ii. IV. 4.

Dancing, I, iii, XTEL. ; viii, XI. ; xii.
If.: H. vi. IV. 4; Ae IV.3. IV.
iti. L; riotous, Ii, vii. VI.

Darnel, k. viii. VEL. 1, 2: in vic VEIL 2.


INDEX I.


Dates, (fruit), I, xv. 1.6. |

Daughter, of a king, I. ii, XIII. ; of
the house of Wei, i. v. V.

Daughters, low estimate of, II. iv. V.


395 :
Dawn, early, I. ii. 11.3; VI. 1; X.
J 1; ii, 1X.8; iv. VE3; vii. VIUIL;
viii. J.; Vi: Tv. If 1.
Day, one, like three months, &c., I. vi.
: VIXL; vii. XVII; a lucky, IT.
iii, VI.; you tum the, into night,
IIL. iii. 1.5; and night. See Night.
Days and months, I. x. I.; passing,
» Iv. ID 4. ;
Dead, antelope, I. ii. XII. ; deer, 7. ;
man, IL. i. ILI. 6; representatives
of the, IT. vi. V. 1; VI. 3; vii. VI.
2: TIL ii. TI, 8; IV.; X. 6.
Death, and burial, IZ. i. IV. 2; of
two youths, I. iii. XIX. ; we should
enjoy our good things before, 1. x.
TL: I. vii. 111. 3; is approaching,
Il. iii. IV. 8. Z
Dory of the power of Chow, E. xiii.
IV. ; of filial piety, I. xiii, IL.
Der ie king’s bright, ILI. iii.


Deep, fish in the, If. iii. X.; v. X.7:
Ill. i. V. 3.


Wi V. 8.
Deer, I. ii, NII. 2: ILI. iii. VIL 5;
efields, I. xv. III. 2; calling to one
another, II. i. I,; herds of, in a
forest, IIE. iii, ILI. 9,
Deersskin cap, I. xiv. III.
ener in the king’s duties, III. iii.


, VI. 6. v
Degradation of the eldest son of king
Seuen, 1]. v. LIL.; of king Yéw’s
queen, II. viii. V.; we are con-
_Stantly subjected to, II]. iti. XI. 3.
Deluge, the, LV. iii. IV. 1.
Demeanour, ) correctness of, in former
Deportment, \ times, II. viii. I. ; be
éareful of your, III. ii. IX. 3;
X.5; duke Woo on, III. iii. I1.; of
_Chung Shan-foo, III. iii. VI. 2; of
the marquis of Loo, LV. ii. ITT. 4.
Demon, the, of drought, II. iii. IV. 5.
Denunciation of the Grand-master
Yin, I. iv. VIL.
Descendant, the distant, II. vi. VI. ;
VIl.; VIII, : ID. ii 11.4: TV.i
ate II. ; filial, IE vi. V.: EV. ii.
.4; of Nan Chung, HL, iii. TX.
1; of the duke of Chow, IV. i, [ii]
IV. 8; of king Tang, IV, iii. I.;
i, 3 V. 1.3; of Woo-ting, IV. iii.
Descendants, of Wan and Woo, IIL. i.
I, 2: 1V.i. (i 1V.; V.; of Shang,
Til. i, 1.4; promised to the king,
-IIL. ii. IIL, 8; thousands and hun-


OF SUBJECTS,


399


dreds of thousands of, IH. ii. V. ,
2; in unbroken line, IIT. ii. IT. 6;
ensuring prosperity to, TV. i. [ii]
VIL; iti, ¥,; prayer that goodness
may be transmitted to, IV. ii. U1.
Desolation of the State of Wei, I. iv.
X.; of the old capital of Chow, I.
vi. 1; of the country, IIL. iii. X41. 1.
a dara an envoy, ode on, IT. i.
Ii].


Deterioration of virtue brings distress,
Il, iii, 11.19. :

Devotion to duty, I. iv. VIL; v, IV.
5; of duke Léw to the people, IIL.
ii. VIL

Devourers of grain, Hi. vi, VIIE. 2:
III. iii, VII. 7.

Dew, morning, I. ii. VI. 1; exposed
to the, I. iti. XI. ; loaded with, I.
vii. XX.: H. ii. IX. 3,4; white, 7.
xi. IV.; on southernwood, II. ji.
ae 3 on rushes and grass, IT. viii.


Dew-lap, the wolf’s, I. xv. VII.
Difficulties of the kingdom, the many,.
IV. i. [iii] IV.

Dignity and happiness of the persona-
tors of the dead, III, ii. IV. ; and
riches of king ‘Tang, EV. iii. IV, 4, 5.

Disappointment at not mecting a lady,
L. iii. XVII. ; of an officer who re-
ake to another State, II. iv. IIT. 5


Discretion of the people of Tit x...

Dishes, I. xi. X.; made of bamboo
and wood, II. vii. VI. 1: IIL. ii.
WI. 4: IV. ii. IV. 4; at ancestral
service, II. vi. V.3; with food and
drink, II. i. IV. 6; of grain, II. i.
V. 2: IL. ii. I. 7; of millet, IT. v.
IX. : IV. iii, TE.

Disorder of the times, IT. iii. IX. ; iv.
Vil. toX.; v. 1; 11; 1V.;1X.;
X.: WIL i, IX.; X35 iii, UL. X.;
of drunkenness, [I. vii. VI.; of the
people, the cause of the, III. iii. ILI.
ll, 18.

Dissatisfaction and distress, III. iii.
HE. 3


Dissipation of the officers of Ch‘in, 4.

xii. I.

Distance, things more difficult to over-
come than, a Vil. ; .

Distant people, I. viii. VE.

Distilling, IIT. ii. 1. 7.

Distress, former wealth contrasted with
present, III. iii. XI. 5.

Ditches, T‘an-foo dug the, ITT. i. III.
4.


Dividing the land, III. i. III. 4; iii,
VILL. 3: IV. iii. IV. 1.
Divination, I. iv. VI. 2; v. IV. 2:


400


IEG. 1X. 4: IL. i. II
of dreams, H. iv. V. 6, 7; Vi. 4;
pees nae 1. xiv. IV.; with grain,
v. I,

Diviner, my “chief, II. iv. VI. 43 of
dreams, Il, iv. WITT. 5.

Diving. Li, Pie: 3 i, X. 4; fish, H.

LIL. Y tv. X. 7.

Dodder, i iv. EV. ¥: UL vil, UE

Does, sleek and fat, im the Marvellous
park, Til, i. VITI. 2.

Dog, I. ti. XIL.; hunting. T. xi, TF,

Dolichos, the, i. i. TT. 1,2 i IV. 15
iii, XII.; iv. TID. 3; vi. VIL;
WIE. ; x. XI: WH. i,'V. 6; fibre,
cava of, I. viii. Vi.; ix. BE: IE. v.


Domain. See Royal.

Pome Me life, a pleasant picture of, I.
Vv)

Doom of the kingdom, the, III. iii,
Til. 2, 3.

Door end sereen, bétween the, I. viii,
ILI. ; of a recluse’s hut, e xit. HL;
crickets about tha, I, xv. FE. 5.

Doors of a pees, IL. iv. V.%

Dove, the, L ii. L3 v. TV. 3; xiv,
{II.; the gall cooing, TL. v. IL,


Doves, Filial, H. i. 12. 3, 4; fi. V. 4.
gon, on upper robe, If. vii. VIIL.
A: TEL iii. VIE. 2.


Dragon-flag, IL. i. VIII. 3; iii. EV.
2; vii, VITI. 2: IIL. iii. VII. 2:
AE i ate VII, ; fi ILT.1; IV.


Deanghto Oxen, the, a constellation, IT.


‘Dreans, divining of, IL. iv. V. 6, 7;
Vi. 4; WHI. 5.

Dress, of great officers, I. ii, VIL. ;
sorrow compared to an unwashed, I.
iti. I. 5; colours of, I. iii, IL. ; of a
lady, T. iv. ome 3 ve IL; simplicity


of Ii. viii
Drink and food, I. x. er Ae i, VI.
ixits, it i 1;


5; viii. VL: WL i V
Lor, re oe or 8
Il. 3; _t.exeoss,
II. i X5 vA, 2; vii. Vie; TX.
5; to the full, IIT. ii. fIL.: iV i
(TX. ; it iL; pleasure and, rt
vi. I. 6; all round, IE. vi. V. 3: the
king happy while, II. vii. VIE;
long life to the ge I. xv. I. 8;
the personator of the dead, ITI. ii,
IV. ; and dancing, IV. ii. IL

Driver of a chariot, L. vit V. 3: Ti.
iv, VILE.

Drought, I. vi. Vi: ILL. iii. IV. ; “the
demon of, IIL. iii, TV. 5; asina
year of, JIT. iii, XI. 4.

Drummers and jinglera, IT. iii. IY. 3.


OF ie ah


INDEX 1


1. 3; X7; Drums, I, ?. 1. 3; xii. 1: ILi V.3:


TIL. ii. FL. 2: re i, ified ¥ ; the
rol? of, 1. iii. i. I'V.33

_ vB Iv: 2,35. Vit. ri TIL. i. TIL. 6:
IV. ii. TH. ; iii, 1. ; and bells, I. x
IL: IL. iii. I. : I, vit VI. 1, 2;
Me V.5: Ti VIL, 3, 4; Wy

i, (i ] IX; hand-, [V. i. iV.

Drunk, not returning until, TL. ti. X.
1; the Spirits have, or are, [T. vi.
V. 6,6; 1 croon as if, HI. iii. IUD,
13.


Drunkenness, IL. vii. VI.

; | Dry provisions, faults in the matter
of, II. i. V, 3.

Dryandras, III. ii. VII. 9.

Ducal court-yard, I. iii. XETY.

Ducks, wild, I. vii. VIEE. 1: IIT. it,
Se) the Yellow, Il. vii. 11. ; viii,


7

Duck-weed, I. i. I. 2, 3

Duke of Shaou, Loa. Vi: UL i,
VIII. ; of Ch‘ing, L vii. IV.

Duke of Chow, LY. ii. FV. 3; praiso
of the, I. xv. V.; Wi.; VIL; ex-

ition to the east, k xv. ML;

V.; vindicates his course, in the

sone TE of a bird robbed of its
g, I. xv. ii,

Duke « a Loo, the first, IV. ii. IV. 3,
the ancient, T‘an foo, TH. i. TIL;
Léw, Tit. ii. VE. ; Woo’s counsels,
TLL. iii. IL. ; of ‘Sung, at the courg
of Chow, EV. i. [ii.] IX.; He of Loo,
IV. ii. TV.

Dukes, L iii, XIII. 3: IL i. VIL. 43
HI. iii, FV. 7.

Dumplings, TEE. i. ITI. 3.

Dust, do not raise the, Ti. iii. IT.

Puties, social, IV. i. [i.] X.; public,

._ IV. 4. ii VL

ne La of king Wan’s queen, I,


Dykes, IV. i. {iii.] V.

Dynasties, the two earlier, ITI. i. VIL.
1: FV.i. {ii} HI. See a Shang,
Yin; InpEx Ii. '


Eagle, II. v. %. 7;
wing, III, i, IT. 8.
Ear, an, laid close to a wall, Il,


like an, on the


Ears, stopped, I. iii, XII. 4; cutting
off the left, 1f1. i. Vil. 8: IV.
eer 5; I hold you by the, ELI. iii.


a lugs, I. iv. TIT.; ¥. 1.2; viii.
: Li. viii. 1. 3.

Ean of grain, left in the field, II. vi.
VHE ee ao the teeth of a comb,
IV. iii.

Earl of Shas, the, building tho city


INDEX 1,°


of Seay, &c., 1, viii. IH.: TEL. Hi.
V. of Juy’s ode, TEL. iii. LEE.

Early, rising, IT. v. IL. 4: UL. iii. HL
4; instruction, ITI. iii. HI. 10;
feasting, IV. ii, II. ; and late, busy,
Ill. iii, VIL4; VIL. 1. See Dawn.

Earth, this tower, I. tii, IV. See
World,


Earth used in building walls, IL. iii.


VU. 2; iv. V. 3: 01D i Il. 6.
Earthen vessel, I, xii. I.; -ware stands,
: TIX, ii, ay cee i

ase, a little, desi ‘or the e

(TE. ii, IX. es
East, the sun in the, I. viii. IV. ; dawn

in the, I. vili. V.; hills of the, an,

open to the, I. xv. HL; [V.;

VIL: IL. viii. VIL : IIL iti, VL;

going to the, to hunt, II. iii, V.;

those tribes of the, IV. di. ITI. 6;
’ the States of the, made to serve the

West, Il. v. 1X.; gate, the, I. vii.

XV.; XEX.; xii. I1.; IV.; V.;

wind, gentle, 1. iii. X.: 11. v. VIL.
Rasy and indifferent, I. iii, X{T1.; the

enlightening of people, III. ij. X. 6;

and self-possessed was our prince,
. Wi V5 ii. VIL, ; VT.

Eating the bread of office, HI. iii. IIL.

6; and drinking to the full, IV. i.

Ix. af field labourers, their meal, LV.

iii. V.

Eaves, crickets under the, I. xv. I. 5.

Eclipsed, the sun, II. iv. 1X.

Herets, like a flock of, on the wing,
V. i, Gi.) TEL ; iii, 1%.

apes feathers, and egret-fan, I. xii.


Elegant carriage, an, like egrets flying,
IV. i. Tabiie

Elephant’s teeth, IV. ii. TH. 8,

Elms, thorny and white, J. x. I1.; xii.
IL.; Six, LE. xi. VII.

Embankment, the, I. xii. VE.
Embroidered robes, I. vii. XIV. ; x.
IIL. ; xi. V.; skirt, I. xv. VI. I.

Embroidery, shell-, I. v. V1. 1.
Enceinte, the gate of the, ITI. i. III. 7.
Engines of onfali and assault, III. i.


Il. 7, 8.

Engraved and chiseled ornaments, Ii.

“i IV. 5. .

Enjoyment, advising present, I. x. II.

Enlightening the people, IT. ii. X. 6.

nmities, the sovereign of Yin con-
tracting, IIL. iii. I. 4,

Entertainment, a royal, IZ.i. 1.; of
friends, If. i. V.; a district-, If. ii,
II], ; of ministers by the king, Ii.
ii. VII; of feudal princes, IL. ii.
IX.; vii. L; U1.; VII; VIL;
ot relatives, II. vii. LIT: ILL. ii. IL;


oF supyects.


40} |
TII.; of personators of the dead,
iwkw oe


Rae? ode on despatehing an, H. i.


Ephemera, an, I. xiy, L.
Equipage of the bride df a marquis,
.v. TL


Error, and confusion, in government,
HI. iii, FR.3; king Ching acknow-
ledges hig, EV. i. (iii) LV.

Escorting, a duke, his uncle, I. xi, 1X.

Eunuch, I, xi. I,; Ming-tsze, an,
suffering from slander, Il. v. VI,

ann interfering with govt., III.
iti, X. f

Evening, a happy, I. x. V. :

Ewes, (emaciated) with large heads,
Il, vaii, 1X. 3.

Examination of prisoners, LY. ii, IH.


4,
Example, bad, of the king, II, vii.
IX.; good of king Wan, IT. i. VI. 1.


V. ; | Excitoment of a gentleman in love, I.


xii. VIIL ; X.
Excursion, an, I. xii. I.
Expedition, an, to the Kast, I. xv. IIE;
«3 WL: IL. viii. VILL: IL. fii.
VE; to fhe North, IL i. VIL;
VIEL ; IX. 5 iti: LIV. ; to the South,
II. iii. IV. ; viii, ITL. ; to the West, -
II. vi. IH. ; against the tribes of
ee HI. iii, — 3 EX:
+ di +3 against King-ts‘oo,
IV. iii. V.; a hunting, Il. iii. V.;
VI. ; the toil of an, I. viii, VI.
Expeditions, many toilsqme, II. viii. X.'
Experiences, bitter, EV. iii. IV.
Extortion, ix Wei, I. ix. VLE. ; of the
officers of Yin-shang, III. iii. I. 2.
Eyebrows, bushy, of old people, I.
xv. 1.6; J. ii, VIL 4: iy i, [ii]
VII; VILL ; ii. 1V. 8,8; ii, ID
Eyes, clear, I. vii, XX.; beautiful, I.


viii. XI.
i dark-yellow and red, I. xv. I.


Face, a prince’s, rouged, I. xi. V.; a
wrinkled, IV. iii. IT.

Faces, unblushing, If. v. IV. 5.

Falcon, 1. xi. VIE. ; YH. iii, 1X.

Falcon-banners, [, iv. 1X. 2: WA. iii.
HE. 4: Hi. di, TH. 2; VEIL. 1.

False hair, I. iv. LIL. 2.

Fame, endless, of king Wan, III. i. 1.
2; X.; and foes of Tan-foo, HI.
i. TIT. 8; of T‘ae-sze, IT. i. VIL 1;
of king Ke, ITI. i. VII. 4; virtuous,
without fail, if. ii. V. 3; iii, VIII.
6: iV. i. [ii.] I¥2.; brilliant of the
marquis of. Loo, TV. ii. 114. 2; of
Woo-ting, IV, iii. V. 5,

4%


402 OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX 1.


. Families, the great, ave buttresses, HI. | . i, (i.] VIII. ; assisting at a sacrifice,


di. X. 4


Family of king Woo, the, IV. i. [ii.]


Famine, I. vj. V.: TEL. di, XD 15 and
death, Ik. iv. X. ¥, 4: ITE iti. TV,

Farms, three hundred, I. ix. VI.

Fat, offerings of, HE. ii. BE 7.

Fat and large, IV. ii. [.; and strong,
VV. ii. 11.

¥ather and mother invoked, 1. di. T¥.
4; thought of, I. ix. I'V.; Ya-
tion from, 1. vi. VIF.; none to be
looked up to like a, IT. y, IH. 3.
See Parents.

Father of husbandry, the, II. vi. VII.
2 VI. 2; of war, 11%. i. VEL 8;
© great and august! IV. i. [iii.J 1.;
ag Oh! my great, LY. i [iti] B;

I


Favour of God, and of Teaven, on
Tang, FV. iii. FV,

Favours conferred on feudal princes,
by the king, H. vit. VHE,

Favourite, indulgence of a, by king
Yéw, Hiv. VIE


Feast, a, I. vii. I.; a private, II. vi.


V.4; a parting, FEF. Ei V.6; VIE:


3.1L (ii) FX.
Feasting, I. i, X.; vii. HI. : Eb. ii.
HHI, 6: FV. i. fi.} EX. ; a bvide, EL.
vii. [V. ; drunken, II. vii. VI. ; and


‘deliberating, IV. ii. 14. Seo Enter- 4 |


tainment, Festal.

Feather, a pheasant’s, I. iii, XII. ;
egrot’s, 1, xii. I. .

Feather-figured shield, I. xi, 11F.

Feathered streamers, §. iv, IX. 3; ore
naments, TEL, iii, VII. 2.

Feathers,'a screen of, 1. vi. IIL; of
the wild goose, I. x. VIEL. ; chang
ing, EI. iv. ¥. 4; stuck in music«
frames, I'V. i. [ii-] V.

Features, various of a beauty, I. v.
Iii. 2; V.3.

Felling ¢rees, Hl. i. V.; v. Hi. 7:
ve VIL. 2: EV. ii. £V. 95° iii.


Fence(s), E¥.-vii. V.1; good men are
a, IIL. ii. X. 7.

Ferns, §. di. $11.: 11.4, VER; v. X.S.

Festal ode, a, 11.i.I.; Tl.; V.; ii
FA; V.; VH.; FX.; X.; it. Z;
vi. V.: IIL ii, H.; 1f7.; IV. See
Entertainment.

Festivity of Chting. 4. vii. X XH.

Fetid tree, tho, used for firewood, I. xv.
16: YF iv. TV. 2.

Feudal princes, entertained by the
king, 18. ii. PX. ; vit. | HL. ; WH;
VIL. ; a gathering of the, IL. vi.
IX.; X.; establishmenteof the, 1¥.


¥V.ii. VH.; VIIL.; praise of, If.
as 3 vi. X.5 vii Tes IVIL {iJ


Fields, should not be too large, 1. viii.
VIE. ; of young millet, ¥ xiv. TV. ;
ublic an@ private, EI. vi. VIL 3:

iV, i. (4i.] H.; toiled iv the open,
II, iii, VIE. 1; stony, Uf. iv. VILL.
7; Jaying out, 1. vi. VE: HI. ii.
VIS; it. ¥.3: VIL 6; extensive,
large, 11. vi, VIL; VEIL; taken
from the people, Hl. ili. X. 2.

Fieldswork, I. iii. VIL; iv. VI. 3; xv.
B: EV. i fF) L; Wy ait¥.

Filial feeling, the decay of, I. xiii, I1.;
of king Woo, fEE. i, TX. 3,4: 1V~

i. fi VIL; [iii] L; of king Wan,

IL, i, X. 3; of king Chiing, IY. i. .
{ii.j] VHL.; [iii.] £5 of the maxquis
of Loo, IV. i, [ii.] HI. 4; of the
king's son, #91. di, Itt. 5; men of,
IL, di, WIIL. 5.

Filial doves, the, ##. & IF. 3,4; di. V. 4.

Fingers, delicate of a bride, I. ix. I.

Vir-trees, F, xi. W.: Bi, VI.6: IL
i, VIL. 3.

Fire, used in hunting, I. vii, FV. ;
4rought like, I10. aii, TV.6; king
‘Lang compared to a blazing, IY.
aii, FV. 6.

Firesstar, the, I. xv. 1.

Fire-wood, I. i. EX.; X.; vi. FY.; vii.
XVILL; viii. Vit; x. Vij xv. 7.
6: Hiv. V%.3; VE. £; v. IIL
7; IX. 3; vii IV. 4; viii. Ve 4:
TIE i FV. 13 V. 5.

Fire-wood, the, gutherers of, consult

the, FLE. di, X. 3.

First«born son, ERI. i. 1. 1, 2.

Fish, I. v. LIL 45 viii. DX.; xf TTL:
xiii TV.: SQ Gf. 7; iii, Xj iv. VEE.
11: (V. i. [ii.) VI; fresh, ILL. iii.
VEI. 3; dveaming of, BE. iv. Vi. 4;
among the pond-weed, IT. vii. VIL;
leap in the deep, [H.i. ¥. 3; ‘in the
Marvellous pond, Ht. i. VIII. 2;
cnet, 1. iii X VILL. 3; v. HI. 4;
«basket, IF. ii. 111.5 yiti, TX. 3.


See Barbel, Rud,
Bream, Sand-blower,
Carp, Sturgeon
Kwan, Téaott, :
Mud-fish, Tench,

Yellow-jaws.


Five braidings, the, of an officer, I. ii.
WIL.; wild boars, £. ii, XT.

Flags. See Banners. ‘

Flames, blazing, may be extinguished,
II. iv. VILL. 8; troubles like, UL
ii, K. 4.


INDEX I.


Flattering parasites, HE. ii. 1X:

Flaw, a, in ree, worse than in white
jade, IIT. iii. IL. 5.

Flesh, roast and broiled, TI. ii. I. 7;


IV. 6.

Flocks and herds, the largeness of king
Seuen’s, If. iv. VI.

Flowers, of the peach tree, I. i. VIL;
fi, XII. 2; of the sparrow-plum, I.
fi. XTIT. 1; of the plum, I. ii. KITT.
2; of the ephemerat hedge-tree, I.
vii. UX. ; of the lotus, I. vii. X.;
xii, X. 3 of valerian, I. vii. KXL;
of the , thorn-mallows, L. sii. Ik.; of
the carambola tree, I. xiii. IE. ; of
the cherry-tree, IL a Iv. 1; Meee
4; of the bignonia, I. viii. 1X;
millet, U1. i, Vill.4; elegant as, t
ix. [L.; brilliant, i, iL 3 splen-
did are the, II, vi. X.

Flute, I. iii, XIIL.: IV. iii. I. ; the
bamboo-, Ik. v. V. i IL. ii, X. 6;
double, I'V. i. (ii) V

Fly, the diue, 1. viii. I: II. vii. V.

Flying away from sorrow, impossible,
L iii, I. 5; aloft to heaven, II. v.
X. 23 egrets, IV. i. fii.) DE

Followers ‘taken from private citizens
by govt., FIL. iii, X. 2; Pa
of duke He, IV. ii, IV

Folly of pursuing objects iat one’s


strength, I. viii. VII. rae not enjoys |


ing good things, I.

Food, spitits and, IT. iv. V. 9; vi. VI.
3: TUL i. VI. 4; bringing. La
labourers, Ii. vi. Vil. 3; I. 4:
IV. iii. V.; dans a eu, ii.
viii. IX. 3. See Viands.

Foot, marching on, II. og II. 3; of
the hill Han, II. i.

Footmen, numerous, IL. iii, V. 7;
30,000, IVSii. TV. 5; and chariot-
eers, ry, ii, TTY. 7,

gies successors treading in the,
of predecessors, III. i. IX.

Forage, and grain, II. vii. I. 2, 3.

Forces, Ts‘in raising, I. xi. VIII.

Forcing a lady to marty, I. ii, VI.

Ford, 1. iti, IX. ;

Forefathers, thuking 0 of er Il. vy.
II. 1; appeal to, 1

Forehead, a fine, Liv. tity ai XX;


viti, XT.
Fores, I. i, VIE..3; ii, XII. ; iii. VI:
iv, VITL. 4; vii. IV.2; viii. V.
zs III. iti. Til. 9; troops like a,
TIL i, U. a How-tseih placed in

a, III. ii.
Hor fulness, ihe lant of, T. v. VIIE.

4; of a husband, I. xi. Vil.

Former wealth and present distress,
IIL iti. XI. 5; kings, Jil. iii. pan


OF SUBJECTS.


403


7: 1V.i. (i ] IV; men, example of,
IV. ii. 1.

Fortifying Ts‘aou, 1, Hii, VEL; the sey
of Ts‘e in the east, II. ii, VE. 7, 8.
Forwards or backwards, impossible fo

go, ILI. iii. TTT. 9.
Heunialey a, by a recluse’s hut, I. xii,


Four, a chariot and, L. vii. IV.; V.
(See Horses) ; dishes of grain, xi,
P.O quarters, God surveyed the,
UL. i. VIL 2; quarters, the people
of the, IIL. i. X. 4-6; seas, 1V.
iii, TIL.

Fowls, L. vi, £2.

Foxes, I. iii, XVI.; v. FX.; viii.

I.; xv. I. 45 the long-tailed, II.

viii. &.4; the white, III. iii. VII. 6.

Porto I. iii, XIN. 3; xi. Vij xiii.
7 IE viii. [. 1.

Piece an a Poa If, vi. VI.
6: UL. ii.

Frames, for Suilding earthen walls,
IL. iv. V. 3: TIL i TL 5, 6;
music-, TV. i. [ii.] V.

‘Friends slandered M an old, Hs Be V5
alienation of an old, I. v. V

Friends, no, aloe to ane a i.
IV. ; left alono in office by, II. iv.
IX. 8; insineore, HI. iti. Ir. 9,-
14; the ping giving ‘repose to his, .
Ill. ii. V. 4


Friendship, and: gifts, Iv. X.; vii,
VIIl.; old, I. vii. VII.; the duty
and value ‘of, IL. i. V.3 "Jike hills


and mountains, IV. i IV. 4
Front-board of a carriage, IV. ii. VIII.
Frontiers of the north, guarding the,

EH. i. VIL.
ie carved, for horses, EIT. iii.

VIL. 2.


Frugality and politeness, II, viii. VEE.

Fruits, the peach, Li. VIL; the plum,
I. ii. IX.; the carambola, I. xiii.
HL; grapes, sparrow-plums, dates,
and bottle:gourds, I. xv. I. 63
heavenly gourds, 1. xv. HI. 2;
bitzer gourds, I. xv. HI. 3; pears,
Il.i. JX. 1; medlars, H. LIX. 3;
gourds, IT. vi. Vi. 4; mulberries,
LV. ii. IIL. 8; vessels of, (LI. iti.

* VII. 3.

Fugitive: collected, II. i. IV. 2; the
people are all wandering, IIE. iii,


Renan I. vii. Vi; xv. 04; IL
v. 1X. 4

Furnace, a small, Tf. viii. V. 4.

Furnaces, H, vi. V. 3.


Gags, the ranks with the, I. xv. JH.
’ 1: TY. i. IL. 8; TI. 2,


404 OF SUBJECTS. INDEX 4.


Galloping, horses, I. iv. X.; II. i. III. | Gentlemen, slight and elegant, IT. v.


Garden, a, fenced with willows, ¥. viii.


IX. 2


V.; peach trees in a, I. ix. IIL; oon a life, each seed a, IV. iii. V.


vegetable, I, xv. I. 7: II. iv. iT.; a


Lacrae IL. iii, X. ; the willow-, HE. | Gifts and friendship, I, v, X.; part-


Garments,  podines sup the lower, I. ba
XIIL.; embroidered lower-, I. xi.


ing, I. xi. TX.
Gilt a tags, buckles, and spear ends, I.


with the hatchet, II. vii. VIII. % Girala I. i. VEIL. 3; v. IX. 2; vi.


II, i
wares ane north, I iii, XV. ; the east,
; KIX. xii 1.5 IV.;
ih : ve AG Rory i. xii. VL; my,
IL v. V. 1, 3; of the temple, It. vi.


X.3; xiv. If. 2: iI. viii. i. 4;
ornaments of a, I. v. V.33 VI.; ;
vii, VIII. IX.; XVIL; ix.L;
xi; Pk 1X.: Id. dit. IV. 2; v.
IX. 5: III. ii. VI. 2.


V. 2; of ‘the eneeinte, and court, | Girl, a lovely, I. viii. IV. See Lady.


TIL i. FEL. 7.

Gatherers, consult the grass and fire-
wood-, IEE. ii, X. 3.

Gathering, duckweed, I. 4. 1.3; ii.
IV,; the dolichos, 1. é Il 2; the


ils, about the Han, I. i. 1X.; against
lewdness of, I. iv. VII. ; clouds of
flaunting, 1. vii, XIX.


Gleanings left in the ala for the wi-


dow, IT, vi. VIII.


mouse-ear, 2. i, TIT. plantains Gioom, consolation under, I vii, XVI.


i, i, VIL. ; Pema X.


Glow-worms, 1. xy. Hi, 2.


X.3 IL viii. V. 4; fed ele Goats, I. vi. IT. . :
Li. IL.; xv. hk: EH.i. VHL6; Bechevece I. v. IV.; viii. Vi. 4;


vi. III. 3; ferns, Li IIL; mus.


xv.


tard-plant and paxthisieloal: I. iif. oo ‘pull figured, IV. ii. IV. 4.


X.; iy, IV.35 x. XIL 3; cones
I. iv. IV. 1; wheat, I. iv. I V. 23
dilies, I. iv. X. 3; sorrel, mulberry
eaves, and oxlips I ix. LE. ; liquor-
‘ice, 1. x. XII. ; mulberry leaves, 1.
xv, 2,2: IT. i. IL2. 1; sowthisties,
I, x. XII. 2; xv. 1.6; hemp-seed,
Ixv. 1.6; thorneferns, IL. i. VIL;
medlars, IE. i. IX. 33 vi. 4;
white millet, IT. iii. IV.; sheop's-
foot and pokesweed, II. iv. 1V. 2, 3;
ge: Hi. v. 1.3; beans, IE, vii.

7IIT.; cresses, Ui. vii. VIE. 2:
IV. ii. INE. 1; the king-grass, IT.
viii, H,; the "indigo-plant, IE. viii.
II. 2; the pond«weed, LV, ii. TIL,
2; maltows, IV, ii. TET. 3.

Geese, flying, 1. vii. IV. 2; xv. VL:
TI. iii. VIL. ; shooting, I. vii, VIIT.
1; ; deathers of the wild-, 1. x. VHI..

Gem, a virtuous ag on pared to + I.

XI1.; girdle, 1. » 3; xi.
1X: il. ii. IV. 2: Tat, ii, VE. Ke
elegant asa, I. ix. If.; IL. iv, IL. 4.


Gems, he beautiful a rae and itt


Iy. X.; vii. IX .i. VE 2
hwa yung and ying stones, I. vif.
Ui; stones fit tor polishing, Ti. iii,
X. 2; ona scabbard, Il. vi. IX. 2;
the sonorous, 1V. iii. 1.

General of an army, the, i. vii. V.
3: IL. i, VIL. 5; VIL. ; ; Fang-shuh
an aged, IT. iii. IV.

Generations, for a hundred, IH. i. 1.


- 9.
Gentleman, a splendid, 1. vii. XEV.


God, there is the great ; does he hate?
If. iv. VII. 4; this god (the king)
is very changeable, Wf. vii. X. ; 3 the
a] fiance Hii. B1: TV. iii.
: king Wan in the presence oe
iit Ed. i; gave the command, III.
i. 1.4; assessors of, IH. i. L. 6; king
Wan served, III. i. IT. 3; “5 with
you, If. i Ti, 7: iV. if, IV. 2;
great is, II{. i. VH.; hating the
t States, pained fas the west, ITI.
i. VEL. 1; "prou % an intelligent
ruler, 1. Vil. 25 surveyed the
hills, 1EL.i. VIX. 3; raised the States
and a ruler for them, HI. i. Vil. 3;
ren Ke was gifted by, IIL. i. VII.
ing Wan received the blessing
of TEI.i, VII.4; gaid to kiag Wan,
IIL. i, VII. 6,7; in accordance with
the pattern of, IIT. i, VII. 7; a toe
print made by, a ii. I. 1; gave
comfort, ITI, 1i. I. 2; smells a sweet
savour, LHL. ii, 1. 8; has reversed
His usual course of procedure, HL
ii. X.; How vast is! How arrayed
in terrors is! ITI. iii. 1.7; it is not,
who has caused this evil ‘time, OL
iii. I. 7; does not come to us, will
not exempt me, grant me liberty,
consider me, ITI. ili. IV. 2, 3, 4, 5;
kinged by, IV. i. (i.] IX. ; ‘appoint-
ed ere for the nourishment of all,
IV. i. ae the bright and glori-
ous, T ii.] I.; regarded Kéang
Yuen with avour, LV. ii. IV. 1; the
great and sovereign, FV. ii. iV. 3;


INDEX 1. OF SUBJECTS. 405


4; the way ¢oChow overgrown with,
Il. v. Ii. 2; dying, Iv. VI. 3;
the king-, LI. viii. 11. ; the davk, EI.
viii. X. 4; Hoty-iseih cleared away
the thick, [TL ii I. 5; elearing
away, FY, i. (aj y.

bata 4 et and inseots, I. ii. IML.
IL. i. VIE. 5.

Sresven er, consult the, H4. ii.


X. 3. :
oe hoping to share tho same, I, vi.


raised up-a son (of Sung’sdaughter),
and founded Shang, 1 ili, fy I;
the favour of, did not eave Shang,
LV. iii, LV. 3; Fang reverenced
God, LV. iii, IV. 3.

ens iady compared to a, I. iv.


Gold, pure as, I. v. I. 3.

Good man, the, I. x. I. V.; xi. TIE;
things should be enjoyed, I. x. IT. ;
men destroyed, I. xi. VI.; men
negleoted, 1. xiv. 11.: 11. iv. 1X.2:
IIH. ii. X, 5; iii. LET. 11, 13; a fence,
Hi. di. X. 7; all aveat first, WI. fii.
I. 1; men, the sovereigns of Yin
had no,. II. iii. I. 4; and evil,
when you did not know, Ii1. iii. H.
10; and bad princes distinguished
by Chung Shah-foo, IEF. til, VE. 4;
men are going away, IfI. dii. X. 5,

6; faith asserted, I. wii. X VIH.
Goose, wild, 1. i, IX. 3.
Gourd-leavea, IL, viii, VII.
_ Gourds, E, iii, IX. 1; EE yi. VI."4; | Groom, I. iv, VE. 3; of the chamber,
the sparrow-, F. v. VE ; the bottler, } anode by a, MH. iv. X.
1. iii, IX.; xv. 1.6; the heavenly, | Growth of grain, IV. i. [iii] V.
Guards, the commander of the, TH.

iii, IV. 7.

Guests, fromthe feudal States, II. i.

L.; Le ore ode of the, FE. i. VE. ;

_ admirable, IT. ii. V.; iii. 1; taking
their places, IE. vii. VE. I: TH. ii.
II. ; VE. 4; and visitors at ancestral

Peas fins an oh 3 - 3. :

ilty and guittiess exchange places,
at iti, X. 2. , :

ale: es as on the brink of a, H..
v. 1 6


Hair, node of keeping the, I. iv. I. ;
HI; v. 1V. 6: £1. vii. 1.5 LL. ; of
a child, I. viii. VIE. 3; garments of,
I. xv. 1.5 thick and oo It. -
viii. I. 2; hoary, IV. ii. IV. 5, 8;
= i 3 virtue is light as a, BEL, iii,


Halberds, I. v. VIL; xiv.
Half-mace (libatioh caps), Hk i. 1V.
2; ii, X. 65 a man not loft, I11. ii.


IV. & Zi

Halt, ¥V. i. {ii} WH. waiting for
in a, I. vii, XIV.; wii, III. ; the.
‘eriekot in the, 2. x. 1.5 of state, f.
xiii. I. ; of on prince, I. xv. I. 8;
of king Win, witha eirclet of water,
QE. i, VIL. 3, 4, K.6.

Hand holding by the hand, I. vi

, ing e vii,

WIL. ; im the, irk. ii. X. 6.

Hand-drums, IV. i. fii.) V. ; iii. I.

Handfuls of grain teft for the widow,
II. vi, VIIL..3, .


Greasing wheels, IT. v. V. 5.

Greed oF ministers of Woi, . ix. VI.

Green colour, significance of, I. iii. TI.

Green-beaks, the, a kind of bitds, 14.

Grey hain, ond ‘wrinkled faco, II i
re) iv, and wrink! . fi,
VEE. 3 ne


Griof, of an officer, 1. ix. IEI.; at the
frivolity of some parties in Ts‘aou,
}. xiv. .; BD

Grind+stones, LI. iii. KX. 1.


& the bitter, L. xv. LET, 2; the sweet,
HW. ii, V. 3; in dong trains, 111. i.
"TIT.; How-tseih’s, IIT. ii. I. 4.
Government, affairs of, € Hi, X¥V.;
error and confusion in, II, iii, 11.
3; X. ; mis-, ITT. ii I.; WI.; the
bonds of, relaxed, Ni. iii. IV. 7;
speed abroad the king’s, ILI. iii.


Grain springing, I. ix. VII.: IT, iv.
VILL 7; four dishes of, I. xi. X,;
different kinds of, I. xv. 1.7: TV.
i, f4i1.] V.; VI,; all kinds of, IT.
vi. V1.2; VIH. 2: IV.i. Ces
good and abundant, II. vi. VII. 3;
for horses, 11. vii. II. 3,4; How,
tsoih’s, IHL ii. 1. 4-47: 1¥. i. X,;
duke Léw’s, IIT. ii, VI. 1; pare
up, IL. v. [I. 5; inseets that destroy,
U1. vi, VIEL. 2: IIL, iii. IV. 1.

Granaries, thousands ef, II. vi. VII.
4; high, IV. i. {ii.] TV. |
rand, is the mountain Léang, IH.
iii. VII.

Grand-danghtor, f, ii. KIEL.

Grandly and clearly, IIT. iii. VIIL

Grand-master, Yin, the, H. iv. VIZ, ;
Shang-foo, HE i. TE. 7,8; Hwang-
foo, III. iti. TX.

Gyandysons, sone and, EH. vi. V. &

Grapes, I. xv. I. 6. te

Grass, white, I. ii. XII. ;_ iti, XVH.
3; v.dIT. 2: EL viii. IV. 4,2; the
Small, I. xv. I. 4; ropes of, I.-xv.
1.7; dew on the huxorviant, H. ii.
X. 2; a Bundle of fresh, H. iv. H.


406


Handkerchiof, F. ii, KIT.

Happiness of the king, II. vii. VEL. ;
desired, II. vii. II. ; secured, IV. jii.
V. 4; like mountains and rivers, JI.
i, VL. ; and dignity of personetors
of the dead, IIT. ii. IV.

Happy, land !—State !—Borders!, I.
ix. VIL; pair!, I. x. V.; and cour-
teous sovereign, IIT, ii. VIL; VIL;
intercourse of a marquis with his
offiders, IV. ii, IL.

Hard-hearted man, a, IIT. iii. FI;
and soft, popular saying about the,
UL. iii. vr 6

Hare, the, I, vi, Vi: Iv. IL. 6;


~ 4,
Hee Lid; H.; it. X.; XL; iv.
Harvesting, I. xv. I. 4—7.
Hatchets, I. xv.I.3; IV. 1; on lower
garments, II. vii. VIIL.; TEI. i. 1. 6.
Hats, bamboo-, Il. iv. VI.; of Zae
leaves, II. viii. I. 2; light splint,
IV. i. [iii] VIL
Hawk, IL. iii, IV. 3; v. &.7; ULi.


Vv. 3. ;

Hazel trees, {. iii, XIIL. 4; iv. VI.
1, aly. Tit. 4: 11. vil. V. 3; WIL
1


Head, bowing the, to the ground, IIT.
iii, VITL. 4, 6.

Head of the Yin clan, the, III. iii. IX.

Heads of departments, IIL. iii. IV. 7.

Head-ache, I. v. VIII. 3; pain like a,
Ii. v. HI. 2. ;

Head-dress of a princess, I. ii. IE. ;
iv. TL,

Heart, the toiled, of a lover, I. xii.
VIIL ; of an officer,
one deploring the decay of filial
piety, I. xiii. T1.; of one deploring
the decay of Chow, I. xiif. TV. ; of
the heir-apparent, degraded, JI. v.
TIL. ; of 4 father disappointed in his
son, III. iii, If. 11; the king’s, at
rest, LI, viii. III. 5: ILI. iii, VIII.
2; exerting all his, IV. i, VI,

Hearts, sorrowing, II, i. VII.; VIIL;
IX.; iv. VOL; VIII; v. 111;
vie TI.; LV.3 vil. TV; viii 1;
V It. i. TH. 1,4; IV.
5; X.6,7


Heaven, submission to, I. iii, XV. ;
invoked, Liv. I.; vi. 1.5 x. VIIE.;
xi. VI. : IL iv. VIL 5,6; X.; v. IU.
3; 1V.; VI. 5; vi. IUL.: LIT. iii. TIT.
1; a visitant from, I. iv. III. 2; pro-
‘tects and establishes the king, iI, i.
VI. 1—8; the son of, II. i. VII: 1,
8; iti, TEL; VI; iv. VII. 3; X. 6;
vii. VIII. 3, 4, 5,; TEL ii, Ve 4;
VIII. 7; iii, VI.; VIII. 5, 6; IX:


OF SUBJECTS.


I. xiii. I. ; of }.


INDEX }.


3,6: IV. i fi] VIIL; fii.] VIE;
iii. IV. 7; unpitying and unjust, IH.
iv. VII. ; dark but mighty, IZ. iv.
Vint. 4, 7, 13; the ordinances of,
IL, iv. IX. 7, 8: TV. i. [i] TT. 5 not
standing in awe of, II. iv. X. 3; v.
V.3; compassionate, IT, iv. X. 13


-y. 1.1; Ibi. [iii] XL. 1; the dove


flies up to, II. v. TJ. 1; the hawk do.,
I11.i. ¥,3; the pheonix do., IIL. ii.
VIIL 8; what H. confers, II. y.
II. 2; what is my offence against ?
Il. v. Tif. 1; who gave me birth,
II. v. FIL. 3; our parent, If. v. I'V.
1; kindness of parents like great, LI.
v. VII. 4; all under, IL. vi. 1. 2:
IV. i. (ii) XI. ; the blessing of,
TI. vi. VI. 4; vii. I. 1; the way of,
hard and difficult, IT. viii. V.2; the
way of, evident, FV. i. [iii.} IIT. ;
king Wanisin, I, i. 1: LV. i. [i]
L.; the appointment of, ITT. i. 1. 4,
5; TI, X.2: FV.i. re Visi {iti-]
IJL. ; the will of, TIT, 4. 1X. 2; ii.
IX. 1; look at Yin in the light of,
IIL i. L. 7; the doings of High, LIT.
i. I. 7; not readily to be relied on,
Til, i. II. 1; surveyed this lower


- world, ILI. i. IT. 4; like a fair deni-


zen of, III. i. II. 5; raised up a
help-meet, III. i. VII. 2; the three
sovereigns were in, III. i. IX. 1;
the king receives his dignity from,
III. ji. LIL. 7 ; V.1; is sending down
calamities, apaheray oppression,
displaying its anger, III. 1i, X. 2, 4,
5; iii, If. 12 ; enlightens the people,
Ill. ii. X. 6; revere the anger &
changing mouds of, III. ii. X. 8;
Great, is intelligent, is clear-seeing,
& is with you, IIT. ii. X. 8; iii, IT.
11 ; gave birth to the people, ITI. iif.
I, 1; VI. 1; made the ministers of
Yin with their insolent dispositions,
ILI. iii. T. 2; it is not, that flushes
your face with spirits, IIL. tii. 1.
5; those whom great, does not ap-
prove of, III. iii, II. 4; great,
makes no mistakes, III. iii. H. 12;
does not nourish us, IIT. iii. 1h. 3;
the severe anger of, ILI. iii. 111.4;
is sending down death and disorder,
ILI. iii. (11. 7; IV. 1; God, in
the great, IIT. ii. EV. 3, 4, 6;
I look up to the great, ITI. iii, [V.
7,8; X. 1; beheld the ruler of Chow,
IID, ii, VI. ; disorder does not come
down from, ITI. iii. X. 3; is reprov-
ing us, IIT. iii. X. 5; is letting down
its net, III. iii. X. 2, 6; mysteriously
great, TEI. iii, K. 7; arrayed in
angry terrors sending down ruin,


INDEX [,


JIL. iii. XI. 1; made the lofty hills,
IV. i. {i.] V.5 accept my offerings!
IV. i. [ij VEL. ; revere the majesty
of, LV. i. {i.] VIL ; How-tseih the
correlate of, TV. i. fi.) X.; giving
rest even to great, IV. i. [ii.] VIL;
does not weary of its favours, IV. 1.
i#.} IX. ;
im the sight of, IV. i. {iii IX. ; the
perpese of, earried out in its time,
V. ii. IV. 2, will give great bless-
ings to our prince, IV. ii. IV. 8;
our Joeperity is sent down from,
IV. iti, If. ; commissioned the swal-
low, IV. iii. HI.; king Tang re-
ceived the favourof, LV. iii, EV. 5;
sent down a minister, IV, iii, 1V.5;
has given their appointments to
princes, IV: iii. V. 3; by ite will
is inspecting the kingdom, IV. iii.
¥ :


Heavens, high, and earth, thick, EI.
iv. VIII. 6; over head one arch of
clouds, H. vi. VI. 2; the points of
the, III. ii, VI. 5; mountain-
masses reaching to the, HT. iii. V. 1.

mary seat, the (the throne), EU.
i


Hedge-tree, the, I. vii. IX.

Height, the acred, II. v. VI. 7.

Heights, ascending, I. i. III. ; ii. TUL;
iv. VI; X.; ix. FV.; Ibi 1X.
3; iii, VI.1; vi, I. 1; vii, IV. 4:
TH. i. irae 6; ii, VI. 2, 3,5: Ne
i. [iii. 3 peas growing on, I.
Kil Wit, southonmneod ot, IL, ti.
IL; level, I. i. U11.; IV.

Heir-apparent, an, bewailing his de-
gradation, IL. v. ILI.

Helmets, LV. ii. LV. 5.

Helpers, a good ruler seeks, IIT, iit.
ILI. 8; in agriculture, IV. i. [iii.}
v


Hemp, I, vi. X.; planting, I. viii. VI.
3; twisting, I. xii. 1.5 steeping, I.
xii, 1V.; robes of, I. xiv. I.; -seed,
I, xv. I. 6, 7.

Herb-tiavoured spirits, ILI. iii. VIII,


é. :
Herds of game, If. iii, VI. 1; of


cattle and sheep, If. iv. V1.3 of


pigs, IIL. ii. VI. 4.

Herdsmen, IT. iv. VI.

Hero, a, [L. v. VITE.; a large and
peerless, I. x. IV.

Hesperus, IT. v. EX. 6.

Hewing timber reverently, LV, iii. V.
6


High-way, I. vil. VIL. 1.

Hill, thunder on the southern, E. ii.
VIII. (See South); hazels grow-
ing on a, I. iti. XTTL. 4; trees on


OF SUBJECTS.


king Woo was glorious |:


407


the sides of a, I. xi. I.; absurdity
of denying that a, is high, 11. iv.
VIL. 5; the northern, II. vi. 1.1; -
Heaven made the fofty, IV. i. (i.]
V.; the high is looked up to, IT.
vii. IV. 5.

Hills, of the east, I. xv. IIT. 1; en-
during as the southern, IL.i. VE. 6;
of the north, IL. ii. VII.; grind-
stones and gems found i, JI. iii.
X.; falling down, IL. iv. 1X. 3;
ferns on the, II. v. X. 8} and
streams, IY. viii. VIEE,; God sur-
veyed the, IEf. i. VIL. 3; our, smalt
and large, III. i. VII. 6; on the west
of the, Iii. ii. VE. 5; parehed, WL. °
iii. [V, 5; lands, and fields, ILI. iii.
VII, 5: LV. ii. FV. 3; Spirits of
the, EV. i. {i.] VIIZ.

Hill-tops, rock-covered, II. v. VII. 3.

Hoarfrost, I. ix. 11; xi. 1V.: UL iv.
VEL 1; v. TX. 2.

Hoary age, INI. ii. If. 4; hair, IV.
Hi, EV. 6,83 iii, #1.

Hoes, IV. i. fai.) I. ; {iti} VI.

Home, a soldier’s thought of, I. ix.
IV.; choosing a, ITE. iti, VIT. 5.

Hooks, for trappings, H. iii, IV. 1:
Ti. iti. V. 4; VU, 2.

Hordes of Keun, the, IH. i. LI. 8;
of the South, I. fi, IL. 4 See
Tribes,

Horn, rhinoceros’, cups of, 1. 4. III.
8; xv. L 8: IL vii. 1.4; a bow
adorned with, If. vii. [X.

Horns, has a sparrow no? I. ii. VI.
2; no old ram is without, II. vii.
VI. 5; don’t leok for, ona young
ram, UI. iii. IT. 8; of a bull, LV. i,
{iii.] VI; ii, IV. 4

Horned sheep, LH. iv. Vi. i.

Horse, an old, thinks himself a colt,
If. vii. IX. 5; the master of the,
Til. iti. TV.7. :

Horses (almost always mentioned in
teams of fou), 1.1. IEE; IX. 2,
33 iv. VI. 3; IX.; X.; v. TIL. 3;
vii. TV. ; viti. X. 5 x. IL; xii TX.:
IL. i. VH. 4,5; EX. 3; di, VI;
vi. E 3; vii. 11.2.3; IV.5; VOL
1,2; black, If. ii, TIL: ILL. iii.
II. 4; with white foreheads, I. xi.
I.; iron-black, I. xi. I1.; piebald,
with white left feet; bay with black
mane; yellow with black mouth ;
and black, I. xi. IIL; bay, I. xi.
IX.; bay, and red, flecked with
white, I. xv. TH. 4; white with
black mane, II. i. IL.; vi. X. 3;
young, ‘piebald, white and black-
maned, and gray, Il. i. HI.; pie-
Vald, IL. iii. IV. 1; yellow, EE. iii,


408


V.6; bays, black-maned and white-
bolied, 118. 4. II. 8; white, IV. i.
it.] EX. ; long-necked, IE. iv. VII.
3; well trained and fieet, IH. ii.
VIII. 10; eager and strong, TIT.
iii. TIE. 2; noble, HE. iii. V. 4;
long and large, [EL. iii, VII. 2;
strong, III. iii. VI. 7,8; grand, IV,

ii. III. 2; chariots and, I. iv. 1X,

6; stallions of difft. colours, IV. ii,

. 1; IL; the Ruler of, EH. iii. VI. 1.
Host, a generous, IT. ii. IIL.; V,;
the king ag, LI, ii. VII. ; 1X. ii. 1.

Hosts, the six, of the king, HI. i. 1V.

Hot, who can hotd anything? Lil.
iti, FEL. 6,

Hounde and hunting, I. viii. VHI. ;
the, eateh the hare, EI. vy. FV. 4.
House, I. ii. VI. 2; a plank-, I. xi.
IIL; a large and_spacious, I, xi.
X.; a bird’s, L.xv. IL. ; the honour-
ed, of Chow, Il, iv. X.2: TIL i. I:
IV. if. IV. 2; origin of do., II. i.
IIL. ; counsels about building a, II.

v.14; my, IL. v. V. 6.
Houses, repairing, for winter, I. xv. I.
6, i here were Yeioes, lil. an
» 2, 5; temporary lodgings, EEL. ii.
V¥.6,; the hundred, FV.i. fili.] V1;
officers have no, in the capital, II.
iv. X, 7; the noble, II. viii. 1.
icy. aaeaeee! how complete! IV.
i. I.

Hulling grain, IIT. ii. I. 7.

Humility, of the duke of Chow, I. xv.
VII. ; recommended, IE v.11. 6;
ancient example of, LV. iii. I.

Hunch-back, I, iii, X VIEL.


Me x. XE. 4, 5; generations,
Th 4.
i. [iii] VIL


Hunger and thirst, troops have to en-


dure, II. i. VII. 2, 6.

Hunting, I. wii. II1.; 1V.; VIH,; viii.
Il..; VIII. ; ix. Vi. ; xi. H.; xv. E.
4:41 iv. VI. 3; viii. IL 3; expe»
dition, a, IT, iii, V.; VI.

Husband, bad treatment by a, I. iii,
IV. ; V.; deploring the absence of a,
L. ii, IUD; iii. VILL. ; v. VILL; vi.
IE.; xi. VEL. : IL viii. 11.; desire
for a, FE. v. 1X. ; return of a, I. vi.
I¥L.; vii. XVI. ; separation from a,
by famine, I. vi. V.; a, praising his
own wife, I. vii. XIX.; rousing a,
in the morning, I. vif. VIII. ; viii.
I.; and wife, happy meeting of, I.
x. xe mourning the death of a, I.
x. XI.


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX f.


Husbands, affection for, I. i. X.; ii.
WHY. ; vii. VIII; IV. i. [iii] V.
Masa neeen, HH. vi. VIL: IV. i. iii.)


Husbandry, traced to its first author,
Ti, vi. VL; VIL2; VUL2: Ti.
ii. 1. See Agricultural.

Hut of a recluse, I. v. H.

Huts, in fields, II. vi. VI. 4; made
by T‘an-foo, ITE. i, ILI.

Heuaestones, I. viii. IIL.

Heese, the, bringing rain, II. viii.


Hypocrites, skilful to prevaricate, III.
eu 15, 16. :


Ice, I. tii, IX. 3; bewing out and
storing in houses, I. xv. I. §; Hower
tseth was placed-on the cold, IL. ii-
1, 3; careful as if treading on, If.
v. E.-6; If. 6. é

Idle, don’t be, ILT. ii, X.8

Idleness and greed of ministers of
Wei, I. ix. VI. :

Illustration of illustrious virtue, the,
IIT. i. II,

Illustrations not taken from things
remote, ITI. iii. II. 12.

Imitation, virtue will secure, IV. i.
IV.; of king Woo, IV, iii. VIII.
Imp, an, or a water-bow, IY. v. V. 8.
Impartiality of Woo-ting, 1V- iii. V.

4.


Implements of husbandry, II. vi.
VI. 1


Incest, I. viii. VI. ; 1X.; X.
Indifference and absenee of a lover, I.
vii, XVIL.; of fellow-oificers, III.


ii, X.

Indignation rife in the Middle king- .
dom, HY. iii. I. 6.

Indigo plant, the, II. viii. If. 2.

indolence, Woo-ting allowed himself
no, TV. iii. V, 4.

Indulgence of some officers, and toil of
others, H. vi. L.


‘Industry of king Wan’s queen, 1. i.


I. ; of » prinee’s wife, I. ii, H.; of
a wife, I. v. IV. 5.
Infant, How-tseih, the perils of the,
TIL. ii. 1. 3.
Influence of king Wan, HI. i. IV. 4;
V.3; VIL. of -king Woo, IIL. i.
IX.; of manly conduct, IIL, iii, 1.
2; of Séeh’s lessons, IV. iii. IV. 2.
Ingenuity, human, IIT. ii. VII.
Injustice of the Grand-master Yin,
and of Heaven, Il. iv. WH.
Innocence, injured, H. v. FV.; TE.
Heths ob I. viii, 1
ts, in buzzing crowds, I. viii. 1.
3; the mulberry-, IE. v. II. 3; that


INDEX I.

eat grain. II. vi. VIET. 2: IfI. iif.

1H.7; X.1; XB2

See Ant, Locust,
Caterpillar, Scorpion,
Cicada, Sitk-worm,
Cricket, Sow-bug,
me Sphex,

¥; Spider,

Glow-worm, Spinner,
Grasshopper, Tree-grab,
Grass-insect, Wasp.


Inspector, and recorder, on ot those who
get. drunk, and who do not, II, vii.
5.
_ Instruments, musical, IT.-vii. VI. 2.
Intercourse, licentious, 1 viii, iV.


Intrigues, with ladies, J. iv. IV.; of


duke Ling with the lady Hie, L


xii, I

Investiture of the marquis of Han,
III. iii, VIT.; of Hoo of Shaou,
Ii. ifi. VILL 6.

Tron, TIL ii. Vi. %.

Irregularity and disorder of a court,

~_ I, viii. V.

aoe three .in the Hwae, Il. vi.

3.


Islets in a viver, I. i.T.1; ii. X. 3;
xi. IV.; xv. VIL 2 VE. iii. IL. 2;
ae TL. i. IV. 3; and ponds, 1.


i, TL,
eee iv. TY, 2; ix. 1.1L i. VIL 5.


igs iv. 111.2; v. 1.3: ULiIv.
5; V. 2; ii, VI. 2; iti, VHI. 5;
bland and soft as a. ieco of, I. xi.
TIT. ; «mace, likes, E11. ii. Vill. 6;
a mace of white, IIL. iti. ID 6
seeptres of, IIE. ti, IX. 5.
Jar, and itcher, il. v. VIIL. 3; of
spirits, [11, iii, VITE. 5.
Jasper, a recious, I. xi. TX.
Sea, ousy | ‘ae+sze’s pie from, I. i?
IV.; V.; cured, f. ii.
' Joke, arid a, of what i is sad, 5396
ii.
J ee at the return of a mashed, 1. vi.


Judges, Sioa having appealed to


the, IV. di, 111. 6
Sujuboctreg 1. iii. Sin: ix. III. ; x
VHIL; XE; xi. VL; > xii, VIL;


xiv. IIL: IL ii. X. 3; vii. V. 2.


Kernels, U1. vii. VI. 1.

Kétwrstones, 1. v. X.3; vi. X. 3.

Kiln-like huts and cay es, IIL. i. UT. 1.

Kindness, satiated with, TIE. ii. UI,
1; we show no, IIT. ii. X.5; Heaven


OF SUBJECTS.


£09


King, the tranquillizing, I. ii. XII. ;
the, orders an expedition, H. iii. L11.;
the claws and teeth of the, ue iv. L;
blaming Sa) Ik, iv. VIL; y.
I. ; vii. > X.: UL wee
led awa aoe ‘slanderers, IL v. IIE. ;
IV.; FEL. iii. XL. 3; praise of the,
My the feudal iar and response,
. vi. TX. ; vii. VIE. ; prayers
for the, HL. vii. iL; Wn is on ee
UL i. E.; not easy to be 4, TEL i.
II. 1; celebrating, Van, ILD. i. 1.
to X.; praise of, Ke, IYI.4. VII. 4;
raise of, Ch‘ing, and, ite TY IV.
1, A] IX; raise of, Woo, III,
aes i Vath 5 3 IX.; fy
[iii as X.; praise of,
evil Il. iii, 1X. 3; praise of
some, [II. ii. V.; Heaven is putting
an ond to onr, IIL. dif. LUT, 7; Seuen,
on the great drought, IIT. iii, IV.:
Seuen, appointing the marquis of
Shin, IH. iii. V.; Seuen, appointing
the marquis of Han, IIL. iii. VEL, 3 ;
en, gave charge to Hoo of Shaou,
II. iti. VIIT. 3; Souen, gave charge
to Hwang-foo, iii. pee the,
gives rules, LV. i. (it, VHL;
ie matte) Iv. i. pit vit
tii. I , 1V.6 e dark (Seen)
Iv. i? IV. ai " the, of Shang, IV.
ii. IV. 7; V
King’s, daughter, I. ii, XML; busi-
ness, E. iii XV.; v. VIII; x. VHL:


Ii. i. IL; VIL; VIE; IX.;
vi. I.; H.; U1; envoy, a request
to, L x. IX. ; State, Lit, iii, VUIT.


2, 3; cause, ‘people ‘of ‘Fetin ee


to fight eat their, I. xi. Meee
feasts, If. VH.; FX. ; iti. L:
vii. I,; IT; arte ILL. ii. "IL. all


the land and people are the, 1. vi.
I, 2; heart at rest, IL. viii. ILL. 5:
tit ‘ii. VIL. ; threat and tongue,
If. iti. VI. 3; ” duties, idl, iti. Vr
6; appointment, III. iii, VIE. 1;
Jans, ili. iii, 1X. 6; army, Ww.
a VIIt.; relations, I. ix. WH:
L. vii. TNT, ; DX.: EEL ti. IL. ; UT. ;


King s, Wise, LIZ. i. TX. 1
iI 3; XL7: yeaa

Kingion, the royal, 4 TEE 1.
i. 1.3; ii, VILL; the miserable
state of the, IT. iv. Vil.; VUL;
IX.; X.; vill, IX.: il i. 1X.:
iii, Lr; s throwin the, into confusion,
IL. vii. V. a e centre of the, III.
ii. IX, ; iii. 3 the Afiddle, WI. iii.


; the sores:


IL
shows Us NO, TEL. iii. K. 1; of king Knee-covers, wens i. xiii. if.; red,


Wan, IV. i. II


I. xiv, IL: ii. IV.; V.;


410


iv. V. 8; vi. IX. 1; vii. VEL.
3.


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX I.


ny of antiquity are his, IIT. iif.
VE 2.


Knife and file, I, v. 1. ve with bells | Laws, and rules given: by Win ‘and


attached, II. vi. VI.
Kwon, the’ name of a fish, I. viii. EX.1,
Kwei, an edible, plant I. xv. I. 6.


tances the sphere of Yu’s, IV. iii.


Lad, a eple Hennes Lv.iV.l;a
conceited, Ly. Vi

Ladders, scaling, In. i, VH. 7.

Lading out water, IIT. ii. Vi.

Ladle, the, a constellation, Il. v. IX. 7.

Lady, pune li. 1 3 IX. ; ii.
1; IV.; VIL; iii. XIV.’; xV IL;
v.VG ; xiv. IL; rincely, Li IV.;
virtuous, 1. ii. KWL. 3 xi. FV. 5 de-
claring her at attachment to her lover,
I. vii. XITE. ; anxious for marriage,
I. ii, 1X. ; iv. VIL } rejoicing in
an unlawful connection, I. vii. X_X.;
longing for her lover, E vi. VIII. ;
vii. XVTE.; lamenting the aljena-
tion of her lover, I. xii, VIT.; warn-
ing off her lover, ¥. vii, EI. ; i, ion-
ate love fora veaaing E. xii, VIL;
X.; raise of a, I. vii. TX. ; ; Kéang,
the, 41. i, ERI. 9; a, mocking her
lover, I. vii. X.

Ladies, intrigues with various, I. iv.

; attendant ons bride, FE. v. TEI,
4; and gentlemen, L. vii. MI. ; IL.
viii, 1.; young, gathering muiberry
leaves, ’&e., I. xv, I.; young, going
to be married, I. xv.

Lamb, sacrificing a, I. xv. ‘L 8; birth
like that of a, ILE. ii. [.2; “skins,
I. ii, VIL; -fur, I, vii. ‘VL; pes
VIE. ; xiii, I.

Lambs, fatted, IT. i. V. 2.

Lament, over the duke Chwang, I.
viii. XE ; of a man bereaved of rela
tives, I. x. VI.; for three worthies
of Ts‘%n, I, xi. VE.; of a lady over
the alienation of her lover, f. xii,
VII. ; over abuses in ‘I's‘aou, I. xiv.
I. ; I1.; over the miserable state of
the kingdom, II. iv. VIL. to X.; v.
I: U0. iii, HT.

Lances, I. xi, VHI.; xiv. [F.

Land dividing the, [V. iii, IV. See
Dividing.

Land-slips, EE. iv. IX. 3.

Lands, hills, and fields, I confer, III.
iii, VIIL. 5; and rivers, IV. ii.
IV. 3.

Lane, waiting in a, I. vii. XIV.;
oe was placed in a, Til. ii.

3.


Law, a, annexed to every faculty and
relationship, III. iti. IV. 1; the


Woo, HI. i. TV. 5; ancient, ITT.
iii, I. 7; wise, of former kings, III.
iii. IT. 3,

Le, thirty, TV. i. (ii. ] H. ; a hundred,
ITI. iti, TXT. 10; a thousand, IV.
‘iii, TH.

Learner, king Ching a, IV. i. [iii]
Ii.; II. it

Leather, vermilion-coloured, J. viii.
X:; naves of wheels bound with,
II. tii, PW. 2: IV. tii. IL.; caps,
UW. vii. IIL. ; eaning-board bound
with, LET. iii, VIE. 2.

Leaves, of the gourd, I. iii, IX.; of
the dolichos, I. i. If. 1; of the mul-
berry-tree, I. v. IV. : TLL. iii. CI.
1; withered, I, vii. XI.; of the
willow, I. xii. V.; of the pear-tree,
Tf. i. 1X. 2; hats of t'aes, IL. viii.
I, 2; of rushes, ILI. ji, II. 1.

Legend of How-tseih, 111. ii, I.

Legions, the royal, III. iii. 1X. 5,

wees an and diay Il. v.


Leisure, no, II. viii, VILL. ;

Leopard-skin, i. vii. Vi. 2; = Vit.

Levée, a king’s anxiety about a morn-
ing-, IT. iti, VIII.

Lewd connections, against, I. iv, VIE.

Libations, LiL. i. I. 5.

Libation-eups, IIT, i. IV. 2; V. 2;
iii, VEIL. 5.

Licentious manners of Wei, I. iii, 1X.;
pleasure, Lv. IV. 3; repressed by
a virtuous magistrate, I. vi. IX.;
assignations, I. vii. XXI.; inter.
course, I, viii. TV.; freedom, I. viii.

Na


Life, an officer weary of, I. vi. VI.

Light and shade, duke Léw surveyed

* the, LID. ii. VL. 5; and darkness,
ou make no distinction between, ”
EL. iti. LS.

Lilies, mother-of-pearl, I. iv. X. 3.

Lin, the, a fabulous animal, Li. XL.

Line, aes straight with a, IIL i.

IIL. 3.


Lines, used in angling, kL. ii. XIII.
3; a few elegant, II. v. VI. 1.

Liquorice, I. iii, XIII. 4; x, XI.

Lizard-skin drums, 111. i, VEIL 4.

Locusts, I. i. V.; xv. I. 5.

Lodging for a night in Too, II. iii
Vil. 3.


Loneliness of a widow, I. x. XI.
Longevity, desired, for the king, IT. i.
Vi.; vi. VIF.4; EX.2,33 vi IL.
II. iii. VIII. : for king’s ininisters,
I. ii. Vid. ; for the feudal princes,


INDEX I.


II. ii, IX,; for the marquis of Loo,
IV. ii. ITI. 3; conferred by ances-
tors, II. vi. Vv; V4: IV. ii TV.
4,5; the e e-brows of; ae i, [ii]
VIL; VIIL; ii. 1V.5, 8; iii. TL. ;
of ‘Woo-ting, LV. ili. V. 5

Look at the Loh, EH. vi. IX.

Looms, empty, IT. v. IX. 2.

Lord, noble, @ husband so styled, I. ii.
VILL ; 3 a princely, I. x. IIL. 3, of
Tsiin, growing opulence of the, I.°xi.
I.; Q1.; people ready to fight for
their, i. xi. era i.; of T‘ae, How-
tseih” became, Ui. ii, 1. 5.

Lotus, I, vii. K.5 xii. Ko

Lover, a lady warning off her, I. vii. IT;
mocking a, 1. vii. X. ; ; declaring at-
tachment to a, I. vii. XML ; think-
ing of a, I. vil. XV. ; dndifference
and absence of a, I. vi, KV IL;
alienation of a, I. xii. VII. ; long-
ing desire of a, I. xii. VIII. ;

tors # women longing for, ir “Vi.


Loyalty, declared, I. x. VII.

Lucifer, a Star, IT. y. IX. 6.

Lucky day, a, Il. iii, VI.

Lutes, Liv. VI. 1; vii. VIEL; x. IL;
xi. I; IL i 15 1V.7: IT. ii, 11.
2; small and large, Lil3: IL vi.
IV. 4.


Lute-strings, six reins made music like,
Il. vii. IV. 5.

Luxuriance of flowers, I. ii. XIII. ; of
the dolichos, I. i, IT. 1; of plants,
and trees, IL. i. VIII. 6: IX. 2; of
sotthernwood, II. iii. IL; ‘ of a forest,
Il, vii. IV. 2 43 Vil. 4; of dry-
andras, I. ii. Vind. 9; of grain,
IV. i. Hel ue the grass attains
no, ITT. iii. L 4.

Luxuriant wiveis the, II. vit. X.;
young mulberry, IIT. iii, IIE.


Mace, a jade-, IIL. ii. VIII. 6; of
white jade, III. iti. II. 5; half-,
VIL. i. IV. 2; ii, X. 6.

Maces, ~~ eo tokens, exhausted,


Ii. iii. I
Madder tant t vii. XV.5 -dyed, I.
vii. XIX.: IL. vi. IX


Magistrate, a severe and Dikisea, 1
vi IX,

aide? pairing of, I. iv. V.; nests

wii 1.5 xii, VIL.

Miller horses, I, vii. V. 5: xi. 2H.

ar Ix. VUL. : JLiv. I. 2; vi

Majestic
HE. iii

Majesty, the dread, on high, III. i.
IL 1; of Heaven, IV. i. {iJ VIE


_ appearance of king Seuen,


OF SUBJECTS.


411


Male animals, hunted by the ruler of
Ts‘in, 1. xi. ID,

Mallows, thorny, i. xii, 1;
ing, IV. ii. LIT. 3

Man, what, was it? T. v. V.3 being
oe ae Hic IQ: IV: Iv. 3 i.


gather-


Manners, licentious, of Wei, I. iii. EX.
Manouvring of an atmy, 1 vii. V,
Manufacture of sik, J. xv. I. 3
Marabou, the, II. viii. V. 6.

March, a day’s, II. iii. III.; of duke
Léw, U1. ti. VE 1

Marching of an army, IL, viii. ITT,

Marchionegs, a vicious, I. iv. V.; a
model, I. viii. I.

Mares, three thousand horses and, I.
iv. VI. 3.

Marquis, the reverent, I. ii, XLT. ; of
Wei, f. iv. X.; of Tse, of Wei, of
Hiag, T. v. Ti. 1; of Tsin, I. x.
1X.; of Shin, IL. iii. V. ; of Han,
Mil. iii, VIT.; of Loo, IV. ii. 1;
Ii; W1.; FV. 2,8

Marriage, of a princess, I. ii. Bs
XL; forcing a, I. ii, VI;
young Vady anxious for, I. ii, ix.3
iv, VIL. ; a widow protestin against
a second, L iv. I.; rules of, 1. viii.
Vi. 3, 4; affinity by, EL. iv. IV. :
of the marquis of Han, ILI, iil, VIL.
4; of king Wan, III. i. II. 4-6. ’

Marriuges and reunions, I. xv. Aue 4,

Marsh, the, in the west, IV. i. [ii,] IEF.

Marshes, and low ground, I. ‘i i.
4; vil, IV.; X.5 x. 4; xi. L.;


VIL; xii, X.; i UU: IE
IIL.; IV.; Hii, VEIL2; X.5.v. XM.
8; vi. VIL 1; viii, UT. 5; TV.:


Il. i, VIL 5; iii, VIE. 6: IV. i
[iii] V.

Martial man, a, I. i. VH.; v. VITE
1; IIL. iii, V. 7; VIL. 5; troops,
HI. iii, VIEL 2; "king, Vi [ii
VUI ; IX.; iii. IIL.; qualities,
IV. ii. TIE. 4, 5, 6.

Marvellous, tower, park, pond, III. i.

Master, of hounds, I. viii. VIIL.; of
horse, ITE. iii. EV. 7; of an estate,
TV, i. [iii] V. °

Mat, the mind not a, [, iii. £.3; of
tiger’s skin, I. xi. IIT.

Matron of a harem, I. i. #1. 3.

Mats, of a and of fine bamboo, IT.
iv. V. 6; guests sitting on, II. vii.
VL: Hh. ii IL. 1,25 VI 4.

Meal. officers retire ‘to take a, I ii.
VIL. ; full, and scanty, I.xi, X.

Mean men in office, IT. iv. VIL 4;
VII. 18: ILI. iii. XI. 1; services
of an officer, I. iii. XIII.


412


Meat, roast and broiled, II. vi. V.
3: TIE. di, IE. 2; dried, M1. ii.
VI.1; minced, IV. ii. FY. 4.
Flesh. °

Medallion-plant, I. xii. VII.

Medlars, W. i, 11.4; IX. 3; if. WIZ.
8; v. X. 83 vi. TE. 2,

Meeting, concerted, with a lady, L_iii.
XVII.; of bride and bridegroom,
I. viii, IEE.

,Melaneholy, I. vi. I.

+ Melon, earth-, I. iii, X.; fruit, I. xv.
. 65 seeds, I. v. III.
‘Men, treated as if not, IT. iif, X.
Mercenary, be not, LV. i. [7] EV.
Merit rewarded with a feast and a red
bow, IL. iii. .; of the chief of Shin,

THE iii. V. 4 of the earl of Shaou,

rewarded, IEL. iti. VIII. 4, 5; of

king Woo, LV. i. (ii) X.; Si. 1X;

of officers of Loo, IV. ii. ITT. 6

, Metal, ornaments of, IIT. 3. IV. 5.
Metals, southern, IV. ii. III. 8.
Middle Kingdom, IFL. iti.. I. 6 (See

Centre); period, the (before king

Tang), IV. iii, LV. 7.

Mild, be, IIL. iii, IT, : IV. iif. 1.

Milky way, the, IE. v. IX. 5: HL i.
IV. 4; ui. TV.

Millet, I. vi. 1.3 ix. VIE; x. VOL:
IL. vi. V. ly VI..38; VIE 1, 2:
TV.i. (1. TV. Gi] VES EV.1;


sacrificial, I. vi. I,; x. VIII: JL
vi. V. 1; VI. 3: IV. ii IV. 1;


young, I. xiv. [V.: IL. viii. TIL;
early sowa and late, I, xv, L. 7: If.
t ee 4; tn La Hi.
. X, 83 gran . iv. TT. 3; in
dishes, II. v. IX. 1: 1V. iii. LIT;
How-tseih gave his people the black,
and double-kernelied, the tall red,
and white, IIL. ii. 1. 6; black, LY.
ii, IV. 1; steaming, IIL. ii, VIT.1;
spirits made‘from black, III. iii.
VULI. 4.

ar I can measure others’, II. v.


, Minister of War, II. iv. I; chief-,
Wil. ii. FV. 7; IX, 1; Heaven sent
down a, IV. iii, 1V. 7.

Ministers, of Le ehd of Wei, I. iii.
VIE.; of Wei, greedy and idle, I.
ix. VI.; a_ruler entertains and

raises his, LI. ii. VIE. ; three, of
Tieangefoo, TL. iv. IX. 6; the three
high, Il. iv. X. 2; oppressive, of
Win-shang, HIE. itt. 1. 2,3; whoen-
larged the kingdom, Til. iii. X1.7;
and officers, I'V. i. [ii.] 1; ii, IV.
: . ae aged, of duke He, IV. ii.


Miraculous pregnancy of Kéang Yuen,


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX ¥.


Ill. ii. I. ; of Kéen-teih, IV. iif,
TEL 1


See | Mire, in the, Ti, RY: UL. VIIA


Mirror, the mind not a, I, iii. I. 2.

Miseries of Chow, I, vi. VI.: I. iv.
VIL-~-X.; v. 1; If.

Misery, I only am fult of, IT. v. LIL. ;
Vili. 5, 6; X. 3; of the times, H.
v. IX.) X.3 viii. 1X. ; LIL i, X.;
iii. TIT. ; X.; XI. ; of some officers,
Ti. vi. I. ; of soldiers, IL. viii. X.

Mistletoe and dodder, II. vii. LLL.

Moat, at the east gate, FE. xii. IV.

Moats, walls and, of Fung, IIL. i. &.;

: of Han, HI. iti, VIZ. 6.

Mocking a lover, I. vii, X.; at the sad
state of the nation, III. ii, X, 4.
Model, to the hine regions, T‘ang a,

IV. iti. IV. 3; the capital of Shang,
a, IV. iii. V5.
Malan teeth, has the rat no? 1. ii.
3.


Monkey. teaching a, to climb trees, IT.
vii. IX. 6,


Month, in the first, I. iv. VIII. 1;


in the tenth, II. iv. IX.; in the
fourth, II, v. X. 1; the second, TI.
vi. HE 1


, Months of the year, ocoupations of


ditferent, I. xv. I. :
Moods, the changing, of Heaven, III.


Moor, I. vii. XX.

Morning star, I. vii. VITL.; xii. V.;
levee, II. iii. VIIL.; victory in one,
ie i. FL. 8; from, to night, IV.
iii, I. .

Mortar, bulling grain in a, HI. ii. BE. 7.

Moth, the silk-worm, I, v. HI. 2.

Mother, pain and toil of a, I. iii. VIL. ;
invoking a, I. iv. I.; none to be de-
pended on like a, II. v, HIE. 3; they
of king Wan, 1I1.i. II.; VI. 1; of
king Woo, IV. i. @) VIL. ; of the
marguis of Loo, LY. ii. IV. 8.

Mothers, obliged todo the cooking, II.
iv. I. See Parents.

Motherwort, I. vi. V. ’

Mound, southernwood on a large, 11.
iii, II.; an oriole on a, H. viii. V1.3
the receases of the, IIT, if. VIEL

Mountain, fine trees on the, II. v, X.
4; firm as a, III. iii. X. 5; nothing
higher than a, IT. y, TIT. 8, .

Mountains, I, vii. X.; x. I; xi.
VII.; the happiness of the king
like, iti VI.; greatly lofty are
the, IZ. iii. V. ; aseending the lofty,


INDEX “I.
IV. i, [i] RI. ; friendship like
IV.it. {i a See Hills, Hel its


Mourning habjt, the neglect of

xii

Mouse-ear, a plant, I. j, 1. 1.

Mouth, and bad words that are
only. m the, Hiv. VIL. 2: v.


. Mug, ‘ adding mud to a man in the, II.


vii.


Muddiness of the King river, 1. iii.


X. 3.
Mud-fish, U1. 2 TIL. 3: [V. i. Tit. ie
Se ae rie OL 2,3;

w orry &r608, dy, ‘

3; pe X.5 ix. H.;'x, iit;
ay xiv. TIT. ; xv. L: it
2; iv. WI. 2; v. WL. $;

V.4; plantors of, I. ix.
; roots of, 1. xv. IT. 2; ound,
L xv. IIL; the popes 1 2s
2; iv. UIE. A; sinsect, {1. v. 3;
the mountain-, TU. i. VI, a rae
yonnes 1 WI. fa TH. ; the fruit of,

ii


Nemnuting of troops, i. vi. IV:
viii, %&.; of a wanderor from Sie,
I, vi. VEL

Music, IL. vit. VI. 2; abandoned to
the delights of, IL. vi. 1V. ; of Chow,
W. i. [ii.] y. 3_invitin: “the spirit
of Fang with, LY. iii. f

Musical instruments, [V. ii. V. See
Bell, Drum, Flute, Hand-drain,
Lute, ‘Organ, Pans pipe, Whistle.

Musicians, H. vi. V,'6 julia, EIL i.
VIL #. 4: 1V.i Lil'V

mar eee ae I, ni. X. 4; iv. IV.


eathy: ae HI. 4.2. 7: FY.


iii.) IX.
Myrinds of E bianes ana of years, II.
4, V.; X,: viii:


TL Litx. es i is b, 2, 6, 7;
iti, VIII. 5, 6; IV. ii, 1V. 5; of
earts, II. vi. VIL. 4; of measures
of grain, FV. Sie. 1. ; 3 of stacks,
tens of, EI. vi 2 TV. i. fii.) V.


Nature, the, omens by Heaven, III.
1.1.4; VIL
Naves, of beacians Ex iH; 3 bound

ti leather, EE. iti, IV. 2: EV, iit,


BE ged officer, a, I. iti. 1. ; wife, a,

iii

Nest, the ig yee ii. Bs “Ril. VIL;
a tebbed.

Net, the, of crime, IIT. iii. X. 1, 2; of
Heaven, Til, iii.

Nots, rabbit-, Li VIE; 3 fish-, 7, iif.
XVIUL 3; v. ILL. 4; with nino


OF SUBJECTS.


uns, bee peril a Fat wil


413


dags, I. xv. VI. 1; dird-, IT. vil. WI.
Now Tower, the, , iii. Vi,
Night and day confounded, f. viii. Y. ; i
rinking long into the, H. ii. X.;
a goes oer II. fii. VIL; busy,
and, THE, ati, VE. 4; Ut. i:
we ek YI; VEE ; Tit] Hd. ; |
y and, IV. i. Hii] E.
I. xv. be
regions, the, $V. iii. iE; IV. 3, 6,
Ninetieth year, drike Woo in his, 11.
Nee: black-lipped cattle, If. iv.


Ninth poot of the anarsh, ¢he,.H. iif. X.
ae a, slandered by his friend, IF.


Nobie men, the king addresses his
re and fords as, 21. di, VII. 5


‘ Reel nature of man, the, IT. iii.


North, expedition te the, ET, i. ree %
vetjurn, from the, H. i. VIEL. ;

the, is the Ladle e sonetallasionl,
If. v. IX. 7; the States and tribes
of the, LET. iii. VEE.6 : EV. ii. FV. 4.

Northern hill, the, 11. vi, J. 2

Note of the pheonix, the, ITE. i VI.
9; of the owl, IV. ii. Be 8.

Notes of music, RV fii.) V.


Oaks, meaty, 1. ii, KUL ; 5 Randy. f i.
x, VILL. ; xi vit. ; xi Li

it, 3; iv. IIT, ti Gunny, Hl. vii.

iv. 4) » WIE. 4: UL i, LH. 8; V.5;


Oars of cedar, i v. V.4; labouring
at their, WY. i. IV. 3.

ath, F will take on, H. a ni -

Oaths and curses, 1M, iii

Octogenarjans, I. xi. I. z

oe { make this, TIf. iii. ITT. 143. of

excellence, iff. iji. V. 8.
or 7 sacrifice, a pure, Tif. ii.


wees baskets of, I. i. I. &; to
Cgeainige 4, Vi.4: IV. i. fiii.
2A spirits aud viands for, I

I have brought my, WwW, i.
1 tn 3 of fish, IV. i. ft) VL;
to father and mother, {V. i, [ii]
VH.; ViTl.; without error, 1).
ii, TV. 3; of spirits and soups, BV.
vo IL; chiefs coming tyith, FY, iii. .


Office, the hazard of taking, I. iv. X.
&; aes preferred to, TEL. iii.


Officer, the wife of an, I. i. ITI. IV. >;
ae dewailing neglect of his worth,
1. aii. 1; mean services of an, r,


414


Hi, XIRI.; hard bot of an, I. fii.

XY.: IL. ‘vi. I.; I.; melancholy,
of ‘an, I. vi. L3 VL: 3 celebrating
an, I. vii, V5; grief of an, I. ix,
HUI. ; lamenting his master’s frivol-
ity, an, I. xiii. IL; an, feasted on
his return from en expedition, II. i.
IL. ; abandonment of public life by
an, II. iv. II. ; moving from one
State to another, disappointed, II.
iv, III.; IV.; a song made by an,
ILv. X. 8; an, admonishing his
fellows, IIT. ii. IX. ; X.

‘Officers, easy dignity of some great, I,
ii. VIL; ‘refugees in Wei, I. iii.
XI.; zealous ‘to welcome ‘men of
worth, I..iv. IX.; attendant on a
bride, Lv. Il. 45 appeal from in-
ferior to sw erior, I. vii. KIL; of
Wei, L ix. Hf.; of Ch‘in, dissipation
of, FE. xii, L.; of escort, TL. xiv. 4, ;


of ‘king Seuen, praise of the, if.
iii, VIL; of king Yéw, named and


accused, II. iv. IX, 43 deserting
their places, II. iv. X.; unfair em-
ployment of, IT. vi. I. ; of the capi-
tal, LI. viii. I.; of Chow all illus-
trious, Tfi, i. Z 2,3; of Yin, TIL
LS; iii, 1 2, 33 of king Na
WIL i. IV. 2; VI.b: IW.i. Gt
of. ee il. i. X. 8: 1 ra
iii 3 proper ordering of, I
fi rs I. 4; of king Ching, Ill.
i vii, ; my great, and excellent
men, FEL, iii. ['V. 8; tigers, L11. iii.
IX. 4: IV. ii. HI. 5; and people
in distress, III. iii, X. 1; Ah
ce and _ ministers, IV. i ti)
I.; of Loo, LV. ii. IL. ; IL1.
ee yes, king Ch‘ing, &e., IV. i. fii.J
Oh! great now és Chow, iV. iii, XI.
Ointment, congealed, I. v. {II. 2.
ola together, growing, ts v. EV. 6;
vii. VIIL. ; friendship, I. vii. VFI. ;
through grief, IL, v. TIL. 2; man’s
admonition, an, IIT. ii, KX. 4; ili.
IL; no, ex: port men, III. iii. I.
73 ways, the, IIT, ii, EY. 12.
Olden. time, iife in Pin in the, I. xv.
I. ; the example of the, FV. iii. FV.
Omen, pee ag an ent EI. iv, IX. ;
a happy, IV. i. [1.7 IIL
Omens, regardless of evil, III, iii. X.
5; of the dignity of Shang, IV. iii.


Iv.
‘One man (the king), the, I. iii.
VI. 4.


ig aera er) @ woman regrets lost,

Vu

Oppression and misery in Wei, I. iii.
AVL; ix. VIL. ; in Kwei, 1. xiii.


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX I.


III. ; in the aa abe If. iv. VIIL ;
v. IV,; : LI. iii. IIT. ;
x. ; XE

Order, and disorder, at a feast, IT, vii.
VL; a the capital of Sheng, IV.
iii, V.

Orders, should be determinate, ITT. iti,
E. -2; or sorts, of men, HI. iii.
IRI, 6. :

Ordinandes of Heaven, II. iv. IX. 7,
8: IV. j. Gii.) HL.

Ordinations of God, the, irregular, IIT.
iii, I, 1.

Organeronect; artful words like, II.

Vv.


> ILil; vi IV. 4;


Origin of the people of Chow, TH. ii. I.

Oriole, the, L. xv. I. 2; III. 4: If. i,
VILL. ; viii. VI. - See Yellow bird.

Orion, I. ii. X.

Ornamented bows, HIT. ii. II. 3.

Ornaments of metal and jade, IT. i.
IV.5. See Girdle.

Orphan, ont of au v. Vil, 3°

Osiers, I. v


: IV. ii, ITD 8; 0

: ii: ; & wise woman is
an, IIL. iii. X. 3.

Oxen and sheep for sacrifice, II. vi.
V. 1: EV. i. (iii.) VIE. ; protected
Howetseih, IIL, ii. I. 3 ; leading, II.
viii, IIL. 2.

Ox-lips, a plant, I. ix. I.

Ox-tails on staffs, I. iv. IX.: IL i
VHLI 2; iii. V. 8.


Paddocks, I. xv. III. 2. :

}| Paddy, I. ix, VI: IL. iv. 11.1;
VIL. 4; How-tseib’ s, ILL. ii. 1, ‘Mg

Pairing, 1. iv.

Pairs, thousands of, IV. i. fii] IL;


ee

Palace, the harem of a, 3 iv. }; build-
ing a, I. iv. Vi. ; the completion and
description of a, TL. iv. V.; drums
and bells beaten in the, II. Vii. V.

; king Wan in the, III. i, VE. 3.

Pan-pi e, IV. i. fl JV.

Paas, I. ii. EV.

Panther,-the Mite FH. iii. VIT. 6.

Papaya, I. v. %!

Papernnitey, II. iii, X. 2; iv


Parasites, III. ii. IX. 5.

Parent(s), a queen going to visit her,
Li. it. 3; ‘honouring, F. i. X.; in-
yoking, I. ‘sii. IV. : Il.iv. VILL. 2;
v. VIIL.4 : ILE. iii. IV. 4; leaving,
IL. iti, XIV. 2; iv. VIL; "y. V2:
IL, vi. 1.; to be feared, I. vii. IY. ;,


INDEX 1.


who has no? EI. iii. EX. ; announces
ment of marriage to, I, viii. VI. 3;
providing for, I. x. VIII.: IL. i.
II. 3—65; ministers the, of the
people, II. fi. VII. 3; daughters
should only not cause sorrow to, II.
iv. V.; thinking of our, IJ. v. 11.
1; Heaven called our, (1. v. IV. 1;

, @ son prevented from rendering the
last service to, II. y. VHI.; the
sovereign should be the, of the
people, III. ii. VII. 1.

Parsimoniousness of the rich in Wei,
I. ix. I. ; of officers, I. ix. II.

Passes, the dangerous, of King, ITI.
iii, V. 1 “

Pasture-ground, IT. i. VIII. 1.

Path, of the temple, the middle, I. xii.
VIL; the Spirit of the, IIL. ii. 1.
7; ii, VL 7; VII. 3.

Pattern, one axe-handle the, for ap-
other, I. xv. V.; a, toall the States,
IL. iii, TTI. 5; they sought me to be
a, UL. iv. VILL 7 ; the ancients a,
II. v. I: 4; take your, from king
Wun, IIL. i. 1. 7; the, of God, IIT.
i, VIL. 7; king Woo a, III. i. 1X.
3,4; king Ch‘ing a, III, ii, VIII.
6, 6; to the people, III, iii, II. 2,
4,8: IV. ii, I11. 4; the chief of
Shin, to the States of the south, and

to all officers, III. iii. V.; Chung
Shan-foo a, ILI. iii. VI. 3.

Pea, the beautiful, I. xii, VII. 1.

Peace, or war, an officer fit for, IE. ii.
Ill. 5; there is no, If. iii, ILL. ;
X. 1; restoration of, LIL. iii. VIII.
2; gifts, both of, and war, IV. i.
fi VIL; ii. ILL. 4; universal,

Vii. [iii] TX. ; enjoyed by Woo-
ting, IV. ili. Vi 5, 6.

Peach, tree, I. i. VE; ii. XIII. ; ix.
IIL. ; fruit, 1. v. X. 2; I return a
plum for a, III. iii. II. 8.

Pear tree, I. ii: V.; the russet, I. x.
VIL; X.: 11.1 1X. 1,2; the wild,
L xi. VO.

Peasantry of Wei, straits of, I. ix. V.

Pebbles, [. v. I. 2.

Pediar’s wares, I. iii, X.

Pelican, I. xiv. II.

Pen for pigs, III. ii. VI. 4.

Pendants of a banner, like the, IV.
wi.IV.4.

Peonies, I. vii. KXI.

People, the, regathered into communi-
ties, II. iii, VII. ; the innocent, II.
iv. VIIT. 3; deplorable state of
the, Tl. iv. IX.; X.; alas for us
the toiled! HI.v. IX.3; happy, Il.
vi, VIL. : ILI. ii. VIII. ; dike prince,
like, IL. vii. IX.; God seeking for


OF SUBJECTS.


415


some one to give settlement to the, _
Ill. i. Vil. °1; the resort of the
lower, III. i. VIL. 6; of Chow,
first birth of the, III. ii. I. ; find
rest in the king, ITI. ii. V. 4; duke
Léw’s devotion to the, UL. ii. VI. ;
the, are heavily burdened, and sor-
rowing, III. ii. IX. ; misery of the,
IIl, it. X.3 iii, X.3 enlightening
the, III. it, X. 6; Heaven gave
birth to the, HE. iti, 1.4; VE 1;
are disorderly, why the, III. iii.
III. 11—16 ; the lower, to be feared,
IV. iii. V. 4.

Pepper, like, is the smell of spirits,
IV. i. iii] V.

Peppor-plant, Lx. IV.; xii ID.
Person, Chung Shan-foo was wise,
protecting his own, IIT. iii, VI. 4.
Personators ef the dead. See Dead,

Representatives. ty

Perversities, the people have .now
many, III. ii. X. 6.

Pheasant, the male, I. iii, VIIT.; IX.;
pheasant’s feathers, 1. iii. XIII. 3;
v. IIL. 3; -figured robe, I. iv, LIT. 2;

easily caught, L. vi, VI. ; flying, II.

iv, V. 4; crowing in the morning,

Il. v. IID. 5; long-tailed, IL. vii.

IV. 2.

ra the male and female, ILI. ii.


Pickles, IL. vi. VI. 4: IID. ii, IL. 2.
Pig, roast, IV. ii. 1V. 4; duke Léw
ies a, from the pen, III. ii. Vi.


Pillars, of a courtyard, EI. iv. V. 5;
of a temple, LV. iii. V. 6.

Pine tree, I. v. V. 4; vii. X. 2: II.
iv. V. 1; vii. IIL.: IV,ii. IV. 9;
V. 6. ‘

Pins, hair-, I. iv. IIT.

Pint measure, [, x, 1V.

Pitcher and jar, 1. v. VUT. 3.

Plain in the south, the, I. xii. I. ; in
the middle of the, II. v. 11.3; the,
of Chow, III. i. TIT. 3; of Muh,
IV. ii. TV. 2.

Plains, and marshes, II. vi. VI. 1;
viii. III. 5; the finest of the, I1f. i.
. VIL. 6; duke Léw surveyed the,
Ill. ii. VI. 2; of the far distant
borders, IV. ii, I.

Plans, recklessness of the king’s, IT.
vy. 1.; wisely arranged, II. v. IV.
4; Il. iti, IL. 8; IX. 6; far-
reaching, III. iii. I. 2: LV. i. [iii.]
Il. ; not far-reaching, III. ii. X.

Plant of forgetfulness, the, I. v.
VIII 4

Plants, dividing, I. xiv. 1V.; the tae ~
and the /ge, II. ii. VII. 1.


416

See Artemisia, Melon,
Bamboo, , Millet,
“Barley, Mistletoe,
‘Beans, Motherwort,
Bignonia, Mouse-ear,
Bitter gourd, ° Mugwort,
Boohmeria, Mustard,
Bottle gourd, Ox-lips,
Broussonetia, Paddy,
Calabash, Pea, |
Celery, Peony,
Cereals, Pepper,
‘Convoivulus, © Plantain,
Creepers, Pokeweed,
Creeping-grass, Pondweed,
Cress, Foo,
Darnel, Pulse,
Dodder, ecds,
Dolichos, Rush,
Duckweed, Scallions,
Fern, Sedges,
Gourds, Shee *sefoot,
Grain, ~~ erd’s~
Gry


pes, UuTBE,
Grass, the white, Binarhceads
Grass, the king-, Sorrel,


Hemp, Southernwood,
Indigo plant, poeta se
K wei, he xrow-gourd
Lilies, ‘Thorn-ferns,
Liquorice, Tribulus,
tus, Valerian,

Madder, Violets,
Maize, “Water Poly.

» Mallows, onum,
Medallion, - heat.


Plantains (plantaginaces), I, i. ‘VIII,
Playing and singing, I. ix. II.


Pleasure, pursuing nothing but, TIE.


tii, IT. 3.


Pledging, III. ii. i 2. See Cup.
Pleiades, L ii, X, 2
Plentiful. See Years, Abundance.


Ploughing, IV. i. fi.) IL. 5 [iii.} V.
Ploughs, 3. xv.
Plough-shares, Il. vi, VIUL 1: IV.
i. Gi.) -V.; bg
ae tthe, I . ii, IX.; XUIL ;
vi, “X. 3 ; xi. Vi; VEL; xii. ae
xiv. IL: H. ii. VIL. 33 v. X.
(See Sparrow-plum) ; fruit, I.v, Ks
Ireturn a, for a peach, Tk. iti. T1. 8.
Points of the heavens, pa by
shadows the, ITI. ii. WI. 5.

Poison, a rejected wife compared to, I.
iii, X. 5.

Poisonous ways, wee the people enjoy,
Wi. iii, TH. 11.

Pokecweed, IL. iv. PV. 3.

var the, of a war-carviage, 3. xi.


OF SUBJECTS.


: Pounding ee walls, Il. iv. V


INDEX I,


Polite intercourse, the rules of, to be
always observed, II. viii. VII.

Pond, fish in a, Ip. iv. VILL. 11; the
Marvellous, Lil. i. VIII. 2.

Ponds and islets, I: ii, 1. 1.

jars ¥. ii, FV. ; IV. ii. TI. 2

table, the, HI, iii. VII. 3.
Pest the ninth, of the marsh, II. iii.
.3 @ deep, II. v. LII. 4;' -water,

Boe be made useful, IIT. ii, VIL. 15
when 8, becomes dry, TIL. iii, XI. 6.

Pools, cattle drinking at the, II. iv.
VI. 2; water flowing from, i. viii.
7.3; eft by floods, 1. i. IV. : TL
ii, VIE.

Poor, Chung Shan-foo did not insult
the, IIE. itt, VI 8.

Popular saying, a, HI. iif. 1.8; ID.
1, 111. 9; VI, 5,6,

Population, increase of the, II. iv.

Til. ii. VI. 6.

Porcelain whistle, the, II. v. V. 7:
ae X. 6.

Post, k cope te to one’s, in bad times,
I. iv.

Posterity, ieee of virtuous, IIT. ii, V.

Posts and boards iu the palace of king
Wan, IE. i, VIE. 3, :

Pounded, feeling as if, II. v. IIL. Le
HE. i

Poverty of an officer, I. ifi. 2a a
person regretting his, I. x.

cas the, above and blag FIL. iff.


I

Praise, of duke Wan, L. iv. VI.; of
virtuous and intelligent lady, I. xii.
IV. ; ofa virtuous lord, I. xiv. IIL ;
of the duke of Chow, Le xv. iv. 0
VIL; of the king, IL i. WI.
IX. ; vii. VIL: 1 1. ii. Ii. ;
of aministers, Ii. i. VIL; ; of boul

rinces, II. ii. UX. ; vi. X.; vii. LD:

W. 4 [i.) IV.; of officers of king
Seuen, ik. ili. VIE. + of a bride, Il.
vii. EV. ; “of the ladies and gentle-
men of a former time, H. viii. L.;
of king Wan, If. i. I. to VIL:


IV. i. Pla: Hing Won tL
Ke, ITE. i. VIL. ; of king hog? :
i, IX.: IV. i.


Oh ee kings


hing and Kang, TW. i. [i.) TX;
of king Ching’s officers, III. ii.
VIE ; -Odes oe Loo, EV. ii. title.
Prayer, before a hunting expedition,
Ii. iii. VI, 1; for rain, HH, vi. VII.
2; for the aged, TIL. ii. TL. 4; for
the king, Il. vii. IE.; for a good
year, IL. iii. TV. 6; King Chit ing e
to his father, FV. i. [iii.] IZ. ;
officers of Loo, EV. ii. H. -


ii.J X.; 3 _ [iti]


INDEX I.


Presenting precious rai te the tribes | Quaifs, I. iv. V.; ix. VE.


of Hwae, IV, ii. HE

Presents, king’s, TEL. iii, VIZ. 2, 3.

Priests, II. vi. V. 4, 8.

Prince, a fit mate for a prince, Li.
VII. ; virtues of a, symbolized b y
a lin, I, i, X1.3 the harem of *
ii, X. 5 of Ts‘in, I. xi Ie; IL; V.;
the duties of a, LIL, iti. iL

Princes, wives for young, I. xv. FE. 2;
lower garments for, I. xv. I. 3; furs
for, I. xv. 1.45 @ pattern for, Tih.
iti, VE. 3; Ye brittiane and accom:
lished, iv, i. (i.] 1V.;° full of
armony and gravity, IV. i, {ii.]
VIL. ; T'ang appointed the, LV. iii.
Iii. See Feudal.

Princess, marriage of a, I. ii. I. ; XIUL.

Princesses of Che, the, LEE. i, IL. 2.

Prisoners and captives, Il, i, VIII. 6:
UL. i. VIL. 8: IV. ii. ELL 8.

Prisons, deemed fit inmates for, II,
v. TE 6.

Private feast, a, II. vi. V. 5; oe
HH. vi. VIEL 3: IV. i (ii.} IE

Prcelecesin; duke Léw made, LIL ii.


: Pastels celestial and terrestrial, H.


Profit, three times cent. per cent., TEI.
iii, X. 4,

Progenitors come and enjoy offerings,
1. vi. V.

Progress, consultation without, If. v.
1.3; making a, AG i, [i] VILE ;
(iit. J XL; 8. UI

eager te aman eines without, I.
-iv, VIEL; the rales of, to be ob-
served even by the most ‘frugal, IL
viii, VIL.; of ae a ii.
IL. 3; HE 4,5; EX. 3;

Protest of a widow pear a  sestnil
marriage, I, iv. I,

Proud men, IL. v. VL 6.

Provident arrangements, 1. xv. I.

Provisions, excellent, Il. ii. TH. 2;
exhausted, IIL. ii. x. 53 stores of,
iii. V. 15 of millet, PV. i. {iti


Publi fields, and private, II. vi.
- 35 service, a young suldier
a I. ix. IV.; service, an officer
complains of the arduous duties of,
IL. vi. I.; I1.; ILL. ; life, regret at
the abandonment of, HL iv. EL;
affairs, a woman has ‘nothing to do
with, LI. iii. X. 4; duties, reverent-
tha pn IV. i. {ii.] 1.
Pulse “ plant), I. xv, I. 6,7: IL. v.
; How-tseih’s, IV. ii. IV. 1.
Purilication for sacrifice, IIL. ii. 1. 7.


OF SUBJECTS.


Quarters, the four, TH. i.-X. 3
8; VIET. 4, 6; 1X. 1, 33 - i
iv. 6; V.1;

Iv.i IX.; : iii, 1

Queen, allusions to an Wian’s, I.-i.
1l.; IV.; V.; king Yéw’s, de-
graded and forsaken, H. viii. V.

Quips and jokes, :. v. 1 3.

Quiver, IV. i, VHL ; 3 of seal-
skin, IE. i. vil. } di. IV, 1


Rabbit, a single, baked, roasted, or
broiled, IL. viii. VII.

Rabbit-catcher, praise.ef a, I. i. VIL.

Rabbit Net, the, a consteHation, the
Hyades, II. v. "EX. 8; a VIIT. 3. -

Rafts, 1.1. UX. 5 iii. x4

Rain, good, E. iv. Vi. 3; O for! lv.
Vill, 3: wind and, 1. vii. XVL;
xv. Tl. 2,3: H. v. VIL 1; genial,
Ui. viii, ILL. 1; grest, U1, viti VIII.
3; drizzling, I. xv. TLE. : EL vi. VI.
2: soaking, II. iy. VILL 93 prayer
for, I. vi. VL. 2; Vin. 3; tears
falling like, 21. vi. "TL 1.

Rainbow, I. iv. VH.

Rain-coats, Il. iv. VE. 2.

Ram, no old, without horns, IT, vii.
VL. 8; don’t look for horns on a
young, IIL. iii. II. 8; sacrificing a,
Hr i 1.7; anda bull, IV. i. fi,]


Samling and singing, III. ii. VEH.


Rams, pure, for victims, If. vi. VIL. 2.
Rank, distinguished by robes, I. x. TX.
Ranks for an army, TIE. iii. TX. 2,
Rats, 1. ii, VI. 3; is, VILL; ix.
hr 4 Pas iv. V. 3; smoked out, i.


v. I. 5,
Reapers, IV.i. fii. )V.; VE
Reaping time, I. xv. 7 4,7; beans,
aed Ik. 3; sowing and, "HL. iit,
Til. 6: IV. ii, FV.

Rebellion plotted against Tsin, I. x.
TIL. ; the duke of Chow on, I. xv. II.

Recesses, the, of a large mound, ITI.
ii. VILL,

Recluse, happiness of ef I. x. ER;
contentment of a, I. xii. EIY.

Recompense, every good deed has its,
UL. iii. H. 6.

Reed-organ, I. vi, III. 1.

Reeds, divination by, 1. vs IV, 2.: Ti.
i, IX. 4; a bundle of, I. ¥. VEL. 1;
and rushes, I. xi IW: Hv. On
4; sedges and, I. xv. E

Reformation, a eall for, THE. ii. 1X,

Refugees in Wei, 1. iti. XI.

Regathering of the people under king
Seuen, II. iii. Vil.


‘418,


esi the nine, IV. iii, LIE. ; Iv.
Yu arranged the, IV. iii. IV.
Rove a woman’s, I. vil. XEV.
Reins, I. iii. XIII. 2; vii, LV. viii.
X. i xi Ue: Ui MIL; ii. TX. 4;
‘tii, IV. 1; vi. x 8; vii. IV. b:
ae a a 2: IV, i. [ii.] VIIL ;


Relations, the mupeximtennienth of the
ruler’s, 1. ix.

Relatives, mean, aes into office, IT. iv.
Vil. 4; feasting the king’ s, II. vii.
FUL: TEL. ii. Tl.; HL ; cold treat-
ment of, by the king, Il. vii. TX. ;
ve king’s, a fortifiel wall, IIL. ii,

7.


‘Bepetition, assiduous, in teaching, TEI.
ji. I. 11.
Repo of soldiers absent from. home,
iti
Representatives of the dead, IT. vi.
OW. VL; vii. VI. 2: iL. ij, HI.


8;

Responsibility, shirking, II. iv. X.;
vi.

. Rest, a wus ee for her husband,

Liv ; E dare not seek, il. iv.
IX. 8; oe people find, in the king,
III, ii. V. 43 the king” s heart at,
IL. viii, TIL. 5: ITM. iii, VIII. 2.

Retiring girl, a, I. iii, XVII.; from
ublic life, against, IT. iv. IL; IX.


‘Berea, ‘of a husband, I. vi. III. ; the
soldier's, I. xv. TUI.: IL. i. VIIL ;
I


Xx.

‘Return, when shall we? II, i. VII. ;
vi. TL. ; let us, U1. iii. Ix. 6.

-Revenue- -system, TiL. ii. vi. 5; iii.

“Reverence, of a prince’s wife, I. ii. IT.

Reverent watchiulness, would prevent
slanders, IT. iii. TX. 35; be, II. iii.
IX. 1; day and night, IV. i. [iii]
I.; let me be, IV. i. [iii] J IIL.

Reversed, God has, His usual course,
TUL, fi. X.

-Reviling the good, III. jii. HI. 6.

Rewards and punishments, justice of
‘Woo-ting’s, IV. iii, ¥. 4

Rhinoceros’ arty I. i. Il. 8; xv. 1

- 8: If, wil.

fei econ Tanti ID. iii. VI. 4;
weare not, it viii. K. 3.

-Rice, 1, x. VIII. : IV. i. fii] IV. ;
IV. 1; coarse ‘and fine, III. iii. Xt
5; era as TI. ii. VII. 1; -fields,
Il. viii. V. 3; -harvest, I. xv. 1.6,

Riches, of Ts‘e, L y. IIE. ; and parsi-
mony of Wei, I. ix. I.

‘Ridge, III. ii. vt. 9. See Heights.


Right, and aid movements of the


OF SUBJECTS.


-INDEX ‘I.


princes all proper, II. vi. X. 4; we
wea descended on the, IV, i. [i.]


Rings, attached to hounds’ necks, I.
viii. VIII. ; * gilt, for the-traces of a
carriage, Y. xi. me attached to
reins, III. iii, VII. 2: IV. i. fii.)
VEL

Rise early and go to bed late, IT. v. II.
4: ID. iii, IL. 4. See Early and
Dawn.

River, seeking a man up and down a,
I. xi. IV.

Rivers, hills and, IV. ii. TV. 1. See
Proper Names, Ho, Kéang, Han,
Hwae, King, Wei, &c.

Road to Chow, the, IE. v. It. 2;
VIII. 1, 2; the great, IT. vii. IV.
5; viii, X.'4; the Spirit of the, INT.
iid, VI.7; VII. 3.

Roads opened, Id, i, HE 8: 1V.i.

Vv.

Rahs and oppressors, IIE. ii, IX. ;
iii

Robe, a lady’s ‘embroidered, I. v. IIL.
1; black, of duke Woo of Ch‘ing, I.
vii. 1.; a prince’s embroidered, I.
xi. V. 5 a grand-ducal, I. xv. VI.

Robes, the upper, I. iii, TI. ; officers’ .
I. iti, RU. 45 vi, IX.; of state,

ictured, I. iv. ILI. ; suits of, I. x.
I.; of white silk, ’I. x. II. 3 not
without, I. x. IX.; xi. WHI;
clothed in, IL. iv. ¥. 8; dark
coloured, with the dragon, Il, vil.
VIII. 1; ITE. iii. VIE. 2.

Rock-covered hill tops, II. v. VIT. 3.

Rocks, white, I. x. [TL ; miasses of,
Dae iv. VII. 1; frowning, IL. viii.

Roofs a houses, I. xv. I. 7.

Root, the, with its three shoots aad
last king of Héa), IV. iii. IV. 6

Rovts, removing, FY. i. i] Vv.

Rope-rush, steeping the, I. xii. IV.

Ropes of grass, I. xv. 1.7; boat-, IL.
fi) 1X. 5; to bind horses, IV. i.

ii .

iano I. iii, KIII.; used by the
prince of ‘Fs‘in, 3. xi. V.

Round and round, F. x. V.

Royal House, the, 1. i, X.; marriage
of a princess of, I. ii. XUL ; do-
main, L. vi. title: IV. iti. TIL;
domain, an officer decides to return,
to the, II. iv. 17.

Rud, a fish, I. xv. VI. 1.

Ruin, a bad man going to, I. xii. VI. :
IIL. iii. IT. 4; coming on the king-
dom, Ii. iv. ‘VIL; VIL; 1X;
Xv? TLL iii. 1. 65° LIL; ; and dis-
order, IIT. ii, X. 4,


FEDER i.


Ruter, the, of horses, an object of

, worship, IT. ii. VT, 1; a righteous

| and an unrighteous, Ih. iii. TIL. 8;
Heaven beheld the, (II. ii. VI. 1;
God raised up,a, ET. i, VIL; God
the, of men, LEY. iii. , 17

Rush, the white-flowered, II. viii. V.

Rush-mat, TH, iv. V. 6.

Rushes, I. it. XIV. 1; xv. 11. 3: IL.

. vil. VIL. 33; by the way-side, Ht.

-. HID; and sedges, I. v. IIL 4

reeds and, 1. xi. [V.: UL. v, ee
and lotus ‘plants, I. xii, X,


Sacks, grain i Hil. ii, VI. 1.


Saevifice, I. i, 1.3 IV. : UL. iii. VI.

1; vi. V. avi. tit. i. ate 8;
a L; at, Ve; VI. VIL 3:
. Ve: fi] IIL ; * fii] Ni. . VIL;


VIEL. ; it, IV. 3. iii, 3 L; vie-
tims fer, I. iv, VI. a vy Ve 7:

_ TL4 V. 4; ii 0. 7.

Sacrificial millet, I. vi. I.; x. VIIL:
I vi. Vib; VEO3: IV. ii, IV. 1;
services, II. vi. V.; Odes of Chow,
IV, ae title; Odes of Shang, IV.

tii. t

Sad condition of the State of Ching,
I. vii, XI.

Sadness, I. v, IX.; vi. 1. See Heart.

" Sages, wise pave of the, II. ¥, IV. 45

thero are no, Ii. ii, X. 1.

Sandal trees, I. vii. II. ; ie VI. : IL.
i 1X. 3; iti, X.; LIL i. IL 8.
so eae a kind of. ‘ish, Il. ii.


Sashes, of brides, I. xv. III. 4.

‘Satiated with kindness, ILE. di. TIT. 1

Satirizing a gente I. iii, XV LiL;
parsimony, I. ix,


Sauces, IL. vii. VI. ce II. ii, ID. 2;


iii, VIL. 3.
Saying, an ancient, II]. ii. X. 3; a
3 popular; IUl, iii. I. 8; 10.1; OY.


Scabbard, gemmed, of the king, IT, vi.
IX. 2; “duke Léw’ 8s ornamented, III.
ii, VI. 2.

Scallions, I. xv. I. 8.

Sceptre, a great, LIT. iii, V. 5; the
large, of his rank, IIL. iti. VI. 2.

eee to Bey with, sons shall have,


TE aks his pride, a, I. ix.


Scorning a scorner, I. vii, XII.
Scorpion’s tail, hair like a, II. viii. %
4, 5


"Rasonivile believed, fT. v. £V. 3.

Sereen of bamboos, a, E, viii. X. 7 IE.
iii, TV. 1: TIL. iii. VHL. 2.

Screens, the great States are, III. ii.


OF SUBJECTS.


419


X. 7; and buttresses, the feudal
chiefs are, IT, vii. I.; Foo and Shin
aré, to all the States, TH, iii, V. 1.
Sea, the court of the, I. iii, IX. 1;
the southern, IIL iti. VIIT. 3; the
States along the, IV. ii. IV. 6, 7.
oe quivers, IZ. i, VIT. 5; iii,
1


+


Searching for a man up and down a
river, I. xi. TV.

Seas, the four, LV, ili, ITI. ; all with-
in "the, IV. iii. IV. 2.

i the four, Hl. i. VI. 4; v.


Sedges, I. vi. IX. ; and reeds, I. xy. I.
Seduction, a young lady resists, I. ii.
X11. ; a woman bemoans, J, v. TV.

Seed, selecting the, H. vi. VIIL 1.

Self-cultivation of duke Woo, I. v..1.
Self-possessed officers, I. ii, VIT.

Self-vailiciont, dow t he, It. i. 12,
10, 11; a bad ruler, whois, TIT. iii.
WL s.

Semi-circular water, pleasant ia the,
IV. ii. ILL.

Separation of soldiers from their fami-
Hes, L. iii. VE. 3 vi. LV.: dL. i, VIL;
of husband and wife, L. iti, VILL. ;
vi. V.; from brothers and parents,
I. iv. VIL; from kin, E. vii VII.

Serpents, on a banner (See ios $
dreaming about, IT. iv. V. 6, 7

Servants, I. i. HI. 4: if. vi, v. 3;
hired, IV. i. [hii.] v. lenty of,
re ke If, 2; all Dee ings, H.
vi

Service, incessant, TI. vill, X.} rever=
ence in the, 1V. iii, I.

Settlement of Pin, the, TL. ii, VI. 5, 6.

Seven sons lament their mothur’s sore
row, f, iii. VII. ; orders of nobility,
Ex. EX,

Sexes, estimate of immorality in the
two, iv. IV. 3; re ae
of the, EL. iv. V. 9: IEE. ii, X. 3.

Shade, the wide, of a mulberry tree,
ELT. iti, HI. 4.

Shadows, determining = oints of
the heavens by, iL i f 5.

Shaking with terror, TH, i. IX. 3.

‘Shameful things in a harem, I. iv. I.

Sheaves, three “millions of, I. ix. VE;
collecting, Lxv.L.7: IV.i. {ii}
VI.; ungathered, IL. vi. Writ 3.

Sheep, and “lambs, Killing, I. xv. 1.8;
herds of, If. iv. VI.; for sacrifice,
U. vi. Vez LV. iid, VID. ; and oxen
protected How-tseih, ILL. ii, I. 3;
cattle and, IIL. ii, IL 1.

— s-foot, a Mera IL. iv. IV. 2,

eepskins, I. it, VII.
Shel Sania! Il, ¥. VIL,


420


an on. vermilion-strings, IV. ii.


Shopherd’s-purse, a plant, 1, iii, X.

Shields, IV. i. [i.] VIII. ; dragon-
figured, and feather-figured, I. xi.
HI. ; of, duke Léw, IIL. ii. VI. 1.

Shoes, made of dolichos, I. viii. VI.
2; ix. 1: Iv. 1X. 2

Shouting and brawling, II. vii. VI. 4;
of workmen, III. i, LI. 6; clamour
and, fF. iii. I. 5.

Shrike, the, I. xv. I. 3.

Shrine, of ae Woo, IV. i. fii
VIIL. ; [iii] If. ; of Woo-ting, IV.
iii. V6.

Sickles, IV.i. ffi] T.|

Sieve, the Southern, a constellation,
Il. v. VI. 2; 1X. 7.

Sifting grain, 111. ii. L. 7.

Sighing and groaning, III. ii. X. 5.

Silk, E. v. FV.; white, L if, VIL;
vii. XIX.; viii, IL; x, IIL;
green, and yellow, I. viii. ITZ;
threads, I. ii. XIII. 3; girdle, I.
xiv. ITI. ; bands, ribbons, and cords,
I. iv. IX.; garments, I. iti. II. 3:
IV. i. {iii.) VIL.

Silk-worm moth, the, I. v. III. 2;
month, the, I. xv. I. ‘

Silk-worms and weaving, III. iii, X.4.

Silken string, the, of a bow, IIL. iii.


I. 9.
Simple-looking lad, a, L v. IV. 1.
Singing and whistling, a sign of satis-
faction, I. ii. XI.; of sorrow, II.
viii. V. 3; and dancing, IL. vii. IV.
8; to admonish by, 1. xii. VI.; to
lutes, IIL. ii. II. 2; of birds, 1. i.
If. 1; iii, VII4; VIIT. 2; IX. 2,


3; xv. I. a

Sister, I. iii, XIV. 2; v. III, 4.

Site of the capital of Chow, III. i.
X,; T‘anvfoo Jooked out for a, III.
i. IIT. 2.

Six. reins, the, IT. i. III.; orders of
nobility, I, x. [X.; hosts of the king,
Til. i, IV. 3; iii, IX. 1; days, a
husband absent for, If. viii. IE. 2.

Sixth month, an expedition starts in
the, IL. iii. III.

Skin of a rat, the, I. iv. VIII.

Skins, lambs’ and sheep’s, FE. ii. VII. ;
of white foxes, red panthers, and
yellow grisly bears, ILI, iii. VIE. 6.

Skirts, gathering seeds in, I. i, VIII.
3; embroidered, L. xv. VI. 1.

Slab of stone, Paou-sze compared to a
thin, II. viii. V. 8

Slanders, against giving ear to, I. x.
XI. : U1. iti. EX. ;.iv. VIII. ; IX.
7; X43 v. HL; vii. V. : 10 iii.
X. 4; XI. 3; appeal to Heaven


OF SUBJECTS,


INDEX f.


against, II. v.1¥.; of anold friend,
-v. V.; an eunuch suffering from,
Ui. v. VI.; of women and eunuchs,

* TNL, iff, KM. 4.

Sleep, death spoken of as, I. vi. VI.

Sleep on couches, sons, but daughters,
on the ground, If. iv. V. 8, 9.

Sleet and snow, IT, vii, IIL. 3.

Slippers, red, I. xv. VH.: 11. iii,
VIL. 2; gold-adorned, II, iii. V. 4.

Slopes, those eastern, III. ii. VIII. 9.

Smartweed, IV. i. [iii.] VI. .

Smile of pride, the, I. iii. V.; every,
and word correct, II. vi. V. 3,

Snow, 1. ii, XVI: IL i, VII. 6;
VIII. 43 vi. VI. 2; vii. III. 3;
IX. 7, 8.

Social life, the duties of, IV. i. [i,] X.

Soldier’s thought of home, a, I. ix.
IV.; x. VIEL. ; xv. TIE.

Soldiers, separation of, from their
families, I. iii, VI.; vii IV.: IL i.
VII.; complaint of, against the
minister of War, II. iv. 1,4 cheer
ful alacrity of, II. viii. T11,; misery
and murmuring of, II. viii, X,

Solitary, alas! for the helpless and,
IL. iv. VIII. 13; v. IL. 5; the king,
TH. ii. X. 7; IV. i. (iii) I.

at of a marquis married, the, I. ii.

{IT.; Oh! my, UX. iii. IT. 10, 12;
of Heaven. See Heaven.

Song, my few verses in prolongation
of your, III. ii. VIII. 10; I have
made this, II. v. V. 8: III. iii. IIT.
16; V. 8; VI.8.

Songs, responding in, I. xii. IV.

Sons, seven, blaming themselves for
their mother’s sorrow, I. iii, VIII. ;
and daughters, the auspicious inti-
mations, and different lot of, II. iv.
V.7, 8,9; train and teach your, II.
v. Il. 3; of the East, and of the
West, II. v. IX. 4; and grandsons,
Il. vi. WV. 6: IV. i. iii.J V.

Sorrel, I. ix. II.

Sorrow, of an officer, I. iii. I. ;.XV.;
of a wife, E. iii. HI.; of a mother,
I, iii. VIL. ; at the departure of the
duke of Chow from the Bast, I. xv.
VI. ; caused by the minister of War,
Il. iv. I,; of the people, IIL. ii.
IX. See Heart.

Sound nor smrell, the doings of Heaven
have neither, TI. i. I. 7,

Soups, 111. iii. EB: LV. ii. 1V. 4; iit. 11.

South hill, the, I. viii. VI.; xiv. II:
IL. i. VI. 6; ii. VIL. ; iv. V.; VH.
5,6; vi. VI. 1.

South,. tribes of the, IV. ii. III. 6;
the hordes of the, IIT. iii. IT. 4; in
the, is the barbel, II. V. 1,2; an


INDEX I


expedition to the, 1. fii, IV. ; viii.
TIL; aridge on the, IIE. it. VI. 3;
the States of the, IE. v. X.6: HI.
iii. V.; IX.

South-lying acres, I. xv. I. b: II. vi.
Vii.1, 3; VILL 1, 4: IV. i. [iii]

Southern Sieve, a constellation, II. v.
VE2; ¥X.7; sea, HE ii, VIL.

. 3; metals, LY. ii. HI. 8.

Southernwood, J. i. IX. ; ii. I. ; xiv.
IV.; xv. E.: UW. i 1, 2; ii. 2X;
vi. IIL. 3; offering, with fat, HEE. ii.
I. 7; oxtail-, FE. vi. VIII. ; aster-,
IL. iii, 11. ; different kinds of, II. v.
VILL 1, 2.

Sovereign, a true, FIT. i. X.; the duty
of a, III. ji. VIE; alas! you, of

. YinrShang, 111. tii. I. ; the last, of
Héa, IE. iii. I. 8; trulyis the king

_ the, -lord, TV. i. (i.j ViiE. ; -king,
IV. i. [ii] VIE

Sovereigns, the virtuous, of ofd, IT. vi.
IV.; the three, in heaven, II. i.
IX. 1; our two, EV. i, [i.] VE.

Sow-bug, in chambers, I. xv. FE. 2.

Sowing, IL. vi. VINE. 1: LL. iii, 211.
6: IV. i, (ii] HL. ; fii] Vo; VL;

_ di. IV. 1; neither, nor reaping, I.
ix. VE

Sowthistle, I. iii, K.; x. XIE. 2: IIL.
i, ILI, 3. ,

Sparrow, I. ii, VI.

Sparrow-gourd, the, I. v. VI.

Srecowales, the, I. ii. XIXT.; xi.

: 3 xv. 1. 6.

Spears, I. vii. V. 3 xi. VIII. : II. iv.
VIP. 8: TL. ii. VIL 1: IV. i fi]
VIL ; ii. TV. 8. :

Speech, the artful, II. iv. X. 5; with-
out action, II, v. I. 3; elegance of,
If, viii. I. 1; be cautious in, III.
iii; IT. 5, 6.

Sphex, the, IL v. IT. 3.

Spider’s web, I. xv. II. 2.

Spike, worn at the girdle, L v. VI. 1.

Spinner, the, an insect, I. xv. I. 5.

Spinning and weaving, I. xv. L. 3.

Spirit, the Father of husbandry, the,
Il. vi. VILI. 2; of the Path, the,
II. ii. 1.7; ili, VI. 7; VIL. 3; no,
not honoured, III. iii. IV. 2; the
mountains sent down a, IIL. iii. V. 1.

Spirits, =spiritual beings, hearken to
him who cultivates friendship, IT. i.
V. 1; come and confer blessings,
Il. i. VI. 53 vi. V.; hearken to
those who love the correct and up-
right, [1. vi. III. 4, 5; representa-
tives of, eating and drinking, IE. vi,
YV.; of the land, and of the four
quarters, II. vi. VIL. 2; VIIL. 4:


OF SUBJECTS,


421


iL, iit, 1V. 6; great altar to the, of
the land, set up, TEE. i. UT. 7;
cheered and encouraged by the, HE.
LV. &; had no occasion for com-
plaint or dissatisfaction, II. i. V1.
2; the host of alt the, IIE. ii. VIIL.
3; the approaches of, cannot de
caleulated beforehand, FIT. iii, HH.
7; reverent to the intelligent, I11.
iii, IV. 6; the, are not biessirig, £11.
iii. X. 5; he bas attracted and given
rest to atl, EV. i. [i.] VIEL

Spirits, ardent, and viands, I. x. IY.<
Il. vii. LET. ; 1V. 3; iv. VILL. 12;
vi. V. 1: IIL if. 1V.; making and
drinking, I. xv. I. 6, 8: If. vi. VI.
3; straining, II. i. V.°2,3; good
and abundant, Il. if. IT. 1, 2,3;
V.; and food, daughters have only
to think of, IZ. iv. V.9; presents
of, I. v. IX. 53 sacrificing with,
IL vi. Vo; V8: IV. i (H] TV,;
{iii.] V.; good and soft, II. vii, L.
4: IV. i (iit) VIL; mild end
good, II. vii, Vi. 1; pouring out a
cup of, IT. viii, VIL. ; clear (yellow
liquid), [1]. i. V.2,4: TV in. 11;
sweet and strong, TET. ii. IT. 43

* drinking to the full, III. ii. IDL.
(See Drinking) ; pouring into a cata-
bash, III. ii, VI. 4; the king’s face
flushed with, III. iti, I. 5; besotted
by, IIL. iii. 11. 3; a hundred vases of
clear, ILI, iii, VII.3; herbsflavour-
ed, from black millet, ITI. iii. VHI.
5; sweet, LV. i. [ii] LV.; iti] V.;
drinking the good, IV. ii. III. 3.

Spirits foaimal)s full of, IIL. ii.
VIL.

Spokes, wood for, [. ix. VI. ; aids for,
IL. iv. VIII. 9, 10. -

Spoons, of thorn-wood, IT. v. IX. 1.

Sport, do not make, III. ii. X. 4, 8.

Spring, thoughts natural to the, I. ii.
XII.; the approach of, I. xv. I. :
II. i. VIII. 6; it is now the ond of,
IV. i. Gil 1.; and autuzn sucri-
fices, IV. Hi. LV. 3, :

Sone of water, L. iii, KIV.1: 4.
v. X.5; cool, I. iti. VIE. 3; xiv.
IV.: Il. v. 1X. 3; @ stream flow-
ing from a, Ii. v. b. 5; nothing
deeper than a, Id. v. HI. 8; water
bubbling up from a, 1. vii. VIEL.
2: ILE. iti, X. 7; surely as the
water flows from a, HT. iii. EL. 4;
when a, becomes dry, IIT. iii. X1. 6.

Springs and streams, 11, viii, III. 5:
ILL. ii. VE. 5; and pools, IML. i.
VH. 6; the hundred, iff. ii, VI. 3.

Sprinkle and sweep, 111. iii. 11. 4.

Spuds and hoes, IV. i. [ii] I.


422


Steble, a, 11. vii. If. 3, 4.
Stack yard, II, v. 11.6. 5
Stacks, IIL. ii. I. 6; ina kitchen gar-
den, I. xv. I. 7,8; tens of myriads
of, TE. vi. V. Ls FV. i. fii] V.;


like islands ang mounds, Il. vi.


TY, 4.

Stags, IE. iii. VI. 2; vy. HI. 5.

Stain, king Wan without, 11. i. VI. 4.

Stairs, IV, i. [ii VIL

Stalks of grain, FV. i. [iii.] V.

Stallions, IV. ii. I.

Stand, a large, IV. ii. E.

Stands of wood and earthenware for

offerings, III. ii. ¥. 7.

Star, the morning-, I. vii. VHE. ; xii.
V.; the Fire-, I. xv. I.

Star-Hght, I. iv. VI. 3.

Stars, L Mi, K.; iv. VE. 1: IE. v.
IX.: IIL. iii. TV. 8; on a cap, I.
v. I. 2; the Three, Lx. Vi: U.
viii. TX. 3.

State, the great, 4 ¢., Ts‘e, I. iv. X.
4; a virtuous man rectifies the, I.
xiv. IIL. ; ministers the foundation
and light of the, II. ii. VII.; worn
ba apres ne o ie ws an

; a large, (Sin), . i, 1% 4,6;
an inferior, 2 #.: IV. 1; God
raised up thé, IIT. i, VET. 3; the
King’s, FEI. iii, VII. 2, 3; onr
complete, IV. i. {i,} ILI. ; unsettled,
IV. i. fit I.; TE; the glory of
the, LV. i. [iti] Ve. * :

States, the feudal, I. xiv. FV. : IE. vii.
L. 2: UL. iti, VIL. 5: IV. i. i.)
IV.; VIII. ; the four, I. xv. IV, :
IN. iii. VII, 6; the myriad, IF. iv.
VII. 10; the lords of the various,
HU. iv. X. 2; of the East, 11. v. 1X.
2; of the South, IE. v. X. 6; ELI,
SH. V2; “EX. ; Wan received the
allegiance of the, IIIL.i. 11.3; HL.
9; LV. ; the centre of all the, [II i.
Vil. 6; ii. TX. 3; the great, are
screens, III. ii. X. 7; screens of all

the, IEL. iii, V. 1; good and bad

princes of the, IIE. jii. VI. 4; of
the North, IE. iii. VII. 6; the at-
_ tached, of Loo, IV. ii. TV. 3, 6, 7;
exterior great, IV. iti, IV. 1; small

and large, IV, iii. IV. 2, 4, 5.

Statutes of king Wan, IV. i. [i] ILL;


Stave-tree, the, IIT. i. VII. 2.

Steps of dissatisfaction, IIL. iii. III. 3.

Steward, the, of the chief of Shin, 111.
iii, V. 3.

Sting of a wasp, the, IV. i, [iii.] TV.

Stone, the mind not a, I. iii. I. 3;
grinds, 11. iii. X. 1; sounding-, IT.
wi TV. 4: 1V.i IX. 5 ik. Ve 5 Awe,


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX I.


yergn, and ying-, ¥. viii. II. See
el


m,

Stools, ITT. di. TF. 1,2: VI. 4.

Stores, using the old, IF. vi. VII. 1. .

Bey, the, of the duke Léw, II. if
qt .


Strangers, booths for, IIT. if. VI. 3,
Stream, happiness like a, IE. i. V1. ;
artful speech like a, IT. iv. X. 5;
going to ruin like a, Il. v.I. 6; roli-
ing lke a, III. iti, FX. 5.
Streamers, white, EI. iij. I]. 4.
Streams, overflowing, LI. iv. IX. 3;
dried up, IEL. iii, £V. 4; large, HE
iii. VIE. 5; going over hills and,
te viii. VIII. ; surveying, III. ii.


I. &
Streets, I. xii. Hit. Chang Sb
Strong and oppressive, ane
foo does not fear the, FII. if. VI. 53
steed, Fang ‘supported the States as.
a, LV. iii. TV. 5.
Study the former kings, III. iii, IL. 3


} Stupid man and a wise, a, IIT. iii, IL.


1, 9,14; TEL. 10. ;
Sturgeon, I. v. IIL. 4: Iv. X. 7:
1V. ii. VI. ;
Suburban region, II. i. VIII. 2.
Success of king Woo, IV. i. fiii.] TX.
Successful, Trang the, LV. iji. V. 2.


Successors treed in the steps of prede-


red on, TV. i. [iJ IV.
Suite, of an envoy, IT. i, TI. 1; of
the duke of Sang, 1V. ii. IX.

Summer, the long daysof, I. x. XI.; in
the fourth month comes, II. v. X.
1; bulls have their horns capped in,
iy. e IV. 4; asacrifice in, LV. iii.
Sun, I. iii, XIN. 1; iv. VI. 15 v.
VIR. 3; vi. IX. : H. vii. IX. 7, 8;
and moon, J. iti. D5; 1V.; VII.
eg i. Vi. 6; IX. 1; vi. TIL


cessors, ITI. ee i, dignity confer-


Superintendent of Works, ITT.i. IL. 6

Superior men, néglected, II. iv. VII.
4; mtercourse with, EII. iii. If. 73
are the bonds of the social state, III.
iii. TUL. 35 my, IIT. iii. TV. 8,

Surmises as to the death of two
youths, I. iii, XIX.

Surname, none like those of one’s own,
I. x. VI. :

Surnames, all the hundred, IT. i. VI. 5.

Surveying, I. iv. VI, : III. ii. VL 6.

Surveyor, the, of the fields, HI. vi.
Vu. 33 VIIL 4.

Swallow,- Heaven commissioned the,
IV, iii, Lil.

Swearing by the sun, I. vi. IX. See
Oath. :


INDEX I,


Sweep your courtwyard; IIL. iii, IT. 4, [

Sweet rain, IT. vi. VI. 2.

Sword, JIL. ii. VI. 2.

Sympathy, an officer complains of
want of, IZX. ii. X.


Tablet of Woo-ting, the tranquil abode
of the, IV. iii. V. 6.

Tablets, orders of the king written on,
If. i. VILL 4,

Tail, the, of a bird, all broken, I, xv.
IL. 3; of a wolf, I. xv. VIE,

: Talent, early kings attended te the
education of, II. iii, IL.

Talk, a lady efraid of, I. vii. IL;
against believing people’s, I. vii.
XVIII.; how to stop baseless, II.
iii, EX.

Tall.end large, a beautiful lady who
was, I. v, EI,

Tamarix, the, III. i. WIL 2

Target, [. viii. XI, : 1b. vii. VI. 1,

Tassels, vermilion, LY. ii. IV. 5.

Teaching a monkey to ¢limb trees, [T.
vii. IX. 6; an inferior asking, from
his superiors, IH. viii. VI.; with
assiduous repetition, U1. iii, I.

Team. See Horses,

L'taou, a fish, IV. i. fi VI.

Tears falling, HI. v. ILk. 6; IX. 2;
vi. LLL, 1.

Teeth, the, of a rat, I. ii, VL 3; iv.
VIL ; elephants’, LV. ii, TIL. 8;
a child's, with hoary hair, IV. ii.
IV. 8.

Temple, the, of a prince, I. ii. IL. ;
the middle path of a, L. xié. VIL. ;

ancestral, II. v. £V. 4; vi. Vo: ILL.
TEL 5; Vi. 38; ti. 1V.; of Chow,
the, IV. i. [ii] V. ; building a, IV.
iii. V. 6.

Temples, the solemn, the new, IV. ii.


‘Len princes, TV. iii. IIT. ;

Ten thousand men, IV. ii. IT. See
Myriad.

Tench, the, I. viii, IX. 2: IL ii, IL
2; viii, YL. 4: TID. iii, VIE 6.

Territory, duke Léw’s, broad and long,
II[. ii. VI. d5 great and glorious,
TIL. ii, VILL 3; and fields of Shin,
IIL. iii. V. 3; of Loo, IV. ii. LV. 2.

Terror, of king Senen in time ef
drought, TIT. ii. 1V. 3; inspired by
the march of troops, IMT. iii. IX. 3.

‘ Terrors, Heaven arrayed in angry, III.

iii, XI. 1.
Tethering by the fect, IL. iv. IT.
Thanksgiving, an ode of, LY. i. fii.]


iv.
Thatch, I. vi. VIL 4.


*


OF SUBJECTS:


423
Thieves, ravening, II. v. X.4; in the
court of Vin, iL iv 3.


Thimbles, bowstring-, IT. fii, V. 5.
Thirties, cattle arrang in, according
to colour, II. iv. VI. 2. ;
Thirty fe, LV, i. ie IL; thousand
footmen, IV. ii. EV. 5.
Thorn-ferns, H. i. VIL; v. X, 8.
Thorns, I. i. IX. 2; vi. IV,; vii.
XVIII. ; x. V.; XE; xi. VIL; the
arrow-, LIT. i. Vi L.
Thorn-wood, spogns of, IT. v. IX. 2.
Thorny bushes, II. vi. V. 1.
Thoughtfulness about horses, IV.


ii, I.
Thousand chariots, a, IV. ii. IV. 5;
le, LV. iii. III. :
sEhoatenae of pairs, FV. i. (ii) IL. ;
2, %
Three Stars, the, I. x. V. : HL. viii.
X. 3; thousand horses and mares,
I. iv. VI. 3; years of oppression, bE.
ix. VII.; years of absence from
home, I. xv. ILL. 3; hundred farms,
and round bing, J. ix. VI, ; ornae
ments of a fur-dress, I. vii, VI. 3;
ministers of Hwang-foo, II. iv. TX.
6; high ministers, IT. iv. X. 2;
aged ministers, LV. ti. IV. 4; sove-
reigns in Heaven, III. i, IX. 1;
troops, LIZ, if. VE. 5; cups, 11. vii.
VI. 5; creatures for sacrifice, IZ. v.


Vv. 2
Threefold labours of husband)
ILL iii, EX. 2. a
Three-year-olds, I. ix. VI.
Throat and tongue, be the king’s, ITI.
ii VE 3 | :
Thunder, I. ii, VIII.; iii, V.; the
onset of battle like, II. iii. IV. 4;
lightning and, FI. iv, IX. 3; I feel
the perif like, III. iti. IV. 33 terri-
fied by invasion as by, IIT. iij. IX. 3.
Tiger, T. iii. XLIL. ; vii, LV, 2 TLL. iii,
VIL. 5; attacking a, IL. v. F. 6.
Tiger’s skin, a mat of, Z. xi. 111.5 2
bow-case of, I. xi. ITI. ; « leaning-
beard covered with, IIT. iti. VIL. 2.
Tigers, wolves and, II, v. VI, 6; we
are not, If. viii. X. 3; officers like
raging, ILL. iii. IX, 4: IV. ii. IIL. 5,
Tiles, ornamental, I. xii, VII. ; to play
aa daughters shall have, IT. iv.


Time, I was born in an unhappy, ITT,
iii. III, 45 of shaking and peril, IV.
iii. 1V. 7; dark, and clear, IV. i.
{iii.] VOL.

Times, the disorder of the, IL. iti. IX. ;
iv. VIL; VILL; IX.; X.; v. 1; H.;
1V.; IX.; X.: IIL ii. IX; XK;
iij. IUD. ; X. ;


424


Tin ce a space in the heavens, I. iv.


Tithes, eas, Tavb VIE. 1.
Tompent, a, madé by God, IE. ii.
1


Tokens of rank, IV, iii. FV. 4.

Tombs, I. x. XI.; the gate of the, I.
xii. VIL

Tongue, words that come only from


OF SUBJECTS.


INDEX }.


Paper-malberry, Stave-tree,
Peach, famarixy,
Pear, Thora,

Pine, Varnish-tree,
Plum, Willow.
Sandal,


T sg on accountof refusing to marry,
ii.


the, IE. iv. X.5; no one can hold | Tribes, cee of King, ee ii. TV.


my, for me, I¥Y. iii. II. 6; be the

king’s throat and, HI. iii. Vi;

mischief of along, LiL. Hi. X, 3.
To! the, in the court-yard, EI. iii.


Tornado, IE. v.-VI1. 2.


4: 2V. ii, TV. 5; ii. Vi; of the

» Fewae, ILD. iil, VIII. ; x) + TV. ii.
ALL. 5, 7 85 EV. 6.7; of the West
and North, iv. aiv's. See Wild,
andin Index UH. » Héen-yun, Jung,
Man, Mih..


Tortoises, ex IV. ii. FIT. $5 on Tribulus, growing on walls, Y, iv. IL. ;


banners. See Banner,


" Tortoise-shell, divination by, Lv. IV. bate


on the; ‘ground, If. vi. Vi. -
Kang received the, IV, iii.


2: rare 4; vy. 8: dil i ly.
Tit. 8; ‘Tridente ears, ]. xi, ELT.
Tower, bes ew, I. iii, RVIUL. ; on] Tripe, U4. ii, IL. 2.
awall, a, 1. vii. XVU.; viii. XIx.; ‘Tripods, and ANS, I. ii. he 2; large
the Marveltous, IPI. i. VIIE. and small, £V. iii, VI


Traces of a carriage, I, xi. U1.
‘Trade,enormous profit in, TLL. iii. X. 4.
Trains of gourds, long, ITE. i. LiL.
baat de between Loo and 'I's‘e, 1.


ii, X.
Tiwvalling through Bad country, HI.
iv. 1V.; V._ See Progress.
Trays, We vi. V. 3.

Treading out grain, HE. ii. 1. 7.°
‘Treatment, bad, of a wife, 1. iii, £V.; V.


Troops, marnuring of, I ve TV. j de-
spatch of, to. the north, EL. i. VIT.;
return of, H. i. VIIE. ; IX. ; of
Yin-shang, in the wildemess of
Muh, UT, i. HU. 7: TV. ii, VV. 2;
-of king Wan, TT. i. VII. 5, 6; three,
WL. ae oe 5; marching of, 1, iii.
VIL. 1

Trunks, dead, and fallen trees, NL. i.
Vii. 2.


Tree, like a ruined, Ik v. HE ” 8: Tube, and reed, I. iii, XVI. 2.


when a tree falls,” &c.
saying), ITI. iii, 1.8.
Precclad hill, lL. ix. TV.
‘Tree- grub, the, 1. v. oa ae


“Trees, I, i,1. 1; EV. ; 3 Hi. VE:


(a popular ae Foast, YL, iii, LLL. 6: ILL. dit.
3


Turtle-dove, I. xiv. III. See Dove.
sae or ferns, I. ii. WY.: HW. v-
x


IL. i. V. 3; v. VIL. Be 1¥V. ii. 12. | Two youths, the death of, I. iii, KIX,


8; fallen, Ut. i. VIL. 2; felling,


mt V.; v. WE. 7: WT. i. vib Uncle, the king’s, RL Hi, Vo 5, 7


: 1V.i.1V.9; V. 6; perched on,


IV. ii. TV. 2.


it v. IT, 6; of. soft wood, HI. v. | Uncles, I. iii. XIL 8, 4; vii, XT;


IV. 5; the e, eat tat 6 = the tsze,
1. iv. VI. EF: TE ah the
d‘aow and the niw, I. x. nt: it. ii.
VIL. 4; the sow and the a T. ii.
VIL. 5; the tsve, TL. v. HI. 8
é, lv. X. 8; the ih, TT. i I,
8; IV. 15 ae 18; V1L.3


TIL i FV. 4

See Arrow-thorn, Fir,
Caram Hazel,
Cedar,
Cherry, g ujube,
Chestnut, Mediar,
Cypress, “Mulberry,
Ein, Onks, a
Fetid tree, Papaya,


Hedge-tree, Valerian, I. vii. XXT,;


paternal and maternal, invited to @
feast, II. i. V. 2; and cousins, II,
vi. V. 5.

Unlawful connection, an, I. vii. XX.


3 the} Unlikely things may be made useful,


TL. it. ¥ Il,


3 the p‘oh, err putting on clothes, I.
Useful, unlikely things may be made,


AYE. ii. VIE


xii. X.

Valley, careful as on. ‘the brink of a,
Ik. v. 1. 6.

Valleys, I. vi. V.; great winds come
from the large, IIT. iii, LI, 12.


‘Valour of T‘ang, LY. iii. 1V. 4.


INDEX I.


Vanity of a ruler-of Kwei, I. xiii. I.
’ Vapours, rising in the morning, I. xiv.


Vernish-tree, the, Liv. VE 1; x. IL;


xi. I. :
Vase, a gilded, I. i. 111. 2; washing a
spirit-, IIL. ii. VIL 2.
Nase . hundred, of spirits, ILE. iii.


VIL3.

Vast is God! TIT. iii. I.

Vegetable, the poos, 11. iti, VIT,.3,

Vegetables, I. iii, X. 6: TIT. iti.
VIL3.

Vegetation, hixuriant, I. xiv. II. {See
Luxuriance) ; decay of, IT. viii. X.

Verses, I have made these few, ILI. ii.
VIEE. 10.

Vessels, drawing water with, III, ii.
VII. ; of sauces and fruit, IIT. iii,
ViL3.

Viands, Il. i. V. 2; iv. VII. 39; vi.
V.1; IT, i. U1, ; L113 1V. 3 iii.
VIL. 3: 1V. i, [iii] V.5 di. TV. 4;

od and abundunt, FI. ii. TH. 4, 5,
3 vii. IIL. ; no good, LH. vii. IV. 3.

Vice, and beauty contrasted, I. iv. IIL;
in the court of Wei, I. iv. V.

ee I have grudged no, II. iii.


wh.
Victims, red and black, If. vi. VEEL. 4.
Victories, three in one day, II. i.
Vl. 4.
Victorious sovereigns of old, the, If.


: ry of king Woo, ILL. i. 11. 8.

Villages, H. iii, FW. 2.

Violets, ILI, i. IH. 3.

Virgins, companions of a bride, IT.
‘ni, .

Virtue of king Wan’s bride, I. i. I.;
I1.;1V.; V.: Wii; Vi. 1;
of the women about the Han, I. i.
IX.; of the women about the Joo,
Ii. X.; of the family of king Wan,
J. i, XI.: Ill. i, 1; IL; of Tae
Kwei, 1. iii, ILE. ; of a husband, L
iii, VIII. ; of a lady of Ch‘in, I. xii.
LV.; of alord of Ts‘aou, I. xiv. LIL.;
of ministers, IL. ii, V1E.; of feudal

rinces, II. ii. IX.; brothers ex-
orted to maintain their own in bad
times, EI. v. TL. ; of a bride, IT. vii.
IV. ; cultivate your, IIL. i. 1.6; of
king Wan’s father and mother, ITI.
i. IL. 2; VEL. 4; characteristics of,

- III, iti, 11. ; of king Wan, LIL, i. 1.
to X.:1V. i. [i] 1; IL; TL;
V.3; VIL; of some king, HI. ii. V.;
an indication of inward, III. iii, II.
1; of the chief of Shin, UI. iii. V.
8; of Chung Shan-foo, III. fii.
VI. ; the people naturally love, FII.


OF SUBJECTS, *


425


iii. VI. 1; ie light asa hait, but few
are able to lift it, WI. iit. VI. 6;
the old, III. iii. XI. 6; will be
imitated, IV. i.1¥.; of king Ch‘ing, ©
1V. i. [i.) VI; 1 wilt cultivate ad-
mirable, LV. i. fi VIL ; of the
marquis of Loo, EV. ii. II. 4, 5; of
Kéang Yuen, IV. ii. IV. 1.
Virtues, you forget my great, IT. v.
VIL. 3; civil, U1. fii, VILL 6. |
Virtuous, sovereigns of old, IE. ‘vi.
AV.; cultivate association with the,
_ IGM. ii. 1X. 3. :
Viscount, the, of T’an, FE. v. HT. 2,
Visitant, a, from heaven, I. iv, ITIL 2.
Visitor, the noble, IV. is (ii.J IX.
Visitors, the representatives of former
dynasties, at court, LV. i. fii.} IIT, ;
” V. 3 we have admirable, IV. iii. I.
Volume of flowing water, a large, II.
iii, TX: :
Vows, broken marriage-, I, v, TV. 6.


Waggon, de not push forward a, IT.
vi. IL.


Waggons, driving, II. viii. ELI.

Wag-tail, the, H.i. 4V, 3; v. TE 4.

Wall, a rat bores through a, J. ii. VI.
3; meeting at the corner of a, I.
iii. XVIL.; fribulus growing on a,
I. iv. Il; a ruinous, I. v. <e
leaping over a, I, vii. I.; buildin
a, in the northern region, EI. i. VIU.
3; and moat, IIL. i. X. 3; the
people are a, III. ii. X. 7; the circle
of the king’s relatives is a fortified,
TIL. ii. X. 7; a wise man builds, but
a wise womay overthrows a, III. iii.
Fs sheaves high asa, LV. i. Liii.}


Walls, brothers. may quarrel inside.
the, II. i. FV. 4; old, L. iv, Vi. 2;
building, 11. iii. VIE. 2; iv. V.:
IIL. i. LI. 6; attacking, IIf.i. VII.
7, 8; of Fung, (11. i. X.; of the
city of Han, HI. iii. VIL. 6.

Wanderer, a, from Chow, I. vi. VH.

Wanderings, Great Heaven is with

. you in all your, (IF. ii. X. 8.

Wanton associations of young people
of Chin, I. xii. IL.

War; keeping up the oxercises of, I.
xv.L4: IL, iii, 11.4; Minister
of, If. iv. I. ; has done its work, II.
iv, X.4; the father of, [EL i. VIE.
8; apparatus of, IIE. iii, LX. 1.
See L:xpedition.

War-carnage, 1.xi. If, SeeChariot.

Warfare, cailed out to, L x. VIL =
Wii TL.

Wazrlike spirit of Ts‘in, 1, xi. VITE ;
preparations of king Waa, Hi, i,


426


VII. 5, 6, 7; energy of king Seuen,
IIL. iii TX. 4; ; of Woo-ting, IV.
fii) v.21
‘Warnings to king Le, ITT. iii. I.
Warrens for fish, IV. i. [ii.] VI.
Warrior, a, in charge of an expedition
to the east, IE. viii. VIII.
Washing, water good for, IIT. ii. VIT.
Wasp, IV. i. [iii]
‘Watobfalness yecommended, III. iii.


Wate, a hot thing must be dipped in,
LT. iii. 413.5; pleasant is the semi-
circular, IV. ii. ILE.

Mem a fabulous creature, IT.


Water-plants attached to a tree, IIT.
iii, XI. 4

Water-polygonum, I. vii. &

Waters, the fretted, I. x. fir: 3 cold,
from a spring, I. xiv. LV. ; ‘a large
volume of flowing, ae iii, IX.; “of
the Hwae, Ii. vi. LV. ; of the Loh,
ae 6 IX,; of the deluge, IV, iii.

Way-farers, II. v. I. 4; IV. 5.

Ways, the grand, IV. ii. III. 3.

ere the, of former days, ILL. iti,

Weapons, I. iii, VI.$ xi. VIEL. : TL.
iii. IL. 4.
Halberds,
Swords.

Weariness of life, I. vi. V1.

Weaving, HI. iti. X. 4.

Weaving oo the, a constellation,


Il. v. 1X. 6
Waving ll. WL VIL 1: IV. iii, V.;


vents, I. viii, VIE.

‘Weeping blood, II. iv, X. 7.

Welcoming men of worth, I. iv. IX.

West, fine men of tho, I. iii, XERE.
4; going to the, I. xiii, IV.: IL.
vi. HET; our hearts in the, I. xv.
Tih 1; "the sons of thé east made to
serve those of the, II. v. IX. 4;
from east to, no quiet, HI, iii. IH.
4; the marsh in the, 1V. i. [ii-]
IIL. ; tribes of the, IV. ii. IV. d.

‘Wheat, I. iv, IV. ; K.4; vj. X. 2;
ix. VIE ; kv. I. rE PIV. ii. Ls How-
tseih’s, We iL 4: Iv.i. fi] X.;
Vii] IV

Wheel-aids, iL iv. VIII. 9, 10.

Whetstone, II. v. 1X. 1: Li ii, VI. 7.

Whirlwind, I. xiii. IV.

Whistle, the porcelain, EI. v. V. 7:
III. ii. X. 6.

Whistling and ane I, ii, XZ; in
sorrow, IT, viii.

White, worn by mourners, I. xiii. II.


‘


Hatchets, Shields,


OF SUBJECTS.


See Arrows, Bows, ‘Axes, ‘


INDEX


White colt, the brilliant, Il. iv. TE. ;
grass, the, I. it, XII; iii. eles
v. Hi. 2: II. iii. IV. 1, 2.

Widgeons, III, ii. IV.

Widow, a, provene against marrying
Pia Ti z loneliness of a, I. x.

XL; nity. for. the, IT. iii. VII. 1;
vi, VUL 3; IIE. iii. VI. 6.

Wife, industry of a prince’s, I. ji. IL. ;
a, bewailing, her husband’s absence,
Li. IIT. ; iii. VIL; v. VII. ; vi.
Ii. ; ve; xi, VIL: IL viii. IL;
diligence of an officer’s, L. ii, IV.
. admiring } her absent ‘husband, i

VILL; aii, VILL; xi. III.
Jeslousy of a, L.ii. XI. ; tye vlostan
sii, If.; bad treatment of a, I
iii. V.; V.;-v. IV. ; a, supplanted,
1 iii. X.; : a, longing for her native
place, I. iii. XIV.; v, V.; _ joy of a,

at her husband?s return, [. vi. IIL;
vii. XVI.; a, rousing her husband
kindly, I. vii, VIII; viii, I; a
man praises his own poor, i vii.
XIX. ; taking a, I. viii. VI, 3, 43
xii, Til. ; 3 happy meeting of husband
and, I. x. ‘V5 ‘and children, union
with, II. i, IV. 7, 8; bad, of king
Yéw, IL. iv. VUL ;'TX. 4; virtue

of king Wan’s, il. ith; VII
See age the mar quis of Han’s,
Il. iti. VET, 4; wee is given you
a heroic, ILI. it. ILL. 8 ; admirable,
of the marquis of ae IV. i. IV. 8.

Wild, the, I. ii, XII; x. XL

Wild tribes of the Nor cd IL. i. VIL:
HI. iti. VII. 6; of Keun, III. i.
III, 8; of- Kwan, HI, i. VIL. 2; of
the South, ILI. iii. 11. 4; the Man,
the Chuy, and the Mik, III. iit
VII. 6.


Wilderness, the, of Muh, TIL. i. IL.


7, 8.

wilds, desolate, II. viii. Xi 3,

Will, the clear, of Heaven, III. i. IX.
2; i1. IX. 1,

Witlow vie I, vii. If. ; viii. V.
1.5 xif. Vi: TL. i. VIL. 6; ii. iit
2; X. 35 iti. II. 4; v. HI. 45 vii.
VIL. 5; X%.; garden, TL. v. VI. 7.

Wily and obsequious, the, IU, ii. a

Wind, fierce, 1. iii. V.; xiii. LV.:
v. VIII. 5,6; X. 3°: genial iaeg
L. iii, VEL’: LUD. ii, VU. 1; gentle
east, I, iii, X.: IL. v. VEL; ; cold
north, L. iii, XV I.; cold, and rain,
I. vii. las cold, I. xv. 1.; and
rain, I. xv. Il, 3: HL. v. VIL 1;
soothing thea UI. iii. VI. 8;
: slanderer like a violent, II. v. Vv.

like going in the teeth of the,

ii iii, IIT. 5


INDEX I.


Auiatoys L i. IV. 3; stopped up, I.
v. 1,5.
Winds, great, havea path, EII. iii, LIT.
12, 18.


Wine, I. iii. I. 13; good, TI, i. 1;
sweet, IL. iii, VI. 4. See Spirits.
Wings, a man has no, to fly from sors
row, 1. iii, E. 5; of the pheasant, I.
iii; VILL. ; of the ephemera, I. xiv.
1.3 of the pelican, I. xiv. IL;
variegated, [1. vii. I. 1; lett of yel>
low ducks Seer up. Il. vii. I.
33 men who act as, to the sovereign,
UL. di, VIII. 5; swift, as if on,

ILL. iti: TX.

Winter, I. iii. X. 6; the Jong nights
of, I. x. XI; preparation for, I.
xv. 16; a sacrifice in, IT. vi.

IV. iii, IL ; ; stormy, EL. v. X. 3.

Wise men still might be found in 9
bad age, IL. v. 1.5; and ey
different effects of drinking on the,
I. v. U1. 2; men plant trees of soft


wood, Il. v. IV. 5; men, were the
“ee of Shang, ILL. iij. L11 4


& reruns itis own. person,
I. 4; ane a, and a stupid, vee
ie Ii. 1, 9;1 10; man, a, anda
- > woman, paren) ML. iii.


x

Withered leaves, I. vii. XI.

Wives of the Joo, affection of the, I. i.
X.; soldiers separated from their, I.
iii. VI5 vi, IV.; xv. IIL: I. i. VIL
1; VIL 5; 1X. ; viii. X. 2; help-
ing at a sacrificial service, LL vi
V. 3, 5; and children bringing food
to field’ labourers, IL. vi. evil. 33
VIII. 4; and husbands, affection of,
Ty. i. [iii] V.3 and cee have
repose, IV. i. [iii.] V. :

oe a, springing Sea, I. xv.


‘Wolt’s-tail grass, I. xiv: IV. : IL vi-
VIII. 2.
Wolves, 1. viii, IT, ; and tigers, II. v.
6.


Woman, a, who had been seduced, I.
v. IV.; desiring a husband, F. v.
IX.; longing for her lovers, I, vi.
XK, ; scorning herscorner, I. vii. XI; 5
regretting lost opportunities, I. vii.
“XIV.; thinking of her lover who
dves not come, I. vil. XV.; a wise,


OF SUBJECTS.


427


causes ruin, ITl, =) - 3; a low
estimate of, IT. iv.

Women, Antetfering ich government,
ILL. iii.

‘Wood, mands ct ILI. if. I.; dishes of,
Ui. vii. VE 1: M1. ii. Ill. 4: TV. ii.
IV. 4; soft and elastic, TEI. iii. [1..9.

Woodséutters, How-tseia found by,
IIL. ii. 1. 3.

Woodman, a stalwart, I. ix. VI.

Words, fair, and hatred, IL. iv. IX. 73
shallow, II, v. 1. 4; sweet, of scoun-
drels, EY. v. IV. 3; artful, iI. v.
IV. 5; be careful of 5 your, ILv. VL
3: ILI. ii, X.; ii IL 5, 6.

Works, T‘an-foo’s superintendent of,
TI. i, IIL. 5.

| World, Lorine: IL. v. 1.1; vi. 111:
WL idl. 4; VILL

Worthless characters employed, I.
iv. VIL; VILL : 11. iii. 2.

Wound, a painful, 1. iii, 1. 1.

weep fit clothing for daughters,

.1¥
Wren, [Vv i. fii] Iv.


Year, the close of the, I. x. I. ; months
of the, described, I.xv.I,; j sacrifices
for the coming, IYI. ii, I. 7; a, of
drought, ITE. it. LV.; XI La’

te. appearance = the chiefs before
the k ing, IV. iii. V. 3.

Fees wife fauhent for three, I. v.

.55 plentiful, II. iv. VEL 4; vi.
VIL.1: IV. i. [ii 1; fe
pare for plentiful, TV. ii. IL. ; an

3 may you fulfil your, Tl. i
VIII. 2—4." See Myriads.
Yellow bird, or Oriole, I. i, If. 1; iii.

Vil. ; xi. VI.: IL iv. UL ; ; ducks,
It. vii, IL.; viii. V. 7; colour of
dress, 1. iii, II. ; every plant i is, II.
viii. X.

Yellow-jaws, a kind of fish, II. ti, IIT.
1: IV. ii. VI.

Ying- -gemé, I, vii. IIT

Yoke, an eacuauat i. iii. VIL 2
IV. iii. 1.

Young people, wanton associations of,
I, xii. II.

Youth, a conecited, Lv VL; and
age, III. iii, 11. 10, 11.

"Youths, the death of two, I, ii, REX.

Yung-stongs, 1. viii. III.


4


98


INDEX II.


PROPER NAMES.


A-hing, E Yin, the minister of king
‘ang, LV. iii, TV. 7.


Chang, 2 ay taken from Loo by Ts‘e,
IV. ii. FV. 8.
Chang Chang, the filial and brotherly,
TI. iii.
Ch‘in, the anak 1, iit, VL; ate ive:
Ching, the king, tit. ij. Vill
nt}


Gi} VI. 5 1X. 5 [iy 115
(it] 1. to IV.; ; ii, TV. 2.
Chting, the State of, I. vii. title.
Ching, a district in the royal domain,
IE. iii. TX. 2
Choo-lin, a city in Ch4n, I. xii. IX.
Chow, the royal State, f, i. ies vi.
ie; vii. 1.; xiii, TV. ;


IL,i. I1.; iv. VIL 3;
2; v. IL 2;


Iv. iL tiie
a 5 “it ]V.; fiii.) X. 5


Chow, the duke of, 1. xv. II. to VII. :
Iv. ii, IV. 3, 8.

Chow, a city of Chiing, I. vii, Ve -

one Kéang = Tae Kéang, III, i.


Chung, Ya, I. vii. IL.

Chung- -hang, one of three men buried
in the grave of duke Muh, 1. xi. Vi.

ei a a mountain im Shen-se, I.


‘By


Chung Shan-foo, the minister of king
Seuen, III. iii, VI.
Chyng-yun, the chief cook of king
Yéw, Il. iv. UX. 4.
Chuy, a wild tribe, 111. iii. VII. 6.
- Chwang, the duke of Lo, IV, ii. FV. 3.
Chwang tang, the wife of one of the
marquises of Wei, 1. iii, I. to V.,
notes; v, III.


Fan, the minister of Instruction under
king Yéw, IL. iv. 1X. 4,

Fang, a place overrun by the northern
tribes, IT. iii, LIT, 4.

Fang Shuh, the leader of an expedition
to the South, IT. iii, 1V

Fei-ts‘6uen, a river in Wei, 1. iii.

IV. 4.


Foo, er Poo, the prince of, III. iii. V. 1.


Foo, a hunting ground, IT. iii, V. 2.

Fuh-kwan, name ofa place, I. v. IV. 2.

Fun, king Le, so called, III. iit, VII. 4.

Fung, the name of the capital of Chow,
and of a stream, FIT. i. X.


Gaou, the name of a hill, IT. jii. V. 3.


Han, the State of, LIE. iii. VII. 5, 6.

Han, the marquis of, TIT. ii, VII.

Han, the river, L. i. {X.: Ifv. KX. 6:

TV. iii, VII.

Han, the name of a hill, IIL. i. v.

Han K‘eih, the bride of the marquis
of Han, Ile, iii, VU. 5.

Vaou, a name of the western ca’ a
ae ili, TIT. 4, 6; vii. Vil: UIT. i.


He-sze, @ ss of the marquis of
ii

3) Hea, the d dynasty, TI. iii, IL 8: IV.
iii.

Héa Nan, ai son of a mistress of the
duke of Chéin, I. xii. 1X

Heah, a river, IT. i. IE. 4,

Héang, a district in the reyal domain,
Il. iv. IX, 6.

Héen-foo, a noble of king Seuen, III.
iii, VI, 3.

Héen-yun, a wild tribe in the orth
Il. i. VII. ; VILL. ; } as Ill.; 1V

Heu, the State of, I. iv. X. 5 vi Ww
IV. ii IV, 8.

ig ee the earl of Ch‘ing, IIT. iii.


FX, 2

Hing, the State of, I. v. [TE. 1.

Ho, the Hwang-ho river, LE ae
XVIIL.; iv. 1.5 v. Ill. 4; ;
Vi. VUL.3 vii, V3 xii. Il): ie v.
3.6: 1V.i. [i] VILL; [ii] XL;
iti, IIT.

Hoo ar Yih, two hills in Loo, IV. ii.
iv.


Hoo, the earl of Shaou, ITT. iii, VITI.

How-tseih, the first ancestor of Chow,
Til. ii. 1 iii, III. 2: IV. i. [ij
X.; ii, IV. 1, 2, 3.

Hwae, the wie IL. vi. TV. : WL iil.
VIIL; 1V. ii. ILL. 3, 7, 8
IV. 6, i;

Hwan, the prince of Wei, I. iv. V.
notes.

Hwang-foo, the president of the


INDEX 10, PRORER


Ea gre under king Yéw, UL. iv.

X. 4, et seg.

Hwang-foo, a Grand-master of king
Seuen, III. iii.

Hwang valley, the, i jn Shen-so, III.
ii. VI. 6.

Hwoh, a plate occupied by the north-
ern tribes, II. iii, ITI. 4.

Hwun, a river in Wei, L. ix. IT.


Jin, T‘ae Jin, the mother of king Wan,
TIL. i, I.

Joo, the river, I. i. X.

Joo, a State on the east of the Ho,
IL. i. LI. 9.

‘Jung, wild tribes of the West, IT. i.
Vil, 5.

Suy, the State of, on the east of the
Ho, ILE. i. TH.

Juy, the name ce ‘a stream running
into the King, I1f. ii. VI, 6.

Juy, the earl of, IIL. iii. TIT.


at the name of a place, I. iii. XIV.


Keng the king, IV. i. i] IX.

aoy, 4 town in Tsin, I. x. ii.

ay aa Shun’s minister of Crime,

Ke king ie - her of king Wan, III.
e, king, the father of king Wan,

i TL-2; VIE 3,4.

K%, the river, Sa hii. XIV. 1; v.1.;

K'e, sAcune Wi. i, TI. 23 VIL. 6:
IV. i. {i.] V.; ij. IV. 2; +Chow,
TLL. iii. VIII. 5.

Kee the name of a place, 1. iv.


Kén-foo, the author of an ode, IT. iv.
VII. 10.


Kéa-pih, the chief administrator under
king Yéw, II. iv. TX. 4

Kéang river, the Yang-tsze, I. i, IX. ;
fi. XI; IL. v. X. 6: I. iii. VIL.

Kéang o Te, tribes of the West, IV.
iii.

Kéang, a surname, I. iv, IV. 1; vii.
IX.; xii, INL. : LOL. i. IIL 2; VILL

Kéung Yuen, themother of How-tseih,
UL i. L: IV. ii. TV. 1.

Kéeh of Héa, the tyrant, IV. iii. IV.6.


Kéen-hoo, one of three men, buried in.


the grave of duke Muh, I. xi. VI.
Kéih, a great clan-name, II. viii. I. 3.
K‘éih, a surname, III. iii. VII. 5.
Kiih-too, an officer who commanded

an. expedition to the North, II. iii.

IL. ; the author of odes, IL. iii. V.

8; ; IX. 2.

Keun, barbarous tribes, TIT. i. IIE. 8.
Keun-woo, a principality of Héa, IV.
iii, IV. 6.


429


Kéw, the wilderness of, in the West,
tI. vi, HI. 1 :

King, the barbarous region of the
South, IT. iii, IV. 41 IV. ii, TV. 5;
ets‘oo, IV. iii. V.

King, the river, I. i X. 3: U1. iii.
Ul. 4: TIL: EV. 3; ii, IV.1.
King, the name of a hill nest the scant

of Shang, IV. iii. IT. ;
we a principality of tea, Ty. fil.
¥.6,


NAMES.


Kung, a ps in the State of Yuen,
Ui. i, VIL. 6.

Kwan, barbarian tribes, III. i. VIT. 2.

Kwei, the State of, 1. xiii. tide.

K wei, a mountain in Loo, LV. ii. IV. 6.
Kwei-foo, the father-in-law of .the
marquis of Han, IIT. iii. VII. 4.
bas voles: the, 3 in Shenese, IIT. ii.


Le, the king, IIT. iii. I. ; IIL. notes,
rie the mountain ‘of, Ill. iii.


Léw, sabes the story of, III. ii. VI.

Loh, the river, II. v. 1X.

Loo. the State of, I, viii. VIL; X.:
IV. ii. title.


Man, the wild tribes "4 the South, IE
vit. IX. 8: IV. iv. 7; wild
tribes, TIE, iii. ViL. ‘6.

Ming-tsze, a eundch, II, v. VI. 7.

Maw, wie tribes in the West, II. vii. |


Mei, a district in Wei, I. iv. IV.

Mei,a a in the roya}.domain, IIT.
iti. 6.

Meih, the State of, III. i, VII. 5.

Mi, awild. tribe, HL. iii, VII. 6: TV.


i, IV. 7.
Muh, the wilderness - a of, ITI.
i. IL, 7, 8: IV. ii.
Muh, the duke of tein L ‘xi. VIL
Mung, a mountain in Loo, TV. ii.


. by


Nan-chung, the leader of an expedition
moe North, I}. i. VIUL. : ILL. iii.

Naou, a hill in Ts‘, I, viti, IT,

aS A ae ofa place in. Wei, I. iii.


«ae


4


Pang, a city of Ching, I. vii. V.

Paou, a nobleman’s friend suspected of
slandering him, IE. v. V.

Paou Sze, the favourite of king Yéw,
Il. iv, VIET. ; IX. 4: WL iii, X. 3.

Pei, I. iii. title,

Pin, the State of, I. xv. title + TEL ii.
VIL 5, 6.


430


Poo, or Foo, the State of, I. vi. TV. 2:
III. iii. V. 1


“PROPER


Song-chung, the name of a place, I. iv.


Seang g-too, the grandson of Séeh, IV.
iii, “TV 2

Séaou, a city of Ch‘ing, I. vii. V.

Seay, building the city of, If. viii.
Lit. ; the capital of Shin, ILL. fii, V.

Sich, the father of the Shang dynasty,
IV. iii. Hil. ; IV.

Seu, a city of Wei, I. iii, XIV.

Seu, the States of, about the river
Hwae, ITT. iii. IX. : FY. ii. TV. 7,

Senen, the Bing, Il. v. If. : IIL, iij.
EV, to 1X

Seuen, a dissolute duke of Wei, and
Seven Kéang his wife, {. iii. VILL.
et seq. notes.

Seun, a small State, I. xiv. IV.
Shang, the dynasty, WY.i, 1.4: IV.i
ates 23 Wi LV. 23 iii. Hee Ik:

V.; YineShang, III. i. IL. 2, 6, 7.
Shang-foo, the Grand-master under
king Woo, ET. i. IE. 7, 8
Srey kane the name of a place, I. iv.


Shaou, an ancient city and Principal:


I. ii. title 3 the dik: e of, I. -ii, V.
IIL. ii. VIEL ; iii, VIII. 4, 5, 65
X17; the earl of, IL. viii. ie

IU. iii. V,; VIL.


Shin, the State of, I. vi. FV.;
chief of, IIT. iii, V.

Shoo, a half-civilized region, east of
King, IV. ii. JV, 5

pk bras &@ mountain in Shan-se, I,


y the


Shub- twan, brother of -duke Chwang
of Ching, I. vii. TIT. ;

Sin, the State of, IL. i. EL. 4—6.

Sin-foo, @ hill in Loo, LV. ii. LV. 9.

Sun Tsze-chung, a military com-
mander of Wei, I, 1 VE

Sung, the State of, I . iti. Vi; 3 y,
VIL. ; 3 xii, III,; the duke of, IV,
i. fii.) TX.

Sung, an ancient State, IV. iii. IV.


Tae Kwei, a concubine of the marquis
of Wei, I. iii. IL. e¢ seg., notes,

Tae, the king, HII. i VIE: IV. 4
fi.J V.5 it. IV. 2.

Tae, the mountain, IV. ii, IV. 6.°

sys 8 principality in Shen-se, EIT. ii,


Bad omy Sige mother of king Wan,
5 Vi.

Tae Keane, the wife of T‘an-foo, III.
i, TIE. 2; VI.1.


NAMES. INDEX II,


Tae Sze, the queen of king Wan, I.
i. I. ef seg. notes: INL. i. U.; VIL
ee a Gistrict in Shan-se, II. ili,

L. 5. :


Fan, the State of, I. v. III. 1.

‘L‘an-foo, the ancient duke, IIT, j. II,

Tang, a town in Wei, I. iv. VI.

T’ang, the State of Tsin, so called, I.
x. title,

T'ang the founder of Shang, LV. iii.


. to V.

fe, the Kéang tribes of, LV. iii. V. 2,

‘Ting, & constellation, I, iv, VI. 1.

T‘o, branches of the Kéang river, 1.
it XI.

ae a pw near. the capital, IIT. iii.


Ts AOU, ae State of, I. xiv, title.

Ts‘aou, a city of Wei, I. iii, VI. 1;
XH. 4; iv, X,

Tse, i penen of a place in Wei, I. iii.


Ts'e, the State of, I. v. HL; vili, ttle 5
VIL; X.3 xii. TU,: it. iii, VIL 8.

Tsdaouya place ogoupied by the north-
ern tribes, I. iii. IT. 4.

Tsteih, a ae in Pin, I. iii, VI. 2:
IIT. i. 21: TV. HY vie

Ts‘en, ‘ ie in Pin, at
Tih. i, IIL. 2: LV. i. (ii.

Ts‘euen-yuen, the Hundred Neng gs,
the name of a river, the same as lei-
ts‘euen, I. v.

aaa a sity of Wei, 1. iii. VII. ; iv.


Tsin, the state of, called Tang, I, x.
title,
Tein, a river in Ching, I. vii, XIIT. ;


Ts‘in, the State of,.I. xi. title.
Tsing, a city in Chting, I. vii. V.
Tso, ‘Bs'o0-kéw, the new capital of
Wei, I. iv. VI.
Tsoo-lae, : bill in Loo, I'V. si. IV. 9,
'Tsow, the recorder of the Interior
under king Yéw, II. iv. IX. 4.
Tsow-yu, a name of doubtful meaning,
anepeee to be ‘‘a righteous beast,”
. XIV.
Tetang the State of, III. i. VIL. 7,8;


Tsze, the sumame of the dukes of
Sung, I. xii. 111.


tTsze-chung, a clan name in Chiin, I.


xii. TL.

Tsze-kéu, the clan name of three men
buried in the grave of Muh, duke of
Ts‘in, TL. xi. VL

Tsze-too, and Tsze-ch‘ung, two gentle-
men so designated, I. vii. X.

Tun-k‘éw, a place in ) Wei, Lv. IV.L


INDEX II, PROPER ‘NAMES. : 431


Wan, the, name of a river, I. viii, X. | Yen, the State - IIT, iii. VIL. 6.
We the king, I. i. 1. et seg. notes! Yen, the name of a place, I. iii.
IIL. i. L. to X.; Rag i, B; XIV. 3.
VUL4 IV. Ji.toV.; VIL; | Yen-seih, one of three men buried in
fi.) VEL; fii.) XS ; IV. the grave of duke Muh, I. xi.

Wan, a duke of Wei, 1. iv. VI. notes, VIL

Wei, the State of, mostly j in the present | Yéw, eclipse in the reign of king, II.
Ho-nan, 1. iif. note on. title; XIV.; iv, IX.

iv, X.; v. ddtle, I. Yih, a surnatne, I. iv. TV. 2.

Wei, the State of, in the present Kéno Yin, the dynasty, Iii. i. 1. ba. iv.
Chow, Shans, absorbed by the | i. ii) X.; ii, UT. Y.1; Shang,
State ‘of Tsin, I. ix. title. - TIL. i. YL. 5 aii, 1.

Wei, * principality of Héa, IV. iii. | Yin, the clanname of a great family
Iv. in the royal domain, IL, iv. VIL 5

Wei, ‘he rivet, F. iii, X23: WL TE} viii 2.32 UE iii, EX. 2.

4,5; VIL 6; ii. VI. 6. Yu, the Great, IL. vi. VI. 1: TT. i,

Wei, a tiver in ‘Chiing, I. vii. XII; X. 4; iii, VIE 1: IV. ii. TV. 1;
XXL Wi. TVL1; Ve 8 ;

Woo, the king, TIL. i. 1X.; X.; iii. | Lu, the captain of the guards under
VHE 4: TV.i. Go Le Ix.: : king Yéw, I. iv. UX. 4.

ii.) VIL; vi L; X.; {iii.] | Yuen, a State, HL i, VIL. 5, 6,
(TIX. ; 1X. 6 ii TV? 2. Yuensk‘éw, the name of a mound, i

Woo, duke of "Wei, Tiv.I.j; v.02) xii 03 TE
IL vii, WL. : TIL iii. I. only i in the Yuh, KEaheyuly a city of Tsin, I. x.
notes.

Woo, duke of Chiing, I. vii. I. xotes. | Yung, a State, I. iv. title.

Woo-ting, a king of ag Shang dynas+ | Yung, , a summame, I. in. ae
ty, LV. iif, HL; Y. |


. THE END.


JOUN ‘CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS, ©


000 0


Digitized _ fins eo from the
