A New and Complete Illustration of the Celestial Science of Astrology (Ebenezer Sibly, 1790)
==========================================================
Sibly's great illustrated astrology in four parts; the most ambitious English astrological work of the 18th century. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b28754906).

yor Fags Se ae


eta


*


8,


os
%
i


t


>


Ase


Me. Lorre
| JbS3 A es
ail ae ; es

ee )


a
hy Y
’
*
eh ae — te Pree
| - * . a %. y
°
ws
sd
‘
+
age &
va 9 »
bee
a
*
$ \
t
fh:
J
‘
a
- Lal


*


sss


i


Gi
Wy)


NK


SN


ss


a


THEE
TA EE

LM
Gh


he
Us
Bi


S Lonsder the Heavens the pe Of thy ngers, lhe Moon ¥ theS tars which’
. ow hatl ordained: Pal. VMl.3.- ti

» (Vhey foughtfrom Jeaven, the Slat tr Sher COWAES fou
Judges V. 20. Z


L5475°


a


' : . ta ‘
NEW and COMPLE T £E-


i Lo es TR Are ON


O Fst HE é : aoe
DPCCULT SCIENCES
Art of foretelling future Events and Contingencies,


Aspscts, Posirions, and Inriuvences, of the HEAVENLY BODIES.


a FOUNDED ss ms a
Natural Philofophy, Scripture, Reafon, andthe Mathematics. «.


IN FOUR PARTS.


PP Age Rees Ts Sa
AN Enquiry into, and Defence of, Aftrology; with an interefting Difcourfe on Natural and Occult Philofephy—in which
the Wifdom and Omnipotence of God; the intellectual Faculties of Angels, Spirits, and Men;.the Order, Harmony,
Sympathy, and wonderful Properties, of the Ceieftial and Terreftrial Worlds; the Signs, Influences, and Effects, of the
Heavenly Bodies upon all animal, vegetable, and mineral, Subftances; the Number of the Spheres; the Method of ereét-
ing the Horofcope to caft Nativities; and the Doctrine of Horary Queftions; are clearly exemplified and explained.
Po AGoRee A VAg. :
EXAMPLES for acquiring a Prattical Knowledge of A(trology, with Rules for calculating, re&tifying, and judging, Na-
tivities; by which the Reader is enabled to difcover, with Precifion and Accuracy, every material Incident of his future
Life and Fortune. {lluftrated by a Variety of new, entertaining; and curious, Queitions, lately refolved, upon every ma-
terial Occurrence in public and private Life. “With a Collection of the mo(t remarkable: Nativities that have been caft for
Kings, Princes, and other eminent Men, by the moft celebrated Profeflors of this Science, in‘all Ages of the World ;
with aftonifhing Inftances of theirexact Completion. ~~ ee *


P ARE ge ae
METEOROLOGICAL Aftrology defined and explained : Wherein certain Rulesare laid down for prejudging the Revo-
lutions, Viciflitudes, and Misfortunes, with which every Part of the habitable World may be occafionally threatened.
‘ General Effects-produced by great Conjunétions, Eclipfes, Tranfits, Comets, Blazing Stars, and other extraordinary
Phenomena; with the Art of calculating Eclipfes, Tides, and Weather, for.any Numberof Yearsto come. To which
is added, a Collection of improved TABLES, contrived to anfwer ali the Purpofes of Aftronomical Calculations.
Rete BP ANB Wee ater oe a
THE Diftin&tion between Aftrology and the Diabolical Practice of Exorcifm; in which the Methods ufed for raifing up
-and confulting Spirits are laid open, with various inftances of their Compacts with | wicked Men. Account of. Appa-
ritions and Spirits; including a general Difplay of the Myfteries of Witchcraft, Divination, Charms, and Necromancy.
- Compiled from a Series of intenfe Study and Application, and founded on real Examples and Experience.
Asopoy de TlAsicedoc eyvws3 tit hoes
‘\ H Qewypor Qeswvos nvoréas.— ARGOL. Astr. Lib. Us. Cc 8, RIF
"The Sun, Moon, and Stars, hath God diftributed unto all Nations under Heaven. They declare the Glory of God, and fhew forth
his Handywork ; Day and Night do continually tell of them, and their Voice is heard in all Languages, and thar Words are
_ gone into the Ends of the Earth.——Deut. iv. rg. Pfal. xix, 15. :


By E. SIBLY, M.D. F.R.H.S.


_ Embellithed with Curious COP PER-PLAT ES,
. LON DON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY CHAMPANTE AND WHITROW, JEWRY-STREET,
ALDGATE; AND AT THE BRITISH DIRECTORY-OFFICE, AVE-~MARIA LANE.


MPT CGican j
MeEGICKL


DA EOD! IP CA AO Tt Id OA-N.
To the Ancient and Honourable FRATERNITY
of Free and AccerpTED MASONS.
> GenTLemMen and Breruren,

HE Antiquity of your excellent Fraternity, the
T univerfality of its plan, andthe moral rectitude
and purity of its defign, claim a decided pre-eminence
over every other Bond of Society into which menkind
have ever formed themfelves, for the mutual welfare and
happinefs of each other. The noblenefs of foul which.
firft prompted to its. inftitution, and the benevolence of |
heart which has ever fince prevailed throughout all its -
members, will remain a fubject of lafting admiration!

To you, therefore, as the promoters of liberal fenti-.
ment, and the guardians of every ufeful {cience, I-com-.
mit this venerable pile of ancient Aftrology ; a fabric:
obvioufly conftructed by the Great Architect of the:
World, primeval with the ordination of nature, and in--
{eparable from one of the grand fubjects of your official
contemplation.

This Science, by being little known, and lefs under-.
ftood, may meet with cenfure and difapprobation from’


that.


DAEODI ITCAAODTY IGOIN
that defcription of learned, as well as of illiterate men,
whofe rule of faith uniformly keeps pace with their own
arbitrary conceptions. But the difpaffionate part of man-
kind, with every good Mafon, will candidly weigh the
evidence « by the balance of the Sanctuary,” andreferve
their fentence till after a fair and impartial trial.

Sheltered, therefore, under the wing of your fraternal
regard, and patronized by every fober admirer of the
fecret works of Nature, I fhall attempt to lay the Foun-
dation Stone of an illuftrious Building, facred to Urania,
upon which fome more able and ingenious Workman,
{anétioned by your patronage and protection, may here-
after raife the edifice to out-top the fkies, and, like Ja-
cob’s ladder, pierce the ftarry region, leading the intel-
leétual faculties of the foul to the moft fublime contem-
plations of God and Nature. )

Ihave the honour to profefs myfelf, with unequivocal
attachment and efteem, GENTLEMEN,

Your Accepted Brother,
And faithful Servant,


No. . U: t -5
oN CAVENDISH-SQUARES Bi SE BL Y:


TO EWE
YOUNG STUDENT in AS TROLGCY:
a. FRIEND,
rFHOEVER thou ad) that fhalt with fo much
eafe receive the benefit of my laborious ftudies,
and doft intend to proceed in acquiring this heavenly
knowledge of the Stars, wherein the great and admirable
works-of the invifible and all-glorious God are fo mani-
- feftly apparent, in the firft place confider and adore thy
omnipotent CREATOR, and be thankful unto him for
thy exiftence. Behumble, andletnonatural knowledge,
how profound and tranfcendent foever it be, elate thy
_ mind, or withdraw thee from thy duty to that divine
| Providence, by whofe all-feeing order and appointment
all things heavenly and earthly have their conftant and
never-ceafing motion; but the more thy knowledge is
enlarged by this comprehenfive {cience, the moredothou
magnify the powerandwifdomof the Almighty God; and
ftrive to preferve thyfelf in his favour; havinginconftant
remembrance, that the more holy thou art, and the
nearer thou approacheft to. God in thy religious duties,
the purer judgment fhalt thou always give. Beware of
pride and felf-conceit, yetnever forget thy dignity. Re-
a flect


(vi)
flect often on the primeval ftate of thy creation, that
thou waft formed in the perfect image of God, and that
no irrational creature durft offend Man, the Microco/m,
but did faithfully ferve andobey him, fo long as he was
mafter of his reafon and paffions, or until he fuffered his
own Free- Will to be governed by the unreafonable part.
Butalas! when the firft father of us all gave up the reins
to his difobedient affections, and deferted his reafon
and his God, then every creature and beatt of the field
becamerebelliousand difobedienttohiscommand. Stand
faft then, O Man! to thy integrity, and thy religion !
confider thy own noblenefs, and that all created things,
both prefent and tocome, wereforthyfakecreated; nay,
for thy fake, even God became man; Thou art that crea-
ture, who, being converfant with Chrift, liveft and con-
verfeft above the heavens. How many privileges and ad-
vantages hath God beftowed on thee! thou rangeftabove
the heavens by contemplation, and conceiveft the motion
and magnitude of the Stars; thou talkeft with angels $:
yea, with God himfelf: thou haft all creatures within thy
dominion, andkeepeft the Devils in fubjection. Thy ca-
pacity for acquiring knowledge is unlimited by thy Ma-


woKeTs


(wily)
ker; and the bleffednefsof an enlightenedmind willbring
thee theconfolations of joy and happinefs---Do not then,
for fhame, deface thy nature, nor make thyfelf unworthy
of thefeceleftial gifts; donot deprive thyfelf of thepower
and glory God hath allottedthee, for the poffefiion of a
few imperfect, vain, and illufory, pleafures..

Wuen thou haft perfected the contemplation of thy
God, and confidered the extent of thofe faculties with
which thou art endued, thou wilt be fit to receive the
following inftruétion, and to know in thy practice how
to conduct thyfelf.---Asthou wilt daily converfe with the
heavens, fo inftruct and. form thy mind according to the
image of divinity. Learn all the ornaments of virtue, and.
be fufficiently inftructed therein. Be humane,courteous,.
familiar to all, and eafy of accefs. Afflict not the unfor-
tunate with the terrors of afevere fate; in fuch cafes, in-
form them of their hard fortune with fympatheticconcern;
direct them to call upon God to divert the judgments im-
_ pendingover them; tofummon up all their fortitude, and
to endeavour to remove the threatened evil, by a manly,
exercife of that free-will with which the all-merciful God
hath endowed them. Be modeft inconverfation, andaflo-


I | elate


( vi )

ciate with the fober andlearned. Covet not riches, but
give freely to the poor, both money and judgment. Let
no worldly confideration procure an erroneous judgment
from thee, or fuch as may difhonour this facred feience.
Love all thy fellow-creatures, and cherifh thofe honeft
men who cordially embrace this Art. Be {paring in deli-
vering judgment concerning thy king andicountry, or of
the deathof thy prince; for | know experimentally that
Reges fubjacentlegibus frellarum. Rejoice m the number
of thy friends; and avoid litigious {uits and controverfies.
In thy ftudy, be totus in i/is, that thou mayeft be fingu-
lusin arte. Be not extravagant in the defire of learning
every {cience; benot aliquid tantuminomnibus. Be faith-
fulandcomplacent; betray noone’sfecrets, lchargethee;
never divulge the truft either friend or enemy hath com-
mitted to thy faith. Inftruct all men to live well; and
beagoodexamplethyfelf. Avioid thefidiven of thetimes,
its luxuries, and lacivioufnefs; butlove thy country, and
-beits friend. Butnot difmayed, though evil fpoken of;
conf{cientia preflat mille teftibus.


POETICAL


YOR PT OAL (eh VeOC ATLON


Ree Ne oe


ESCEND, Urania, with prolific Flame,

And fpread the growing Trophies of thy Name;
Difclofe to Man a Knowledge of the Skies,
Whofe fpangling Beauties draw our wond’ring Eyes.
Inftruct young Students in their Care to know,
The ftarry Influence on all Things below;
Unveil to them the ftrange myfterious caufe
Of thofe Effects deriv’d from Nature’s Laws ;
As fiery Meteors, Comets, Lightning, Thunder,
. Eclipfes, Blazing Stars, at which Men wonder.
The boift’rous rolling of the troubled Sea ;
The daily. Tides, their fov’reign Regency.
Whirlwinds, and Water-{pouts, which pleafing jen
The compound Colours of the heav’nly Bow;
With ev’ry occult Virtue and Attraction,
The rife, the growth, decay, and putrefaétion,
Of all Sublunaries that can be found,
From noble Birth, to Herbs within the Ground.
How Fire and Water, Air and Earth, agree.
When equipois’d, in focial Harmony.
That there’s a Chain of Concord down defcends,
From Heav’n to Earth; then back to Heav’n afcends,
By Nature thew to fober Men of Senfe,
Orion’s Bands, Pleiades’ {weet Influence ; |
Shew that the Stars, which trim the heav’nly Spheres,
Are fet for Signs, for Seafons; and for Years ;
Which Day by Day to Man do utter Speech,
And Night to Night this facred Knowledge teach;
That there’s a Time for all Things here below :

6-9 A Time


“J 1C xi)

A Time to reap, togather in, and fow;

A Time for Birth to Creatures God has giv’n,
A Time to view the great Expanfe of Heav’n.
What thall befal us, if we’re wife to look,

Is there contain’d, asin a facred Book;

What moves ott Inclinations, what our Wills ;
What gives us Health, what fubjedts us to ills ;
What makes one wife; another raving mad ;
Another thrifty, yet in rags is clad:

What makes one born a Beggar, and his Fate
Shall be to rifeunto a great Eftate ;

Another, born in very high Degree,

Defcend therefrom, to abject Poverty.

What makes us merry, lovers of the Fair ;

And others hate to come where’er they are.
“What makes fome barren, as we daily fee,
While others fruitful are inclined to be.

What makes one chufe to change a fingle Life,
Yet grafp much Mis’ry when he takes a Wife;
And why ahother fhall this Path purfue,

And prove that one is not fo bleft as two.

What makes one travel both by Sea and Land ;
While others hate to move from whence they ftand.
What makes one labour much for well-earn’d Praife,
While others, undeferving, wear the Bays.
What makes one Army, going forth to fight,
| By one much {maller quickly put to Flight.

Is it not plain the ftarry Influence forces,
Ordain’d by Heav’n to a& in conftant Courfes ?
Thefe Truths unthaken ftand within this Book,
Therefore, confider o’er the Leaves, and look;
Where Rules enough you'll find to Practice by,
In the pure Science of Aftrology.


a tes


Ha THE AU THO R’s |
I tales eel giao boise rte ana et


To trois N E W ED Lee TOON:


X*LATTERED, as I have been, by an uncommon demand for the

_ former editions of this work ; and honoured by letters of unbounded
approbation and applaufe, from fome of the higheft and moft venerable
characters in the Britifh Dominions, I could no longer forego their im-
portunities to bring forward the prefent new edition, which will be
found confiderably improved, and fome of the predictions foretold in it
upwards of feven years ago, particularly concerning France, now actually
fulfilled, and others fulfilling every day.

When this publication was fr announced, many indeed were furprifed
at the ftrangenefs of the doctrine; but none ventured to oppofe the rea-
fon and caufes on which it depends. Some ingenious perfons, who then
doubted the poffibility of fuch a f{cience, having tried its rules for {pe-
culating into futurity, and finding them correfpond with truth, are now
become its warmeft advocates. And I have no difficulty in declaring,
that a// who contemplate this itudy with candid and unbiaffed minds,
will foon be convinced of the high and important advantages to be de-
rived from it, both in temporal, and eternal affairs.

Many, who had been in the habit of regarding Elementary Philofophy
as a fable or a farce, have, in very recent letters, expreffed no {mall de-
gree of pleafure to find, that the principles of this fcience, which were
formerly held in fuch high veneration by the learned, are once more re-
vived and explained, and fitted to reafon under fuch examples, as the
fenfes cannot eafily miftake. Indeed it is moft certain that they wonder-
fully agree with the very nature of things, and correfpond with theit ac-
cidental effects; and, fince thefe caufes and effects flow by influx from the
celeftial bodies, and thus influence the ambient, the {cience claims pre-


eminence


| (exis)
eminence over its twin-fifter 4/fronomy, which every one admires and ap-
proves.’ Yet aftronomy, divefted of this {peculation, and regarded only
as the explication of celeftial phenomena, is likea cabinet without a jew-
el; but, when united toelementary philofophy, it is replete with ufeful
inftruGion, and conduces to the falutary purpofe of making mankind
wifer, happier, and better.

The track of Nature is a ftraight and obvious road; and yet her foot-
fteps are often fo fecretly conducted, that great perfpicuity is requifite to
purfue her with effect. The mind of man is unqueftionably too much
clouded: wholly to comprehend the immenfe fabric of an all-wife and in-
finite architect; and he might as well attempt to empty with a cup the
immenfe waters of the deep, which are only as a fingle drop, compared
with the Omnipotence of the Creator, as to attempt to meafure, by the
utmoft ftretch of human capacity, the boundlefs extent of the furrounding
heavens. Yet in things which more immediately concern ourfelves, and
our future fate and fortune, the permanency of empires, and the prof-
perity and happinefs of mankind, as the fame refult from the natural con-
fequences of good andevil, regulated by our choice of either; fo far weare
qualified with ability to forefee, by contemplating the influx or influences
by which they are governed. ‘Thus, from the writings of the moft emi-
‘nent men in philofophy and the mathematics, improved by my own la-
borious application and experience, I have at iength afcertained thofe
powers and properties in the celeftial regions, from whence thefe in-
fluences are conducted, and which open a door for the difcovery of fecrets
‘in futurity replete with wonder, deduced from the firft and efficient pro-
perties, paflions, motions, fympathies, and active qualities of all things;
which, if reafon and truth had not repeatedly confirmed, to the full con--
viction of my fenfes, I fhould have condemned and rejected long ago—
for reafon and truth have uniformly guided the innumerable experiments


of my laboratory, and fhall ever influence the pen which communicates
them to the world.


AN


ie
si AN |
Mb eLak: UsS eb OR A: T LON


Of the CELESTIAL SCIENCE of
Reser rer 1 OG.
oe sina Sed Fea sia Fe soy 1.


the venerable fcience of Aftrology, and fenfiblealfo of the reproach

and obloquy that will be levelled againft me by men of obftinate
and dogmatical principles; I fhall neverthelefs venture, upon the bafis of
TRUTH and EXPERIENCE, to make this feeble effort towards reftoring a
competent knowledge of that comprehenfive fcience, which in all ages
of the world was deemed the chief ornament of fociety, and the diftin- -
guifhing excellence of enlightened minds. It is therefore to be lamented
that the cultivation of it is become obfoleteand unfafhionable; and that,
owing to the violent difturbances at the clofe of the laft century—to the
want of recent information on the fubject, and to the too refined notions ~
of modern philofophers, its* congenial rays have been fo long withheld
from fhedding their divine light upon thefe kingdoms.


G terres as I am of the rooted prejudices of the times againft


That an Aftrology in the Heavens does really exift, and was ordained of
God from the beginning of the world, fortheimmediate information and
direction of his creatures here below, is obvioufly andinconteftibly proved
form various parts of thofe facred Books, which containthe unerring word
of God, and the perfect rule of faith for every good and fober Chri(tian.—
To revive the gloomy days of fuperitition, or to impofe on the untaught
multitude, precepts of ignorance, is no part of Author’s defign.—His
aim is, to remove the mote from the eyes of prejudiced-men; and by juft
reafoning and fair argument, founded on.the principles of religion and
morality, to thew them that God is a God of order, and created nothing in
vain ;—that he framed the world by number, weight, and meafure, and
fixed the whole fyftem of heavenly and earthly things upon fo perfect and
immutable a plan, that the whole doth work harmonioufly and fympathe-
wien fohg Ree B tically


14 4A NOTE Les T) RA TolOON,


tically together, fo as to anfwer all the various purpofes for which they _
were firft ordained ;—that fuperiors do uniformly rule inferiors ; and that
 celeftial bodies fenfibly a€t upon and influence all earthly fubftances, whe-
“ther animal, vegetable, or mineral; not by chance or accident, but by a


regular inherent caufe, implanted in them from the beginning by the om-
nipotence of God. |


It is a maxim with perfons of a contumacious turn of mind, to confider
every thing as impoflible that does not immediately fall within the com-
pafs of their own ideas; forgetting that the operations of Nature are as un-
fearchable as they are curious, and that the ways of God furpafs all human
comprehenfion !—-and fo warped are they from every fentiment of libera-
lity, that thofe who difcover a willingnefs to receive inftruGtion, or who
differ from them in opinion, are condemned to ridicule and fcorn. But, to .
fhew how reprehenfible {uch condué is, we need only reflect on the unbe-
~ lieving St. Thomas, and the pointedexclamation of our Saviour upon that
occafion. Men of this untoward difpofition, will take up my book from
the impulfe of curiofity, till, recollecting themfelves, they will tofs it
with contempt into fome obfcure corner, and upbraid its author perhaps in
terms not the moft liberal or pleafing. And yet, I amy bold to fay, that
even fuch perfons, invulnerable as they may be to the force of reafon,
might foon be convinced of the purity and excellence of this Science,
would they but for a time diveft themfelves of prejudice, and impartially
weigh the evidence brought in its fupport.—Nay, I have reafon to be-
lieve, that, how much foever they appear externally tocondemn Aftrology,
they neverthelefs feel in their own mind, and vainly attempt to ftifle,
an-internal conviction of its abfolute exiftence. Would they but wifely
cultivate this internal evidence, and put on the folid reafoning of dif-
paflionate men, the order of nature would then unfold itfelf to their view,
and the ftupendous works of Creation captivate their fenfés ; till, emu-.
lous of attaining the moft exalted knowledge, they would feek the vatt
extent of {pace, and find the whole canopy of heaven expanded for their
contemplation. And thus, familiarized in the wonderful properties of
heavenly and earthly things, they would no longer confider Aftrology
as the parent of wicked compact and infatuation, or the child of impof-


ture, but would be fenfible it contains the balfamic nutriment of Truth
and Wifdom.


Thofe, who deny the being of Aftrology, have furely never contem-
plated the myfteries of their own exiftence, nor the common occurrences
thatareinfeparable from it; many of whichare inexplicable when abftract
edly confidered, and only ceafe to ftrike us with wonder becaufe they are


obvious


a
Of WS TROL Oe YN. oe


obvious and familiar to our fenfes. If we recollect that the moft trivial
incident in nature cannot come to pafs without a caufe; and that thefe
caufes are inceffantly giving birth to a new fate, which at one time brings |
us comfort, and at another overwhelms us with misfortunes; that to-day
gives us the full enjoyment of our wifhes, and to-morrow confounds
every imagination of our hearts; it is {trange we fhould deny that fuch
caufes exift, when every hour’s experience confirms the fact, by the good
or ill fuccefs that conftantly attends all human purfuits. To illuftrate
this obfervation more fully, let us attentively confider the ftupendous
frame or model of Nature, as laid down in the holy Scriptures, and en-
deavour to deduce therefrom the fubordinate dependence of one part upon
another, from the interior heavens to the minuteft fubftance upon earth.
Hence we may poflibly difcover the origin of thefe caufes, and prove that
Attrology does not exift in imagination only.


The fubftance of this great and glorious frame, which the Almighty
created, we call the world; and the world confifts of the heaven and the
earth*. The model of it is, as the prophet Ezekiel defcribes it, in the
form of a wheel +; with many wheels within the fame, involved one
within another. And thus we find it by mathematical demontftration ;
for the earth is a wheel or globe of fea and land, circum{cribed by the at-
mofphere, as within a greater wheel, which is globoustoo; and furrounded
by the heavens, as.by many wheels involved one within another, encircling
the fan, moon, and ftars, and all the hoft of them. The power, which
firft actuated and put thefe wheels in perpetual motion, was the fame
which called them into exiftence; the executioners of whofe will are re-
prefented by the prophet under the fimilitude of four living creatures,
immeafurably endued with wifdom, courage, agility, and ftrength. And
hence were life, and {pirit, and power, and virtue, communicated to the
heavens, and from the heavens to the earth, and from the earth to man
and beaft, and to every plant, and herb, and earthly fubftance. ' Hence
alfo are derived the magnetic powers, and wonderful properties of na-
ture; the virtues of fympathy and antipathy, the invifible effects of at-


traction and expulfion, and all the various influences of the ftars and
planets.


The proper agents of this noble ftructure are angels and men; the
one compofed of a pure etherial {pirit, and incorruptible ; the other, in
his primary ftate lefs pure, butincorruptable alfo until his fall, which
brought upon himfelf and offspring mortality anddeath. The angels are
either good or bad, and ultimately know their reward or doom; but the


* See Gen. i. 1. + Ezek. i. 15, 16.
works


 *

16 A-N ob Boe RA A TH OON

works of fallen man are yet upon anvil, and time with us is {till going
on. But man is now endued, asin his primary ftate, with the agency of a
free will, and hath goodand evil, for a teft of his obedience, continually
fet before him, with freedom to choofe either.. And thus, unconftrained
either by the immediate hand of God, or'by the operation of the planets
as fecond caufes, fome embrace life, and others feek condemnation; and
hence follow virtue and vice, profperity and adverfity, ficknefs and health,
life and death, and all the viciffitudes of Fortune. -And though the rife
and fall-of empires proceed from the virtues and vices of thofe men who
govern and inhabit them ; and thefe virtues and vices proceed from the
free will or agency of thofe men; and though the incidents good and
bad of one man’s life are innumerable, andthe men who are the fubjects
of thofe incidents in one fingle age are: innumerable alfo; and though
the ages of men, fince the creation of the world, are innumerable too;
yet have all thefe multiplied incidents, whether trivial or important, come
“to pafs by a regular courfe or concatenation of caufes, originally im-
planted in the wheels or frame of nature.» And with fuch minute per-)
fection was this ftupendous frame conftructed, that neither the fall of
man, nor the tremendous fhock which agitated the world upon that af-
flicting occafion; not all the wickednefs of mankind in after ages, nor the
defolations which have rent the earth in confequence thereof; have yet
impaired the wheels of this aftonifhing machine, or for a moment im-

eded its conftant and unceafing motion. And fuch was the amazing
forefight and providence of God, that perceiving, at one view, all the
events of futurity, and turnings and windings of every man’s will, andthe
total {um and upfhot of all virtue and vice, he at once contrived the fates
of profperity and adverfity, of rewards and punithments, fo to come up,
as precifely to anfwer the virtues and prayers of the righteous, and the
‘vices and profanenefs of the wicked, in all ages of the world, at their
fit and appointed feafons.


Now all mankind have each of them, more or lefs, a certain fhare of
wifdom, power, or wealth, wherewith they occupy in this life, and carry
forward all their undertakings. Thus we fee fome men, by means of
riches, courage, or contrivance, grow mighty, and purpofe as if nothing
could impede the full accomplifhment of their defigns; and yet we find
there are two things which confound the wifeft, and greateft, and proudett,
of them all, in the very fummit of their glory ;—thefe are, Time and
Chance—two mighty lords upon earth, which bring to pafs many ftrange
and marvellous events. ‘Time is that motion of {pace which proceeded
out of eternity when the world began, and holdeth on unto eternity, which
is to fucceed at the world’s end. Out of this one long time are engen-

. ; dered


OOF! GA“S FOR O-L OG +Y. ! 17


dered’ infinite {paces of time, of a great variety of forts; and thefe are
either general or fpecial, and each of them either fortunate or unfortu-
nate. There is a time for every purpofe under heaven*; a time of plea-
fure, and another time of pain and grief ; a time to rife, anda time to fall;
a time to be born, and atime to die. There is a certain lucky time in
man’s life, wherein if he go out to battle, though with but few men, yet
he carrieth the victory; and there is another time wherein, though he go
out with ever fo complete anarmy, yet fhall he gain nothing but difgrace-+.
So alfo there is a time when overtures of marriage fhall be fuccefsful, buta
man’s defires anfwer it not; and again there is a time when defires of mar-
riage fhall ftrongly urge, and all overtures prove ineffectual ; but there is
a time alfo when defires and overtures fhall exactly correfpond, and fuit
together. In like marfner there is atime when profperity and riches fhall
offer themfelves, and be attained, whether a man fleep or wake; and by
and by, though he purfue them with wings, yet fo unlucky a time occurs;
as renders all his endeavours fruitlefs. Some men come into the world
ina lucky hour, fo that let them be wife or foolifh, they fhall be buoyed
‘up on the wings of fate in all matters of wealth or honour, and fucceed in
all that they take to; while wifer and better men, fmitten with an un-
lucky time of birth, fhall be as undeferved]y difparaged, and all their un
dertakings fhall prove unfuccefsful and unhappy. Some fhall be lucky
in the van of their enterprizes, and as unfortunate in the rear; and othere
again contrariwife. And thus time feems to mock and fport with the
men of this life, and to advance, or countera@, all their fkill and contri-
vances, even to a degree infinitely beyond whatever we could reafonably
conceive or expect. And yet time of itfelf is but a dead thing, and a
mere inftrument ; but the wheels of the heavens, turning upon it, imprint
riddles in its face, and carve and cut out the various fhapes of profperity
and adverfity upon the minuteft portion thereof. And wonderful it is to
obferve, that a child, the moment it draws breath, becomes time-fmitten
by the face of heaven, and receives an impreflion from the ftars therein,
which, taking rife from the afcendant, fun, moon, and other principal
fignificators, operate as the impreffors ftand, and point out, as with
the finger of God, the caufes whence the fate and fortune of the new-
born infant proceed ; and, whether it comes before or at’its full time, or
in what part of the world foever it is born, it matters not; for, as the na~
ture of the fignificators are that afcend upon the horizon at the birth,
fuch fhall certainly be the fortune of the f native. This is a truth that
~ * See Eccl. iii. 1,2, &c. -. + Chap. ix. at. ;

+ This aftonifhing property of nature will be illuftrated more at large, in its proper place,
and the reader enabled, by plain and obvious rules, to make the experiment upon himfelf, upca
his own family, or upon any other fubjects he may think proper.—The event of his own. obier«
vations will confirm the’ fact, and afford him/an inexhauftible fund of moral and religious con-


templation !
No, 1. G will


18 AN ILLUSTRATION


will bear the moft minute enquiry, and will be found the ordination of
_ anall-wife and indulgent Providence, for the {peculation and improvement

of his creature man. And thefe fignificators reprefent, as it were, a feries
of curious knots, which untie by courfe; and, as every knot unties, dif-
ferent times feem to fly out, and perform their errands ; and of thefe,
fometimes we may obferve two, orthree, or more, lucky knots opening
together, and at other times as many thatare inaufpicious. Yet a// times
are beautiful in their feafons, if men could hit them ; but through the ma-
lignity of fin, and an intemperate purfuit of worldly pleafures, we often


lofe the favourable time afforded us, of embracing the moft fubftantial
happinefs,


The fecond great lord over human inventions, @s chance. And thefe
chances proceed from a great variety of rare and fecret operations of hea-
ven, which throwin the way of men thofe ftrange and fortuitous turns of
fortune that furpafs all human forefight or conception. And yet there
is really no fuch thing as chance in nature; but all thofe curious hits,
that {trike in between the caufe and its effect, we call chances, as beft fuit-
ing human ideas, becaufe of the undefcribable properties of them, For
in fhuffling a pack of cards, or in cafting the dice, it feems to us amere -
chance what caft fhould happen uppermoft, or what card will go to the
bottom of the pack; and yet it is evident by experience, that there isa
certain luck in nature, which prefides over all thefe adventures, fo that a
man fhall either win or lofe ina methodical courfe. It alfo happens in the
time of battle, and in every purfuit after wealth and honour, that chances
fall in upon us, and turn the fcale by a fecret kind of fate, beyond all
that could reafonably have been expected; and thus heaven breathes into
all human actions an infinity of thefe chances, that overturn the wifdom,
and power, and all the greatnefs, of man. Thefe chances are uniformly
managed by a certain kind of luck, either good or bad, which drives the
mail; and this, by fome heavenly influence, that infufes a fecret virtue or
- poifon into our actions, as courage into their hearts on one fide, or difmay
on the other; and {kill into fome men’s heads to purfue the right courfe
_to- be rich, or folly into others, whereby they run headlong to mifery and
want; or elfe fortunateth or infortunateth by miftake of words, fignals,
or ats, that turn to the beft or worft- advantage, by ftrange hits or mif-
carriages; and thus it happens that a flight miftake in battle begets an utter
rout, after avictory madealmoftcomplete, by the mere utterance of a wrong
word, or fteering an improper courfe. But, which way foever it happens,
the whole matter is wrought by a good or ill luck, and the hand of God
is at the bottom of it; not by any new contrived act, but by the fame
regular courfe of nature ordained from the beginning of the world.


Thus


OF ASTROLOGY. . 19


Thus both Time and Chance are the fervants of nature, under whofe
commands they fway the world, and worldly men; but by her laws are
both of them difpofed. Time meafures out the extent of mens lives, and
fets bounds how long they may live by ftrength of nature, and how much
of that time fhall be extenuated by means of fin; and it alfo carves out
limits to the particular fates of all mankind and Chance acts in obferv-
ance of thofe limits, and brings about the good and bad fuccefs of every
fate. And thus, by the fervice of Time and Chance, nature performs all
her great and fecret operations, whether upon collective bodies, or places,
or perfons. It may be thought ftrange that nature fhould bring forth men
and women at a great diftance of years, hours, and places, all deftined to
die at one time, and by the fame manner of death, either by war, plague,
peftilence, or fhipwreck; and that time and chance fhould pick them up,
and draw them together, from a variety of different purfuits, to partake
at laft in one and the fame deftructive fate. Yet this is no more ftrange
than true; for thefe things frequently happen, and that by the imper-
ceptible influences of thofe heavenly afpects and ftars, which. zz their
courfes fought againft Siferas. And by the fame rule, as many. men, wo-
men, and children, are, oa the other hand, gathered together by a fimi-
lar force and virtue, to enjoy great and good fortune.


Some perhaps will contend, that thefe operations of nature are incom+.
patible with the free agency of man’s will. But, if what has already
been premifed be attentively confidered, this fuppofition will immedi-
ately vanifh; for God, who ordained the courfe of nature, certainly
forefaw the minuteft turn of every man’s will, and eventually contrived
his fate to correfpond therewith, fo as to admit its free and uncontrouled:
choice. And whoever denies this antecedent principle, or prefcience of
God in the conftruction of the world, denies one of his moft effential
attributes. The will of man, without doubt, in a variety of inftances,
makes great f{truggles and wreftlings with the ftarry influences, both:
in good and in evil purfuits, and often prevails over them exceedingly ;—.
for, though a perfon be born under fuch benevolent or malignant afpects,.
as fhall point out his natural temper and difpofition, and indicate the
principal tranfactions, fortunate or unfortunate, that are likely to be the
diftinguifhing marks of his life; yet does it depend entirely upon:the
free uncontrouled will of that man, whether all thofe circumftanees, fo-
pointed out in his nativity, fhall come to pafs, or not; becaufe the free:
will in every man, when fortified by habits of virtue and wifdom, often
enable him to. over-rule thofe evi] afpects, fo as to avoid the commif=
fion of any criminal offence, and to guard. him againft the misfortunes or


* Judg..v. 20. t


loffes.


20 A NEL T RAAT LON


lofies impending over him; while men of a profligate and carelefs
habit. not only lofe the advantages of a promifing nativity, but, if
born under malevolent afpects, are often reduced to the laft ftage of di-
ftrefs, and perifh under the very fame ftrokes of nature, which wifer
and better men, born in’ the fame inauf{picious moments, have endured
with much eafe. And thus far /apiens dominabitur aftries, the wife man,
above the fool, may rale his ftars. Bat we muft not forget, that under
thefe operations of fate, there are many influences fo powerful, that no
wifdom of man can oppofz. Such are the fatal wounds of death, when
nature’s glafs is run out, and fuch the violent blows of excruciating
pain and ficknefs, and the high tides of profperity and adverfity; in all
which cafes, we find by experience, affra regunt homines, the ftars rule
and overpower men. Yet neverthelefs, fuch is the infinite prefcience
and providence of God, that forefecing the defires and deferts of all wife
and holy men, in their different ages and times, he alfo laid their fates
fuiting to their aétions. He forefaw Jofeph’s prayers and tears in his
captivity, and accordingly provided his advance in nature to correfpond
therewith*. He forefaw Hannah’s fafting, and earneft prayer, and ordained
her opening womb to bud forth in courfe of nature exactly anfwering
thereto}. So that the wifdom and will of man has its full free work,
without reftraint or controul; and grace and virtue act by their own
principles, as they are led by the Holy Ghoft; and yet nature, as it was
contrived from all eternity, acts freely too. This is the doctrine we are
taught by the word of God, which is confirmed by the evidence of our
own reafon and experience.


Now the fcience which we call Aftrology, is nothing more than the
ftudy or inveftigation of this frame or model of nature, with all its admi-
rable productions and effects; whereby weacquire a knowledge of the fe-
- cret virtues of the heavens, and the fhining luminaries therein contained.

It is a {cience which all may attain to, by common diligence and applica-
tion; and, the more we delight init, the more readily do we forefee the
motions of future events, and the curiofities of chance and natural acci-
dents, and the courfes of luck by which both are governed, and the order
of fate, unto which all of them are fubfervient ; together with all the
moft curious acts of attracting and expelling, alluring and threatening,
-encouraging and difheartening, and all fuch-like operations of nature,
moft fecretly and imperceptibly: performed, beyond the reach of ima-
ginations And, as by afkillinthis ftudy we attain to fee and experience
things that are paft, fo by the fame {kill we attain to a knowledge of
things which are to come; .and,..by knowing the time of our/birth, are


* See Gen. xxxvii. and xli. 40. Pfal. cv. 18, 19, 20.—+ Sam. i. 10, 11, &c.


enabled


OF ASST ROL O'G Y. 21


enabled to read in the heavens the ftory of our whole lives, our blefiings
and crofles, honour and difhonour, profperity and adverfity,’ ficknefs and
health, and all the years of our life, and time of our death, even as though -
we had feen them tranfacted and come to pafs, in their feveral times and
feafons. For God hath affuredly given this knowledge unto the wife
man, to know the time and the judgment, and the number of our days, that
we may be certified bow long we bave to* live, with comfort and content ;
that we may be timely prepared for all itates of profperity and adverfity,
for along and happy life, or a calamitous and {peedy death ; and that we
may fupport ourfelves with fortitude and refignation, in proportion to
our foreknowledge of thefe events. And no man fo fit to foreknow
thefe, as he whois able to fay, Mayor jum quam cui pofit fortuna nocere.


But many men will not believe, that by natural means all or any of
this foreknowledge can be fairly and lawfully obtained, or that the in-
fluences attributed to the heavenly bodies have any foundation in truth.
It is therefore neceflary, before I enter upon the practical part -of the
{cience, to bring fuch evidence in fupport of what has been already ad-
vanced, as will be found incontrovertible and decifive ; and for this pur-
pofe I muft refer to the teftimony of thofe facred writings, which con-
tain the revelation of God, and in which the doctrine of this fcience is
fo demonttrably proved, that it will be difficult to believe the one with-
out admitting the other. Let us confider the account given by Mofes, of
the creation of the heavenly bodies. God faid, ‘‘ Let there be lights in
the firmament of heaven, to divide the day from the xzight; the greater
light to rule the day, and the kffer light torule the mghz; and let them
be for fins, and for feafons, and for days and years.”’—Thefe then were
the purpofes for which they were ordained, and irrevocably fixed by their
great Creator—firft for lights ; for had they not a place in the firmament,
or were we deprived of their illuminating rays, we fhould be inftantly
overwhelmed with impenetrable darknefs. Secondly, they are to divide the
day from the night; and this they never ceafe to do; for when the fun,
the greater light, is {unk five degrees below our horizon, we call it night ;
for then the moon and {tars appear, and fhed their eer Aight, and darknefs
in fome degree is {pread around, and every thing declares it to be the ftate
of night. But when the fun, that glorious fountain of life, light, and
motion, begins to.teuch the eaftern verge of the horizon, darknefs is
difpelled, lightybegins again to dawn, and the ftars which beautifully be-
{pangle our hemifphere are foon ob{cured by the full blaze of day; but,
as days and nightsare unequal, and never continue at one ftay, thefe celetf-
tial luminaries diftinguifh their refpective reigns. ‘Thirdly, they are for


* Eccl. i. 5. Pfal. xxxix. 4, 5
No. 2. D Agns *


22 A NvE TSUOUAUS FT IR 2A AT TO) N


figus—not to brutes, for they have not the faculty of underftanding them ;

nor to angels, for they continually behold the face of God, and obey his
will in the government of the heavenly bodies, at his pleafure. There
fore, when God faith, Let them be for figns, he mutt {peak in reference
to man, whom he formed arational creature, capable of diftinguifhing one
fign from another, and of improving by them. Nor are we to look upon
them as mere figns, like beacons upon a hill, or as only fetting bounds to
days, months, and years ; but we are to confiderthem as figas and tokens
of thofe hidden events of futurity, which it concerns every wife and good
man to know; and which he may always forefee, by a virtuous and fober
ftudy of thefe intelligent fas, placed by God for that purpofe, in the fir.
mament of heaven. Andthat this was the intent of them, is clearly de-
monftrated by the words of our Saviour, when he foretold the deftruétion
of Jerufalem, and the final confummation of -all things. His apoftles
afked him, What fhall the fez of thefe things be? He replies; Earth-
quakes, famines, and peftilences ; fearful fights in the heavens, and fgns in
the fun, in the moon, and in the * fars. Such alfo was the fgu by which
the Eaftern Sages difcovered the birth of our Saviour, and the place of
his nativity ; and numerous other inftances .may be adduced both from
facred and profane hiftory, in fupport of this dottrine.-—The fourth ufe
of thefe celeftial luminaries, is for /eafons. | This is alfo obvious; for we
find that heat and cold, and drought and moifture, are all guided and go-
verned by the heavenly bodies ; and that not only {pring and autumn,
and fummer and winter, bear teftimony of it; but we haveit confirmed by
the evidence of our own conftitution and feeling ; for, when the weather
is heavy and lowering, we.find ourfelves dull and languid ; when bright
and radiant, we are chearful and merry ; and, when unfettled and unfea- -
fonable, we feel it by indifpofition and melancholy ; and this is all brought
about by the operation of thefe luminaries upon the feafons of the year,
- in the due courfe of nature. The next ufe allotted them is, fifthly for
days, and fixthly for years ; and that thefe are meafured out, and governed
by them, is every way apparent ; by the fun’s circuit, and the moon’s
energy.—The fun, like a {trong man, rejoices to run his race; he rifeth
out of the chambers of the eaft, and with golden rays difpels the morn-
ing clouds, and exhales the pearly dew ; chearing and refrefhing all na-
ture with his prefence, Henceit is evident that thefe luminaries were
not only placed in the heavens to give light upon the earth, to govern
the feafons, and to fet bounds to time ; but alfo to communicate fgus
and ¢okens to mankind, of things to come. We fhall now confider how
far it is {criptural, and confonant to reafon, to allow them thofe Influences
attributed to them by Aftrology. |


* Luke xxi. 6, 7;11,'25, &e,


That


@. Fo) Ap SHTYRLO.L0;G.Y. 23


That the fun, moon, and all the planets, havea direft and obvious infiu-
ence upon earthly fubftances, no man of common obfervation will pretend
todeny. The fun is the fountain of heat, and that heat is the nurfe of
life; and the moon is the fountain of moifture, which tempers the vio-
lent heat of the fun, and modifies all his operations, But the fun and
moon, and all the planets, have each of them a particular fpecific pro-
_ perty, according to their own innate quality, and according to the nature
of that fign or band of ftars, under which they happen to be pofited.
This is a fact eftablifhed by repeated obfervation and experience ; for
when the fun enters the equinodiial fign Aries, the {pring begins to thew
herfelf, and all vegetative nature, by the moon’s humidity, and the fun’s
temperate heat, feems to revive and flourifh, and, as it were, to rife from
the dead; whither the cold blafts of the hyemnal air, had before configned
it. So, when his radiant beams enter the fign Taurus, they ftir up the
beningn Influences of the Pleiades and Hyades ; Hoedi being then to the
north, and Orion tothe fouth, and Arcturus finking below the horizon ;
and their cold and tempeftuous effects begin to ceafe, as they are fuc-
ceeded by thefe benevolent conftellations, which produce warm fouthern
winds, and gentle fhowers, replenithing the earth, and caufing vegetation.
Again, when the fun rifes with the Dog-ftar, we findan fluence which
caufes vehemency of heat, contagion, and infirmity. Medicaments ad-
miniftered under this eonfelasion prove hard and obnoxious; and we
find dogs at this time are apt to rum mad: the fea is troubled without any
apparent caufe, and all nature feems more or lefs oppreffed by it ; and
yet thefe effects are never found to. be equally violent in any two fummers,
which clearly proves an zzfuence in the ftars, as well as in the fun. And
again, though the fun keeps the fame conftant and invariable courfe
through the twelve figns of the zodiac, for an infinity of annual revo-
lutions, yet we never find the feafons and weather exactly correfpond,
which they doubtlefs would do, were it not that cold and heat, and wind
and rain, are governed by the configurations the fun has with the planets
and fixed ftars ; and this alfo evidently proves the force of their zzfuence.
It is likewife manifeft, that whenever the planet Saturn is paffing out of
one fign into another, the weather is more-or lefs turbulent and unfettled.


But it is not the weather only, nor the inanimate part of the creation
alone, that is affected by the influences of the fun, moon, and planets ;
for we find they operate upon the human {pecies, and upon all animate
nature, in every part of the world. The fun, and the quality of the
heavens about the torrid zone, naturally occafion thofe men who are born
and live under it, to be quite black, with fhort crifped hair, of a mean


{tature, and hot conftitution, imbibing a fierce and favage f{pirit, and
this


24. AUN ST (L207 S “SR SAS TOaN


this by reafon of the fun’s continual ftay and power in that fiery r gion.
It is obfervable, that the inhabitants of the fouth are of a better and
quicker wit, and much more ingenious and tractable; and this is ac-
counted for by their vertical point being fituated nearer the zodiac, in
which the planets move. So likewife the inhabitants of the north are of
a ftrong body, but of rude manners and condition, becaufe their vertical
point is placed at a great diftance from the fun’s courfe; and therefore they
abound with cold and moifture, and are of a phlegmatic conftitution, of
a fair complexion, tall, courageous, and ingenuous. Europe, being
fituated in the north-weft part of the earth, is under Mars in Aries, and,
by reafon of this planet ruling in that triplicity, its inhabitants are na-
turally of anoble and magnanimous fpirit, given to martial exploits, and
feats of war ; of a generous mind, andcourteous manners. And thus the
fun, modified by the different figns and conftellations through which he
paffes, regulates the climates, and fheds his influence upon all mankind,
leaving behind him evident marks of his government and fway. Some,
indeed, have attempted to account for the {warthy and black complexion
of the favage race, by a variety of other plaufible conjectures : but none
are to be relied on, that do not attribute its caufe to the intenfe heat and —
power of the fun in thofe climates ; than which nothing can be more
confonant to reafon, fince we find, evenin this country, that if we remain
long together in the fun, in the heat of fummer, our complexions change,
and we become in a degree tanned and {warthy.


Confpicuous as are the zyfluences of the fun, thofe ef the moon are no
lefs fo. This is evinced by a confideration of that wonderful and never-
ceafing operation of the moon upon the ocean, fo as to occafion that per-
petual flux and reflux of the fea, which we call tides. Here we fee the
waters of the vaft ocean, forgetful, as it were, of their natural reft, move
and roll in tides obfequious to the ftrong attractive power of the moon,
and with an increafe or diminution of force, in proportion as fhe appears
in ftrength, or want of afpect. This is an influence fo univerfally ad-
mitted, and fo peculiar to that luminary, that it eftablithes at. once the
dotrine we contend for. But there are numerous other inftances of
the effecis of the moon, no lefs common than extraordinary, and perfectly
well known. Thofeunhappy perfons who labour under a deprivation of
fenfe, and are afflicted with lunacy, have their fits more violent and ter-
rible, in proportion as the moon increafes or diminifhes in light and. mo-
tion; and inall chronic and acute difeafes, her power and influence are
vifibly and forcibly felt. Indeed every fubje& of the creation is more or
lefs affected by the moon’s energy; the eyes of cats are obferved. to {well
or fall at the full and change of the moon; and even the thell-fith at the

bottom


OF AS T R'O'L'O,'GY. a5


bottom of the ocean, are known to feel the weight of her influence.
Thofe who fleep in the fields, or in. any place expofed to the open air, by
moon-light, find their heads oppreffed with water, and their fenfes inert
and heavy; and butcher’s meat hung up, and expofed to the moon-light,
will foon putrify. The gardener alfo brings us abundant teftimonies of
the influence of the moon upon the vegetable world, If peas are fown
in the increafe of the moon, they never ceafe blooming; and, if fruits
and herbs are fet in the wane, experience fhews they are neither fo rich in
flavour, nor fo ftrong and healthy, as when planted during her increafe; fo
_ vines, becaufe they fhould not {pread too faft, are ufually pruned in the
wane. It is alfo remarkable that a pomegranate will live only as many
years as the moon was days old when it was planted; and, in planting
fhrubs, or the like, if they are to fhoot up ftrait and tall, and to take little
root, they are fet when the moon is in an airy fign and increafing in light:
but contrariwife when they are to take deep root, and to ftrike downwards.
And thus we may obferve flowers that are under the moon’s influence
only open their bloffoms in the night ; whilft thofe which are peculiarly
under the government of the fun open every morning when he begins to
rife, and clofe in the evening when he finks below the horifon. . Thefe
effects and influences of the moon are fo common, and fo generally known,
that it were almoft needlefs to repeat them here, but for the purpofe of
drawing this conclufion, that, as one planet has a known and forcible ac-
tion upon fublunary things, it is natural to believe that all the others
are endued in fome degree with a fimilar force and virtue. Indeed moft
phyficians know that the planet Saturn rulesall climacterical years, as the
{un doth critical days, and the moon the crifis of all acute difeafes ; and
that every feventh year Saturn comes to the fquare or oppofition of his
lace in the radix of every man’s nativity s and that, after the revolution
of the fun, he becomes the chief ruler of critical days, and is often
obferved, by hisconfigurations with the moon, to fet afide the fatal crifis
of thofe defperate diforders, over which the patient was not expected to
live. From thefe phyfical reafons, we may fafely conclude that Saturn’
is by nature cold and melancholy, as the fun is hot and chearful; and,
being thus oppofite to the fun in quality and effect, fo is he in relation to
the figns and manfions of the heavens where he bears rule, and therefore
inclines always to cold, as the fun does to heat. Hence it follows, that
when the fun is in Aquaries, which is the proper fign of Saturn, and op-
pofite to his own fign Leo, the weather inclines more to cold than to heat;
and, at every conjunction, fquare, or oppofition, of Saturn with the two
great luminaries, we always find the weather cold, moift and lowering,
even in the midft of the fummer, unlefs the rays of Jupiter or Mars inter-
pofe, in which cafe thefe effects are fomewhat lets vifible. Thus, we
No, 2. ; E may


6. AN-LIGUGn UGS TR IAM LON


may prefume to affirm, that the influences of the fun, moon, and planets,
are eftablifhed beyond contradi¢tion.


But, befides thefe figniorities of the fun, moon, and planets, the j/ixed
ftars have alfo their principalities in the heavens, The Lord, who gave
the fun for alight by day, gave the ordinances of the moon and ftars alfo
for alight by night; and to thefe ftars hath he committed a certain ru/e
or dominion® over the day and night, and that promifcuoufly, Now the
{tars have no vifible operation upon us, befides that little light they had ad-
minifter to our eyes in adark and clear night; and that is fo very fmall,
that all the ftars in heaven, befides the fun and moon, are not to be com-
pared, in this refpect, with the fmalleft wax-light ; and this little light
too is only to be had when the nights are ferene and unclouded. Can it
then be fuppofed that God made thefe glorious bodies, many of which
are bigger than the whole earth, and move in their orbs as fo many other
worlds in the heavens, merely for atwinkle in the night, and that only .
when the weather permits ? lo! every little daify that grows upon the cold
ground has afecret and infenfible virtue wrapt in its leaves and flowers ;
and have thefe celeltial bodies no zzfluences but what we now .and then
catch with our eyes, as they occafionally fparkle their dim glances upon
us? Yes, they have each of them a fecret power and virtue, wherewith
they act upon all earthly things, as well by day as by night, and in cloudy.
as well as in clear weather, But, as their operations are not performed by
fenfible and palpable means, it follows that they have a fecret and hidden
way of rule, whereby the influences are imperceptibly infufed into every
concern of this life. And, as have the ftars, fo alfo have the fun and
moon, afecret and imperceptible action, peculiar to themfelves ; for itis
not the mere heat that gives life, nor the mere moifture that fuftains it ;
for, if that were the cafe, then might man make living creatures artificially.
It is true that heat may hatch the eggs, but all the ingenuity of man can-
not make an egg that can be hatched; for there is afecret operation of
the fun and moon, independent of heat and moifture, neceffary to the pro-
duction of life, both in vegetive and fenfitive animals. And in thefe
fecret and infenfible operations, befides the /igh¢ that they give, confitts
that rw/e which the fun, moon, and ftars, were ordained to exercife over
all the fons of day and night; and herein are written all thofe ordinances
of the moon and ftars, which are to be a /aw unto mankind, and to the
whole body of nature, fo long as the world + endures. Thus the ftars
have their natural influences, affigned to them in the frame of nature,
from the beginning of the world ; and thefeinfluences are diffufed upon all
earthly things, as far as day and night extend their limits. And this God


* See Jeremiah xxxi. 35. and Gen, i, 18, + Jeremiah xxxi. 35, 36.
im-


OF CAUSED ROL 0 GLYe 27


himfelf confirms, when he fays to Job, ** Canft thou bind the {weet
influences of Pleiades, or loofe the bands of Orion ?—Canft thou bring
forth Mazzaroth im bis feafon ; or canft thou guzde Arcturus with his fons*?”
Whence it is evident that the ftars called the Pleiades have their ordinances,
that is, their /weet influences, which no power of man is able to reftrain,
And the ftars of Orion have their ordinances, and binding faculty, by
fhowers infummer, and froft in winter, bringing fuchan hard and tough
coat of armour upen the ground, as all the contrivances of man are not
able to prevent. Thus Mazzaroth, and + Ar@urus with his fons, havealfo
their ordinances, and the whole hoft of heaven have their courfe, by
which the purpofes of God, and all the events of this life, are uniformly


brought to pats.


To this purpofe it is faid, by Deborah the prophetefs, That rhe fars of
heaven fought in their courfes againft Siferat, not by fword or fpear, nor
by thunder or lightning ; but by thofe fatal and malevolent zzfuences,
wherewith Sifera and his hoft were marked from their cradle, and drawn
together, by the operations of tzme and chance, to partake in one common
deftruétion in the fame day. And to this effect the Almighty difcourfes
with Job, concerning the ¢reafures of the fnow and hail, which he bas bid
againft the time of trouble, and the day of war and § battle. Now what can
we fuppofe the meaning of this Azding to be, but the order of thofe me-
teors, fo curioufly lodged within the arms of the ftars, and withheld by
their influences, that they may fall by due courfe of nature, at fach exa&
periods, as to effect the punifhment of the wicked, and of God’s declared
enemies, fuch as was Sifera, at the precife time when their abominations
call forth the judgments of an injured andincenfed Deity? And after the
fame manner the light and heat, the wind and rain, the thunder and
lightning, the froft and dew, are all of them fo admirably contrived in
the pofition of the heavens, that they come to pafs in their due and ap-
pointed feafons, and make the gra/s to grow even in the wilderne/s, where no
man || dwells. Now it muft be obvious to the meaneft underftanding,
that, if thefe things were regulated by a virtue immediately iffuing from
the bofom of the Deity, then would the light and heat, the wind and
rain, and all the reft of them, fall only where men and beafts dwell, who
may fee and enjoy the bleffings of them, and adore and glorify Him who
fends them ; but, fince they fall equally where neither man nor living
creature is to be found, it follows, that they fall by virtue of means, and
that in acontinued courfe, wherever thofe means lead them, making the


* Job xxxviii. 31, 32, 33.—t+ See Argol. Aftr. ante Ephem. lib. ii. cap. 8. Stelle tempel-
tuofe funt Orion, Aréturus, &c. pluriofe Pleiades. —t Judges vy. 20.—§ Job xxxviii. 22, 23,
24, 25, &c.—|| Job xxxvill. 26, 27.

earth


-


28 AN’ PUY LeO S(T RCALT 1 @ N


earth fertile and produCtive where eaters are not be found as wellas where
they are.


Thus far both Scripture and Reafon unite, in confirming our belief of
the ftarry influence ; but, there are fo many other proofs of it, in the or-
dinary productions of nature, that it would be highly unpardonable were
I to pafs them over in filence. The loadftone affords us one very ftriking
example, by its attraétive and expulfive faculty, and by the magnetic vire
tue it has a power of communicating to other diftin& bodies. Thus we
fee a needle, only touched with the loadftone, and placed in the compafs,
will con{tantly point towards the north pole, and, though it be ever fo
far diftant, or though rocks and mountains, or even the earth’s body, in-
tervene, yet it retains this directive property in fo extraordinary a degree,
that it will continue precifely in the fame dire€tion, unlefs violence be
ufed to prevent it ; and, even after it has been removed by force, it will of
itfelf return to its former fituation, without the leaft fenfible difference,
The properties of the loadftone in many other refpects are fo very inex-
plicable, that the experiments of our moft celebrated modern mathema-
ticians have not been able to afford us a fatisfactory definition of them,
This however is certain, that it could not poffibly imbibe thefe miracue

lous properties without the aid of fome celeftial matter, which is com~
municated to it by the influence of the pole-ftar, or fome other of the
heavenly bodies within the polar circles, from whence it is manifeft the
loadftone receives thefe fecret and admirable qualities. Another afto-
nifhing effect of this influence may be obferved in the natural produce
tion of life and motion ; how it ftarts up and grows, and continues in the
lap of heat and moifture, proportionably conjoined, and perfect in all its
parts, beyond the utmoft of our comprehenfion whence it comes, or
which way it is maintained, unlefs by the operation of this fecret and ins
vifible influence. And, if this be denied, J would with to afk, Whence
the rofe, furrounded by ill-feented weeds and thiftles, derives its fragrant
fmell ? or how the plantane, by the path-way fide, acquires its admirable
virtue of healing fores ? or which way the lily, ftanding up to its middle
inmudand mire, receives its coat of many colours, fo beautifully wrought,
as many times we fee it is ? or how a grain of wheat, thrown into the
cold earth, putrifies and * dies, and then farts up into new life, and mul-
tiplies into an ear of thirty or forty grains for one? Or tell me how the
matter in an ege, by the fitting of the hen, is in a few weeks animated,
and converted into a chicken, that will eat, and walk, and chirp the mo-
ment it emerges from the fhell ? Or by what means the feed in the womb,
without any art, or dkill, or knowledge of the mother, coagulates, and


* St, John xii, 24, s
2 turns


OF ASTROLOGY. 39


turns into flefh and blood, receives life, and is fo admirably formed into
a perfect. child, that learns to cry, and fpeak, and call ? You will fay,
perhaps, That this is the immediate workmanfhip and effect of God.
But this we already know; the only queftion is, how he does it ; whe-
ther by means, or without? If wzthout means, then every child that is
born, and every feed that grows out of the ground, mutt of neceflity come
to pafs by a new creation ; for to bring things into exiftence without
means, is the fame as to produce them without matter; and requires no
more but for the Almighty to fay, Let there be men, or, Let there be
leaves and flowers; and, as the Word fays, they come to pafs. But we
are certain there never was more than one creation, which was at the be-
ginning of the world, and ever fince that time all things have come to
pafs by aregular courfe of nature ; and hence it follows that there muft
be a natural and efficient means for the production of all things. And,
if fo, then mutt thefe things come to pafs by an earthly means alone, or
elfe by the aid affiftance of fome celeftial influence. But by an earthly
means alone, it is evident, they cannot come to pafs; for we know ex-
perimentally, that neither fire, earth, air, or water, can of themfelves in-
fufe into the rofe its grateful and fragrant {mell ; it muft therefore pro-
ceed from the agency of fome /piritual or material fubftance, far fuperior
in efficacy and virtue to any earthly element. If it proceeds.from a fpi-
ritual fubftance, it is effected either by the angels, or by the foul of the
world. But by the angels we know it cannot be; for they have their pe-
culiar offices allotted them in another way ; and, though they are fubjects
of the world, yet are they no part of the great frame of nature, from
whence all things in their order are formed. And, if it be effeCted by the
foul of the world, then certainly muft there be fuch a foul fomewhere ex-
ifting, which at prefent is a matter in difpute among the learned ; and this ;
foul muft have a {pecial feat in the world, worthy of itfelf, from whencei:
may inform and actuate every minute particle of thecreation. If this b
* admitted, then it undoubtedly dwells among the celeftial matter, and from .
thence fupplies the earth, through the medium of the heavenly bodies, -
with all that power and virtue, which brings to pa{s that variety of fhape,
colour, {mell, life, and increafe, which we daily fee come to pafs. But .
if this hypothefis be denied, and it is infifted that the earth is, fup-
plied with all her fecret virtues by fome fupernatural mazeria/ {ubftance ; .
then name any one thing befides the heavenly matter, and the ftars of
heaven, that can be fuppofed to form that fubftance, and the argument .
ceafes ; for either way it proves an infiuence and a/trology in the heavens, |
beyond contradiction, and there will remain only one queftion to-be de-
cided, which is, Whether thefe celeftial influences create the fucceflion of
earthly things by an immediate power from God, or whether there exifts
No. 2. F a gene-


40 A NY DLOL WOS 7 iR CAAT 2 ON


a general foul in the world, through the means of which they’come to
pafs in a due order and courfe of mature? Usrum horum mavis accipe; 1 |
contend for no more. ‘In ithe beginning God created the heaven and
the earth; and the earth was without form, and ovoid, and darknefs was
upon the face of the deep, and the fpirit of God moved upon the face of
the waters.” Here, when there was nothing but earth and water, and
darknefs overfpread all, the /pzrit of God maintained that chaotic mafs,
and managed the earth by the water, and the water and darknefs by
himfelf. © But now both the earth and water are under the face of heaven,
and the light is wpon this heaven, and the {pirit of God moveth upon the
face of ‘the heavens 7 that tight; and, ashe actuates the earth and the
waters Jy the heavens, fo doth he attuate the heavens dy dim/fe/f. And
agreeably to this idea {peaks ‘the prophet Hofea, when he fays, God «wall
bear the heavens, and they {hall bear the earth, and the earth the corn and
«ine and oil, and they* “fezreel; wherein hethews us, that, as man lives
by corn and wine, fo they bythe earth, and the earth by the heavens; and,
if fo, then by the heavens is it that the earth receives all its efficacy and
virtue, whereby it brings forth fmell, colour, tafte, and life. Mofes
alfo tells us, that God fhall open his good treafure the heavens, to give rain
unto the land, and to blefs all the4- works of our bands ; whence it ats evi-
dent that there lodges 1n the celeftial influences a faculty of fortunating
civil affairs, as well asof managing natural things; and that the root of
all earthly bleffings is from heaven. \Mofesfays again, that the fun, moon,
and flars, God hath difiributed unto all nations under heaven; and the
Pfalmift, fpeaking of the fun and heavenly bodies, fays, they declare the
glory of God, and fhew forth his handy-work; day and night do continually
tell of them, and their voice is heard im all languages, and their words are
gone into the ends of the § world; by which we learn that the heavens,
and all the ftars therein, are full of fuch virtues as the whole world hath
need of ; and that thefe virtues God hath lodged in the heavens, to be
dealt out for the comfort and happinefs of his creatures upon earth. His
Spirit (faith Job) bath garnifbed the t heavens ; and by the fpirit of bis
mouth was the whole army of heaven made.

The notion, or idea, that there is one general foul actuating the whole
world, as there is one foul informing every man’s body, was not only the
opinion of the Platonifts and ancient philofophers, but alfo of many
learned men in Jater ages: andI muftconfefs, it appears very reafonableto
believe, that the world has fuch a foul. For, were there not one and the
fame general living virtue, comprehending the whole fyftem of nature,


* Hofea ii, 21,22. 4 Deut. xxviii, 12. § Deut. iv.19. Pfal. xix. 4 i
13. Pfal. xxxiii. 16. Beaty San El ea Pts tte ed dO AN


from


G6. TASTTTRE O' L' OLG: YI 41


from the exterior circumference of the heavens to the inmoft center of the
earth, how could the fympathies and antipathies of nature poflibly work
fuch compliances and differences as’ we know they do, at the amazing
diftances we fee them, and without any vifible or imaginable contact;
unlefs fome faculty exifts in the world, that is capable of {uftaining this
invifible correfpondency between one creature and another? Where life
is, thefe things are eafily effected ; as the child in the womb is nourifhed
by the food the mother eats; but in the inanimate part of the creation,
we are ata lofs which way to account for it. Now admitting that there
really is fuch an univerfal foul exifting, yet. is it queftionable whether
this foul he znteMeGtual, or merely vegetive. That there is an intellettual
ower informing the whole world, as the foul does the body, is not to be
’ doubted ; for otherwife the whole frame of nature would be inert and
motionlefs ; but then, if we admit the foul of the world to carry this in-
tellect in its own brain, it will follow, that this foul isa God; for an
intellectual being, filling heaven and earth with its prefence, is an attri-
bute of * God’s. Hence I conclude there is an univerfal foul in the
world, but that it is only vegetive, and not zztelleciual; and that in. this
foul dwells the f{pirit of Almighty God, who filleth the heavens and the
earth with his prefence, and from hence garnifheth the heavens, and
caufeth the precious influences of the fun, moon, and ftars, to be diftri-
buted into all parts of the § world. And thus God rules immediately in
the heavens, but rules the world mediately by the heavens. It is true,
indeed, that God is equally well able to govern and maintain the world
without means, as he-was at firft toconftitute and create the frame of na-
ture ; but fuch is His divine will and pleafure, that he has thought fitto
bring all things to pafs by virtue of means, as ordained from the beginning
of the world. ‘It is a common and true maxim, that:God and nature
have made nothing in vain ; and yet it is as true, that grafs and herbs
grow where no creatures live to eat + them.. Now were the world go-
verned by God’s immediate prefence only, then would the production of
this grafs and herb be a work in vain; becaufe’ God’s word brings
forth all things at pleafure; and, having a power of increafing or dimi-
nifhing its operation in a moment, would certainly not have brough tforth
this fertility in an uninhabited and defolate country. But nature running
her courfe by a conftant and unchangeable decree, has no power to ceate
her work without a miracle ; and therefore, though the grafs may growin
vain, yet nature’s operations are not in vain, fince by one and the fame
caufe it produces vegetation in all parts of the world.


“* See Jer. xxiii. 23, 24,25. -§ As xvii..28. Job xxvi.a3.. Deut. ive tg. + Job xxxviii,


Known


pe AUN YD Desa Ty Ro ALT ee N


Known unto God are all bis works, from the beginning of the* world; and
therefore it would be derogatory tothe attributes of the Deity, not to be-
lieve that the minuteft events of this word were forefeen and provided
for in that moft perfec frame or model of nature, whichas we have al-
ready feen, may be compared to the conftruction of a watch, confifting of
many {mall wheels, regulated by one mafter- wheel, or firft mover, which
being. wound up at the creation, with the line of time, of a feemingly
infinite length, has ever fince been winding off, unto the prefent hour ;
and yet is there {till more line upon the wheel ; but how much remains,
is only in the breaft of the Almighty. And when this line fhall be en-
tirely wound off, then will the frame of nature find its + period, and all
fubordinate wheels will ceafe their motion. But, until that time, there
is allotted in this frame of nature, unto every one that comes into the
world, acertain order or courfe of life, by which he runs through fick-
nefs and health, honour and difhonour, and all the occurrences of life,
from his cradle to the grave. For man is, as it were, alittle world within
himfelf ; and, though heftand but as one wheel in the frame of the great
world, yet within this one there feems many thoufands of wheels, efpe-
_ cially in enterprifing people, which appear to move one within another

almoft ad infinitum, till the thread turned on the outer wheel break, or
elfe be wound off, andthere they make aftop, and dic. All thefe things
God,-who made man at the firft, perfectly knows, and foreknew from
the beginning of the world ; and, by this order of man’s life, he perfectly
knows all the paflages of our lives, and even the moft fecret thoughts of
our hearts, both fleeping and { waking ; and how one thought drives off
and brings on another, and continues fo doing till’ the laft moment of our
life, when our breath fails. Now every man being, as it were, a wheel
of the great world, it will follow that all men move in a certain frame or
wheel above themfelves, by virtue of which the mafter-wheel of every
man’s life is put in motion: and this wheel is fubordinate unto others,
and thefe alfo unto the mafter-wheel of the whole world, which is the
high and mighty wheel of heaven, wherein the fun, moon, and ftars, are
fet, to carry on the great works of nature, unto the end of time. And
hence comes the original of every man’s nativity, and of all natural qua-
lities, paflions, and incidents of our lives, except the motions of our free-
will-and reafon, which may be allured and inclined by the works of na-
ture, but cannot be forced by them. Now above and beyond this great
wheel of nature, there is yet another § wheel, within which the heavens
themfelves are turned ; and herein is that great and hidden line of time,
whereby the whole world, with all its dependencies, is made to hold on
and continue its motion, unto the final end of all things; and this ftu-


* Adis xv. 18. 42 Peteriii. { Johnii. 24,25. § 2 Cor, xii. 2, 3, 4.
1 pendous


OF 2 ASS2T ReOUL-“O'G' Y. 43
pendous wheel is God himfelf, who draws out the line of time, and, fitting
upon the circles of the earth, he firetches out the heavens as acurtain, and
beboldeth all the inhabitants of the world as grafshoppers under bis * feet ;
and hence he difcerns, as it were, with one view, all the world naked
before him, both paft, prefent, and to come.


From what has been advanced, it appears obvious that every occurrence
of our lives, and all the various productions of nature, however ftrange
or incomprehenfible they may appear, are brought to pafs by a regular
and eftablifhed means, decreed by the wifdom of God, at the begin-
ning of the world; and confequently, whatever happens by a contrary
effect, mutt of neceflity be produced by the immediate hand of God, and
conftitutes @ miracle. Such was the cafe when the Almighty made the


fun and moon ftand ftill ; and when, at the prayer of Ifaiah, he reverfed . -


its courfe, and made it retrograde. Such alfo were the works of our Savi-
our, when he raifed the dead, and gave fight tomen born blind. And fuch
was the work of God, when the fea made a lane for men to pafs through
on dry ground; and when the fire had no power to fcorch, nor to burn
thofe who walked in the midft of -it. Thefe miracles, it is true, had
no immediate dependence upon the works of nature; and yet, as God
from the beginning faw the neceflity of them, and the occafion upon
which they would be required, it is reafonable fuppofe he fet down in
his eternal mind the contrivance of thefe miracles, and‘fo ordained them
to keep pace with the works of nature, and to come to pafs at their ap-
pointed feafons, without difturbing or deranging that univerfal frame of
the world, out of which all natural things proceed, and from whence all
the hott of heaven derive their faculty of influencing earthly fubftances.
And that the heavenly bodies poffefs thefe influences, in an infinitely
powerful degree, I believe will not be denied, fince both {cripture and
reafon, as we have now. feen, fubftantially prove them. The ancient
philofophers were unanimous in fub{cribing to this opinion, even with-
out the teftimony of the facred writings ; and many very learned authors,
in later ages, have fupported the fame doétrine. Milton gives us avery
ftriking proof of his belief of the ftarry influence, in the following pal-
fage of his Paradife Loft:
To the blank moon

Her office they prefcrib’d ; to th’ other five,

Their planetary motions and a/pects,

In fextile, {quare, and trine, and Oppofite,

Of noxious efficacy, and when to join

In fynod wndbenign ; and taught the fix’d


* Tfaiah xl. 22, 23, &c. 4 See Jofh. x, 12, 13.—2 Kings xx, 11.—John ix, 6, 7. and Xi. 44) 53+
Exod. xvi. 21, 22.—Dat. iii. 27.


No. 2. G Their


Ad AN ton s @oR AT 1-0 N’


Their influence malignant when to fhow’r ;
Which of them rifing with the fun, or falling,
Should prove tempeftuous, &c.*


The ingenious Mr. Fergufon alfo proves, in a variety of inftances, an
efficiency and influencein the funand moon, though he denies that any fuch
faculty exifts in the fixed ftars. And yet he has fhewn, by very fatisfac-
tory obfervations, that ‘* the fixed ftars are fo many glorious funs, with
fyftems and worlds furrounding them fimilar to our own ;” and that
*¢ the Almighty would not have placed them-at fuch diftances from each
other, unlefs proper objects were near enough to be denefited by their
influences.’ Hence it follows, from his own hypothefis, that the fixed
ftars do each of them poffefs a natural + influence, homogeneal to the fun
and moon. But to what diftance the fixed ftars, or any of the heavenly
bodies, are capable of extending thefe influences, is beyond the power of
the moft enlightened mind to determine; fince the celeftial matter flows
through a boundlefs and unlimited {pace, and operates upon every fub-
ftance that falis within the line of its direction. And now, having made
it apparent, by an union of concurrent teftimonies, that the fun, moon,
and ftars, have their ref{peCtive influences, and that an Aftrology in the
heavens does by confequence exift, it will be proper to confider how far
the ftudy of this noble fcience is compatible with our moral and religi-
cus obligations, and what degree of it is attainable by the human un-
derftanding.


That the ftudy and practice of Aftrology is amoral purfuit becoming
fober and religious men, may be collected from the cuftoms of the an-
cients in all enlightened countries ; as well as from the beft and wifeft of
God’s chofen people. And that our all-wife and beneficent Creator
originally implanted in the frame of nature ameans whereby mankind
may attain to the knowledge of fuch future contingencies as concern their
welfare and happinefs, is in no refpect to be doubted, fince we obferve
in the brute creation, that even the moft inconfiderable creatures upon
the earth are more or lefs endowed with a gift of foreknowledge. Thus -
the induftrious bee, and laborious { ant, lay in their fummer ftore, to
fupply the neceflary wants of an inclement winter, which they /foreknow

. is
pari Paradife Loft, b.x. I. 656. +See Fergufon’s Aftronomy, 6th edit. Sect. 4, 5, 8, 9, 14,
a 1 Cz

‘t Of all the race of reptiles, the ant, the fpider, and the bee, appear to be endowed with
the greateft fhare of fagacity. The wifdom of the ant is confpicuous in forming themfelves
into a kind of. republic, and therein obferving as it were, their own peculiar laws and po-
licies. But the cunning of the fpider feems to exceed that of the moft other infects 3 its various
artifices to enfnare its prey are no lefs. remarkable than its contrivance of acell or retreat
behind its web, where it feafts upon its game in fafety, and conceals the fragments of thofe


careafes it has devoured, without expofing to public: view the leaft remains of its barbarity,
which


OQ hia A Si Te Re OL: Oy Gey >, 4s


‘Is yet to come. The badger, the hedge-hog, and the mole, alfo pro-
vide themfelves a magazine of plants and herbs, which they foreknow will
enable them to lie concealed in their holes, during the hard frofts of
winter, contented with their prifon, which affords them fafety. Their
holes are alfo conftructed with amazing art, and have generally two a-
‘pertures, that, in cafe one is befet by an enemy, they may efcape by the
other. The doublings of the hare, and the tricks of the fox, to efcape
the hounds, are alfo aftonifhing indications of forefight and fagacity.
The feathered race are likewife endowed with a fimilar faculty, and often
foretel an approaching ftorm a confiderable time before it appears, by re-
_ tiring in flocks to their holes and hiding-places for fhelter and protection.
The birds of paflage feem to inherit this gift in a moft remarkable de-
gree; for they aflemble together in prodigious flocks, at an appointed
hour, and take their leave of us before the approach of winter, which
they forefee will deftroy the flies and other infects upon which their own
life depends, as they feed upon nothing elfe. And it is no lefs extraor-
dinary than true, that thefe birds return as early as the fun brings forth
this clafs of infects into new life ; and they have alfo the fagacity to find out
and repoffefs their former nefts and * habitations. ‘The fame provident
Sorecaft, for felf-prefervation and fafety, is even extended to the innume-
rable inhabitants of the immenfe ocean, where we fee the fifhes, prefled
by unceafing hunger, indifcriminately prey upon one another, the large
upon the fmall even of its own f{pecies; whence the fmaller fifth, in re-
gular gradations, when in danger of being devoured, fly for an afylum
to the fhallow waters where they know their enemy cannot of dares not
purfue them. And this purfuit of one {pecies of fith after another, is by
no means confined toa fingle region ; for we find fhoals of them purfu-
ing oneanother, from the vicinity of the pole even down to the equator;
and thus the cod, from the banksof Newfoundland, purfues the whiting,
which flies before it, even to the fouthern fhores of Spain. It is aftoni th-
ing alfothat herrings, which appear to generate towards the north of Scot-
land, regularly make their way, once a year, to the Britifh Channel.
Their voyage is condutted with the utmoft regularity ; and the time of
their departure is fixed from the month of June toAuguft. They always
affemble together before they fet out, and no ftragglers are ever found


which might diftinguifh its place of abode, or create the leaft jealoufy in any infe@, that their
enemy was near. Into what hiftory can we look, to find people whoare governed by laws equal
to what we obferve in the republic of bees? What experience can we defire beyond that we ob-
ferve in the cunning fpider, to teach us to guard againit the artifites of thofe who lay {nares to
catch the thoughtlefs and unwary? Osx what can exceed the indefatigable ant in teaching us lefi-
ons of frugality and induftry ?— Well might the wife man fay tothe flothful and ignorant, Go, thou
fuggard, tothe ant, confider her ways, and be wife.

* This has been difcovered by tying certain marks to their legs, or by cutting off a claw, &c.
before they emigrate. in the eniuing fpring, if you preferve their nefts, you will find the
fame birds will inhabit them, or if you deftroy them they will rebuild in the fame place, or
near it. :


from


46 AN oP Us eT Ro er | GN


from the general + body. It is impoffible to affign any caufe for this
emigration, but it doubtlefsly proceeds from the fame inftinétive im-
pulfe with which all orders of animate nature are more or lefs endued.
Seeing then that the fapreme Being, in his paternal regard for the mi-
nuteft part of his works, has endued the loweft clafs of animals with a
gift of foreknowledge in what immediately concerns their fafety and
welfare; would it not be derogatory to the equal providence of God, to
fuppofe he had not ordained, in an infinitely fuperior degree, a means of
communicating foreknowledge to man, whom he hath gracioufly formed
in his own exprefs image and likenefs, and appointed lord over his vaft
creation ?—A creature whom he hath endowed with a rational foul, ca-
pable of paying him adoration and worfhip ; and with an underftanding
qualified to decypher the golden characters he hath placed in the firma-
ment of heaven, for fgus of thofe hidden events of futurity which are
yet to come? If we give the fcriptures an attentive,gerufal, we fhall
find a variety of paffages to confirm this opinion, both in the old and new
Teftament. And we may gather additional evidence, that the Alniighty
intended we fhould ftudy futurity, from the communications giveh to
Adam in Paradife by the angel Gabriel ; as well as from,the commifflion Mi-
chael the Archangel received from God, to thew him, in a vifion, the
principal events of futurity, from his fall, to the birth, refurreCtion, and
‘afcenfion, of * Chrift. And Ithink Iam warranted to fay, from the
authority of our Saviour’s own words, that there appears only one event
concerning the human race, which the Deity ever propofed to withhold
from their knowledge, and that is, the time of the laft and terrible day
of Judgment. But even of thisawful and fecret event, we are promifed
fome previous intimations, by figns in the fun, moon, } and ftars;
whichare the common fignificators of all inferior tranfaCtions of futurity.
For this reafon.we are told to watch, for no man knoweth the hour when
thefe things fhall come ; therefore, thofe who ftudy the fydereal fcience, by
their watchfulnefs of the heavenly bodies, and their capability of difco-
vering fuch figns in the fun, moon, and ftars, whenever the tremendous
fiat fhall be paft, will be the firft to know that the vifitation of God is
at hand ; whilft thofe who condemn both the fcience and its profeffors,
unprepared by any previous intimation, and folded in the arms of
incautious repofe, will find the fatal hour approach ke a thief in the.


+ See Brookes’s Nat. Hift. 2d, edit. 1zmo. vol. i. p. 25. Introd. vol. ii. p. 168. vol. ili. p. 2, 4.


vol. vi. 3206 .
* See Milton’s Paradife Loft, Books v. vi. vii. viii. xi. and xii. Adam for this purpofe, is faid
to be taken up to the top of anhigh hill, by Michael, who addrefles him in thefe lines:
Adam, afcend
This hill ; let Eve, (for I have drench’d her eyes)
Here fleep below, while thou to forefight wak’tt ;
As once thou fleptft, while fhe to life was form’d.
+ Matt. xxiv. 29, 36.—Mark xiii. 24, 25, 32.—Luke xxi. 25.


night ;


Gk TA oeri Re On IO1GEY: 49


night ; when petrified and motionlefs, in bitter anguith and defpair, they
will too late repent their negligence and incredulity... I would recom-
mend a ferious and attentive perufal of thefe {criptures to every perfon
-who has doubts concerning the doctrine of Aftrology. It is here pointed
out, tothe underftanding of the moft unlettered part of mankind, that
the great and terrible day of the Lord, the day of judgment, will moit
affuredly come. Our Saviour’s difciples enquire of him, When this day
fhall be? He replies, ‘* Of that day and hour knoweth no man, no not
the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only:
Watch, therefore, forin an hour when ye think not fhall thefe things
come; for asin the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah en-
tered the ark; and they knew not, until the flood came and took them
away; fo alfo fhall the coming of the Son of man be. Then {fhall he
fend forth his angels, and fhall gather together his elect from the four
winds, from,.the. uttermoft part of the earth, to the uttermoft part of
heaven ; then fhall two be in a field, the one fhall be taken, and the
ather left. Therefore be ye ready, left, coming, he find you fleeping;
and what I fay to you, I fay unto all, Warcu.” Nowitis clear, from
theabove, that figns of great and direful events, are difcoverable not only
by the celeftial bodies, but alfo by fearful fights in the heavens; by
tremendous earthquakes ; by total eclipfes of the two great luminaries,
which deprive them for atime of the power of giving light ; and by
other extraordinary phenomena, which fhould always beattended towith
reverence and awe. Thefe figns our Saviour informed his difciples
fhould precede the deftruction of Jerufalem; and aftrologers, and other
hiftorians, have borne record of the exact completion of this -prophecy ;
and it muft be felf-evident to every thinking mind, that the laft day
will come to pafs exaétly in the way our Saviour has defcribed it.—
Now if we confider aftrology, what it truly is, a legal and virtuous
ftudy, we may eafily believe the accounts tran{mitted to us by Jofephus
and other hiftorians, concerning its antiquity and divine original. We
have already feen that Adam, previous tohis expulfion from Paradife, was
inftrucied in a foreknowledge of futurity, by the exprefs command of
God, asa means of enlarging his mind, and alleviating his diftrefs, upon
being turned adrift into the wide world. Jofephus, an hiftorian of cha- .
racter and eminence, who quotes the moift ancientauthors of refpectability
for what he afferts, confirms the fame thing, and furtherinformsus, that
Adam, before his death, inftructed his fon Seth in this {cience, who after-
wards engraved therudiments of it upon permanent pillarsof {tone, which
endured through many generations, and were not entirely effaced till fome
time after the deluge. We have it from the fame authority, that the
art was taught by Enos and Noah, who preferved it to the days of Abra-
ham, and he increafed the knowledge of it by divine aids, teaching it to

No. 2. H the


~


- A NY IOLOURMOSITIRGAAT 40° N


the Chaldeans and Egyptians. Jofeph is alfo faid to have patronized and
taught it in Egypt, and is fuppofed by Origen, Diodorus Siculus, and
other ancient hiftorians, to have been the author of an aftrological work,
called, The Aphorifms of Hermes the - Egyptian. Mofes afterwards
taught and profefied it, independent of the gift of prophecy, which al-
ways came by divine infpiration, and confequently was only exercifed
upon certain extraordinary occafions, From Mofes, we are.told, the Pro-
phets and Seers had it; and that it was afterwards particularly taught
among the tribe of Iffachar, who are on that account {tiled in the facred
writings, Men who bad underftanding in the { times, and were expert at re-
folving all queftions concerning futurity; and as this tribe were neither
priefts nor Levites, nor endued with the fpirit of prophecy, it follows
that their waderfianding in the times, and their ability in foretelling future
events, arofe entirely from an acquired knowledge of the figns and influ-
ences of the heavenly bodies. For the famereafon the Perfian aftrologers
were called Mages, or Wile men, who were fkilled in. the times; and the
Chaldeans termed their young ftudents in aftrology, Men killed in wifdom
and cunning § fcience, to learn the learning of the Chaldeans. And after the
Chaldean method of ftudying the {cience of aftrology, Daniel, and Shad-
rach, and Mefech, and Abednego, were initructed by their tutor Melzar,
and became fen times more learnedin all matters of wifdom and underflanding
than all the aftrologers in the realm, in confideration of which they were
elected members of the public * {chools at Babylon, which were founded
for the ftudy of this art; and Daniel was made, by the King’s decree,
Mafter over the Chaldean || aftrologers.


-In the days of Samuel, it appears to have been a common cuftom to go
to the Seers, or men of underftanding inthe times, not only to be infor-
ed concerning future contingencies, but alfo to enquire after loft goods.
To this effect we find Saul and his fervant difcourfing, when they were
fent out to find the ftrayed affes of Kifh, Saul’s father; and, not being able
to find them, the fervant propofes to goand enquire of the Seer, which way .
theafles were gone, and where they may be found, Saul agrees to this, but
atks, What have we to give bim.? we have no bread left, nor have we. any


Sufficient prefent. The fervant replies, I Lave a fourth part of a fhekel of
floer, Iwill give him that. Saul anfwers, Well faid, letus ** go. This


paffage enables us to diftinguifh between the gift of prophecy, for the
purpofes of eftablifhing God’s true religion, and the art of anfwering ho-
rary queftions, and predicting future events, The one was evidently ef-
fecied by fupernatural means, and promulgated to the people without


+ Orig. tom. in Gen. Diod. Sic. lib. i. cap. 2. {1 Chron. xii. 32. § Efth. i. 13. Dan. i. 4.
“* In fome of thefe fchools Abram is faid to have been taught ; and that Belus, the father of
Nimrod, afterwards. built the fchool-houfe were Daniel was inftruéted in this fcience. See Jof.
Ant. lib. i. cap. 8. Diod. Sic. lib, i. cap. 8,
t Dan. i, 4, 5, 17,17, 18, 19, 20, ti. 13. ve 11. ** 1 Sam. ix, 6, 7, 8, 10.
expence ;


OFA S TROL 0 °G6'Y. 49


expence ; whilft the other, by being calculated for the benefit of refpec-
tive individuals, was always accompanied with money or prefents. In
the fame way we find David, when in Keilah, where he heard that Saul
was coming to befiege him, was defirous of knowing the truth, whether
Saul was coming or not; and if he was, Whether the men of Keilah would
be true to bim, or would betray bim. And being informed they would
betray him into the hands of the enemy, who were feeking his life, he
fled into the wildernefs of Ziph, and efcaped the danger that was im-
pending over + him. And in the New Teftament alfo, we have fre-
quent confirmations of the meteorological part of this fcience, from our
- Saviour’s own words, in his converfation with the Pharifees, who were
all verfed in aftrology. He addreffes them to this effect: ‘* When it is
‘* evening, ye fay, it will be fair weather, becaufe the fky is red; and
<* in the morning, it will be foul weather, becaufe-the fky is red and
** lowering. And when acloud arifeth out of the weft, ftraightway ye
‘* fay, A fhower cometh; and it is fo. And when ye fee the fouth-wind
«© blow, ye fay, There will be heat; and fo it comes to pafs. Ye hy-=
** pocrites, ye can difcern the face of the || {ky, but the figns of the times
‘* ye cannot difcern.” And now, if we impartially contemplate the
origin and. antiquity of this fcience, and recollect that the beft and wifeft
men in every age of the world were profeffors of it, we muft admit its
practice to be highly confiftent with all our moral and religious duties.


That the human underftanding is alfo capable of attaining to a very
high degree of knowledge in the hidden woks of futurity, and in the
fecret operations of nature, is likewife to be proved, beyond the power
of contradiction. Indeed the paflages already quoted from the holy
fcriptures, are a fufficient confirmation of it to every difpaffionate reader ;
but as there are fome very extraordinary inftances of this predictive fa-
culty, recorded by different hiftorians, I will juft mention a few of
them, by way of corroborating the evidence already brought in its fup-
port. The Emperor Domitian required the Profeffor Largius Proculus
to calculate his nativity, from the fuppofed time of his birth, which was
done, and delivered into the Emperor’s own nands. Afclatarius, amoitt
famous aftrologer of thofe times, procuring a copy of this nativity, rec-
tified it, and foretold the hour and manner of the Emperor’s death ; which
when Domitian heard, he commanded Afclatarius to be brought before
him, when he affirmed his prediCtions would prove true. Domitian afk-
ed him if he could foretel the manner of his own death? Afclatarius re-
' plied, That he knew he fhould fhortly be torn in pieces by dogs; but, to
confute the aftrologer, the Emperor ordered him to be burntalive, The
cruel fentence was accordingly put in execution ; the body was bound and

+ 1 Sam. xxiii. 10, 11, 12, 13, 4. || See Matt. xvi. 2, 3. Luke xiis 24, 55, 56.


1a


5 A Noo da ST BEA A YOON


laid upon the pile, and the fire kindled j but at that inftant, therearofea
dreadful ftorm.of wind and rain, which. drove the-{peQiators away, and
extinguifhed the fire ; and Afclatarius was afterwards torn in pieces by
dogs, as he had foretold. When Latinus informed the Emperor of this
event, he was greatly mortified, and very melancholy ; and, on the day his
aflaflination had been predicted, he feigned himfelf indifpofed, and locked
himfelf up in his chamber... Stephanus, the captain of his guard, went to
his door, pretending he had received fome important difpatches, which
he wanted to deliver to him ; but, Domitian declining to.admit him tilla
certain hour was paft, Stephanus perfuaded him it was.then much later
than the time fpecified. The Emperor, in confequence, concluding the
danger to have paffed by with the hour, or looking upon the predictionasa
mere fable, feeing no confpiracy or danger about him, opened the door,
upon which Stephanus ftept up to him with a drawn dagger, and {tabbed
him to the heart, in the very hour that had been predicted by the aftro~
loger, on the eighteenth day of September, the month he had ordered to
be called * Germanicus. The fame.writers add, that Apollonius Tyaneus
was at that inftant of time at Ephefus, ftanding in the prefence of the
magiftrates, and in a kind of ecftacy, cried out, O Stephanus, {trike the
tyrant; and after a paufe, added, It is well, thou haft killed him. This art
of rectifying nativities was a difcovery which brought the {cience to very
high perfection, and has enabled its profeffors to be aftonifhingly exact in
predictions of confequence. Thus Lucius Tarutius Firmianus, by the
acts of Romulus’s life, and the time of his death, found that he was born
in the firft year of the fecond Olympiad, the twenty-third day of ‘the
month, about fun-rifing. And hence he difcovered that the building of
Rome was begun when the moon was in Libra, the fun with Mercury, and
Venus in Taurus, Jupiter in Pifces, and Saturn with Mars in + Scorpio,
The Archbifhop of Pifa confulted feveral different profeflors of aftrology
concerning his deftiny, and they all calculated his nativity at different
times, and without any communication with one another ; but they all
foretold him he would be hanged. “It feemed highly incredible at the
time, becaufe he was in fo much honour and power ; but the event juftified
the predictions ; for, in the {edition of Pope Sextius IV. in the fudden
rage and uproar of the people, he was feized and { hanged. Petrus
Leontius, a celebrated phylician and aftrologer of Spoletanum, caft his own
nativity, and foretold that his death would be occafioned by water, and
many years afterwards he was found drowned in a pond, into which he had
fallen the preceding night, by miftaking his § way. Jofephus tells us
he caft the nativities of Vefpafian, and his fon Titus, and predicted that
they would both be Emperors ; and fo it turned out. R. Cervinus
* Vid. Sueton. in Domitian. + Vid. Peucer de Divinat. fect. de Aftrolog. + Vid. Annal.
Florentine § Jovius, Elog. 35...
: 2 calculated


OF LASITIR CO Lo 6 ¥: on


calculated the nativity of his fon Marcellus, and foretold that he fhould
come to great preferment and dignity in the church ; and, his mother
afterwards entreating him to marry one Caffandra Benna, he very refo-~
Tutely declined it, faying, He would not with the bands of matrimony bind
himfelf from that better fortune which the {tars had promifed him if
he continued to live fingle and unmarried, And he was afterwards really
made Pope*. Picus: Mirandula was a fevere writer againft Aftrology,
infomuch that he was termed, Flagellum Aftrologorum ; and, to ftop the
malignity, of his pen, Lucius Bellantius, and two other aftrologers of
eminence, procured the time of his birth, and calculated*his nativity,
which they afterwards fent him, with this prediction inclofed, ‘* That he
would die in the thirty-third year of his age.” ‘This exafperated him fo
much, that he began to write a new tract, with inconceivable afperity,
againft the poor aftrologers, attempting to prove their calculations a mere
bubble, and themfelves a fet of impoftors. But, when the fatal ap-
pointed hour arrived, he faw the folly of his own conceits; recanted his
opinion, and fealed by his death a ftanding memorial of the inerrability
and truth of this fcience. Many other extraordinary circumftances of
the kind might be related from different authors, were it not already
fufficiently obvious that the intellectual faculties of man, when culti-
vated by ftudy, and improved by obfervation and experience, are capable
of attaining avery extenfive degree of knowledge and {kill in this art.
We will therefore difinifs this argument, and endeavour to explain what
the fubjects are that the fcience of Aftrology naturally comprehends.


Aftrology is compounded of eon, flar, and rofec difcourfe, and literally
implies, Ihe doctrine of the flars ; teaching how to judge of their effects,
and fecret influences, and to foretel future events, by the order of their
different afpects, qualities, and pofitions ; and alfo how to difcover their
energy and force upon earthly fubftances, in the wonderful and abftrafe
operations of the nature. It comprehends the moft excellent part of that
noble fcience called Phyfiology, ornatural Philofophy, which is the doc-
trine of natural bodies in the conftruction of the works of nature. The
body natural may be conceived either generally, as one perfect and entire
body ; or fpecially, as it may be divided into two, or fubdivided into»
many thoufand component parts. This grand and perfect body of na-
ture is called the World, or-the whole world, which is generally confis
dered as making’ but one entire body ; but this general body admits of
many fpecial divifions and fubdivifions; and is firft divided into two


* Vid, Thuan. 1. 15. It is remarkable that this predi€tion was printed at Venice, and pub-
lifhed by Curtius Trojanus, in a book of nativities written by Gauricus, upwards of three
ears before Marcellus Cervinus was proclaimed Pope. And this is that Pope, who, when the
eCturer, as the cuftom was, read a certain portion of the writings of the Fathers at dinner-
time, faid, “ He could not conceive how thofe who held fo high a place could provide


for their own falvation.’’
No. 3. 7 I branches,


$2 ACN» [DeLay SiTeR) Ad Wie N


branches, making one body natural called Celeftial, and another called
‘Terreftial; and hence arife two diftiné&t {ciences, the one termed Ura-.
nology, and the other Geology.


Geology is a feience treating of the natural body called the earth, and
{peaks either generally of the whole earth, or {pecially of the parts, or fome
particular part, thereof; and is either fpeculative, or practical. Specu-
‘lative Geology -confifts in the fimple inveftigation of the.earth, either
in whole, or in part, and of the principles and affections thereof ; and to
this purpofe it treats either of the common being of any earthly thing,
merely as it is a being abftraét from all matter, whether intelligible, or
ienfible ; and as it operates thus, it is termed Metaphyfical-or Preter-
natural Philofophy. But, if it difcourfes of a movable being in matter,
and that as it is perfectly material, it is then called Natural Philofophy.
Or, if it {peaks of things converfant in matter intelligible, but not fen-
fible, as they are the abftracts of matter, it is named Mathematical or
-Abftraét Philofophy. Of this fort of f{cience the fubje@ is Quantity,
and is either continued, or difcrete. If .of continued quantity, it is
called Geometry, or its fubordinate, Perfpective; but if the quantity be
difcrete, it is then termed Arithmetic, .or its fubordinate, Mufic, Na-
tural Philofophy properly fo called, treats of terreftrial bodies, either
fimple or mixed. The fimple bodies confift of the four elements,
called Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, which occupy all places, from the
utmoft and inferior bodies of :the heavenly matter unto the inmoft cen-
tre of the earth; fo that vacuum no where exifts under the cope of
heaven. The mixed -bodies are compounded of thefe four elements, and
are divided into animate and inanimate bodies. And all animate bodies
are endued either with a vegetive, fenfitive, or rational, faculty. Now,
while we ftudy the doctrine of this earthly body natural, the {ciences of
Geography, Hiftory, and Chronology, naturally flow from it: the firft
of which defcribes the fituation and boundaries of the different parts of
the earth; the fecond relates the hiftory of whatever has been feen or
tranfacted upon it; and the third computes and adjufts all the different
gras and portions of time, from the creation of the world to the pre-
fent‘hour. And fubordinate to thefe are Topography, or a defcription of
particular places, and Chronologies of certain diftinét periods of time.
Practical Geology is that part of natural Philofophy which confifts in
Speculation, for the profit and advantage of mankind; and leaves a track
or fruit of its operation remaining, when the a@ itfelf is paft and gone.
And this is a fort of ftudy claffled under the denomination of Art, rather
than of Science. The fubject of it muft be cither Man himfelf, or fome
fubordinate fubftance. If Man be the fubje@ of invettigation, then the
object will be to teach him precepts of morality ; and this we call


Ethical


@


OIF Aro TR. O L.O Gry: » 53


Ethical Philofophy ; or elfe to inftruct him in the Artof Reafoning, called
Logical Philofophy ; or in the Art of Speaking, which we term Gram-
matical or Rhetorical Philofophy. But, if the Speculation be upon any
fubordinate fubftance, then the Earth itfelf, or the productions of it,
become the fubject of inveftigation. If it be the Earth, then the bufi-
nef{s we contemplate, is toimprove and cultivate the foil, for the en-
creafe of ufeful vegetation, which is called Agriculture ; but, if it be the
produtions of the earth, then the ftudy muft be fo to prepare and manu-
faGture them, as to render them the effentials of Health, Wealth, Food,
or Cloathing ; or whatever elfe is conductive to the comforts or necefli-
ties of mankind. And thefe are-feverally diftinguifhed by as many fig-
nificant Terms as there are occupations or employments, by the inven-
tion and ufe of which all thefe things are produced.

Uranology is a Science which treats of the natural body of Heaven»
after the fame manner as Geology defcribes that of the Earth ; and f{peak$
either generally, of the whole Heaven ; or fpecially, of fome particulat
or diftinct part of it. And, as Uranology is a part of Phyfiology, fo has
it the fame principles, whether internal, as Matter and Form ; or ex-
ternal, as the caufes Efficient and Final; and thefe are Principles of their
own nature, as Chance and Fortune are Principles by accident. It hath
alfo affeCtions internal, as Motion and Reft, and Finity and Infinity s
and the fame external, as Time and Place. Uranology is alfo either
{peculative or practical. Speculative Uranology confifts in the fimple
knowledge of the Heavens, either in whole or in part, and of their
various Principles and Affections ; and to this purpofe it {peaks of thefe
things either mathematically or naturally. Mathematically, it treats
of Aftronomy, or Uranometry, which is a fcience that points out the
magnitude, meafure, and motion, of the heavens, and of the ftars there-
in; and naturally, it defines the qualities, motions, afpects, and opera-
tions, of the heavenly Bodies, and all their apparent and infenfible in-
fluences. Practical Uranology is that fublime Art, which, being once
perfectly known and rightly underftood, enables a man, by his {kill in
the affections of the Heavens and heavenly Bodies, to unbofom the re-
moteft tranfactions of futurity, and to trace the myfterious and moft
obf{cure operations of Nature to their fource ; whence he defines the in-
nate principles and virtues of all animal, vegetable, and mineral, fub-
{tances, and points their refpective ufes, for the lafting profit and ad-
vantage of mankind. |


Having thus fhewn what the word Aftrology imports, and arranged its
component parts by the rules of Science, it will be feen that its colla-
teral branches are fo extenfive and multitudinous, that moft men, of any

3 learning


54. AN DM La s*T RA THD N


learning or ingenuity at all, are fome way or other converfant in aftro-
logy, without appearing to know it. But the perverfenefs of human
nature is in this inftance moft ftrikingly vifible, fince it leads mankind
to a choice of inferior fpeculations, whilft they utterly neglect an invefti-
gation of thofe curious, indifcernible, infenfible, and impalpable, tracks
of nature, which open to a field of unbounded information, calculated to
reform the mind, and enlarge the underftanding ; and to extirpate the
feeds of atheifm, by leading to the moft fublime and heavenly contem-
plations of a Supreme Being. The common objeciions againft engaging
in this elevated ftudy are equally abfurd and ridiculous ; but they pro-
ceed only from thofe men who wilfully neglect, or obftinately perfift in
a difbelief of, Nature’s fecret and imperceptible works.; and yet her ope-
rations are fo manifeft, and fo often confirmed by fatal experience, that
it is aftonifhing mankind are not more frequently awakened by them.
Thus we fee a man inftantaneoufly taken off, by a violent and feverifh
diftemper, and yet no one can poflibly conceive how or from what caufe
it proceeds; nor canthe mcf able phyfician, by any depth of medical fkill,
point out its genuine caufe, fo as to fhew that another man under the
fame fymptoms fhall be feized with juft fuch another diforder. But
look into the fick man’s nativity, by the rules of Aftrology, and there
you will moft apparently fee the root and caufe of his affliction : and
hence we demonttrably prove, that it was not fo much the effect of
catching cold, or of any accident, which brought on the malady, but
the evil influence of fome malignant afpect, that unperceived and unfuf-
pecied gave the fatal blow, while a cold, or fome trifling accident, were
but mere inftruments ; for another man fhall have a worfe cold, and
{carcely find himfelf the leaft feverifh, or expofed to danger.


Thus we find Aftrology comprehendsevery operation that proceeds out
of the mafter-wheel or frame of Nature, and furnifhes us with a know-
ledge of the occult virtues of all earthly fubftances, and of the nature and
end of every particle of God’s Creation ; and, to minds that can relifh
enjoyments fuperior to thofe of fenfe, nothing can furnifh more noble
and exalted pleafures than a contemplation and ftudy of thefe immenfe
works ; while nothing furely can give greater proots of an abje@ and
contracted mind, than to be daily converfant with, and yet ftupidly in-
fenfible of, the amazing miracles of nature. The fun, moon, and ftars,
were not made by a wife and beneficent Creator, that the wonders of
them fhould open themfelves to eyes that fee not, or difplay their in-
fluences unregarded to the incurious inhabitants of the earth. It was in-
deed principally forthe pleafure of Him by whom all things exift, that
they are and were created; who rejoiceth in bis works—in {urveying that
ftructure which omnipotence alone could raife; but they are likewife de-

figned


4 OPr A Sy TPR: O; LOG Y. 55


figned to communicate wifdom and happinefs, and intelle¢tual and mo-
ral improvement, to mankind. And to him, who is not barely fatisfied
with anexternal admiration of things, they will fuggeft fuch refle@tions
~~ as will maké! him both’ wifer and better ;. for, at the fame time that they
feaft his imagination, they will enlarge his underftanding, and meliorate his
heartiic Whatever part of the works of naturewe caft oureyes upon, we fhall
find: imprinted: therein’ ample’ lefons of inftruction’ and improvement.
Would we comtemplate the inexpreflible greatnefs and majefty of God, let
us but look up and furvey-the heavens, which are {pread overus likea cur-
tain; they declare’the glory of God, and fhew.farth bis handy work—they vifi-
bly thew: it forth'to the rudeand illiterate; but the mind whichis fraught
with thiscomprehenfive ftudy may for ever expand itfelf in the immenfity
ofthe-profpect. ©» Even the‘irrational and inanimate part of the creation
are held forth by: the wifdom of God to direct the Beings of Reafon in
the way that they. fhould go’; and our Saviour in his parables defcends to
the: lifelefs emblems of feed fown, of the fig-tree, and of a fingle grain
of muftard-feed, toenlighten the underftanding of mankind. Is it not then
the duty of every rational creature to improve by this divine example, and,
by a ftudy of that excellent part of Aftrology called natural philofophy,
to increafe our imperfect knowledge in the fubjects of creation? Such
knowledge as this lies open even to the way-faring man ; it grows in every
field, and meets us‘in all our paths; and, as-it is moft important to be
well.underftood' by the reader before'any material progrefs can be made
in the Aftrology of the heavens, I‘fhall conclude thefe obfervations with
a {hort introduction to the ftudy of Nature, :


0085: | ae A Summary


“


66 AN’: POE W StTi re A TT'O N


A Summary VLEW of the WO RKS of CRE ATIO N, in the
CONSTRUCTION of NATURE.


ATURE is that which ‘God has ordained: Emprefs; over all: the
Works of his Creation, and-over every part of the: Celeftial and
Terreftrial World. ‘This world comprehends both the Heaven and
the Earth, and is compounded of three feparate and diftincy parts,: which:
are alfo called Worlds, naniely, an Elementary world, which is the low-:
eft in dignity; a Celeftial world, which is next above the: elementary ;.
and an Etherial world, which is the higheft of all ; and thefe three lefs.
worlds, make the one entire Great World. In the order of Nature, the:
all-wife and fupreme Being has ordained that every inferior fhould be:
governed by its fuperior; and by this eternal decree, the Intellectual.
world actuates and governs the Celeftial, which confifts of the fun,:
moon, and ftars, and all the hoit of heaven; and the Celeftial world:
actuates and governs the Elementary world, and.-all elementary bodies,
whether animal, mineral, or vegetable.


‘Phe Elementary world is compofed of the four elements, Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water, of which all things peculiar to the elementary world |
are generated; but thefe elements, in-the {tate wecommonly find them, are
not pure, butintermixed with each other; and they often change one into
the other by nature, as fire turns into fmoke, and fmoke into air, and air
into water, &c. Each of thefe elements has likewife two fpecific qua-
lities, viz. fire is hot and dry, water is cold and moift, air fs hot and
moift, and the earth is cold'and dry ; fo that fire is inimical to water,
and air to earth. Thefe elements alfo poffefs three effential proper-
ties inherent in themfelves, viz. air has motion, thinnefs, and darknefs;
fire has motion, brightnefs, and thinnefs ; water has motion, darknefs,
and thicknefs; and earth has darknefs, thicknefs, and quictnefs ; fo that
fire is twice more thin than air, thrice more moveable, and four times
more bright ; air is twice more bright, three times more thin, and four -
times more moveable, than water ; water is twice more bright, thrice
more thin, and four times more moveable, than earth ; as therefore fire is
to air, fo is air to water, and water to earth; and vice ver/a, as earth isto
water, fo is water to air, and air to fire. Three of thefe elements have
motion, and are active ; but the earth is fixed and paflive, aad only fup-
plies matter for the other elements to act upon ; for as nothing can be
produced unlefs matter be fubminiftered, fo of neceffity one element
mutt fubminifter. that matter for the operation of the others: and no
influence could be difpenfed by the heavens, unleis there were elementary


bodies


Qi FR AS- TER. O-L. 0. GiY.): 57


bodies to: receive their influence ; therefore every active principle muft of
neceflity be in motion, and every paflive principle muft be at reft. And
accordingly, as the active elements find the earth that they act upon
to be pure, or impure, ‘fo will the work be that is produced. ‘The
earth ‘can bring forth nothing of itfelf; but is the womb or matrix into
which ':the: other: elements diftil or project their feminal virtues ; and in
proportion:as it 1s:impregnated by their foree and energy, it brings forth,
atcording :to the due courfe of nature. ‘The Earth alfo receives the ce-
leftial:rays and’influences: of all the heavenly bodies, as ordained by God,
to, be the object, fubject, and:receptacle of them ; whereby it not only
brings:forth what is intendedito be produced, but alfo multiplies what.
it receives, and feparates the good from the bad, and the pure from the.
impures! It likewife contains the feeds or feminal. virtues of all elemen-
tary bodies, and: hath. a triplicity in itfelf, viz. mineral, animal, and ve-:
getive.!\Itris:thescommon: fountain or mother from whence all things
{pring, whofe fruitfulnefs is-produced by the three-fold operation of fire,.
air, cand water. “And, as thefe elementary bodies poffefs moft extraordi-:
nary qualities, it -will:be proper to confider each of them diftin@ly, and
to explain their feveral properties more at large.


Fire, the firft ative element, is an elaftic body, compofed of infinite-
ly {mall particles, {carcely, if at all, adhering to each other, and a body in.
motion. It is in effeét, the univerfal inftrument of all the motion and.
action in the univerie; without fire, all bodies would become immove-
able, as in a fevere winter we actually fee our fluids become folid for want
of it. Without fire aman would harden into a ftatue, and the very air
would cohere into a firm rigid mafs. Fire then is the fole caufe of all.
mutation or change; . for all mutation is by motion, and all motion by
fire. Upon the abfence of only a certain degree of fire, all oils, fats,
waters, wines, ales, fpirits of wine, vegetables, and animals, become,
hard, rigid, and inert; and the lefs the degree of fire, the fooner is this
induration made. Hence, if there were the greateft degree of cold, and.
all fire was abfolutely taken away, all nature would grow into one con-
crete body, folid asgold, and hard as diamond;. but upon the re-ap-
plication of fire, it would recover its former mobility. So that upon.
this one element of fire, depends all fluidity of humours and juices ;. alfo
all vegetation, putrefaction,. fermentation, animal heat, and a thoufand
other things. Fire is:in itfelf but one, though it centers in divers places.
It centers in the heavens, and is boundlefs, where it guards and pre-
ferves nature, and.enlivens all: the creation, giving life, light, and mo-
tion, to all creatures, and ftirs them up to fecundity and fruitfulnefs. It
centers alfo in the earth, where it generates metals, minerals, and {tones ;


and, by joining itfelf with the beams of the celeftial fun and moon, pro-
; duces


58 AN ILLUS RAT HON


duces veretation’ upon’ the furface ofthe earthin! Itdecafions: that Heat!
we fometimes obferve in {prings and fountains; and invpartsi a principle:
of its own into whatever it produces, fo that whatioevde retains» life: re+:
tains it by virtue of its own inclofed heat ;vand, whenever this iscexhauft-)
-cd ‘or extihguithed,/it perithes and dies.’ And)as water! purgeth;! clean {éth,:
and diffolveth, all things that/are*not fixed, fo fire purgeth and pérfectethy
all things that are’ fixed | and,as' water conjoins allithings that are dife)
folved, fo fire feparates all things that are conjoined; it caufes all. feeds to:
grow and ripen; and, when they are ripe, it expels them by the fperm!
‘into divers places of the earth ; and, jas the:fituation and’ temperature of,
thefe’ places are, whether hot or cold, moift-or:dry, pure or impure, foi
wil] the diverfity of things be both in the bowels, and:upon the furface of:
the earth. But, amongft all the wonderfal properties of fire, there are:
none more extraordinary than this; That, though it is the prineipab caufe:
of almoft all the fenfible effets that continually fall under our obferva-
tion, yet it is in itfelf of fo infinitely’a fubtle nature, that it bofiles or des
feabs ok Olt fagacious ‘enquiries, nor ever! comes within: the cogni«
zance of our fenfes.


Fire may be divided into three kinds or {pecies, viz. celeftial, fubterra-
neous, and culinary. ~ Celeftial fire is that which is peculiar to the celeftial
regions, where it exifts in the greateft purity and perfection, unmixed
with fmoke, or any of ‘that grofs, feculent, or terreftial matter, found in’
culinary and fubterranean fire ; but allowing for this difference, the effects
of the celeftial fire appear to be the fame as thofe-of the culinary. © Subs
terraneous fire is that which manifefts itfelf in fiery eruptions of the earth,
volcanoes, or burning mountains, and is always found in the morecentral
parts of the earth, and often in mines and coal-pits. : “Culinary fire is that
which we' employ 'i in all chemical operations, and in the common occafions
of life. To afcertain the force and power of fire, the learned: Boerhaave
made innumerable curious experiments, which enabled him to divide it
into fix degrees. ‘Ihe firft degree is that by which nature performs the
office of vegetation in plants, and by which chemiftry imitates and does

the like. ‘This commences from the higheft degree of cold, which im
Fahrenheit’s thermometer is denoted by one, and ends-at eighty degrees,
fince in this. whole interval vegetables of one kind or other give indication
of life and growth; fo that if all plants be examined by the degrees of:
heat contained within thefe limits, we fhall find all of them come to:ma-=
turity. in one or other of thefe intermediate degrees. This heat is fuited
to extracting the native f{pirits of odoriferous vegetables with oils, as’ that
of rofes, jeflamin, and the like. Thus the fragrant {cent of rofes may be
communicated to oil, by putting the inodorous and infipid oil of olives ina
tall clean chemical glals, and digefting it in a heat of fifty-fix degrees,

with


GH WS TR OL 0G, Y: 59


with the moft fragrant rofes, gathered juft'as they are opening in a morn-
ing; the application of a fimilar degree of heat would alfo impregnate
alcohol with the pureft fpirit of faffron. The fecond degree of fire may
-be accounted that of the human body in.a healthy fate. This degree is
always greater than that of the ambient air, and may be fuppofed to
commence at the goth degree of the thermometer, and end about the
g4th. Within this compafs animals may live and fubfift, that is, if their
juices. be of any degree of heat within thefe bounds. ‘The eggs of infects
fubfift unhurt during: hard winters, and hatch in the fucceeding fpring.
Fithes, both’of the fea and of rivers, live in water which is only thirty-
four degrees warm; and fifhes that have lungs, and all ref{piring animals,
in a ftate of health, communicate to their humours a warmth of ninety-two
degrees ; and therefore the utmoft limits of this degree are fixed at thirty-
three and ninety-four. Within the compafs of this heat are included the
vital actions of animals; the fermentation of vegetables, and the putre-~
faction both of -vegetables and animals; and likewife the generation,
breeding, hatching, birth; and nutrition, of animals. ‘his degree is alfo
employed by chemitts to prepare elixirs, volatile alkaline falts, and tinc-
tures. The third degree of fire is that which extends from ninety-four
degrees of the thermometer to 212; at which laft, water ufually boils.
This degree is required in the diftillation of fimple and compound wa-
ters, the effential oils of vegetables; and will coagulate or confolidate the
ferum, blood, and other animal. juices, and. confequently deftroy life.
The fourth degree of heat may by reckoned from the degree 212 to 600;
within which limits all oils, faline lixivia, mercury, and oil of vitriol, are
diftilled ; lead and tin will alfo melt and mix together. The oils, falts,
and faponaceous juices, of animals and vegetables, are rendered volatile and
acrid, and become more or lefs alcalefcent; their folid parts are calcined,
and lofe their diftinguifhing qualities and proper virtues ; and with this
degree of fire, foflil fulphur and fal armoniac are fublimed. ‘The fifth
degree is that wherein the other metals melt, and which commences from
fix hundred degrees of the thermometer, and ends where iron is held ina
{tate of fufion. In this degree moft bodies are deftroyed; but glafs, gold,
filver, copper, and iron, remain long unchanged ; all other fixed bodies.
grow red-hot in this degree, and all the unvitrifiable ftones are calcined.
‘The fixth and higheft degree of fire hitherto known, is that of the burn-
ing lens, or fpeculum, by M. Villette, T{chirnhaufen, Buffon, and others.
The focus of thefe lenfes will even volatilize what is called the metalline
or mercurial part of. gold, and vitrify the more terreftrial. , The utmoft
degree of fire is the vitrification of fixed bodies, which the ancient magi,
or the aftrologers of the eaft, difcovered; and they predicted the final
end of the world by fire, and its mutation into tran{parent glafs.


Air is the next active element that engages our attention, and it is di-
vided into proper or elementary, and common or beterogenecus. Elementary
No. 3. L alr,


60 AN UL bE U's TR AT PON:


air, properly fo called, is a fubtile, homogencous, elaftic, matter ; the bafis

or fundamental ingredient of common air, and that which gives it the

denomnation. It likewife enters into the compofition of moft or perhaps

all bodies, and exifts in them under a folid from, deprived of its elaf-

ticity, and moft of its diftinguifhing properties, and ferving as the ce-

ment, and univerfal bond, of nature; but capable, by certain procefles,

of béing difengaged from them, recovering its elafticity, and refembling

the air of our atmofphere. ‘The peculiar nature of this aerial matter we.
know but little of; what authors have advanced concerning it being

chiefly conjectural. We have no way of altogether feparating it from the

other matter, with which, in its pureft ftate, it is more or lefs combined,

and confequently no way of afcertaining, with fatisfactory evidence, its

peculiar properties, abftractedly from thofe of other bodies. Philofophers

both ancient and modern maintain, with great plaufibility, thatitis the fame!
with the pure ether, or that fine, fluid, active, matter, diffufed through the
whole expanfe of the celeftial regions, and of the interior heavens ; and

is fuppofed to be a body fu generis, ingenerable, incorruptible, immuta-

ble, prefent in all places and in all bodies. .


Common or heterogeneous air is a coalition of corpufcles of various
kinds, which together conftitute one common mafs, wherein we live and
move, and which we are continually receiving and expelling by refpiration.
The whole aflemblage of this makes what we call the atmo/phere; and
where this air or atmofphere ends, there the pure ether is fuppofed to
commence, which is diftinguifhed from air, by its not making any (fenfi-
ble refraction of the rays of light, as air does. This common air, fays
the ingenious Mr. Boyle, is the moft heterogeneous body in the univerfe ;
and Boerhaave fhews it to be an univerfal chaos, or co//uvies, of all kinds

of created bodies. Befide the matter of light or fire, which continually
_ Hows into it from the heavenly bodies, and probably the magnetic effluvia
of the earth, whatever fire can volatilize, is found in the air. Hence the
whole foffil kingdom muft be found in it; for all of that tribe, as falts,
{ulphurs, ftones, and metals, are convertible into fume, and thus capable
of being rendered part of the air. Gold itfelf, the moft fixed of all na-
tural bodies, is found to adhere clofe to the fulphur in mines ; and thus to
be raifed along with it. Sulphurs alfo make a confiderable ingredient of
the air, on account of the many volcanoes, grottos, caverns, and other .
fpiracles, chiefly affording that mineral, difperfed through the globe. All
parts of the animal kingdom muft alfo be in the air; for, befide the co-
pious effluvia continually emitted from their bodies, by the’vital heat, in
the ordinary procefs of perfpiration, by means of which an animal, in the
courfe of its duration, impregnates the air with many times the quantity
of its own body; we find that any animal when dead, being expofed to
the air, isin a certain time wholly incorporated with it. This fact is

proved


OF TAS TT. F- OLD Oe XY. 64


proved in a very ftriking manner, by an extraordinary effect produced by

thofe dead bodies, after they became filled with air, which were unfor-

tunately drowned in the Royal George at Spithead, on the 2gth of
Auguft, 1782. This thip was heeled on her fide for the purpofe of
fome repair, when the water rufhed into her lower port-holes, and funk

her almoft inftantaneoufly. »She went down in fourteen fathom water,

and fell upon her fide, as was evident from her.top-mafts, which remain-

ed above the water, in an inclined direction. A confiderable time after

this fatal accident, fhe fuddenly righted, and her mafts became nearly

perpendicular. Noone couldaccount for this extraordinary circumftance,

till an anonymous writer publithed the following ingenious and corre&

folution of it:—‘* By the mufter-roll of this unfortunate fhip, it appears

that 495 fouls perifhed between her decks ; and, as the bodies had no

way to efcape, they of courfe remained in that fituation. Now all bodies
in aftate of putrefaction ferment, and this fermentation generates large

quantities of air, fo that a putrifying carcafe, inflated by the generation

of air, expands itfelf toa fize far exceeding its original bulk, and becomes
lighter than water in a very highdegree ; and will confequently be prefled
upwards towards the furface with a power equal the weight of a quantity
of water adequate in bulk to the inflated carcafe ; and would rife imme-
diately to the furface in a perpendicular line, if not obftructed in its paf--
fage. Now it is obvious that the 495 carcafes, which lay between the
decks until fermestation and putrefation commenced, would rife as foon
as the generated air rendered them fpecifically lighter than fea-water : and,

as fermentation increafed their bulk, they would, by their expanfion, re-
moved a quantity of water from between the decks, on the loweft fide of
the thip (to which by their gravity they would naturally incline when

their breath firft left them), equal to their encreafed bulk; and, being then

acted upon by the upward preflure of the water, would exert againft the

under-part of the decks, immediately over them, a power likewife equal

to fuch weight of water as equals their increafed bulk. The heavieft fide

of the fhip, being thus firft lightened by the difplacing fo large a quan-

tity of water, and exchanging it for air; and then acted upon by the

preflure of the water upwards again{t the under fide of the inflated carca-

fes, lifting hard againft the decks on or beneath the center of the fhip ;

and farther by the preffure of the water upwards, againft the underfide of

the hulls, mafts, &c. together with the counterpoife of a large weight

of water between decks, on the higheft fide, would caufe her to be near-

ly in equilibrio ; and confequently, the firft ftrong tide (as was the cafe)

would {wing her on her keel, and right her.”

As to vegetables, none of that clafs can be wanting in the contribution of
their effluviato the commonair, fince we know that all vegetables, by pu-
trefa€tion, become volatile. ‘Ihe affociations, feparations, aftritions, dif-
folutions, and other operations, of one fort of matter upon 5 a: may

likewitfe


62 AON? SRLS LEUeS Ue RAL To.

-likewife beconfidered as fources of numerous other neutral or anonymous
bodies, unknown ‘to the moft inguifitive naturalift. Thus air is one of
the moft confiderable and univerfal agents in all nature, being concerned
in the prefervation of life, and the production of moft of the phenomena
relating to this world. Its properties and effects, includinga great part of
the refearches and difcoveries of the modern philofophers, have in a con-
fiderable degree been reduced to precife laws and demonttrations ;. in which
form they make a very extenfive and important branch of the mixed ma-
thematics, called Pneumatics ; for a more perfect knowledge of which,
I beg leave to recommend the curious reader to-Dr. Prieftley’s invaluable
Experiments and Obfervations on different kinds of air. But I fhall juft
obferve further, that tothe preffure of air we are to attribute the cohe-
rence of the parts of bodies.. Breathing too, on which depends animal
life, is owing to the preffure and-{pring of the air; and to the fame
eaufe may be attributed the production of fire and flame, as appears from
the fudden extinction of fire when deprived of air. © It is likewife necef-
fary for the exiftence and propagation of founds, for the germination and
growth of plants, for conveying all the variety of fmells, and) for re-
ceiving and tranfmitting the rays andinfluences of the celeftial world to
the terreftial. _ Air acts upon all bodies by its common properties of
weight and elafticity, and by the peculiar virtues of the ingredients where-
of itis compofed. Thefe properties of weight and elafticity in the air,
when engendered in large quantities in the bowels..of the earth, and
heated by the fubterranean fire, occafion earthquakes, and other vehe-
ment Ccommotions of nature. And by fome late experiments of M. de la
Hire, it is found that a certain quantity of condenfed air, if heated to a
degree equal to that of boiling water, would produce an explofion fuffi-
cient to tear afunder the folid globe. By means of a corroding acid, air
diffolves iron and copper, unlefs well defended by oil; even gold in the
ehemift’s laboratory, when the air is impregnated with the effluvia of aqua
regia, contracts a ruft like other bodies. It fixes volatile bodies, and vo-
latilizes thofe which are fixed. From the different effluvie diffufed
through the air proceed a variety of effects. | Near mines of copper, it
will difcolour filver and brafs ; and in London, where the air abounds
with acidand corrofive particles, metalline utenfils ruft much fooner than
in the country. Stones alfo undergo the changes incident to metals.
Thus Purbeck ftone, of which Salifbury cathedral is built, is obferved
to become gradually fofter, and to moulder away in the air; and Mr.
Boyle gives the fame account of Blackington ftone. Itis very difficult
to obtain oil of fulphur in a clear dry air, as its parts are then more ready
to evaporate ; butin a moift cloudy air it may be obtained in abundance,
All falts melt moft readily in cloudy weather ; and feparations proceed beft
in the fame {tate of the air. If pure wine becarried into a place where the
air is full of the fumes of wine then fermenting, it will begin to ferment
a-frefh. ‘The wholefomenefs and unwholefonsenefs of ‘air is certainly

2 owing


OF A STR OL‘O'6 Y¥; 63


owing to the different efluvia with which it abounds. The beft air is to
be found in open champaign countries, where the foil is dry, and fpon-
taneoufly produces wild thyme, wild marjoram, and the like {weet-
{cented plants. The morning air ts more refrefhing than that of the even-
ing, and air agitated with breezes than that which is ferene and ftill.
‘As good “air contributes greatly to-health, fothat which is bad or in-
feGtious is no lefs prejudicial to it, as is evident.in contagious difeafes,
plagues, murrains,:and other mortalities, which are fpread by an infected
‘air. But this infected air may be corrected, and the-body preferved from
its fatal effets, ‘by the effluvia of aromatic and ftrong-fcented herbs and
flowers. From obfervations:on bleeding.in rheumatif{ms, and after tak-
ing cold, it is evident the air-can enter with-all,its qualities, and vitiate
‘the whole’ texture of ‘the blood, and other juices. From palfies, verti-
goes, -and other nervous affections, caufed by damps, mines, &c. it is
evident that air thus qualified, can relax and obftruét-the whole nervous
fyftem. And from the cholics,) fluxes, coughs, .and confumptions, pro-
‘duced by damp, moift, and nitrous, air, it is evident it.can corrupt and
‘fpoil the noble organs .of the whole human ftructure. ‘Thus air is an
inftrument which ‘nature is univerfally applying in all her works, .con-
fequently a knowledge of its. properties feems highly neceflary not only
to the chemift and phyfician,, but to the. philofopher and. divine.—For
more on this. important fubject fee Hales’s Veget. Stat. ch. vi. Sir
‘Ifaac Newton’s Optics, Qu..31. p. 371,372. Buffon’s Hift.. Nat. Supp..
-vol..i. M. dela Hire, .Mem. de l’Acad. An. 1703. Phil. Tranf. vol.
Ivi. p. 152, &c. Bacon, Nov. Organ. lib..1i. app. 13. Lavoifier’s Phy-
fical and Chemical Effays, vol. i. Black’s Eff. and Obf. Phyf, and Liter.
vol. ii. Chamb. Cyclop. new Edit. Art. Air. And Prieftley on Air.


Water, the third activeelement, is the menitruum of the world, and
‘is of two kinds; firft, Pure Water, which is a limpid and colournefs li-
quor, without fmellvor itafte, fimple and volatile, and is peculiar to the
~ celeftial regions. ‘Secondly, Grofs Water, which is a pellucid fluid, con-
wertible into ice by cold, naturally pervading the {trata of the earth, and
flowing on its furface,;°and with the body of the earth conftitutes the
“terraqueous globe. The:figure of the component parts of water.appears
to be fmooth and fpherical, like thofe of quickfilver ; whence it becomes
extremely moveable and penetrating. Thus it readily enters the pores of
wood, leather, fkins, chords,:and.mufical ftrings, and is capable of
“moving and agitating .particles of matter lefs active than itfelf; and fo
- proves the more immediate phyfical agent of fermentation, putrefaction,
‘folution, and the like ; and:thus it alfo conveys earthy and faline matter
through filtres of paper, ftone, &c. and even raifes fome proportion of
them in diftillations. Its particles appear to be extremely minute, and
“fo have a large fhare of furface. Hence water is admirably fitted for a
No. 3. M _ folvent,


64 AON) Ste S.Ts Ro ALT DN
folvent, or for readily entering the pores of falts, and coming into full
contact with all their particles ; and thus it will.pafs where air cannot, on
account of its moifture, or lubricating power, whereby it faftens muci-
laginous matters, and will therefore foke through the clofe pores of a
bladder. It penetrates the atmofphere very copioufly, by means of the
continual diftillations of the ocean and rivers, raifed up by the heat of
the central fun, and draws along with it a warm un¢tious vapour, which
caufes a natural generation of whatever the earth, as a matrix, is impreg-
nated with. Water always contains an earthy fubftance, and is found in
the hardeft bodies, and in the drieft air. It is the proper menftruum
of falts, and, by the readinefs with which it imbibes the different
kinds of air, is eafily rendered, by a lately-difcovered chemical procefs, to
poflefs the fame qualities and virtues of the moft efteemed mineral waters
hitherto difcovered. Water is alfo of infinite ufe in all the works both
of nature and art, as without it there could be no generation, nutri-
tion, or accretion, performed in any of the animal, vegetable, mine-
ral, marine, or atmofpherical, regions. ‘The blood could not flow in the
veins, the fap in the veffels of vegetables, nor the particles of minerals
‘concrete and grow together, without water. It is this that makes the
largeft part of our blood, our drink, and other aliments. There could
be no corruption, fermentation, or diffolution, carried on without it; no
brewing, no diftilling; no wines, no vinegar, no fpirits, made without
at. We alfo meet with water under an infinite variety of forms, and in an
infinite variety of bodies, as that of air, vapour, clouds, fnow, hail, ice,
fap, wines, blood, flefh, bone, horn, {tone, and other bodies, through
all which it feems to pafs unaltered, as an agent or inftrument that fuf-
fers no alteration by re-action, but remains capable of refuming the form
of ‘water again upon any occafion. In its own common ftate, water ap-
pears to be acombination of all the elements together, as containing a
quantity of fire, which keeps it fluid; a quantity of air, and a quantity
-of earth; whence it is not at all furprifing, that water alone, as it appears
to the fenfes, fhould fuffice for vegetation in fome cafes, where little
earth is wanted, or for fupporting animal and mineral life, where no great
-degree of nutriment is required; and hence it proves a glue or cement to
fome bodies, a. folvent to others; thus it confolidates brick, plaifter
‘of Paris, ftone, bone, and the like; but diffolves falts, and fubtile earth
approaching to falts, and becomes the inftrumental caufe of their action.
‘Water alfo conveys nourifhment or a more fixed and folid matter to the
parts of vegetables, where having depofited it, the finer fluid perfpires
into the atmofphere, which gives us the phyfical caufe of the dampnefs and
unwholefomenefs of woody countries, as they remarkably find in America,
For all large vegetables act after the manner.of forcing-pumps, continu-
ally drawing in large quantities of water at their roots, and difcharging
It


OF ASTROLOGY. Oe 6s


it at their leaves; which intimates a method of colleGting water in dry
countries, and likewife of making falt water frefh. It is alfo obferva-
ble, that water in paffing through plants, after having depofited its more
terreftrial part, does not always go off pure, but impregnated with the
finer effluvia, or more fubtile particles, of the vegetable; thus making an
atmofphere around every plant according to its nature, odoriferous or o-
therwife, which fupplies us with arule for procuring the odoriferous
‘waters of vegetables by diftillation. But the particles, not fine enough
to go off thus ‘along with the water, are left behind upon the furface of
the leaves and flowers of plants, being now thickened or ftrained from
their moifter parts, and remaining in the form of honey, manna, gums,
or balfams, according to the nature of the vegetables. And hence we
deduce the phyfical caufe why plants prove more odoriferous and {weet
when the air is both warm and moift, as is the cafe immediatly after a
fummer fhower. Water is likewife of the utmoft ufe in divers of
the mechanical arts and occafions of life; asin the motion of mills,
engines, fountains, aud.all other machines which att by the laws of
Hydroftatics.—-For the further properties and effects of Water, fee
Defag. Exp. Phil. vol. ii. Cotes’s Hyd.and Pneum. Lectures. Phil.
Tranf, No. 203, 220, 337. Fergufon’s Lectures, 4to. p.68, &c, Chamb,
~Cyclop. Art. Water, Fluids, Hydroftatics, &c.


The fourth element, which is paffive and fixed, is Earth, and confitts
of a fimple, dry, and cold, fubftance; and is an ingredient in the compo-
fition of all natural bodies. It muft be obferved, that pure native earth
is a very different matter from the earth whereon we tread, and this pure
earth is fuppofed to be the bafis or fubftratem of all bodies, and that
wherein the other principles refide. It is all that is folid in an animal
or vegetable body, all the real vaicular parts, the reit being juices. This
earth may be found in and feparated from all animal and vegetable fub-
ftances, and is the fame in all, and is the bafis of all. It remains after
the feparation of the other principles, by chemiftry, from all animal and
vegetable fubftances, and neither coheres together, nor fuffers any change
in the fire. The affayers acknowledge no difference between the earth of
animals and vegetables, but make their tefts for the niceft ufes equally of
both.. If water be poured upon this earth, it requires fome degree of te-
nacity, fo as to become capable of being formed into veffels ; but, if oil
be added, it coheres into a much ftronger and more compact mafs; hence
-it appears that oil and earth are the principles which give confiftence and
tenacity to plants. This oi], as well as this.earth, feems the fame in all,
and poffefies nothing of the poifonous or medicinal virtues of the plant,
or whatever it is extracted from ; they being all feparable by. decoction,


diftillation, and other proceffes of that kind, and never remain either ia
. . the


66 ASN. TS Toe Gt oR AcTe1s0O ON

the earth, or in this connedting oil. Long drying will diveft plants of all
their virtues; fo that nothing but thefe principles fhall remain in them,
and thefe, ‘giving folidity and figure, preferve the plant in its former ap-
pearance; but, thefe only remaining, it pofleffes none of its virtues.
‘This pure earth may be procured by drawing off the fpirit, fulphur,
phlegm, and falts, of wine ;. and:what remains will bea taftelefs, fcent-
lefs, dufty, matter, not capable of being raifed by diftiliation, or diffolv-
ed by folution, but will preferve the fame ftate and form even in the fire;
and this is called pure earth, or caput mortuum. It may alfo be obtained
pure and unmixed from the common clafs of vegetables and other bodies,
by letting the remaining mafs, after diftillation, be thoroughly calcined.
then boiled in feveral-waters to get out all its falt, and after this dried
in aclear fire, or in -the fan; and this dried mafs will be pure earth.
Thus, from the different qualities and operations of the four elements
upon one another, we may obferve, that the fire preferves the earth
from being overwhelmed or deftroyed by water ; the air preferves the fire,
that it is not extinguifhed; and.the:water preferves the earth, that it is
not burnt; but, if either of thefe active elements were to become predo-
minant in any great degree, the world would be deftroyed ; as was the
cafe at the time of the deluge, by the predominancy of water.—For more
on this fubject, fee Boerhaave’s Chemift. part ii. p. 21. Shaw’s Lectures,
p. 151, Phil. Tranf. No. 3... Hill’s Hitt. of Foffils. Linn. Syft. Nat.
tom, iii, 1770. Da Cofta’s Foflils, p. 119, &c. Swed. Mem. 1760,


Of thefe four elements the whole terreftrial world is compofed, with
all. its productions and appendages; rnd over thefe Man hath the do-
minion, as God’s vicegerent.upon earth, being compounded of the moft

perfect and noble part of. earthly matter, and formed after God’s own
image and likenefs. Hence man is called: the Microcofm, from ju,
little, and wove, world, literally Gouabpinuyiabesuiee ceerld Gabich te e:
plied to Man by way of eminence, as being an.epitome of all that is excel-
jJent and wonderful in Nature... If, we, attentively confider the ftructure
and faculties of man, -we fhall clearly..perceive his exiftence upon earth,
in a character fubordinate to.that of angels, is only, intended by the Deity
for a ftate of probation ; and, as this corporeal life fhall terminate, either
in a€ts of piety or profanenefs, fo fhall follow the retributions of an im-
partial and juft Judge, in a future ftate of everlafting duration, Man is
compofed of three diftinct effences, Spirit, Soul, and Body; as Sr. Paul
evinces when he fays, Let your Spirits, Souls, and Bodies, be kept blame~
lefs at the coming of the Lord Fefus Chrift. _ And thefe three eflences are
compounded of the three leffer worlds; the Soul of Man is formed of the
ethereal world ; the Spirit, of the celeftial world ; and the Body, of the
elementary world. Hence are deducible the influences of the fun, moon,


and


Olft ASTER OE O.G ¥: 67


and ftars, upon Man’s body, becaufe he hath a microcofmical fun, moon,
and ftars, within himfelf, that bear a fympathy with the celeftial bodies,
andin the centre of which fhines the divine Spirit. For the fenfual, ce-
leftial, part of man, is that whereby we move, fee, feel, tafte,and fmell,
and have a commerce with all material objects ; and through thefe the
influences of the divine Nature are conveyed to the more refined and
fenfible organs. ‘This celeftial fpirit a€tuates and influences the elemen-
tary eflence, and ftirs it up to the propagationofits like, and to every other
purpofe for which Nature defigned it. And this {pirit is even difcoverab!e
in herbs and flowers, which open when the fun rifes, and clofe when he
fets ; which motion is produced by the fpirit being fenfible of theapproach
and departure of the fun’s influence. Next to thefe, in Man, fhines that
pure, etherial, angelic part, called the rational foul; which is a divine
light or ftream flowing immediately from the Great Creator, uniting
Man with God, and raifing him above all other parts of animated na-
ture. This’ Soul, when once it enters the body, runs parallel with
eternity ; and joins in with the celeftial {pirit, through the fphere of the
planets; and is conducted by adivine genius, to an hypoftatical union
with the elementaty body ; fo that there exift two active principles in
the body of man to one paflive ; and, as the Superior Rules in the celef-
tial world are fituated at the time of man’s nativity, fo will his confti-
tution and difpofition be framed. And here we derive the caufe of all
thofeaftonifhing variations of temper, difpofition, andconftitution, which
are not only peculiar to different fubjects, but even to one and the fame
perfon ; for every one will bear teftimony of this fact, that we find our-
felves {ometimes chearful, and at other times melancholy ; to-day in perfect
health, and to-morrow in pain and anguifh; this hour compofed, affa-
ble, and complacent, and the next auftere, petulant, and peremptory ;
and thefe contrarieties are evidently produced by the continual refiftance
and oppofition of the four elements in man’s body, which alternately dif-
pofe him to the various affections difcoverable in human nature. ‘The
caufe of this is induced from the natural enmity of the elementary mat-
ter, viz. heat and cold, and drinefs and moifture ; each of which occa-
fionally predominates in man’s body, according to the motion and influ-
ence of thofe heavenly bodies, thatrule, govern, and modify, the Operation
of the four elements, in and upon every terreftrial fubftance. Thus it is
evident, that the underftanding and intellectual faculties of Manare form-
ed of the ethereal world; the fenfitive powers of life and action are derived
from the celeftial world ; and the grofs and corruptible part, the flefhand ..
blood, confifts of the elementary world; which are all fubordinate the
one to the other. Under this idea of the workmanfhip and conftruction
of Man, Job exclaimed, that e was fearfully and wonderfully made; in
in poffeffing the three-fold effences of {pirit, foul, and body.

No. 3. N Sceptical


68 AN: I, & LeU; ST eR Ay. Tal ON


Sceptical and atheiftical writers, indeed, have attempted tooverturn this
fyftem of nature in the conftruction of man, by denying the immortality
of the foul, anda future diftribution of rewards and punifhments ; con-
tending that the foul is anindivifible part of the body, and has its diffo-
lution in the common courfe of mortality. But thefe tenets are fo ex-
tremely abfurd, fovague, and fo deftitute of evidence, that the rational
mind is at a lofs to conceive how fuch an inconfiftent doctrine could have
ever been broached ; for, the fame philofophical reafoning, thatenables us
to define the nature and exiftence of the body, will likewife prove the
nature and exiftence of the foul. It is only from the primary or effential
qualities of body, itsextenfion, and folidity, that we form any idea of
it; and why may we not form the complex idea of a foul or fpirit, from
the operations of thinking, underftanding, -willing, and the like, which
are experiments in ourfelves ? This idea of an immaterial fubftance is as
clear as that we have of a material one ; for, though the notion of imma-
terial fubftances may be attended. with difficulties, we have no more
reafon to deny or doubt of its truth, than we have to deny or doubt
of the exiftence of the body.. That the foul is.an immaterial fub-
ftance, appears from hence—that the primary operations of willing and
thinking are not only unconnected with the known properties of body,
but feem plainly inconfiftent with fome of its moft effential qualities.
For the mind not only difcovers no_ relation between thinking and the
motion and arrangement of parts ; bo it likewife perceives, thatconciouf-
nefs, afimple act, can never proceed from a compounded fubftance, ca-
pable of being divided into many parts. ‘To illuftrate this, let-us only ©
fuppofe a fy{tem of matter endowed with thought; then, either all the
parts of which this fyftem confifts muft think, which would make it
not one, but a multitade of diftinét confcious beings; or its power of
thinking muft arife from the connection of the parts one with another,
their motion, and difpofition, which, alltaken together, contribute to the
production of thought. Bat it is evident, that the motion of parts, and
the manner of combining them, can produce nothing but an artful ftruc-
ture, and various modes of motion. Henceall machines, however artful-
ly their parts are put together, and however complicated their ftruc-
ture, though we conceive innumerable different motions, varioufly com-
bined, and running one into another with an endlefs variety, yet ne-
ver produce any thing but figure and motion. If aclock, or watch, tells
the hour and minute of the day, it is only by the motion of the different
hands, pointing fucceflively at the different figures marked upon the
dial-plate for that purpofe. We never imagine this to be the effect of
thought or intelligence, nor conceive it poflible, by any refinement of
ftructure, fo to improve the compofition, as that it fhall become capable
of knowledge and confcioufnefs ; and the reafon is plainly this, that

| | theught


q
© FT A SaTER’ OL) Of Gye 6g


thought being fomething altogether different from motion and figure,
without the leaft connection between them, it can never be fuppofed to
refult from them. This then being evident, that intelligence cannot
atife from an union or combination of unintelligent parts ; if we fuppofe
it to belong to any fyftem of matter, we muit neceffarily attribute it to
all the parts of which that fyftem is compofed; whereby, initead of one,
we fhall, as was before obferved, have a multitude of diftin@ confcious
beings. And becaufe matter, how far foever we purfue the minutenefs
of its parts, is ftill capable of repeated divifions, even to infinity, it is

lain that this abfurdity will follow us through all the fuppofitions that
make thought inherent in a material fubftance. Wherefore, as confci-
oufnefs is incompatible with the cohefion of folid feparable parts, we are
neceflarily led to place it in fome other fubftance of diftintét Nature and
Properties—and this fubftance we call Spirit, which is altogether diftin@
from body, nay, and commonly placed in oppofition to it; for which
reafon, the beings of this clafs are called iaymaterial ; a word that im~
plies nothing of their true nature, but merely denotes its contrariety to
that of matter, or material fubftances.


As to the immortality of the human foul, the arguments to prove ‘it
may be reduced to the following heads ; firit, The nature of the foul it-
felf, its defires, fenfe of moral good and evil, and gradual increafe of
knowledge and perfection ; and fecondly, The moral attributes of God.
Under the former of thefe confiderations, itis apparent that the foul, -be-
ing an immaterial intelligent fubftance, as has been already proved, does
not depend upon the body for its exiftence ; and therefore may, and ab-=

folutely muft, exift after the body, unlefs annihilated by the fame power
which gave ita being at firit, which is not to be fuppofed, fince there are
no-inftances of annihilation in nature. This argument, efpecially if the
infinite capacity of the foul, its {trong defire after immortality, its ra-
tional activity and advancement towards perfection, be likewife confidered,,
will appear perfectly conclufive to men of a philofophical turn ; becaufe
nature, or rather the God of nature, does nothing in vain. Bat argu-
ments drawn from the moral attributes of the Deity are not only better
adapted to convince men unacquainted with abftract reafoning, but equally
certain and conclufive with the former; for, as the juftice of God can
never fuffer the wicked to efcape unpunifhed, nor the good to remain
always unrewarded ; therefore arguments drawn from the manifeft and
continual profperity of the wicked, and the frequent misfortunes and .an-:
happine(s of good and virtuous. men in this life, muft convince every
thinking perfon, that there is a future ftate wherein all will be fet right,,
and God’s attributes of wifdom, goodnefs, and juftice, fully vindicated,,
Had the religious and conf{cientious part of mankind no hopes of a future


ftate, they would be of all menthe moft miferable; but, as this is abfo-.
lutely:


« |
70 AN! Di)LIWSATORI MT T OW


lutely inconfiftent with the moral characterer of the Deity, the certainty
of fuch a ftate is clear:to.ademonftration. peg


. Thus far we have confidered the elementary world, whichis the loweft
in dignity ; and man, the chief fubjett. thereof.| The celeftial world,
which is next‘in eminence, is conftituted of a body natural, moft. fimple,
-{pherical, clear, fluid, and moving conftantly inacircle, andthis by virtue
of an innate power always within itfelf; comprehending and containing
the fun, moon, planets, and flars, fixed in diftiné orbs by the great Ar~-
chitect of Nature, and bearing fympathy with all terreftrial fub{tances, as
being formed out of the famechaotic mafs at the beginning of the world,
~ This celeftial heaven is what Mofes calls dakign, the firmament, which was
the work of the fecond day’s creation, and literally fignifies an expan/e or
extenfion ; aterm very well adapted by the prophet to the impreffion
which the heavens make on our fenfes ; whence in other parts of the
Scriptures, the heaven is compared to a curtain, or a tent ftretched out to
dwellin. Through the mediom of this celeftial world, and the heavenly
bodies therein contained, the fupreme Being rules, governs, and actuates,
_ the elementary world ; and this is apparent, becaufe that thing which we
term obedience is only to be.found in elementary bodies. And fince mo-
tion is the caufe of all mutation and change, and as all motion originates
with the heavenly bodies, by the revolutions of which even Time itfelf
is meafured out and divided, fo we find thefe celeftial influences produce
all the variations of heat and cold, drinefs and moifture, generation and
corruption, increafe and decreafe,. life and death, and all the viciflitudes
of nature, without even varying themfelves, or being fubje& to the leatt
change or alteration; whilft the elementary bodies are perpetually chang- -
ing, and never continuein one ftay. Hence it is apparent that thecelef-
tial bodies are active, and the elementary paffive; fo that the celeftial bo-
dies give the form and ftamp to all the productions of nature, and the ele-
mentary bodies f{ubminifter matter to receive this form. And as the pofi- .
tions and affections of the heavenly afpects are when this form or. {tam p
is given, and as the quality of the elementary matter fhall be when fubmi-
niftered, fo will the nature and quality of the fubjeCt be, that receives this
celeftial form or ftamp. And, were it not for this active and paflive prin-
ciple, then would all elementary things be alike, without a poflibility of
exifting. It is, therefore, a perfect knowledge of this mediate or celef-
tial world, its various affections and difpofitions, the nature, tendency,
and effect, of the luminaries, their motions, afpects, and pofitions, which
enable us to judge of future contingencies, and to difcover the fecretand
abftrufe operations of nature. But, to attain this knowledge in any com-
petent degree, we mutt trace thefe heavenly intelligencers throughout the
whole celeftial regions, and acquaint ourfelves with their general and

Pee Prine Se oanaprori ss : _ effential


Pre


: Ane


Wy


il


I


A


"


|


ak


ere


SSS SSS
= .


Genesis Chap. 1. Vert4 Frov.3 Verse


Men.


* x aot

NM how
NS 5
Soeny ad


OF TA SITrR OF. OG Y: ay
effential qualities. I fhall for this purpofe, after treating of the ethereal


world, make this fpeculation a leading clue to the art of calculating
nativities. .


The Etherial world, which is the fuperior, and the. higheft in dignity,
is that which the infpired writers, and the ancient philofophers, called the
Empyrean Heaven, and is conceived to be the abode ef God, and blefled
fpirits, of angels, and the fouls of the righteous departed; wherein the:
Deity is pleafed to afford a nearer and more immediate view of him(elf,.
a more ienfible manifeftation- of his. glory,, anda. more: adequate per-
ception of his attributes, than in the other parts of the univerfe, where he
is likewife prefent. But the moft exalted conceptions. we-can poffibly:
form of this blifsful abode, are extremely inadequate and: imperfect; nor:
is itin the power of the moft enlarged underftanding to frame {uitable:
ideas of the Godhead, or of the angelic hoft that perpetually furround his:
throne. As much, however, as the human comprehenfion is able to con -
- tain, the Almighty has been. gracioufly pleafed to.reveal to us im the Serip--
tures, by the infpired writers, particularly [faiah, Ezekiel, and'St.. John:
the Divine, who have given us very magnificent defcriptions of the hea~
venly manfions, their ftructure, apparatus, and angelic attendance... From:
this divine Revelation the Hebrew writers, and other learned men, have:
defcribed the Harmony of the Univerfe, and the neceflary fubordinatiom
and dependence of one thing upon another, from the interior heaven, to.
the remoteft corner of the earth. We fhall therefore prefume to follow
thefe authors in {peaking of God and his angels ; and whoever fufficiently
contemplates the fubject, will be fecure againft the impious doétrines of:
Atheifts, of Free-thinkers, of immoral and irreligious men.


God is an immaterial, inteHigent, and free Being; of perfe& goodnefs,.
wifdom, and power; who made the univerfe, and continues to fupport
it, as well as to govern and direé& it by his providence. By: his imma-
teriallity, intelligence, and freedom, God is diftinguifhed from fate, .na-
ture, deftiny, neceflity, chance, and from alk other imaginary beings..
In fcripture, God is defined by, I am that Iam; Alpha and Omega ;.
the beginning and end of all things. Among philofophers,. he is de-
fined a Being of infinite perfection; or in whom there is no: defec&
of any thing which we conceive might raife, improve, or exalt his na--
ture. Among men, he is chiefly confidered as the firft caufe, the firft
Being, who has exifted from the beginning, has created the world, or:
who fubfifts neceffarily, or of himielf ; and this knowledge.of God, his:
nature, attributes, word, and works, with the relations between him
and his creatures, make the extenfive fubject of Theology, the fifter
fcience of Aftrology.

oO Sir


72 | AN VTELO@S TRATION


Sir Ifaac Newton confiders and defines God, not as-is ufually done,
from his perfection, his nature, exiftence, or the like; but from his
dominion. ‘The word God, according to him, is a relative term, and
has a regard to fervants ; it is true it denotes a Being eternal, infinite, and
abfolutely perfect ; but a Being, however eternal, infinite, and abfolute-
ly perfed&t, without dominion, would not be God. ‘The fame author
obferves, that the word God, frequently fignifies Lord; but every lord is
not God; it is the dominion of a fpiritual being or lord, that conftitutes
God; true dominion, true God; fupreme, the fupreme; feigned, the
falfe god. From fuch true dominion it follows, that the true God is
living, intelligent, and powerful ; and from his other perfections, that
he is fupreme, or fupremely perfect: he is eternal, and infinite; om~
nipotent, and omnifcient ; that is, he endures from eternity to eternity,
and is prefent from infinity to infinity. He governs all things that exift,
and knows all things that are to be known; he is not eternity, nor infi-
nity, but eternal, and infinite; he is not duration or fpace, but he en-
dures, and is prefent; he endures always, and is prefent every where ;
and by exifting always, and every where, he conftitutes the very thing,
duration and f{pace, eternity and infinity. Heis omniprefent, not only
virtually, but alfo fubftantially ; for power without fubftance cannot fub-
fiftt. Alithings are contained, and move in him, but without any mutual
paflion; he fuffers nothing from the motions of bodies ; nor do they un-
dergo any refiftance from his omniprefence. It is confeffed that God ex-
ifts neceflarily; and by the fame neceflity he exifts always, and every
where. -Hence, alfo, he muft be perfectly fimilar; all eye, all ear, all
brain, all arm, all the power of perceiving, underftanding, and acting ; but
after a manner not at all corporeal, after a manner not like that of men,
after a manner wholly to us unknown. He is deftitute of all body, and
all bodily fhape; and therefore cannot be feen, heard, or touched ; nor
ought to be worfhipped under the reprefentation of any thing corporeal.
We have ideas of the attributes of God, but do not know the fubftance
even of any thing ; we fee only the figures and colours of bodies, hear only
founds, touch only the outward furfaces, fmell only odours, and tafte
taftes ; but do not, cannot, by any fenfe, or any reflex a&t, know their
inward fubftances; and much lefs can we have any notion of the fub-
ftance of God. We know him by his properties, and attributes ; by the
moft wife and excellent ftru€ture of things, and by final caufes; but we
adore arid worfhip him only on account of his dominion; for God, fet-
ting afide dominion, providence, and final caufes, is nothing elfe but fate
and * nature.


The admirable metaphyfician and divine, Dr. Clarke, has demonftrated
the being of a God, with that clearnefs and force of reafoning, for which
* See Newton’s Philof. Nat. Princip. Math. in calce,


he


OF AS TROL OG Y. 73
he is fo eminently diftinguithed, by a feries of propofitions, mutually con-
nected and dependent, and forming a complete and unanfwerable argu-
ment in proof of the attributes of the Deity. Something, he fays, has
exifted’ from all eternity; for, fince fomething now is, fomething always
was: otherwife the things that now are, muft have been produced out of
nothing, abfolutely and without caufe, which is a plain contradiction in
terms. There mutt have exifted from all eternity fome one unchangeable
and independent Being; or elfe, there has been an infinite fucceflion of
changeable and dependent beings, produced one from another in an endlefs’
progreflion, without any original caufeat all, For without, this feries of .
beings can have no caufe of its exiftence, becaufe it includes all things that .
are or ever were in the univerfe; nor is any one being jn this infinite fuc-
ceffion felf-exiftent or neceffary, and therefore it can have no reafon of its
exiftence within itfelf; and it was equally poffible, that from eternity
there fhould never have exifted any thing at all, as that a fucceffion of fuch
beings fhould have exifted from eternity. Confequently their exiftence
is determined by nothing; neither by any neceflity in their own nature,
becaufe none of them are felf-exiftent; nor by any other being, becautfe
no other is fuppofed to exift.—That unchangeable and independent Being,
which has exited from eternity, without any external caufe of its exif~"
tence, muft be felf-exiftent ; it muft exift by an abfolute necefflity origi-
nally in the nature of the thing itfelf, and antecedent in the natural order
of our ideas to our fuppofition of its being. For whatever exifts, muft
either come into being without a caufe; or it muft have been produced
by fome external caufe; or it muft be felf-exiftent: but the two former
fuppofitions are contrary to the two firft propofitions. From this laft
propofition it follows, that the only true idea of a felf-exiftent or necef-
farily exifting being, is the idea of a being, the fuppofition of whofe non-
exiftence isan exprefs contradi¢tion ; and this idea is that of a moft fimple
being, abfolutely eternal and infinite, original and independent. It fol-
lows alfo, that nothing is fo certain as the exiftence ee fupreme inde-
pendent caufe; and likewife, that the material world cannot poflibly be
the firft and original being, uncreated, independent, and of itfelf eternal ;
becaufe it does not exift by an abfolute neceflity in its own nature, fo as
that it muft be an exprefs contradiction to fuppofe it not to exift. With
refpect both to its form and matter, the material world may be conceived
not to be, or to be in any refpect different from what it is, without a con-
tradiction. ‘The fubftance or effence of the felf-exiftent being is abfo-
lutely incomprehenfible by us; neverthelefs, many of the effential attri-
butes of his nature are ftrictly demonftrable, as well as his exiftence.—
The felf-exiftent being, having no caufe of its exiftence but the abfolute
neceffity of its own nature, muft of neceflity have exifted from everlaft-
ing, without beginning ; and mutt of neceffity exift to everlafting, without


end.—The felf-exiftent being muft of neceflity be infinite and omnipre-
z fent.


74 A Nw Tyg LaUySeToRsAtT LO, N


fent. Such a being muft be every where, as well as always unalterably
the fame. It follows from hence, that the felf-exiftent being muft be a
moft fimple, unchangeable, incorruptible being, without parts, figure, |
motion, divifibility, and other properties of matter, which are utterly in-
confiftent with complete infinity.. The felf-exiftent being muft of necef-
fity be but one; becaufe in abfolute neceflity there can be no difference
or diverfity of exiftence ; and, therefore, it is abfolutely impofiible, that
there fhould be two independent felf-exiftent principles, fuch as God and
matter.—The felf-exiftent and original caufe of all things muft be an in-
telligent being. This propofition cannot be demonftrated ftrictly and
properly @ priori; but a pofleriori, the world affords undeniable argu-
ments to prove that all things are the effects of an intelligent and know-
ing caufe. The caufe muft be always more excellent than the effe@ ; and,
therefore, from the various kinds of powers and degrees of excellence and
perfection, which vifible objeéts poflefs ; from the intelligence of created
beings, which is a real diftin@ quality or perfection, and not a mere ef-
fect or compofition of unintelligent figure and motion; from the variety,.
order, beauty, wonderful contrivance, and fitnefs of all things to their pro~
per and refpective ends ; and from the original of motion, the felf-exiftent
creating being is demonftrated to be intelligent. The felf-exiftent and
original caufe of all things is not a neceflary agent, but a being endued
with liberty and choice. Liberty is a neceflary confequent of intelli-
gence; without liberty, no being can be faid to bean agent, or caufe of
any thing ; fince to act neceflarily, is really and properly not to at at alf,
but to be acted upon. Befides, if the fupreme caufe be not endued with,
liberty, it will follow, that nothing which is not, could poffibly have
been ; that nothing which is, could poflibly not have been; and that no
mode or circumftance of the exiftence of any thing, could poffibly have
been in any refpect otherwife than what it now actually is. Farther, if
there be any final caufe in the univerfe, the fupreme caufe is a free agent ;
and onthe contrary fuppofition, it is impoffible that any effect fhould be
_ finite; and inevery effect, there muft have been a progreflion of caufes iz
infinitum, Without any original caufe at all_—The felf-exiftent being, the
fupreme caufe of all things, mutt of neceflity have infinite power ; fince all
things were made by him, and are entirely dependent upon him ; and all
the powers of all things are derived from him, and perfectly fubje& to
him; nothing can refift the execution of his will.—The fupreme caufe
and author of all things. muft of neceflity be infinitely wife. This fol-
lows from the propofitions already eftablifhed ; and the proof @ pofferiorz,
of the infinite wifdom of God, from the confideration of the exquifite
perfection and confummate excellency of his works, is no lefs ftrong and
undeniable.—The fupreme caufe and author of all things muft of neceflity
be a being of infinite goodnefs, juftice, and truth, and all other moral
perfections ; fuch as become the fupreme governor and judge of the

world.


“U @OlrTA iT RO £66. Y¥! ! 75
world. The will ofa being, infinitely knowing and wife, independent and |
all-powerful, cat never be influenced by any wrong affection, and can ne-
ver be miflead or oppofed frem without; and, therefore, he muft do
always what we know fitteft to be done; that is, he muft act always ac-
cording’ to.the ftricteft rules of infinite goodnefs, juftice, and truth, and
all other moral perfections ;: and, more particularly, being infinitely and ne-
ceffarily happy and all-fufficient, he muft be unalterably difpofed to do


and to commiunicate good or ‘*happinefs. |

To this more abftrufe’ argument ¢@ prior7, for the exiftence of God, we
may add. another, ‘more generally obvious, ‘and ‘carrying irrefiftible con-
viction,- which is deduced from the fraine of the world, and from the
traces of evident contrivance and fitnefs of things for one another, that
occur through all the parts of it. Thefe con{pire to prove, that the ma-
terial world, which in its nature is originated and dependent, could not
have been the effect of chance or neceflity,; but of intelligence and defign.
The beautiful, harmonious; ‘and beneficial arrangement:of the various bo-
dies that compofe the material fyftem:;°their mutual dependence and fub«
ferviency; the regularity of their ‘motions,’ and the aptitude of thefe mo-
tions for producing the moit beneficial effects ; and many other pheno-
mena refulting from their relation, magnitude, fituation, and ufe, afford
unqueftionable evidences of the creating power and wife difpofal of an in-
telligent'and almighty agent. The power of gravity, by which the ce-
leftial bodies perfevere in their revolutions; deferves our particular confi-
deration. ‘This power penetrates te the centres of the fun and planets,
without any dimunition of its virtue, and is extended to immenfe dif-
tances, regularly decreafing, and producing the moft fenfible and impor-
tant effects.’ Its action is proportional to the quantity of folid matter in
bodies,,and not:to their furfaces, as is'ufual in mechanical caufes ; and,
therefore, feems to’ furpafs mere mechanifm. But however various the
phenomena that depend on°this power, and‘ may be explained by it, no
mechanical principles can account for its effects ;) much lefs could it have
produced, at the beginning, the regular fituation of the orbs, and the pre-
fent difpofition of things. Gravity could not have determined the planets
to move from weft to eaft, in’ orbits nearly circular, almoft in the fame
plane; nor could their power’ have projected the comets, with all the va-
riety of their directions. If we fuppofe the matter of the fyftem to be
accumulated in the centre by its gravity, no mechanical principles, with
the affiftance of this power, could feparate the huge and unweildy mats
into fuch parts as the fun and planets; and, after carrying them to their
different diftances, project them in their feveral directions, preferving ftill
the equality of a¢tion and re-action, or the-ftate’of the centre of gravity of


* See Clarke’s Demonftration of the Being and Attributes of God.
the


a6 AN Feb GS TR A Tul O N

the fyftem. Such anexquifite ftructure of things could only arife from
the contrivance and powerful influences of an intelligent, free, and moft
potentagent. ..The fame powers, therefore; which at prefent govern the
material world, and condu@t its-various motions, are, very different from
thofe, which were neceffary ,to have produced it from nothing, or to have
difpofed it-in the admirable form,in which it now proceeds,


But we fhould exceed the limits of our plan, if, confining our obferva-
tion to the earth, our own habitation, we were to enumerate only the
principal traces of defign and wifdom, as well.as goodnefs, which are dif-
cernible in its, figure,and jconftituent parts,-in,its diurnal, and annual mo-
tion, in the pofition,of its; axis vith regard, to, its' orbit, in. the benefit
which it derives from -the light and heat of the fun, and the alternate vi+
cifitudes of the,feafons ;, in, the.atmofphere, which furrounds it, and in
the different {pecies and varieties of vegetables and animals with which
it is replenifhed. No‘one.,can,furvey,the vegetable productions of the
earth, fo various,, beautiful,.and,,ufeful, nor the, various gradations of
animal life, in fuch a variety of fpecies, ‘all preferved diftin&, and propas
gated by a fettled law, each fitted to its own element, provided with pro-
per food, and with inftin@s and organs,. fuited to its rank and fituation,
and efpecially with the powers of fenfation and {elf-motion, and all more
immediately or remotely fubfervient to the government. and ufe of man,
without admiring the {kill and,defign of ‘the original Former. . But thefe
are more fignally manifefted in. the ftruGture.of the human. frame, and in
the noble powers and capacities of the human-mind; more efpecially in
the moral principles and faculties, which are a diftinguifhing part of our
conftitution, and lead to the perception and acknowledgment of the ex-
iftence and government of God.: In thofe inftances that have now been
recited, and a variety of fimilar inftances fuggefted, by them, or naturally
occurring to the notice of the curious and refle@ing: mind,-contrivance sis
manifeft, and immediately, without any. nice or fubtle reafoning, fuggefts
acontriver, It {trikes us like a fenfation; and artful. reafonings againft
it may puzzle us, without fhaking our belief. No perfon, for example,
that knows the principles of optics, andthe ftructure of the eye, :can
believe that it was. formed without fkill in: that fcience;, or that theear
was formed without the knowledge of. founds ;. or that the male and: fe-
male, created and preferved, in due proportion, were not formed for each
other, and for continuing the fpecies.. All our accounts of nature are full
of inftances of this kind.:. The admirable and. beautiful ftructure of
things for final caufes, exalt, our idea of the contriver; and the unity of
defign fhews him to be one. , ‘The.great, motions; in the fyftem, performed
with the fame facility as, the leaft, fuggeft his almighty power, which
gave motion to the earth and the celeftial bodies, with equal eafe as to
the minuteft particles; the fubtility. of the motions and aétions in the

internal


Gol 44 GT MRYO-ED*G Y. 79


internal parts of bodies, fhews that his influence penetrates the inmoft
recefles of things, and that he is equally active and prefent every where.
The fimplicity of the laws that prevail in the world, the excellent difpo-
fition of things, in order to obtain the beft ends, and the beauty which
adorns the works of nature, far fuperior to any thing in art, fuggeft his
confummate wifdom. The ufefulnefs of the whole fcheme, fo well con-
trived for the intelligent beings who enjoy it, with the internal difpofition
and: moral ftructure of thofe beings, fhews his unbounded goodnefs.
Thefe are arguments which are fufficiently open to the views and capa~
cities of the unlearned, while at the fame time they acquire new ftrength
and luftre from the difcoveries of the learned. The Deity’s acting and in-
terpofing inthe univerfe, fhew that he governs it, as well as that he formed
it; and the depth of his counfels, even in conducting the material univerfe,
of which a great part furpafles our knowledge, tends to preferve an inward
veneration and awe of this. great Being, and difpofes us to réceive what
maybe otherwife revealed to us concerning him. | His effence, as well as
that of all other fubftances, is beyond the reach of all our difcoveries ;
but his attributes clearly appear in his admirable works. We know that
the higheft conceptions we are able to form of them, are {till beneath his
real perfections; but his dominion over us, and our duty towards him,
are abundantly * manifeft.


_ Another fubftantial argument to prove the exiftence of God, as the
creator and governor of the univerfe, may be deduced from the univerfal
confent. of mankind, and the uniform tradition of this ‘belief through
every nation and every age; it is impoffible to conceive, that a fallacy,
fo perpetual and univerfal, fhould be impofed on the united reafon of man-
kind... No credible and fatisfactory account can be given of this univerfal
confent, without afcribing it to the original conftitution of the human
mind; in confequence’of which it cannot fail to difcern the exiftence of a
Deity, and'to the undeniable traces of his being, which his works afford.
Fear, ftate-policy, and the prejudices of education, to which the concur-
rence of mankind in this principle has been fometimes refolved, are founded
on this univerfal principle, fuppofe its being and influence, and are actuated
by it. >It ismuch more reafonable to imagine, that the belief of a God
was antecedent to their operation, than that it fhould have been produced
by them; and that it was dictated by reafon and confcience, independent
of the paffion and policy of men. The uniform and univerfal tradition
of this belief, and of the creation-of the world by the divine power, af-
fords concurring evidence both‘of the principle and of the fad. The
exiftence of Gods alfo.farther evinced by thofe arguments which have been
ufually alledged to prove, that the world had’a beginning, and, therefore,


* See Maclaurin’s Account of Sir Ifaac Newton’s Phil. Difc. b. iv. chap..9: Baxter in his
Matho, Derham, Ray, Nieuwentyt, De laPluche in his Nature difplayed, Chamb, Cyclop. hat
tnat


78 A Nr ofteh ot sS TR AA Ti DO’ N


that it muft have been created by the energy of divine power. In proof
of this, the hiftory of Mofes, confidered merely as the moft ancient hifto-
rian, deferves particular regard. His teftimony is confirmed by the moft
ancient writers, among the heathens, both poets and hiftorians. It may
be alfo fairly alledged, that we have no hiftory or tradition more ancient
than that which agrees with the received opinion of the world’s begin-
ning, and of the manner in which it was produced; and that the moft
ancient hiftories were written long after that time. And this confidera-
tion is urged by Lucretius, the famous Epicurean, as aftrong prefumption
that the world had a beginning: ;
| Si nulla fuit genitalis origo
Terrarum & ceeli, femperque eterna fuere :

Cur fupra bellum Thebanum, & funera Troje,

Non alias alii quoque res cecinere poete ?
Befides the origin and progrefs of learning, and the moft ufeful arts,
confirm the notion of the world’s beginning, and of the common era of
its creation; to which alfo may be added, that the world itfelf, being
material and corruptible, muft have had a beginning ; and many pheno-
mena occur to the obfervation of the aftronomer and mathematician,
which furnifh a ftrong prefumption, that it could have had no long du-
ration, and that it now gradually tends to diffolution. From thefe con~
fiderations, we may infer the abfolute being and providence of God;
which alfo demoniftrate the exiftence of his angels and miniftring fpirits,
_who are the meffengers of his will, and the proper inhabitants of the
ethereal world, and confequently the next fubjects of our enquiry.


An Angelis a fpiritual, intelligent fubftance, and the firft in rank and
dignity of all created beings; though the word Agel, Ar»ae, is not. pro-~
petly a denomination of nature, but of office; denoting a meffenger, or
executioner of the will of fome fuperiorpower or authority. In this fenfe
they are frequently mentioned in Scripture, as miniftring f{pirits fent by
the Almighty to declare his will, and to correct, teach, reprove, and com-
fort. God alfo promulgated the law to Mofes, and appeared to the old
patriarchs by the mediation of angels, who reprefented him, and {poke
in his name. The exiftence of angels is admitted in all religions; the
Greeks and Latins acknowledged them under the names of genii and
demons ; and in the Alcoran we find frequent mention of them; the
profeflors of the Mahometan religion afligned them various orders and
degrees, as well as different employments, both in heaven, and on earth.
The Sadducees alfo admit their exiftence ; witnefs Abufaid, the author of
an Arabic verfion of the Pentateuch; and Aaron, a Caraite Jew, in his
comment on the Pentateuch; both extant in manufcript in the king of
France’s library. The heathen philofophers and poets were alfo agreed as
to the exiftence of intelligent beings, fuperior to man; as is fhewn by


St.


OFTASITNR OLOGY "79


St. Cyprian, in his treatife on the vanity of idols, from the teftimonies
of Plato, Socrates, and Trifmegiftus. Authors are not fo unanimous
about their nature as of their exiftence; Clemens Alexandrinus believed
they had bodies, which was alfo the epinion of Origen, Cefarius, Ler-
tullian, and feveral others; but Athanafius, Baflil; Gregory, Nicene,,
Cyril, and Chryfoftom; hold them to be mere fpirits. Authors
are alfo divided as to the time of the creation of angels; fome will have
it to have been before the creation of our world, or even from eternity ;;
while others maintain that they were created at the {ame time with our
world. The moft probable conjecture is, that they were created at difs.
ferent periods, whenever it pleafed the Almighty to call them into ex-
iftence. But, though we cannot fo clearly demonitrate the precife nature
and duration of angels, we may neverthelefs conclude, that, though they -
are of an order highly fuperior to that of men, yet are they not complete.
and perfect; for, had they been created thus originally, they could not:
have fallen, as Adam did, nor have finned, which the {criptures inform
us fome of them did by rebelling againft the Almighty, and in contend-
ing with him for fupreme authority. For this reafon, as they are them.
felves imperfect beings, they can in no one refpect be confidered proper -
objects of human adoration, which we are bound to pay alone to that
One SUPREME, who is omnipotent, immortal, infinite, the fource.
and centre of every thing that is great, and good, and perfect.


Theologifts have divided angels into different ranks or fubordinations,
which they term Hierarchies, from jeo,, Boly, and ayn, rule, fignifying, ,
- holy command, or to rule in holy things. Dionyfius, and other ancient.
writers, have eftabliihed nine choirs or orders of thefe celeftial fpirits, ,
namely, feraphim, cherubim, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers,
virtues, angels, and archangels; and thefe they form into three Hierarchies, ,
appointing them their refpective offices in the performance of adoration .
and praife, and in executing the word and will of Ged. The Rabbins
and Jewifh writers, who had obviouafly a more tinmediate knowledge of
- ‘the angelic hoft, by the infpiration of their prophets, and the revelation »
of God’s true religion, have defined one rank of angels, or intelligent
beings, fuperior to all the foregoing, which anfwer ‘to or are contained in -
the ten diftinguifhing names of God, and are the pure effences of his
—fpirit, or ftream though which his will and pleafure is communicated
tothe angels and blefled {pirits, and through which his providence extends s
to the care and protection of all his works. The firft of.thefe divine ef-
fences is denominated VP, febovab, and is peculiarly attributed to God
the Father, being the pure and fimple effence of the Divinity, flowing
though Hajoth Hakados, to the angel Metratton, and to the miniftering ~
fpirit Re chith Hagalalim, who guides the primum mobile, and beftaws .
the gift of being upon all things. To this fpirit is allotted the office of

No, 4. | Q bring=~


80 AN’. dba SST RANT COUN


bringing the fouls of the faithful departed into heaven; and by him God.
{pake to Mofes. The fecond is 1 ‘as, and is attributed the Perfon
of the Meffiah, or some, whofe power and influence defcends though the
angel Mafleh into the {phere of the Zodiac.. This is the {pirit or word
which actuated the chaos, and divided the unwrought matter into three
‘portions ; of the firft, or moft effential part, was the {piritual world com-
pofed ; of the fecond, was made the vifible heavens and the luminous
‘bodies ; and of the third, or inferior part, was formed the terreftrial
world, out.of which was drawn the elemental quinteffence, or firft matter
-of all things, which produced the four elements, and all creatures that
inhabit them, by the agency of a particular fpirit called Raziel, who was
the ruler of Adam. The third is 78, EAjeh, and is attributed to the
Holy-Spirit, whofe divine light is received by the angel Sabbathi, and
communicated from him though the fphere of Saturn. This is the prin-
cipium generationis, the beginning of the ways of God, or the manifefta-
tion of the Father and the Son’s light in the fupernatural generation.
And from hence flow down all living fouls, entering the inanimate body,
and giving form to unfettled matter. The fourth is x, E/, through the
light of whom flows grace, geodnefs, mercy, piety, and munificence,
to the angel Zadkicl ; and, thence pafling through the {phere of Jupiter,
fafhioneth the images of all bodies, beftowing clemency, benevolence,
and juftice, on all. The fifth is ws, Elohi, the upholder of the {word
and left-hand of God, whofe influence penetrates the angel Geburah, and
thence defcends though the fphere of Mars, giving fortitude in war and
affliction. The fixth is MS2¥, Tfebacoth, who beftoweth his mighty
power through the angel Raphael into the {phere of the Sun, giving mo-
tion, heat, and brightnefs, to it, and thence producing metals. The fe-
venth is YW, Elion, who rules the angel Michael, and defcends though >
the {phere of Mercury, giving benignity, motion, and intelligence, with
elegance and.confonance of {peech. The eighth is 178, Adonai, whofe
influence is received by the angel Haniel, and communicated through the
{phere of Venus, giving zeal, fervency, and righteoufnefs of heart, and
producing vegetables. The ninth is Sw, Shaddai, whofe influence is con-
veyed by cherubim to the angel Gabriel], and falls into the {phere of the
Moon, caufing increafe and decreafe of all things, governing the genii and
protectors of men, The tenth is coro, E/ahim, who extends his bene-
ficence to the angel Jefodoth, into the fphere of the earth, and difpenfeth
‘knowledge, underftanding, and wifdom. The three firft of: thefe ten
names, viz. Mi, Jehovah, tt, Jah, and Myx, Ehjeh, exprefs the
eflence of God, and are proper names; but the other feven are only ex-
preflive of his attributes. The principal and only true name of the God-
head, according both to the Hebrews and Greeks, is APMN¥ITNID,
Tereayeeuparn, the name of four letters, with which the Godhead, in moft
languages, is obferved to be expreffed ; thus in Hebrew the Supreme


Being


OF ASTROLOGY.  &


Being is called My Jehovah; in the Greek, o..,; in Latin, Deus; in
Spanith, Déos; in Italian, Zdio ; in French, Dzew; in the ancient Gaul-
ith, Diex; in ancient German, Diet; in the Sclavonic, Buch; in Arabic
Alla; inthe Polith, Bung; in the Pannonian, Jf/u; in the Egyptian,
“Tenu ; in the Perfian, Sire ; and in the language of the ancient Magi,
Orf. Thus God is conceived to work by the ideas of his own mind;
and thefe ideas difpenfe their feals, and communicate them to whatever
is formed or created.


In the exterior circle of the celeftial heaven, in which are placed
the fixed ftars, the Anima Mundi hath her particular forms, or feminal
conceptions, anfwering to the ideas of the Divine Mind; and this fitu-
ation approaching neare{t to the empyrean heaven, the feat of God, re-
ceives the fpiritual powers and influences which immediately proceed
from him. Hence they are diffufed through the fpheres of the planets
and heavenly bodies, and communicated to the inmoft centre of the earth,
by means of the terreftrial elements, Thus have the wife and learned
men among the Jews deduced the conftruction and harmony of the world
and fhewn that God performs all his fecret and ftupendous works by the
medium of the celeftial bodies. He acts and governs immediately by
himfelf, but mediately by the heavenly bodies, which are the inftruments
of his Providence, and the fecondary caufes, by which the earth an dall
fimilar fyftems are regulated ; and thefe, perhaps, regulate one another,
by a reciprocal influence and fympathy, communicated to them in the
ordination of nature. And hence comes the original or ground-work
of all men’s nativities, and all manner of natural queftions and things,
and the ftory of all that may happen or proceed out of natural caufes, to
the full end of time. Todemonftrate this more fatisfaCtorily, we fhall
now define the natural properties of the celeftial world, with its particu-
lar divifions, quantity, motion, and meafure, as laid down by the rules
of Aftronomy; and this will lead us to the doctrine of nativities.


AN


$2 ANE 2LU ST RATIO N


AN ASTRONOMICAL SURVEY of the CELESTIAL WORLD;


with the Places, Order, and Motions, of the HEavENLY BoplEs.e


Ti was formerly a fubject of difpute among Philofophers, whether the
@ earth, or the Sun was thecentre of the celeftial fyftem ; but the latter
opinion has been generally received fince the time of Copernicus, who about
the year 1543 publifhed his fix books De Orbium Ceeleftium Revolu-
tionibus, wherein he proves the Sun to be very near the centre of gravity of
the whole fyftem, and in the common focus of every one of the planetary
orbits. Next the Sun, Mercury performs his revolution around him ;
next to Mercury is the orbit of Venus; and next to Venus, our earth,
with its attendant or fecondary the Moon, perform a joint courfe, and by
their revolution meafure out the annual period. - Next to the earth is
Mars, the firft of the fuperior planets: next to him is Jupiter; and, laft
of all, Saturn. Thefe and the comets are the conftituent parts of the
Copernican or folar fyftem, which is now received and approved as the
only true one, becaufe moft agreeable to the tenor of nature in all her ac-
tions; for, by the two motions of the earth all the phenomena of the
heavens are refolved, which by other hypothefes are inexplicable, without
a great number of other motions contrary to philofophical reafoning. It
is alfo more rational to fuppofe that the earth moves round the Sun, than
that the huge bodies of the planets, the ftupendous body of the Sun, and
the immenfe firmament of ftars, fhould all move round the earth every
twenty-four hours. The harmony which runs through the folar fyftem
wonderfully confirms this hypothefis, viz. that the motions of all the
planets, both primary and fecondary, are governed and regulated by one
and the fame law, which is, that the fquares of the periodical times of
the primary planets are to each other as the cubes of their diftances from
the Sun; and likewife the {quares of the periodical times of the feconda-
ries of any primary are to each other as the cubes of their diftances from
that primary. Now the Moon, which, in the Copernican fyftem, isa fe-
condary of the earth, in the other hypothefis is confidered as a primary
one; and fo the rule cannot take place, becaufe the periodical time ftated
as that of a primary one does not agree therewith. But this fingle confi-
deration is fufficient to eftablifh the motion of the earth for ever; viz. if
the earth does not move round the Sun, the Sun muft move with the
Moon round the earth. Now the diftance of the Sun to that of the
Moon being as 10,000 to 46, andthe Moon’s period being lefs than twen-
-ty-eight days, the Sun’s period would be found no lefs than two hundred
and forty-two years; whereas, in fact, it is but one year. The Sunalfo
being the fountain of light and heat, which it irradiates through all the


i fyftem


OF ASTROLOGE Y. 8


fyftem, it muft of courfe be placed in the centre, in order that the planets
may at. all times have it in an uniform and equable manner. For, if the
earth be fuppofed in the centre, and the Sun and planets revolve about it,
the planets would then, like the'cométs; be f{corched with heat when
neareft the Sun, and frozen with cold in their aphelia, or greateft diftance;
which is not to bé imagined. But, if the Sun be fuppofed in the centre
of the fyftem, we then have the rational hypothefis of the planets being abl
moved round the Sun, by the univerfal law or power of gravity arifing
from: his: vaft. body, and every thing wilk anfwer to the laws of circular
‘motion and central forces; but otherwife we are wholly in the dark, and
know not how to define thefeoperations of nature. Fortunately, however,
we are able ‘to give not only reafons, but demonftrable proofs, that the Sun
does poflefs the centre of the fyftem, and that the planets move about
him) in the order above-mentiotied. The firftis, that Mercury and Ve-
nus are‘ever obferved to have two conjunctions with the Sun, but no op-
pofition, which could not happen unlefs the orbits of thefe planets lay
within the orbit of the earth. The fecond is, that Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn, have each their conjuntions and oppofitions to the Sun alternately
and fucceflively, which could not be, unlefs their orbits were exterior to
that of the earth. In the third place, the greateft elongation or diftance
of Mercury fromthe’ Sun’ is about twenty degrees, and that of Venus
forty-feven’ degrees; which anfwers exaétly to their diftance-in this fyf-
tem’; but, in the other, they would be feeh one hundred and eighty de-
grees’ from the Sun, in oppofition to him. Fourthly, in this difpofition
of the planets, they’will-all ofthem be fometimes much nearer tothe earth
than at’ others’; the confequence of which: is, that their brightnefs and
_ f{plendor, and alfo their apparent! diameters, will be proportionally great-
er at one time than’ another; and this we obferve to be true every day.
Thus, the apparent diameter of Wenus, when’ greateft, is near fixty-fix
feconds, but, when'leaft, not more than nine and a half; of Mars, when
greateft, itis twenty-one feconds, but, when leaft, no more than two fe-
conds anda half; whereas, by the other hypothefis, they ought always
to be‘equal: The fifth is, that, when the planets are viewed with a good
telefeope, they’ appear with’ different’ phafes, or with different parts of
their bodies enlightened. Thus Venus is fometimes new, then horned,
and afterwards: dichotomized, then gibbous, afterwards full, and fo en- ‘
creafes and decreafes her light in the fame manner as the Moon, and as
this-fyftem requires.. The fixth proof is, that the planets, all of them,
do fometimes appear direc in motion, fometimes retrograde, and at other
times ftationary. Thus Venus, as fhe paffes from her greateft elongation
weftward' to her greateft elongation eaftward, will appear direct in mo-
tion, but' retrograde as fhe paffes from the latter to the former ; and,
when the is ‘in thofe points*of greateft diftance fromthe Sun, fhe feems

No. 4, R . for


84 K WNT TD EMG SSTT RIM TL ON


for fome time ftationary ; all which is neceflary upon the Copernican hy-
pothefis, but cannot happen in any other. The feventh is, that the bo-
dies of Mercury and Venus, in their lower conjunctions with the Sun,
are hid behind the Sun’s body, and in the upper conjunétions are feen to
pafs over the Sun’s body, or difk, in form of a black round fpot, which is
neceflary in the Copernican fyftem, but impoflible in any other. The
eighth is, that the times in which thefe conjundtions, oppofitions, fta-
tions, and retrogradations, of the planets happen, are not fuch as they
would be if the earth were at reft in its orbit, but precifely fuch as
would happen were the earth to move round the Sun, and all the other
planets in the periods affigned them; and therefore this, and no other,
can be the true fyftem of the world.


But, the better to determine the places of the celeftial bodies, and to
underftand the conftitution of the heavens more clearly, aftronomers have
conceived or defcribed feveral circles, called the circles of the {phere, by
which the celeftial world is divided and meafured out. Some of thefe
are called great circles, as the equinoctial, ecliptic, meridian, &c. and
others {mall circles, as the tropics, parallels, &c. The equinodtial line
is a circle which we imagine to inveft the whole world, and is fo called,
becaufe, whenever the Sun, in his progrefs through the ecliptic, comes to
this circle, it makes equal days and nights all round the globe, as he
then. rifes due eaft, and fets due weft, which he never does at any other
time of the year. This equinoéctial line is conceived to be three hundred
and fixty degrees in its whole circumference; and each of thefe degrees
are divided into fixty minutes, or fixty equal parts of a degree, and thefe
again into as many feconds. ‘The meridian is another great circle, con~
fifting alfo of three hundred and fixty degrees, extending from one polar
point to the other, and twice cutting the equinoctial line, compafling the
whole world from north to fouth, as the equinoctial does from eaft to
weft, and terminates at the fame point where it began. The equinoétial
line is fixed and immutable, and is of neceflity always conceived to be
in oneand the fame place; but the meridian is mutable, and may circle
the world in any or in all degrees of the equator, as we may have occafion
to conceive or imagine; it muft however, uniformly divide the {phere
into two equal parts, which are called hemifpheres. The polar points
are thofe two points in the immenfe ball of the world which are equi-

_diftant from the equinoctial line, the one in the utmoft northern, and the
other in the utmoft fouthern, point. The three hundred and fixty degrees
of the equinoctial line are called the longitude of the world, becaufe they
are in order as the Sun and ftars move in their circuits through the f{paci-
ous heavens in their ref{pective orbs. But the three hundred and fixty de~
grecs of the meridian are called the latitude of the world, becaufe they


1 mete


OFTARTROELOG Y. 86


mete out that diftance wherein the Sun and all the ftars, in a certain
breadth one from another, move in their circuits from eaft to weft.


Now the Sun, in his annual progrefs from weit to eaft, does not keep
the equinoctial line, but declines from it at one part of the year to the
north, and at another part of the year to the fouth; and the planets alfo
obferve the fame order in their progrefs, except that the Sun always keeps.
the fame conftant track, whereas the planets often vary in their declina-
tions from the equinoétial Jine. Hence another great circle is conceived
in the heavens, called the Zodiac, which’ is: likewife divided, as all the
great circles are, into three hundred and fixty degrees; but this circle
being as it were the high road of the planets, and comprehending fo much
of the heavens as the Sunand:planets fwerve in their declinations, is con-
ceived to be twenty degrees broad; and it is confined to this {pace, be-
caufe none of the: planets ever reach beyond ten degrees north, or ten de-
grees fouth, from the equinoctial line; and the Sun’s path or track in the
‘Zodiac is called the ecliptic line, becaufe the eclipfes only happen when:
the Moon is alfo in this line.


The Zodiac is alfo divided into twelve equal parts, called the twelve-
Signs, or houfes of heavon ; and, thefe beginning where the Sun enters the -
equinoctial to the northward, the firft fign is named Aries, and the reft.
in order are called Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, |
Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquaries, and Pifces. Thefe figns confift of:
thirty degrees each ; and, being all of them divided into four equal parts, .
determine the four feafons of the year. Now, when the Sun enters into.
the fign called Cancer, he is in his greateft north declination, and at that.
time is diftant from the equinodtial line twenty-three degrees to the
north’; which occafions another circle to be defcribed, called the tropic
of Cancer, the center of which ‘being the north pole, it comprehends ,
as much. of the extremity of the round world as falls under twenty-.
three’ degrees and a half from the equator to the northward. And, when,
the Sun enters the fign Capricornus, he is in-his utmoft fouth decli-
‘nation, and occafions another circle to be defcribed, called the tropic
of Capricorn, as many degrees from the equator to the fouth as the.
other tropic is to the north. ‘At the diftance of forty-five degrees from
each of thefe tropics two other circles are imagined, called the arctie.
and antarctic circles, which, being but little more than twenty: degrees .
-diftant from each pole, do likewife encircle fome fmall portion of the
extremities of the world. The inferior circles, called parallels, ran,
from eaft to weft, and ferve to divide the heavens. into feveral {paces be-..
tween the greater circles, | ,


-Anciene. -


86 AN ABPRPU SERA TTON


Ancient tradition has handed down to us, the origin of that important
circle called the Zodiac, with the reafon why, it is, fo named, and the inge-
nious method which the firft men made ufe of to know exactly the line
which the Sun defcribes, under the heavens: in the perpetual changings of
its place, and) to, divide the year into equal portions. This tradition, is
found in two, ancient, authors, the one Roman, the other. Greek. The
firft attributes. it to the Egyptians; the other, to the firft: inhabitants. of
‘Chaldea. They every day faw the-Sun and the whole heavens turning
and pafiing from eaft to weft. In the mean time: they obferved: that the
Sun, by a motion peculiar to it, from day, to day receded from fome cer-
tain ftars, and) took its place under others, always: advancing.towards. the
-eaft, Whilt the Moon was making twelve.times that revolution, the
Sua made it only once; but the began the thirteenth again, before: the
‘Sun had as yet compleated its own. The habit. of dividing the year into
pretty near twelve lunations, made them with that they had twelve divi-
fions.of a year perfe@ly equal, or twelve months, which might be exactly
equivalent to the year itfelf, and which might, as it were, be pointed at
with one’s finger in the heavens, by fhewing fome certain ftars under which
the Sun pafles during every one of thefe months. Here is then the me-
thod.in which:they. divided the courfe of the Sun in twelve equal pertions
or collections of ftars, which,are called: afterifms, or. conftellations. Our
aftronomers took a couple of brafs. open, vefiels, the one pierced at the
bottom, and the other without any, orifice below. Having dtopped the
hole of the firft, they filled, it with. water, and placed.it.fo.as that: the wa=
ter might,run out into the other veflel, the moment the cock fhould be
opened. This done, they obfervedin that part of the heaven, where the
Sun has. its annual courfe,, the rifing. of a ftar, remarkable. either for its
magnitude or brightnefs.; and, at the critical inftant. it appeared.on. the
horizon, they began to let the water flow out of the upper veffel into the
other during the reft of the night, and the whole following day, to the
very. moment when the fame ftar, being come to the eaft again, began to
appear anew on the horizon. The inftant it was again feen, they took
away, the under vefiel, and threw the water that remained: in the other
onthe ground. ‘The obfervers were thus. {ure of having one revolution
of ‘the whole heaven, between the firft rifing of the’ ftar| and its return.
The water, which had flowed during that time, might.then afford them
‘a means of meafuring the duration of one whole revolution of the heaven,
and of dividing that duration into feveral equal portions ; fince, by dividing
that water itfelf into twelve equal parts, they were fure of having the re-
volution of a twelfth. part of, the heaven; during. the efflux ofa twelfth

part of the water; they then divided ithe water,of the under veffel into
twelve parts perfectly equal, and prepared two other {mall veffels capable .
of containing exactly one of thofe portions, and no more. They again


poured


Oi “PAAR RIIR cOUL.03 GY 87


poured into the great upper veffel the twelve parts of water all at once,
keeping the veffels fhut. Then they placed under the cock, {till fhut,
one of the two fmall veffels, and another near it to fucceed the firft as
foon as it fhould be full.


All thefe preparations being ready, they, the next night, obferved that
part of the heaven towards which they had for a long while remarked that
the Sun, the Moon, and the planets, took their courfes, and ftaid for the
rifing of the conftellation which is fince called Aries. The Greeks, per-
haps, gave that name to fome ftars different from thofe which went by it
before the flood; but this enquiry is not neceflary at prefent. The in-
ftant Aries appeared, and they faw the firft ftar of it afcending, they let
the water run into the little meafure. As foon as it was full, they re.
moved it, and threw the water out. In the mean time they put the other
empty meafure under the fall. They obferved exactly, and fo as to re-
member very well, all the ftars that rofe during all the periods which the
meafure took in filling ; and that part of the heaven was terminated in
their obfervations by the {tar which appeared the laft on the horizon, the
moment the meafure was juft full: fo that, by giving the two little veflels
the time neceffary to be alternately filled to the brim three times each
during the night, they had, by that means, one half of the courfe of the
fun in the heaven, that is, one half of the heaven itfelf; and that half
again was divided into fix equal portions, of which they might fhew and
diftinguifh the beginning, the middle, and the end, by ftars, which, from
their fize, number, or order, were rendered diftinguifhable. As to the
other half of the heaven, and the fix other conftellations which the fun.
runs over therein, they were forced to defer the obfervation of them to.
another feafon. They waited till the fun, being placed in the middle of
the now known and obferved conftellations, fhould leave them at liberty
to fee the other during the night. |


Doubtlefs, fome precautions were neceflary, not to miftake as to -the.
fall of the water, which mutt flow more flowly in proportion as its mafs
is lefs high. However, after having, by this or fome fuch means, made:
themfelves fure of the great annual courfe which the fun faithfully fol-
lows in the heavens, and of the equality of the {paces filled by the twelve
collections of ftars that limit that courfe, the obfervers thought of giving
them names. They in general called them the ftations or the houfes of
the fun, and afligned three of them to each feafon. They then gave:
each conftellation a peculiar name, whofe property did not only confift.
in making it known again to all nations, but in declaring, at the fame:
time, the circumftance of the year (which was of concern to mankind),
when the fun fhould arrive at that conftellation,

No. 4» 5 By,


88 ANY DS RgLG0GS XT IR CANT Ff @ N


By a particular care of Providence, the dams of the flock commonly.
happen to be pregnant about the end of autumn; they bring forth
during the winter and in the beginning of the fpring; whence it
happens that the young ones are kept warm under the mother. during.
the cold, and afterwards eafily thrive and grow active at the return of
the heat. The lambs come the firft, the calves follow-them, and the
kids fall the laft. By this means the lambs, grown vigorous and ftrong,
may follow the ram to the fields, as the fine days come on. Soonafter
the calves, and at laft the kids, venture abroad, and, by increafing the

flock, begin to augment the revenues of their mafter.


Our ancient obfervers, feeing that there were, during the fpring, no
produCions more ufeful than lambs, calves, and kids, gave the conttel-
lations, under which the fun pafles during that feafon, the names of
the three animals which enrich mankind moft. The firft was named
Aries, the fecond Taurus, the third the two kids, Gemini, the better
to characterize the fecundity of goats, which more commonly bring


forth two young ones than one, and an abundance of milk more than
fufficient to nourifh them.


The bulk of mankind had already very often remarked, that there was
a point to which the fun raifed itfelf in its coming towards them, but
which it never exceeded ; and that it afterwards funk daily, in receding
from them, for fix months together, till it arrived at another point a great
way under the firft, but below which it never defcended... This: retreat
of the fun, made very flowly, and always backward, gave the obfervers
the occafion of diftinguifhing the ftars, which follow the two kids, or
Gemini, by the name of the animal that walks backward, viz. the crab.
When the fun paffles under the next conftellation, it makes our climate
feel fultry heats, but chiefly the climates'where men were at that time
all gathered together. When poets attribute to that conftellation the
fiercenefs and raging of the lion, of which it bears the name, it is very
eafy to guefs at what might determine that choice from the beginning.
Soon after, the houfing of the hay and the corn is entirely over through~
out the eaft; there remain on the ground only a few ears fcattered here
and there, which they caufed to be gleaned by the leaft neceflary hands ;
this work is left to the youngeft girls. How then could they reprefent
the conftellation, under which the fun fees no longer any crops on the
ground, better than by the name and figure of a young maid gleaning ;
‘The wings you fee her have in the {pheres are ornaments added of later
date, after the introdution of fables. The virgin, which follows the
lion, is certainly no other than a gleaning girl, or, if youwill, a reaper; |
and, left we fhould miftake her fun@iions, fhe befides has in her hand acluf-
ter of ears ; a very natural proof of the origin here attributed to her.
I The


*


OF TAS AT IR OL .O GY. 89
~The perfect equality of daysand nights, which happens when the Sun


quits the fign Virgo, caufed aftronomers to give the next fign the name of
Libra, that is, of a balance. The frequent difeafes which the Sun leaves
behind him, or caufes by his retiring, procured, the next fign the name of
Scorpio ; becaufe it is mifchievous, and drags after it a fting and venom.
Towards the end of autumn, the fall of the leaf expofes wild beatts, leav-
ing them lefs covering: vintage and harveft are over; the fields are free ;
and it is.of ill confequencé to fuffer the propagation of beafts at the ap-

roach of winter. Every thing then invites us to,hunt,,and the fign, in
which the Sun is at that, time, has from thence obtained-the ‘name of
Sagittarius ; that is, the archer, or hunt{man. Whatis the proper and
diftinGtive character of the wild .goat, or Capricorn, of which the firft
fign of ,winter has the name? it is to look for its food; getting from the
foot of the mountains to the higheft fummit, and always climbing from
rock to rock: the name of Capricorn was then fit.to inform men. of
the time when the Sun, having reached the loweft verge of its courfe, was
ready to begin to afcend again towards the highe(ft, and to continue to do
fo for fix'months together. This is quite the reverfe of the crab (Cancer);
andthe »happy concurrence of the oppofite characters of thefe two ani-
mals isa proof of, what directed the firft. obfervers in the impofition of
all thefe names.. Aquaries and Pifces, without any difficulty, mark out
the rainy feafon, and the time of the year when fifhes, fatter and nicer than
in/any other time, bring on again the profit and pleafure of fifhing. It
may be remarked, that, of the twelve conftellations, there are ten, the
names of which are. borrowed; from feveral animals; which caufed aftro-
nomers to give the annual circle, which they compofe, the name of Zo-
diac. It.is;as muchas if. you would fay, the circle of animals.


»By this very plain induftry, men acquired a new method of meafuring
time, and of regulating all. their works, They already knew, without
any trouble or care, how to regulate the order of their feafts and common
bufinefs, by infpection only of the phafes of the Moon. , From.the know-
ledge of the Zodiac, they obtained. an exact knowledge of the year: the
conftellations became to them) fo many very fignificant figns, which,
both by their names and refpective fituations, informed them of the or-
der of \their harvefts, and of the cautions they were to take, in order to
bring them about, openly and daily fhewing them how long they were to
ftay forthem; the people were neither obliged to-caft up the days, nor
mark out,the order of times, to regulate themfelves. Twelve words, ap
plied to twelve different parts of the heaven, which every-night,revolved
before their eyes, were to them a part of, knowledge no lefs convenient
and advantageous than eafy to be acquired. When men, after the fetting
of the Sun, faw the ftars of the fign Aries afcend the oppofite horizon,


and diitant from the Sun by one half-of the heaven, they then knew that .
the


90 he er Th ee C6 oT WR CANT, EOIN


the fun. was under the fign Libra, which, being the feventh of the celef-

tial figns, was diftant from the. firft by one whole half of the Zodiac, —

When at the approach of day they faw in the middle of the heaven, and

at an equal diftance from eaft and weft, the fineft ftar of the figm Leo, they

eafily underftood that the fun, then ready to rife, was at the diftance of
three figns from Leo, and removed towards the eaft one quarter part of its

circle. Thus, without feeing the ftars which the fun drowned by’ its

brightnefs as he came‘under them, they faid, with a perfe@ affurance, that

the fan is now in Scorpio; two months hence we fhall have the fhorteft
day. They could, on fight of a fingle conftellation, placed in the eaftern,

or middle, or weftern, part of the heaven, immediately fay where the fun.
was, how far the year was advanced, and what kind of work it was.fit
they fthould bufy themfelves about. After this manner fhepherds and
farmers ftill regulate their works ; and, if we at prefent are now ignorant

_ of the ftars, if we are not able to determine the diftance between one
conftellation fhewn us and the aétual place of the fun, it is becaufe we
can read and write. The firft men perufed the heavens for want of writ
ing ; and it'is‘on account of the conveniency of writing that the gene-

rality of men now difpenfe with looking among the ftars for the know-
ledge of the operations and order of the year. But writing itfelf, that
fo ufeful invention, is one of the products of aftronomy ; and it may’ be
eafily fhewn alfo, that. the names given the twelve celeftial figns gave
birth to the-invention both of painting and writing. The hiftory of the
heavens ftill promifes further novelty, and it will continue to inform us

of the helps for which we are indebted to the ftudy of nature.


Now, merely to know and to underftand thefe divifions of the heavens
is nothing more than f{peculative aftrology, commonly called Aftronomy ;
but, to attain to the knowledge of Aftrology in general, we muft be con-
verfant in the affections and qualities of the heavenly matter, and of the pla-
nets and fixed ftars. Itis generally imagined that the fixed ftars are faft-
ened in the eighth orb of the celeftial heaven, and only move as that orb
doth, and uniformly together, about one minute’s {pace in a whole year ;
_ but reafon has not abfolutely determined this point, fo as to leave it quite |
fatisfactory, or incontrovertible. The fixed ftars are obferved to differ
from the planets by their twinkling or fparkling; whence philofophers
have conceived them to fhine with their own innate light, the fame as the
fan does. The number of ftars difcoverable in either hemifphere is
not abovea thoufand. This at firft may appear incredible, becaufe they
feem to be without number; but the deception arifes from our looking
confufedly upon them, without reducing them into any order*. If we
but look ftedfaftly upon a pretty large portion of the fky, and count the


* See Fergufon’s Aftronomy, Sect, 355, dc.
ftars


@ # TAAS MF IR COUL JOUGI Y.-J gr


ftars'in it, we fhall be furprifed to find them fo few ; and, if we confi-
der how feldom the moon meets with any ftars in “her. way, although
there aré 4s many-about her path as in other parts of the heavens, we
may {oon be convinced that the ftars are much thinner fown than peo-
ple are aware of. The Britith catalogue, which, befides the ftars vilible
to'the naked eye, includes a great number which cannot be feen without
the affiftance ofa telefcope, contains no more than three thoufand in both —
hemifpheres. From what we know of the immentfe diftances of the fixed
ftars, the neareft may be computed at 32,000,000,000,000 of miles from
the earth, which is farther than a cannon-ball would fly in feven mil-
lion of years! Thefe ftars, on account of their apparently various mag-
nitudes, are diftributed into feveral claffes or orders ; thofe which appear
largeft are called fars of the firft magnitude; the next to them, in fize
and luftre, fars of the fecond magnitude; and {oon to the /fxth, which
confift of the fimalleft that can be feen by the naked eye. This dittci-,
bution having been made long before the invention of telefcopes, the
ftars. which cahiot be ‘feen without the help of thefe inftruments are


diftinguifhed by the name of ¢e/e/copre flars.


For the fame reafon that the ftars within the belt or circle of the zo?
diac wete-divided into conftellations, fo have been thofe on either fide
of it; viz. to diftinguith them from one another, fo that-any: particular
ftar may be readily found in the heavens, by the help of aceleftial globe,
upon which the'conitellations are fo delineated as to put the moft re-
markableftars into fuch parts of the figures which reprefent them as
are mofteafily diftinguithed ; and thofe ftars which could not be brought
into any part of thele figures are called unformed fiars. The number of
theancient conftellations is forty-eight : viz.upon the zodiac twelve;
upon allthat région of the heavens on the north-fide of the zodiac,
twenty-one ; and upon: the fouth-fide fifteen more ; making in the
whole forty- ‘eight conftellations. But, the: more modern philofophers
and aftrologians having added a number of others, I fhall {ct the whole


down in their proper order.


TABLE Of tthe tAncients CONSE L L ATLONS.


Ptolemy. Tycho, Hevel. Flamtt,


Urfa minor The Little Bear 8 7 12 24
Urfa major The Great Bear plas 29 72 87
Draco The Dragon 31 32 40 80
Cepheus Gepheus Sey a 4 tp de
Bootes, Arctophilax . 23 18 52 $4.
Corona Borealis The Northern Crown ~ 8 8 8 Dae
Hercules, Engonafin Hercules kneeling BOareniczo 45°. 183
No. 5. pe bee Lyra


92 A ON. { YOLGL M008 :T-R PAAT, 1 OLN


Ptolemy.
Lyra The Harp 10
Cygnus, Gallina The Swan 19
Caffiepea The Lady in her Chair 13
Perfeus Perfeus 29
Auriga The Waggoner 14.
Serpentarius, Opdincus Serpentarius 29
Serpens The Serpent 18
Sagitta The Arrow i
Aguila, Vultur The Eagle
Antinous | Antinous \ +5
Delphinus The Dolphin 10
Equulus, Egui fectio Horfe’s Head 4
Pegafus Equus Flying Horfe  _ 20
Andromeda Andromeda 23
Triangulum The Triangle ibe
Aries The Ram 18
Taurus The Bull 44
Gemini The Twins 25
Cancer The Crab 23
Leo The Lion .
Coma Berenices Berenice’s Hair \ 35
. Virgo The Virgin 32
Libra, Chele The Scales 17 .
Scorpius The Scorpion 24
Sagittarius The Archer 31
Capricornus The Goat 28
Aquarius The Water-bearer AS
Pifces The Fithes 38
Cetus - The Whale 22
Orion Orion 38
Eridanus, Fluvius Eridanus, the River 34
Lepus | The Hare 12
Canis major Great Dog 29
Canis minor Little Dog 2
Argo ‘The Ship AS
Hydra Hydra 27
Crater The Cup 7
Corvus The Crow 4
Centaurus Centaur 37
Lupus The Wolf 19
Ara The Altar 7
Corona Auftralis Southern Crown 13
Pifces Auftralis Southern Fith 18


Tycho.


OF ASTROLOGY, 93


The NEW SOUTHERN CONSTELLATIONS.


Columba Naochi Noah’s Dove Resist

Robur Carolinum The Royal Oak . 12

Grus The Crane 13

Phcenix The Phenix 13

Indus The Indian 12

Pavo The Peacock 14

Apus, Avis Indico The Bird of Paradife TI

Apis, Mu/ca The Bee or Fly iy Ar ed

Chamelion The Camelion 10

Triangulum Auftralis South Triangle 5

Pifcis volans, Pafer Flying Fifth 8

Dorado, Xiphias Sword Fifth 6

Toucan American Goofe 9

Hydrus Water-Snake 10
HEVELIUS’s CONSTELLATIONS made out of the unformed Stars,
; Hevel. Flamft.
Or eam The Lynx 7 Q 44
Leo minor The Little Lion 53
Afteron & Chara The Greyhounds 23 25
Cerberus Cerberus 4
Vulpecula & Anfer The Fox and Goofe 27 35
Scutum Sobieski Sobiefki’s Shield 7
Lacerta Lizard 16
Cameleopardalus Cameleopard | 32 58
Monoceros Unicorn 19 31
Sextans Sextant 11 41


Thefe conftellations, or groupes of fixed ftars, have doubtlefs their
diftinét energy and inflence in the operations of nature; although we
have not means fufficient to diftinguifh them all, according to their
peculiar virtues. ‘The nearer they are fituated to the ecliptic line, and
the zodiac, fo much the apter are they to operate in the common acts
of nature; and fo much the more eafily allured into the opportunities
of our acquaintance. Of the firft magnitude we have extraordinary in-
{tances of that ftar in Leo, called Cor Leonzs, in twenty-five degrees of the
fign, to be of the nature of Mars and Jupiter mixed together ; and is a
ftar greatly contributing to noble qualifications, and kingly favour, Fa-
mous alfo is the knowledge of Spica Virginis, a ftar of Virgo by conftella-
tion, but in thefign Libra: this ftar partakes both of the nature of Venus
and Mars, and contributes greatly to ecclefiaitical preferments. After
thefe are very well known the ftars called .d/debaron in Gemini, and

Antares


94 AN TLDUS TRATION


Antares in. Sagittary, both ftars of the nature of Mars, proyoking to
courage arid magnanimity, bat inclining to violence ‘and’ craclty. Of. -
the fecagnd magnitude are the South Bataee. and the Head of Pollux,
both ftars of a furious and violént nature. Of the third magnitude,
the Head of Medufa, of Algol, is famous for its mifchievous inclinations ;

and fo are the two Afes, ttars of the-fourth magnitude. Of’ the Gfth
magnitude are the P/eiades, ftars of remarkable influence, dnd°eelebrated
fore their fweet and benevolent nature. Stars of the fixth tnagnitude
are very fmall ; yet, notwithftanding this, they are not without their
operations upon earthly things; as in the breaft of the Crab, called
Prefepe, are feveral little ftars which appear only liké’a white ‘cloud,
and yet the force of this conftelation has been often felt°in the afeits
of mankind. Thefe fixed ftars alfo often prove their force in ‘the change
of weather, as they happen to rife, Culinary or fet, with the fun,
moon, and planets.


But the conftellations which form ‘the twelve figns of the zodiac have
obvioufly the moft. powerful and moft immediate operation upon man ;
and the reafon is, becaufe they form the pathway of the fun, moon, and
planets, in all their peregrinations, and thereby receive from'them a
more forcible power and energy. And, as thefe figns form a confiderable
part of the Science of Aftrology, we fhall confider them under all their
various qualities and affections, both with refpect to their "operations upon
man’s body and upon the four feafons of the year. .Thefe figns: are
Known or diftinguifhed by the following characters


xv Aries ss Cancer = Libra ye Capricornus
xy Taurus Ss Leo m Scorpio se Aquaries
a Gemini m Virgo | ¢ Sagittarius x Pifces


They are placed in this order, and divided into four equal parts, an=
{wering tothe four: quarters of the year, becaufe the equator cuts and
divides the circle of the zodiac at the point beginning with Aries, and at -
_the oppofite point of Libra, dividing the whole into two equal parts,
confifting of fix northern and fix fouthern figns.. But the reafon why
the fun’s courfe begins and is reckoned from Aries.is, as tradition in-
forms: us, becaufe the fun, when firft. brought into exiftence, was
placed, in this ign. And this is not an unreafonable conje@ure, fince
the {pring quarter begins when the Sun enters Aries, and brings with
it increafé and length of days, and all nature begins to multiply and
flourith, and, as it were, to rife into. new life. The fix northern figns
terminate with Virgo, and the fix fouthern commence with Libra; but
the northern figns have always been confidered of a more eflicacious and

noble nature than the fouthern.
Philofophers


OF TA SITIROO LO GY. | 98


» Philofophers have alfo affigned another reafon for this order and di-
vifion.of the twelve figns of the zodiac, namely, ‘That Nature works by
oppofition and contrariety, and thus brings about the four ftates of all
elementary bodies, viz. generation, confervation, corruption, and anni-
hilation. As therefore generation is the firft itate, and is produced and
nourifhed by heat, they begin with the fiery fign Aries. The next
quality being confervation, or durability, they fignify the fame by
placing an earthy fign next in order, fince earth gives permanency and. -
fixation to corruptible bodies. The third quality being corruptible,
itis reprefented by an airy fign, becaufe air is known to be the fource
of putrefaction. The laft ftate of an elementary body is its final end,
or diflolution; and, as water diffolves all corruptible bodies, fo have
they defcribed it by placing a watery fign the laft of all. In this ar-
rangement of the figns of the zodiac we may further obferve, that two
paflive principles are placed between two active ones; and, as our all-
wife Creator hath fo conftructed nature, that the oppofition of one
thing fhould occafion the exiftence or duration of another, fo we may
obferve it in the divifions of the zodiac ; for inftance, Aries, a fiery fign,
is placed oppofite to Libra, which is an airy fign; and in all refpects
refembles a man fitting before a fire with a pair of bellows in his hands,
blowing to keep it burning: for, without air, fire is foon extinguifhed.
In the fame manner it is with the water and the earth; but, to make
thefe obfervations more apparent, we will arrange the figns of the zodiac
under all their different qualities and forms.


The Divifions of the Twelve SIGNS of the ZODIAC.


Signs oppofite are thef v y a 2 9 m Northern and commanding.
firft fix to the laft fix| =m £ » = x Southern and obeying.


They are divided alfo according
to their four Triplicities .and
Nature


Fiery v2 # Hot and dry.
j Earthy ws m™ yw Cold and dry.
Airy u#« Hotand moitt.
Watery = mx Cold and moitt.


Some are Mafculine, as ru Q 2 ft -F iery and airy, mafculine.
Some are Feminine, as 3 @ mm wx Earthy and watery, feminine.


Equinoctial Ye
‘Tropical ao iY
Fixed ay a
Common . CL NE ARO |
Moveable + DB &


No.'s. | Lees tens | -‘Thefe


9 AN ILLUSTRATION


Thefe figns are termed fixed, common, and moveable, becaufe, when-
ever the funis in anyone of them, it anfwers to the feafon of the year ;
the weather being then either moveable, or fixed; or between both.


~


eos (Spring quarter Bb
Tak an es ; a ia Summer quarter. @
eee Fike a a | Autumn quarter 2
iy year, #8 Winter quarter.


EL a Rate
eee


Aries begins the fpring quarter, for which reafon all the revolutional.
figures, either for the world or for particular ftates, are fet from the
{un entering the firft point of the equinoctial fign Aries.


Bicorporal or double m |
* bodied } Ps the firft part of the fign only.
Fruitful Signs Ss m x |
Barren xr Q Mm
Humane or courteous zm me & &
Mute figns, or flow of fpeech @ m x
Feral figns &  & the laft part only.


Signs of right or long afcenfions Ss 2 Ma m #)
Signs of fhort and oblique afcenfions 7 = 0% © 8


ore


Signs broken
Signs whole


Ru x

es) Dee) gett ay
Signs fortunate YY uO & f£
Signs unfortunate 8 3 mm ww x
Signs {weet IESE ee) be cor
Signs bitter aoe le
Signs weak , ff ow
Signs ftrong Ri. emyphese


Some figns are controvertible in their nature, according to their
accidental fituation in the heavens, as m and q in the eaft are hot
and dry, % and * hottifh, g cold and moift, w cold and dry. In
the weft nm mand & are cold and moift, x cold, # hot and dry.


Thefe qualities are abfolutely neceflary to be obferved in judging of the
weather. .


: When the moon, or lord of the afcendant, is pofited, at a nativity,
in any of the figns we term hot, the native will be manly and vigorous,


and


O:FS ASTROLOGY. 97


and choler will abound in him; ~but, if any of thofe figns we term cold,
he will then be meek, womanith, and effeminate; all which affections


proceed from phlegm.


There are figns called quadrupedian, or four-footed, as TY » 2 4 ¥,
becaufe thofe creatures from whence they are named have four feet ;
and in a nativity, where either of them afcend, they import that the con-
ftitution of the native partakes much of the nature of that creature they
reprefent ; for. inftance, if Aries afcends, themhe will be hot and dry, and
partake of the qualities of the ram; if Taurus be lord of the afcendant,
he will be furious, as the bull; if Leo afcend, he will be in nature bold
and magnanimous; if Sagittarius, he will be. perfevering and intrepid ;
if Capricorn, he willbe luftful and libidinous, like the goat. So there
are figns of humanity, as a mm 2 «, and the firft part of ¢; and in
nativities where any of thefe figns afcend, or in which the lord of the
afcendant is placed, it fignifies that the native is of a friendly difpofition.
humane, affable, and courteous; of an excellent.carriage, and engaging
‘behaviour. Again, fome figns are called fruitful, asm ; and, if
the afcendant or his lord, or the moon, be placed in any one of thefe, or
if the cufp of the fifth houfe has one. of thefe upon it, or if his lord be
pofited in one of them, the native will have many children, or will be
of a prolific conftitution ; but, if barren figns poffefs the aforefaid-places,
then, according to the plain courfe of nature, fterility and barrennéfs
will follow. There are alfo fome figns termed mute, as @o mx. If
any of thefe afcend ina nativity, and Mercury, who is the general fig-
nificator of {peech, be affli@ed by the planet Saturn and the Dragon’s
Tail in an evil houfe of heaven, and the afcendant alfo vitiated, the na-
tive will be born dumb ; if Mercury be free, and the afcendant only
afflicted, or if the afcendant be free, and Mercury afflicted, the native
will be generally filent, and flow of fpeech. But, if figns of voice afcend
in a nativity, as © m os 4 *, the native will pofiets a volubility of
fpeech, and be a good orator. Again, fome figns are feral, i. e. brutith,
or favage; fuch are 2 and the laft part of Sagittarius. Some are
termed hoarfe, or whiftling, as Ys 2 #3; and whenever Leo, or the
Jaft part of Sagittarius, afcend in a nativity, the native will be brutifhly
inclined, and poffefs an unfeeling and cruel difpofition. Thofe perfons,
in whofe nativity Ys 2 w are horofcopical, have a conftant hoarfe-
nefs or whiftling in their delivery and fpeech, though otherwife quick
and voluble enough ; and thofe perfons are generally crooked, deformed,
or imperfectly born, who have x afcending, and Caput Algol pofited
in the afcendant.


There are alfo degrees which are termed mafculine, feminine, light,
dark, fmoky, pitted, azimene or deficient, and increafing fortune;
thefe are all exhibited at one view in the following table.

A. TABLE


93 AN tHLEUS TRA TION


A TABLE exhibiting the Arrections and SigniricaTions of thé
DEGREES in each Sicn of the Zopiac.


so0139q
susWIZYy IO
aun}O Wy
gaioua


Sut


DUIPNIJe PY
sa0182(]
SuTHIONS J
$9243]
jusioyaq,
_ -gaaasdoq]


12.17 23 | 9 10 11
26 30 12,13


6 13 15
22 23 28


In the firft column againft you find 8.15. 30, under the column of
mafculine degrees ; and under the column of feminine, you have g. 22
which thews that the firft eight degrees of Y are‘mafculine, and the
ninth degree feminine; from g to 1¢ are mafculine, and from 15 to 22
feminine ; and from 22 to 30 are mafculine.. The ufe of whichis, that, if
the principal fignificator in a nativity be pofited in the degrees and figns
mafculine, be the native male or female, it argues, that he or the hall
inherit a more mafculine temper and refolution than ordinary. But, if
the fignificator be in feminine figns and degrees, then the native will be
more effeminate, timid, and lefs robuft. The fame obfervation holds
good with refpect to the other figns and degrees, as in the table they
ftand directed. Thefourth column points out that there are certain de-
grees in each fign, which ate termed /igfz; and, if either of thefe afcend

2 A
= in


OlF AUSTTER’ O' L? of dG’ Ye bb


in anativity, the native will be of a fairer and clearer complexion than
ordinary. The fifth column fhews that there are degrees termed dar or
obfcure ; and, whenever thefe happen to be horofcopical in a nativity, they
declare the native to be of a dark or fallow complexion, and, if he thould
be born deformed, his deformity will be confiderably greater. The fixth
column fhews which degrees of the zodiac are called /moky; and, if any
of them arife on the eaftern fineter at the time of birth, they declare the
native of a mixed complexion, neither fair nor {warthy, but partaking of
both; and fimilar to his complexion will be his underftanding. The
feventh column fhews which of the degrees of the zodiac are called void;
and, if the afcendant in the radix of any nativity be pofited in them, it
delares an imbecility in the judgment and underftanding of the native ;
and, the farther he enters into converfation or bufinefs, the more obvious
will this defect appear. The eighth column points out what degrees in
each of the twelve figns are called deep and pitted; and thefe, ina nativity,
fienify, thatif the afcendant, his lord, or the moon, be fituated in any of
them, the native will be of a hafty and imperfect {peech, incapable of ex-
prefling his defires, or of declaring his fentiments ; and will be always in-
volved in vexatious litigations and difputes ; and, like a man in a pit or
fnare, will want the afliftance of another to help him out. The ninth
column diftinguifhes the azimene, lame, or deficient, degrees; and, if ina
_ nativity any one of thefe afcend, or the lord of the afcendant, or the moon,
be in any of them, the native will be crooked, lame, or deformed, or in
fome manner vitiated in the member or part of the body that the fign
governs in which fuch azimene degrees fhall happen to be. This rule
is fo unexceptionable and invariable, that it ought to be well confidered
in the judgment of every nativity. The tenth column points out all the
degrees in the twelve figns that are augmentors or increafers of fortune;
and the knowledge to be derived from them is, that if, in a nativity, the
cufp of the fecond houfe, or lord of the fecond, Jupiter, or part of for-
tune, be in cegreés augmenting, they then become arguments of much
wealth ; and prefage that the native fhall, according to his capacity or
fituation in life, attain to {till greater honour, riches, and preferment.


But, befides thefe general properties, each of the figns poffefs a parti-
cular efficacy and virtue peculiar to themfelves, or to that part of the hea-
vens wherein they bear rule. For, as upon earth all ground will not
bring forth the fame fruit, fo in the heavens all places or parts thereof
will not produce the fame effects. Upon the earth, aman in his journey
rides over ten miles, more or lefs, upon the fands; at another time, he
traces over as many miles more upon the clay; and, after that, he pro-
ceeds on another ten miles upon the marl and gravel. Similar to this,
by the moft correct obfervation, appears to be the alternate variations of


No. 5. x the


100 A Ny LijlsUsSeTeR2 A, TI ON


the heavenly matter. This we fhall render apparent, by examining the
different and diftin@ qualities of every fign throughout all the degrees of
the zodiac. And firft 3


~


Of VA RelcE.S, (os:


This fign, obfervation and experience both inform us, is hot and -
dry, like ahigh gravelly or fandy ground; and, when this fign afcends
at a birth, or if the fan or moon be pofited in it, it ufually contributes
unto the native a dry body, lean and {pare, {trong and large bones and
limbs, piercing eyes, a fwarthy or fallow complexion, and fandy-co-
loured or red hair, and inclines him to be choleric, brutal, violent, and
intemperate; that is, this fign naturally produces thefe effets. But, if
the planets Jupiter or Venus be in the afcendant, or in this fign, it very
materially alters both the conftitution and complexion of the native for
thebetter; but, if Saturn or Mars be pofited there, then it is altered
confiderably for the worfe *. For, as fome land will bear wheat, and
other land only rye, and yet, by adding compoft to it, or by ordering it
accordingly, the nature of the mold may oftentimes be changed, and
made to bring forth fruit contrary to its own nature :——juft the fame it
is when the planets, or their afpects, fall ftrongly intoafign; they quite
change its nature and effect; but, if none of thefe happen, then the fign
Aries, and the reft, unalterably purfue their own nature.

Aries is an equinottial, cardinal, diurnal, moveable, fiery, choleric,
hot and dry, luxurious, violent, fign; eaftern, and of the fiery triplicity.
It is the day-houfe of Mars, and confifts of twelve ftars. The difeafes
produced by this fign are the {mall-pox and falling ficknefs, apoplexies,
head-ach, megrims, baldnefs, and all difeafes of the head and face, hair-
lips, rmg-worms, meafles, fevers, convulfions, and the dead palfy.
The regions over which Aries prefides, are England, France, Baftarnea,
Syria, Paleftine, the Upper Burgundy, Germany, Switzerland, the Up-
per Silefia, the Leffer Poland, Denmark, and Judea; the cities of Naples,
Capua, Ancova, Imolia, Ferrara, Florence, Verona, Lindavia, Brunf-
wick, Craconia, Marfeilles, Saragoffa, Barganum, Ceefarea, Padua, Au-
gufta, and Utrecht. In man, it governs the head and face; and the
colour it rules is white mixed with red.


TAURUS, g.


Taurus differs greatly from the preceding fign, being in nature cold
and dry, as if out of a hot and fandy foil aman were on a fudden to
enter into a cold deep clay country. If this fign afcends at a birth, or is

* See Doct. of Nat. lib. i. cap. 10, fect. 1.
2 pofited -


Ot ASI Ro CO) Li OG YY, Lor


pofited in the fun or moon’s place, it ufually renders a perfon with a
broad brow, thick lips, dark curling hair, of qualities fomewhat brutal
and unfeeling ; melancholy, and flow to anger; but, when once enraged,
violent and furious, and difficult to be appeafed. Hence it follows that
this is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy, feminine, fixed, noéturnal,
fign ; fouthern, and of the earthy triplicity; the night-houfe of Venus ;
and contains twenty-three ftars. The difeafes incident to this fign are,
cold and dry melancholic habits, fluxes of rheum, wens in the neck, fore
throats, king’s-evil, quinfeys, and confumptions.. The regions OVErs:
which it prefides.are, Perfia, Media, Parthia, Cyprus, the iflands.of the
Archipelago, the Leffler Afia, White Rufiia, the Greater Poland, Ireland,
Lorraine, Helvetia, Rhetica, Franconia, and Switzerland; with the cities
of Mantua, Borronia, Parma, Sens, Terentia, Bythinia, Panorum, Heri-
opolis, Leipfic, and Nantz. In man, it governs the neck and throat;
and-the colour it rules is red mixed with citron.


G EOMODON) Ejayin.


Gemini is in nature hot and moift, like a fat and rich foil; and pro-
duces a native fair and tall, of ftraight body and fanguine complexion,
rather dark than clear; the arms long, but oftentimes the hands and feet
fhort and flefhy: the hair and eyes generally a dark hazle, of perfe&
fight, and lively wanton look, the underflanding found, and judicious
in worldly affairs. Gemini is defined an airy, hot, moift, fanguine,
double-bodied, mafculine, diurnal, weftern, fign, of the airy triplicity,
_ Jt is the day-houfe of Mercury; and confifts of eighteen fixed ftars.
The difeafes produced by this fign are, all the infirmities of the arms,
' fhoulders, and hands, phrenzy-fevers, corrupt blood, fractures, and dif.
orders in the brain. The regions over which it prefides are, the weft
and fouth weft of England, Brabant, Flanders, America, Lombardy,
Sardinia, and Wittembergia; the cities of London, Mentz, Corduba,
Bruges, Hasford, Norringberg, Louvaine, Mogontia, and Verfailles.
In man he governs the hands, arms, and fhoulders; and rules all mixed.
red and white colours. ;


GAA NY Gy BERS x? 'ss-


This fign, like a watery m@orifh land, is by nature cold and moitt ;
and, when it afcends at the time of birth, it yields a native fair and pale,
of a fhort and fmall ftature, the upper part of the body- generally large,
with a round face, brown hair, and grey eyes ; of qualities phiegmatic
and heavy, effeminate conftitution, and {mall voice ; ifa woman, inclin-
ed to have-many children. Cancer is the only houfe of the moon, and

: is


C7


102 A No DIB TeR Aor OLN


is the firft fign of the watery or northern triplicity ; it is a watery, cold,
moift, phlegmatic, feminine, nocturnal, moveable, fruitful, folfticial,
fign ; and comprehends nine fixed ftars. Peculiar to this fign are all dif-
orders of the’ breaft and ftomach, pleurifies, indigeftion, fhortnefs of
breath, want of appetite, cancers, coughs, phthifics, dropfies, furfeits,
impofthumes, afthmas, and confumptions. The regions which are ©
more immediately under the government of this fign, are Scotland, Hol-
Jand, Zealand, Grenada, Burgundy, Numidia, Africa, Bythinia, Phrygia, -
Cholcis, and Carthage ; together with the cities of Conftantinople, Tu-
nis, York, St. Andrew’s, Venice, Algiers, Genoa, Amfterdam, Mag-
denburg, Cadiz, St. Lucia, and New-York. In man, it governs the
breaft, ribs, lungs, liver, pleura, and ventricle of the ftomach; and the
colour it rules is green and rufiet.


Live O, R-


Leo is the only houfe of the fun, by nature fiery, hot, dry, mafculine,
choleric, barren, and commanding ; eaftern, and of the fiery triplicity ;
and claims twenty-feven of the fixed ftars, When this fign afcends in.
anativity, it denotes that the native will be of a large mafculine body,
broad fhoulders, and auflere countenance ; dark or yellowith hair, large
commanding eye, fprightly look, and ftrong voice ; the vifage oval, and
ruddy, or fanguine ; arefolute and courageous f{pirit, afpiring mind, free
and generous heart, with anopen, bold, and courteous, difpofition. It
muft however be remarked, that the beginning and middle of this fign
produce all the above faculties in the greateft degree of ftrength ; and
that, in the latter part.of the fign, the native will be rather {pare and
thin, with light flaxen hair, and of a weaker conftitution and tempera-
ture. The difeafes produced under Leo, are all the pafflions and affec-
tions of the heart, as convulfions, {woonings, tremblings, qualms, violent
fevers, plagues, peftilences, fmall-pox, meafles, yellow jaundice, pleu-
rifies, foreeyes, and all difeafes arifing from choler, and all pains in the
back, ribs, and bowels. ‘The provinces under the rule of Leo are, Italy,
the Alps, Silicia, Bohemia, Phoenicia, Chaldea, part of Turkey, and
Apulia; alfo the cities of Rome, Damafcus, Cremona, Prague, Linzi-
nus, Philadelphia, Syracufe, Briftol, Crotona, and Ravenna. In man, it
governs the heart and back, the vertebra of the neck, and pericranium,
It rules the colours red and green. |


VIRGO, m.,


Virgo isan earthy, cold, dry, barren, feminine, fouthern, noéturnal,
melancholy, fign, of the earthy triplicity, and the houfe and exaltation of
Mercury, confifting of twenty-four fixed ftars, When this fign afcends,

it


a Ad SUE RUOLT .O Goyer 02 409


it perfonates a decent and. well-compofed body, flender, and above the
middle ftature, of a ruddy brown complexion, black or dark brown lank
hair, the vifage fomewhat round, the voice fmall and fhrill, @witty and
ingenious mind, ftudious, but rather unftable; and, if the afcendant be
free from the malevolent afpecis of Saturn, and this fign afcends with
Mercury therein, the perfon who hath them fo fituated at his birth will
be an excellent orator: The particular difeafes of this fign, are thofe
produced by worms, wind, and obftruttions ; hardnefs of the {pleen, mo-
ther, hypocondriac melancholy, cholic, and iliac paflion. The regions
under the government of Virgo, are Babylon, Melopotamia, Affyria, A-
chaia, Greece, Croatia, Corinthia, Crete, the Duchy of Athens, part of
Gallia Comata, part of Rhenus and the Lower Silefia; with the cities of
Jerufalem, Corinth, Navarre, Arethium, Brundufium, Padua, Touloufe,
Paris, Bafi]; Cratiflavia, Heidelburg, Sigina, Erphordia, and Lyons. In
man it governs the belly, bowels, fpleen, omentum, navel, and dia-
phragm ; and it rules the colour black {peckled with blue.


Dish RAY =.


Libra isa fign aerial, fanguine, hot, and moift, equinoctial, cardinal,
moveable, mafculine, weftern, diurnal, and humane ; the day-houfe of Ve-
nus, of the airy triplicity, and confifts of eight ftars. At a birth it pro-
duces one of atall, ftrait, and well-made, body ; of a round, lovely, and
beautiful, vifage, a fine fanguine complexion in youth, but in old agecom-
monly brings pimples, or a very deep red colour in the face ; the hair yel-
low, or fomewhat tending to flaxen, long and lank, grey eyes, of a cour-
teous friendly difpofition, with a mind juft and upright in all its purfuits.
The difeafes common to this fign are, the ftone, gravel, heat, wind, cho-
lic, and difeafes in the loins, impofthumes or ulcers in the reins, bladder,
or kidneys; corruption of blood, weaknefs in the back, and gonorrheas.
The regions under its peculiar {way, are Baftriana, Cafpia, Seres, Oafis,
féthiopia, Sabandia, Alfatia, Sundgavia, Livonia, Auftria, Pannonia, Por-
tugal, and the Dukedom of Savoy. Alfo the cities of Lifbon, Spria,
Placentia, Lauday, Friefbury, Heilborn, Antwerp, Frankfort, Vienna,
. Olyfiponis, Arafatum, Cajeta, Charles-Town, Suefla, Argentum, Velk-
kirchium, aud Halafrifinga. In manit governs the reins, kidneys, and
bladder; and the colours under itsruleare black, darkcrimfon, or tawney.


SCORPIO, m.


Scorpio is 4 moift, cold, phlegmatic, feminine, noéturnal, fixed,
northern, fign ; the night-houfe and joy of Mars, and is of the watery
trigon; and includes twelve ftars. It gives a ftrong, robuft, corpulent,

No. 5. Y body,


104 AN? OD Geo STOR Ae Ie N

body, of middle ftature, broad vifage, brown complexion, and brown
curling hai; an hairy body, fhort neck, and fhort thick legs, quick in
bodily motion, but referved and thoughtful in converfation. The dif-
eafes incident to Scorpio, are the ftone and gravelinthe bladder, ftrangu-
ary, and other imperfections in the urinal paflage; ruptures, fiftulas, he-
morrhoids, venereal difeafe, running in the reins, priapif{ms, fcurvy, and
piles. It bears rule over the regions of Matragonitida, Commagena, Cap~
padocia, Judea, Idumea, Mauritania, Getulia, Catalonia, Norwegia, the
Weft Silefia, and the Upper Bavaria, the kingdom of Fez, and Barbary;
together with the cities of Algiers, Valentia, Trapizuntia, Aquila, Pof:-
toria, Camerinum, Petavium, Meffina, Vienna of the Allobroges, Ge~ |
dandum, Crema, Ariminum, and Frankfort upon Oder. In man it go-
verns the privities, feminal veflels, groin, bladder, and fundament; and
prefers a brown colour.


S, A'G Part AOR espe.


Sagittarius is afiery, hot, dry, mafculine, diurnal, eaftern, common, bie
corporal, fign, of the fiery trigon; the houfe and joy of Jupiter; contain-
ing thirty-one ftars. Ata birth it endows the native with a well-formed
body, rather above the middle ftature ; with an handfome comely coun-
tenance, a vifage fomewhat long, ruddy complexion, chefnut-coloured.
hair, but fubject to baldnefs; the body ftrong, active, and generally makes
a good horfeman; ftout-hearted, intrepid, and carelefs of danger. The
difeafes proper to this fign, are the {ciatica, windy gouts, running fores,
heat of the blood, peftilential fevers, and diforders produced by intem-
peratenefs, and falls from horfes. The regions under its government are
thofe of Arabia Felix, Tyrrhenia, Celtica, Hifpaniola, Dalmatia, Scla-
-vonia, Hungaria, Moravia, Mifnia, Provincia, Lyguria, and Spain; the
cities of Toledo, Mutina, Narbonne, Avignon, Cologne, Agrippina,
Stutgardia, Rottemburgus, Cullen, Tuberinum Indemburges, and Buda.
In man it governs the thighs, hips, and os facrum, and rules the yellow
' green colour, tending to red, ~


CAPRICORN, »,


Capricorn is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy, feminine, nocturnal,
moveable, cardinal, folfticial, domeftic, fouthern, quadrupedian, fign,
of the earthy triplicity, the houfeof Saturn, and exaltation of Mars ; and
contains twenty-eight ftars. When this fign governs a nativity, it pro-
duces a flender fiature, of a dry conftitution, long thin vifage, {mall
beard, dark hair, long neck, and narrow chin and breaft; with a dif-
pofition collected, witty, and fubtle. The difeafes peculiar to Capri-
corn, are the gout, fprains, fractures, diflocations, leprofy, itch, {cabs,

" and


nO RP TA STR O lL: OG. Xe 105
and all difeafes of melancholy, and hyfterics. The regions over which it
bears fway, are thofe of India, Ariana, Macedonia, Illyria, Thracia, Bof-
nia, Mexico, Bulgaria,-Greece, Mufcovy, Lithuania, Saxony, Morea, the
Orcades, Stiria, Romandiola, Marchia, Heflia, Teringia, and Albany.
Likewife the cities of Juliacum, Chevonia, Berga, Meeklinberg, Gau-
danum, Vilna, Oxford, Brandenburgh, Auguifta, Conflantia, Derrhona,
Feventra, Fortona, and Pratum. In man it governs the knees and hams ;
and rules the black or dark brown colour.


AQUARIES, =


ni ;

Aquaries is an hairy, hot, moift, rational, fixed, humane, diurnal, fan-
guine, mafculine, weftern, {ign ; of the airy triplicity ; the day-houfe of
Saturn, and comprehends, in its degrees of the zodiac, twenty-four ftars.
In a nativity, it denotes a perfon of well-fet, thick, robuit, ftrong, body,
long vifage, and pale delicate countenance; clear fanguine complexion,
with bright fandy or dark flaxen hair. The difeafes common to this fign
are, lamenefs and bruifes in the ancles, fractures and diflocations, corrup-
tion and putrefaction of the blood, gouts, cramps, and rheumatifms. The
regions under its government are, Oxiana, Sogdiana, the Deferts of Ara-
_ bia Petrea, Azania, Sarmatia, Great Tartary, Wallachia, Red Ruffia, Da-
nia, the fouth part of Sweden, Wettphalia, Moffelani, Pedemantum, part
of Bavaria, Croatia, Germany, and Mufcovy ; with the cities of Hamburgh,
Breva, Montferrat, Trent, Pifaurum in Italy, Salifburgus, Ingolftadius,
Forum, Sempronium, and Bremen. In man it governs the legs and an-
eles; and rules the fky-colour, or blue.


P lsiG VRS, x.


_ Pifces is a watery, cold, moift, feminine, phlegmatic, nocturnal, com-
mon, bicorporal, northern, idle, effeminate, fickly, fruitful, fign, of the
watery triplicity, the houfe of Jupiter, and the exaltation of Venus ; and
confiits of twenty-four ftars. It produces a native ofa fhort ftature, pale
complexion, thick fhoulders, brown hair, of a flefhy body, not very up-
right; round-fhouldered, with an incurvating of the head. The difeafes
produced by this fign, are gouts, lamenefs, and pains incident to the feet ;
falt phlegm, biles, pimples, and ulcers proceeding from putrified blood ;
alfo all cold and moift difeafes. The regions it governs are Phazonia,
Nazomontidis, Garmatia, Lydia, Pamphilia, Silefia, Calabria, Portugal,
Normandy, Galicia, Lufitania, Egypt, Garomentus; and the cities of
Alexandria, Sibilia or Hyf{palis Compoftella, Parantium, Rhotomagum,
Normatia, Ratifbonne, and Rhemes. In man it governs the feet and toes, .

nd prefides over the pure white colour. ©
2 It


106 ALN? TD Rees TR Al T To: N


It may perhaps be thought, by fome of my readers, that the foregoing
influences, attributed to the twelve figns of the zodiac, are merely con-
jectural and imaginary. But the artift, whoever he be, that has the
good fenfe to determine for himfelf, by the ftandard of experience and
obfervation only; will carefully attend to all that has been ftated, as the
particular effet and virtue of each refpe€tive fign. For, without an
intimate acquaintance with them, no correét judgment can be formed
upon any nativity ; but, on the contrary, if the foregoing are ftrictly ate
tended to, no one who tries them will ever find an error in his calculations.


Confiderations


te
WN


Ry = % 3/88 v Po No: . " ch =
6 ORB SS S79 a 1 \Os Veg: i eee
SB BRS VO a Nex \'S @-\ 2
2 Se “SI Y wv Co, \ 5 : \ A
Spee NA A oSS\ \ \e SE. \ee|
(2% RS 7 S ne & =) steed =
ly re” fern fo \ \ oo Poe ame
Ririne BOE 1) eel
florzzon , or ‘ Nest Angle |W. | eS he Le Pan
PUDUIA 2 | rom DY, Ss
Hniay =o | zu] 8
okt Sle. Coe: a) yy SS
4 “ EB ig | x
KS Shes QP |
Dr CAT et a Ne,
f : v4)
x SS BN fs y /
A 2? th N /
y 4 Og Me /
SS we ig
YS ory
ow & ON /
On La \ i
2, f ‘ ge WE \
PRS eee. Vee”
‘uz, ~ PJo| sia> WN <ee  %
¥ r 3 e ~ \ 4 4) a 7
Loses


re


apner ce ve 8 Ae ae y sf eee yA
e Lplivkies, ) Sfectons VA WL10 igh ri Rio : Spe;
/ 3
/ se


A Nees ys
O vie TABLE, call iting aC ONC brew? She.
EP .


/ ) " Sy) om ru
NWMICS Y MUMES,


OoFi ASTRO EL O.-GiY. 107


Confiderations on the Natural Properties, Influences, and Effeéts, of the
| SUN, MOON, and PLANETS.


A es importance of thefe celeftial luminaries in the fcale of Nature,

and the force of their operations upon the animal and vegetable
fyftems, require that they fhould be thoroughly inveftigated, and their
properties well underftood, before any advances are made in calculating
nativities, or refolving horary queftions. We fhall begin with Saturn,
the moft remote of the fuperior planets, and confider them individually,
in the following order:


Saturn “b Mars $ ; Venus 2
Jupiter y Luna D Mercury 8
And the central Sun ©.


There are alfo other characters hie we fhall have occafion to {peak
of. The Dragon’s Head @, the Dragon’s Tail ge, and the Part of
Fortune @. And firft, ae


Of SAT UR Ny wy.


Saturn is the moft fupreme, or moft elevated, of all the planets, being
placed between Jupiter and the firmament, at about feven hundred and
eighty millions of miles from the fun.’ It travels in its orb at the rate of
eighteen thoufand miles every hour, and performs its annual revolution
round the fun in twenty-nine years, one hundred and fixty-feven days,
and five hours, of our time; which makes only one year to that. planet.
And, ,though it appears to us no larger than a ftar of the third magnitude,
yet.its diameter is found to be no lefs than fixty-feven thoufand,Englifh
miles; and confequently near fix hundred times as big as the earth! This
planet is furrounded by, a thin broad ring, fomewhat refembling the ho-
rizon of an artificial globe; and it appears double when, feen through a
good telefcope. ‘It is inclined thirty degrees to the ecliptic, and is about
twenty-one thoufand miles in breadth; which is equal to its diftance
from. Saturn on all fides. ‘There is reafon to, believe that the ring turns
round its axis, becaufe, when it is almoft edge-ways.to.us, it appears fome-
what thicker on one fide of the planet than on the other ; and the thickeft
edge has, been feen on different fides at different times. But, Saturn, hav-
ing no vifiblefpots an his body, whereby to determine the time of his
turning round his axis, the length of his days.and nights and the pofition
of his axis are wholly unknown to us. He has two degrees forty-eight .
nilnutes north, and. two degrees forty-nine minutes fouth,,. latitude. He

No.. 5. Z is


108 AN {1438 O'S TR ATI" OUN.


is retrograde one hundred and forty days, and ftationary five days before
and five days after his retrogradation. ;

Saturn is in nature cold and dry, occafioned by his being fo far re-
moved from the heat of the fun; abounds in moift vapours, and is a me-
lancholy, earthy, mafculine, folitary, diurnal, malevolent, planet; and
the greater infortune. His effects, when lord of the afcendant, or prin-
cipal ruler of a nativity, with all his qualities, are as follow: he produces
a middle ftature, with adark, fwarthy, or pale, complexion, {mall leer-
ing black eyes, broad forehead, lean face, lowering brow, thick nofe
and lips, large ears, black or brown hair, broad fhoulders, thin beard,
with {mall lean thighs and legs. If this planet is well dignified at the
time of birth, the native will be of an acute and penetrating imagination ;
in his conduct, auftere ; in words, referved ; in {peaking and giving, very
fpare; in labour, patient; in arguing or difputing, grave; in obtaining
. the goods of this life, ftudious and folicitous; in his attachments, either

to wife or friend, conftant and unequivocal ; in prejudice or refentment,
rigid and inexorable. But, if this planet be ill dignified at the time of
birth, the native will be naturally fordid, envious, covetous, miftruftful,
cowardly, fluggith, outwardly diflembling, falfe, ftubborn, malicious,
and perpetually diflatisfied with himfelf, and with all about him. When
Saturn is oriental, the human ftature will be fhorter than ufual, and, when
occidental, thin, lean, and lefs hairy. If his latitude be north, the na-
tive will be hairy and corpulent ; if without any latitude, he will be of
large bones and mufcles; and, if meridional, fat, fmooth, and flefhy ; in
his firft ftation, ftrong and well-favoured ; and, in his fecond {tation,
weak and ill-favoured. Thefe remarks likewife hold good with refpect
to all the other planets. It is alfo to be remarked, that, when Saturn is
fignificator of travelling, he betokens long and laborious journeys, peril-
ous adventures, and dangerous imprifonment. Saturn governs the {pleen,
right ear, bones, tecth, joints, and retentive faculty, in man; and rules


every thing bitter, fharp, or acrid. His government and effects in all
other refpetts are as follow. /


Difeafes under Saturn.—All melancholy and nervous affe@tions, quartan
agues, falling ficknefs, black jaundice, tooth-ach, leprofy, defluxions,
fiftulas, pains in the limbs and joints, gout, rheumatifm, hemorrhoids,
deafnefs, infanity, palfy; confumption, dropfy, chin-cough, fra€tures,


apoplexies, and all phlegmatic humours; and, in conceptions, he rules
the firft and the eighth months.


Herbs and plants under Saturn.—Barley, fumatory, beech-tree, bifoil,
birdsfoot, biftort, buckthorn plantane, vervane, f{pinach, bearsfoot, wolf-


bane,


OF OR SITIREO LI" O'G ¥. 109


bane, fern, fage, box, poppy, angelica, tamarind, capers, rue, willow,
yew-tree, cyprefs-tree, hemp, pine-tree, wild campions, pilewort, clea-
vers, clowns woundwort, comfrey, cudweed, croflwort, darnel, dodder,
epithymum, elm-tree, ofmond royal, flea-wort, flix-weed, gout-wort,
ftinking gladden, winter-green, hound’s tengue, hawk-weed, hemlock,
henbane, horfetail, knap-weed, knot-grafs, medlar, mofs, mullen, night-
fhade, polypody, quince, rupture-wort, rufhes, Solomon’s feal, yarrow,
cetrach, Saracen’s confound, fervice-tree, tamarifk, black-thorn, melan-
choly thiftle, thorowax, tutfan, aconite, afphodil, agnus caftus, ftarwort,
orach, fhepherd’s purfe, black hellebore, mandrake, opium. In gather-
ing his herbs, the ancients turned their faces towards the eaft, in his
planetary hour, when in an angle, and effentially fortified, with the moon
applying to him by fextile or trine.


Stones, metals, and minerals.—The fapphire, and lapis lazuli, or that
ftone of which azure is made; likewife all unpolifhed black and blue
ftones; the loadftone, tin and lead, and the drofs of all metals.


Animals under Saturn.—Theafs, the cat, the hare, monfe, dog, wolf,
bear, elephant, bafilifk, crocodile, fcorpion, adder, ferpent, toad, hog,
and all creeping things produced by putrefaction. Alfo the tortoife, the
eel, and all kinds of fhell-fith.. Among birds, the crow, lapwing, owl,
bat, crane, peacock, thruth, blackbird, oftrich, and cuckow.


Weather and winds.—He brings cloudy, dark, obfcure, weather, with
cold biting winds, and thick, heavy, condenfed, air. Thefe are his
general effects ; but the more particular and immediate alterations of
weather produced by this planet are only to be known by his feveral
pofitions and afpects with other planets, fortitudes, and debilities, of
which I fhall treat at large in my third book. ‘Saturn delights in the
eaftern quarter of the heaveus, and caufeth the eaftern winds. He is
friendly to Jupiter, Sol, and Mercury, but at enmity with Mars, Venus,
and the Moon.


Triplicity and figns.—He governs the fign Capricorn by night, and
Aquaries by day, and the airy triplicity by day. Of the weekly days
he rules Saturday, the firft hour from fun rifing, and the eighth hour
of the fame day, and the firft hour of Tuefday night.


Regions under Saturn.—Bavaria, Saxony, Stiria, Romandiola, Ravenna,
Conftantia, and Ingoldftadt.


Years.—Saturn’s greateft year is four hundred and fixty-five ; his great
is fifty-feven ; his mean, forty-three and a half; and his leaft, thirty.
The fignification of which, in aftrology, is, that, if a kingdom, city, —

towns


110 A No RLOLIUOS oTURGAST. 1 O.N

town, principality, or family, takes its rife when Saturn is effentially
and occidentally ftrong, and -well fortified, it is probable the fame wilk
continse in honour and profperity, without any material 4lteration, for
the {pace of four hundred and fixty-five years. Again, if in a nativity
Saturn is well dignified, is lord of the geniture, and not afflicted by any
crofs-afpeéts, then the native, according to the common courfe of na-
ture, may live fifty-feven years; if the planet be but meanly dignified,
then the native will not live more than forty-three years; and, if he be
weakly dignified, he will not live more than thirty years; for the na-
ture of Saturn at beft is cold and dry, which are qualities deftructive to
health and long lifein man.


Oré.—Saturn’s orb is niné degrées before and after any afpect ; that is,
his influence begins to operate, when either he applies, or any planet ap-
plies to him, within nine degrees of his perfect afpect ; and his influence
continues in foree until he is feparated nine degrees from the afpect partial.


JUPITER, x.


Jupiter is the next: planet below Saturn, and called the greater fortune.
He appears to our fight the largeft of any ftar in magnitude except
Venus:; and is of a bright refplendent clear afpec&t. Modern aftronomers
have proved him to be four hundred and twenty-fix millions of miles from
the fun, and above a thoufand times bigger.than our earth ; he goes.in
his orbit at the aftonifhing rate of near twenty-fix thoufand miles an hour,
and his diameter is computed at eighteen thoufand Englifh miles, which
is more than ten times the diameter of the earth. He conpletes his
courfe through the twelve figns of the zodiac in eleven years, three hun-
dred and fourteen days, and twelve hours. He is confiderably fwifter
in motion than Saturn; but to us his mean motion is four minutes .
fifty-nine feconds ; his {wifter motion fourteen minutes. He has exaltation
in fifteen degrees of Cancer; fuffers detriment in Gemini and Virgo,
and receives his fall in fifteen degrees of Capricorn. His greateft lati-
tude north is one degree thirty-eight. minutes; and his greateft latitude
fouth one degree and forty-minutes. He.is retrograde one hundred
and twenty days; and ftationary five days before and four days after his
retrogradation. His orb, or radiation, is nine degrees before and after
any of his afpects. | 7


Jupiter is a diurnal, mafculine, planet, temperately hot and moift,
airy and fanguine; author of temperance, modefty, fobriety, and juf-
tice. He rules thelungs, liver, reins, blood, digeftive virtue, and na-

2 i tural


O, Be A> See Re O  L10O°G. ¥. IIL


ral faculties of man. When he prefides overa nativity, he gives an ereét
and tall ftature, a handfome rofy complexion, an oval vifage, high fore-
head, large grey eyes, foft thick brown hair, a well-fet comely body, fhort
neck, large wide cheft; robuft, ftrong, and well-proportioned, thighs and
legs, with long feet; his {peech fober and manly, and his converfation
grave and commanding. And, if well dignified at the birth, this planet
betokens moft admirable manners and difpofition to the native. He will
be in general magnanimous, faithful, and prudent, honourably a{piring
after high deferts and noble actions, a lover of fair dealing, defirous of
ferving all men; juft, honeft, and religious; of eafy accefs, and ofvaffable
manners and converfation; kind and affectionate to his family and friends;
charitable and liberal to the utmoft extent of his abilities ; wife, prudent,
and virtuous, hating all mean and fordid actions. But, if Jupiter be il-
dignified and afflicted with evil afpects at the time of birth, he then be-
tokens a profligate and carelefs difpofition, of mean abilities, and thallow
underftanding; a bigot in religion, and obftinate in maintaining errone-
ous doctrines ; abandoned to evil company ; eafily feduced to folly and
extravagance ; a fycophant to every one above him, and a tyrant in his
own family. If the planet be oriental at the birth, the native will be
more fanguine and ruddy, with larger eyes, and more corpulent body,
and generally has a mole or mark upon the right foot. If occidental,
then it beftows a moft fair and lovely complexion, particularly to a fe-
male; the ftature fomewhat fhorter, the hair light brown, or approaching
to flaxen, but thin round the temples and forehead.


Difeafes under Fupiter.—All infirmities of the liver, obftructions, pleu-
rifies, apoplexies, inflammation of the lungs, infirmities in the left ear,
palpitations of the heart, cramps, pains in the back, diforders in the
reins, proceeding from corruption of blood; quinfies, windinefs, fevers,
proceeding from a fuperabundance of blood; all griefs in the head, pulie,
feed, arteries, convulfions, pricking and fhooting in the body, and putre-
faction of the humours. In generation, he governs the fecond and the
ninth months. :


Herbs and plants.x—Agrimony, Alexander, afparagus, avens, bay-tree,
elecampain, beets, betony, borrage, bilberries, buglofs, chervil, colts.
foot, {weet Cicely, cinquefoil, alecoft, dandelion, docks, bloodwort,
quickgrafs, endive, harts-tongue, hyflop, liverwort, lungwert, {weet-
maudlin, oak-tree, red rofes, fage, faucealone, fcurvy-grafls, fuccory,
cherries, lady’s thiftle, barberries, {trawberries, liquorice, apples, mul-
berries, myrobolans, olives, peaches, pear-tree, felf-heal, wheat, madder,
maftic, fugar, honey, rhubarb, violets, pomegranate, mint, faffron, daily,
feverfew, nutmegs, gillyflowers, mace, cloves, flax, balm, fumitory, wild


No. 6. Aa and


EX ALN TAL i eS 2 T- RAL A 18 a) NN


and {weet marjoram, St. John’s wort, almond-tree, hazel, fig-tree, goofe-
berry-tree, pine-tree, coral-tree, ivy, andthe vine. Rule for gathering,
the fame as under Saturn. 3


Stones, metals, and minerals.—The topaz, amethyft, marble, emerald,
chryftal, fapphire, hyacinth, bezoar, and freeftone. Tin, lead, and


pewter.


Animals.—The unicorn, doe, hart, ftag, ox, elephant, horfe, fheep, and
all domeftic animals that do not fly the dominion of man. Alfo the
whale, dolphin, fea-ferpent, and fheth-fith. Among birds, the eagle,
ftork, peacock, pheafant, partridge, ftock-dove, {nipe, lark, &c.


Weather and winds.—Jupiter produces pleafant, healthful, and ferene,
weather ; and governs the north and north-eaft winds. He is friendly
with Saturn, Sol, Venus, Mercury, and Luna; but at enmity with
Mars. We call Thurfday his day; and he rules on Sunday night. His
influence commences an hour after fun rife, and he governs the firft hour
and the eighth.


Signs and triplicity.—He rules the celeftial fign Sagittary by day, and
Pifces by night. ‘The effect of which is, that, if Jupiter be fignificator
in the revolution of any year, by day, and in Sagittary, he is fo much the
more fortified; and, if in Pifces, in a nocturnal revolution, the effect is
the fame. The obfervation extends to all the other planets. He pre-
fides over the fiery triplicity by night; fo that, if Jupiter. be in twenty
degrees of Aries, or the tenth degree of Leo, in any diurnal revolution,
he fhall be accounted peregrine, as not having any dignity therein, being
neither in his houfe, exaltation, term, triplicity, or face; but, in a moc-
turnal revolution, he would not be accounted peregrine, for then he
would have triplicity in both thefe figns.


Sfourneys.—When heis fignificator, he denotes pleafant travelling, good
fuccefs, fafety, health, and mirth.


Countries under fupiter.—Spain, Hungary, Babylon, Perfia, and Cullen.


Colours under Fupiter.—Sea-green, blue, purple, afh-colour, a mixed
yellow and green. }


Years.—Jupiter’s greateft year is four hundred and twenty-eight; the
longeft year he gives is feventy-nine ; his mean year is forty-five ; and, -
his leaft year is twelve.


MARS,


.


OP METROLOGY. 113


MAIR Sis.


Mars is next located to Jupiter, and is the firft planet above the earth
and Moon’s orbit. His diftance from the Sun is computed at one hun-
dred and twenty-five millions of miles; and, by travelling at the rate of
forty-feven thoufand miles every hour, he goes round the Sun in fix hun-


dred and eighty-fix of our days, and four hours; which is the exact length


of his year, and contains fix hundred and fixty-feven days and three quar-
ters; but every day and night together is forty minutes longer than with
us. His diameter is four thoufand four hundred and forty-four miles,
which is but a fifth part fo large as the earth. He is of a deep fiery red
colour, and, by his appulfes to fome of the fixed ftars, feems to be encom-
paffed by a very grofs atmofphere. _ His mean motion is thirty-one de-
grees twenty-feven minutes; and his fwift motion from thirty-two to
forty-four minutes. His exaltation is in twenty-eight degrees of Capri-
corn; his fall in twenty-eight degrees of Cancer, and his detriment in
Libra and Taurus. His greateft north latitude is four degrees thirty-one
minutes; and his greateft fouth latitude fix degrees forty-feven minutes.
He is. retrograde eighty days, and ftationary two or three days before re~-
trogradation, and two days before direction. His orb or radiation 1s feven
degrees before and after any of his afpects.


Mars is a mafculine nocturnal planet, in nature hot and dry, choleric
and fiery, the lefler infortune, author of quarrels, diffentions, ftrife, war,
and battle; and rules the gall, left ear, head, face, fmell, imagination, and
attractive faculty, of man, This planet, prefiding ata birth, renders upa
ftrong well-fet body, of fhort ftature, but large bones, rather lean than
fat; a brown ruddy complexion, red, fandy, flaxen, or light brown, hair;
round face, fharp hazel eyes, confident bold countenance, active and fear-
lefs. If well dignified, the native will inherit a courageous and invincible
difpofition ; unfufceptible of fear or danger ; hazarding his life on all oc-
cafions, and in all perils; fubject to no reafon in war or contention; un-
willing to obey or fubmit toany fuperior; regardlefs of all things in com-
parifon of triumphing over his enemy or antagonift’; and yet prudent in
the management and direction of his private concerns. Ifthe planet be
ill dignified, and afflicted with crofs afpects, the party will then grow up
atrumpeter of his own fame and confequence, without decency or honetty ;
a lover of malicious quarrels and affrays; prone to wickedne({s and flaugh-
ter, and in danger of committing murder, of robbing on the highway, of
becoming a thief, traitor, or incendiary ; of a turbulent fpirit, obfcene,
rath, inhuman, and treacherous, fearing neither God nor man; given up
to every f{pecies of fraud, violence, cruelty, and oppreflion, Ef the planet

; be


114 AWN (Ll PS ReAGT 160


be oriental at the nativity, the native will be above the middle ftature, very
hairy, and of aclearer complexion. If occidental, the native will be
fhort, of a more ruddy complexion, a fmall head, with yellow hair, and
a dry conftitution.


Difeafes under Mars.—Peftilential fevers, plagues, murrains, tertian
agues, megrims, carbuncles, yellow jaundice, burnings and fcaldings,
ringworms, -blifters, phrenzy-fevers,. all hot and feverifh complaints in
the head, bloody flux, fiftulas, difeafes of the genitals, wounds of every
defcription, ftone in the reins and bladder, the difuria, ifcuria, diabetes,
firanguary, fiall-pox, fhingles, St. Anthony’s fire, choler, and all cho-
leric difeafes, wounds or bruifes by iron or fire, overflowing of the gall,
and all effects proceeding from intemperate anger and paflion.


Herbs and plants. —Arfefmart, aflarum, barberry-buth, broom, fweet ba-
fil, rape, butcher's broom, bramble, brooklime, betony, crow-foot, mad-
der, wake robin, crane’s bill, cotton-thiftle, toad-flax, garlic, hurt-buth,
hawthorn, hops, mafter- wort, rocket, muftard, hedge-muftard, onions, dit-
tany, carduus benedittus, radifh, horfe-radifh, rhubarb, rhapontic, monk’s
rhubarb, thiftles, woolly thiftle, ftar-thiftle, treacle-muftard, dyers weed,
wormwood, birthwort, camelion thiftle, danewort, eflue, cornel-tree, eu-
phorbium, fpearwort, white-hellebore, fpunge, laurel fteel, monk’s hood,
leeks, {cammony, colloquintida, elaterium, devil’s milk, nettles, ginger,
pepper, red fanders, briers, commock, horehound, and all trees that are
prickly, and thorny.—Rule for gathering, the fame as before.


Stones, metals, and minerals. —The bloodftone, load-ftone, jafper, touch-
ftone, adamant, amethyft of divers colours; antimony, ftone-{ulphur, ver-
million, white arfenic, &c.


Animals. —The maftiff, wolf, tyger, cockatrice, panther, and all fuch
beafts as are ravenous and wild. Alfo the fhark, pike, barble, fork fith,
all {tinging water ferpents, and voracious fifh. Of birds, the hawk, kite,
raven, vulture, owl, cormorant, crow, magpie, and all birds of prey.


Weather and winds.—Of Mars proceedeth thunder and lightning, fiery
meteors, peftilential air, and all {trange phenomena in the heavens. He
rules the weftern winds ; and is friendly with all the planets except the


Moon. Tuefday is his day; he rules the firft and the eighth hours, and
Friday nights.


Signs and triplicity.—Aries is his day-houfe, and Scorpio his night.
He bears rule over the watery trigon, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifces.


’ Regions


OFF ART ROLGAG ¥ 115


Regions under Mars.—Jerufalem, the Roman Empire, Evento, Saro-
matia, Lombardy, Batavia, Ferraria, Gothland, and the third climate.


Sourneys.—In journeys he portends danger of robbery, lofs of life, and
all the other perils attendant upon the traveller. .


Years.—His greateft revolution year is two hundred and fourteen ; his
great year is fixty-fix; his mean year is forty ; his leaft year is fifteen.


The Wi OO ts. 5 »


The Moon is next below Mars, being a fatellite or attendant on the
earth, and goes round it from change to change in twenty-nine days twelve
hours and forty-four minutes ;,and round the Sun with it every year.

The Moon’s diameter is two thoufand:one hundred and eighty miles; and
her diftance from the earth’s centre is two hundred and forty thoufand
miles. She goes round her orbit in twenty-feven days feven hours and
forty-three minutes, moving about two thoufand two hundred and ninety
miles every hour? and turns round her axis exaétly in the time that fhe
goes round the earth, which is the reafon of her always keeping the fame
fide towards us, and that her day and night taken together are as long as
our lunar month. She is an opaque globe, like the earth, and fhines only
by reflecting the light the Sun; therefore, whilft that half of her which
is towards the Sun is enlightened, the other part muit be dark and invifi-
ble. Hence fhe difappears when fhe comes between us and the Sun; be-
-caufe her dark fide is then towards us. When fhe is gone a little way

forward, we fee a little of herenlightened fide; which ftill encreafes to
our view as fhe advances forward, until fhe comes to be oppofite the fun,
and then her whole enlightened fide is towards the earth, and fhe appears
with around illumined orb, which we.call the Fu// Moon; her dark fide
being then turned away from the earth. From the full the feems to de-
creafe gradually as fhe goes through the other half of her courfe, fhewing
us lefs.and lefs'of her enlightened fide every day, till her next change, or
conjunction iwith the Sun, and then fhe difappears as before. Her mean
motion is thirteen degrees, ten minutes, and thirty-fix feconds; her {wift,
or diurnal motion often varies, but never exceeds fifteen degrees two mi-
nutes in twenty-four hours. Her greateft north latitude is five degrees and
feventeen minutes; and her greateft fouth latitude is five degrees and
twelve minutes, or thereabouts. ') She is never ftationary nor retrograde,
but always direct ; though, when fhe is flow in motion, and goes lefs than
thirteen degrees in twenty-four hours, fhe is confidered equivalent toa
retrograde planet. Her exaltation is in the third degree of Taurus, -her
detriment in Capricorn, and her fall in three degrees of Scorpio. Her

No. 6. Bb orb,


116 AN ILLUSTRATION


orb, or radiation, is twelve degrees before-and after-any of herafpelts ; and
fhe rules over all infants until the feventh year of their age.


The Moon is feminine, notturnal, cold, moift, and phlegmatic. Her
influence, in itfelf, is neither fortunate nor unfortunate, but as fhe hap-
pens to fall in with the configurations of the other planets, and is then
either malevolent or otherwife, as thofe afpeéts happen to be. And un-
der thefe circumftances fhe becomes the moft powerful of all the heavenly
bodies in her operations, by reafon of her proximity to the earth, and the
fwiftnefs of her motion, by which fhe receives and tranfmits to us the
- light and influence of all the fupericrs, by her configurations with them.
When fhe has rule in a nativity, the produces a full ftature, with fair and
pale complexion, round face, grey eyes, lowering brow, very hairy,, thort
arms, thick hands and feet, {mooth body, inclined to be fat, corpulent,
and phlegmatic. If the be impedited of the Sun at theime of birth, fhe
leaves a blemifh on or near the eye; if fhe be impedited in fuccedent
houfes, the blemith will be near the eye; but if with fixed flars, and in
unfortunate angles, the blemith will fall in the eye, and will affed the
fight. If the be well dignified at the nativity, the mative will be of foft
engaging manners and difpofition, a lover of the polite arts, and of an
ingenious imagination, fond of novelties, and given to travelling, or ramb-
ling about the country; unftable, and providing only for the prefent time,
carelefs of futurity ; timorous, prodigal, and eafily affrighted; but loving
peace, and defiring to, live free from the cares and anxieties of the world.
If the native be brought up to a mechanical employment, he will be
frequently tampering with a variety of different trades, but purfuing none
of them long together. If the Moon be ill dignified at the birth, the
native will be then flothful, indolent, and of no forecaft; given up toa
drunken, diforderly, beggarly, life, hating labour, or any kind of bufinefs
or employment, When oriental, she inclineth more to corpulence; but,
when occidental, rather lean, awkward, and ill-formed.


Difeafes under the Moon.—The palfy, cholic, complaints of the bowels,
the ftone and gravel, overflowings or obftructions of the terms, dropfy,
fluxes and difentery, all cold and rheumatic complaints, worms in the
belly, diforders of the eyes, furfeits, coughs, convulfions, falling fick-
nefs, king’s-evil, impofthumes, {mall-pox, lethargy, meafles, phrenzies,
apoplexies, vertigo, lunacy, and all crude humours in any part of the bo-
dy. In,conception fhe rules the feventh month ;and governs the brain,
the ftomach, bowels, bladder, the left eye in man, and the right eye in
woman, and the whole expulfive faculty.


fie. Herbs


SF AST ROL 6 & Y¥,; f17


Herbs and plants.—Adder’s tongue, cabbages, colewort, duck’s=meat,,
water-flag, lily, water lily, flower de luce, lettuce, fluellin, moonwort,
loofe-ftrife, moufe-ear, orpine, poppies, purflane, privet, rattlegrafs, tur-
nips, white rofes, white and burnt faxifrage, wall flowers, willow-tree,
toad-ftool, water plantane, water agrimony, water betony, houfeleek,
moon-herb, hyflop, cucumber, endive, mufhrooms, poppies, linfeed,
rapefeed, and all fuch herbs as turn towards the Moon, and increafe and
decreafe as fhe doth; the palm-tree, which fends forth a twig every time |
the Moon rifes, and all fuch trees and plants as participate or fympathize
with her, and are juicy and full of fap. In gathering her herbs, the fame
rule is to be obferved as with the other planets.


Stones and metals. —A\l ftones that are white and green, the ihavcatied,
the chryftal, the fenenite, and all foft ftones. Silver, and all hard white
metals. And the colours white, pale green, and pale yellow.


Animals under the Moon.—Al\l amphibious animals, or fuch as delight
in water, and all that fympathize with the Moon, as the camelion, dog,
hog, frog, hind, goat, baboon, panther, cat, the civet cat, mice, rats,
&c. Among fifhes, the lurus, whofe eyes increafe and decreafe ac-
cording to the courfe of the Moon, and all other fithes of the like na-
ture; the tortoife, the echeneis, the eel, crab, oyfter, lobfter, cockle,
mufcle, and al] kinds of fhell-fifh. Among birds, the goofe, {wan, duck,
dive-dapper, moorhen, the night-ow], night-raven, bat, and all forts of
of water-fowl.


Weather and winds.—She produces weather according to her configu-
rations with other planets, viz. with Saturn, cold, moift, and cloudy,
weather; with Jupiter, warm and temperate air; with Mars, winds,
clouded fky, and fudden ftorms; with the Sun, fhe varies the weather
according to the time of the year; with Venus, warm and gentle
€howers ; with Mercury, ftormy winds; and rain. But in the third part
of this work, we {hall treat on this fubje&t more particularly. The
Moon always occafions thofe winds fignified by the planet to which the
applies in her configurations. -


Signs and triplicity.—Of the celeftial figns, fhe has only Cancer allotted
to her for her houfe. She rules the earthy triplicity by night viz. Tau-
rus, Virgo, and Capricorn. She is in friendfhip with Jupiter, Sol, Ve-
nus, and Mercury; but at enmity with Saturn and Mars, Of the
weekly days fhe rules Monday, and Thurfday nights,


Regions. —She has dominion over Denmark, Holland, Zealand, lar
ders, Noringberg, and North Americ;.
| . Years.


118 AN #2 igie: Si Ty Rea T PO N


Years. —Her greateft year is three hundred and twenty; her great is


one hundred and eight; her mean year is fixty-fix; and her leaft year is
twenty-five. | .


V-E-NiU'S, Bir


Venus is the next planet below the earth and Moon, having her orbit
within that of the earth. She is computed to be fifty-nine millions of
miles from the Sun, and, by moving at the rate of fixty-nine thoufand miles
every hour, fhe pafles through the twelve figns of the zodiac in two
hundred and twenty-four days feventeen hours of our time nearly. Her
diameter is feven thoufand nine hundred and fix miles, and by her diurnal
motion fhe is carried about her equator forty-three miles every hour, be-
fides the fixty-nine thoufand above-mentioned. When fhe appears weft
of the Sun, the rifes before himin the morning, and is called the morning
ftar; but, when fhe appears eaft of the Sun, the fhines in the evening after

che fets, and is then called the evening flar ; and continues alternately for
the {pace of two hundred and ninety days in each of thefe fituations. It
may perhaps be thought furprifing at firft, that Venus fhould continue
longer on the eaft or weft fide of the Sun than the whole time of her pe-
riod round him; but the difficulty vanifhes when we confider that the
earth is all the while going round the Sun the fame way, though not fo
quick as Venus; and therefore her relative motion to the earth muft in
every period be as much flower than her abfolute motion in her orbit as the
earth during that time advances forward in the ecliptic, which is two hun-
dred and twenty degrees. Tous fhe appears through the telefcope in all
the various fhapes of the Moon. Her mean motion is fifty-nine minutes
eight feconds ; and her daily or {wift motion is from fixty-two minutes
to one degree twenty-two minutes ; but never greater. Her utmoft la-
titude, either north or fouth, never exceeds nine degrees two minutes. Her
exaltation is in twenty-feven degrees of Pifces, her detriment in Aries and
Scorpio, and her fall in twenty-feven degrees of Virgo. She continues
retrograde forty-two days, and is ftationary two days before and two days
after her ftate of retrogradation. Her orb, or radiation, is feven degrees
before and after any of her afpects. In the human ftru@ture the governs
the reins, back-bone, feed, and feminal veffels ; alfo the neck, throat, breafts,
and expulfive faculty; and rules the light blue and white colours.


Venus is a feminine planet, temperately cold and moift, nocturnal, the
fmaller fortune, author of mirth and conviviality, alluring to procreation
and to the propagation of the fpecies. When fhe afcends at a nativity,
fhe gives a handfome, well-formed, but not tall, ftature; complexion fair
and lovely, bright {parkling eyes, of a dark hazel or black, the face round,
regular, {mooth, and engaging; the hair light brown, hazel, or chefnut,


fhining


OF ASTROLOGY 119


fhining and plentiful; the body regular and well-proportioned; of a neat,
fmart, and airy, difpofition; generally with dimples in the cheeks or chin,
and often in both; the eyes wandering, and naturally amorous; in motion
light and nimble; in voice foft, eafy, {weet, and agreeable, inclined to
amorous converfation, and early engagements in love. If well dignified
at the time of birth, the native will be of a quiet, even, and friendly, dif-
pofition, naturally inclined to neatnefs, loving mirth and cheerfulnefs, and
delighting in mulic; amorous and prone to venery, though truly virtuous,
if a woman; yet fhe will be given to jealoufy, even without caufe. If
the planet be ill dignified, then will the native be riotous, profligate, a-
bandoned to evil company and lewd women, regardlefs of reputation or
character ; a frequenter of taverns, night-houfes, and all places of ill-
fame ; delighting in all the incitements to inceftuous and adulterous prac-
tices; in principle a mere athieft, wholly given up to the brutal paffions
of unbridled and uncultivated nature. If Venus be oriental at the time,
the ftature will be tall, upright, and ftraight ; but, if occidental, fhort and
f{tooping, though comely and well-favoured. If the be fignificatrix, in a
journey, and well-dignified, fhe portends much mirth, pleafure, and fuc-
cefs, and promifes fafety and good fortune by the way.


Difeafes under Venus.—All diforders of the belly and womb, fuffoca-
tion, palpitation, heart-burn, diflocation, priapifm, impotency, hernias,
diabetes, all ftages of the venereal complaint, and all diforders of the ge~
nitals, kidneys, reins, navel, back, and loins.


Herbs and plants.—Ale-hoof, alder-tree, apple-tree, ftinking arach,
alkakengi, archangel, beans, burdock, bugle, ladies’ bed-ftraw, bifhop’s
weed, blights, chickweed, chick-peafe, clary, cock’s head, cowflips, dai-
fies, devil’s bit, elder, eringo, featherfew, figwort, filapendula, fox-gloves,
gromwel, groundfel, kidney-wort, ladies’ mantle, mallows, herb Mercury,
mint, motherwort, mugwort, par{nip, penny royal, periwinkle, primrofe,
ragwort, rofes, fow-thiftles, f{pinach, tanfey, teafels, violets, vervain,
maiden-hair, coriander, melilot, daffodil, {tone-parfley, fanders, fatyrian,
wild thyme, mufk, the fig-tree, pomegranate, the Cyprus, {weet-apple
tree, peach, myrtle, walnut-tree, almond-tree, apricots, the fig-tree, tur-
pentine-tree, ambergris, gum, laudanum, frankincenfe, and all {weet
odoriferous plants, as the lily, rofe, &c. In gathering, the fame rule is
to be obferved as with the other planets.


Animals under Venus. All fuch as are of a hot and amorous nature, as
the dog, coney, bull, theep, goat, calf, panther, and hart. Among fithes,
the pilchard, gilthead, whiting, crab, dolphin, and tithymallus. And,
among birds, the fwan, water-wagtail, {wallow, pelican, nightingale,

No. 6.", Cec pigeon,


120 AN 4 QIU S: TRL A Tpio w


pigeon, fparrow, turtle-dove, ftock-dove, crow, eagle, burgander,, par-
- tridge, thrufh, blackbird, pye, wren, &c.


Stones and metals.—The beryl, chryfolite, emerald, fapphire, cornelian,
marble, green jafper, xtites, the lazuli, coral, and alabafter ; alfo.cop-
per, brafs, and filver. She governs the light blue, and white, colour.


Weather and wind.—She denotes gentle fhowers in winter, and tempe-
rate heat in fummer ; and fhe rules the fouth wind.


Signs and triplicity.—Of the celeftial figns fhe hath for her houfes
Taurus and Libra. She rules over the earthy triplicity by day, viz.
Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn. She is friendly with Jupiter, Mars,
Mercury, and the Sun and Moon ; but is at enmity with Saturn, She
prefides over Friday, and Monday night.


Years.—Her greateft year is one hundred and fifty one; her great year
is eighty-two; her mean year is forty-five; and her leaft year is fifteen.


MERCURY, 3. *


Nextto Venus, and within theorbits of all theother planets, is Mercury,
and of courfe, the neareft of them all to the central fun. He completes
his revolution, or traverfes through the twelve figns of the zodiac, in eigh-
ty-feven days and twenty-three hours of our time nearly ; which is the
length of his year. But, being feldom feen, on account of his proximity
to the Sun, and having no {pots vifible on his furface or difk, the time of
his rotation upon his own axis, and the length of his days and nights, are
as yet unknown to us. His diftance from the Sun is computed to be thir-
ty-two millions of miles, and his diameter two thoufand fix hundred.
He moves round the Sun at the rate of ninety-five thoufand miles every
hour; and receives from that luminary a proportion of light and heat al-
moft feven times as great as that of the earth. At the times he becomes
vifible, he appears of a bright filver colour, though generally faint and
dufkith to the naked eye. His mean motion is fifty-nine minutes and
eight feconds, and fometimes fixty minutes; and his diurnal motion is”
moft times one hundred minutes a day. His greateft latitude, both north
and fouth, is three degrees thirty-three minutes. His exaltation is in
fifteen degrees of Virgo; his detriment in Sagittarius and Pifces ; and
his fall in fifteen degrees of Pifces. He is retrograde twenty-four days ;
and is ftationary one day before and one day after retrogradation. His orb
or radiation is feven degrees before and after any afpeét. He prefides over
Wednefday, and Saturday night; and governs the brain, tongue, hands,

et, and intellectual faculty of man.


Mercury -


OF AS TROLOGYY. Tar


Mercury is tHe leaft of all the planets ; in nature cold, dry, and me-
jancholy ; but author of the moft pointed wit, ingenuity, and invention.
He is occafionally both mafculine and feminine; and lucky, or unlucky,
as his pofition in the heavens may happen to be. When he is in conjunc-~
tion with a mafculine planet, he is mafculine, when with a feminine pla«
net, feminine ; good and fortunate, when joined with the fortunes; but
evil and mifchievous, when in conjunction with malevolent afpects. When
he governs a nativity, he renders up atall, ftraight, thin fpare body,
narrow face, and deep forehead ; long ftraight nofe, eyes neither black
nor grey ; thin lips and chin, with but little beard ; brown complexion,
and hazel or chefnut coloured hair ; the arms, hands, and fingers, long
and flender ; and thighs, legs, and feet, the fame. If orientally pofited,
the ftature will be fhorter, with fandy hair, and fanguine. complexion,
fomewhat fun-burnt ; the limbs and joints large and well fet, with {mall
grey eyes. But, if occidental, the complexion will be quite fallow, Jank
body, fmall flender limbs, hollow eyes, of a red caft, and of a dry conftitu-
tion. If Mercury be well dignifted at the nativity, the perfon will inherit
a ftrong fubtil imagination, and retentive memory ; likely to become an
excellent orator and logician, arguing with much eloquence of {peech, and
with {trong powers of perfuafion ; is generally given to the attainment of
all kinds of learning ; anencourager of the liberal arts ; of a fharp, witty,
and pleafant, converfation; of an unwearied fancy; and curious in the
fearch of all natural and occult knowledge: with an inclination to travel
or trade into foreign countries. If brought up in the mercantile line, le
will be ambitious of excelling in his merchandize, and will moft times
prove fuccefsful in obtaining wealth. But, if the planet be ill-dignified,.
then the native will betray a difpofition to flander, and abufe the charac-
ter of every one without diftin¢tion ; he will be a boafter, a flatterer,. a.
fycophant, a bufy-body, a tale-bearer, given to propagate idle tales and
falfe ftories; pretending to all kinds of knowledge, though a mere ideor
in his intellectual faculty, and incapable of acquiring any folid or fub-
ftantial learning; apt to boaft of great honefty, yet. very much addicted
to mean and petty thievery. ves


| Difeafes under Mercury.—Al\ diforders of the brain, vertigoes, mad-
nefs, defects of the memory, convulfions, afthmas, imperfections of the
tongue, hoarfenefs, coughs, {nuffling in the nofe, ftoppages in the head,
dumbnefs and whatever impairs the intellectual faculty, and gout in the
hands and feet. In conceptions he governs the fixth month.


_ Herbs and plants.—Calamint, carrots, carraways, champignon, dill, |
fern, fennel, hogs fennel, germander, horehound, hazel nut, liquorice,
{weet marjoram, mulberry-tree, oats, parfley, pellitory of the wall,
a famphites.


429 AN? CYRUS aT Ria TIO K


famphire, favory, fmallage, fouthern-wood, trefoil, valerian, honey-fuckle,
annas, columbine, juniper-tree, piony, the herb Mercury, lugwort, dra-
gons-wort, cubebs, vervain, hicra, treacle, and diombra wallnuts. In
gathering, the fame rules are to be obferved as with the other planets.


Stones and metals.—Thezemerald, agate, red marble, topaz, mill-ftone,
marcafite, and fuch as are of divers colours. Alfo, quickfilver, block-tin,
and filver marcafite.


Animals.—The dog, and all fagacious animals, and fuch as do not fly
the dominion of man; the ape, fox, weazle, hart, hyena, mule, hare,
civet-cat, fquirrel, fpider, pifmire, ferpent, adder, &c. Among fithes,
the trochius, the fox-fith, the mullet, the pourcontrel, and the fork
fifh. And among birds, the linnet, parrot, popinian, {wallow, martin,
pye, and bulfinch.


Weather and winds.—He ufually caufes rain, hail-ftones, thunder,
lightning, &c. according to the nature of the planet he happens to be
in configuration with. He delights in the northern quarter the hea-
vens, and produces fuch winds as are fignified by the planet to which he
applies-in afpect.


Signs and triplicity,—He has for his houfes the celeftial figns Gemini
and Virgo; and he rules the airy triplicity by night, namely, Gemini,
Libra, and Aquaries. —


Regions.—Flanders, Greece, Egypt, and the Eaft and Weft Indies.


Years.—His greateft year is four hundred and fifty; his great is feven-
_ty-fix; his mean year is forty-eight; and his leaft year is twenty.


VPP Gis Be ©.


Sol, or the Sun, is an immenfe globe or body of fire, placed in the
common centre, or rather in the lower focus of the orbits of all the
planets and comets; and turns round his axis in twenty-five days and fix
hours, as is evident by themotion of thefpotsvifible on his furface. His
diameter is computed to befeven hundred and fixty-three thoufand miles;
and, by the various attractions of the circumvolving planets, he is agi-
tated bya {mall motion round the centre of gravity of the fyftem. He
pafies through the twelve figns of the zodiac in three hundred and fixty-
tive days, five hours, forty-eight minutes, and fifty-feven feconds, which
forms the tropical or folar year, by which ftandard all our periods of time
are meafured. His mean motion is fifty-nine minutes and eight feconds;


but


O Bite Ay Sa TRY O; LO. G, ¥, 123


but his fwift or diurnal motion is fixty minutes, and fometimes fixty-one
rninutes, fix feconds. He conftantly moves in theecliptic, and is there-
fore void of latitude; and, for the fame reafon, is never ftationary or re-
trograde. His exaltation is in nineteen degrees of Aries ; his detriment
in Aquaries; and his fall in nineteen degrees of Libra. His orb or radia-
tion is fifteen degrees before and after all his afpects. In man, he governs
the heart, back, arteries, the right eye of the male, and left of the female;
and the retentive faculty. He prefides over Sunday, and Wednefday
night. He is friendly with Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the
Moon ; but is conftantly at variance with Saturn.

The Sun is in nature’mafculine, diurnal, hot, and dry, but more tem-
perate ‘than Mars, and, if well dignified, is always found equivalent to one
of the Fortunes. When he prefides at a birth, the native is generally of
a large, boney, ftrong body, of a fallow fun-burnt complexion, large
high forehead, with light or fandy curling hair, but inclined to be foon
bald; a fine, full, piercing, hazel eye; and all the limbs ftraight and well
proportioned. If he is well dignified, the native will be of a noble,
magnanimous, and generous, difpofition ; high-minded, but very humane;
of a large and benevolent heart, affable, and courteous ; in friendfhip,
faithful and fincere; in promifes flow, but punctual. The folar man is
not of many words ; but, when he fpeaks, it is with confidence, and to
the purpofe; he is ufually thoughtful, fecret, and referved; his deport-
ment is ftately and majeftic; a lover of fumptuoufnefs and magnificence ;
and poffefies a mind far fuperior to any fordid, bafe, or difhonourable,
practices. If the Sun be ill-dignified, then will the native be born of ,
a mean and loquacious difpofition ; proud and arrogant; difdaining all
his inferiors, and a fychophant to his fuperiors ; of fhallow underftanding,
and imperfect judgment; reftlefs, troublefome, and domineering ; of no
_gravity in words, or fobernefs in actions; prone to mifchievoufnefs, au-
{terity, uncharitablenefs, cruelty, and ill nature.


Difeafes of the Sun.—All palpitations and trembling of the heart,
fainting and {wooning, weaknefs of fight, violent fevers, choler, dif-
orders of the brain, tympanies, cramps, foul breath, all diforders of the
mouth and throat, catarrhs, defluxions, and king’s evil. In conception,
she prefides over the fourth month. :


‘Herbs and plants.—Angelica, avens, afh-tree, balm, one-blade, lo-
vage, burnet, butter-bur, camomile, celadine, centaury, eye-bright,
fig-tree, St. John’s wort, marigolds, mifletoe, piony, Peter’s wort, pim-
pernel, raifins, rofa folis, rofemary, rue, faffron, tormentil, turnfole,
o No.6. Dd vipers


124 AN’ PERIAUO ST R2A'T BO N


vipers buglofs, wallnut-tree, cloves, mace, nutmegs, fcabions, forrel,
wood-forrel, borage, gentian, ivy, lavender, bay-tree, myrtle, olive-tree,
mints, date-tree, oranges, citrons, thyme, vine, zedoary, myrrh, frank-
incenfe, aloes, lapis calaminaris, lemon-tree, mufk, {weet marjoram,
ginger, vervaine, cinquefoil, barley, and pepper honey. In gathering thefe
herbs, 'the cuftom has been to do itin the Sun’s proper hour, which may
be found by the table calculated, for that purpofe, in this work, when
he is in an angle, well fortified effentially, and no way impeded ; and let
the Moon apply to him by trine or fextile. :


Stones and metals. —fEtites, thé ftone called the eye of the Sun, becaufe
it is like the apple of the eye in form, the carbuncle, chryfolite, the ftone
called iris, the heliotropion, hyacinth, topaz, pyroyphylus, pantaurus,
pantherus or pantochras, the ruby, and diamond. Alfo pure gold, and
all yellow metals. |


Animals.—The Sun rules all ftately, bold, ftrong, furious, and invin-
cible, animals, as the lion, tyger, leopard, hyena, crocodile, wolf, ram,
boar, bull, horfe, and baboon. Among fithes, he rules the fea=calf, whofe
nature is to refift lightning ; all fhell-fith, the f{tar-fith for its remarkable
heat, and the fithes called ftrombi. Among birds, the eagle, pheenix,
fwan, cock, hawk, buzzard, lark, and nightingale.


Weather and winds.—He produces weather according to the proper
feafon of the year ; in the fpring, warm and gentle fhowers; in fummer,
if in afpeét with Mars, extemity of heat ; in autumn, fogs and mifts; and
in winter, fmall drizzling rain. He delights in the eaftern part of the
heavens, and brings eaftern winds.


Signs and triphcity.—Of the celeftial figns, he has only Leo for his
houfe. He rules the fiery triplicity by day, viz. Aries, Leo, and Sa-
gittarius.


Regions.—He rules the fourth climate, Italy, Bohemia, Sicilia, Chal-
dea, the Roman Empire, and North and South America.


Years.—His greateft year is one thoufand fix hundred and forty : but
others fay, only four hundred and fixty-one; his great year is one hun-
dred and twenty; his mean year is fixty-nine; and his Jeaft is
nineteen. I


The


OFT A RUROUOG ®%. 125


The DRAGON’s HEAD ®, and DRAGON’s TAIL e.


The Head of the Dragon is mafculine, partaking of the nature both
of Jupiter and Venus; but the Dragon’s Tail is feminine, and of a di-
rect oppofite quality to the head. Thefe are neither figns nor conftella-
tions, but are only the nodes or points wherein the ecliptic is interfected
by the orbits of the planets, and particularly by that of the Moon; making
with it angles of five degrees and eighteen minntes. One of thefe points
looks northward, the. Moon beginning then to have northern latitude ;
and the other points fouthward, where fhe commences her latitude fouth.
But itumuft be obferved, that thefe points do not always abide in one
place, but have a motion of their own in the zodiac, and retrograde-
wife, three minutes and eleven feconds per day; completing their
circle in eighteen years and two hundred and twenty-five days; fo that
the Moon can be but twice in the ecliptic during her monthly period ;
but-at all other times fhe will have a latitude or declination from the
ecliptic. The Head of the Dragon is confidered of a benevolent nature,
and almoft equivalent to one of the Fortunes, and when in afpett with
evil planets, is found to leflen their malevolent effects in a very great
degree. But the Dragon’s Tail I have always found of an evil and un-
happy tendency, not only adding to the malevolence of unfortunate af-
pects, when joined with them; but leffening confiderably the beneficial
influences of the Fortunes, and other good afpetts, whenever found in
. conjunction with them. ;


Should the reader be defirous of more particular information on the
planetary fy.:tem, I beg leave to recommend to his attentive perufal, the
aftronomical works of the ingenious Mr. Fergufon. And, in order to
bring all the foregoing particulars, concerning the periods, diftances,
bulks, &c. of the planets, into one point of view, I fubjoin his following
comprehenfive table. 7


A TABLE


AUN: 2 3a Sore R.A T MD


OP ee 8 +S ; | mR po . Lot jooofcoo'zgr'gzisSSt o00'zgSSzorvi ‘uy jooog1 | +6 96 Uime
Sete? ee SARp 203,81 a zm) 0 bee d00%0005S.65 ‘ES 1°gZz o60 ee etod%or eee. ee. oz =| 82 andar
otf} 03 TeApInout ath <pakoryopoioamasap arty e812 obg'S£ £69685 + obz‘gfotzg - 955 looodp |-uxug! 4 sre py
gy 2 OL | § | 222fo1d s Woo] au JT) aslor +9 jooo'ghz‘gobss oS L°g6gh1 £ 007% as uooyy
Pega sik mee g of gr Sor, -¥ PS fot tg jogo’g6Sob'Sgz 098658661 zbozy jooogS} 1 i yuey
S@ cextt e 6FO-8 aL £ || <j Zr 68 jooz*zfg‘Los‘ghz oof ‘19£%169 tb 00069 |'uyuQ! £1 stud A
oy) Lite Zz Gq. Mel ee) z i] Bel fr. $1 jooShbS'S61%6 : 00g ‘gf z°1z ‘uy {00086 | uyup| 29 | Ainosaqzy
61, 1% 1 1 |i@of. gt 24 I 3 | sy skeplooo‘ooot LE pS 11SZZS*zF&z  joootooo’116%gzg"t |grge  |———|coSZzz o10S+ ung
‘N ‘HG ‘ON A= (Hee ‘ON : royenb] “31q_ |ganepy! “3eafy
“WY SUi-IOC su} Jo Ay) pue
get lhe th Dae Ses ae suier ater cab xe sSterrld
‘uInjeg as sronidnf © | 03 [Tes plnom | *AIprypoy ur sopruy s1qnd ur sap asenbg Fo Aj|-our Ay] teuon yo won pue nag
punoi sporiag a2 punos spollog $8 ; =inop3| anopy todos j{rodoa i
\cQ i oe
Si zy 9g$ | 2glg [f1o1z OS ole F ‘Lok. ozi-uyuG, Coo'SEL*zp} ooo%000%0g4 | \.91 coofg §=*umouxyuy YZ =pbSZor1] uanjeg
61 z 6ror! E1gdr|,6%o2 2.01 46 =F }OzZ 91].0 90 | 000zS£%oz, coofcoo'gzh | \4E | coorg | ‘wigs -y6 yz peter | sazidnf
‘uyan| ‘uqug |. = 26 | Liof1 Q zE 50. Yu | 7S ol]0 40 | C00%6EH‘17| OoofOoO'Szr | | 2 bby ‘mor “yrz yfz pgsg sIeyAy
Ha gon Go | Sez jrapquiie A ——|\8t 65|.01 oz. | 008k! 000‘000'7g wt) 081% "ygzI “p6zyg pavt uoopy
oor I I frol TI 68 M10 60],.62 o£z -000°ZZE%1 | oo0%000'%g | Iz oL6Z ‘yO “pl jyg plgé yueq
‘uyuQ | “uyuA |. I 2oy | 65 £1 wm 02 of se loz of] 0 _§2 oooh | c00%000%6S of go6L "ug “pre |yéi przez snua A
‘uyup| ‘uyug | 42 tre [eyoh1 2g oft ¥ LVS. og|"uyxUG | COC‘0ZZ‘g | coo‘ooOSzE Oz 009% sumouyuy| fz plg = | Ainosaypy)
26z Vz o$922g\00001 | ——— | —-—- | 0 0g ———— i ooofgd | ‘yg “piz =— NaS
*Aq | -adeyiny “yng *siaa] ‘apON ‘odyo|"31qIQ | “sap = soplMTyppsuy sung ay3 Gi SIX “ing amp |,
Se OR 0 pe oy ee Surpusa | -uoraydy |-q 03 | oipa | Ul yqID | Ul ung 9q3 Moy 92} WMNSUT loys yo uoney'punoi pou sjaurtd ||
Jo won AWAvILy rodorg JO Uoll| -}Y¥ SI |sy Jo sox] gq) ‘UlpoU!) -UTfoUT} sj Jo A319) Worf aduv] | se “weIp) Ul doy | jeumnigg-ad jenuuy pure NNS
todos gq} jo "01g lodo1g| Jo sovrg gig | sixy {-wueoxg | -pipuvopy | uvapy | -aweiq :


"rgft Iva yi UI ‘snuaA Jo JyULIy, oy} Jo suonvalayqg


“WIOLZ PaulUtiajap sv ‘NAG oy} Woy soouryig onay Apsvou s10q3 Jog—"siomiouoryy Aq payndaios Xjiowsoj sy


‘SLANVIg oY} jo 0%» “sdadALINOVY ‘SNOILATOATY *sao1utag 24} JO ATAV.L V.


OPF ATR OL © GC. 12%


Befides the foregoing natural influences of the planets, which they
produce on the human frame, as often as they bear abfolute rule at a
birth ; it muft alfo be remembered, that they differ in their effects, ac-
cording as they are pofited, or impeded by other afpects, at the time; and
thefe variations muft be attentively perufed and digefted, before any
correct judgment can be formed on the circumftances of a nativity. [
thall therefore arrange them under diftin& heads, and fhew, in the firft
place, how their natural qualities are changed, by their different afpetts
and pofitions in the heavens.

The © in v xand mo is fanguine, and produces heat and moifture, as
in {pring.

The o©ins and ™ is choleric, and caufes heat and drynefs, as in
fummer. P

The © in & mand ¢ is melancholy, and brings cold and drynefs,
as in autumn,

The 0 in w s and x is phlegmatic, and caufes cold and moifture,
as in winter. : .

The » from the new unto the firft quarter occafions heat and moifture.

The » from the firft quarter to the full caufes heat and drynefs.

The » from the full to the laft quarter produces cold and drynefs.

The > from the laft quarter to the new brings cold and moifture.

The planet Saturn, oriental, .caufes cold and moifture.

The planet Saturn, occidental, brings drynefs.

The planet Jupiter, oriental, produces heat and moifture.

The planet Jupiter, occidental, occafions moifture.

The planet Mars, oriental, caufes heat and drynefs.

The planet Mars, occidental, gives drynefs only. —

The planet Venus, oriental, produces heat and moifture.

The planet Venus, occidental, caufes moifture.

The planet Mercury, oriental, caufes heat.

The planet Mercury, occidental, brings drynefs.


The Moon, of her own nature, is cold and moift, and always inter~
mixes her influences with every planet that joins in afpect with her, or
from which her afpett is feparated. Her effects alfo increafe or decreafe
as follows: increafing with ¢, fhe caufes heat and drynefs ; but, decreaf-
ing with}, fhe produces cold and moifture.


No. 6, Ee ESSENTIAL


€ 3428 A oN Tt Giese S Terk: AaTeeoO on


ESSENTIAL DIGNITIES of tHe PLANETS.


A Planet is effentially ftrong, or operates with the greateft force and
energy, when pofited in its own houfe, exaltation, triplicity, term, or
phafis, according to the following Table.


Z Houfes fe Tri- ; ou 3
21 of the | & | plici- The Terms of the The Phafes of the | 4.4-~
Planets. 5 ties. PLANETS. PLANETS. 3
gt ket ADL aN .

y 3D © oat | un 6:| o14| Barb ase. h30 | S10 | ©20 “9301 & |m|
im 9N ip D| 2? 8 pres Wen [hee $30 | $16] py 20} h30 ras ba |
nul 8D |a@3b81e7 U4 9a $25 | h30| #10 | 320 ©30/ u lg
) Vy [Urs) SS | so 6] U13 | ¥20} $27 | b30] SIo} 20 30! b Ig
a| od OU) bk 6] $13) 819] 925 | 350| b10| 420} 830] b
m| ¥N- [¥ssl 9D) ¥ 7 | 913 | 418 | b24| ogo | O10] g20| ¥30| # le
S| ¢D |hail b8 |b 6| a1 | ¥t9| 24) #9019301 -h20) 30] 6 lo
ml aN || @a | @ 6: -uatlwerdiapal gue Maelo ned tase ads
lt yD 6 3] OW rary 214 | ¥19| b25 | 830] B10 pape “gle
| BN [28 @ >| @ 6| ¥x2| UI9| bes | 50] UI0| S20] O50] D lw
=| bD | |b | & 6| ¥12| ¢20| u25) 430] $10] B20| paolo]
x uN lex aa fe 8] til ¥20| 25 | 30! brol wal ajo l ele


‘This table thews that each of the planets have two figns for. their
houfes, except the Sun and Moon, which have only one each. Thus
the houfes of Saturn, are Capricorn and Aquaries; of Jupiter, Sagittary
and Pifces; of Mars, Aries and Scorpio; of Venus, Taurus and Libra;
of Mercury, Gemini and Virgo; of the Sun, Leo, and of the Moon,
Cancer. One of each of thefe houfes is diftinguifhed by the name of
diurnal, or day-houfe, and the other by noéfurnal, or night-houfe, which
is denoted by theletters Dand N inthetable. In thefe figns or houfes,
the planets have their exaltations, as pointed out in the third column 5
viz. the Sun in nineteen degrees of Aries ; the Moon in three degrees of
Taurus, the Dragon’s Head in three degrees of Gemini, and foon. Thefe


twelve


O BT ASITOR OL-O CG Yy . 129


twelve figns being divided into four triplicities, the fourth columnfhews


which of the planets, both night and day, govern each triplicity. For
inftance, oppofite to Aries, Leo, and Sagittary, are the Sun and Jupiter,
which imports that the Sun governs by day, and Jupiter by night, in
that triplicity. Oppofite Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, are Venus and
the Moon, which fhews that Venus has dominion by day, and the Moon
by night, in that triplicity. Oppofite Gemini, Libra, and Aquaries,
are Saturn and Mercury, by which it appears that Saturn rules by day,
_ and Mercury by night, in that triplicity. Oppotite Cancer, Scorpio, and
Pifces, ftands the planet Mars, who rules in that triplicity both night
and day. In the fifth, fixth, feventh, and eighth, columns, oppofite Aries,
ftands 46. ¢ 14. &c. which imports that the firft fix degrees of Aries are
the terms of Jupiter; from fix degreesto fourteen are the terms of Venus,
and foon. In the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, columns oppofite Aries,
we find 10.0 20. ? 30. which fhews that the firft ten degrees of Aries
are the phafes of Mars.; from ten to twenty degrees are the phafes of the
Sun; and from twenty to thirty, the phafes of Venus. In the thirteenth
column, ina line with Aries, ftands Venus in detriment ; which fhews
that Venus, being in Aries, isin a fign dire€tly oppofite to one of her
own houfes, and is therefore faid to be in detriment. In the fourteenth
column, in the fame line with Aries, ftands Saturn in f/¢//; which fhews
that Saturn, when he is in Aries, is oppofite to Libra, his houfe of
exaltation, and fo becomes unfortunate, and is hence faid to have his
fall in that fign.


The effets produced by the planets under thefe fituations-are as fol-
low: if the planet, which is principal ‘fignificator, be pofited in his own
houfe, in any {cheme or calculation whatever, it indicates profperity and
fuccefs to the perfon fignified, to the bufinefs in hand, or to whatever
elfe may be the fubje@ of enquiry. If a planet be in his exaltation, it
denotes a perfon of majeftic carriage, and lofty difpofition, high minded,
auftere, and proud. Ifa planet’be in his triplicity, the perfon will be
profperous and fortunate in acquiring the goods of this life; no matter
whether well or ill defcended, or born rich or poor, his condition and
circumftances will notwithftanding be promifing and good. If a planet
be in his terms, it betokens a perfon to participate rather in the nature
and quality of the planet than in the wealth, power, and dignity, in-
dicated thereby. Ifa planet be in his phafes, and no otherwife fortified,
though fignificator, it declares the perfon or thing fignified to be in
great diftrefs, danger, or anxiety. And thus in all cafes, judgment is
to be given, good or bad, according to the ftrength, ability, or imperfec-
tion, of the fignificator.

TABLE


130 AN ILLUSTRATION


TABLE thewing the FORTIT UDES and DEBILITIES


of the PLANETS.


EssEnTIAL DIGNITIES, DEBILITIES.

A Planet in his own houfe, In detriment 5
or mutual reception by In fall 4
houfe, fhall have dignities 5 || Peregrine te

In exaltation, or reception

by exaltation 4. i

In triplicity 3

In terms 2

In decant or phafis 1
ACCIDENTAL FORTITUDES, AccIDENTAL DEBILiTIES.

‘In medium ceeli or afcendant 5 | In the 12th houfe 5

In the 7th, 4th, or 11th, houfe 4 || In the 8th or 6th houfe 4

In the 2d or 5th houfe 3 || Retrograde 5

In the gth houfe 2 || Slow in motion 2

In the 3d houfe 1 || ® %oré occidental 2

Direc - 4 || ¢ or 8 oriental 2

In hayz 1 || » decreafing in light 2

Swift in motion 2 || Combuftion of theo 5

4 wor oriental 2 || Under the Sun’s beams 4.

@ ¥or the » occidental 2 || Befieged by and ¢ 6

Free from combutftion 5 || Partial conjunétion of #' 4.

In cazimi or in the heart of @ 5 || PartialconjunGtionwith ord, 5

Befieged by 4 and ¢ 5 || Partial oppofition of & or 2, 4

Partial conjunction of thea’ = 4_ || Partial quartile of ® or ¢ 3

In partial conjunction with In conjunction with Caput Al-

AOL Bic 5 gol, in 21° degrees of yor

In partial trine of yor @' 4 within 5 degrees r

In partial fextile of 4 or ¢' 3 || In the term of & or ¢, 1

In conjunction with Cor Leo-
nis, in 25 degrees of 9 6

In conjunction with Spica Vir-
ginis, in 18 degrees of 5 ,

In the terms of or 2, 1 |


3 - TABLE


,


(OME TAPC ATER ORL IG Gaye 8 a1


7


TABLE of the FORTITUDES and DEBILITIES of the PART of


: FORTUNE. |
DIGNITIEs. aye DEBILITIES.
The Part of Fortune ins or X 5 || In m, w,or # 5
In 2, 2, or @ ; 4 | In the 12th houfe 5
In o 3 | In the 6th houfe 4.
In m 2, || In the 8th houfe 4
In theafcendant, or medium ceeli G | In conjunction of ® or @ 5
In the 7th, 4th, or1ith, houfes 4 || In conjundtion of 8 3
In the 2d or sth houfe 3 || In oppofition of or ¢ 4
In the gth houfe 2 || In quartile of b or ¢ 3
In the 3d houfe 1 || In terms of ) or @ 2
In conjunction of 4 or ¢ 5 || In conjun@tion of Caput Algol
In trine of 4% or ¢ 4 in 21 degrees of x 4
In fextile of 2% or ¢ 3 || Combutt < 5
In conjunction of the e F206 :
In conjunction of Regulusin 2¢
degrees of 2 6
In conjunction of Spica Virginis |
in 19 degrees of = cd
Not combuft bases


The » in conjunction or oppofition of the @, h, ¢, or the @, isim«
peded two days, viz. one day before, and one day after.


The » in quartile of the ©, %,o0r @ ,is impeded twelve hours before
and after. BH end: |


To arrive at a proper degree of correctnefs in our refearches into futu-
rity, we muft be well verfed in the true nature and {trength of the planets’
fortitudes and debilities, fo as to give them their due weight in the
{cale of nature, according to the experienced rules of the {cience, and
no further. For the more a man endeavours to ftrain a judgment be-
yond the natural tendency of the planets, and the more he fwerves from
truth in putting down their ftrength or debility, the more he augments
his error, and betrays his inexperience. To avoid this, let the ftudent
acquaint himfelf perfectly with thefe tables ; and, in practice, whenever he
has occafion to colleét the fortitudes and debilities either of the planets
or Part of Fortune, let him fubtract the lefs number from the greater,
and the remainder will be the planet’s excefs of fuperiority or de-
bility; according to which will be his operation upon the fubject
of his inveftigation. | |

No.7 Ff Of


132 A Ne RAP DPUIS TRA: TP Ow
Of the PLANETARY HOUSES, and their EFFECTS.
To give a more fubftantial idea of the nature and arrangement of the


twelve houfes of the planets, we fhall confider them according to the
following diagram:


oe


%O


be 4


©
Xo mtsm th wv


hv


Vee oe SE Ue GN © ed CR


In this fcheme, Cancer and Leo have affligned unto them the two
great luminaries, Sol and Luna; becaufe they are agreeable to each other
in nature; for the Sun, being naturally hot and dry, fhews his effets more
forcibly when pofited in Leo than he doth in either Aries or Sagittarius.
And the Moon, for the fame reafon, has Cancer allotted to her govern-
ment, becaufe fhe is cold and moift, and of the nature of this fign; and,
being the firft of the watery triplicity, and next to the Sun’s houfe, fhe
receives her light from him; and all] things are generated by their joint
influence.


Saturn is naturally cold, and therefore an enemy to heat; and, being the
higheft and moft remote from the luminaries of all the other planets,
has for his manfion the figns Capricorn and Aquaries; which are the
oppofite figns to Leo and Cancer, and are confequently cold and moift,
Saturn is accounted the moft obnoxious and moft malevolent of all the
planets, becaufe he oppofes the two great luminaries, which are the
fountains of life, light, and nutrition.

Jupiter


OF ASETAROronc He ft


Jupiter is placed under Saturn, and has the two figns that go before
and after Capricorn and Aquaries allotted for his houfes; namely, Sagit-
tary and Pifces, which are in trine to the houfes of the two luminaries ;
Pifces, his night-houfe, is in trine to Cancer, the houfe of the notturnal
luminary ; and Sagittary, his day-houfe, in trine to Leo, the houfe of the
diurnal luminary. Jupiter, being naturally temperate, and having thefe
amicable afpects, is deemed the moft benevolent of all the planets to
mankind, and the greater fortune.


Mars next in order follows Jupiter, being placed under him ; and there-
fore thofe figns that go before and after the houfes of Jupiter are allot-
ted to Mars, viz. Scorpio and Aries, which are in quartile to the houfes
of the Sun and Moon, as Aries’s day-houfe is to Cancer, and Scorpio’s
night-houfe is to Leo. And, fince a quartile is found to be an afpect of
enmity, he is accounted malignant and unfortunate in an inferior degree
to Saturn, who beholds the luminaries with an oppofition ; therefore he
is called the /e/fer infortunate. ;


Venus, a more temperate planet, hath appointed unto her thofe houfes
that go before the houfes of Mars, viz; Libra and Taurus, which are in
a fextile to the houfes of the two luminaries, and form an a{pect of love
and amity; but, becaufe a fextile is not fo ftrong Wind perfett an afpect as
a trine, fhe 1s accounted the ker fortune.


Mercury, being fituated within the orbits of the other planets, has figns
allotted him which precede the two houfes of the great luminaries, namely,
Gemini and Virgo; and, becaufe Mercury is never diftant from the Sun
above one fign, he naturally inclines neither to good nor evil, but parti-
cipates either in the good or evil influences of whatever planet he is joined
with in afpect.


The EXALTATIONS and FALLS of the PLANETS.

The Sun, which is the fountain of life, takes his exaltation in nine-
teen degrees of Aries, becaufe he is then in the higheft northern point
of the ecliptic, making all things to fpring and flourifh, and producing
fine warm weather, and length of days. And he is faid to have his fall
in Libra, becaufe it is the oppofite in the heavens to Aries, in which
the Sun declines to the utmoft fouthern point, and occafions fhortnefs
of days, and cold winterly blafts, deftructive to the fruits of the earth.
Now the Moon being contemporary with and partner to the Sun, and
receiving all her light from him, enables her to be vifible to us firit
in Taurus ; and, becaufe it is the firft fign wherein the has a triplicity, her


exaltation takes place in Taurus, wherein fhe increafes in light and mo-
tion.


x ;?


134 ASN! i EUS T REA it Bloun


tion. But Scorpio being,the fign oppofite to Taurus, in which the de-
creafes in light, it is hence allotted for her fall, being the fign immedi-
ately after Libra, and oppofite to Aries, the houfe of the Sun’s exaltation,


Saturn, the moft remote planet, is the author of cold, as the Sun ts of
heat, and is therefore exalted in that fign wherein heat is diminifhed and
cold increafed, viz. Libra; and his fall takes place in that fign where cold
is diminifhed arid heat increafed, viz. Aries ; which are quite contrary in
nature to the Sun.


Jupiter is exalted in Cancer, and has his fall in Capricorn ; for Jupiter
‘delights in the northern part of the heavens, where he ftirs up northern
winds, which increafe fertility and vegetation; and, his higheft declina-
tion northwards being in Cancer, he is therein exalted. For the contrary

reafon he has his fall in Capricorn.


Mars is naturally hot and dry ; and, becaufe his influence and effects are
moft powerful in Capricorn, a fouthern fign, where the fun is generally
hotteft about noon, he is for this reafon exalted therein ; and he takes his
fallin Cancer, quite contrary to the nature of Jupiter ; for Marsis hot and
violent, and Jupiter cool and temperate.


Venus is naturally moift, efpecially in Pifces, in which fign the {pring
is moiftened and forwarded in the increafe and {trength of nature; and
therefore the has-the fign Pifces for her exaltation; and, as Venus is the
mother of generation and procreation, fhe has her fall in Virgo, in the
autumn, when all things wither and fade.


Mercury, becaufe he is dry, and contrary in nature to Venus, is exalted
in Virgo, and has his fall appointed him in Pifces. Virgo is both his
houfe and joy.


The TRIP,LICIT IES; of the PLANE TS.


A Triplicity means three figns of the zodiac, of one and the fame
nature, making a perfect triangle; and of thefe triplicities among the
figns there are four, anfwering to the four elements; viz. the fiery tri-
plicity, which confifts of Aries, Leo, and Sagittary; the airy triplicity,
confifting of Gemini, Libra, and Aquaries; the watery triplicity, con-
taining Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifcés; and the earthy triplicity, which
includes Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn. Thefe figns apply to each other
in a trine in the fame manner as a planet in a fiery fign applies to another
planet in a fiery fign (if in the fame number of degrees) in a trine; and


I thus


OF 8 TR DO iLO GW. 435


thus a planet in an airy fign beholds another planet in an airy fign with
atrine; and fo the watery and earthy figns apply in the fame manner; and
each of thefe trine afpeéts confifts of one hundred and twenty degrees.


The Sun and Jupiter have dominion over the fiery triplicity ; the Sun
by day, and Jupiter by night. The Sun by day, becaufe he is hot and
fiery, and of the nature of thefe figns; and Jupiter by night, becaufe he
is temperate, and moderates the extremity of heat, This is called the
eaftern triplicity.


Saturn and Mercury have dominion over the airy triplicity, which is
weftern ; Mercury by night, and Saturn by day. But, as Libra is the ex-
altation of Saturn, and Aquaries the houfe and fign wherein he has moft
joy, and as Gemini is only the houfe of Mercury, it follows that Saturn
has the principal government in this triplicity.


Mars, both night and day, governs the watery triplicity, which is nor-
thern; and it feems that Mars. was appointed to this triplicity to temper
and abate his violent heat; for we find he is more powerful in his malig-
nant effects in the fign Leo than he is in Cancer, therefore he has his

fall appointed him in Cancer, though he is peregrine in Leo.


Venus and the Moon bear rule over the earthy triplicity, which is
feminine and fouthern, cold and moitt, producing fouth-eaft winds
and cold moift air; hence this triplicity’is affigned to the care of femi-
nine planets.


The TERMS of the PLANETS.


A Term is @ certain number of degrees, in each houfé or fign of the
zodiac, wherein the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury,
have a certain priority; but the Sun and Moon have no terms. Thefe
degrees are called terms,ends, or bounds; for.the planets have each their
proportions fo allotted therein, that, at the end of a certain number of
degrees, the terms of one planet ceafe, and thofe of another begin. For
initance, from the firft degree of Aries to the fixth are the terms of Ju-
piter; from the fixth to the fourteenth are the terms of Venus; and fo
of all the reft. Ptolemy, Albumazer, and Bonatus, have all thewn that
the greater years of the planets are difcovered by their feveral terms or
bounds threugh the zodiac; which is done by finding what number of
degrees each of the planets have allotted them in each fign’; and then, by
adding them together, the fum will be the number of each of their great
years, as will appear more obvioufly by the following example : |

No. 7. Gg TERMS,


136. AN slab US TR AT FON
PEO Be oR. MLS,


h a 3 9 3
Inthe Sign 4 6 is 8 i
8 2 7, 6 8 7.
i 2 SRNGNS REO Merny
i peas SP sme n MEN er
KX 6 6 gio OMS Lomay
io 6. 5 6 6 7
a 6 8 6 5 5
m 3 8 Ga 7 6
sn Gt IL AN Re
us <7 My ;
a 6 g 5 8 6 ;
x 5 6 5 8 6
Great years MM eerie Cie Sh2 6


|


Thefe great years, being added together, make juft three hundred and
fixty degrees, being the whole extent or circumference of the zodiac.


The degrees are in this.manner divided into terms, to fhew what pla=
net has moft dignities in a fign, whether by exaltation and houfe, tripli-.
city and houfe; or houfe, exaltation, or triplicity, alone ;. and to that: .
planet, which has two or more dignities, we affign the firft term, whe«
ther he be.a fortune or an infortune. If.an infortune has not two dig-.
nities in a fign, he is placed laft, and the firft term is given either to the
lord of the exaltation, or to the lord of the triplicity, or to the lord.
of the houfe, uniformly preferring that planet which. has two dignities
to thofe that have only one. Butan exception to this rule extends to the
figns Cancer and Leo; for Cancer, being the oppofite fign to the exalta-
tion of Mars, which is in Capricorn, oceafions the firft term of Cancer
to be afligned to Mars; and, becaufe Leo is the cppofite fign to the houfe
and joy of Saturn, the firft term of Leo is for this reafon given to Sa-.
turn. ‘Fo the infortunes are allotted the laft degrees of all the figns, ex-
cepting thofe of Leo, whiclvare given to Jupiter. The-quantity of terms
are divided according to the following method : when: Jupiter and Ve-
nus have not two dignities in the fame fign, nor-in the fecond, third,.or
fourth, houfe, they have feven. degrees allotted for their terms. Saturn
and Mars, becaufe they are infortunes,. (except in-theirown houfes,) have
but five, and fometimes only four, three, or two, degrees each. Mercus _
ry, becaufe heis of a mixed nature, has ufually fix degrees-allotted him ;,
but, when any of the planets are effentially dignified, they-claim each one


degree more;,as Venus in the firft term of Taurus has eight degrees, and
3.


Saturn:


OR’ A STIR OL OG Wa 137


Saturn in the firft term of Aquaries claims fix. But, becaufe Venus has
eight degrees in Taurus, Saturn has only two, .being very weak in Tau-
rus; and again, in Sagittary, Jupiter is increafed one degree, becaufe he
is trong, and Mercury is diminifhed one degree, becaufe he is weak; fo
that Jupiter takes eight degrees, and leaves Mercury but five.


It is alfo neceflary to obferve, that a planet in his own term is ftrong,
and that the more dignities he gains therein, the ftronger will his in-
fluence be; for example, Jupiter in the firft term of Sagittary is ftronger
and more powerful than in the firft term of Aries, though they are
Both equally his terms ; and the reafon of this is, becaufe the fign Sa-
gittary is both his houfe and triplicity, and Aries is his triplicity only ;
wherefore he has the firft eight degrees of Sagittary for his term, and
only fix in Aries. Hence it becomes apparent, that the nearer a planet is
in nature to the place of his term, the ftronger will his influence be
therein. Jupiter, being hot and moift, has but five degrees for his term
in Virgo, which is a cold and. dry fign; but in Gemini, which is hot —
and moift, he has fix degrees, becaufe it agrees with his nature; and yet |
in Cancer, whichis cold and moift, he poffefles feyen degrees, although -
it does not agree with his nature ; and the reafon is, Cancer is the houfe
of Jupiter’s exaltation, and therefore the greater term is allotted him.— -
In like manner, if a planet that is cold and dry be pofited in a term of
the fame temperature, his cofdnefs and drinefs will be greatly increafed
thereby, and he will operate the more powerfully in bis influences. The
fame rule holds good in refpett to all the other qualities of the planets ; -
and it muft be remembered, that a planet.is always increafed in {trength
by being fituated in houfes or places of his own temperature and quality.
Thus, a planet that is hot and dry lofes much of his natural vigourina term
that is cold and moift; and a planet that is cold and moiift lofes confi-
derably of its nature ina term thatis hotand dry. And, in like manner,
if a planet that is a fortune be pofited in a fortunate term, his beneficent
effects are the more increafed, and he is fortified with greater power and”
ftrength to operate upon whatever fubject he is the fignificator of. And,
on the contrary, if an evil and malevolent planet be in an evil fign and -
term, its effects will be thereby rendered ftill more mifchievous. And the -
lord of a term, when pofited in that term, be thefign what it may, has more
power therein than the lord of the fign, or than the planet that has the
fign for its exaltation. Again, if the lord of any term be pofited in his
term, and the lord of the fign be fituated in another fign in afpect with
him, the lord of the term will have more power in the fign where he is
than the lord of the fign, and {hall be the principal fignificator; but, if
the lord of the term be pofited in his own term and fign alfo, thenvhis
firength and energy will. be ftill more confiderable. It may alfo rs ob-

, erved,


16, . OA NE SD EUS TTTR ACT HO oN.


ferved, that, when a planet is weak in a fign, his debility would be very
much leffened fhould he chance to be fituated in that part of “the fign
wherein he has terms. Whenever a planet is pofited in a term and fign

both of his own nature, it is a very ftrong and fortunate afpect. .


The PHASES.wof:the PLANETS.


The planets phafes confift of the twelve figns of the zodiac, divided
each into three equal parts; fo that one phafis contains ten degrees, and
_ every fign three phafes. They are called phafes, becaufe they fignify or
reprefent the forms, natures, and. inclinations, ofthe feveral planets ap-
propriated tothem. A planet’s term divides a phafis; a phafis divides a
-fign ; a fign divides a triplicity ; and a triplicity divides the whole zodiac.


To afcertain the proper phafes of each planet, we begin with Mars
/in the equinoétial fign Aries, becaufe it is the houfe of this planet ;
- wherefore, the firft:ten degrees conftitute the phafis of Mars; the fecond
, ten degrees are the phafis of the Sun; and the third, which make up the
-whole thirty degrees of Aries, conftitute the phafis of Venus.. The
firft ten degrees of Taurus make the phafis of Mercury; the fecond ten
. degrees are the phafis of the Moon; and the third ten conftitute the phafis
.of Saturn, The firft ten degrees of Gemini make the phafis of Jupiter ; '
the fecond ten the phafis of Mars; and fo .on, in the following order,
throughout the twelve figns of the zodiac.


Mars hath the firft phafis in Aries: which is the phafis of ftrength,
.Magnanimity, and courage; of refolution, confidence, and intrepidity.
The Sun hath the fecond phalis in Aries: and this is the phafis of re-
Down, majefty, and might; of candour, generofity, and noblenefs of foul;
and herein the Sun. has his exaltation. Venus has the third phafis in
Aries: which is the phafis of effeminacy and wanton merriment ; of joy,
Apart, and play.


In Taurus, the firft phafis is attributed to Mercury: and it is the phafis
-of mechanical arts, agriculture, and learning; of refined wit, logic, and
oratory. The moon has the fecond phafis in Taurus: and it is the phafis
_of power, ambition, and authority ; of violent force, compulfion, and ar-

bitrary fway. Saturn has the third phafisin Taurus: which is the phafis
,of cruelty, opprefiion, and bondage ; of poverty, fervitude, and menial oc-
cupations.


Jupiter hath the firft phafisin Gemini: and this is the phafis of nume-
fation, algebra, and all figures; of decyphering hieroglyphic charatters,
eo Writings,


OF ASTROLOGY. 139


writings, and fculptures. Mars has the fecond phafis in Gemini: which
is a phafis of ftudy, perfeverance, and labour; of trouble, grief, and
painful anxiety. The Sun has the third phafis in Gemini: and it is the
phafis of boldnefs, contempt, and difdain ; of indolence, forgetfulnefs,
and ill manners.


The firft phafis in Cancer belongs to Venus: it is the phafis of a good
underftanding, mirth, and wit; of cheerfulnefs, complacency, and love.
The fecond phafis in Cancer belongs to Mercury: it is the phafis of
wealth, honour, and preferment ; of fruitfulnefs, fertility, and fuccefsin
bufinefs. The third phafis in Cancer belongs to the Moon; and it is
the phafis of fuccefs in arms, law, and oppofition; of travelling, perfe-
verance, and ftrength.


Saturn has the firft phafis in Leo: it is the phafis of violence, rage,
and tyranny ; of luft, cruelty, and mifchievoufnefs. Jupiter has the fe-
cond phafis in Leo: itis the phafis of difputation, contention, and ftrife ;
of hoftility, violence, and battle. Mars hath the third phafis in Leo:
which is a phafis of efteem and friendfhip, of union in the public caufe,
and of fuccefs in arms.


The Sun has the firft phafis in Virgo: it is the phafis of riches, pro-
- perty, and wealth; of.induftry, improvement, and cultivation. Venus
hath the fecond phafis in Virgo: it is the phafis of avarice, covetouf-
nefs, and fordid gain; of meannefs, penurioufnefs, and parfimony.— ~
Mercury has the third phafis in Virgo: and it is the phafis of .advanced
age, infirmity; and weaknefs; of gradual decline, diflolution, and decay.


The Moon has the firft phafis in Libra: it is the phafis of juttice,
mercy, and ‘truth ; of humanity, liberality, and benevolence. Saturn has
the fecond phafis in Libra: it 1s the phafis of advantage, emolument, and
gain ; of watchfulnefs, labour, and fubtilty. Jupiter has the third pha-~
fis in Libra: which is the phafis of lafcivioufnefs, luxury, and licenti-
oufnefs ; of diffipation, drunkennefs, and depravity.


Mars has the firft phafis in Scorpio: it is the phafis of violent ftrife,
contention, and flaughter ; of thieving, murdering, and robbing. |The
Sun has the fecond phafis in Scorpio: it isa phafis of injuftice, deccit-
fulnefs, and envy; of difcord, malice, and detraction. . Venus hath the
third phafis in Scorpio: and it is a phafis of lewdnefs, fornication, and
adultery ; of flattery, feduction, and deceit.


Mercury pofleffes the firft phafis in Sagittary: it is a phafis of ftrength,
valour, and intrepidity ; of jollity, opennefs, and feftivity: The Moon
No. 7. Hh has


- 140 AN 2@£oO s TR A TWO Ww


has the fecond phafis in Sagittary : itis the phafis of afi€tion, forrow,
and perturbation of mind; of internal woe, fufprcion, and’ miitruft. Sa-
turn has the third phafis in Sagittary: andiit is the phafis of obftinacy,
obduratenefs, and tyranny; of wilfulnefs, mifchievoufnefs, and cruelty.


Jupiter has the firft phatis in Capricorn: it is the phafis of hofpita-
lity, benevolence, and honefty; of conviviality, merriment, and fport.
‘Mars hath the fecond phafis in Capricorn :, it is the phafis of inordinate
defires, of unbridled paflions, and intemperate:Iufts'; of difcontentednefs,
peevifhnefs, and difappointment.. The Sun has the third: phafis in. Ca=
pricorn: and it is a phafis of exalted underftanding, manlinefs, and
wifdom ; of fobriety, integrity, and:honour, J !

Venus hath the firft phafis in Aquaries: it is a phafis of continual
anxiety for gain, of laborious toil, and unwearied application ;; of difap-
pointment, misfortune, and lofs.. Mercury has the fecond phafis of Aqua-
ries: it is the phafis of modefty, clemency, and: good nature; of | gen~
tlenefs, mildnefs, and complacency... The Moon hath the third phafis of
Aquaries: and it is the phafisof diffatisfaction, repining, and difcontent ;
of jealoufy, ingratitude, and envy.


Saturn hath the firft phafis of Pifces\: it is a phafis of thoughtfulnefs,
fedatenefs, and temperance ; of fobriety, reputation, and fuccefs.in bufi-
nefs. Jupiter hath the fecond phafis in Pifces: it is the phafis of aufte-
rity, haughtinefs, and ambition; of pride, vain-glory, and felf-conceit.
Mars hath the third and laft phafis in Pifces: and it is the phafis of
concupifcence and luft; of debauchery, lewdnefs, and profligacy.


The advantage to be derived: by a perfe&t knowledge of the planets’
phafes will hereafter appear in.the judgment of a nativity; for, if the
afcendant on the cufp of any perfon’s nativity be foundi in thefe phafes,
then will the native’s natural difpofition, manners, occupation, and gene-
ral purfuits, be regulated by them, according to the ftrength or debility
of the other afpetts ; for, if the lord of the afcendant, or the Moon, or

planet applying to the afcendant in afpect, or beholding the lord of the
afcendant, or Moon, are: both) pofited: im phafes of the fame nature, then
will their effects upon the native be moft powerful and efficacious.


The JOYS of the PLANETS,


The planets are faid to be in their joys, when they are pofited in thofe
houfes wherein they are moft {trong and powerful.;' as,


I | / The


OF (-AS'*T*eR OL OG Y: TAL


The oe] (x
YU | f
3 | m
© > joyeth in 4
us k
¥ my
DJ Ls


It may perhaps be enquired, why Saturn joyeth not in Capricorn, as
well as in Aquaries, fince both thefe: figns are his honfes? The reafon
is, that in Aquaries he has both houfe and triplicity, andis therefore bet-
ter dignified, and more potent, in Aquaries than in Capricorn. Solike-
wife Jupiter joyeth in Sagittary, and notin Pifces, becaufe in the former
fign he has both houfe and triplicity, but in the latter he has houfe
only. The fame obfervation extends to the other planets. The Moon,
indeed, has no triplicity; but fhe joyeth in Cancer, becaufe it is a fign
of her own quality and nature. Hence it appears that Saturn, though ftrong
and well dignified in’ Capricorn, is much ftronger, and has more digni-
ties, in Aquaries; Jupiter alfo has ftrong influences when pofited in
Pifces, but much ftronger in Sagittary; Mars is potent in Aries, but
infinitely more fo in Scorpio; Venus. has great operation in Libra, but
in Taurus her effects are more powerful; and Mercury, for the fame
caufe, operates much more forcibly in Virgo than he does in the fign
Gemini. The efficacy of thefe rules having been proved by repeated
experience, it is neceflary for every ftudent to confider them with
atrention.


The ANTISCIONS of the PLANETS.


A -planet’s antifcion is a certain virtue or influence it acquires by
being pofited in conjunction with any ftar or planet, in degrees equally dif-
tant from the two tropical figns, Cancer and Capricorn, in which degrees
the Sun, when it arrives, occafions equal day and night all over the world.
For example, when the Sun is in the tenth degree of Taurus, he is as far
diftant from the firft degree of Cancer as when in the twelfth degree of
Leo; therefore, when the Sun, or any planet, is pofited in the tenth degree
ef Taurus, it fends its antifcion to the twentieth degree of Leo; that
is, it gives additional force and virtue to any planet at that time in the
fame degree by conjunction, or that cafteth any afpect toit. The planets’
antifcions may at all times be found by the following table.


A TA-


142 AN ILLUS TRATION
A TABLE of the ANTISCIONS of the PLANETS*.


Deg. into deg. | Min. into min.
¢ into m™


I 29 1 59
% XL rs 28 2 58
“ = 3 P7 3 57,
up z 4 26 4 50
od m 5 25 5 55
x ra 6 24: | +6 54.


The foregoing table fhews, that a planet, fituated in one degree one
minute of Aries, fends. his antifcion into twenty-nine degrees fifty-nine
minutes of Virgo; a planet, in two degrees two minutes of Taurds, into
twenty-eight degrees fifty-eight minutes of Leo; and fo on through the
table. Thefe antifcions are confidered, in the rules of aftrology, equi-
valent to a fextile or a trine, particularly if the planets are of the
benevolent or fortunate kind. Thefe planets have alfo their contra-anti-
f{cions, which are of the nature of a quartile, or oppofition. To know
where thefe fall, it only requires to find the antifcion, and in the oppo-
fite fign to that will be the contra-antifcion. For inftance, fuppofe Ju-
piter in one degree of Aries, his antifcion will then fall in twenty-nine
degrees of Virgo, and his contra-antifcion in twenty-nine degrees of
Pifces, becaufe Pifces is the fign immediately oppofite to Virgo, where
the antifcion falls.


The ASPECTS of the PLANETS.


The ftrongeft or moft forcible rays, afpects, or configurations, pecu-
liar to the planets, are the following: a conjunction, denoted by this
character, é ; atrine, 4; aquartile,o; afextile, *; and anoppofition, 9.


A conjunction, 6, is not properly an afpect, though frequently fo call-
ed; for, when two planets are both in the fame degree and minute of a
fign, they are faid to be in conjunCtion, confequently cannot at that ‘time
be in afpe@ to each other. The effects of conjunctions are either good
or bad according to the nature and quality of the planets that compofe
them, or as the planets in conjunction are friends or enemies to one
another, or to the fubject then under confideration.


A fextile afpeG, *, implies two of the heavenly bodies pofited at the
diftance of fixty degrees in longitude, or one fixth part of the zodiac,
* The Antifcions, according to the fyftem of Argol and Morinus, are followed here, though


difcontinued by fome modern profeflors, ‘The Placidean method, however, will be given in
the courfe of the work.


from


DET ASTROLOGY 143


from each other ; for which reafon it is fometimes called a fexangular
afpect, or an hexagon. The fextile is termed on afpett of imperfect love,
amity, or friendfhip ; becaufe, when two planets, or fignificators, are in
fextile to each other, they import that any matter in difpute, treaty of
marriage, or other fubject of enquiry, may be happily terminated, or
brought about, by the intervention of friends; or that for want thereof,
‘the contrary may happen. And, though the fextile afpett is fometimes
over-ruled by the more powerful influences of malignant ones, yet it
is generally confidered an omen of the favourable kind.


By a quartile afpect, o, two planets are underftood to be pofited at
ninety degrees, or one fourth part of the circle of the zodiac, from each
other; whence it is alfo called a quadrangular or tetragonal afpect. The
quartile is confidered an afpect of imperfect hatred ; and afis vice ver/2
with the fextile, inclining rather to malignancy, contention, and mis-
fortune, asthe other does to friendfhip, harmony, and good fortune.


A trine afpe&t, a, imports the planets to be fituated at the diftance of
one hundred and twenty degrees, or one third part of the circle of the
zodiac, from each other; and is fometimes called a trigonal afpect, or
a trigonocrater, implying rule or dominion in a certain tfigon or tripli-
city. This is an afpect of the moft perfect unanimity, friendthip, and
peace ; and it is fo confidered, becaufe, when the planets are in aa afpect
they are pofited in figns precifely of the fame triplicity and nature; that
is to fay, they are both in an earthy, airy, fiery, or watery, fign ; and
confequently both contribute the fame influences unimpeded. But, ina
#, which is an afpect of imperfect amity, the planets are pofited in
figns of only a partial nature, viz. fiery with an airy, or an earthy with a
watery, fign ; and, as the fiery fign is hot and dry, and the airy hot and mos ;
the earthy cold and dry, and the watery cold and mos ; fo the planets
thus pofited, agreeing only in one point out of two, give but an imperfect
influence. Thus the diftin¢tionas betweena+*and aafpect, and between
anand ¢, are founded in reafon and experience.


The oppofition g of two planets, fignifies their being pofited at one
hundred and eighty degrees, or juft half the diftance of the zodiac, apart,
which places them diametrically oppofite to one another in the heavens,
whence it is called a diametrical radiation. This is confidered an afpett
of perfect hatred, or of inveterate malice and enmity, as malignant in
its effects as the trine is benevolent ; and of double the deitructive ten-
dency of the nafpect. To inftance this, let us fuppofe two kingdoms,
ftates, focieties, or private gentlemen, at variance, and it is enquired whe-
‘ther the caufe of difpute may be amicably adjufted? If a figure be erected

No. 7. Dein idie & for


144 AN ob @cR O'S T! ReAgT io ON


for the pofitions of the heavenly bodies, and the two fignificators, repre-
fenting the two adverfaries, be in a quartile afpect, I fhould infer, that,
notwithftanding the then fubfifting enmity of the parties, with all the
‘threatened mifchiefs attending it, harmony may be reftored, if proper
means were ufed for that purpofe. But, if the fignificators are- found in
actual oppofition, the difpute in queftion would moft probably occafion
hoftility, war, litigation, or duel, or be attended with fome alarming con-
fequences, before the matter would fubfide. Wherefore an ¢ is juftly
termed an afpect of perfect enmity.


Thefe afpects are all divided, for the fake of perfpicuity, into partie
and platic afpetts. A partile afpect confiders two planets exactly fo many
degrees from each other as make a perfect afpect; that is, if Venus be
‘in nine degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in nine degrees of Leo, they are in
partile trine afpect. Again, if the Sun be in one degree of Taurus, and
the Moon in one degree of Cancer, they are in a partile fextile afpect ; fo
that all perfect afpects are partile; andimply the matter or thing threat-
ened, whether good or evil, to be near at hand.


Bya platic afpect, we are to under{tand two planets fo pofited, as to
admit half the degrees of each of their own rays or orbs; for inftance,
if Saturn be pofited in fixteen degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in twenty-
four degrees of Gemini, then Saturn would be in a platic fextile afpect
to fupiter, beeaufe Saturn would be fituated within the moiety of both
their orbs, which are nine degrees each. The fame circumftance ap-
plies to the afpects of all the planets ;. for, if their diftance from each other
brings them within one half of each of their orbs or radiations, whenadd-
ed together, they will then form aplatic afpect. It mutt alfo be care-
fully obferved in thefe platic afpects, whether the co-operation of the
two planets is going off, or coming on. Inthe above example, the ef-
fect of Saturn’s platic fextile afpect with Jupiter was going off ; but, if
we reverfe their fituations, and place Saturn in twenty-four degrees of
Gemini, and Jupiter in fixteen degrees of Aries, then the afpect would
be coming on with all its force and influence, and would proportionably.
affect the fubject, whatever it be, under confideration.


To enable the reader to find the platic afpects more readily, I fub-
join the following table of the plancts orbs, mean motion, and latitude.


TABLE


OF AYER OL OG Y. 145
TABLE of the Orgs and Mean Morton of the PLANETS.


ORBs. Mean Motion.
Saturn 10 degrees | 2 minutes 1 fecond
Jupiter 12 degrees 4 minutes 59 feconds
Mars 7 degrees 31 minutes 27 feconds
Moon 12 degrees 39 min. 13 deg. 10 min. 36 fec.
Venus __ 8 degrees 59 minutes 8 feconds
Mercury 7 degrees 30 min. $9 minutes 8 feconds
Sun 17 degrees 59 minutes 8 feconds

PABLE.of ‘the PLANETS LATITUDE.
North Latitude. South Latitude.

[i ea aes te ERs ORT a Fe
Saturn POA a Se Ag
Jupiter BR 25a iO 154) 49, 1 O
Mars Ay van NG Bes A
Moon 5 Ona 5 IES Be
Venus 9 Aa 9 pai e
Mercury 3 33 © Bi 35 44%


The Sun, always moving in the ecliptic, can have no latitude.


Now it muft be obferved, that thefe afpects of the planets are project-
ed or caft contrary ways, either onward in a line progreflively with the-
figns of the zodiac, which are termed finifter afpeéts; or elfe back-
ward, ina line reverfeways to the order of the zodiac, which are termed
dexter afpeéts. The whole of thefe appear at one view in the following
table. feat


TABLE of the RapiaTions, or SrnisTER and Dexter Aspects,
of all the PLANETS.


“Dexter
Sinifter
Dexter
Sinifter | °
Dexter |
Sinifter
| Dexter


)  &) Sinifter


* UO Shes r,s Mie PAS 3]


146 A Ny 3p LaW ScTyRoACT 419 N


In the*foregoing table, at the top of the third column, note the the cha-
raGers of the afpetts, fextile x, quartile o, trine a,andoppofition ¢,
as placed over the figns of the zodiac. In the firft column, obferve the
words dexter and finifter; and in the fecond column, the fign Aries v. |
Thefe are intended to fhew, that aplanet, pofited in , would fend his
fextile afpeét, dexter to Aquaries, and finifter to Gemini; his quartile,
dexter to Capricorn, and finifter to Cancer; his trine, dexter to Sagittary,
and finifter to Leo; and would be in oppofition to a planet pofited in
equal degrees of Libra. The fame rules apply throughout the table; but
it muft not be forgotten, that finifter afpects go in the fame order with the
figns of the zodiac, and dexter contrarywife; and that the dexter afpects
-are more ftrong and powerful than the finifter. And thus, according to
the operations of the planets and ftars, are the natures of all men, as the
planets have predominancy in them; and fuch are the natures of all man-
ner of herbs and plants that grow in the field. Some are influenced by
Saturn, and thence are cold and dry; others by Jupiter, and thence are
hot and moift; one by an order of Mars draws nothing but poifon to its
roots, and another by the {weet influence of Venus fucks nothing but the
fweet fap of the earth into all its fibres. If Saturn or Mars rife with a
birth, it is ten to one but the child dies that year, unlefs Jupiter or Venus
dnterpofe, by throwing their friendly influences ftrongly into the fign.
And in thefe refpects we have as inconteftible proofs of the truth of what
we advance as the phyfician has of the nature of herbs when he taftes
them; he, from that demonftration, declares them to be hot or cold, and
good either to cure or kill; but we can afcertain this without. tafting
them, becaufe we know the fource from whence they derive thefe oppo-
fite qualities.


It were needlefs for me to dwell longer upon an explanation of the
different virtues and effects of the planets and figns. Sufficient has now
been faid, to point out their operations and natural influences to the
underftanding of the moft limited capacity. It therefore only remains
for my readers, or fuch of them as intend to make any progrefs in the
{tudy, to familiarife themfelves with the fubject by a frequent perufal of
it; and particularly to-acquire a correct knowledge of all the charac-
ters by which the figns, planets, and afpects, are feverally diftinguithed,
" will then be proper to underftand the following terms peculiar to
this Art.


3 7 EXPLA-


GO F -A'S4TI(R:-O- L560 & Y. 147


\


EXPLANATION of the TECHNICAL WORDS and
TERMS of AR T ufed in ASTROLOGY.


{RECTION fignifies a planet moving on in its natural courfe,
from weft to eaft, according to the fucceflion of the figns in the
zodiac ; thus, a planet is direct, when it moves za confequentia, from
Aries to Taurus, from Taurus to Gemini, &c. Directionisalfo a ca/-
culus, whereby to find the time of any accident or remarkable event that
will happen to the perfon who propounds a queftion, or has his nativity
caft. For inftance, a perfon enquires how many years he may live, by
the courfe of the planets at the time of birth ? Having eftablifhed the
Sun, Moon, or afcendant, as fignificators of life, and Mars or Saturn as
promittors or portentors of death, the direction is a calculation of the
length of time in which the fignificator will be in meeting the promittor ;
and this refolves the queftion. In thefe calculations, the fignificator 1s
fometimes termed apheta, or giver of life, andthe promittor anareta, or
giver of death. The directions of all the principal points of the heavens,
planets, and fixed ftars, as the afcendant, mid-heaven, Sun, Moon, and
part of fortune, are worked by the fame rule.
STATIONARY is underf{tood ofa planet, when, to the eye or fenfes of
a beholder here on earth, it appears to ftand ftill, without any progreflive
motion in itsorbit. Not that a planet ever is or can be naturally in this
ftate, but is only rendered fo in appearance, by the inequalities which
arife from the pofitions and motions of the earth; for, were the planets
to be viewed from the Sun, or centre of the fyftem, they would always
appear uniform and regular.


RETROGRADATION implies an apparent motion in the planets,
whereby they feem to go backwards in the ecliptic, and to move 7” ante-
cedentia, ot towards the antecedent figns, viz. from eaft to weft, contrary
to the order of direction and to the fucceffion of the figns of the zodiac.
This alfo is an appearance produced by an oppofite motion of the earth ta
that of the planets.


APPLICATION fignifies the approach of two planets together, eithe?
by conjunction or afpect, and is of three kinds; the firft is, whena pla-
net, fwift in motion, applies to one of flower progrefs ; for example, fup~
pofé Mercury pofited in fixteen degrees of Gemini, and Mars in twenty-
one degrees of the fame fign, both being direct in motion; Mercury, by
having the greater apparent projectile force, would overtake and forma

No. 7: Kk ? con-


148 A Ny Py 0OS eT i aAaT IO: N


conjunction with Mars, which is termed a direct application, The fe-
cond kind is formed by two retrograde planets ; as, fuppofing Mercury
in fixteen degrees of Gemini, and Saturn in fifteen degrees of the fame
fign, both retrograde, Mercury, being the lighter planet, applies to the
body of Saturn, a more ponderous planet, by retrogradation.; and this is
termed a retrograde application.. The third kind 1s occafioned by one
planet going direct in motion, and meeting another planet that is retro-
grade; for inftance, fuppofe Mercury retrograde in fixteen degrees of
Gemini, and Saturn direct in twelve degrees of the fame fign ; here
Mercury, being the lighter planet, applies to a conjunction of Saturn by
a retrograde motion ; and thefe two laft are deemed evil applications. It
mutt alfo be obferved that the fuperior planets never apply to the inferior.
but by a retrograde motion ; whereas the inferior planets apply both ways.


SEPARATION is underftood of two planets that have cither been in
partile conjunction or afpect, and are juft departed or feparated from
it. Thus, if we fuppofe Saturn in twelve degrees of Sagittary, and Ju-
piter in thirteen degrees of the fame fign, Jupiter will be then feparated
one degree from a perfect or partile conjunction with Saturn; but they
would {till be in a platic conjunction, becaufe they are within the moiety
of each others radiations, which is four degaees and a half each, confe-
quently thefe planets would continue in platic conjunction until they
were feparated nine degrees, and then the afpect would entirely ceafe.
The exact knowledge of every degree of the feparations of thefe afpects
is of the utmoft confequence in. giving judgment upon various impor-
tant occafions. For inftance, fuppofe it were demanded whether a cer-
tain treaty of marriage would take place, or not? When all the afpects
are collected upon the horef{cope, and the two planets, that are fignifica-
tors of the parties, are found applying to each other in a conjunction,
and in common or fixed figns, the marriage may probably take place in
fome length of time. If the fignificators are pofited in moveable figns,
angular, and approaching fwift' in motion to a conjunction, it may then
be confummated ina very fhort time ; but, if the fignificators are fepara-
ted from a conjunction only a few minutes of a degree, one may fafely
conclude that there has been great probability, only a few days before,
that the wedding would have taken place; but by this afpect the parties
appear to be hanging in fufpence, and fome diflike or change of {fenti-
ment feems to have taken place: and, as the fignificators gradually {epa-
rate from the partile and platic conjunctions, in the fame gradation will
the treaty and affections of the parties alienate and wear away ; and, by
the comparative time that the afpect will occupy before it entirely ceafes,
fo will the time be fo many weeks, months, ‘or years, before the parties
thall wholly relinquifh the connection.


~ ProwiBiTioy


OF ASTROLOGY. 49


PRonIBITION indicates the ftate of two planets that are fignificators
of fome event, or the bringing of fome bufinefs to an iffue or conclufion,
and are applying to each other by conjunction ; but, before fuch conjunc-
tion can be formed, a third planet, by means of a {wifter motion, inter-
pofes his body, and deftroys the expected conjunction, by forming an
afpect himfelf ; and this indicates that the matter under contemplation
will be greatly retarded, or utterly prevented. For example, fuppofe-
Mars were pofited in feven degrees of Aries, Saturn in twelve degrees,.
and the Sun in fix degrees, of the fame fign ; Mars is the fignificator of -
the bufinefs in hand, and promifes the iffue or completion of it fo foon:
as he comes to a conjunction with Saturn ; but the Sun, being {wifter in.
motion than Mars, pafles him, and prevents their conjunction, by forming.
the afpett himfelf. This indicates, that whatever was expected from the-
approaching conjunction of Mars and Saturn is now prohibited by the:
Sun’s firft impediting Mars and then Saturn ; and this is termed a conjunc-
tional or bodily prohibition. There is alfo a prohibition by afpett, either:
fextile, quartile, trine, or oppofition ; and this happens when two pla--
nets are going into conjunction. Suppofe Mars to be in feven degrees of
Aries, Saturn in thirteen degrees of the fame fign, and the Sun in five
degrees of Gemini; the Sun, being {wifter than Mars in his diurnal mo~-
tion, will quickly overtake him, and pafs by the fextile dexter of Mars,.
and forma fextile dexter with Saturn, before Mars-can reach him ;. by,
this means their conjunction is prohibited.


FrusTRATION imports a fwift or light planet approaching: to-an:
afpect with one more flow and ponderous; but, before they can approach:
near enough to form that afpect, the weighty planet is joined to fome.
other, by which the firft afpeét is fruftrated. To inftance this, .fuppofe
Saturn pofited in fixteen degrees of Gemini, Jupiter in fifteen degrees of.
Leo, and Mars in eleven degrees of the fame fign ; here Mars applies to «
a conjunction with Jupiter, but, before he can reach it, Jupiter meets -
a fextile afpeCt from Saturn, which fruftrates the conjunction of Mars, .
and, in practice, utterly deftroys whatever was promifed by it..


REFRANATION is the ftate of a planet in direct motion, applying. to
_ an afpect or conjunction with another planet, but before they can meet.
becomes retrograde, and thus refrains to form the afpect expected.. Sup--
ofe Jupiter in the twelfth degree of Gemini, and Mars in the eighth; .
fees Mars, the fwifter planet, promifes very foon to overtake Jupiter, and .
form aconjunction with him; but juft at the inftant falls retrograde, .
and refrains from the conjunction, by taking an oppofite courfe from -
Jupiter.
TRANSLATION®


150 ACN <T 44 TT RA TeIVO N


Transiarion of Ligur and Nature. This happens when a light
planet feparates from a weighty one, and joins with another more pon-
derous, and is effected in this manner: let Saturn be placed in twenty
degrees of Aries, Jupiter in thirteen degrees, and Mars in fourteen de~
grees of the fame fign; here Mars feparates froma conjunction with Ju-
piter, and tranflates the fight and nature of that planet to Saturn, to whom
he next applies. The cffect of this in practice willbe, that, if a matter or
thing be promifed by Saturn, then whoever was reprefented by Mars
fhali procure all the affiftance that the benevolent planet Jupiter could


‘beftow, and tranflate it to Saturn, whereby the bufinefs in hand would be.
the better effected, and more happily concluded ; and this, being a very


fortunate pofition of the planets, is very proper to be known, fince it pro-


mpifes much in lawfuits, marriages, and all other queftions of the kind.


RECEPTION is when two planets, that are fignificators in any queftion
or nativity, are pofited in each other’s dignity, as the Sun in Aries, and
Mars in Leo, which is a reception by houfes, and is deemed the moft
powerful and efficacious of all receptions. But reception may be by ex-
change of triplicity, term, or phafe, or by any effential dignity ; as Venus
in Aries, and the Sun in Taurus, is a reception by triplicity, if the quef-
tion or nativity happen by day. Or if Venus be in the twenty-fourth
degree of Aries, and Mars’ in the fixteenth degree of Gemini, it is a re~
ception by terms. The ufe of thefe pofitions in practice is confiderable ;
for, fuppofe the event of any queition required be denied by the afpects,
or the fignificators are in no afpe& with each other; or it is doubtful
what may happen from a quartile or oppofition of the fignificators ; yet,
if the principal fignificators are found in mutual reception, the thing
defired will fhortly come to pafs, and probably to the fatisfaction and


content of all the parties concerned,


PEREGRINATI0ON defcribes a planet to be fituated in a fign, or inv
fuch certain degrees of a fign, where it has no eflential dignity, either
by heufe, exaltation, triplicity, term, or phafe; as Saturn in the tenth
degree of Aries, is peregrine; and the Sun, in any part of Cancer, is
peregrine, having no dignity whatever in that fign. Inall queftions of
theft, it is very material to know the peregrine planet; for it has been
uniformly found, by almoft every regular profeflor of this Art, that the


thief may be almoft conftantly difcovered by the peregrine planet pofited
in an angle, or in the fecond houfe.


ComBusTion isthe ftate of a planet, when fituated within eight de-
grees thirty minutes of the body of the Sun, either before or after him.
Suppofe Mercury in the twenty-firft degree, the Sun in the twenty-fifth


degree,


ne OF ASTROLOGY. 151
degree, and Venus in the twenty-feventh degree of Aquaries ; here
Mercury and Venus would be both combuft; but Venus would be
more affected by it than Mercury, becaufe the Sun applies to, or moves
towards Venus, and recedes from Mercury, whereby his rays afflict her
more forcibly on his nearer approach, and become weaker upon Mercury


by his recefs from him.


Cazimt reprefents a planet in the heart of the Sun ; thatis, if a planet
be only feventeen minutes before or after the Sun, as if the Sun were in
fifteen degrees thirty minutes of Taurus, and Mercury in fifteen degrees
twenty minutes of the fame fign, Mercury would be then in cazimi, or
in the heart of the Sun. All authors agree that a planet in cazimi is for-
tified thereby, and is of greater efficacy ; whereas a planet in combuftion
is of a malignant nature. If the fignificator of a querent, or perfon pro-
pounding a queftion, be combutft, it fhews him or her to be under fearful
apprehenfions, and threatened to be over-powered, or greatly injured by
fome fuperior perfon. It fhould be carefully obferved, that all planets
may bein combuftion with the Sun, but the Sun cannot be in combuttion
with any planet ; and that combuftion can only be by perfonal conjunc-
tion in one fign, and not by any afpect, either fextile, quartile, trine, or
oppofition ; the Sun’s quartile or oppofite afpects are afflicting, but they do
not combure, or render the planet combuft. A planet is always confi-
dered under the fun-beams, until he is elongated feventeen degrees before
or after his body.


Voip oF Course, is whena planet is feparated from another planet,
and does not, during its continuance in that fign, form anafpect with any
other. This moft ufually happens with the Moon ; and in practice, itis
obferved, that if the fignificator of the thing propounded be void of.
courfe, the bufinefs under contemplation will not fucceed, nor be attended
with any fatisfactory or pleafing confequences.


BEsIEGING, fignifies a planet fituated betwixt the two malevolent pla-
nets Saturn and Mars ; for inftance, if Saturn were placed in the twelfth
degree of Aries, Mars inthe fixteenth, and Jupiter in the fourteenth, de-
gree, Jupiter would then be befieged by Saturn and Mars.


IncREASING in LicutT, is whena planet is feparating from the Sun
or the Sun from a planet ; thus the Moon, at her greateft diftance from the
Sun, appears with the greateft degree of light, having her whole orb


illumined.
No. 8. Ll ORIENTAL


$52 A Ny fob cS aR PAAT EON


ORIENTAL and OccIDENTAL. A planet, whenoriental, rifes before
the Sun ; and when occidental, fets after him, and is feen-above the hori-
zon after the Sun is down; confequently when a planet is oriental, it is
pofited in the eaft, and when occidental, in the weft.


7s


SuPeriors and INreriors. Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are diftin-
guifhed by the name of the fuperior, ponderous, and more weighty pla-
nets ; and Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, are called the inferior planets.
A fuperior always governs or over-rules an inferior; this is an obferva-
tion that holds good throughout the whole {yftem of nature.


SwiFT or Course, is when a planet moves farther than his mean,


motion in twenty-four hours ; and he is flow of courfe when he moves
Jefs than his mean motion in the fame portion of time.


-AtmuTion, fignifies a planet that bears principal rule in a fign or fi-
gure; which planet muft confequently have the moft effential dignities.


Hayz, implies a mafculine diurnal planet to be fituated above the
horizon in the day-time, or a feminine nocturnal planet pofited below the
horizon in the night-time ; which is an accidental fortitude the planets


delight in, and gives a favourable omen in all figures wherever they are
founa


LoncitTupE and Latitupe. ‘The longitude of any ftar or planet,
is the degree of the ecliptic or zodiac in which they are found, numbered
from the firft point of the fign Aries. The latitude of a ftar, or planet,
is its diftance north or fouth from the Sun’s path or ecliptic line, num-
bered by the degrees of the meridian. :


DECLINATION, is the diftance a planet fwerves either north or fouth,


from the equator or equinottial line, in his circuit through the twelve
figns of the zodiac.
af


RrcuT AscENTION, is the number of degrees and minutes of the
equinottial line, reckoned from the beginning of Aries, and comes to
the meridian with the Sun, Moon, ftar, or planet, or any portion of the
ecliptic.


Opiique ASCENSION, is the. degree and minute of the equinottial
line, that comes to, or rifes with, the degree of longitude of any ftar or
planet in the horizon ; or it is the degree of 'the equinoétial line that,
comes to the horizon with any ftar or planet in an oblique fphere.


a 1


a


OBLIQUE


OxnitovE DerscEenTION, is the degree of the equino@tial line that fets
in the horizon, with the: degree of longitude of any ftar or planet,: in an
oblique {phere ; making any oblique angle with the horizon.

ik

ASCENTIONAL DIFFERENCE, is the diftinction between the right and

oblique afcenfion of any planet or ftar, reckoned in the equator.


Pots or Posrrion, fignifies the elevation of the poles of the world
above the circle of pofition of any {tar or planet.


-Crrcies or Posi Trion, are circles pafling through the common in-
terfeCtions of the horizon and meridian, and through any degree of the
ecliptic, or the centre of any ftar, or other point in the heavens, and are
ufed for finding the fituation or pofition of any ftar or planet.
Horoscope, isa figure or fcheme of the twelve houfes of heaven,
wherein the planets and pofitions of the heavens are collected for any
given time, either for the purpofe of calculating nativitics, or anfwering
horary queftions. It alfo fignifies the degree or point of the heavens rif-
ing above the eaftern point of the horizon, at any given time when a
prediction is to be made of any future event; but this is now moft com-~
monly diftinguifhed by the name of the A/cendant.


Cotours. The colours given by, or peculiar to, each of the planets
and figns, is of great importance in the determination of all queftions
where the complexion of a perfon, or the colour of a thing is neceffary
to be known. The reader muft therefore be careful to remember, that of
the planets, Saturn gives a black colour; Jupiter red mixed with green ;
Mars, a ted fiery colour ; the Moon, all white fpotted, or light mixed
colours ; Venus, white and purple colours ; Mercury, light blue or
azure colour ; the Sun, all yellow colours, or inclined to purple. Of the
twelve figns, Aries gives a’ white mixed with red; Taurus, white
mixed with citron; Gemini, white mixed with red; Cancer, green
or ruffet; Leo, red or. green; Virgo,. black fpeckled with blue ; Li-
bra, black or dark crimfon, or fwarthy colour ; Scorpio, dark brown ; Sa-
gittary, yellow, or a green, fanguine colour ; Capricorn, black or ruf-
fet; Aquaries, light blue or fky-colour; Pifces, a gliftening light co-
lour. Thus, by knowing the colour or complexion: attributed to each
of the planets and figns,. it is eafy to: determine: the complexion of the
native, or of any perfon or thing enquired after ; for as the complexion
or colour of the lord of the afcendant, or the fign, or fignificators are,
that reprefent the party, fuch will be their colour or complexion. So if
it beafked’ concerning two cocks juft going to pit, Which fhall be the

winner ?


154 A Ny DEALIVOS AT RAAAT HON ge «+


winner ?. Erect the figure, and. the two planets reprefenting the .diftin-
guifhing colours of the two cocks, fhall be, their fignificators, and that >
planet which is the fuperior, or that has moft eflential dignities, and is.
moft ftrongly fortified, fhall by his colour point out the cock that fhall
win his battle. So of any other queftion.determinable by colours:


And fince this Art cannot be underftood, nor the work read with any
pleafure or improvement, without a perfect and familiar knowledge of
all the characters peculiar to the figns, planets, &c. I fhall infert them
in this place all together, that they may be at any time referred to with
cafe ; recommending at the fame time to all my readers, not to proceed
any further, till they have learned them by heart.


CHARACTERS reprefenting the TWELVE SIGNS of’ the ZO-
DIAC, Dracon’s Heap, Dracon’s Tait, and part of FoRTUNE.


Aries + | Scorpio m
Taurus 8 Sagittary ~ ie
Gemini ma | Capricorn “ye
Cancer oS Aquaries be
Leo ce} Pifces x
Vigo ny Dragon’s Head &
Libra Dragon’s Tail Ss


ft
The Part of Fortune @.


CHARACTERS of.the PLANETS.


Saturn h Moon Dd,
Jupiter uh Venus 2,
Mars 3 Mercury ce
The Sun o.
CHARACTERS diftinguithing the feveral ASPECTS of the
PLANETS.
Sextile * Trine A
Quartile o Oppofition 8.


And the Conjunction 6.


~ EXPLANATION


OF ASTROLOGY. 55


EXPLANATION of the TWELVE HOUSES of HEAVEN, with
Directions for erecting the HOROSCOPE.


AVING fhewn what the effential qualities are, which the planets.
and heavenly matter derive from an inherent principle of nature, it
follows that I fhould explain the accidental qualities they receive by their
different pofitions in the twelve houfes of heaven; for, as the heavens
are perpetually in motion, either afcending or defcending, and {ince it is
beyond the reach of human penetration to define what ftar or planet hall
afcend at the nativity of children yet unborn, fo, in reference to human
ideas, it is purely accidental what dignities the planets fhall acquire, or
what hounfes they fhall be pofited in, at the time of birth.


That the reader may form a competent idea. of what is meant by the
twelve houfes of heaven, let us fuppofe the whole celeftial globe, or
{phere of heaven, divided into four equal parts by the horizon and meri-
dional line, and each of thefe into four quadrants, and each quadrant
into three equal parts, by lines drawn from points of fections in different
parts of the horizon and meridian equi-diftant from each other. By this
operation, the whole globe or {phere will be apportioned into twelve
equal parts, which conftitute what we call, the twelve houfes of heaven.
And thefe houfes, as obfervation and experience abundantly thew, make
up that great wheel of nature, whereon depends the various fortunes con-


tingent to all fublunary matters and things.


In this divifion of the heavens, the firft quadrant 1s defcribed by a pa~
rallel line, drawn from the point of the eaft angle to the fouth, or mid-
heaven ; and contains the twelfth, eleventh, and tenth, houfes, called the
oriental, vernal, mafculine, fanguine infant quarter. The fecond qua-
drant is defcribed by a fimilar line, running from the exterior point of the
midheaven to the point of the weftern angle, and contains the ninth,
eighth, and feventh, houfes, called the meridian, eftival, feminine,
youthful, choleric quarter. The third quadrant is farmed by a parallel
line running from the extreme point of the eighth houfe to the north
angle; and contains the fixth, fifth, and fourth, houfes, called the occi~
dental, autumnal, mafculine, melancholic, manly, cold and dry quar-:
ter. The fourth quadrant is defcribed by a line drawn from the extreme
point of the north angle to the extremity of the line which defcribes
the firft quadrant, both meeting in the eaft angle of the heavens, and con-
tains the third, fecond, and firft, houfes, called the northern, wintery,
feminine, phlegmatic quarter, the feat of old age, decrepitude, and
decay. ‘The lines thus drawn defcribe the following figure, or horo-
{cope, into which the figns and planets are feverally introduced, and re-

No. 8. M ta prefented


wo - AN TOU IVKR ATAU®N


prefented as in their true places in the heavens, before any queftion can be
folved, or nativity calculated. The {pace in the centre, were the figure
drawn circular, might reprefent the vacuum in which the earth moves ;
but it is generally ufed to write down the day, year, and hour of the day,
when the figure was erected, with the purpofe of it, whether for a-nati-
vity or queftion refolved.


FIGURE of the HOROSCOPE, or Twetve Houses of Heaven.


x ~
=a a ao


Thefe twelve houfes are each diftinguifhed by their refpetive figures,
and are either angular, fuccedent, or cadent. ‘The angular houfes are four,
called the afcendant, midheaven or medium cceli, the feventh houfe, and
the bottom of the heaven; thefe are deemed the moft powerful and moft
fortunate houfes. The fuccedent houfes are the eleventh, fecond, eighth,
and fifth ; and are ranked next in force and virtue to the angles. The
third clafs, or cadent houfes, are the third, twelfth, ninth,and fixth ; and
are confidered of the leaft efficacy of them all. But, notwithftanding they |
are divided into only three clafles, or orders, whereby their force and ef-
ficacy are eftimated, yet is there a regular gradation in this refpe running
through the whole, whereby one houfe is fubordinate tothe other, from
firft to laft. Confidered in this order, they ftand thus ;

LPO. A Le oO)! 08 ae OT ake
According


OFT ATTIRE OUAE YZ 157
According ‘to this rule, if we find two planets, equally ftrong and
of the fame dignities, one pofited in the firft houfe and the other in the
tenth, we judge the planet in the firft houfe, or afcendant, to have fupe-
riority over the planet in the tenth houfe; and, in practice, we infer, from
fuch a pofition, that the perfon, whofe fignificator was in the firft houfe
would get the better of his opponent, whofe fignificator was in the tenth.
houfe ; but, both being fo nearly equal in point of dignity, great ftrug-
gles and difficulties would intervene, as the nature of the cafe in point
may happen to be. This rule holds good‘from the tenth houfe to the
feventh; the feventh to the fourth, and fo on through the whole; but
it fhould always be remembered that planets in angles, that is, thofe
which are feated in the angular houfes, are the mof forcible and potent
in their operation.


The firft houfe, which is denoted by the figure 1, is called the a/cen-
dant, becaufe, the point of its angle being level with the horizon, what-
ever planet afcends from under the earth muft afcend upon this line, and
become vifible firft in this houfe. The line upon which the planets
afcend, or move, is called the cufp of the houfes; and that of the afcen-
dant is generally reckoned to extend about five degrees above the earth
and twenty-five degrees beneath, ready to afcend. But, if figns of long
afcenfions afcend, ‘then half five degrees above the earth, and thirteen be-
low, are its utmoftlimits. If figns of fhort afcenfions afcend, then five
degrees above the horizon, and fifty degrees below, are ufually allowed.
Now the quality of whatfoever part of the heavens occupies or fills up the
degrees of this houfe, carries along with it the health, life, and nature, of
every infant or thing that is conceived or brought forth within its juridic-
tion. And hence hath this point of the heavens a faculty of attratting or
receiving the virtues of the celeftial matter that is accidentally afcending
in that part of heaven at the birth ; and alfo of the planets and fixed ftars
in their tranfits ; and all the rays of the planets, in their afpects and con-
junctions, are attracted into this part of heaven, in order to the formation
of the fhape, ftature, temperature of the body, quality of the mind, and all
accidents and contingencies which fhall befal the native’s body, or health,
or life, unto his dying day ; fuch a fympathy is there between this part
of the heavenly frame and of every act and thing that is produced or
that receives life under it. For, as the feed in the ground, after it has
taken root, buds forth, and appears above groound, fo the heavenly in-
telligencers, after they have tramed the embryo, and the temperament
thereof, under the earth, give it life and being of its own, putting forth
level with them juft as they afcend. We do not however fuppole, that
the temperature and qualities of the native were wholly framed at the exact

time


158 AN ILLUSTRATION


time of birth, although the fituation of the heavens at that time never
fails exactly to.defcribe them ; we have every reafon to believe, that the
temperature and qualities of the body, and the difpofition of the mind,
are formed in regular gradations from the conception to the time of birth ;
but that the birth defcribes them is indifputably clear, becaufe it can-
not happen at any moment of time, in any part of the world, but it muft
fall even with that part of the heavenly matter afcending from the lower
unto the upper horizon, which is interefted in, and therefore points out,
thofe temperatures and qualities. For any man to be fatisfied in this
point, let him but note what the nature of this afcending point of hea-
ven is, with all the ftars and planets pofited therein, or having afpec&
with them from other houfes, giving each of them their due weight and
influence, according to their nature and dignity, neither {trained one way
nor the other; and, juftas thefe are found at the time of birth, juft fo
fhall be found -the qualities and endowments of ‘that native, with the
principal actions. and events of his life, which this point afcending takes
the charge of. And in this trial will the reader find more fubftantial
proofs of the truth and exiftence of Aftrology than the moft acute .argu-
ments can inftil into.his mind.


Now, fince the firft houfe, or afcendant, gives birth and life to the na-
tive, it follows that thofe houfes which are the attendants. on and up-
holders of life, fhould be joined with it ; and, as children, or the-native’s
offspring, are the upholders of life in this world, and religion and learn-
ing the grand means of upholding it unto eternity in the other world, fo
the houfes, which contribute thefe bleffings to the life already given, are
joined in an harmonious trine with the firft houfe, making up that three-
fold cord, which, as Solomon faith, cau never be broken; the one is a ©
fuccedent houfe, called the fifth houfe, and the other a cadent houfe,
called the ninth houfe; and, to be convinced of the effe€ts of this fifth
houfe, note the heavenly matter, planets, ftars, and af{pects therein po-
{ited at the time of birth, according to the rules here laid down, and they
fhall truly reprefent the number and ftate of the native’s offspring, and
all other particulars relative to children, and to breeding or barren women,
Soalfo examine the ftate of the eleventh houfe ; and, as that reprefents,
fo fhall the native be in refpect of religion and {cience ; for the heavenly
matter, planets, ftars, and afpects therein, fhall fhew what and how the
man fhall prove, whether wife or foolifh, devout or fchifmatical, and
what ftudy or occupation he fhall be inclined to follow ; and thefe fur-
nifh matter for grace to work upon ; but, as for grace itfelf, nature can
have no power over it; grace may rule nature, but nature cannot {way
grace.


The


s OOLE AS DRO, O-Glve 6 4- ey


The fecond angular point of the houfes of heaven is called the mid-
heaven, which is that point which culminates, being the very top or’
higheft point of the heavenly frame. And, whatever part of the heavens
happens to be culminating in this point at the birth of any perfon or
thing, that takes charge of, and carries along with it, ever after, the pre-
ferment, honour, profeffion, fituation, and authority, of the native ; and,
as the nature of the planets, ftars, afpetts, and heavenly matter, happens
to be, that are fituated in this point, or in the degrees pertaining to it,
fo thall the native prove in his life-time, in point of dignity, advancement,
and reputation, in this world, whether high or low, fortunate or unfor-
tunate, favoured or difgraced. The attendants upon, and upholders of,
man’s honour and dignity, as the Scriptures and every day’s experience
perpetually thew us, are wealth and fervants. The firft of thefe is at-
tached to the midheaven in a fuccedent houfe, called the fecond houfe of
heaven ; and the other in a cadent houfe, called the fixth houfe of heaven;
and thefe two are fituated in an harmonious trine with the angular point
of the midheaven. And now well obferve what the planets, ftars, aft
pects, and heavenly matters, are in either of thefe houfes at the time o-
birth, and fuch fhall the native’s fortune prove in point of riches and
fubordinate dependants; in'the firft of thefe houfes for wealth, and in
the other for fervants or dependants.


The third angle of the figure of heaven is the feventh houfe, or point
of the heavens and degrees contingent, which are always de/tending, or
fetting out of our horizon, and finking under the earth; and this point
is directly oppofite to the eaftern angle or afcendant.' Now, as the rifing
heaven, or afcendant, is the beginning and conduit of life, fo this fet-
ting heaven, level with the afcendant, is the bringing all mundane
affairs level with life, fuch as our entrance into the ftate of marriage ;
our contracts and enterprifes in bufinefs, war, and travel; and our con-
nections and fuccefs therein, whether with friends, {trangers, or enemies ;
and thefe whether honeft men, parafites, or thieves. And the heavenly
matter, planets, ftars, and afpects, fituated in this angle at a nativity, appa-
rently fhew how a man thall fare in refpe& to wives, more or le{s, any or
none, good or bad ; and, in matters of bufinef{s or adventure, how fortu-
nate or unfortunate he may be likely to prove; and, with enemies or
thieves, how far he is likely to be injured by them. Neceffary upholders
of marriage, fupporters in trade and travel, and defenders againft thieves,
plunderers, and enemies, are friends, relations, and neighbours. And
thefe, in a trine to the feventh houfe, are brought forth, the firft out of
the eleventh houfe of heaven a fuccedent houfe, and the other out of the
third houfe of heaven, a cadent houfe. ‘The eleventh houfe, by the pla-

No. 8. Noa nets,


160 AON: (ea wes: TOR A PT agiOoON


nets, ftars, afpects, and heavenly matter, therein, points out the ftate of
a man’s friends and hopes in this life; and the third houfe defcribes, by
the fame means, how happy or unhappy a man fhall prove in his rela-
tions, connections, and neighbours.


The laft angle of heaven is the fourth houfe, called the bottom of
heaven, and reprefents that point which in our conception feems to hang
at the very bottom of the round ball of the celeftial world, being diame-
trically oppofite to the exterior, or midheaven. And, as that fhews what
@ man in the courfe of nature fhall rife to in the world, this, on the con-
trary, declares what and when fhall be his fall, decay, and death. This
houfe has therefore fignification of the end of every worldly concern,
and, amongft other ends, of the grave, which is the end of all men liv-
ing, however dignified or great. And the planets, ftars, and afpects, po-
fited in this houfe at the time of birth, never fail to thew what kind. of
end the native is likely to find; for, as the twelve figns have each their
particular and vifible effe€ts upon and over every part of man’s body, and
as the planets and their afpeéts fhew in what fign the native fhall be im-
pedited, that is, in what part of the body the root of his natural infirmity
fhall be placed, and what accidents fhall befal him during life, fo is it
an eafy procefs to point out the mannerof his death, and whether natural,
honourable, or ignominious. The upholders of this angle are the houfes
of tribulation and death ; the one a fuccedent houfe, called the eighth
houfe, or houfe of death ; and the other a cadent houfe, called the twelfth
houfe. And now let it be carefully obferved what planets, ftars, afpects,
and heavenly matter, occupy thofe houfes at the time of nativity ; and
they thall point out, in the twelfth houfe, all the principal misfortunes,
afflictions, and tribulations, of the native’s life, and in the eighth houfe
the time and manner of his death. |


Independent of the faculties hitherto fpecified, each of thefe houfes of
heaven have other fignifications and effects, which they demonftrate in
various other ways. For inftance, the afcendant reprefents the native
coming into the world, and the fourth houfe at the fame time repre-
fents the parents of the native going out; for ome generation goes off, and
another always comes in}, according to the courfe of nature. Of thefe
parents, the father is more efpecially fignified by the fourth houfe;
and then, fecondarily, but not fo forcibly, the mother of the native is fig-
nified by the tenth houfe, and the grandfather by the feventh; and uncles,
aunts, and relations, on the father’s fide, by the fixth; and uncles, aunts,


+ See Ecclef. i. 4,
and


OF ASITIR OL‘ OG Y. 161


and relations, on the mother’s fide, by the twelfth. Hence alfo it comes
to pafs, that by the fourth houfe are fignified houfes and lands, and all de-
grees of patrimony, left by the father; and by the eighth houfe are fhewn
all goods and legacies left by will of the deceafed. The fecond and fixth
houfes in half-trine to the houfe of the grave, and in oppofition to the
eighth and twelfth, have a fecondary fignification of ficknefs and death.


Such are the qualities and operations of the twelve houfes of heaven
in the common courfe of nature; but thefe qualities are fometimes ma-
terially altered, and changed for the better or worfe, by means either of
the moon or fome other of the celeftial motions or affections. It is cer-
tain that the Moon circleth the earth once in every twenty-eight days; but
inthis perambulation fhe neither keeps the Sun’s pathway in the ecliptic,
nor continues her courfe conftantly on the fame fide of it; but once in
every fourteen days fhe croffes the ecliptic, alternately to her north and
fouth declination; and it is found by Jong and correct obfervation, that
the point in the heavens where fhe croffes this line is very ftrongly af-
fected by her motion. ‘The Moon is the great body of life and growth ;
and, when fhe paffes the ecliptic to the north, which brings her nearer
into this northern world, fhe then gives an extraordinary degree of fruit-
fulnefs, which wonderfully ftrengthens with its influence whatfoever
happens within the line of its jurifdi@tion. And this point, wherever it
falls, is called the moon’s north node, but. is diftinguifhed in aftrological
works by the name of the Dragon’s Head, as already explained in page
125. If this point happens to afcend ina nativity, it ftrengthens life with
a robuft and lively conftitution ; if it falls in the mid--heaven, it promifes
great honour and preferment; if in the eleventh houfe, profperity and
riches. If Jupiter or Venus happen to be in thefe degrees, it makes them
much ftronger and more efficacious in their benevolent operations ; but,
if Saturn or Mars be pofited there, it gives them, on the contrary, a
f{tronger inclination to prove mifchievous and unfortunate. When the
moon interfects the ecliptic line to her fouthern declination, the leaves
that point of the heavens where fhe croffes it, which is termed the Drag-
on’s Tail, as barren to all intents and purpofesas the other was fruitful.
Hence this point afcending at a nativity blemifhes life, and leaves a {tain
upon it; impairs honour and advancement in the mid-heaven, and wattes
riches, and brings adverfity, in the eleventh houfe ; and it weakens as well
the benevolent aufpices of Jupiter and- Venus as the evil inclinations of
Saturn and Mars. How thefe circumftances operate beyond the equinoc-
tial experience is yet filent; but it feems reafonable to fuppofe that the
Dragon’s Tail is there the fruitful point, and the Head the barren point,
fince, when the Moon is going off from us, her influences muft be coming
on with them.

Next


&,


162 A NY TG cs oT RAT OE @ N


_ Next to the nodes, the part of fortune has its operations upon theft
twelve celeftial houfes. The point, which we term the part of fortune,
is the diftance of the Moon’s place from the Sun’s, added to the degrees
of the afcendant ; and the nature of it is, as conftant obfervation afcer-
tains, that, if this point falls among fortunate ftars, or in a fortunate part
of the heavens, then it promifes great fuccefs in health or wealth, honour
or offspring, or any other fpecies of profperity, according as it is feated
either in the firft, eleventh, or fifth, houfes, or in any others. The rea-
fon of this appears to be, that the Sun, Moon, and Afcendant, being the
ptime conduits through which the ftream of life flows, this feat of the


part of fortune is the harmony of all three concentring and uniting in
the fame acts of benevolence.


|

Now, befides thefe, there are yet other qualities, accidentally affected,
which concern either particular perfons or times. Thus, the places of
Saturn, or Mars, or the Tail of the Dragon, in the vernal figure, are un-
fortunate in the higheft degree for the whole of that year; or, if they
happen in any of the quarter figures, they portend affliction and mifs
fortune for that quarter. But the places of Jupiter and Venus in a ver-
nal figure are as fortunate as the others are unfortunate for the fame time.
The places of an eclipfe of the Sun or Moon, and of the comets, are alfo
fortunate or unfortunate, as their fituation may be, or as perfons, coun-
tries, or fates, may be concerned in them. ‘The place of Saturnor Mars
in a man’s nativity proves unfortunate to him all the days of his life; and
the place of either of them in a revolutional figure is equally bad for that
year. But the place of Jupiter or Venus in a nativity, or in a revolu-
tional figure, is always as fortunate, either for a man’s life-time, or for
the year, as the other is unfortunate. Alfo the places of the twelfth
houle, or eighth, or fixth, as they were in the native fcheme, have always
bad dignifications unto a man, whenfoever they come up upon any of his
concerns. And the places of the tenth houte, of the eleventh, of the
afcendant, and of the fecond houfe, generally promife as much good as
the other houfes do evil upon all the common occafions of life.


Thus far we have feen the operations of the twelve houfes of heaven,
as they appertain to the time and circumftances of a nativity. We. thall
now explain their properties in that fyftem of nature upon which the
doétrine of horary queftions is grounded. And fuch has been the induf-
dry and indefatigable labour of our forefathers, in bringing this {cience to
maturity, and in difcovering and diftinguifhing the particular fignifications
and effeéts of all pofitions of the planets in thefe twelve houfes of heaven,
that whoever takes the pains to inform himfelf fufficiently of them will


i on


OF AGTR OL OG Y.4 163


not bein want of competent grounds whereon to judge, or give'rational
anfwers to every interrogation’ or queftion’ on the comimén occurrentes of »
life; or any contingent accidents or undertakings, with the coffequénces
and fuccéts of then 4


The firftvhoufe bears fignification of the life of man, and of the fta-
ture, colour, complexion, form, and fhape,of him who:propounds ‘a quef-
tion; and, asvall the viciflitudes'of nature depend upon ‘the periods of
rian’s life, fo all queftions are refolved by this houfe that relate to: fick
nefs, health, or long life; andalfo all accidents by which life may be en-
dangered or impaired; what part of one’s’ days’ will be the moft happy
and profperous.;’whether any abfent'friend or relation be living or dead;
or whether any journey, voyage, or fhip at fea; will be attended with fuc-
cefs: and fafety, ori meet with any accident fatal to life or deftruive
to the thip.———Inh fhort, all queftions relating to’ circumftances that
affect life are to’ be anfwered from the firft houfe. In’ ftate-afttology,
and:in eclipfes, greatoconjunctions, appearances of comets, and other la-
minous andextraordinary phenomena in the heavens ; and, upon the Sun’s
annual ingrefs into the equinoctial fign Aries, the firft houfe bears’ figni-
fication of the community at large, or of that ftate, empire, or kingdom,
where the figure is ere€ted. Of colours, the firft’ houlé gives’ a white;
from which is to be underftood, that, ifa planet be pofited in this houfe
that governs a light colour, anda queftion be propounded from any party
relative to a perfon, matter, or thing, where colours are concerned, and
this planet be the fignificator thereof, then the perfon’s complexion and
hair, or, if cattle, then their colour, ‘fhall be of a white, pale, or lightith,
kind; and, though this may appear ridiculous and infignificant to the un-
derftanding of fome readers, yet the fact ftands unfhakenin practice, Now,
as every one of the twelve houfes of heaven have their fignificators, fo
have'they’alfo their co-/iguificators, which have frequent operation, and
therefore ought to be confidered.. A co-fignificator is’a planet either
fallen into conjunction, or joined in afpett with the principal fignificator;
in which! cafes the planet either affifts or oppofes in the matter undércon-
fideration’; if it 'be joined with a benevolent planet, it ‘imiports good;
but, if it happens to the contrary, it either denotes deftruction to*the fub-
ject of enquiry, or great difturbance in the effeGting it. ‘The co-fig-
nificators of this houfe are Saturn and Aries; and, if Saturn is moderately
well dignified in this houfe, and in any benevolent afpett with Jupiter,
Venus, or the Sun or Moon, itpromifes a good fober conftitution of body,
and generally gives long life. If Mercury is lord of this houfe, and well
dignified, the perfon fhall bea powerful and good fpeaker. |


No:'8. Oo From


640 ASN IMD as T Ren ETON


From the fecond houfe we form judgment upon all queftions relating
to wealth or poverty, profperity or adverfity, and lofs or gain in any un-
dertaking that may be propounded by the querent; and alfo concerning
moveable goods, money lent, or employed in fpeculation. In fuits of
law or equity, it fhews a man’s friends or affiftants ; in private duels, it
defcribe the querent’s fecond ; in eclipfes, it fhews the growing profpe-
rity or adverfity of a ftate or people; and, at the Sun’s entrance into Aries,
it expreffes the ftrength of the empire where the figure is erected, in its
internal refources, in its allies, and in all other requifites of war, or felf-
defence. It gives a green colour, of which a fimilar ufe is to be made
as is defcribed in the firft houfe; and the fame obfervation will hold
good in all other houfes, and in queftions that relate to colours. The
co-fignificators to the fecond houfe are Jupiter and Taurus; for, if Jupiter
be placed in this houfe, or is lord thereof in full dignity, it implies the
acquifition of an eftate or fortune; but the Sun and Mars never promife
good in this houfe; either of them indicate difperfion of fubftance, ac.
cording to the capacity and quality of him who propofes the queftion.


The third houfe having fignification of brethren, fifters, kindred, and
neighbours; and of all inland journeys, and of removing one’s manu-
facture or bufinefs from one place to another, fo all queftions that are
founded upon any fubjedts relative thereto are anfwered from the pla-
nets fituated in this houfe. Its co-fignificators are Mars and Gemini;
which is one reafon why Mars, unle{s joined with Saturn, is not found
fo generally unbenevolent in this houfe as in the others. If the Moon
be pofited here, it is always an argument to the querift of much reft-
lefInefs, travelling, and change of fituation. This is a fuccedent houfe,
and gives a yellow, red, or forrel, colour.


From the fourth houfe we refolve all queftions in any way relating to
or concerning the father of the querift. Alfo all enquiries relating to
lands, houfes, or eftates; or to towns, cities, caftles, or intrenchments,
befieged ; of treafures hidden in the ground, and all other queftions re-
lating to the earth ; are anfwered out of this houfe, which is called the
ymum cel, or the angle of the earth. Its co-fignificators are the Sun and
Cancer ; and therefore, if the Sun be pofited in this houfe, it denotes the —
father of the querift to be ofa generous and noble difpofition. It go-
verns the red colour.


By the fifth houfe we formall our predictions relative to children, and
to women in the ftate of pregnancy; alfo, all queftions concerning the
prefent health of abfent fons or daughters, or the future health of thofe
at home; enquiries relating to the real and perfonal effects of one’s fa

ther,


OPH 1 Ser RO 0 GiY 3 165


ther, or concerning the fuccefs of meflengers, ambaffadors, or plenipo-
tentiaries ; or refpecting the ammunition or internal ftrength of a place
befieged ; are all anfwered from this houfe. Its co-fignificators are Ve-
nus and Leo, and therefore unfortunate when occupied either by Saturn
or Mars, both of which indicate bafe and untoward children to the en-
quirer. It indicates a mixed black and white or fanguine colour.


The fixth houfe refolves all queftions that in any refpect appertain to
fervants or cattle. Alfo enquiries concerning the ftate of a fick per-
fon, whether curable or not; the nature of the difeafe, and whether of
fhort or long duration; particulars relating to uncles and aunts, and all
kindred on the father’s fide; alfo concerning one’s tenants, {ftewards,
or the like; are refolved by the difpofition of the ftars and planets fituated
in this houfe. Its co-fignificators are Mercury and Virgo; and, when
Mars and Jupiter are found in conjunction here, it is a ftrong argument
of a good phyfician, whenever it comes up upon a queftion propounded
in behalf of a patient who is vifited by a gentleman of thefaculty. This
houfe, having no afpet with the afcendant, is always deemed unfortu-
nate. It gives a black or dark colour.


By the feventh houfe, we are enabled to refolve all queftions on love-
affairs and marriage, and to defcribe the perfon of either the man or
woman that the querift will be joined with in marriage. It likewife
an{wers all enquiries of the defendant in law-fuits and litigations; or
concerning our public enemies in time of war. In thefts, it enables us
to defcribe the perfon of the robber, by his thape, ftature, complexion,
and condition of life. In an annual ingrefs,it ufually indicates whether
peace or war may be expected ; and, prior to am engagement, betokens
which fide fhall prove victorious; it difcovers fugitives, out-lawed men,
and offenders efcaped from juftice. The co-fignificators to this houfe
are the Moon and Libra; and, when Saturn or Mars are found herein, it
is deemed an unfavourable omen, productive of great forrow and wretch-
ednefs to the querift in any matrimonial engagement. It gives a dark
blue, black, or brown, colour.


From the eighth houfe we folve all queftions concerning death, its
time, quality, and nature; with all matters relating to legacies, wills,
and laft teftaments; or who {hall inherit the fortune and eftates of the
deceafed. Enquiries on the dowry or portion of maids or widows; in
duels, ‘concerning the adverfary’s fecond; in law-fuits, relative to the
defendant’s fuccefs and friends ; and queftions on public or private ene-
mies, or concerning the fubftance and fecurity ef thofe we connect our-


{elves with in bufinefs ; areall anfwered by the fituation of the planets in
this


166 ANXITLRDR US FRAT MON


this houfe. Tts co-fignificators are Saturn and! Séeorpio ; and ‘its colours
are green and black. ° - . 3 i


By the ninth houfe we are-enabled' to anfwer all queftions on the fafety
and fuccefs of voyages and travels into foreign"countri€s’;’ alfo, enquiriés
of the clergy ‘concerning chareh preferments, benefices, advowfons}
and the like, and all queftions relative to kindred and_ relations on the
wife’s fide ; and'the fame'on' the hufband’s fide, if the wife be the queritt ;
and-all matters ‘relating to’ the-~ arts and {ctences are: likewife refolved
from this houfe. Jupiter and Sagittarius are its co-fignificators; for, if
Jupiter be pofited herein,’ it naturally indicates’ a\ man of’ religious and
exemplary manners, and of modeft catriagé and behaviour ;‘ but, if Sas
turn, Mars, or the Dragon’s Tail, are‘found herein, it indicates a’ perfon
of atheiftical and ‘irreligious principles; inftances of which; from the na:
tivities of many unhappy men of this ‘caft, are almoft innumerable. The
‘colours betokened by this-houfe are green and white.


The tenth houfe, being the: medium 'celi, or moft' elevated’ part of the
whole heavens, refolves all queftions concerning’ kings, princes, dukes,
earls, marquifles, and all noblemen, judges, principal officers of ftate,
commanders in chief, all orders of magiftrates, and other perfons in
power arid authority. Enquiries after’ preferment, honours, dignity, of<
fices, places, penfions, or finecures ; or concerning the ftate’ of king-
doms, empires, provinces, commonwealths, counties, cities, or focie-
ties of men; are all refolved from the mid-heaven. The ‘co-fignificators
of this houfe are Capricorn and’ Mars; and, whenever Jupiter or the
Sun are pofited herein, it gives the ftrongefl pref{umptions of fuccefs in
whatever purfuits the querift may be engaged*in. But, if Saturn or the
Dragon’s Tail afflict the fignificators in this houfe, it denies honour,
fuccefs, or preferment, to perfons of quality or eminence; and’ to com-
mon people it denotes vexation and difappointment in’ the’ common


functions of their occupation or employment. Its colours are the red
and white. -


_ By the eleventh houfe we anfwer all enquiries concerning friends and
friendfhip, hope, truft, expectance, or defire; alfo whatever relates to
the fidelity or perfidiou{nefs of friends; or to the counfellors, advifers,
affociates, favourites, flatterers, or fervants, of kings,’ princes, or men in


power. The co-fignificators of this houfe are the Sun and Aquaries’;
and its colour is either faffron or deep yellow. |


The twelfth houfe, being the houfeof contribution, refolves all queftions
of forrow, affliction, anxiety of mind, trouble, diftrefs, imprifonment,


2 perfecution,.


O F TASSETTREO/LIOI GY) 167


perfecution, malice, fecret enemies, fuicide, treafon, confpiracy, affaf-'
fination, and every thing appertaining to the misfortunes and affliGions
of mankind. Its confignificators are Venus and Pifces ; and Saturn
greatly joyeth in this houfe, being the parent of malevolence and malig-


nity. The colour it gives is green.


From the foregoing circumftantial furvey of the twelve houfes of hea-
ven, I truft the reader will be enabled to form fuch an idea of the nature
of prediating by the horofcope, as will enable him not only to proceed to
place the ftars and planets therein with correctnefs and precifion, but alfo
to form an accurate and diftinct judgment of their power and influence,
under whatever afpects or pofitions he may occafionally find them ; for,
until he can accomplifh this, it will be in vain for him to attempt any
examples in the dottrine of horary queftions or nativities, which will be
the next ‘object of our plan, after explaining the tables for finding the
places of the planets every hour and minute of the day, and directing the
reader how to place them in the horofcope. But I cannot difmifs this
fubje€t, without giving my readers the definition of the twelve houfes of
heaven, from the works of the learned and much-efteemed philofopher and
aftrologian, Morinus ; and in doing this, I fhall adhere as much to the
{pirit and letter of the author as the nature of a tranflation will admit.


“It isa fact, fays this excellent author, which preponderates in the ba-
lance of reafon, and highly claims our fober confideration, that the life of
man is refolvable into four diftinét periods or ages ; namely, infancy,
youth, maturity, and old age; though it may be faid with ftri@ ie
that {carce half the human race attain to the conclufion of only their third
period. In the conftruction of man, therefore, we difcover four affections,
into which all other things appear to be reducible, as it were to their firtt.
beginning ; namely, life, action, marriage, and paffion. Thefe agree with
the rife, perfeGtion, declination, and termination of all things, and com-
prife the whole effects and operations of nature. For man is truly faid.
to rife into the world, the moment he receives refpiration and life; to be
in perfection, when he attains to manhood and maturity, and to the pro-
pagation of his f{pecies ; to decline, when he begins to lofe the innate
radical principle of heat and moifture ; and to fuftain the laft paflion of
life, when ‘he ceafes to breathe, and filently finks into the Staves” 7 tet
~‘jife, aGtion, marriage, and patlions, of men, are therefore governed by the
fame celeftial principle, which regulates the birth, perfettion, declinati-.
on, and diffolution, of all other things. Wherefore life, in the fyftem.
of nature, is regulated by the eaft angle of the heavens, callea the afcen-
dant ; action, by the fouth angle, or mid-heaven; marriage, by the weft.
angle; and paffion, by the north angle of the heavenly frame. And hence


No. 8. Pp arife


168 AN ILLUS TR‘ATION


arife four triplicities of the fame genus or generical nature, and twelve,
houfes, as heretofore defcribed. The firft triplicity is of the eaftern an-
gle, or afcendant, attributed to infancy, and called the triplicity of life,
and includes the firft, ninth, and fifth, houfes, which behold each other


in a partile trine in the equator, where this rational divifion of the twelve
houfes is made.


‘© Man either does or ought to live in a three-fold refpett, in himfelf,.
in God, and in his pofterity ; for the great ends for which he was created,
are toworfhip and glorify his Maker, and topropagate his {pecies. The life
of man in himfelf is therefore the firft and prime objet in the order of
nature ; for without this all other parts of the creation would be vain,
being made for man’s ufe and benefit. For this caufe, the life of man ap-
pertains to the firft and principal houfe in the divifion of the heavens.
But man’s life in God, confifting in his image of the Divinity, in the ra-
tionality of his foul, and in the purity of his morals, claims, for this rea-
fon, the ninth houfe, according to the motion of the equator, which is
the houfe of piety and religion. And, as man’s life is continued in his
pofterity, according to one and the fame unchangeable law prefiding over
all nature, fo the houfe of infancy and children, which is the fifth houfe,
is appropriated for this purpofe. And thefe three concerns being con-
fefledly the grand object of man’s life, the three houfes of heaven, under
which they are refpectively nourithed and foftered, form a trine with each
other, in a chain of mutual harmony and concord.


‘«¢ The fecond triplicity confifts of the angle of the mid-heaven, with
the fixth and fecond houfes. This triplicity wholly appertains to the
fecond ftage of man’s life, namely, that of vigour and action ; and there-
fore comprehends all worldly attainments, with the advantages flowing
from them ; for every thing that worketh phyfically, worketh for fome
phyfical good ; and, as the motion of the equator is from the eaft angle to
the mid-heaven, fo is the progrefs made in all our earthly acquifitions.
The higheft degree of man’s elevation in this world is to that of majefty,
power, honour, dignity, preferment, or magiftracy, or to any of thofe fi-
tuations by which he acquires fuperiority and affluence. ‘Thefe, confifte
ing of immaterial matter, and forming the firft order of earthly dignity,
claim the angular houfe of this triplicity, or the mid-heaven. The fe-
cond degree of worldly honour is conceived to arife from fubjects, fer-
vants, tenants, vaflals, and domeftics ; and thefe, being formed of mat-
ter material and animated, are placed under the fixth houfe. The third
advancement to earthly grandeur is by matter material and animate, fuch
as gold, jewels, and other valuable effects, accumulated by induftry and
Jweat of the brow ; which being under the fecond houfe, thefe three houfes


are


OF ASTROLOGY. 169


are alfo joined by fympathy in a partile trine, applying to each other in
concord and unanimity.


‘* The third triplicity comprehends worldly connections, whether by
marriage, confanguinity, or friendfhip ; and thefe, holding on in the or-
der of nature, even as the progrefs is made from the mid-heaven to the
weftern angle, apply to the progreflive tendency of youth to manhood and
maturity: In this ftage of life, man is joined in a three-fold tie or obli-
gation ; in body, in blood, and in friendfhip.. Firft, he is joined in body,
by the moft facred of all earthly ties, matrimony ; fan@ioned under the
feal of God’s primary command, ‘‘ increafe and multiply.” Secondly, he
is joined in confanguinity, not only by the propagation of his like, but
by all orders of his kindred in bload. Thirdly, he is joined in friend~
fhip under that facred-bond of benevolence and love, which the Almighty
commands every man to exercife towards his neighbour. This is the
very cement of fociety, and medicine of life, performing thofe good offi-
ces in civil life, which the tree of life promifed in our more perfect ftate,
and thefe are the fentiments of friendfhip, which alone can give a true
relifh to every enjoyment of this world. The moft important of thefe
obligations, being marriage, is for that reafon placed under (anion of the
angular or fuperior houfe; the fecond tic, being that or blood, claims the
government of the third houfe; and the eleventh houfe, which perfects
this triplicity, is facred to friendfhip. Thefe three houfes, from an
union of nature, behold each other ina partile trine, according to the mo-
tion of the equator. ;


‘¢ The fourth and laft triplicity is that of paflion, which comprehends
the three claffes of human afflictions. The firft, or angular houfe of this
triplicity, in allufion to its pofition in the lower horizon, is termed the
dark angle, the depth of night, and bottom of heaven ; the den and cave
of the ftars and planets. To this houfeis committed the firft order of our.
woes, agreeable to the courfe of nature: thefe are, infupportable mis-
fortunes, and vifible decline of life; the firft confequences of original
fin, by which man is devoted to corruption and decay, and to all the infir-
mities of nature. ‘The fecond order of human afflictions is tribulation,
forrow, and difeafe ; arifing either from the treachery and perfecution of
enemies, from the chains of fervitude and bondage, or from poverty and
want : thefe, with a long train of confequentmileries, are appropriated to
the twelfth houfe. The laft fhock that can be fuftained by human na-
ture, is death, the fina] end of all men: this is under government of
the eighth houfe, termed, on this account, the houfe of death. And
thefe houfes likewife, from the conformity of their nature and qualities,
conftitute a partile trine in the equator.

66 Thus


170 A NETS s Tr OR PAM oN


«* Thus the termination of this temporal life is the beginning of life
eternal. For nature knows no annihilation. All the works of Omnipo-
tence are refolvable or changeable from one ftate to another; but God,
having created nothing in vain, fuffers nothing to be annulled. Where-
fore, according tothe fecond motion of the planets, which is from weit to
éaft, an entrance is made out of the eighth into the ninth houfe, which
is the houfe of life in God, wherein man is taught, by the revelation of
the SUPREME WILL, that he fhall pafs, by the fecond motion of the
foul, which is attributed to the mind or reafon, (as the firft or wrapt foul
or fenfitive appetite is to the body,) from this life of anxiety and peril,
to an eternal life of peace and reft. And therefore, whatever is firft in
dignity in the order of nature, poffleffes the firft and more noble houfes in
thefe triplicities, in regular fubordination, according to the motion of the
ecliptic and planets.


«¢ And now, WHAT MAN Is HE, who, confiding in the ftrength of his
own wifdom, will dare to meafure the works of his CREATOR by the
ftandard of his own comprehenfion ? or will venture to affirm, that thefe
operations and divifions of the twelve celeftial houfes, conjoined with
fuch wonderful harmony, contrivance, and concord, are the effects of
chance or accident ; or that will fay, fuch admirable confents, fo excellently
formed, and mutually dependant on each other, are cafually found in
things fo complicated and abftrufe? If he obftinately perfifts that thefe
are altogether fictious, let him point out the thing wanting to complete
the evidence in fupport of the natural foundation and excellency of them?
But he can do neither ; and therefore, as this divifion of the heavens is
founded in reafon, and obvioufly contrived by fupernatural wifdom and
prefcience, it comprehends genethliacally all things that in the courfe of
nature can poflibly be enquired of or concerning the works of man.
For as much as the knowledge of contrarieties is univerfally the fame, fo
an affirmative, or a negative, may be fought out, and found to be com-
prifed in the twelve houfes of the zodiac anfwering to the divifion.”


DIRECTIONS


HP ASTRO O GrY.:, 99


Too underftand the preceding table, the reader muft recolle& that we
have already afligned to each planet his re{pective rule over every day in
the week; for inftance, the Sun governs Sunday, the Moon Monday,
Mars Tuefday, Mercury Wednefday, Jupiter Thurfday, Venus Friday,
and Saturn Saturday. Each planet begins his rule the moment the Sun
appears above the horizon, and continues for one planctary hour, at the
expiration of which the next planet in order commences his rule, and con-
tinuesthe fame portion of time, and then the third planet in order governs,
and fo on throughthe whole week. So that, if I want toknow what planet
rules in any particular hourof the day or night, I take the planet which be-
gins rule that day, and reckon in order till I find it.) For example on Sun-
day the Sun rules the firft hour, Venus the fecond, Mercury the third, the
Moon the fourth, Saturn the fifth, Jupiter the fixth, Mars the feventh,.
the Sun theeighth, Venus the ninth, and fo on through the whole day
and fucceeding night, till the Sun rifes again ; by which mode of reckon«
ing it will be uniformly found, that each planet will begin his govern.
ment at Sun rifing, according to the order above defcribed, to the end
of the world. This alfo evidently appears by the table: for, if we begin
with the firft.column, and reckon down the whole twenty-four hours,
we find the Moon begins hisgovernment at the top of the fecond column
on Monday morning, when the fun rifes. If we reckon down the fecond
column, in the fame order, we find Mars begins his rule at the top of
_ the third column, on Tuefday morning. So the planets will be found
to obferve the fame regular order throughout all the other columns,
which take in the hours of every day and night throughout the week
and for the enfuing week the table begins again in the fame order, and
will fo continue without alteration or error, to theend of time. By re-
ferring to the figures, which reprefent the refpective hour of every day


ritan, with bowels of compaflion, adminifter balm to the bleeding ifflues of their afflifted bre-
thren. The many invaluable difcoveries lately added to the Pharmacopceia, both from the
vegetable and mineral worlds, are ftrong arguments of, the neceffity of regular practice, and of
profefional education, in forming the phyfician. But, were the bulk of thefe gentlemen to
confulta little more the planetary influences, both on vegetable and mineral fubftances, and
apportion them in their prefcriptions according to the nature and conftitution of the patient,
uniformly confulting the effects of Saturn and the Moon. in each crifis and critical day, Iam
perfuaded that more immediate relief, in moft cafes where nature is not too far exhaufted, might
be afforded to the fick and languifhing patient. Surgery too, which like a guardian angel fteps
forward to alleviate the perilous accidents of the unfortunate, would gain much improvement
by the like confiderations, Itis not therefore the regular-bred practitioners of either Phyfic or
Surgery, that the author means to arraign; but that baneful defcription of empirics and
quacks, who now pervade the kingdom ; and, like a fwarm of locufts from the eaft, prey
upon the vitals of mankind. Thefe montters in the fhape of men, with hearts callous to every
fentiment of compaffion, have only fees in view. Governed by this fordid principle, they
{port with life, unmoved amidft the bitter anguifh and piercing groans of the defponding patient;
till, too far gone for human aid to reftore, they abandon him to defpair and death. For the fake
of humanity, and the honour of a Chriftian country, let the legiflative power check this grow-


ing enormity ! :
| an


4 AN: I'L ‘Bev's Rap EON


and night throughout the week, the reader mayalways fee what:planet
governs in that hour, asits character is placediin. the fame line with the’
figure. For example, fuppofe I want’ to know. what planet rules the:
fifth. hour on Sunday morning; I look down the firft colum of the
table, over which is placed Sunday planetary hour, and-at the 5th hour)
I find Saturn governs. Again, fuppofe it be required to know what pla-.
net governs the ninth hour on Friday afternoon : Look down the column)
over which Friday planetary hour is printed, and in the gth hour it will
be feen that Mercury governs. Or if it beafked, what planet rules the:
nineteenth hour on Wednefday night ? Look down the columnover which
Wednefday planetary hour-is prefixed, and at-19, which fignifies the:
19th hour, or the feventh hour after the Sun is fet, it will be found that
Mars governs ; and fo for any other time required. | T

But a planetary hour not agreeing with the common: divifion of time;,
and being peculiar to aftronomy andi aftrology only, we {hall explain it
more fully. The planetary hours are reckoned from the time of the Sun’s
Tifing'to its fetting, which {pace of time is divided into twelve equal: parts,
and thefe are termed the twelve planetary hours of that:day. Then the.
time from the Sun’s fetting to its rifing the next morning, isin the fame,
manner divided into twelve equal parts, and thefe conftitute the twelve
planetary hours for that night. Hence it is obvious, that when the
days are fhort, a planetary hour does not confiftof above forty minutes,
more or lefs, according to the twelfth part of the whole time: from: the
Sun’s rifing to:its fetting ; and the nights. being then long, a planetary
hour by night may confift of an hour andten or twenty minutes, or more;
and fo vice verfa, when the days arelong, and the nights fhort, fo that the.
duration of planetary hours, both by day and night, are continually varying, .
and never agree with the common meafure of time, except on thofe two
days in- every year when the Sun enters Aries and Libra, and then’ equal:
night and day are difpenfed to allparts of the world. Therefore, to enable.
the reader to find the length of the planetary hours. without the trouble
of calculating, I fubjoin the following table, by which they may be found
both night and. day tor ever.


TABLE


O; Be A/S sTAR -O-L:0°G Y: 175


TABLE ofthe PLANETARY HOURS for every Day and
NicGutT in the Week. .


L£neth of the ‘Length of the Plane-/Length of the Plane-


| Day. | tary Hours by Day. |tary Hours by Night.

Bip M. | H M. S Hi M S
6 O | ° 30 fe) I 30 °
6 fe para APE: vie wie de (0. 1 by see chs,
7 fe) fe) 35 fe) I 2 fo)
Z 30 fexe) by geese 1 Zar, yO

8 fe) fe) 40 Oo 1 20 fo)
8 30 fo) 43-90 I £95--"9O
9 fe) fe) 45 fo) 1 15 fe)
9 30 ° A tt RO I 121 E30
10 ° ° 50 fo) 1 10 °
10 3o fo) Fe ata at ga 1 7 AS 50
11 fo) O 55 ) I 5 fo)
rf 30 ~ SMe 1 2 3°
12 ° 1 Oo fo) I OWN wee
12 30 I Mates) fo) 57 BO
13 fo) I 5 fe) Oo y fe)
e 3° : 215 388 ON be
14 fe) I 10 O fe) 50 fe)
14 30 ES Pate fo) 47: -1,.330
15 fe) 1 15 fo) fe) 45 Oo
a5 Ag ; eR ‘3 Ai SO
16 fe) 1 20 fo) O 40 fe)
16 30 1 Be Ae fe) 27 ERO
17 Oo 1 25 fe) fe) 35 O


The firft column of the above table is intended to thew the time be-
tween the rifing and fetting of the Sun, from fix hours to feventeen,
which takes in more than the longeft or fhorteft days. Then fuppofe the
time from the Sun’s rifing to its fetting be only fix hours ; the planetary
hours that day would be each thirty minutes long, as f{pecified in the fe-
cond column, and the planetary hours the night following would be
each one hour and thirty minutes long, as exprefled in the third co-
lumn. Again, fuppofe the time between the Sun’s rifing and fetting be
thirteen hours and thirty minutes, what would be the length of the pla-
netary hours that day and night ? Look in the firft column of the table

No. 9. Rr : for


176 AN?’ LYE U's T RAAT POON


for thirtéen hours and thirty minutes, and in the famelinein the fecond
column ftand one hour feven minutes and thirty feconds, which is the
exact length of each planetary hour that day; and in the fame line in the
' third column ftand fifty-two minutes thirty feconds, which is the length
of the planetary hours that night. By the fame rule the length of the
planetary hours may be eafily found in this table every day and night
through the year. Thelength of time between the rifing and fetting of
the Sun may always be found in the Ephemeris. This table is ealcu-
lated within thirty-minutes of the Sun’s real time every day, which is
fufficiently near for all the purpofes required.


TABLE to reduce the Morton of the PLANETS to


Oo any Hour of the
Day or Night. — : =


i] z0 ;
= &iOne Hour’s| |S & One Hour’s -|One Hour’s
$5} Motion, | +8 5) Motion. Motion.
Dor) D. M.S) Diet DOM. Sic) bso DLM .S
Me Me Sit Mai Vise TD M. i.M. S.cT
1 ° 84 30 yay AN 8 TES 5h Oo I. 47 30
BO wats Oo 23 0. 57 30 P50 fe)
8 Pee? Boe teat NO O a ee
4 gO 1 ae aa eae |) hee Sire he)
$9.12) Bole) e641 9 fe) Ie NG OTR OG)
Gere Oo A MS ase ae SVS oO
710 17% go 28 jI Io ‘e) at LES
SHOrs 20 ° 29 {I 12 gol Ae By fe)
g }9 22 3°] 30 Oh ale’ O4 O 2 or 30
10 |O 25 fe) ee 00K iat br hea gic) 2 1o fo)
PO 27 30 F241 L eZ oO ra Deh ie 30
12 |O 30 fe) 33 j1 > 22 30) 2 15 fo)
13/0 826 39 | 34] 25 ° 2n yar lix age
14 0 385 OQ 35 |1 27 39) 2 i 29 ‘o)
PSO; VBP AJO! OFS TBO fo) 20289 ag0
16 jo 40 Che: egy aay Bi2igs go DOK re)
V7 HO Maan Bowe) e8) (eh etgs fa) Shee 7a
1810 945° OP 1°89 I) B79 go 2 18001
19 jo 247) «3° 40 b 40 fe) Bir Qe 30
20 |}O0 $0 fe) 41 i 42 3o 21 Bs re)
By {G219O0 30 42 jboo4gs O BIRBT vi 96 .
To


Of (AS TROL 0G Y, “397


To find the true place of each planet, at any hour when we have occa-
fion to erect a figure, it only requires to turn to the Ephemeris forthe pla-
‘nets’ places at noon ; thofe being found, note how many degrees or mi-
nutes they move in.the zodiac by twelve o’clock the next day, or from
noon the preceding day ; and then, by the help of the foregoing table, it
will be feen how many degrees, minutes, or feconds, they move in an
hour. Forexample, fuppofe a planet moves one degree in twenty-four
hours, how far does it move in one hour ? At the topof the firft column
is the figure 1, and in the fame line of the fecond column is 2 minutes
and 30 feconds ; which fhews, that, if a planet be twenty-four hours in
moving one degree, it then moves at the rate of two minutes and thirty
feconds in an hour. Or fuppofe a planet only moves two minutes in
twenty-four hours; look into the firft column of the table for the figure 2,
oppofite, in the fecond column, ftand 5 feconds, which fhews that, ifa
planet moves two minutes in twenty-four hours, it then only moves five
{econds in an hour. Again, if a planet’s diurnal motion be thirteen mi-
nutes, What is its hourly motion? Look into the firft column for ee
and oppofite is 32, 30; which indicates, that, if a planet moves thirteen
minutes in twenty-four hours, it moves thirty-two feconds and thirty
thirds in an hour. The fame rules hold good for the motions of all the
planets; it muft however be carefully obferved, that, if the diurnal mo-
tion of any planet be in degrees, then you mutt enter the firft column of
the table under the denomination of degrees, and the fecond column
with minutes and feconds ; but, if the diurnal motion of the planet be -
only in minutes, then you muft begin to reckon in the firft column only
with minutes, and in the fecond column with feconds and thirds,
This is indicated by the initial letters placed.over each column, which
fignify degrees of minutes in the firft column, and, in the fecond, degrees
and minutes, minutes and feconds, fecends and thirds. Then, fuppofea
planet moves one degree and thirteen minutes in twenty-four hours, how
far does it move in an hour? Refer to the table, and fay,

One degree in 24 hours is 2 min. 30 fec. o thirds per hour.
Thirteen min. in 24 hours is o min. 32 fec. 30 thirds.
Anfwer 3 2 30


ae


And thus any quantity of a planet’s diurnal motion may be reduced to


time in the fame manner.
But, as no figure can be eretted without the help of an Ephemeris, and
tables to fhew the Sun’s place in each of the twelve figns, unlefs by en-
tering into Jong and tedious calculations, I fhall therefore infert in this
place the two pages of White’s Ephemeris for June 1784, and the tables


above-mentioned, with an explanation of the whole.
z (CO.


178 AN? “ToBeeeO. S*T- RAC DDN
DAECR Ow P 9 TM
WHIT E’s EPHEMERLS, For June 1784.


June hath XXX Days.


The LUNATIONS.


Full moon the 3d day, at 34 minutes paft 4 afternoon. ~
Laft quarter the roth day, at 28 minutes paft 8 morning.
New moon the 17th day, at 6 minutes paft 6 evening.
Firft quarter the 2sth day, at 33 mintues pait Io at night.


M. | Sundays and other| © ©’s | D’s | yprifest py Clock
ae remarkable days | rifes_| fets_|declin, jdeclin. | & fets | fouth lafter©
r \Whit-Tuefday  |Nicom| 8 8|z2n t1!20 s 7] 1ms52 1oai7} 2 31
2 |Ember Week 3 51) Bi O12y Lola AS) 2 alte gs) 2. 2
50| 8 10/22 26|27 2) ) rifes)\morn | 2 12
4 K. Geo. III. born 3 49 : 11/22 33/28 30 a 3)0 16[2 2!
_5 jPr.Ern. Aug. born) 3 49| 8 11!22 40j27 7/10 4g} rar) t 52,
“C {Trinity Sunday | 3 “3 48/8 12 1222 46|24 I8lit 22] 2 25/1 4!
z 3 a7) BN Tae arate sl 4613. 25/1 30
3 47 13.22 714 24! morn 20} 1. 19)
g Oxford T. begins | 3 46 8 14/23 a SPOUT uk Ms AN Sate,
eto) 'Prs. Amelia born | 3 46) 8 1423 6) 1 41) 0 18] 6 ol o 56
ti (St. Barnabas 3 As) 8 8 45/23 10] 40 47} 0 2916 46,0 44)
12 3. 45) ons 410 55,9 4117 32/90 3!
Cin Suns alt. 2 rinses ‘a3 17/16 28/0 551 8 As Oo 19}
14 3 44) 8 ue ZOIZE™ OMT LAO. BHO REO
a5 344 44| 8 16) ay a 22/24 46 46 I 311 9 sgiobef. 6
16 43 “3 43,8 47 Si227123 .2hla7g St CUBS ce This
17 |St. Alban 3 43/8 7\23 26)28 1] D fetsir1 4s] 0 fal
18 3 43) 8 17/23 27127 321 9a 34 0238 0 45
19 3 43) 8 17123 28\25 44)10 4/1 29 0 58
Gc Bisant aft. Trin. 3 43/8 8 17\23 28|2z2  47|\10 26) 2 17, 111
21 Longeft day 3. 4318 17/23 28118 54/10 4413 2) 1 25
22 Brag ; 17|23 2814 Iglto 57/3 45| I 37
23 3 43 17\23°°°27| Q TENT 98)! 4 i 25). 8) tO
24 St. John Baptift | 3 43) 8 17/23 25/3 43/11 19) 5 ; 2 e
a5 ut Aas ABTS 8 17/23 24) 18 57/11 28) 5 44) 2 16
3 4418 16123 22! 7 40 tt 8} 6 26'2 28
E os 3 Sun.aft. Trine | 3 44) 8 1623 Iogliz L4glit 2 7 CHOMSL Ae
3 44] 8 16/23 16)18 24 mormn|-7 59) 2 53
a St. Peter 345) 8 15123 I3|22 51,0 9g) 8 52) 3 3]
30 |TrinityTerm ends} 3 45/8 15/23 gj26 9 0 36/9 sil 3 16
“ Day | Length |Helioc|Helioc|Helioc Helioc |Helioe Helioc|
increaf. | of day. long kh long long $ |longS jlone ¢ long & vifes_
r| 8 33] 16 7 |tourgiiasmez1'13V42|1 f 30,26V27)19m 46/104 53
7| 8 +e 16 26 l19 42\25 5316 atlt7 14) 68 2 6433/10 28
13} 8 467 16 30 |I9 53/26 25'18 sol22 5815 3923 3llo 3
19| 8 50) 16 34 |20 4126 salar 3)" 8 AES VAL Osta 38
25 }odec 2 | 16 32 [zo t5'27 2ol24 AvP 56 _25 lodec 2} 1632 120 1527 29/24 15| AuPs6| 411 56/28 15 a eri TSS Ae eee


OFT He TR OL OSG vit A 19
Croom Po Fy
WHITE’s EPHEMERLS ror June 1784,


June.


© |Day-lig. Day-lig. |Dura. |Pl.D’s| h’s | 7s | 3’s | 2’s | ¥’s
< | begins ends _jtwilig. | node. | Jatit. | latit. | latit. latit. | latie,
I nes | 4% 38 on 6 0859 ing} Is 8] os 22
7 4 19] 0 6 i jodlet 18io 562 3
13 Ally | day-jlight, | 4 of o OF 1 Zin 17] 0» 43) 3. 36
19 3 4i}o° sr Sir I6l-0 29)'4 27
25 3. 2zto0 41 6 1 1;| 0 15 4 29
6's DS foo De 7S fF 28 =| BES fo G28, fm BS. Ln ”S
long. | latit. | long. | long. |long. | long. | long.


oO
»
%
7] |r 30 4 12m 43 48 -40|23bP23 6X59 20255 1/22 ¥ 57127 27
4 |e 1 27 27426 36) 4. 59\23R 21} 7 321 28\24 0/27 23
3] 13. 24 $00 f511 4 §9\23 18 7 822 §/25 23127 15
4 14 22 12/25 22) 4 40/23 15) 7 1222 42126. 36127 {2
5 |) Is) 19° 33 {rove 2| 4) 3123 42) 7 1623 T9l27 49/26 _ 44
C 16 16 53 |24 44) 3° £0\23 9 19 23 56129 = 2/26 24
Gh 39s 134, ES) Gorell Zales 7 23124 33| Om15|26 I
3 18 Ir 32|23 48) O S123 317 «26/25, Toy FT 28/25 35
9 °
°


ONO


I9 8. 51 | 8X 2) on 25/23 7 290/25 47) 2 41/25 6
20 6 g|22 1] + 37,22 §6)|7 33/26 24) 3 53/24 34


one


2: 3. 27) 5146) 2 4322 53)
22 O- =©45)\19 17) 5 3822 50
22 58 3| 2835) 4 2122 47
73 55 21\T5 40) 4 4922 43


Lr 36\27 | 1.5 7/24 I
12

C

14.

15 |_ 24 52 38/28 33) 5 222 40

16

17

18


39127 39 6 20/23 27
41|28 16) 7 34|22 541
43128 53/8 47|\22 21
45129 _ 30110 oi2t 48
If 14)/21 15
49, © 45/12 27/20 45
5l I 2213 40\20 18
53) 2 oOI4 54/19 53
541.2 37/16 719g 31


| 20) 0° 360 ZTE 58) r 45/22 17) 7 95) 3 14/17 2olkg- 13


25 49° 55 |1LM14) 4 5922 36
26 47 TZ |23 44' 4 4222 33
27 44. 27] 627.2 4 1322 29
bor] 29 ak 43{18, 9] 3 32,22 25
C | 29 38>, 58| oO 7 2 42,20 21


cae


a

NI
3
°o


|
|


az) 1 33 27(|23 4610 44/22 13) 7 56) 3 52/18 33119 0
23] 2 30 4h 5m™3z}ostgi2z 87 56/4 29119 47l18 52
24 3 27 eg lt7| 257 E\ 2224: are eet 5.) Oot: olF8. 47
(25. | a4 Oetieg 7\29 28] 22222 Of 7 57| 5 44/22 I4/08D45
26; 5 22 4Q|1leas] 3. 17/21 56 7Ro7| 6 21/23 27/18 51
Ci} 6 19 31/24 2314 421 5217 57/6 5824 4olIg 0
2) 7 16 42) 7M25) 4 4o2r 37/7 $717 3625 S49 12
29 8 13 §3|20 55) 5 220 4317 568 1327 7JI1g .30
30) 9 WI 314453) 5 7/21 3917 56) 8 $028 21/19 54
S a ‘He VE a! Se Se ST ——~ ——<—— |f
4 4 & g % | bh’s | Us | B’sioe’s | B's
Pe) rifes fets |, rifes | fets jdeclin, |declin./declin.|declin. ldeclin.|f.


I om4z'| If a 5 |.3M 9! ga 22/21 s 20] gs 53/23 n gil7n 26/23 n 5
7.1 "0: 2011 TO), 87/3) \ILSY 402th: 23 45\22 32119 T9l2zu 21
13| t1a63 | 10 36|)2 57) rifes |zr 27|.9 4o0\2t 48120 53119 41,
19 | 11 29] 10 23|2 54) 3m3q2t 31/9 3720 sol2z 818 30
2} Ir -4il to 7)2. S7P3  6lZE 36) 9 38120 ; 4123 ol18 329


Se)


180 AN I) lay Li Uy Sey Ra AyT Jn0 N
Of Houfescalculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes, by
double Horary Times.


Sol in Aries.


Time 10 11 12 Afcendant| 2 3
. from Noon.|Houfe. |Houfe.|Houfe. Pr Houfe.|Houfe.
y |DsMiDuM! D. M. [DaMiDuaM


ay oy
et oe
24 95
25. Ae
26. 22
26 54


be
10)
3
Oy:
@)
(0)
Oo
re)
1@)
°
1@)
@)
fe)
fe)
@)
fe)
te)
T
I
1
T's
1
I
1
I
I
1
a
I
i ;
5


Oo CW Aw Bw ND BH


OF ASTROLOGY. 18i


Ae eA YB: ol, +E


Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes,
by double Horary Times.
We A ican Be
— Sol in Taurus.


Time ae) it 12 \Afcendant] 2 3


| A. R. |From Noon.|Houfe. |Houfe.|Houfe. NX Houfe.|Houfe.
D.M. | H. M. y IDuMIDasM D. M. i DemMDxM


52
55
59


N Aon Bww Nn
es
Ke)
N
in
aS
Wn
N
bo
oy
@)


i8a AN ILLUS FRAT EON


we YT AE LAE
Of Houfes. calculated’for the Latitude of 51 esa 32 Minutes,
by double Horary Times.


Sol in Gemini.


Time..( tsaipeiea. & 12


Afcendant; 2 cial
Houfe. |Houfe.


A. R. |From Noon.| Houfe.|Houfe. |Houfe. ty

ID uve he Te C, IVE, u |Ds@ MD aM_D. M.|DmMiD2M
G7 4801 vB x 5! fo) ] 58 |10 58 | 7 22. \28 14 |25 29 |]
Roy Shih iB) 1g I 364 11% 46 | 8) Gr 129 5 4 126 Bs
59; 54 |. 4> 9 2 19 49 |12 35 | 8 50 [29 55 127 21
60 57 | 4 4 3 \10 45 119 23} 9 34 joa4é6 |28 18
O20 Oba 8 Ae Alp ia 2 1 108,38 | 1296) 120. ne
635. Sm 4. 3 212 & Ai Boat gilt tls gpl 2827 om ee
64. 6 1.44 0 46 6 9/19, B45 Ot | It 4g} 3018 1a 9
65803 eds ee 4 ATR SQ dt Oro if 12° Fie) Ae O Uae iG
66; 19) 4 Ares 6.8 1 § BOUT BBO 13! LON! 8) oO raul a3
Gl i As p20 9 (16.22) 178109 A 14) eae) 5 acd) ep xO
68 21| 4 33 to |17 18 119 9 | 14 46| 6 42 | 4 57
BO 26 |S Ate 38 It 418 TAM O088 fel 5y Blo 7 a eee
40,290). 4. 42 12 |I9 10 \20 48 |.16° 16 | 8 24 | 6 51
Oh OB Ned 2h 113 12Q, (Ja {2% 438 4417)> hel 9 el [op 48
FO. Belin Ale od TA eo 2b [eau 28 fot7 in 4410 6 6 Wy Ag
Fp Age tA. bs 15 |22 .'0,)23..19 118! 82. |10 7 || 40
The AFE |e Ah S9 16 |22 56 j24 9} 19 17 [11 49 |10 39
752 52) 355 3 LF 129 eh 2 (25s OW 2O) > yy 12 ht a 96
96, $71 \ ab 8 18 12447129 51 #20) 49°13 -g2.| ua: 39
a oy eek aie 19 125 43 |26 42 | 21! & |14 24 Ing go
4 at Je ee ey 4 20 120. 390: 127.633 221) ae; its 15 \t4ray
BO Ll Gok icy enced Zhe: (2 35428 242) O11 One tees oe
lias Ur freee 9 22 |29 31 |29 14} 23 51 \16 58 116-20
Go 22.) eat ame AQ) 23 °|29 27 OM 5 | 24° 37 \17 50 j17 17
82° 2471) 115 ni 34 24 |02%23 | 0 56.| 25 23 |18 42 118 14
84.33} 5 38 | 25 | 119} 148 | 26 9g [19 33 |19 11
Be 98 i). 6-443 260 .|.2 15.) 240 | 26) ¢¢. 120 or igon 1S
86 43| 5 47 27 |3 12) 3 82|27 41 \21.17 jar 5
Goo: | 5 iu So 29 oh 4v 19a) 43 23728 | ona ziomion. 2
Soe54 | -5 56 29. | 5 615 14] 29, 13 [29-1 [22 69
go 0:14) ,.,6 fe) Sa. 6 6


Osf” Avot rReO.L. OGY: 183


by double Horary Times.


Sol in Cancer.


ae) uI 12 |Afcendant| 2 eRe
Houfe. | Houfe.|Houfe. a Houfe. Houfe.
cs |IDaMiDmM| D. M. DaMDmM


Time
fA. R. {From Noon.
(D.M. | H. M.


A Gear tb te
, Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Leora
1} go of 6 O | OF Oe OG BAe WO Pe. Orie 2 BTS. 2at £6
Ho1 5 6 4 D7 OO COP MO AT eA Tey aa sg
oz gr 6-99 BET miso 7 40) mt) 38 28 97 25°. 50
fe as EO On 13 SN Oleg ating) EO aeO 2820449
(194 227 6 17 4 19 52/9 331 3 5 27 2027 44
| gs 27| 6 22 CUNO RAS O MO 2 oN TAG gO
OG. gar G6 26 Ouyirt 45itr 417} 4 37 \29 |2.29 36
97 38, & 31 7 |12 4212 9) 5 23 |29 53/9433
98 43 6 35 8 113 3913 2] & g)om4gi i 2g
99 48) 6- 39 Qa 3013) 5 4) sO. 55d Gl 12my aig
100) § 3) .6'. 44 POS tec hd adn A One 2 AG, Boat Qe
tor 58 6 48 11 46 3015 37 Lea ie adi yg ie Sy)
1ORS Bi 6342.52 Teer ler a Sar Ou ceO eee LSS Ar SOI Bes Bp
Fog) B16 1.057 1 oeeaet ys OOO gz A eG OF: V8
VOR {13h 7 1 | 14 Pi | Kean. i ea EN ON dd AL hina ae) ay fod
ROO NIT a7 5 Eso pOmada tO Parent 1 25h 0) (a1! Bie G
ey BOC ae Demme, PORMOL IER OA keto: Ph ANE BIN 8.0 86
HOU 20) 7s 74. Tiuates We de eOnAGTEI2 non (8 2. 22h .9u ka
Bee shih Pe RA i 18423 OT a aGg 4st 9) 23110'. 50
BION ZS 7 0 22 1Ow yi2Au Clase Sts tA): 30°10 3|11 46
NG ers) ey Ba 20 |2 BOs AG ee TA (LO o 5 {ee go
112 43} 7 31 | 21 |26 924 9/15 59 |11 42113 98
VEQUAT Pi eee (s0- 57125 OO Ogg l12 911148 34
114 51) 7 39 eo ee 5475 Spade 20/15 130
Re SALT ee a PAB eeO Aa). 14514. Glt6n 26
RIO 67 | 7 ae SRP UeOer aaa ea Ge. 58.194) e8lr7e 22
Roe) 7 ee 20. | om45128 23] 19° 42 \15 - 47/18: 18
M19 4| 7 56% | (27 | 1p gei2g 414) Bo 26116 ~gdjtg: 14
120 7 8 fe) 285 "\'220'Oe “lat. Io#17 25120: Mio
121 40}. 8 5 DBOm meer Osan | cdegg. 4st. 5g
122.2 Paes 9 DON eaeReeZil. + AG 2a Oe LO 220°) Se


ANYILLUS TRATION


RT TA Bi, ses ;
Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Sree 32 Minutes, |
by double Horary Times


Solin Leo.


Time — 10 11 12°’. Afcendant 2


HA. R. (From Noon.|Houfe.|Houfe. |Houfe. L Houte. Honte.

1D. M. M. x |DeMDeM D. M.|\DmM|D ¢M |
9 ON 4 AQ 1) Nb) 22 128 hI vresaras Wee 4
13 I 6.) 2820 gO 23 2a EO veal ie gr ee
1g 2 Oy Qa 2 aeOI Bat 6 BOs Ol aaa.
21 3 TP ead GIs a4 As aL eile 40
25 4 | 8 16) 5 ; 5) 25.82 122. 17/25. 45
29 SCO Nee Saba 264 Ooo. Olan Am
34 6 l10 86 43 26 58 )23 5427 35
38 FAL QeAl 7) BOA AT AE ds hones Sr
42 8112. py Ol .O.), 201-88. BRUB EG gOlag az
46 9 412-2 §6).9.° 8) 20) O66 Visi e roe
50 BO" NDZ CaSO: CRU 20) 248 29 OUT tO

4.


OOOO OOWOOOMOWO OOO reeeesnnnnane]


acts
mH


OF ABER OULFOLG Yai, 2 yes


: A Te AL Bea: B
Of Houfes Sass for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes, by}
double Horary ‘Times. |


Sol in Virgo.


ee


Time 10 11 | 42. |Afeendant 2 5


A. R. |from Noon.|Houfe. |Houfe. |Houfe. m, Houfe.jHoufe. |
Dee) Fil” 2M. m |DeMiDaM!| D. M. [D*tMiDwM


1e2 06) 30 SOL A Oe hin Balt? ~ Se 12 44/20 15 :
Draw LO ope 2), “agree. 17 (igs ok Ihs Sein Sas
154 0) 10 16 2,13 4227 21 14 49 {14 17 ||
oa WA enemy ae Be} 4 3527 O47 ES 29 11S 1o ||
155 54) 10 24 4 |}5 27/28 32) 16 9 15 9 ||
BRO Cog sO.) 27 cr O° RgI2Z9* P76. 4 49°16 9
167 48| 10.“ oF OS ope ROM OIL 7 ae 417 10 |
168 45] 10 Be My 8 3,0 46 18 g {18 11
$e0) 40) 20.20 Bi Ot Meat Ta por V8 Sadi 5 a
160 37) 19 42 9 |9 46-2 14) 19° 27 |19 ae
HOt 23). FO. 46 LO WLON TSS 2 RS 20 Vi Gei20 om12 |
£6299) TO < 50 LU or a Aa! Ovi O18 80.) 48 407 13 |]
163 25| tO 54 LQ 4T2 20) 4.) 26h 21 .. 26122" 14
LO4 @ijFO. > 27 PoueM Ce yesT Ol 5) A Onsen te Sag ps
105 std. 25) 2 PARES) SG: UA h 2 2 Aa ook ee 16
16642) #1 =< 5 Ig (14 55/6 37/23 24 [24 18 |]
cg peas eB 9 6 UI Wg hg mien ae ae Ray Ba 19 |f
POG 2 3-41. 1g D7 O10 e010 4 %4) 8442 126 7 g2t |i
168 sg) 11 16 LOE A ROO aN Se 112 POF JB cae
ti169 54/11 20 19 |18 71g 30) 26 2427 26 |
WO 40| it) 24 SONI. AOL a2 26 | 4 1280! soo? Boil
71 45/11 27 | 21. 419 5710 55, 27 22 129 34. ||
103 Boe UL ae Ber WO AS 11 9 3oh 28): 2.) Ole 92118 * 34.
L723 ah l ee SF 2dee Aa eek Bre 4a) 1 ro) har fi]
14. BOL tly age 24 12% 2813.5), 20. 20°) 2! 14/14 as) |
hy Cee be ge 2a Ie SO aa BO cok, 3 Gike < eal il
176 20) 11,545 26 “N24 Bie aor 0 £397) 9. 6886s 36H
Spas) Ii hg 29 Navan agate dt teed TON AA RUS © Bhi
Preto x1. 153 Sore aan nap 2). diel” eh dna ee Bi
rom srt 56 29.20 49816)" 9A 2 39°). 6)' gtido--t4
180..o| 120 BO. B87 2807 Ot) Bs 10°17 4.32121 .28
ee ———


186


iD. M.


180 oO
180
i384
1182


AN


A


Rive OOS TiR AvTat OoN


OP) As ByelirE |
| Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes, by


double Horary Times.


Sol in Libra.


Pe ae


Time 10 11 12 |Afcendant| 2 3
WA. R. |from Noon.|/Houfe. |Houfe. |Houfe. it Houfe.| Houfe
H. M., = IDe«MDmM DD. M. |DeMDsM
sees iy ee ee aoe
2 dO 0 427, 28117 . 21). 8-191) .9- “golbe “fot
Rep 1° 428 818 4b 3 gg 8 Balag gy
12) oye) 2 \29 818 46 4 40.) 9 22/93 34
AB TLia | 633) 290 SOMO 20), 5 390 TO meraieA AG
eS oe 4. {om4s5i20 1 6 ?2|11 12\956 48
121g bh Lo BH20 eu Sal 6 4g ire. | Rigo aes
Loy 132 NON OUR RVR: iWin) an ee Malai tr
12 e220 Tod 3a 1B)22 202 8k gata aa ae
P2520 B47 21e8 Wha 8 CA Gg aie OX 25
12 33 9 [4 52/23 47, 9 28 15 53/1 35
TZ C4 10 | 5 41124 31) 10 10 16 sil2 4s
12 40 22016 sae} 15) 19. 52 117 50137 55
PQ Ab AD 4 We EOS SOT) Ba NTS kOe oe
122288 13428 8/26 42| 12 181 0* (en 6) OTs
PQ ed 14 | 8 5727 26.12 59 |20 53) 7 98
12 BA ad 5 che 40,28 10] 13 43 |21 56) 8 4o
penis 0% 16 {10 35)28 53) 14 26 123 of 9. o2
19 ku 8 17 |1¥ 2429 37/15 10 lage sty 4
134.6 LOciT 131 0 4 20] 16 5A 12ST Ukg Oae
13-00 A918 Ap ly Al 18 (30.1264 18ite Be
13° 14 PR eS RBM OR vip tea Lexa ba Miers, 91,5 43
13 18 21 (14 41/2 32/18 8 l28 ari 66
Ton er 22 i115 30 3 1618 54 |29 (AS ae
es RON 23 416 Wear Gie say 19.39 | 05518 24
£20529 24. |17. Ol Ae S46 20 26 ho 619 39
13in23 25 17 C8 8hNS Saat Mae oe 1720 54
19° 26 26°18 48 6 16) 22. 1} 4 20201 ©
13 40 OTe 9! 37) Ua eee A Ne ee OG
ee 2804120 3.26) 7 46, 23 37} 6 56\24 42
Ls cones 29812 1.4168 32, 24 26] 8° Joes 54
es 38°. 22 O19 18 25 I519 a2slar 13
A


|


Time


(From Noon. !


52
55
ae


A


PMAVB OL &
Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 92 Minutes,


by double Horary Times.


Po | Sir 1) ve


Sol in Scorpio.


Houfe. | Houfe. iHoufe.


NOY SO! GOST. Chic cs US) Ss


Aféendant


2
Houfe
Q 25
10 42
eee O


ay
28 30]
29 40 |


UM

Ba): 42
14 e)
LES Vy
S08) or
Zer 58
Lge 14
201,20
21 48 |]
Bo Ol


188 A -N-) BLOLSUUS aT RO AAT. FO N


—


ty a me As as E
Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes,
by double Horary Times.


_——_..


Sol in Sagittarius.


Time 10 i 12 (Afcendant


2
.R. |From Noon.|Houfe. |Houfe. |Houfe. w _|Houfe. Scute: ;
WMe iby. M. # IDtMDwM D. M..IDxM'DsM

2 3 ASh 1-5. ST O18 9 Bh 5 923) 27 10 126 AEs fe)
238 51, 1555 A 9. -4h0O 24 28 37 27 51) a. 16
* H239 54) 16 fe) 2 120 < 01.7 126). .0% 6 |g9 38) 8 32
[1240 57) 16 4 3 |20 56) 8 29 1 37 liv 2619 48
H242 o| 16 3 Ae NAL RAY QB) 6g) HT 4 2 GN Rs ot
1243 31 16 12 & 1122 ABiNO ep4] 4 48 bas alia 20
244 6) 16, 416 6 lay Adit 38! 6 2746 swbli gy 36
45: Ob 16, em 7:24 mie -we) 8 18 b8 A6l1g.- go
1124613} 16 26 8 fas 238103 47] 19. §2 [40 Qalt6.- 45
1247.17, 16 29 9 (20 35114 53) It 40 |12 27117 go
1248 21| 16 © 33 10 [27 33|16 O13 $0 faq 16118. - 34:
H24.9° 25) 1H... 38 If 29 (3007 8} ko 20 46 41g » 48
1250 29, 16 42 2 129 @ONS a3 1% 19 Wy saiawe ay,
254. 99 316. a6 13 jw 30119 28/19 18 jig 3722 13
252 35) 16 9 on 14 2 CGO 39] 2h FO tl 2 One 215
3 ASbO, veg 15 2. OM 257) 29, 90 199 nlegin 96
254.47, 106 59 |. 16 | 3 28/03 4) 25 32 [og 4805 47
256; can 47 4 17, | 4 29/24 19] 27 44 |26 31/26 57
256. 57) 17 8 18, | 5 gos 36 28 58 je8 s4le8 ~8
258 2)17 dteh 19 | 6 41/26 56] 2x17 I29 57|29 19
259. 749, 26 20;,b7 33/28 44) 4 38 la.8 39|0m: 30
B60. 12). (Be 21, 8 399 g4 7 Obs ge) tec 4a
BOly) 17h a7). ag 22; 19. CGO gh) Oe 24 5 sl go ea
262 22-47 36 23; |49 89h 2 - 27) 186 52.06 38h 40 a
BOS 27.49. $4 4: 2: 142 gales gol tae "BB 18. a5) gh- ro
264-33) 175 98 25. |12 <45) 5-21 16 59 |.9 51) 62. 19.
$05 38) 49% BS 26 113 4316 27| 19. 30 41 27 Teg
266 43117. 47 27. |14 $27 53)-22 5 \4g 2 8. 34
207 48) 17 st | 28. 115 571.9 20] 24. 39 lng 3619 40
208 841.17. 6 29 |17 2/10 49] 27 20 |16 910 46
2790 «o} 18 ° 389 118 8lr2 gl gol oO tz «1411 54
A


OF ASTROLOGY. 189


4. jaw BOL B


Of Houfescalculated for the Latitude of 1 Degrees 32 Minutes, by]
double Horary Times.


Sol in Capricorn.


11 i2 |Afcendant 2


Time PON: 3
A. R. |from Noon.'Honfe. |Houfe. |Houfe. y Houfe.|Houfe
Bom. th. ML w |DeMD#«M)|D. M. (DsM|\DuM
Sen tieaeim chiaic Ges ak oe fh he
270 oO} 18 O O 118 812 19 ON On ug: Atta ee
271 6) 18 § eee aa 9 CeO Ie! 37 719 - Toln 2: 66
272 12| 18 9 DIO NO Re PO AOL BO ” OOin4g:- '\S
273 F7| 28-13 Piiig @ ROLE a 8 KORA Sai ty Ain ES ya aaa | Mae,
Es a2) ho” P17 Aa yao (948 eo) 10%) 2901235" 9011013
275 27, 18 32 5 |23- 4220 8/13 2 24 5417 17
276-331 18 ~ 26 OP ie. port 45) rs t97) a6) Ta | 20
277 381 18 go 7 \25 59123 22) 18 7 \27 4ij19 22
278 Ay 18 4 Bi l27 , 9l2 0) 20.085" 20 alge toe
27g 481 18 © 39 Oras hee 6 49/522.) OF m. 26LaT ya
280 53} 18 844 SOnIAQ *-eoleoy. 201.25 020 bot. A Olean. 2g
281 58} 18 48 Pett RO sar MNO POG 2) Be AS ROL eles. eS.
Boe iB. 4 go 12 1 eget 46 FO. | OF 2 a1e4 9g
284 Bus ° 97 PA tol mon Ash oH IO Te! oe. Sy
28% 123F g i Cae SPOS h EOl 4 OT 116 eAI2 Oo. Oe
286 17! 19 5 Perea 0 Fe GOR) 1) 8.0) Ol ag’ ag
287 22| 19 9 LO Organs .30r" 8. 36. 19 20/28 33
e808 2719) 14 | BT 7 ABI 85) 0 43, 110 31/29 32
289 31| 19 18 00) M8Avgoit2 \ t2l 12 .42'11 4riogs 30
290 35 ie) ip 19 10 12 13 59 14 40 ha 50) 1 2
13 582 27
Bo2 431 19 33 Be ie er ah tee OCS. |g 25. |


300 6| 20 Q Bo J21 wear Ip) 29 3 \22. Bald _. 2
301 9/20 «'5 | 29 |22 4glr “57) 1123 123° 35]10 59
posses. 9 Go. leg Pag S44) 2.50 lag 36 '5 5


190


NES LS RS ats


AN


Th) Bees TER: Auer wea uN


| A
| Of Houfes. calculated for the Latitude of ¢1 Degrees 32 Minutes, by
i double Horary Times.
Sol in Aquaries.
H Time 10 11 12 |Afcendant) 2 24
A. R. from Noon.|Houfe.|Houfe, |Houfe.| a  |Houte./Houtfe. |
(D.M.| A.M. | = |D=MID*M| D. M. DuMD= MI
15 PASS 0) Raed oie 6° 124. 0 2 AT 2 4 $024 BOTT aect
hapa 14)" Zo \.13 1 deg I PlOe Ol A PA oS AOS oie
1304 16) 20 17 2 125 341.7. 11) § 87 (26 35113 451
1305 18) 20 a1 3 lo gt Bi eb) 6. eo le7 aan aol
306 20] 20 26 4 .j29°) 8l10...40) 8477) 28 glee. -golk
11307 22) 20 29 SCOR G22 2h: 2930120 OMRON 2b)
308 24) 20 34 6 | 1 43)14 10; 10 49 jos 24117 19)
1309 2.61120... 48 VR ARKHCE ey ee nay et fev ieltees)
11310 26} 20 42 8 4 Oy way? 1148 ota na
oi, Boe 20Ly AG Ql 5 B79) 22h 14 .e4 2 Ma eo el!
QE 2 20 44 eG LO 0) el al Te ean a ee: ace
324 20 20ling 127.18 1 9lg2 40] O° 24a a eae ae)
ISt4 29) "21 58 12. |. 9. aaled: O94) do 40.) 5 paee 2a
HQts  2Ul Von Be 13, \10:, 4006 20 ig O° a ee. aa)
320 200020 56.) Aas Oa 381 10) ab 7 | ona, uae
HII) 290221. 10 LR SAA? M2Hi20% 6 13) O0) SPO.) 10) oak aaa
t2@ SOQMee 2d (hig 16: |14 4208 37| 22 0]9 1826 5]
UG; or 14. 1s U7 tO Me 1 Onee 4d OO in Gis 66H
G20) 27.21 32 IB SIG. 8 Ag Oke Ogi eae aan
391,26) 21) 26 19 1185. $F & wat) 240 68 rt \ colee a8
W322) 251521 |) 30 20 |19 5516 40) 25 55 |12 4ola9 29
Reo SA 21s ka 216129. 212) Be 88) Boe ibd lt) Aogignt) oa
ng24. 23) 21) 128 22 N22) OO LO ae oe a eA TOA te
B25) Ciera 23) 120 4G Th 2 Oe ie >). Ol Seung
20. 20) Sry AR 24.125 Oita) (96) 207 mgOhlie Mea ol) cd
Bee, 10lu er. eG 25 126 20/13 5ojom@ 29 16 43] 3. 42
laze 30|.-21 <3 ZOU 27 Bye: OTS tL) 2a ai ee
ee Bs a 990423) 54116. 8el 2 1H a8 Sol es
Seon ts 225) 0 26 10% 12/17) 66003 > 5 [19 eo 131)
33159), 22. 8 | 29 |r 29\19 ~16 3 56.19, 50 7 «49
332° O22) 8) 30 (2 azizo’ 84) Araaee 44h 7 52


O FP A. SH MR L001. 0.1G! Y; rx


Bis ceo h hte ae cay Ee


Of Houfes calculated for the Latitude of 51 Degrees 32 Minutes,
by Goapts Horary Times.


Solin Pifces.


Time 10 II 12 2 3
A. R. |From Noon.) Houfe |Houfe. |"oufe. |Afcendant| Houle. | Houfe.|}
PTS PES IVE, x |IDrMDsM|D.sM.'DsMiDaM
332 6/22 88 Gamay 20, Sed eho 4a | aig |
333 3] 22 «12 1 74 38/21 50} 5 35 j21 41 | 8 43
334 0} 22 16 2 15 19 |23 5 23 |22 17 | 9 33
ays [22 6 ee 3 pia qe wake Po ga Don tO: x2 2
OL es yeh ale ee Obl PAWEL Oe att! 13
conten Fey a ate SG, Oe 42 AO IZA IL. US 12
= ela phic oa spate eng e cone gall eG cg yr: Pees olin (ie a 2
Ely keaby hi hee? Poul ae 9 abel Wy eds a 49 bees 22120 VeOt1s AE
OO VAt Sai a0 Ses eh |Oak 2 TAZ 45 14 SO
vias gh Gey Mean 9 pai W we. tact 6 adr ee Coomera LO
pate 3oi22 : 140 LOT Gg. (yasay SF ae a tb. Ss

3


aN
of

Oe ee ‘

OOO CONN ONS HCO NF BH OM DOWN


Bad iag) 22 60 at G32.) .3, 33] 18) 23)08 158 10 sz. i
343,25, 22 54 | 12 |17 45 | 4 39 7 29 42 17 46 |
344 21) 22 57 { 13 |18 57 | 5 54 jor25 18 35 |
845 17/23 1 14 j20 9 | 6 48 35} 1 9 19 25
DAD TAs 5 Ve metuie dy oo el AP iiadtes 2 Oy Et
347 8 23 8 107° .192,.92 | 8) 54 A ee TRO aa
348; 3} 23.12 | AZ (238 43) 9 56 44.| 319 [20 52
348 259h 29V. (26 18 |24 54 |10 58 26) 4. 2 |22 44 ||
349 54) 23 20 | 19 \26 § j11 59 9 | 4 46 |23 30 |]
350 49) 238 28 | 20 27 16 13 0 521 § 30 [24.19 |
Bil A Shy 29) 2 977 Zi--\29: a6) law 104 33|.6 14 J25 -8 |]
352)40|.23.> 91 22 G2 BO gor Cid SHO ire, | 6 58-ja5 158 |]
353095) 21. 3H 23) NOsd4 11 6 Oc) 2H og6)| 7.42 [26.47 7
354..30):29 298 S4ii 4, 1, hd 100; 88.1 225.9748 26 (27:36. |]
355 25) 23 42 | 25 | 3 2 |17 56) 23 18 | g 10 [28 26 |
356. 20) 28 (45 -| 26) i410 118 '52|.23, 59.1 9 54 J29 15 |
857 15} 23. 49 | 27 | 5 18 119 47 | 24 30 j10 38 jo ™ 4
348-10) 23 513 28 |6 26 |20 40 | 25 22 |11 22 |.0 53 |]
359 51 23. 56 | 29. |7 33 J21 34) 26 2 12 5'} 1.43
360 Ol 24 fe) 30 | 8 4v '2 27} 26 42 '12 49 | 2 33>
No. 10. KX It}


192 A NP IONOL CS JT ORGAAT 110 -N


It is no uncommon thing with many readers, and particularly thofe
not very converfant with figures, to pafs over all tables as intricate, or
difficult to underftand. Bat, fince no information can be obtained in the
practical part of this fcience without them, it is proper to caution all my
readers againft this much-miftaken notion ; for every perfon who can make
ufe of a Ready Reckoner, or Trader's Sure Guide, may with equal eafe un-
derftand all the tables calculated for this work.


The ufe of the Ephemeris, in fetting a figure, is to point out the places
of the planets at noon, whenever required. For this purpofe, we refer
to the given day of the month, in the firft column of the right-hand page,
and oppofite to it, in the fecond column, is the Sun’s place or longitude
that day at noon. So alfo, in the fame line of the fucceeding columns
through the whole table, are the places of the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, as fpecified at the top of each diftin@ co-
Jumn ; and thefe are the true places of the Sun, Moon, and planets,
every day throughout the year, precifely at twelve o’clock at noon.
Therefore, if the figure be erected before that time, the diurnal motion
of the planets muit be deducted in hours and minutes, in proportion to
the rate they move at per hour; but, if it, be erected after noon, then fo
many hours or minutes muft be added as will bring them to the precife
time of eretting the figure.


The twelve tables of Houfes are next to be referred to; and thefe are
calculated to fhew what degrees of each fign poffefs the cufps of the
twelve houfes of heaven when the figure is erected. They begin with
the Sun’s entrance into the fign Aries, and fhew his progrefs through
each degree of the twelve figns of the zodiac.


Now let it be required, by way of example, to ereCt a figure for Fri-
day, the 11th day of June, 1784, at 11 h. 24 min. A.M. that is, at
twenty-four minutes paft eleven o’clock in the morning. To do this, I
refer to the firft column of the right-hand page of the Ephemeris for —
June, and oppofite the 11th day of the month, in the fecond column,
which has ©’s longitude printed at the top, I find 21. 3. 27, with the
fign u prefixed at the fide of the firft range of figures. This indicates,
that the Sun, at twelve o’clock that day, is in twenty-one degrees three
minutes and twenty-feven feconds of Gemini; but the minutes and
feconds, when lefs than thirty, are rejected without fenfible error, and,
when more than thirty, have as many added as will make them up even
degrees. I therefore turn to the tables of houfes, and in the page enti-
tled Sol iz Gemini I look for the column that has the fign u at the
top, which is the third; I feek for 21 degrees, andin the column on

the


OF VAIS TR (O'L .o-GTY, 193


the left fide of it, entitled Time from noon, I find,even with 21 degrees,
gh. 21 min. The hours and minutes thus found are uniformly to be
added to the time or hour of the day when the figure is erected, un-
lefs it be precifely at noon, in which cafe, as we have before obferved,
the places of the Sun, planets, and figns, are to be fet down exatily as
they are found in the Ephemeris, and tables of houfes. But, the pre-
fent figure being erected juft thirty-fix minutes before twelve o’clock, I
am to add this time, reckoning from noon the preceding day, to the
above sh. 21 min. and from thefe two fums added together I fubtra&
twenty-four hours, and the remainder will give the degrees of each of the
twelve figns, as then pofited upon the cufps of the horofcope ; thus :


he) mins
Time anfwering to 21 degrees of u i 21
Time from noon the preceding day 28 24
Added together, make 28 45
Subtract a4. Oo
Remainder 4 45


I feck this remainder in the table of houfes entitled Sol in Gemini, in
the column of time from noon ; but, not finding 4. 45, 1 take the neareft
number to it, whichis 4. 46; and oppofite this number, in the next
column_on the right, I find 13 degrees of Gemini in the tenth houfe,
which is denoted by 10th houfe a, at the top of the column ; and there-
fore I place thirteen degrees of Gemini in the line or cufp of the tenth
houfe of the figure. This done, I referto the next column in rotation
to the right hand, and in the fame line with the twenty-one. degrees of
Gemini I find 20. 7, and, looking to the top of the column, find it to
be twenty degrees and feven minutes of the fign =, with 11 houfe over,
and therefore I place twenty degrees feven minutes of Cancer upon the
cufp of the eleventh houfe. I follow the. fame rule with the next co-
lumn, where I find 21. 48, and looking to the top find the fign a, 12
houie, and accordingly place twenty-one degrees thirty-eight minutes
of Leo upon the cufp of the twelfth houfe in the figure. When I refer
to the next column, where I find 17. 1, and at the top the word J4/cen-
dant with the fign m prefixed, which fignifies that feventeen degrees one
minute of Virgo occupy the firft houfe or Afcendant, which I place ac-
cordingly. I then refer to the next column, and even with the preced-
ing figures ftand 9. 15, when, looking up the column, I obferve the
fion + below m, and 2 houfe at the top, which fhews that nine degrees
fifteen minutes of Libra are to be placed on the culp of the fecond houfe.
This done, I refer to the laft column, and, even with the former num.

2 bers


194 A NST Urs TRAM RON


bers, I find 7. 48; and, looking up the column as before, I obferve the
fign m below «, and 3 houfe over, which indicates that feven degrees
forty-eight minutes of Scorpio are to be placed on the cufp of the third
houfe. Thus the fix oriental houfes, namely, the tenth, eleventh, twelfth,
firft, fecond, and third, are furnithed with the degrees of each fign then -
rifing upon them ; and the fix occidental houfes, being oppofite to the


former, are always furnifhed with the fame degrees and minutes of the
oppofite figns ; thus:


Houfes oppofite. Signs oppofite. -
4 10 oe &
fs 11 8 m me
pope reae 1 F
I 7 a) up
2 8 K ee
3 9 ™ x


So that the tenth houfe is oppofite to the fourth, and the fourth to |
the tenth ; the eleventh to the fifth, and the fifth to the eleventh ; and
fo through the whole; the ufe of which is, that, if on the cufp of the
tenth houfe you find the fign Aries, then on the cufp of the fourth houfe
you muft place the fign Libra ; and, whatever degree and minute of Aries
poffefies the cufp of the tenth houfe, the fame degree and minute of Li-
bra muft be placed on the cufp of the fourth houfe; and the fame rule
mutt be obferved with all the other houfes and figns, which is univerfal
and ever holds true. For example, in the prefent figure, we have placed
13 degrees of n on the cufp of the tenth houfe ; now ¢ being oppofite
to um, and the fourth houfe to the tenth, I therefore place 13 degrees of
¢# onthe cufp of the fourth houfe. Upon the cufp of the eleventh
houfe, 20 degrees 7 minutes of Cancer being already placed, and the
fifth houfe being oppofite to the eleventh, and ye oppofite =, I there-
fore put 20 degrees 7 minutes of w upon the cufp of the fifth houfe.
The cufp of the twelfth houfe being alfo occupied with 21 degrees 38
minutes of 2, I place 21 degrees 38 minutes of the oppofite fign «
upon the cufp of the fixth houfe, which is oppofite the twelfth. Upon
the cufp of the firft houfe, or afcendant, there is i7 degrees 1 minute of
m, and the feventh houfe being oppofite to the firft, and the fign % to
m, I accordingly place 17 degrees 1 minute of % upon the cufp or line
of the feventh houfe. Having alfo placed g degrees 15 minutes of =
upon the cufp of the fecond houfe, I place g degrees I5 minutes of the
oppofite fign v upon the cufp of theeighth houfe, which is oppofite to
the fecond. I then refer to the third houfe, upon the cufp of which are
placed 7 degrees 48 minutes of m; and the oppofite houle to this being


the


OF ASTROLOGY, 195


the ninth, and » the oppofite fign, I place 7 degrees 48 minutes of
Taurus upon the cufp of the ninth houfe 3 and thus the twelve houfes
are compleatly occupied with the twelve figns of the zodiac, with the de-
grees afcending, at the precife time of erecting the figure.


Having fo far fucceeded, the next thing is to place the Sun, Moon, and
planets in the figure, agreeable to their pofition at that time in the heavens,
and this is alfo to be done by the helpof the right-hand page of the Ephe-
metis. For inftance, I again refer to the 11th of June, and oppofite
to it, in the column of the ©’s longitude, I find him in 21 degrees 9
minutes and 27 feconds of Gemini that day at noon. But, as the figure is
erected thirty-fix minutes before noon, I note how far the Sunhas moved
from noon the preceding day, and find he has gone at the rate of fifty-
feven minutes, which gives a difference-of one minuteand twenty-feven
feconds for the time before noon, as follows:


h. min. fec.

Sun’s place at noon, June 11th Stipe 2 27
Deduct for 36 min. beforenoon o 1 27
Remains 21 2 fo)


Thus I find the Sun’s place at twenty-four minutes after eleveno’clock,
in 21 degrees 2 minutes of Gemini; which fign being then upon the cufp
of the tenth houfe, I therefore place the Sun in that houfe, clofe to the
fign, with thefe degrees and minutes, I then refer to the Ephemeris for
the Moon’s place, and in the column of her longitude, oppofite the 11th
day of the month, I find her in 5 degrees 46 minutes of y, atnoon; but,
to know her place thirty-fix minutes before, I note how much {fhe goes
in an hour, and find her motion to be 35 minutes; then I deduct 21 mi-
nutes for the time before noon, and find her true place to be in 5 hours
25 minutes of Aries, which I accordingly enter before the cufp of the
eighth houfe, clofe to that fign. Ithen refer to the Ephemeris for the
planet », and on the 11th of June I find him retrograde in 22 degrees
53 minutes of the fign 1, wherefore I place him under Capricorn, in the
fifth houfe, with an R prefixed, to denote that he is retrograde—I refer
to the Ephemeris in like manner for the planets Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercury, which I alfo enter in their proper places in the figure, viz.
Jupiter in 7 degrees 36 minutes of »%, Mars in 27 degrees 1 minute of
vs, Venusin 5 degrees 5 minutes of no, and Mercury retrograde, in 24
degrees 2 minutes of the fame fign.


The planets being thus entered, 1 next refer to the top of the fecond
page of the Ephemeris, for the column of the Moon’s node, which we
term the Dragon’s Head, and I find on the 7th day of the month it is

No. 10. Yy in


196 AN. DLL US$ TRAT&ON


in four degrees of Pifces; but, as it moves backward about three minutes
per day, I deduct eleven minutes, to bring it to the 11th of June, and
its place will then be in four degrees 8 minutes of Pifces; I therefore
enter it in the fixth houfe, under the ign x ; and, as the place of the
Dragon’s Tail is always oppofite to the Dragon’s Head, I place it in the
fame degrees of the oppofite fign, which in this figure falls in the twelfth
houfe, which is oppofite to the fixth.


The figure is now entirely compleated, except putting in the Part of
Fortune, which is the diftance of the Moon’s place fromthe Sun’s added
tothe afcendant. The mode of determining this has commonly been by
firft finding the true place of the Moon, then the true place of the Sun;
then fubtracting the Sun’s place from the Moon’s and adding to the re-
mainder the degrees of the afcendant; and this, if taken in the {phere of
the Moon, gives the place of the Part of Fortune. But, a much more
correct method having been adopted by the learned Placidus, we recom-
mend it in preference to any other; it is as follows: Firft note the fign
and degree on the afcendant, and enter with the fame fign and degree in
the table of oblique afcenfions calculated for this work, in the latitude
wherein you ere¢t your figure; and in the common angle of meeting you
will find the number required. Then enter the fame table with the de-
greeof the Sun, and fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the one from the
other, and the remainder will be the Sun’s diftance from the f afcendant.
Then take the Right Afcenfion of the Moon, and enter the table of the
Moon’s Right Afcenfion under the degrees of north or fouth latitude, as
fhe then happens to be; and, when the Moon’s Right Afcenfion is found,
fubtraét it from the Sun’s diftance from the Afcendant, and the remainder
will be the Right Afcenfion of the Part of Fortune, For example, in
the figure before us : 7 deg. min,

The fign m™ has 17 deg. 1 min. upon the Afcen-


dant, the oblique Afcenfion of which is 100) 33.
The oblique Afcenfion of the © (both being in
northern figns, nothing is added) is 47 43


Which being fubtracted from the other, remains 113 50 :


Then fubtract the Right Afcenfion of the Moon, 2 52
| Remains Lit 58


Which is the Right Afcenfion of the Part of Fortune. I refer for this
fum to the firft column of the preceding tables of houfes, under A. R.


t In this operation always obferve, that, if the fign afcending be fouthern, and the fign in
which the Sun is pofited be northern, then add the whole circle of the zodiac, or three hundred
and fixty degrees, of the northern fign; and vice ver/a, if anorthern fign afcend, and the Sun be
placed ina fouthern. }

which


Ort e ot R Ol. 076 Y. 197


which fignifies Right Afcenfion, and in the fourth table, or Sol in Can-
cer, I find 111 deg. 39 min. which is only nineteen minutes lefs ; and op-
pofite to this fum, in the third column of the table, ftands 20, with the
fign s at the top, and this denotes the Part of Fortune to be in 20 de-
greesof Cancer; but, as nineteen minutes were wanting to make up the
number, I allow one minute more, becaufe fifteen minutes on the equator
is equal to 1 minute of time; and hence the true place of the Part of For-
tune falls in 20 degres 1 minute of Cancer ; and I accordingly enter it be-
low that fignin the fcheme, which is now compleated, and ftands thus.


: On Friday, 11th of June, ith. }
d 24 min. A. M. or Forenoon,
. 1784. ;
‘ 603 x DP og 4 |
& hk ¢


This figure includes all that is required for the purpofe of judging
horary queftions, and the like; but, in nativities, and in the more imme-
diate concerns of life and death, regard muft be had to the fixed ftars,
according to their magnitude, influence, and pofitions near the afcendant
or itslord, near the Moon, or the other fignificators. And, becaufeit is
of importance to know their natures, qualities, and fignificators, I fhalk
fubjoin a table of the moft confiderable fixed ftars in the northern he-
mifphere, and then fhew how to collect fuch of them into the horofcope
as may relate to the fubject at any time under inveftigation.


A TABLE


198 AN ITELUS TRATION


A TABLE of the principal Fixep Stars near the Ecliptic, thewing
their true Longitude, Latitude, Magnitude, and Nature.


Her ‘Longitude Latitude,
D . M . M.


<4
fo
oo
Z
5)
ot
&
=
oO


Names of the Frxep Stars.
‘South End of the Tail of the W hale
The Star inthe Wing of Pegafus
The Head of Andromeda

W hale’s Belly

t | The Girdle of Andromeda

|| Bright Star in the Head of the Ram
1 Che left Foot of Andromeda

[!The Bright Star in the Jaw of the Whale
I The Head of Algol Medufa

1) The Pleiades

hi} The middle Star of the Seven

#/Oculus Taurus

| Aldebaran

} Rigel

{|The former Shoulder of Orion

She Goat:

The former Star in Orion’s Belt

The middle Star in Orion’s Belt

The higheft Star in the Head of Orion

1} The Star in the Horn of the Bull

fT he following Shoulder of Orion
1|Propus

The right Shoulder of Auriga

f| Che Bright Foot of Gemini

1|Caftor Apollo

Pollux Hercules

The fmaller Dog Star

Praefepe

North Affellus

South Affellus

1\Cor Leonis, Regulus

Heart of Hydra

Vindemiatrix

The Back of the Lion

The Tail of the Lion

Crater, or the Bottom of the Pitcher
Arcturus

‘|The Virgin’s Spike, Arifta

The South Balance

1) The North Balance

The left Hand of Ophinchus

Higher Star in the Forehead of the Scorpion
The left Knee of Ophinchus ;
Cor Scorpio

|The Scorpion’s Heart, Antares

The right Knee of Ophinchus

The Bright Star of the Vulture

The Mouth of Pegafus

The Tail of the Goat

Marchab
Fomahaut
Scheat Pegafi


wa


KKAAUUCHHeHHS SIP PSI SSODOOCOH AS A EHH Renee Haacanacs333s|s


- |

a Poy
rH WS a

Os +O 400


re Be hog NRWkRNNN
Bes
wuR


3 40


ey


‘ O3 40
foc 408 HEI 40 OS FP IN 10 1S! OS 40 Os tee 40 10 40 OOws swe cw HTH


is)
ao


WS WM DAHKCABIBE TORO AH oT BWI BK GO PP Paap
Oy


wKZZZAZZZZnZZZoZnZZrnaZZnZnunnnwnZ nnnwnZaZnZa7zZnzZu¥y
tO OH OS


PH NWH HWE NW DOH DR ERE NO HAR ADH RADA NWANRNADA
ys


Ce eee


ZnZnZZaZun


st


Ou pAgS BuO) 1..0..G5 ¥: 199


The firft column contains the names of the ftars ; the fecond column
fhews their longitude, or in what degree and minute of the twelve figns
they are fituated ; the third column fhews the degree and minuteof their *
latitude, either north or fouth, which is denoted by the letters N.S.
The fourth column denotes their magnitude ; and the fifth fhews their
natural quality ; for example-: the ftar in the wing of Pegafus is in fix
degrees eleven minutes of Aries ; has twelve degrees thirty-five minutes
north latitude, is of the fecond magnitude, and participates of the nature
and quality of Mars and Mercury. The fixed ftars may be found and
diftinguifhed in the heavens by their conjunctions with the Moon, or by
obferving their order from any given point in the heavens ; thus, begin
with the Pleiades, vulgarly called the /even frars, and next to them in
order, but fomewhat lower, is a large red {tar called Aldebaran, or the
fouth eye of the Bu//; next follows Orion’s Belt or Girdle, which are three
ftars in a rank, thus, ***, and are vulgarly called the Yard or Ell.
Next follows a ftar called the Great Dog, which is a large bright ftar,
fomewhat lower than the Girdle of Orion. The next is called the head
of Gemini, and is about the height of the Seven ftars; there are two to-
gether appear thus, «*; the largeft of the two is the ftar here nomi-
nated. The next, which follows in order, is called South Afellus, no
great ftar, but of ared colour ; there are two of them, near together and
alike, and ftand or appear thus, **; the loweft of the two is the far
here meant. Next in order follows a ftar called the Head of Hydra,
lower than Affellus, and of a bright white colour. Then follows a ftar
in the flank of the Lion, very bright, and about the height of the Se-
ven Stars. Next tothat the Virgin's Gird/e, a bright ftar, and lower
than the flank of the Lion. . And next follows a curious ftar called the
Virgin's Spike, very large and bright; it is a ftar of the firft mag-
nitude, and appears alittle lower, or more foutherly, than the Virgin’s
Girdle. Next in order follows the ftar called 4réfurus, a very remarka-
ble bright red coloured ftar, about the latitude of the Pleiades. Then
follows the ftar of the Crown, large and bright, and higher than Arétu-
rus. Then the Right Shoulder of Hercules, of a pale white colour, near
the altitude of the Seven Stars. Then follows the head of Opdsincus of
a pale white colour, and fomewhat fouthward of Hercules. Then ap=-
pears a ftarunder the armpit of Sagzttary, a bright ftar, but very low.
Next, the bright ftar of the Vu/ture, large, and lowerthan the Seven Stars,
The next ftar is called the left fhoulder of the Water-bearer; about the
altitude of Orion’s Girdle, ofa pale white colour. The next in order is
the ftar called Marchad, being a ftar of a bright colour, a little lower than
the Seven Stars, but much bigger. Then follows the Southern ftar of
the Whale’s Tai]; this ftar is of a pale colour, and about, the height of
the Sun the fhorteftday. Then follows a ftar called the Girdle of 4n-
. No, to. Vie? 4 dromeda,


200 AN ILLUSTRA TLON


dromeda, a bright glittering far, and much higherthan the Pleiades,
Laftly, there is the bright ftar of the Ram, of a red colour, and lower
than the Seven Stars. Thofe that would be curious in thefe {peculations
fhould ftudy the celeftial globe, and learn to be very expert in the ufe of
it, which is mofl eafily attained, and alfo very entertaining. .


Now, to know whether any of the fixed ftars fall into the figure erect-»
ed, I note the fign and degree upon the cufps of the houfes, and ‘then exa-
mine the fecond column of the foregoing table of fixed ftars, and, if I find
either of them afcending, or defcending within five degrees of the figns
upon the cufps of the feveral houfes, they are then to be entered in the
fame manner as the planets, and their qualities and influences are to be
duly weighed, according to the nature of whatever planet they corref-
pond with, which is fhewn in the laf{ column of the table. In the fore-
going figure of the heavens, I obferve feventeen degrees one minute of m:
upon the afcendant ; then, looking down the twelve figns in order in the -
fecond column of fixed ftars, I find ™18. 32, and even withit, in the firft
column, the tail of the Lion, which fhews that this ftar is alfo afcend-
ing within five degrees of the cufp of the firft houfe, or afcendant ; and
thereforeI placeit in the firft houfe of the figure, underthe fign m. I then
examine the other cufps according to their rotation, and, on the cufpof
the fourth houfe, I find t.13. 0, and, in the table of fixed ftars, I find
# 14. §5. and even with it the Right Knee of Ophincus, which
fhews that this ftar is within two degrees of the cufp of the fourth
houfe, in which I accordingly placeit. On the cufp of the fixth houfe
I fee « 21. 38, and inthe table of fixed ftars I-find Marchab Pegafi in
wm 20.263 I therefore place it under the fign = in the fixth houfe of the
figure. Upon the cufp of the eighth houfe in the figure is v g. 16,
and in the table of fixed ftars I find the head of Andromeda in ¥ 11. 20,
I therefore place it juft within the cufp of the eighth houfe. Upon the
medium ceeli, I find m 13. 0, andin the table I find the eminent fixed
ftar Rigel, of the firft magnitude, in n 13. 56; I therefore place him in
the mid-heaven. Upon the cufp of the eleventh ftands = 20.7, and
in the table I find the itar Pollux in o 20.12, which I enter within the
cufp of the eleventh houfe. Uponthe cufp of the twelfth is 9 21. 38,
and in the tableI find the flar Hydrain 9 24. 12, and therefore I enter
him in twenty-four degrees of Leo in the twelfth houfe; and thus I have
collected the pofitions of all the planets and eminent fixed ftars, as they
ftoodin the heavens at twenty-four minutes paft eleven o’clock, on Fri-
day the eleventh of sane, 1784. As the fixed ftars move on their lon-
gitude at the rate of fifty feconds per year, and of courfe vary in their po-
fition, I have for this reafon calculated a table, by which their fituation
may be known at apy given time, pait or to come.


TABLE,


| OOF “AS TR O11 0 Gi. 201
TABLE, fhewing the Placesof the Fixep Srars, at any Time, paft


or to come,


Years, |\degrees| Min. | Sec. ; Years. degrees Min..| Sec.
1 fo) fo) 50 4 40 fo) 33 20
2 fe. I AD av 50 fe) 41 40
3 fo) 2 30. |, 60 ° 50 fe)
4 ° 3 20 | 70 ° 58 20
5 fe) 4 10 80 1 6 40
6 fe) 5 O go I 15 fo)
a fe) 5 50 100 1 a 20
8 fe) 6 40 200 2 46 40
9 ° 9 30 |} 300 3 10 °
10 ° 8 20 | 400 5 33 20

20 fe) 16 4.0 500 6 56 40
go fe) 25 O81 "600 8 19 Oo


Now, fuppofe it were required to know the fituation of A/debaran twenty
years ago ; I refer to the table of fixed ftars, and find him in fix degrees
forty-five minutes of Gemini, inthis prefent year ; I then enter the co-
Inmn of years in the above table, at No. 20, and even with. it in the fol-


lowing columns ftand 0. 16.40, which fhews that Aldebaran has moved —


fixteen minutes and forty feconds in twenty years ; and, this fum being
deducted from fix degrees forty-five minutes, his prefent place in Gemi-
ni, fhews that twenty years ago he was pofited in fixdegrees eighteen mi-
nutes andtwenty feconds of this fign. This rule will hold good for any
other ftar, or for any number of years; only obferving, that, if it be re-
quired to know the ftar’s place twenty years hence, then the fixteen minutes
and forty feconds muft be added; and fo in proportion for any other length
of time. But, fince the afpects of the planets at the time of erecting the
figure conftitute the principal -index of our judgment, I examine their
pofition in this refpect, and note them down under the title of the figure,
where they ftand as a conftant guide to our judgment on the matter under
confideration. For inftance, I examine the figure above projected, and
in the mid-heaven I| find the Sun in twenty-one degrees two minutes of
Gemini, and Mercury in twenty-four degrees two minutes of the fame
fign, applying by his retrograde motion fo a partile conjunction with the
Sun, which I note thus, 6 © §. Examining the other planets, I find
Venus in five degrees five minutes of Gemini, and the Moon in five de-


grees twenty-five minutes of Aries; I then reckon from five degrees of Aries.


to five degrees of Taurus is thirty degrees ; and from five degrees of Tau-
rus to five degrees of Gemini is thirty degrees more; thefe, amounting to
fixty degrees, conftitute a partile fextile afpect, which I thus note,

#De.


202 AN: *]°L‘E US T R A-T+ HOON


‘x >» ¢. ThenI obferve Jupiter in feven degrees thirty-fix minutes of
Pifces, and Venus in five degrees five minutes of Gemini; and, their dif-
tance from each other being reckoned as before, they are found to be near
eighty-cight degrees apart ; and, as ninety degrees make a quartile, they
are now within each other’s orbs, and are confequently in a platic o
applying to a partile afpect, becaufe Venus is a {wifter planet than Jupi-
ter; wherefore I note down this afpectt o ¢ 4. ThenI find Mars in
twenty-feven degrees one minute of Cancer, and Saturn retrograde in
twenty-two degrees fifty-three minutes of Capricorn ; which, being op-
polite figns, and the planet’s degrees within each other’s orbs, conftitute
a platic oppofition, which I note thus,, 8b ¢. Thefe being all
the afpects, I range them together under the title of the figure thus,
6O¥x DF aoReUSkh Ss. This figure is erected in the hour of
Mars, as may be feen by referring to the table of planetary hours ; I there-
fore fignify it thus, ¢ hor. and, the latitude under which the figure is
erected being that of London, I enter 51° 32’, that is, fifty-one degrees
thirty-two minutes north latitude. Eut, as no figure can be ereéted by
the foregoing tables of houfes for any other latitude than that of London,
without being rectified by the pofitions of the poles, I here fubjoin a
table of the poles pofitions for the eleventh, third, twelfth, and fecond,
houfes, whereby a figure may be erected for any latitude from thirty to
fixty degrees.


TABLE of the Circles of Pofitions of the eleventh, third, twelfth, and
fecond, Houfes, from thirty-one to fixty degrees of Latitude.


Afcen-] 11& 3 tm 6&2 |lAfcen-] 11 & 3 12 & 2
dant! Houfes Houfes dant.! Houfes Houfes


O F p AcSatyRe0: OQ: GLY; - 203
Suppofe it were required to find the poles elevation of the éleventh,
third, twelfth, and fecond, houles for the latitude of fifty-three degrees, :
IT enter the table at No, 53, under the title afcendant, and right againtt
itI find under the eleventh afd. third houfes twenty-four degrees thirty
minutes, which is the poles elevation; and under the twelfth and fecond
houfes:l: find forty-two degrees twenty-fix minutes, which. is the poles
elevation for, the twelfth and fecond houfes; and in this manner they may
be found for any others latitude. 1


Now, by knowing the poles elevation for thefe houfes, a figure of the
heavens may beere¢ted for the nativity of any perfon born within thirty-
one to fixty degrees of latitude. For example, fuppofe a perfon born
in fifty-three degrees, of latitude, on the firft of June, 1784, at thirty-
fix minutes paft five o’clock in the afternoon, what would be the de-
grees of each fign upon the cufps of the twelve houfés? to know this,
turn to the Ephemeris for the Sun’s place on the firft of June, and it
will be found in eleven degrees thirty minutes of Gemini; then refer to
the, table of houfes for the Sun in Gemini, and in the column under
ioth-houfe,:I look down for 11.30, but, finding no minutes, I look into
the column jupon -the left hand, under time from noon, where I find”
4h, 38 min. the next arch of time being 4h. 42 minutes, I divide
the difference for the thirty minutes, which makes the true time 4 h, go
min. _TothisI add 5h. 36 min. the time after noon, which added to-
gether make 10°h. 16 min. which I feck in the column of time from
noon, and in the next column on the.right hand I find the figure 2,
with 10 houfe ™ at the top, which denotes that two degrees of Virgo
are at that time upon the cufp of the tenth houfe. Then, in order to
know what figns poffefs the other houfes, I look into the firft column of
the table, with A. R. at the top, which fignifies the right afcenfion of
time, and even with the above number I find 154.0, which declares that
to be the right afcenfion of the mid-heaven. To thefe 154 degrees [
add 30, which miake together 184; then I refer to the above table for
poles pofition in fifty-three degrees, and even therewith ftand 24. go.
which is the pole of the eleventh honfe. I then refer to the table of
oblique afcenfions, at the end of this work, for twenty-five degrees of la-
titude, and feek the number 184, which I find in the colamn under Li-
bra, and12 min. over; then I lookinto the firftcolumn of degrees in this
_ table, and even to 184 ftand 4; but thefe twelve minutes being too
much, I equate for them by the Sexagenary tables, placed alfo at the end
of this work, by whichI find that three degrees forty-three minutes of
Libra are to be placed onthecufpoftheeleventh houfe. ThenJadd thirty
‘degrees to the above 184, for the twelfth houle, which make 214. I re-

No. 10. 3A 7 | fer


204 A. N. tale be lenUwes TRAST dt. Oo N


fer to the above table of poles pofitions in the latitude of fifty-three de-
grees for the pole of the twelfth houfe, which I find to be 42. 263 I re-
ject the 26, and in the table of oblique afcenfions for lat. 42 I feek 214
which I find under the column of Libra; and, looking into the firft co-~
lumn of degrees, I find 27 ; but, equating by the Sexagenary table for the
odd minutes, it gives twenty-fix degrees thirty-one minutes of Libra for
the cufp of the twelfth houfe. Then, forthe firft houfe or afcendant,
Iadd tothe above 214 thirty degrees more, which make 244, and this
fum I feek in the above table under the pole or latitude of birth, which
is fifty-three degrees ; I turn to the table of oblique afcenfions for fifty-
three degrees, which I find in the column under Scorpio, and even with
itin the fitft column of degrees I find 14, which fhews that fourteen
degrees of Scorpio are on the cufp of the afcendant. I then bring down
the above 244, adding thirty degrees more for the fecond houfe, and thefe
make 274; I then refer to the above table of poles pofition for lat. 53,
and even with it in the column under fecond houfelI find 42. 26.—I re-
ject the 26 as before, and refer to the tables of oblique afcenfions for
forty-two degrees of latitude, where I feek No. 274, and find it in. the
column under Sagittarius; and even with it inthe firft column of de-
grees I find 14, which directs fourteen degrees of Sagittarius to be placed
on the cufp of the fecond houfe. ‘Then for the third houfe I add thirty
degrees more to the above { 274, which makes together 304 ; I then refer
for the pole’s pofition of the third houfe in the above table, and find even
with lat. 53 the number 24. 42; but, as thefe minutes exceed thirty, I
refer to the table of oblique afcenfions for twenty-five degrees, where I
feck 304, which I find in the column under Capricorn, and even with it,
in the firft column of degrees, I find 21; but, by equating as before for
the odd minutes in the Sexagenary tables, I find that twenty-one degrees
twenty-nine minutes of Capricorn are upon the cufp of the third houfe.
Thus the fix oriental houfes are furnifhed with the proper degrees of each
fign rifing upon them at the time required, and ftand thus:


Deg. — Min.


On the cufp of the roth houfe m 2 °
11th houfe Fa 343
12th houfe si 26064 OE

Afcendant, or 1{t houfe m 14 re)
2d houfe £4 °
3d houfe UBL! 29


t Note, that as often as thefe additions of 30 for each progreffive fign exceed 360, which is the
whole number of degrees in the circle of the Zodiac, then the circle or 360 muft be fubtraéted,
and the remainder will be the number required of the tables of oblique afcenfions.


And


Of A SYD RO 0 Gayl 205


And by thefe, the fix occidental houfes are to be furnithed in the fame
manner, as before directed, with the oppofite figns; but for the fake of
plainnefs I will again ftate them.


mp x 2 fe)

: rab Fas

x ° 2 3t

oppote at is { as 4
t m 14 Oo

Be (. 21 29


In this plain, eafy, and obvious, manner, may the fituation of the
heavens be found for any latitude whatever. But, to make it more eafy,
itis neceflary to explain what we mean by the poles pofitions, and the
equations of time. If we imagine twelve great circles, one of which is
the meridian of any given place, to interfect each other in the two. poles
of theearth, and to cut the equator in every fifteenth degree, they will be
divided by the poles into twenty-four femicircles, which divide the equator
into twenty-four equal parts ; and as the earth turns on its axis, the planes
of thefe femicircles come fucceflively after one another every hour to the
fun. And, as in an hour of time there is a revolution of fifteen degrees
of the equator, in a minute of time there will be a revolution of fifteen
minutes of the equator, and in a fecond of time a revolution of fifteen
feconds. Thus, to every place fifteen degrees eaftward from any given
meridian, it is noon an hour fooner than on that meridian, becaufe their
meridian comes tothe Sun an hour fooner. And to all places fifteen de-
grees weftward, it isan hour later, becaufe their meridian comes an hour
later tothe Sun; and fo on, every fifteen degrees of motion caufing an
hour’s difference of time. Therefore they, who have noon an hour later
than we, have their meridian, that is, their longitude, fifteen degrees
weftward from us; and they, who have noon an hour fooner than we,
have their meridian or longitude fifteen degrees eaftward from ours, and
fo, for-every hour’s difference of time, fifteen degrees difference of longi-
tude. And, as we fhall have frequent occafion to equate the motions of
the equator with the hours and minutes of time, I here fubjoin two ta-
bles for that purpofe.


* © OG: TABLES


206 AN. 2 BE US Tr PR &-TUd OWN


TABLES for converting mean folar Time into Degrees and Parts of the
terreftial Equator; a and alfo for converting Degrees and Parts: of tite
Equator into mean folar Time.


\ ~ Tasxe I. For converting Time into Seen Gs For conver ting ‘Degrees and Parts Py
Degrees.and Parts of the Equator of the Equator into Time.
sk 3 | rail * ' & * om) {
ely S29 S15 (2 S19 |F §

S Ete ee gee dS | |S
Tia (MIS alm % | y= nei=a o mae
aa el a ee
ned ie-) Ar oh. ar ser bir. sa ic sla re) a

7\8 Bo|8 ES 1% B28 8 5
BTS) 1) 015132 | a vggll To}:07) 4132 Biya 7°|.4 \40
2} 391. 2] © 3032 | 8 o| 2|)0 832} 2 8.8} 5 |20
3| 451 3 | © 45133 | 8 rg] 3 | o 12133 | 2 12] 99} O | ©
4: Co] 4} 1 034 | 8 30) 4 ifaw 16) 34) 2 16|40° 6 '40
fo 57515 Vt 15/35} Bi 452 5a} @ 1 20/3504 12 2OULTOL 7. j20
1b 6) 90 6 | 1 30136 (79 0} © Jo 24/36 | 2 24|i20 8 | 0]
71951 7} 1 45137'| g 16] 7 | 0 28197 | 2 28/130] 8 igo |} -
8/120, 8 |. 2 038 | g 30] 8 | o 42138 2 32/140| 9/20 |
91135; 9 |. 2 15/39 | g 451 9 | © 36139 | 2 3615010 | o
|_20)150)10| 2 30/40 |ro_ 0/10 | o 4ol4o | 2 4o}100|10 140
He 41/265)a1 246141 ‘10 16) 11 O 44i4t | 2 44ir7o11 20 ||
) 12)180)12 3. O42 110 30/12 | o 48/42 | 2 48)180| 12 fe)
1 13)195113 | 3 15/43 jro 4sit3 | o s2l43 | 2 52/190/T2 140
} 14)210114 | 3 30144 j1r oll4 | o 56144] 2 56\200/13 [20 |
-15|225/15 | 3 45/45 (12 rsit5 | 1 0/45 | 3 O/270)14 | o
“76240116 | 4 0/46 [rr 30/16 4146 | 3 4\220114 [go |


1
17/25 5|17 | 4 15147 |11 46117 | 1 847- 81230}15


3

3 20
18]270)18 | 4 30148 |r2 olt8 tr 1248+] 3 a2i240]16

3

3


19/285\19 | 4 45149 [12 15/19 | x 16149 16|250|16 '40
j)_20}300|20 | 5 0/50 1 3 20/260117 |20
) 21315121 | § 15/51 [2 45/21 | 1 24ig1 | 3 24/270118 | o
22) 330,22 Bi 20g 20 ise Oleet 3 28)280]18 [40
|) 23134523 | 5 4553 13 15 23 | 1 32/53 | 3 32[290|19 20 |
24.360|24 6 0154 (13 30,24 | 1 36/54 | 3 36/300/20 | ©
}-251375.25 1) 00 95)55 113:45)25 | 3


| 2639026 | 6 3056 |14 0/26 | 1 44156 | 3 44/320)21 [20
2740527 6 i 14 15127 | 1 48157 | 3 48)330122 | ©
28142028 | 7 ol58 |14 33° I 52l58 | 3/ 521340122 |40
2943529 | 7 1559 |14 45/29 | 2 56/59 | 3 56)350123 |20
30.450,30 7 sone 1g alle 2.0601 4 0'360}24 | o


OsF4 A Svs OL OFGy. 207


If the readerin Table I. reckons the columns marked with afterifks
to be minutes of time, the other columns give the equatoreal parts or
motion in degrees and minutes; if he reckons the afterifk columns to be
feconds, the others give the motion in minutes and feconds of the equa-
tor; if thirds, in feconds andthirds. Andifin Table II. he reckons the
afterifk columns to be degrees of motion, the others give the time
an{wering thereto in hours and minutes ; if minutes of motion, the time
is minutes and feconds; if feconds of motion, the correfponding time is
given in feconds and thirds. An example in each cafe will make the
whole very plain.


EXAMPLE I.


In 10 hours 15 minutes 24 feconds 20 thirds, Qy. How much of the
Equator revolves through the Meridian ?


Deg. 7 Wear

Hours 10. y= - 50 9¥O °
Minutes 15 - - 224 Agu aO
Seconds 24 ~ = Oo Oo
Thirds 20 - - Oona s
Anfwer US Qtek ters


eS pace


EXAMPLE II.


In what time will 153 degrees «1 minutes 5 feconds of the Equator


revolve through the Meridian? nu

1 ea a es Be
150 - = 10 ie} O oO
eta 3 i ORME? 2), One O
Minutes 51 ; 5 Sr PE Bele Sek
Seconds 5 “ / INO thie ae
Anfwer POmRLe I24." 20


For the convenience of perfons, born in any part of England, who
may want to calculate their own nativity, I have added the following
table of the latitude and longitude of the moft confiderable towns in
the kingdom, which will likewife anfwer for any other places of birth
that happen near them.


No. 10. 3B A TABLE


pe AN. ¥ Mle o GoD Rw WT ON


A TABLE ‘of the Larirupe and LoneirupeE of the principal
Citiesand TownsinENGLAND ©


Long} Lat. F-ong:| Lat.
Reading, Berkthire 22:30\51 23 |Newcaftle, Northumberland 2. sticg “5s
Bedford, Bedfordfhire 22 55\52  8|Nottingham, Nottinghamfhire |22 14/52 57
Buckingham, Buckinghamfhire [22 57\51 59 Oxford, Oxtordhhire {22 4 151 46
Comee Lager, [4 252 SAIC MN Re AL
dgefhire

Chetter, Chethire 20 21/53 14/|Briftol, Somerfetthire I9 aa gl B
Eauveron Corll also aaah Same as ar

arli : erlan ce) 7 ) ame 2
Toby Berbyltive 21 3S 57l, Litchfield, Staffordfhire 21 Hee 12
Exeter, Devonfhire ig 38|50 42/|{pfwich, Suffolk 24 42/52 10
Crookhern, eae a g\50 45 een bre see SUS PRONE
Dorchefte orfetfhire 47150 40 icheiter, Suliex 22 4o0ls0 4
Ditnea. Duta 22 O54 49] Coventry, Warwickthire 21 ie Ne
Colchefter, Effex 24 25\51 59)|Kendal, Weftmoreland 20 A41\54 21
Gloucefter, Gloucefterfhire Bi ae7be k 52 Salifbury, Wiltthire 21, i28\st 3
Wincheiter, Hamp fhire De abet ZN Worcetter, W orcefterfhire My els2 ats
Keer eerie Melee ee tea

reford, Herefordihire O 38ic eal i nglefea 1 2

Pi adinedans fumbasdorthivas sles x aee 1 Brecknock, Brecknockthire ee
Canterbury, Kent 24 42cr% 18,\Carmarthen, Carmarthenfhire 18 I
Rocher, Kent Be 24'|Bangor, Carnarvonfhire fe) pie 2 4
Lancafter, Lancafhire 20 33/54 Pi Cardigan, Cardiganfhire, 18 3452 I9
Leicetter, Leicefterfhire 22 14/52 39||Denbigh, Denbighfhire 19 5453 14
sarc ois Lincolnfhire 22 5453 = s Ee Cee i Ig 4953 21

ONDON 23 26'5 a rganfhire ZOg 12.51 32
Monmouth, Monmouthfhire 20 3051. 51 Montgomery, Montgomeryfhire |z0 to}52 :
Portfmouth, Hampfhire 22 2650 50)\St. David’s, Pembrokefhire 17 56150 59
Norwich, Norfolk 24 4552 44||Radnor, Radnorfhire 20 10|s2 20
Peterborough, Northamptonfhirelz3 752 34


Thus, by proper attention to the rules and directions preceding, may
any perfon, though of fmall abilities, erect the horofcope and introduce
the figns, planets, and ftars, therein, at any given time required. This
is indifputably a confiderable advancement in the practical part of the
Science of Aftrology ; though it muft be owned, that the mere know-
ledge of thus defcribingand arranging the planets in the horofcope, with-
out we add unto it the ability of defining, from fome certain and expe-=
rienced rules, the meaning, effects, and influences, of them, under what-
ever afpects or fituations they may be found, can be of but little or no
advantage. ‘Tomake this apparent, let me but afk the reader to turn to
the foregoing figure of the heavens, erected for the 11th of June
1784, and defcribe the natural meaning and indications of the figns and
planets we have taught him to place therein? Acompliance with this
he finds impoffible, not having either by theory or prattice attained to
them. As a key to this important acquifition, I fhall now lay down
fome experienced rules and aphorifms, which fhould be attentively con-
fidered, and thoroughly underftood, before any further advances are made


inthe ftudy. I fhall therefore begin with the following general Axioms.


I” That


OM AST ROL 0G: Y. 209


I. That every fign, planet, and fixed ftar, hath a fpecific and particu-
lar effect in one houfe, or part of the heavens, different from what they
have in another. ‘ 1


II. That the Sun by himfelf in any houfe of a figure hath one effeét,
the Moon another, Saturn another, Jupiter another, and fo on through
the whole. And that this holds good alfo in refpett to the figns and
fixed ftars.


III. That, as a planet hath one effe@in himfelf, fo hath he another
when joined in conjunction with another planet; and by a fextile, quar-
tile, trine, and oppofition.


IV. That the quartile and oppofition of Saturn and Mars have one ef-
fect; and the quartile and oppofition of Jupiter and Venus another.


V. That a planet hath one fpecial or fpecific effect when lord of the
firft houfe or afcendant; another when lord of the fecond houfe; ano-
ther when lord of the third houfe; and, when lord of the fourth, ftil
another ; and fo on through all the twelve houfes of heaven. .


VI. That whatever point of the heavens retains the Sun as fignificator
in any nativity retains a folar force and influence in refpe¢t to that native
as long as he lives. The fame rule extends to the Moon, and to Sa-
turn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, &c. wherefore the horofcope or afcendant
in every geniture hath and doth contain a radical influence over the na-
tive’s life; the mid-heaven over his a¢tions and occupation ; and each of
the other houfes over thofe. particular events and viciflitudes to which
they re{peCctively appertain.


VII. That the fame point in the heavens, which in one nativity is the
place of, the Sun, may in another nativity be the place of Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, Mercury, or the Moon.

ys


VIII. That every agent, acting by itfelf, atts only according to its own
peculiar form and virtue.


IX. That every patient fuffers according to its own proper nature ; and
that whatever is received is received only in proportion to the capacity of
the receiver. |


X. That the fame, always exifting, muft always work the fame effett
in or upon the fame fubject, Thefe being premifed, we fhall eee)
: le


210 AN ILL U5 TR ATI OON


The Effects of each PLANET in each of the TWELVE HOUSES.


SaTuRN in the firft houfe, or afcendant, fhews melancholy, with many
forrows; if near the afcendant, fhort life; if ata diftance, innumerable
troubles ; in the fecond, deflroys the fubftance ; in the third, hatred bes
tween brethren, and danger and lofs in journeying ; in the fourth, death
of father and mother before the native, lofs of inheritance and friends;
in the fifth, barrennefs, death of children, or difobedient ones if living;
in the fixth, much ficknefs, croffes by fervants, and loffes by cattle; in
the feventh, an ungovernable wife, fhort and wretched life, with many
public enemies; in the eighth, a violent death and lofs of legacies; in
the ninth, many loffes by fea; in the tenth, difhonour, imprifonment,
fhort life to the parents, death by fentence of a judge; in the eleventh,
defpair, falfe friends, death of children ; in the twelfth, forrow, trou-
ble, imprifonment, and perfecution, by private enemies. Thefe are the
common effects of Saturn, when fignificator, and weak or ~ meanly

dignified.


JupiTeR in the firft givesa good, happy, and long, life, juft and ho-
neft; in the fecond, profufion of riches; in the third, friendfhip of
brethren, and fortunate journeys; in the fourth, lands and inheritances,
with an honourable life and end; in the fifth, many children obedient
and virtuous; in the fixth, health and faithful fervants, profit by deal-
ing in cattle; in the feventh, an honourable marriage, a good. wife, an
honeft, wife, difcreet, virtuous, woman; in the eighth, a natural death,
long life, legacies; in the ninth, a true Chriftian, ecclefiaftical prefer-
ment, profitable fea-voyages ; in the tenth, preferment, great and dura-
ble honours, and riches by trading ; in the eleventh, encreafe of riches,
faithful and great friends, the fulfilling of all his defires; in the twelfth,
profit by cattle, victory over private enemies: this if he be ftrong; if
weak, the good will be much abated.


Mars in the firft houfe denotes fhortnefs of life, quarrelfomenefs, {cars
in the head or face; in the fecond, poverty, want, and many troubles ;
in the third, evil brethren, danger in travelling, atheift, an ungodly
perfon; in the fourth, fhort life to the father, ftrife between him and
the native, deftruction to his inheritance in the fifth, wicked children,
and of fhort life, or fickly ; in the fixth, fevers, bad fervants, lofs of
cattle ; in the feventh quarrels, law-fuits, public enemies, an evil wife,
ficknefs, a follower of lewd women; in the eighth, a violent death,
lofs of fubftance, poverty; in the ninth, changing of religion, lofs at
fea by robbers, an atheift; in the tenth, unfortunate honour, troubles
from magiftrates, ficknefs to the mother, martial preferment; in the

eleventh,


OFTASTROLOG Y art


eleventh, falfe friends, lofs of fubftance. In the twelfth, imprifonment,
lofs by fervants and cattle, many private enemies ; this if Mars be weak
and afflicted ; if ftrong, thefe evils abate, and fometimes the contrary
good takes place.


Sol in the firft gives honour, glory, and long life. In the fecond,
a flow of riches continually, but a confumption of it. In the third, good ~
brethren and journeys, a ftickler for his religion. ‘In the fourth, honour
in age, a great and noble inheritance. In the fifth, few children, yet fuch
as will be good and virtuous. In the fixth, difeafes of the mind. In
the feventh, a good wife, honourable adverfaries, and ficknefs. In the
eighth, a good portion with a wife, danger of a violent death. In the
ninth, truly religious, ecclefiaftical preferment, gain bythe fea. In the
tenth, -greatnefs, honour, glory, and power, from kings, princes, and no-
ble women, much exceeding the quality of the native’s birth, the friend-
thip of perfons of high degree. In the eleventh, great and noble friends,
and very faithful, the fulfilling of one’s hopes. In the twelfth, power-
ful adverfaries; this if ftrong; if weak, in many things the contrary.


Venus in the firft gives health, but inclines to the pleafure of women.
In the fecond, riches in abundance by women’s means. In the third,
religious loving brethren, good journeys. . In the fourth, an inheritance,
honourable old age. In the fifth, matty children, comely, obedient, and:
virtuous. In the fixth, ficknefs from womankind, faithful pleafing fer-
vants, profit in {mall cattle. In.the feventh, an incomparably good and
Virtuous wife, a happy marriage, and having: but few enemies. In the
eighth, a good dowry with a wife, a natural death. In: the ninth, eccle-
fiaftical preferment, a real. religious man, profit by fea. In the tenth,
honour and preferment by. women’s means, the favour of great women.
In the eleventh, honourable and faithful female friends. In the twelfth,,
profit by great cattle, free from. the power of private enemies; this’ if
{trong ; if weak the contrary. .


Mercury in the firft gives noble thoughts, good invention, graceful
elocution, a lover of arts and feiences.. In the fecond, profit by arts and
{ciences, books, writings, and:the like,. Inthe-third,, amathematician,
{wift and profperqus journeys, a fcholar, one of an excellent invention,
crafty brethren, a moral perfon. In the fourth, the getting of an inhe-
ritance by cunning or deceit. Inthe fifth, ingenious children. In the
fixth, thievith fervants, difeates of the breath.and brain. In the feventh,
a fomenter of quarrels, vexatious law-fuits a. difcreet wife. In the
eighth, an augmentation of eftate by wills and legacies, death: by a con-
fumption. In the ninth, an incomparable artift, and one that under-

No. Ii. 3C . oe ftands


212 ANU FUSTR ATION


ftands all fciences, even the moft obfcure and occult things, a finder-out
of many new and excellent inventions. In the tenth, liberal prreferment,
or a fecretary to fome great perfon. In the eleventh, inconftant friends.
In the twelfth, his private enemies will be of little effect. This if Mer.
cury be ftrong and not afflicted ; if weak, the good will much abate.


Luna in the firft thews the native will travel; will gain fuperiority
and rule over others ; the favour of princes and noble women, and
great advantages thereby. In the fecond, fometimes riches, fometimes
poverty, an unftable fortune. In the third, many journeys. In the
fourth, gain by travelling, In the fifth, many children. In the fixth,
difeafes of the brain, good fervants, and gain by {mall cattle. In the fe-
venth, an honourable marriage. In the eighth, danger of drowning, but
otherwife a long and healthful life. In the ninth, travels beyond fea,
inconftancy in religion, acquaintance with arts and fciences. In the
tenth, great honour unto the native, profit by fea-voyages ; the favour of
fome noble woman. In the eleventh, the friendthip of great ladies, and
noble friends. In the twelfth, the common people will be his private
enemies. This if Luna be ftrong and free from affliction ; if weak and
afflicted, the contrary. .


The Dragon’s Head in the firft fhews honefty. In the fecond, a gaod
eftate. In the third, fortunate journeys and honeft kindred. In the
fourth, gain by land and travels. In the fifth, long life; happy and vir-
tuous children. Inthe fixth, health, good fervants, and profit in cattle.
In the feventh, an honeft and virtuous wife. In the eighth, many lega-
cies, and anatural death: In the ninth, fincere piety, profperity at fea.
In the tenth, durability of honour. In the eleventh, everlafting and
faithful friends. In the twelfth, open enemies; but the pofition of the
Dragon’s Tail in the fame places fignifies the contrary. The pofition of
the Part of Fortune gives fubftance from all thofe things fignified by
that houfe in which it is pofited, unlefs afflicted by the prefence or beams
of a malevolent planet. :


General Effetis of the PLANET'S in each of the TWELVE
PS) GN)S, of 4hes4 O DIAC:


SATURN in his own houfe fignifies wifdom, prudence, and ftability
of fortune. In the houfe of Jupiter, a juft man, and one that will
be rich, and acquire honour. In the houfes of Mars, a {trong body, and
furious. In the houfes of Sol, greatnefs and honour. In the houfes of
Venus, afecret lover of women. In the houfes of Mercury, one that is —
{tudious of arts and fciences. In the houfe of Luna, infirmities of the
breaft and lungs, iy

Jupiter


2


OF MSETERLO:L:0:4_Y: 213


Jupiter in the houfes of Saturn fignifies avarice and covetoufnefs,
living always in fear of poverty. In his own houfes, infinite riches, ho-
nours, and dignities, and that among great perfons, and clergymen. In
the houfes of Mars, the native may rife to honour by war. In the
houfe of Sol, fhews honour, glory, and treafure from kings and great
perfons. In the houfes of Venus, riches by women, or an honourable
wife. Inthe houfes of Mercury, a good rhetorician. In the houfe of
Luna, encreafe of fubftance beyond expectation, with honour and re-
nown ; for Cancer is not only the exaltation of Jupiter, but alfo alfo a car-
dinal fign, and the northern tropic.


Mars in the houfes of Saturn fhews a lofty and magnanimous fpirit,
and wife. In the houfes of Jupiter, it fhews the acquaintance of kings,
princes, and noblemen. In his own houfes, a great and ingenious wit, a
mathematician. In the houfe of Sol, forenefs of the eyes, danger of a
violent death. In the houfes of Venus, luxuriouf{nefs, a boafter, given to
falfhood, and a deluder of women. In the houfes of Mercury, one in-
genious in arts and {ciences, but covetous, knavifth, and deceitful. In
the houfe of Luna, a wavering, furious, rath, man, one that may arrive to
honour, but will precipitate himfelf therefrom afterwards.


Sol in the houfes of Saturn thews a dejected forlorn man. In the houfes
of Jupiter, one that fhall attain honour and glory in the world, and be a
companion of princes. - In the houfes of Mars, a great and eminent man,
a commander, captain, or general of a army; a fubtle, crafty, politic;
ftatefman. In his.own houte, one that may attain the height of honour,
glory and renown, quod capax, according to the quality of his birth. In
the houfes of Venus, one that will rife or fall by the means of women. In
the houfes of Mercury, agood engineer, a foldier, and mathematician, In
the houfe of Luna, honour by different women, but fuchas he afterwards


fhall réceive prejudice from.


Venus in the houfes of Saturn fignifies hopes of honour and friends
many children, and old age. In the houfes of Jupiter, fhort journeys,
ficknefs, imprifonment or death. In the houfes of Mars, private and
public enemies, andmany journeys ; asalfo a lover of different women, In
the houfes of Sol, a fincere lover of his friend and a lover of his children.
In her own houfes, a healthful long-lived perfon, juft and religious. In
the houfes of Mercury, one covetous, but fiickly, religious, yet an enemy
tohimfelf. In the houfe of Luna, a traveller, and one that will arrive to”


great honour and preferment.
Mercury


ee


ard ANT PWLIWS TRIAMT TON


Mercury in the houfes of Saturn fhews honour and travelling by fea,
with much pleafure, but ficknefs withal. In the houfes: of Jupiter,
lands, inheritances, an honourable wife, and good friends. In the houfes
of Mars, private enemies; ficknefs, many journeys, and a long life. In -
the houfes of Sol, lands and inheritances, yet fubject to imprifonment,
and private enemies. In the houfes of Venus, much wealth and riches,
travelling by fea, one religious, with fome ficknefs. In his.own houfes,
wit and ingenuity, knowledge of arts and fciences, honour and renown,
andalover of children. In the houfe of Luna, many good friends, and
many journeys by land.


Luna in the houfes of Saturn fignifies one religious, and having many
adverfaries, as alfo fore eyes. In the houfes of Jupiter, a fickly body,
but one that fhall attain honour, glory, renown, and the favours of great
men. Inthe houfes of Mars, a lover of friends and children. In the
houfe of Sol, one that thall be very rich through his own induftry, In
the houfes of Venus, a great lover of children, and one that fhall have
many friends. In the houfes of Mercury, inheritances, lands, and private
enemies. In her own houfe, happinefs and long life.


General Effetts from the Posirron of the LORDS of the HOUSES.


The lord of the afcendant in the afcendant thews a fortunate and
happy life, and one that fhall overcome all his enemies. In-the fecond,
riches and wealth by his own induftry. In the third, many journeys.
In the fourth, lands. and inheritance. In the fifth, children, and one
given to pleafure, Inthe fixth, ficknefs. In the feventh, public adver-
faries, the. man will be. an enemy to himfelf, In the eighth, legacies.
Im the ninth, one religious, learned, and a traveller into foreign countries,.
In the tenth, honour, preferment, and favour of princes. Inthe eleventh,
friends. In the twelfth, danger of imprifonment.


The lord. of the fecond in the fecond imports great wealth. In the
third, wealth by brethren.and travelling, In the fourth, by the father.
In the fifth, by. gaming. In the fixth, wealth by dealing in cattle. In. -
the feventh, by marriage and. womankind. In the eighth, by legacies,
In the ninth,, by the church, arts.and fciences, religion, andthefea. In.
the tenth. by honour, preferment, trade, merchandife. In the eleventh,.
by friends. In the twelfth, by great.cattle. In the afcendant, by birth,
or. good fortune.


The lord of the third in the third fhews affe@ionate brethren,
good journeys. Inthe fourth, gain by travelling. Inthe fifth, plea-
fure


*


-:
Ovfl (An ROL, O-G+Y. 215


fure in travelling. In the fixth, ficknefs in travelling, In the feventh, »


thieves and robbers, and fometimes the native meets with a wife. -In


the eighth, death in travelling. In the ninth, religious journeys. In


the tenth, for preferment, trade, and the like. In the eleventh, for
ftudy and improvement. In the twelfth, imprifonment in travelling.


In the afcendant, for pleafure, and in purfuit of ufeful difcoveries. In


the fecond, for profit, wealth, and riches.


The lord of the fourth in the fourth, forethews a good eftate or inhe-
ritance, a father of long life. In the fifth, that the eftate thall go to the


native’s children. In the fixth, that an eftate may be acquired by phyfic.


In the feventh, that he may have an eftate with a wife. In the eighth,


by fome gift, legacy, or wife’s portion. In the ninth, by merchandize,
by arts and {ciences, or by the church. In the tenth, by fome office,
dignity, or preferment. In the eleventh, by means of a friend. Inthe
twelfth, by dealing in great cattle. In the afcendant, by inheritance.
In the fecond, by purchafe. In the third, by travelling, or by the


death of brethren.


The lord of the fifth in the fifth, indicates ftrong, lively, and vir-
tuous, children. In the fixth, that his children fhall be induftrious to
gain, wealth, and it may be by his fervants. In the feventh, that they
will travel, and that the native and they will difagree. In the eighth,
that they fhall poffefs the mother’s dowry. Inthe ninth, that they thall
be given to pleafure, and go to fea for the father. In the tenth, that
they fhall be fickly, and follow the father’s trade. In the eleventh, that
they fhall have many public adverfaries, and prove enemies to themfelves.
In thetwelfth, that they fhall have many legacies, yet prove enemies to
their parents. In the afcendant, they will prove religious, and. learned,
and love their parents. In the fecond, they will prove honourable, and
poffefs the native’s fubftance. In the third, that they fhall have many
friends, and fuch as will be of their own kindred. In the fourth, that


they ‘will have many private enemies.


The Jord of the fixth in the fixth, forefhews ficknefs, yet jutt fer-
vants. In the feventh, ficknefs by women, and quarrelling. In the
eighth, danger of a violent death, and dangerous ficknefs. In the ninth,
ficknefs at fea. Inthe tenth, ficknefs from hard labour and employment
in fome trade. In the eleventh, by lofs of fome friend, or fruftration
of his expectations. In the twelfth, by vexation of private enemics,


In the afcendant, by irregularity of life. In the fecond, by lofs of fome ,


eftate. In thethird, by reafon of fome journey. In the fourth, by lols
No. 116 aD | of


| ‘*
216 ANS SERRA ST ROA we TON


of inheritance or difappointment in trade. In the fifth, from vexatious
children and loofenefs of life.


The lord of the feventh in the feventh, fhews ficknefs or death to the
native; yet a good wife. In theeighth, danger of lofing the wife’s for.
tune. Inthe ninth, fhe will bea ftranger to him, and a traveller. In the
tenth, fhe will be honourable, and poffefs a good inheritance. In the
eleventh, the will bean entire lover of him and of his children. In the
twelfth, fhe will be his private enemy. In the afcendant, fhe will be a
very great lover of her hufband. In the fecond, fhe, will be the aug-
mentation of his eftate. In the third, fhe will be a lover of her huf-
band’s kindred, and defire to go beyond fea. In the fourth, fhe will be
very honourable, and the native fhall have land by her. In the fifth, a
lover of the native’s children. In the fixth, the will be a great affliction
to the native and herfelf.

The lord of the eighth in the eighth, fhews the native fhall die a na-
tural death, and that he fhall have a rich wife. In the ninth, he will
be in danger of drowning. In the tenth, his death may be by fentence
of the judge. In the eleventh, by the confpiracy of fome pretended
friend. Inthe twelfth, by confpiracy of a private enemy. fe the a{~
cendant, by the native’s own irregularity. In the fecond, by means of
fome moneys or goods. Inthe third, either by the confpiracy of fome
brother, kinfman, neighbour, or thief. In the fourth, by means of
the lofs of an eftate, or fome grief. In the fifth, by drunkennefs and. de-
bauchery. In the fixth, byficknefs. In the feventh, by a public adver-


ary, or eminent grief.


The lord of the ninth in the ninth, fhews good fea-voyages, know-


_ ledge of arts and fciences, a religious perfon. Inthe tenth, that reli-


gion will be profitable and honourable, and the native fhall be famous
for hislearning, In theeleventh, church dignity, and merchandize,, by
means of a friend. In the twelfth, church lands, and that the native
will have clergymen for his enemies. In the afcendant, makes the na-
tive truly religious and learned; and amerchant.. In the fecond, riches
by fea, arts, {ciences, and the church. In the third, a feCtarian. In
the fourth, gain by the church. In the fifth, one of a loofe religion.
In the fixth, honourable church preferment; and yet that the native
may bea flave in his religion. In the feventh, an enemy to the church,
In the eighth, death or perfecution for his religion.


The lord of the tenth in the tenth, great honour, glory, and renown, -
In the eleventh, by means of a friend. In the twelfth, through an
enemy.


a
ODF MASS PT eR eOPC LOG y, 247


enemy. In the afcendant, by the native’s own induftry. In the {e-
cond, by means of his money, In the third, by a brother, kinfman, or
neighbour, or by travel. In the fourth, by his father. In the fifth, by
a wife. In the eighth, by a wife’s fortune ; it may alfo fignify a vio-
jent death. In the ninth, by religion, arts, {ciences, and navigation.


The lord of the eleventh in theeleventh, denotes great friends. In the
twelfth, private friends. In theafcendant, friends indeed to the native.
In the fecond, fuch as fhall augment the native’s fortune. In the third,
fuch as are of his kindred or neighbours, or as he fhall find in travelling.
In the fourth, his father. In the fifth, fome friends of his wife. In
the fixth, his fervants. In the feventh, his wife. In the eighth, fome
brother’s fervant. Inthe ninth, aclergyman, merenant, or lover of arts.
In the tenth, kings, princes, nobles, or great perfons.


The lord of the twelfth in the twelfth, denotes. {trong and powerful
private enemies. In the afcendant, fuch as are among his own family
or houfhold. In the fecond, fome perfon envying his fituation or eftate. |
In the third, kindred and neighbours. In the fourth, his father. Inthe
fifth, his.children. In the fixth, his fervants. In the feventh, his wife.
In the eighth, fome diftant relation. In the ninth, fome merchant, fo-
reign dealer, or dignitary in the church. In the tenth, kings, princes,
or men in power. In the twelfth, fome particular reputed friend.


GENERAL EFFECTS produced by the ASPECTS.
Of th CONJUNCTION.


The conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter fhews inheritances of houfes
and lands, poffeflions, and many worldly profits arifing from cultivating
the earth and tillage, if Mars afflict not, nor the evil beams of Sol. If
Jupiter is fignificator, the native is miftruftful.


The conjunétion of Saturn and Mars fhews much evil, the native wil!
be affliGted, and’ vexed, fhall undergo many troubles, and go through
great difficalties. If you would know the-caufe of the good or evil, you
muft confider the houfe in which the configuration happens, and what
- houfe the configurated planets are lords of, and accordingly you may
nearly {peak to the particular matter or accident, be it good or evil; for
things are much varied according to the diverfity of pofition and do-
mination of the planets, by which you muft neceffarily vary thofe judg-


ments. ;
2 71 . The


a
218 A NedyLoh 00S FR vA,T 1.0;


The conjunction of Saturn and the Sun, thews the lofs of inheritance,
danger of houfes being burnt, the native likely to be cheated, to receive
much detriment, and, it may be, lofe all and become poor ; except a
fortunate planet be pofited in the fecond houfe.


The conjun@ion of Saturn and Venus fhews one libidinous, and that
he fhall marry a woman wholly of an oppofite temper and difpofition to
himfelf, get difhonour among women-kind, be unhappy in marriage,
and lead, by reafon of his wife, a very aitconfolat life. If Venus be fig-
nificatrix, fhe is much pa ed but, if Saturn, then the conjun@tion is
beneficial ; and this is to be eee ee in all fimilar cafes.


The conjunction of Saturn and Mercury fhews craft, fubtilty, and
policy, that the native will dive into many fecret, deep, and occult, things,
“find out myfteries, be covetous and proud, mixed with a certain kind of
gravity. If Saturn be fignificator, the native has a good elocution ; but,

if Mergury, he has a great impediment in his fpeech,


The conjunction of Saturn and Luna fhews one poor and obfcure ; if
Saturn be fignificator, the man is changeable, feldom an hour in one
mind, often doing things, and then repenting of them again; but, if
Luna be fignificatrix, he is grave, cautious, malapert, over-wife and con-
ceited, and for the moft part wilful in all things.


The conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, if Jupiter be fignificator, makes
the native choleric, ha‘ty, angry, bold, proud, prefumptuous, and dar-
ing; gives him fome martial command, and glory and renown in war-
like undertakings ; but, if Mars be fignificator, it makes him milder,
Be ARS good, juft, gives him preferment 1 in the law, or he becomes a
prieft, deacon, bifhop, or other dignitary in the church,


The conjunction of Jupiter and Sol: if Jupiter be fignificator, he af-
flicts the native feverely, cafts him into a deep melancholy or difpair,
{eizes him with a fever or frenzy, brings the body toa confumption, and
afflicts the eftate with confiderable lofs, even to his utter ruin and de-
ftruction ; yet, when by direction Jupiter frees himfelf from» Sol’s
beams, thefe evils will ceafe ; but, if Sol be fignificator, he fo debilitates ¢
Jupiter, that the configuration can promife nothing; but it makes the
native religious.


The conjunction of Jupiter and Venus: if Jupiter be fignificator, the
native is {uperlatively happy (more efpecially if the configurations happen


in Pifces, the houfe of Jupiter, and exaltation of Venus) ; he increafes in
wealth


Wh,


OOF ASTROLOGY. 219


wealth and fubftance, in honour and glory, in health of body, and tran-
quillity of mind, having in general the love of woman-kind; but, if
Venus be fignificatrix, the native has beauty, health, and riches, attains
to great honour and renown, is truly virtuous, pious, and religious,
and has generally ecclefiaftical or jurifpradential preferment. This is
one of the moft happy configurations that can be.


The conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury, if Jupiter be fignificator,
makes the native virtuous, religious, wife, of great. knowledge, and of
good elocution, makes a general {cholar, and gives him the knowledge
of moft arts and fciences ; he may prove to be the ambaflador of a prince,
or fuch-like; but, if Mercury be fignificator, the native is folid, ferious,
and grave, pious and religious, and probably may acquire a good eftate by
merchandize or fome ecclefiaftical promotion.


The conjunétion of Jupiter and Luna: if Jupiter be fignificator, the
mative proves a traveller, it may be beyond fea; he is generally of a
changeable and mutable mind, and, although naturally of avery good hu-
mour and condition, yet fometimes pettifh, froward, and peevith. If
Luna be fignificatrix, it gives great riches and treafures, according to the
native’s capacity or birth, makes him prudent, wife, religious, and ho-
nourable ; gives him the acquaintance of great and worthy men, clergy-
~ men, and fuch-like, and probably church preferment.


The conjunction of Mars and Sol fhews a hot and dry conftitution,
danger of fhort life, and death by hectic. fevers, marafmos, or by fire
or lightning. If Mars be fignificator, the native has the favour of kings
and princes, and it may be their frowns too, to his utter undoing; he
may rife haftily, but perhaps toa precipice. If Sol be fignificator, the
native proves valiant and warlike, attains fome martial command or
preferment ; but ifhe goes into war he is killed in the battle, or at beft
comes off wounded, or with the lofs of a limb.


The conjunGion of Mars and Venus-: if Mars be fignificator, the na-
tive is given up to women, and retains the acquaintance of fuch as have
_an infamous life and’ converfation; he is kind, gentle, and courteous,
and, though fometimes hatty, yet of a good humourand difpofition, in-

fomuch that his kindnefs is oftentimes his undoing; but, if Venus be

fignificatrix, the native is luftful, lafcivious, a fornicator, adulterer ;

given over to wicked and lewd courfes, haity, rafh, proud, inconfiderate,

-quarrelfome, and running himfelf into many hazards, dangers, troubles, —
and loffes.


No. 11. 2E The


220 A-N “YI2LY] US T BR AA IOON


The conjunttion of Mars and Mercury: if Mars be fignificator, he
makes the native pragmatical, talkative, a fmatterer in learning, a bab-
bler, and deceiver, yet induftrious for the promotion of his own ends
and defigns ; it gives no great preferment, he may bea knavith apparator,
cheating petty-fogger, or pedantic pedagogue; but, if Mercury be figni-
ficator, the native proves one of harfh manners and converfation, of an ill
life, a thief, highwayman, felon, murderer, traitor, &c.


The conjunétion of Mars.and Luna: if Mars be fignificator, the na-
tive is of evil manners and infamous converfation ; rifes to no great pre-
ferment; but, if it fhould fo chance that the f{cale fhould turn, his rife
may be by means of fome great lady ; but, if Luna be fignificatrix, the
native is bold, rath, adventurdus, quarrelfome, furious, given to cruelty
and bafe actions, may prove a thief, murderer, or traitor; feldom lives

slong, for this pofition fignifies a fhort life, and that the native may die a
violent death, by the means of fire, iron, a fall, blow, wound, or by the
' hands of the executioner.


The conjunction of Sol and Venus: if Sol be fignificator, it makes
the manners of the native foft and effeminate, yet he is born to glory,
and to do and perform great aftions; he obtains the love of women, but
affociates himfelf with fuch as are bafe, obfcure, libidinous, infamous,
and much below his rank and quality. If Venus is fignificatrix, it fhews
a fhort life, one aiming at glory, but not attaining it; the nativeis hec-
tic or confumptive, melancholy, meets with many croffes, loffes, and -
vexations, lives not out half his days.


The conjunttion of Sol and Mercury: if Sol be fignificator, the na-
tive is adorned with wit, ingenuity, learning, arts, {ciences, policy,
underftands languages, and the power of words ; and, becaufe Mercury
delights to be under the Sun-beams, not being there by hurt, as are the
other planets, the native has excellent elocution, and proves a good rhe-
torician and logician. If Mercury be fignificator, he bends all his wit,

‘craft, and policy, for the accomplifhing of high matters, and the at-
taining of great things; he becomes the favourite of a king, prince, or
great man.


The conjunction of Sol and Luna: if Sol be fignificator, though he
generally gives a great and high fpirit, and aiming at magnificent things,
yet this configuration gives only mean and low acquaintance, and the fo-
ciety of the common people, makes the native mutable and changeable,
and his fortune as unftable. If Luria be fignificatrix, the native fhall aim
at noble and gallant things, but not attain them; many croffes fhall be- »
fal him, and his life fhall be fhort. 4 ;

| The


¢


OF 1A4S4T ROUL OIG Y, 221


The conjunction of Venus and Mercury: if Venus be fignificatrix, it
gives a delicate beautiful body, adorned with wit, ingenuity, and elo-
quence, makes the native courteous and complaifant, furnithes him with
variety of arts, and learning, and is a configuration of very good import ; -
if Venus be lady of the fecond, it gives a good augmentation of fortune
through merchandize, or the ftudy of arts and feiences. If Mercury be
fignificator, it makes the native an orator, furnifhes him with courtthip,
foft and effeminate words, makes him pleafant in all company, gives him
the fociety and love of women, and, if Venus be ftrong, of great ladies ;
in a word, it makes him exceedingly happy. :


The conjunction of Venus and Luna, if Venus be fignificatrix, makes
the native mutable and changeable, a mete Proteus, yet with adeal of
pleafantnefs and fatisfaction to others; it makes him of many words, a
great promifer, but no performer; proud, lofty, conceited, and gives
him profit by the fea, and all lunar and moift commodities: If Luna
be fignificatrix, the native is very effeminate and courtly, having a vola-
ble tongue, free language, and excellentdifcourfe, inclined to the love of
women, which, if Venus be ftrong, is only to fuch as are virtuous; de~
lights in mufic, dancing, and merry company, never thinking of forrow,


or laying any thing to heart.


The conjunction of Mercury and Luna, if Mercury be fignificator, °
makes thenative travel into foreign countries, defirous to fee new things.
fafhions, and places; gives him favour and efteem among the ladies, and
to be in great eftimation among the popularity, by means of whom he
rifes to a good fortune and to great profperity in the world. If Luna is
fignificatrix, it makes the native ingenious, and a lover of learning, feek-
ing after the knowledge of moft arts and fciences ; chiefly the mathema-
tics, geography, cofmography, and navigation, by which he attains
credit and reputation; he delights in journeys and embaflies, being of a
mutable and inconftant humour and difpofition.


; b fOf the EX TLD Baad. DUR LN-E,


The fextile and trine of Saturn and Jupiter, if Saturn be fignificator,
makes the native grave, fober, wife, religious, pious, and endows him
with riches and treafures of this life, gives him the favour and acquain-
tance of the rich and great, or the native becomes a merchant, and gains
confiderably by it. If Jupiter be fignificator, the native is more propenfe
to melancholy, is inclinable to dig and delight in the earth and follow
hufbandry ; fome eftate, inheritance, or houfes, may fall to him ; and he
“may be promoted to’ fome ecclefiaftical dignity for his worth, learning,
and virtue; however, Saturn fhews cowardice. g i:

e


»


se AON SY IODGL ques sR OART LON -


The fextile or’trine of Saturn and Mars; if Saturn be fignificator, bis


natural flownefs and warinefs turns into rafhnefs and boldnefs, (yet with
a kind of temerity ;) he runs into precipitate actions, and ftrange adven-
tures; it commonly gives martial preferment. If Mars is fignificator,
the rafhnefs and daringnefs of difpofition are much abated, and the native
is guided by very confiderate and deliberate counfels ; if he proves reli-
gious, (as fuch feldom do,) he is an abfolute fectarian, following pettina~
cioufly the fentiments of his own mind: it fhews an eftate in land or
legacies. :


The fextile or trine of Saturn and the Sun: if Saturn be fignificator,
the native has an auftere countenance, a lightifh brown hair, large bones,
not very flefhy, ftooping a little in his going, he has a fhow of generofity
and noblenefs in his actions, but paflionate and feeking revenge, yet
without any great courageor valour if put to the trial; he probably may
attain preferment at court. If Sol be fignificator, the man is more
corpulent, yet with a very decent body and a full round face; given to
boaiting and oftentation, wilful and conceited, yet without any kind of
malice, fcarcely injuring any but himfelf, by his too much extravagant
expence and prodigality.


The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Venus: if Saturn be fignificator,
the native is comely, having brown hair, a delighter in women’s company,
wafting his patrimony upon the female fex, fcarcely leaving any eftate
behind for his fucceffors, given over to pleafure and voluptuoufnefs.” If
Venus be fignificator, the native is modeft, fhamefaced, yet loving his
belly well, very affable and courteous, and inclinable to few vicious ac-
tions ; gains by the dead, from ancient people, and from the fruits and
profits of the earth; he has a good repute and converfation, and fearcely
marries till after thirty years of age.


The fextile or trine of Saturn and Mercury: if Saturn be fignificator,
the native is conceited, full of chimeras and whims, of plots and con-
trivances, yet not often with effect, though carried on with a gre:t
deal of ingenuity ; he loves curiofities, and is {tudious, fubtil, ana re-
ferved. If Mercury is fignificator, the native is peevith, difcontented
and deiected in his own mind, has ftrange fancies, and.is very wilful,
even fometimes to his own ruin, yet given to the ftudy of arts and {ci-
ences, and finding out many curious inventions. : |


The fextile or trine of Saturnand Luna: if Saturn be fignificator, the
native is wilful, though very changeable of difpofition, fubject to jealoufly
and. mifteutt ; if Saturn be well fortified, the native becomes popular

' and


€e


a i


O F yA SeTyRe0;L+0;G Y;, 223


and gains much wealth and eftimation by the common people ; he alfo
attains the favour of fome eminent lady, and becomes famous in his ge-
neration,, If Luna is fignificatrix, the native is cold by nature, and of an
ill complexion, inclinable to fordid.and mean aCtions, yetheis deliberate,
and, if he does ill, he does it with preconfideration ; he is apt for invention,
but verp wilful in all things, conceited of himfelf, fo that he thinks no-
thing well done but what he does himfelf.


The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Mars: if Jupiter be fignificator,
it fhews-one of a free and noble difpofition, bold, valiant, and honoura-
ble, attempting and attaining brave and honourable exploits, generous to
his friends, obliging ;to his enemies, yet defiring and endeavouring to
rule ; he-is alfo refolute and fubtle ; if Mars is fignificator, the native is a
man of alarge foul, chearful and merry, of a jovial difpofition, active, cou-
rageous, pious, and avery juftman; ennobled with valour, victory, and
virtue, one of good fame, and obtaining the favour and good-will of great


and worthy perfons.


The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Sol: if Jupiter be fignificator, it
fhews ¢ ftrong, tall, well-proportioned, body, of a frefh ruddy com-
plexion, a noble, generous, courageous, foul, and of a magnanimous
mind, one attempting and. atchieving great and honourable things ; or
becomes the favourite of fome king, prince, or great perfon, and rifes to
the top of preferment. If Sol be fignificator, the native is born to honour
and glory, and, guod capax, arrives to the higheft of all worldly felici-
ties ; he is a man of great {pirit, performs beneficent and honourable
actions ; as Jupiter endows, him with a fund of. treafure, fo the liberal
{pirit of Sol makes him wafte it, by his too great,generofity.


_ The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Venus, if Jupiter be fignificator,
gives a tall and complete perfon, of a pleafant, loving, courteous, difpo-
fition,. kind to the female fex, of an exceeding good nature, and the pa-
tron of hofpitality ; itis the afpect of love, concord, agreement, good
fortune, and-riches;. the,native is preferred, and rifes to honour. If Ve-
nus be fignificatrix, the, perfon.is comely and lovely, one generoufly dif-
pofed, aiming only at things brave, honourable, virtuous, and good ; it
is the afpect of virtue and piety, of honour, perferment, and vaft for-
tunes in the world ; the native has the acquaintance of perfons of the
higheft ecclefiaftical order, and, it »may,be, attains the like prefermeng
himfelf, ere :


The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Mercury: if Jupiter be fignificator,
it fhews a juft, virtuous, good, man, ingenious, and of avery fubtle wit ;
No. 11. ane . it


4° AN Pils Wstree ae 1.0 N


it is the afpect of ingenuity, eloquence, and learning; the native is af. -


fable, courteous, mild, and a general lover of learning, one who by his
worth and virtue may be the fecretary or ambaffador to fome king or prince.
If Mercury is fignificator, it fhews one very ingenious, and whole wit is
mixed with virtue and honefty ; of a deep underftanding, profound wif-
dom, found judgment, and fuccefsful in any enterprize; a perfon fit
to be the counfellor of a king, or manager of the affairs of a kingdom or
commonwealth ; generous, free fpirited, and perfectly trufty.


The fextile or trine of Jupiter and Luna: if Jupiter be fignificator, the
native is naturally good, juft, and virtuous, but of a very mutable mind,
changing his opinion with the leaft perfuafion ; it is the afpect of popu-
larity and general applaufe, and he becomes famous in his generation,
and draws after him the love of the.common people ; he is loquacious,
highly conceited of himfelf, fortunate by water and women: if Luna
be fignificatrix, it fhews one of a generous, noble, juft, mind, aiming at
high and honourable things ; he gains by the church and churchmen,
and is an exact obferver of juftice and truth ; and a perfon who by his
good nature would oblige the whole world.


The fextile or trine of Mars and Sol; if Mars be fignificator, the native
has a rifing fortune, proves great, famous, and eminent, in the worid,
meets with preferment at court, or has the efpecial favour of fome king
or prince: it is the afpect of ation and honour ; he is witty, ingenious,
and trufty ; faithful even to his adverfaries ; of a nimble wit, quick fancy,
courteous, and friendly ; he may provea general or commander of an army.
If Sol be fignificatrix, it is the afpe@t of valour and vittory ; the native is
of a high fpirit and courageous, attains military honour and preferment,


loves warlike exercifes, appears a terror to his adverfaries, and rifes far ©


fuperior to his birth.


The fextile or trine of Mars and Venus: if Mars be fignificator, it is
the afpeét of liberty and love ; if Mars be out of his dignities, the native
is vicious above meafure, loves gaming, wantonnefs, women, and all
manner of lewdnefs and debauchery, he is ill-natured, unlefs among his
own party, and waftes and fpends his fortune upon women ; but, if Mars
is in his dignities, it {hews one witty, ingenious, a fearcher out of myfte-
ries, and one who fhall gain a confiderable fortune in the world. If Ve-
Mus is fignificatrix, it is the afpeét of pride, vanity, and vain-glory: the
native is comely, bold, rafh, adventurous, fearing nothing, aiming at
great things, and promifing himfelf mountains, but perfecting little ;
~ and, if Venus is weak, the perfon is debauched, and guilty of many lewd

actions. | ) |


The


a


OF > A Seti Re OO. LtoO'G. ¥: 226


The fextile or trine of Mars and Mercury : if Mars be fignificator, it
is the afpeCt of confidence and craft; the native has a pregnant fancy,
capable of any thing; prudent, fubtle, bold, very ingenious, eloquent,
and ftudious in moft arts and fciences, yet fomething hafty, and fubjeét
to paffion, which being over, the man is good-humouredagain. If Mer-
cury is fignificator, the native is valiant, courageous, ingenious, a lover
of military exercifes, phyfic, furgery, and chemiftry; and may probably
get a fortune by the fire, or dealing in martial commodities; the native
has generally a good opinion of himfelf. | 2


The fextile or trine of Mars and Luna: if Mars be fignificator, it is
the afpect of loquacity and mutability ; the native gets by the common
people, or by travel, often changing his ftation or place of dwelling; he
is turbulent, furious, and rath, bat as eafily purfuaded again to a compla-
cent humour. If Luna be fignificatrix, the native is paffionate, ambi-
tious of honour, afpiring to great things, and purfuing them even toa
precipice ; and, when attained, they feldom continue with him ; andthe
reafon is, becaufe of the mutability and changeablenefs of his own na-
ture, mind, and difpofition, which beget a change of his fortunes.


The fextile or trine of Sol and Venus: if Sol be fignificator, it is the
afpeét of candour and generofity ; the native is exceedingly good-natured,
ofan heroic difpofition, having nothing but gallantry in all his actions ;
he gets by women, and has the favour of fome rich lady, by whom he
meets either with a good fortune or promotion ; he is witty, ingenious,
and of an active fancy. If Venus be fignificatrix, it is the afpect of gran-
deur and magnificence; the native meets with court preferment, or has
the favour of fome prince ; rifes to high honour and glory inthe world;
of a good difpofition, yet a little paflionate, foon angry, and as quickly
appeafed again ; of a free, liberal, difpofition, lofty, and a little given to
pride and vain-glory; but in generaba fociable, merry, good-humoured,.
perfon. . |


The fextile or trine of Sol and Mercury: if Sol be fignificator, the na-
tive is proud, ambitious, conceited, yet'very courtcous, and without any
feeming refentment ; pafles over {mall affronts, left the taking notice of
them fhould be any prejudice to his grandeur ; he is nimble-witted,
loquacious, and very good at invention. If Mercury be fignificator, the
native feems to rife in the world wholly by his own wit and ingenuity,.
and without doubt will attain to a degree of honour above that of his
- birth and anceftors quality. 7


The


*«


a ae


ew


226 A N.Y EX DSL Wes. sT ReAS TC 1O N

The fextile or trine of Sol and Luna: if Sol:be fignificator, it is
the afpect of credit and fame, makes the native eminent in the world,
born to great actions, and to perform extraordinary undertakings amongtt
the common people; he is cried up for a god among the. multitude ; if
he bea prieft.or a phyfician, he has a vaft number of followers ; he ts
pleafant, chearful, and good-natured. If Lunais fignifieatrix, the na-
tive is proud, ambitious, coveting after honour and glory, and generally
born to enjoy a great meafure thereof, but very mutable in his refolves,
and, if Luna be weak, he falls into difhonour again.


The fextile of Venusand Mercury : if Venus be fignifieatrix, the native
is very comely, witty, ingenious, fubtil, and of a good nature, feldom
guilty of any difhonourable ation, a good orator, and of an afpiring
fancy, yet feldom bringing things to perfe@ion. If Mercury be fig-

*nificator, the native is of an exceeding courteous nature ; amorous, one
delighting in womens company, by whom he meets either with for-
tune or preferment; he is wife, prudent, juft, virtuous, a lover of
learning, and embellithed with many excellent parts, both natural and
acquired ; -but, if Mercury is weak and out of his dignities, the native
proves vicious inftead of virtuous. .


The fextile or trine of Venus and Luna: if Venus be fignificatrix, the
native will certainly arrive to honour, and be made great or rich, by
means of fome eminent lady ; he alfo has the eftimation of the common
people, and becomes very popular; but isone of an inconftant, unftable,
mind, by reafon of which he performs no great things; he is a comely
engaging perfon, neat and genteel, and very apt to be taken with court-
fhip. If Luna be fignificatrix, the native is very effeminate and amorous,
of a gentle obliging difpofition and temper, one fober, jut, and having
the love of moft women that he converfes with; but, if Luna be weak
and otherwife unfortunate, the native inclines to vice.


The fextile or trine of Mercury and Luna: if Mercury be fignificator,
the native is witty and ingenious, a lover of novelties and all manner of
new inventions and fancies, and mutable and changeable in his mind,
refolution, and in all undertakings ; a man purely given to the art
of diffimulation ; though a pleafant companion. If Luna be fignifica-
trix, the native dives into arts and {ciences, is fubtle, crafty, .covetous,
a-lover of himfelf, referved, and a little melancholy ; if Luna is ftrong,
he makes an excellent orator, a good advocate, and may be a fecretary
to fome prince or nobleman; if Luna be weak, the native is a complete
mafter of the art of deceiving.

Q stn : Of


*


OFT ASATTROLIaG Y, 227


: — ;
Of the QUARTILE and OPPOSITION,


The quartil2 or oppofition of Saturn and Jupiter: if Saturn be fig-
nificator, it fhews trouble and vexation ; if the man be a feCtarian, he is
perfecuted by the clergy, tormented, and molefted ; if the conjunction
falls in the afcendant, twelfth, eleventh, tenth, or ninth, houfes, the mif-
chief falls in the fore part of life, and the native, through his own folly,
lofes a great part of his fortune or eftate. If Jupiter is fignificator, it is
the afpect of unceafing troubles and miferies. The native is a continual
lofer, has great croffes, meets with difgrace and contempt, and, were he
born to a prince’s eftate, would be in danger of becoming a beggar; the
native is of apoor low fpirit, crofs, peevifh, inactive, dull, miferable, and
unfortunate in the world.


The quartile or oppofition of Saturn and Mars: if Saturn be fignifica-
tor, it is the afpect of cruelty and murder; the native is bafe, trea-
cherous, perfidious, envious, quarrelfome, choleric, proud, {cornful,
‘unfociable, rafh, ungrateful, and avery ill-natured perfon; he has good
ftore of wit, but it is only to do mifchief with, and he himfelf meets with
many troubles by war; if Mars be fignificator, it is the afpect of treafon
and rebellion ; the native is wilful, melancholy, fubject to many linger-
ing and continuing difeafes, and will be in danger of an untimely death
by falls, blows, treachery, or poifon ; the native has an unhappy father,
from whom he in part derives his turbulent fpirit, which extremely hurts
both himfelf and others.


The quartile or oppofition of Saturn and the Sun: if Saturn be figni-
ficator, it is the afpect of contempt and infamy, it fhews danger of a vio-
lent death, and it may be by the hand of Juftice ; the native aims at high
and great things, but always miffes his expectations, for his very at-
tempts only are his ruin, both of goods and eftate, and may fometimes
coft his life. The native has a fhew of boldnefs, courage, and revenge,
but his valour is but a vapour. . If the Sun be fignificator, it is the afpect
of treafon and cowardice; the native is inwardly very {piteful and mali-
cious, falfe even to his deareft friend, ftudying revenge only by ways oc-
cult and cowardly ; he is wilful, fearful, and timorous, yet impudently
boafting of great things, far above his fphere, capacity, underitanding,
or undertaking.


‘The quartile or oppofition of Saturn and Venus: if Saturn be fignifi-
cator, it is the afpect of infamy and vice. The native loves women,
defires unlawful things ; his carriage is rude, his condition bafe, given

No. 11. oy Gy '. OVEr


-.*


228 AN! PUD UIS%T! Re ACT 1-0. N


over to Iufts and pleafures of the flefh, inclinable to nothing but vicious
and fordid actions, prodigal in his expences, wafteful to the confumption
of his fortunes. If Venus be fignificatrix, it is the afpeCt of deformity
and bafenefs ; the native is of a poor, low, bafe, timorous, fpirit, afiGed
with the greateft of all misfortunes and cataftrophes, lofes by the fruits
and produtts of the earth, and is indeed a gainer by nothing. Itis the
_deftruction of the fignificatrix.


The quartile or oppofition of Saturn and Mercury: if Saturn be figni-
ficator, it brings many evils from mercurial men and things, and from
profecution and lawfuits; gives the native an impediment in his fpeech,
and makes him ftutter, or ftammer, dulls the fancy, fpoils the inge-
nuity, and makes the native wholly intent upon mifchief, wickednefs,
deceit, cheating, and thieving. If Mercury be fignificator, the native
will be unfortunate in all his actions, perpetually poor, of a perverfe,
felf-willed, evil, malicious, envious, treacherous, difpofition, and it may
be a murderer, for Saturn ftirs up mercurial men to all manner of wick-
. ednefs ; he will be deceitful above meafure, of a dejected mind, revenge-
ful, and bring nothing to perfection.


The quartile or oppofition of Saturn and Luna: if Saturn be fignifi-
cator, it is the afpect of travel and difcontent ; the native is of an in-
different ftature, dark or black hair, a difproportioned body, fometimes
crooked, atraveller, wanderer, or vagabond; one having the ill-will and
reproach of all people, and not undefervedly ; a mere deceiver, and fubjec&t
to great and manifold misfortunes from the vulgar. If Luna be fignifi-
catrix, it is the afpect of jealoufy, fufpicion, and miftruft, the native is
crooked both in perfon and mind, malicious, deceitful, ftrongly vi-
cious, fcandalous, and debauched ; he is afflicted all the days of his life
with innumerable troubles, croffes from adverfaries, want of health,
wafting of his eftate, poverty, death of his mother, a fhort life, and
danger of a violent death.


The quartile or oppofition of Jupiter and Mars: if Jupiter be fignifi-
cator, it is the afpect of fury and ingratitude ; the native is rath, furious,
adventurefome, quarrelfome, choleric, and fometimes is vexed with ma-
ligant fevers, 1s in danger of a violent death by a wound or blow; a
wafter and deftroyer of himfelf, running headlong into precipices, defi-
rous of rule, refolute, ill-natured, fubtle, and perpetually ungrateful to
all his friends, forgetting all their kindneffes. If Mars is fignificator,
it is the afpect of atheifm and infidelity ; the native waftes and deftroys
his fortune and fubftance ; he is bold audacious, impudent, and incorri-
gible; of a proud, {cornful, {coffing, haughty, infolent, humour, a defpifer

2 of


af, ,


<
OFT A SHR OL OG’ Y. 229


of religion, virgue, piety, and moral honefty; and is the abomination of
all good men.


The quartile or oppofition of Jupiter and the Sun : if Jupiter be fig-
nificatof, it is the afpect of arrogance and vain-glory; the native is
profufe and riotous, given to all forts of excefs and prodigality, and lofes
his expectation ; this configuration deprives him of all manner of honour
and preferment: he is noble, lofty, and brave, but only in outward ap-


“pearance, and does nothing but to be feen of men, If the Sun is figni-


ficator, the native waftes his patrimony, is proud, lofty, and pragmati-
cal; -a defpifer of the church and religion, and a great lover of pleafure
and diflipation, to his own infamy and ruin.


The quartile or oppofition of Jupiterand Venus: if Jupiter be fignifi-
cator, it is the afpect of fornication and luft; the native is given over to
debauchery, more efpecially if Venus difpofes of Jupiter. If Venus
be lady of the fecond, fhe native waftes his fortune and eftate, and will
become indigent and poor; he follows bafe and lewd women, and gets
an infamous name in the world. If Venus be fignificatrix, the native is
proud, pragmatical, conceited, given over to carnal pleafures, a defpifer
of piety, virtue, honefty, and religion, one having a mere outfide, a flat-
terer, deceiver, a wafter of his own fortunes and patrimony; he will
shave many enemies created by his own evil ways, chiefly among thofe of
the church, and people of an honeft converfation.


_ The quartile or oppofition of Jupiterand Mercury: if Jupiter be fig-
nificator, it is the afpect of f{trife and contention ; the native will be in-
volved in many troubles, controverfies, and perplexities, have many law-
fuits and incumbranes, to his very great prejudice, and to the injury of
his health as well as of his eftate ; he will berafh, humourfo ne, and very
unftablein all his ways, being generally deceived in all his expectations ;
for Mercury, thus afflicted, reprefents things wrong to the imagination.
If Mercury be fignificator, it is the afpect of folly and impudence, the
native is overfeen in all he undertakes, makes filly refoives, and as fool-
ifhly repents of them to his prejudice ; a repining fimple creature, given’
over to fimplicity and abfurdity, to his own utter undoing.


The quartile or oppofiton of Jupiter and the Moon : if Jupiter be fig-
nificator, it fhews a wafting and lofs of fubftance by many ordinary peo-
ple, makes the native mutable, foolifh, without refolution, and one full
of words without any depth or reafon in them; it thews alfo lofs of
credit and eftimation, and brings many popular evils on him; if the

. » Moon
Sel


2


%


ed


&


a | e
230 AN YPEBUSTR ATION
Moon be fignificatrix, the native is perplexed with unequal fortunes in
the world, many crofles and afflictions befal him; falfe friends, and des


ceitful confederates enfnare him, his fubftance is made a prey to merci-
lefs enemies, and himfelf the object of their cruelty.


*


The quartile or oppofition of Mars and the Sun: if Mars be fignifica-
tor, it is the afpect of confufion and ruin, the native aims at great and
high things, but falls at laft into an abyfs of trouble and mifery ; he
mifcarries in all his undertakings, heaps upon himfelf torrents of for-
row, and forebodes a violent death, which, ifthe Sun be lordof the -fixth,
feventh, or eighth, houfes, will be by means of a fall, or of a wound
with a weapon ; but, if lordofthe tenth, by fentence of a judge. If the
Sun be fignificator, it is the afpect of vanity, fury, and madnefs; it fhews
danger of the lofs of an eye, violent death, or death by a malignant fever;
the native is rafh in all his a@lions, fquanders away his fubftance, and
makes his life and fortunes miferable and defperate.


The quartile or oppofition of Mars and Venus: if Mars be fignifica-
tor, the native is given to vanity, wickednefs, luftful pleafures, and all
manner of abominations of the flefh, gluttony, gaming, and drinking ;
he is treacherous, ill-natured, and very unfortunate ; when he marries,
he commonly marries a woman of ill-fame; he is much given to boaft-
ing and oftentation. If Venus be fignificatrix, the native is infinitely
wicked, a thief, felon, highwayman, or murderer ; takes to all manner
of vice and mifchief; unfortunate both to himfelf and others; given to
ftrife, contention, and every kind of debauchery and wickednefs.


The quartile or oppofition of Mars and Mercury: if Mars be fignifi-
cator, the native is bold, impudent, bafe, treacherous, deceitful above
meafure, even to his moft endeared friend ; an atheift, a defpifer of God
and all goodnefs, afuperficial, inconftant, unfettled, wretched, creature;
a fhifter up and down, a thief, and one that lives by dangerous courfes ;
one ill brooking, andlong retaining, the fenfe of an injury; humourfome,
conceited, difficult to be pleafed, and unfortunate in all things. If Mer-


“cury be fignificator, the native is guilty of many crimes, is of a very


wicked and evil nature, likely to be guilty of murder or robbery; a
breeder of contention and mifchief, anda follower of almoft every difho-
nourable practice.


The quartile or oppofition of Mars and: the Moon: if Mars be fignifi-
cator, the native is ill-tongued, a perfect {cold, gives railing and bafe
language in almoft all difcourfe, is ungrateful, anda forgetter of kind-

* j


7


se mi nefles, -


%


OF ASFROEL OGY / 854
nefies, 4 winderet, a vagabond, 4 détraCtor from other men’s worth, offe
ftupid, and of a fervile lifé; unfortunaté in all his undertakings. If the
Moon’ be fignificatrix, the’ native’ will bé in danger of lofing one’ of his
eyés, die a violent death, or be fubjeG’ to many croffes, troubles, and
afflictions of fortune and. juftice ; he is fubjeG@ to hurts, wounds, anid
othér mifchiefs, and is mutable, rath, paflionate, ambitious, prodigal,
imalicious, tréachérous, and fulbject to innumerable miferies.


The quartile or oppofition of Sol and Venus; if Sol be’ fignificater,
the native lives in a diffonourable repute, receives many great trowblés
and’ misfortunes by means’ of women; he is bold, confident; proud, one
delighting in ftrife, contention, and oppofition, unfortunate in moft of


his actions, and coming off in moft of his undertakings with dithonout,


s


If Venus be fignificatrix, the native déludes himfelf with vanities, and
expectations. of things which will never be; -he is angry, paffionate,
and givemup to pride, boafting, and vain glory; receives much hurt by
‘great men, and fometimes may be in danger of his life, by fentencé of
the judge: ° -


The quartile or oppofition: of Sol and: Mereury if Sol be fignificator,


the native is fubject to many loffes and vexations by the law; or receives °


hurt by mercurial men and things, is: unfortunate; and has.an impédi-
ment ini his fpeech, one thatis: deceitful, falfe, dnd not tobe trufteds If
Mercury’ be! fignificator, the native is of a middle ftature, dull fwarthy
complexion, tanned or fun-burnt, with light brown hair, full face and
eye, high nofe, hafty, choleric, proud, angry, and infolent ;' a boafter,
ambitious, highly conceited: of himfelf, and: fubject to the frowns. of
princes and great men.


The quartile or oppofition of Sol and Luna if Sol be fignificator, the
native’s fortune is mutable and unftable, he falls into contempt and re-
proach among the. commion: people, and: merits’ the hatred or difpleafure
of fome' great lady or perfon, ;' he isa cheat, deceiver, or impoftor. If
Luna be fignificatrix, the native is full-faced, of a clear vifage, and Jight-
coloured: hair, very ambitious-of honour, which flies from him like a
fhadow’ purfued:;; one aiming at and attempting many great things with-
out fuccefs, but meets with;many croffes, lofles, treubles,) forrows,. and
obftructions, in his way to preferment.. :


The quartile’or oppofition of Venus and’ Mercury ; if Venus. be figni-
ficatrix, the nativeis crafty, fubtle, deceitful, and given to thievery ;-he
has an:impédiment: in his fpeech, is of dull underftanding, froward;: {elf.

No. 12. | 3 a willed,


*,


250 AN XBU US TR AT IVO N


willed, crofs, and indeed a perfect knave, onewhofe ill conditions and
bafe mind always keep him poor. If Mercury be fignificator, the na-
tive is deceitful, difhoneft, flothful, given to indolence and eafe, and
delights in the company of lewd women ; a mere diflembler, and one
that waftes and fpends his fortune in debauchery.


The quartile or oppofition of Venus and Luna; if Venus be fignifica-
trix, it fhews mutability, ftrife, contention, quarrelling, debate, one of
_an ill tongue and a worfe life, unfortunatein marriage and children, one
idle, indolent, and lazy, fubjeét to poverty and beggary. If Luna be fig-
nificatrix, the perfon is of a bold, impudent, audacious, difpofition, given
up to Juft and lewdnefs; a mere vulgar fordid: creature, a wanderer,
fugitive, and vagabond ; deceitful, and fubject toa multitude of misfor-
tunes, efpecially from and 2mong women.


The quartile or oppofition of Mercury and Luna; if Mercury be fig-
nificator, the native is mutable, unftable in all his ways, foolifh, arro-
gant, void of reafon and good manners, loquacious, and very much con-
ceited of himfelf; he fhall meet with many troubles and oppofitions,
and that from the common people, lofe the favour of fome noble wo-
“man, and be reduced to an abject ftate of poverty: the frowns: of a
prince are not fo formidable as the hatred of the common people, for. that
fo precipitates a man, that it prevents him for ever from rifing again
without fome extraordinary aid: if Luna be fignificatrix, let the native
take what care and pains he will, he fhall never doany thing commenda-
ble; it fignifies a defect in the tongue, and makes the native in every
undertaking very unfortunate, and forthe moft part expofed to contempt
and infamy. .


On the -E FUP ’E*e T'S “of “the, HOU SES!


Firft houfe. Ifone or both of the infortunes vitiate the degrees afcend-
ing, orthelight of time be eclipfed or afflicted, or the lord of the afcen-
dant combuft, or retrograde and peregrine, or the birth was exactly up-
on a new or full Moon; or Luna be in conjunction, quartile, or oppofi-
tion, of Saturnor Mars, or both, in the fourth, fixth, eighth, or twelfth,
houfe, or befieged of the infortunes ; the native will be of fhort life; but
contrariwife, if there be fignifications of long life; that is, if the afcen-
dant, planet therein, or its lord, or all of them, be ina good houfe of hea-
ven, effentially ftromg, and free from affliction, encreafing in number,
light, and motion ; the native will then have a long and happy life ;
otherwife unhappy. Now the afflicting ‘planet, by confidering what
houfe he is lord of, and pofited in, will thew the caufe. |

Second


OrFrwe STR OL G ¥! 233


_.» Sevond houfe.—The cufp. of the fecond houfe, free from affliCtion, or

aflifted with the prefence or beams of fortunate planets, or part of for-
tune, or lord of the fecond ; or the lord of the fecond ftrong, free from
affliction, and in a good houfe, or in conjunction, fextile, or trine, of
fortunate planets, or in conjunction of benevolent fixed ftars of the firft
or fecond, magnitude, are all evident teftimonies of much wealth, and
great riches; but, if the cufpof the fecond houfe, the planet therein,
or the lord thereof, be combuft, weak, afflicted by conjunction, quar-
tile, or oppofition, of the infortunes, decreafing in number, light, and
motion, or in an evil houfe, they are evident teftimonies of poverty and


extreme want.


Third houfe.—-The cufp of the third, free from affliGion, fortified
-with the dragon’s head, or good planets, or their afpects, or the prefence
of its lord; or the lord thereof ftrong and free from affliGion, and in a
good houfe, in fextile or trine with good planets, or the Moon, thews
good, pleafant, and fafe, journeys ; but, if the cufp thereof or its lord be
afflicted with the conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the infortune;
or the lord thereof be weak, peregrine, and in the feventh or eighth houfe,
it indicates misfortunes, and loffes by robbery or otherwife.


Fourth houfe.—The lord of the fourth, in the fourth, (and generally
any planets there,) fhew an inheritance in land, if they are fortunes, and .
ftrongly dignified ; or, if the cufp of the fourth, or its lord, be in fextile or
trine with Saturn or Jupiter, it denotes the fame; but, if infortunes, or af.
flied by the quartile or oppofition of any planet, chiefly Saturn or Mars,
or the lord of the fourth be weak or retrograde, there is either no ine
heritance, or elfe it is much incumbered, and in danger of being loft.


Fifth houfe.—The angles and cufp of the fifth, and fign in which the
lord of the. eighth is, being in fruitful figns, many planets in the fifth,
efpecially Jupiter Venus, Mercury, and Luna; or they cafting their
trines to the fifth, or its lord, or if there be any tranflation or reception,
or mutual pofition between them and the lord of the fifth; or the lord of
the fifth, and the lord of the afcendant, or the planet in the afcendant, or
dragon’s head, be there; thefe are fignificators of a plentiful iffue: but
Saturn, Mars, Sol, or dragon’s tail, there, efpecially in barren figns, and
Luna, and the lord of the afcendant, in barren figns alfo, and the lord of
the afcendant, or fifth, in quartile or oppofition of one another, or with
Saturn or Mars, are evident teftimonies of barrennefs. :


Sixth houfe.—If the lord of the fixth or planet in the fixth afflid
not the afcendant or the lord thereof, or the lord of the afcendant be not


in the fixth, or in its lord’s dignities, or in quartile or oppofition of Sa-
: turn


p .
’ a


" -


294 ANW 42DLUS T RAT ICO N


tura or Mars; of combuftof Sol inthe fixth, feventh, or. twelfth, houfes ;
or the lord. of the fixth, orany planet of his nature, be notin the afcen-
dant ; then will the native be healthful, and of a ftrong body, and very
free fromrdifeafes ; and fo contrariwife. If the lord of the fixth or pla
net therein be in quartile or oppofition of the lord of the afcendant or fe-
cond, or-planets therein,. or exalted therein, or the lord of the fecond be’
in the fixth im quartile oroppofition of the lordof the afcendant, or fixth,
the native’s fervants will prove treacherous and thievifh to him ; and fo
on, the-contrary.


Seventh houfe.—If the Moon or any light planet tranflate the light: of
the lord of the. afcendant or planet therein to the lord of the feventh
or planet therein, or there be any mutual reception between the figni-
ficators, either by houfe er pofition, or they apply one:to: another by
conjunction,, fextile;. on trine, but efpecially with reception, or the Moon
apply to the conjunction, fextile, or trine, off the lord:of the afcendant,
or planet therein, and the fignificators be: in: fruitful figns, the: native
will marry ; foralfo, if fhe tranflates the light. of Mars to Venus; and
fo contrariwife. TEhe:lordi of the afcendant near a partile afpect of many
planets, or the lordofithe feventh and planets therein, applying jointly to
the lord of the feventh, many planets in the feventh, and they in good
afpeét with Luna or Venus, or lord of the feventh, are arguments of
marrying more than once ; and’ fo'contrariwife. The agreement between
both is difcerned' from the quality of the application, reception, tranfla=
tion, pofition, and‘ dignities, of the fignifrcators ; and in thefe words the
whole bufinefs of public adverfaries is comprehended ; fave that that figmifi-
_eator which is ftrongeft, freeft from affliction, moft affifted, and’ beft po-
fited, fhall'overcome, and that perfon’ fhall livelongeft.


Eighth houfe.—The lord‘ of the‘afeendant ftrong; orin a‘ good houfe,
and in: good afpect with the lord of the eighth, or planets'in’ the’ eighth;
or if Jupiter or Venus: be lords of: the eighth, or pofited' in the cufp
thereof, or Luna tranflates the light of the lord‘of the eighth, or planet
in the eighth, to the lord of the afcendant, -or planets therein, by good
afpetis ; or when the lord of the afcendant, the luminaries, lord of the
eighth, or cufp of the erghth, be in' violent figns, the native will‘die'a
natural death; but; if the fignificatorsof death be effentially fortified) and
in the eighth, or in quartile-or oppofition of the lord of the afcendant, Sol
and Luna, or planets in the-afcendant, and in violent figns, or in oppo-
fition to the afcendant, the-native will bein’ danger’ of dying a violent
death. Thecufp of the eighth adorned, with fixed flars of the firft and
fecond magnitude, or with.the prefence of. Jupiter, Venus, Sol, Luna,
dragon’s head, or part of fortune, or with the good af{pect of the faid pla~
nets ; or the lord thereof ftrong, free from affliction, and fortified with

‘the


°


»
ry


9 FOASTTyROO LOG Yix » aS


the conjunction, fextile, gr trine, of benevolents, are figns of a good
dowry ; and fo contrariwife.


Ninth houfe.—If the lord of the ninth, or planets in the ninth, be in.
mutual reception with the lord of the afcendant, or planets in the afcen® ¥
dant, or the Moonor any light planet makes any tranflation, or there be
any. pofition or any application between the principal fignificators by
good afpect, the native will travel, prove a merchant, a fcholar, or cler-
gyman; and, if Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Luna, the Part of Fortune, or
Dragon’s Head, be there, or the lord of the ninth, or. planets therein,
being in good afpect with any benevolent, the native will be truly religi-
ous, and gain much byany thing he undertakes. The lord of the ninth
in the-afcendant, in trine to a planet in the ninth, the fame; but, ifSaturn,
Mars, or the lord of an evil houfe, or Dragon’s Tail, be pofited there ; or
the lord thereof be weak, combatt, afflicted, or retrograde ; it forebodes
much evil. a


* Tenth houfe.—The only figns of honourare the ftrength of the lords of
the afcendant, medium cceli, and their difpofition either by good applica-
tion, pofition, reception, or tranflation ; or the prefence or good afpett of
Jupiter, Sol, Venus, Mercury, or Luna; or the pofition of the Dragon’s
Head or Part of Fortune in the tenth or eleventh houfes ; the contrary
afpects fhew difhonour, difgrace, fhame, contempt, and at length endan-
gera violent death.


Eleventh houfe.—The lord of the eleventh, or any other planet there,
fhew friends; fo alfo, if they be in mutual reception, or pofition, or if
there be any tranflation or application between them and the lord‘of the
afcendant, or planets therein, or if Jupiter, Venus, Sol, Luna, or Dra-
gon’s Tail, be there, they are arguments of great, noble, generous, and
faithful, friends ; but, if the fignificators have malignant afpects, and
there be no tranflation, reception, nor pofition, or if Saturn and Mars
or the lord of the twelfth be pofited there, they thew either few or no
friends, or elfe very bad and falfe ones.


Twelfth houfe.—No planet in the twelfth, nor the lord thereof in
any af{pect with the lord of the afcendant, or planets in the afcendant, or
afcendant itfelf, or the lord of the afcendant not pofited in the twelfth,
or in afpect with the lord of the twelfth, are arguments of few private
enemies ; but, if the afcendant, its lord, or planets therein, be in conjunc-
tion or evil afpect with the lord of the twelfth, or Saturn and Mars, and
they lords of evil houfes, or if they be pofited in the afcendant, feventh,
or twelfth houfes, or in combuftion, the native will have many and great
enemies, and be {ubject to imprifonment, and many other troubles; but


No. 12, 31 if


| i
246 AN PDs TR ATT ON


if inftead of evil, the afpects be good, with the fignificators in bad
houfes, the native will be deluded and drawn into troubles through fair
pretences, and his private enemies will always be fuch as outwardly ex-
prefs a kindnefs for him.


GENERAL JUDGMENTS to be inferred from DIRECTIONS.


The lord of the afcendant to promiffors. To the afcendant, it figni-
fies much happinefs ; to the fecond houfe or its lord, it has fignification
of fubftance ; to the third or its lord, of journeys; to the fourth or its
lord, of inheritances ; to the fifth or its lord, of children ; to the fixth
or its lord, of ficknefs and fervants; to the feventh or its lord, wives,
public enemies, and law-fuits ; to the eighth or its lord, death and le-"
gacies ; to the ninth orits lord, learning, ecclefiaftical preferment, mer-
chandize, going to fea; to the tenthor its lord, honour, preferment,
office, dignity, trading ; to the eleventh or its lord, friends, hopes, and
expectancies; to the twelfth or its lord, imprifonment, and private
enemies.


The lord of the fecond to promiffors. ‘To the. fecond, a great encreafe
of wealth and riches ; to the third or its lord, gain or lofs by. kindred,
neighbours, or travelling ; tothe fourth or its lord, gain orlofs by houfes,
lands, or parents ; to the fifth orits lord, by children, or by gaming; to
the fixth or its lord, by fervants, or cattle; to the feventh or its lord,
by marriage, women, public enemies, law-fuits ; to the eighth or its
lord, by death, or legacies ; to the ninth or its lord, by learning, arts,
{ciences, the fea, religion; to the tenth or its lord, by trade, honour,
preferment, or dignity ; tothe eleventh or its lord, .by friends; to the
twelfth or its lord, by great cattle, private enemies, imprifonment ; to
the afcendant or its lord, by the native’s own induftry. |


The lord of the third to promiffors. To the third, many pleafant jour-
neys; to the fourth houfe or its lord, gain by travelling, or.tofee his father,
or fome eftate; to the fifth or its lord, travelling for pleafure, or on ac-
count of children ; to the fixth houfe or its lord, journeys about fmall
cattle ; to the feventh or its lord, journeying on fome law-fuit, public
adverfary, or woman ; to the eighth houfe or its lord, concerning fome
legacy, or wife's portion ; to the ninth or its lord, for the fake of reli-
gion, merchandize, learning, or to fee foreign countries ; to the tenth
orits lord, for honour, preferment, trade, cr to fee his‘mother ; to the
eleventh or its lord, to fee a friend, or inshopes of advantage; to the
twelfth or its lord, becaufe of private enemies, or fear of imprifonment;

to


OF PASAT R ONLIO'R yor / 239,
to the afcendant or its lord, for health or pleafure; to the fecond or its
lord, for fubitance or wealth.


The lord of the fourth to promiffors. To the fourth houfe, inheri-
tances ; to the fifth or its lord, aneftate to fome of the native’s children;


to the fixth or its lord, an eftate to fall to the native from fome relations,
or uncles and aunts by the father’s fide ; to the feventh or its lord, by
marriage, or the law ; to the eighth or its lord, by fome legacy or portion
by a wife ; to the ninth or its lord, by learning, trading to fea, the
church, or wife’s kindred ; to the tenth or its lord, by the wife’s fa-
ther, or the king or fome noble or great man; to the eleventh or its
lord, by means of a friend ; to the twelfth or its lord, by dealing in cat-
tle ; to the afcendant or its lord, by his own induftry ; to the fecond or
its lord, by purchafe ; to the third or its lord, by death of kindred.


The lord of the ffth-to promiffors. To the fifth houfe, it gives to the |
native achild; to the fixth or its lord, that his children may become


fervants to him; to the feventh or its lord, that they may travel, or that
his wife may have another child ; to the eighth or its lord, danger of
death, through fome excefs of pleafure; to the ninth or its lord, that
the native will chiefly delight in religion, arts, feiences, or the fea; to.
the tenth or its lord, ficknefs to the native’s children; to the eleventh or
its lord, the love of a {pecial friend, or the marriage of one of his chil-
"dren; to the twelfth or its lord, the death of a child, or danger thereof,

or a legacy left to it; to the afcendant or its lord, the love or hate of the
native’s children to him, or their travelling beyond fea; to the fecond or
its lord, that they fhall have honour and renown in the world, and have
fome gifts from their father ; to the third or its lord, that the native
fhall take recreatioh in the country, and among his kindred; to the
fourth or its lord, that the native’s children may deal in great cattle, and


have many private enemies.


The: lord of the fixth to promiffors. To the fixth houfe, thriving by
trade and hufbandry; to the feventh of its lord, danger of ficknefs
through feme women, or by quarrelling ; to the eighth or its Jord, dan-
ger of mortal ficknefs ; to the ninth or its lord, ficknefs at fea, or from
too much ftudy ; to the tenth or its lord, grief for fome difhonour, or
not attaining the honour defired ; to the eleventh or its lord, infection
among cattle, or gricf of the native for fome fpecial friend’s fake; to the
twelfth or its lord, lofs of cattle by thieves, ficknefs, or infection ; to
‘the afcendant or itslord, ficknefs through the native’s own folly ; to the
fecond or itslord, for want of money, or lofs of an eftate; to the third
or its lord, by reafon of fone journey, or unkindnefs of kindred ; to the


fourth or its lord, by reafon of his father, or grief for lofs of inheri-
tance;


238 A NW DLoL Ues TR gAAT 1 Oy N


tance; to the fifth or its lord, from fome unlawful pleafure, difobedi-
ence, or death of a child.

The lord of the feventh to promiffors. .'To the feventh  houfe, fick-
nefs, or illnefs to the native ; to the eighth or its lord, the wife's por-.
tion ; tothe ninth or its lord, fhe goes into the country, or.is concerned
with her kindred ; to the tenth or its.lord, takes poffeffion of an inheri-
tance.; to the eleventh orits lord, the hasa child, or comes more into the
hufband’s favour ; to the twelfth or its lord, fhe is fickly, or fome way
concerned with her hufband’sprivate enemies ; to the afcendant or its lord,
fhe and her hufband become greater friends or enemies than formerly ; then
alfo law-fuits either begin or end. to the fecond or itslord, a wife politic
enemy, oralaw-fuit proves good or bad to the native’s fubftance ; to the
third or its lord, fhe either goes beyond fea, or takes fome long journey ;
to the fourth or its lord, the brings him lands; to the fifth or its lord,


children and friends ; to the fixth or its lord, fhe meets with private
enemies.


The lord of the eighth to promiffors. "To the eighth houfe, legacies ;
to the ninth or its lord, legacies by fome of the wife’s brethren, or by a
clergyman ; to the tenth or its lord, by his wife’s father or hisown mo-
ther ; tothe eleventh or itslord, by fome friend; to the twelfth or its
lord, by fome of his wife’s uncles or aunts by the father’s fide, or fomeof
his own -by the mother’s fide ; to the afcendant or its lord, danger of
death ; to the fecond or its lord, receiving of the wife’s portion ; to the
third or its lord, a legacy by a brother or kinfman ; to the fourth or its
lord, by afather ; to the fifth or its lord, danger of death to achild, or
the falling of an inheritance to it; to the fixth or its lord, a dangerous
ficknefs to the native ; to the feventh or its lord, the wife’s dowry, or
legacies by means of a wife. .


Tbe lord of the ninth to promifors. To the ninth houfe, good fuc-'
cefs at fea, church preferment; to the tenth or its lord, preferment
and honour by means of learning, the fea, or the church ; to the eleventh
or its lord, that the native gets many friends by his learning and fanétity ;
to the twelfth or its lord, many private enemies ; to the afcendant or its
lord, that the native fhall attain to learning, arts, feiences, or ecclefia-
ftical preferment through his own induftry ; to the fecond or its lord, by
means of his wealth, and that he may get or lofe fubftance thereby ; to
the third or its lord, that he may attain thofe things by means of a bro-
ther, kinfman, or neighbour, or may travel for improvement; to the
fourth or its lord, by means of a father or of an inheritance, or he ma
get an eftate thereby ; to the fifth or its lord, that he fhall be induftri-


1 ous,


“OPO ASSTSR OLOG Y, 239


ous, and-delight in the education of his children ; to the fixth or its lord,
ficknefs through too much ftudy, or care for bufinefs; to the feventh
or its lord, church preferment by means of .a wife or woman; to the
eighth or its lord, by means of her fortune ; or danger of death for fome


mifdemeanor..


The lord of the tenth to promiffors. To the tenth houfe, great and
eminent honour and preferment ; to the eleventh houfe or its lord, pre-~
ferment through friends, and that he fhall attain honourable friends by
his preferment ; if he be a tradefman, he will gain much thereby, through
his friends and acquaintance, and fo on, confideratis confi derandis ; to the
twelfth or its lord, difhonour and lofs, or danger of imprifonment by
means of a private enemy ; to the afcendant or its lord, honour, glory, or
dignity, by his own induftry ; to the fecond or its lord, by means of
money ; to the third or its lord, by travel, kindred, neighbours, or the
like ; to the fourth or its lord, by means of a father, or an inheritance ;
tothe fifth or its lord, by means of children, or pleafant companions; to
the fixth or its lord, by means of a fervant; to the feventh or its lord;
by a wife, or fome womans to the eighth or its lord, by a legacy, or
wife’s portion; to the ‘ninth or its lord, by the fea, merchandize, the
church, arts, fciences, &c.


iThe lord of the eleventh boufe to promiffors. .To the eleventh houfe,
fure friends ; to the twelfth or its lord, friendfhip from enemies; to
the afcendant or its-lord, endeared friends for the native’s own fake ; to
the .fecond or. its lord, profitable friends; to the third or its. lord,
friendthip or kindred, brethren, or neighbours ; to the fourth or its lord,
friends by means of an eftate; to the fifth or its lord, by means of jo-
vial companions, or children ; to the fixth or its lord, by means of a fer-
vant; to the feventh or its lord, by a wife, or. the reconciliation of an
enemy ; to the eighth or its lord, legacies by means of a friend, alfo
honourable friends ; to the ninth or its lord, friendfhip by reafon of the
church, fea, arts, {ciences, merchandize, &c. alfo religious friends; tothe
tenth or its lord, the friendfhip of the king, queen, or fome nobleman;
honourable friends, and fuch as are friends to him by reafon of his pro-
feffion, dignity, or greatnefs.


The lord of the twelfth to promifors. To the twelfth houfe, pri-
vate enemies ; to the afcendant or its lord, danger of imprifonment ;
to the fecond or its lord, lofs or gain of fubftance ‘by private enemies or
by cattle; to the third or its lord, enemies amongtt kindred or relations ;
to the fourth or its lord, prejudice to inheritances ; to the fifth houfe
or its lord, ficknefs, falfity of children; to the fixth houfe or its lord,


Oe) Fo 3K lofs


d40 ANY Prbiw siTiRs Mat ON


lofs of ‘cattle by robbery or the like; to the feventh or its lord, death
of private enemies; to the eighth or its lord, gifts or legacies ; to the
ninth or its lord, enemies among churchmen, merchants, and learned
men; to the tenth or its lord, the notice of great and noble men, or
lofs of credit ; to the eleventh or its lord, lofs of friends, or that friends
may become enemies.


Thefe dire€tions may either fignify good or evil to thofe things which
we have fpecified them to fignify, according to the nature and quality of
the promiffor ; for, if the direction was to the fextile or trine of the pro-
mificr, without doubt the things promifed by that direction may be
eminently good; if to the quartile or oppofition, very bad; and, if to
the conjunction, then according to the nature and quality of the planet,
and the houfes he is lord of, be he good or evil.


As the afcendant fignifies the body, mind, and life; the fecond, ef-
tate and fubftance ; and the tenth, preferment, credit, trade, and favour of
great men; fo alfo So), Luna, and the part of fortune, befides what they
import by being pofited in or lords of any particular houfe, fignify the
body, mind, fubftance, life, health, dignity, offices, affections, eftate,
fortune, and friendfhip, of great perfons. ‘Thefe things being under-
ftood, he that would truly judge of the effects of direttions, ought
to confider the true fignification of the fignificator, of the promit-
tor, and of the houfe; firft, what they fignify effentially, and what ac-
cidentally ; fecondly, what by domination, and what by pofition; for
thofe things fignified by the fignificator thal] either be augmented or di- -
minifhed, preferved or deftroyed, ftrengthened or weakened, attained or
loft, according, firft, as the houfe or point where the direction falls is
fortified or vitiated, by the prefence or beams of good or evil ftars; fe-
condly, according to the eminency of the fignificator ; and, laftly, as the
promiffor is good or bad, {trong or weak.—Therefore the fignificator
fignifies the thing promifed ; the houfe in which the direétion falls, its:
relation or quality ; and the promiffor, the means of the accomplifhment;
wherein muft be confidered the radical fortitudes of both, for accordingly
the effects of the direction will operate, and be durable, whether good
or evil, till this or fome other fignificator meets with another promiffor,
& é contrario; wherein note, that, if the fignificator be ftrong, the thing
promifed will be very good and great; which, if the promiffor anfwers
in ftrength, in the direétion will glorioufly appear ; but, if the promiffor be
weak or mean, the native may attain the thing fignified, but not without
great delay, labour, care, and toil; but contrariwife, if the fignificator be

weak ;


OF AS TROLOG Y; 244


weak ; for then the matter will not be great nor eminent, let the promif-
for be what it will.


If the fignificator difpofes of the place of the direction, though an
evil one, the promiffor will not do fo much hurt/as it otherwife would ;
but, if the promiffor be difpofer of the place of an evil direction, it will
then operate with double force, according to the greatnefs of its malig-
nity. But, if another planet difpofes of the place of the direction, then,
according as that planet fympathizes with the fignificator, either by na-
ture, body, or beams, fo the good or evil fignified by the direction
fhalh be increafed or diminifhed, | .


If Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, be fignificators, they will not be fo much
impedited by evil promiffors as the other planets are; but, whenever they
are promiffors, and afflicted by malefic afpects, they effect what they
portend with violence.


If two directions, the one good, the other evil, fhall operate at one and
the fame time; unlefs they are diametrically oppofite one to another, the
effects of both will appear, but that moft apparently which coheres with
the revolution of the year.


The fignificator and promiffor thall fympathize together ; and, if the
good direction fhall fall in fextile to the radical place of the fignificator,
or near the body of an eminent fixed ftar, cohering in nature; that di-
rection will famoufly manifeft its influence ; for directions to the bodies
of fixed ftars of the firft, fecond, or third, magnitude, according as they
in nature agree or difagree with the fignificator, fo they will fuddenly and
unexpectedly either help or impede him, and chiefly in and by thote things
fignified by the houfe in which the direction falls.


JUDGMENTS tobe inferred from TRANSITS.


Tranfits of good planets by good places or promifiors fignify good, but
by evil places, evil; and fo contrariwife. And whatfoever we have bee
fore faid of directions, the fame things, in an inferior degree, are to be
underftood of tranfits, with this difference, that, whereas directio nsfig-
nify the good or evil to be eminent, tranfits fignify much finaller mat-
ters of the famé kind ; and whereas the force or effects. of a diredtion lafts
long, the effects of a tranfit are generally over as foon as the tranfit; the
one oftentimes lafting years, the other but days or weeks at moft.


But


242 AN TEE US TR ATED 'N


But the tranfits of the fuperiors, as Saturn and Jupiter, are'very emi-
nently to be confidered, for they never pafs without obvious éffects, which
often laft a whole year, be they good or evil; for, if they be lords of ill
houfes, or radically in an ill houfe, if they tranfit the afcendant, the
quartile, or oppofition, or place of its lord, they threaten life; if the
fecond or its Jord, the fubftance ; if the’third or its lord, journeys; ‘if
the fourth or its lord, danger to the father, or lofs of inheritance’; if the
fifth or its lord, lofs by gaming, and death of children; if the fixth or its
lord, death of cattle; if the feventh or its lord, ficknefs of the wife;
if the eighth or its lord, lofs of fubftance, becaufe they caft their op-
pofition unto the fecond ; if the ninth or its Jord, lofs at fea, robbing by
land, envy of churchmen; if the tenth or its lord, the king’s difplea-
fure if a courtier, but lofs-of trade if a tradefman ; if the eleventh or ‘its
lord, evil friends, or their affliction, the lofs of hopes ; if the twelfth or
its lord, death, and ‘lofs by cattle.


Obferve on what day the moon or other planets caft their trine or
fextile to the cufp of the fecond, or tranfit the trine or fextile of its lord,
or planet near its gufp, or caft their trine or fextile to the part of fortune, -
for .thofe days will be good to the native, and very profitable ; and, if
the mind his bufinefs, he may then have aftonithing fuccefs ; but thofe
days-in which the faid planets tranfit the quartile or oppofition will be as
bad, wherein, if he lofes not money, he is fure to get none; and this I
have found more than a thoufand times true; the fame if an evil planet
tranfits the conjundtion of the lord of the fecond or part of fortune ; but
the tranfits of a good planet to their conjunttion are advantageous,


Saturn and Jupiter, if they be lords of good houfes, and tranfit the
good afpect or conjunction of any fignificator, with whom they agree in
nature, or were radically in good afpect with, fignify much good.


If .good planets or the lord of the afcendant tranfit the medium ceeli,
or place of its lord, or its fextile or trine, the native gets honour, or
trade, and, if he be in purfuit of any preferment, he attains it.


The lord of the afcendant, tranfiting the afcendant or his radical place,
fhews health to the native; the fecond, or the conjunction, fextile, or
trine, of its lord, gain; the third, or-conjun@ion, fextile, or trine, of its lord,
good journeys, and the friendfhip of kindred and neighbours, &c.


The lord of the fecond tranfiting the cufp thereof, or his radical place,
denotes gain; the third houfe, or the conjunction, fextile, or trine, of its


Jord, or planet therein, fhews gain by travelling, neighbours, kindred, &c.
I The


~


© FT AA SITTR: OF LI OG. YZ 243


_ The tranfits of the Moon. difcover all things, whether good or evil,
which happen to a man daily, through the whole courfe of his life ; her
application to, or tranfits of, fextiles and trines, thew good ; of quartiles
and eppofitions, »evil,. concerning all thofe things fignified by that houfe
in, which the trapfit is made ;.where, if fhe be fignificatrix, the good or
eyil willial(o,fall in, part; upon the things fignified by her, according to
the houfe the was. lady, of, or pofited in the radix ;. but, if not, the good
or evil will fall upon thofe. things fignified by the fignificator which is
tranfited.. 0 oft consi b


JUDGMENTS to beinferred from REVOLUTIONS.


Thejudgments of a revolution. are eafy to be determinied, by confider-
ing in what houfe and fign in the revolution the radical fignificators are
pofited ; for according» to thofe.revolutional pofitions and configurations
we are tojudge... So that, if the lord of the fecond houfe be in the third, it
thews gain tocome either. bytrayel, or by kindred, or neighbours; and, if
he be alfoin fextile or trine with the lord of the third in the radix, the
fame. if with the lord of the fourth, by a father ; if in the medium ceeli,
or in conjun@tion, fextile, or trine, with his radical lord, gain by trade,
office, preferment, or noblemen. Hence it appears, that the fignificator of
fubftance ina revolution;is not thelord of the fecond in the revolution,
but the lord of the fecond in the radix; the fignificator of lands is not
the lord of the fourth in the revolution, but the lord of the fourth in the
radix ; the fame is to be under(tood of the reft; but, if the fame fign which
afcended radically afcends in the revolution, its effects will be the more
firm, begaufe the fignificators are the fame; the like, if the fame planets
~which were lords of the feveral houfes in the radix be lords of the fame
in the revolution, though they poffefs not the fame fign.


Whatfoever good or evil is prefaged unto the native, either. by direc-
tion, tranfit, or revolution, we are to meafure the greatnefs thereof, ac-
cording to the radical {trength or fortitudes of the tignificators, compar-
ed with their ftrength or. fortitudes at the time of direction; where, if
they are radically ftrong, the good or evil will be great and permanent,
the which is confirmed if they be ftrong alfo at the time of direftion or
tranfit ; if radically weak, the good or evil will but meanly manifeft it-
felf; and.{carcely at all, if weak at the time of direction or tranfit ; but,
if radically weak, and {trong at the time of the direGion or tranfit, the
effects thereof may appear much beyond the expectation of the native,
but will not be very durable. ee


No. 12, 3L The


244. ANY DW. UW SuTTRi As T 70 N


The SIGNIFICATION of feveral FIXED STARS in
NATIVITIES, Heb


The fignificator of life or manners; joined to Caput Algol, makes the
native furly and choleric, and’ fhews danger of fudden death. To the
Pleiades, it fhews wantonnefs, ambition, and fcorn. ‘To Aldebaran,
courage in war, and a martial inclination; the lord of the afcendant and the
_ Moon or Saturn in conjunction with this ftar, fhews a murderer, or one
that bears a very wicked mind. To Hircus, fhews curiofity, one defiring
novelties ; yet a careful and fteady perfon. To Cingula Orionis, a tharp
memory and underftanding, one induftrious.»To Syrius, an angry, proud,
faucy, giddy, imprudent, perfon. To Hercules, fubtilty, craft, bold-
‘ nefs, and cruelty. To Regulus, greatnefs of {pirit, a generousand mag-
nanimous mind, one ambitious of rule and dominion. To Antares, an
unruly rath perfon, and one likely to ruin himfelf by his obftinacy. ‘To
Arifta, a fweet, noble, generous, foul, a‘lover of artsand fciences, and,
if Mercury be with it, a curious inventor of rare things ;’ but, if Saturn,
a violent rigid fellow, and fometimes a fool. To Aquila, boldnefs, con-
fidence, valour, but a wicked perfon. To Cauda Delphina, one delight-
ing in fports, games, fhooting, hunting, and the like. The fignifica-
tor of fubftance, or cufp of the fecond, part of fortune, or its difpofitor,
in conjunétion with Regulus, or with Arifta, thew much riches: ~


The fignificators of fubftance, part of fortune, or its lord, in conjunc-.
tion with Aldebaran or Caput Algol, thew lofs of eftate, and poverty.
The Sun or Moon with the Pleiades or Prefepe, Antares, or Deneb, the
native will fuffer fome hurt or defect in his eyes; and it is incurable if
that light be angular. The Moon in conjunction with Cingula Orionis,
and combuift, fhews blindnefs of one eyeat leaft. The fignificators of ho-
nour in conjunction, or within five degrees of conjunction forward or back-
ward, with Aldebaran, or with Hercules, Regulus, Arifta, Lanx Bore-
alis, or Antares, fhew great honour and preferment. The Sun or Moon
in conjunction with the Pleiades, or the Hyades, fhews military prefer-
ment; the fame if thofe ftars culminate. Caput Algol culminating, gives
the native authority over others; fo alfo Aldebaran, or Antares, in con-
junction of Sol or Luna in theafcendant, or medium‘ceeli, give the native
honour, but with many difficulties and cafualties, Arifta afcending or
culminating, gives the native religious preferment. Fomahaut and Ri-
gel in the afcendant, or medium cel, give animmortalname. Regulus,
Arturus, or Humerus Orionis, in conjunction of Sol, Luna, or Jupiter,
in the tenth, give ample fortunes, and very great preferment. ‘Syrius,
or Procyon, in conjunction with Sol in the afcendant or tenth, gives royal


preferment and favour:
The


A


OF TA STIR. O.L' O:G Y. 245


' The luminaries, one or both in conjunction with Caput Algol, or
with Aldebaran, Hercules, Humerus Orionis, or Antares, pgefage a vio-
lent death. Sol in conjunction with Caput Algol, in the eighth, and
his difpofitor in quartile or oppofition to Mars, the native will be in dan-
ger of lofing his head; if the light culminates, he may die by fome wound.
Luna with Hercules, or Arcturus in the afcendant, feventh or tenth, in
conjunction with Mars, the native will be in danger of being fuffocated.
Luna. with: Antares, and Mars in the fourth, feventh, eleventh, or
twelfth, houfes, with Aldebaran, the native will die by the fword, or by.
a blow, or ‘a fudden fall. © Luna with Antares in oppofition of Saturn
with Aldebaran, fhews, that, if the native be not hanged, he- will at leatt.
die a violent death. Saturn or Mars with Caput Algol, and Luna with
- Deneb, he dies by the fentence of the judge. . The Moon: with Cor Hy:

dra, affli€ted by Saturn or Mars, he will be in: danger of poifon, or of
drowning ; and, if the infortune be angular, it.is-fo much the more:certain.
The Moon with Procyon, and Sol or Mars with. Lucida Vulturis, or Fo-
‘mahaut, or Ultima in dorfo Capricorni, fhews danger of being bit by aveno-
mous beaft.. The Moon with Syrius and Saturn, or Mars with Ultima in
ala Pegafi, a'violent death by the fury of violent beafts, or martial men.
The Moon with Cingula Orionis and Saturn, or with Caput Hercules,
or Antares, fhews the native will be in danger of perifhing by water, or by
wicked perfons. The Moon with the Pleiades, and Saturn or Mars with:
Regulus, fhews the lofs of'one or both the eyes: and this judgment is
confirmed, if Luna at the fame time be combutt.


~ The Pleiades‘in conjunction with Mars, and Regulus with Saturn, are-
eminent fignifications-of a violent and untimely death. Fixed ftars of
the firft magnitude near the cufp of the feventh, fhew a good and. rich

wife; but her conditions will much fympathize with the nature of the

ftars.. Significators joined with fixed itars of the firft or fecond magnitude,

near the ecliptic, fhew great preferment, and eminent honours. Fixed

ftars of the nature of Saturn in conjunction with Sol, involves the native

in many miferies. Fixed ftars.of the nature of Marsand Sol, or Mercury

and Luna, give glory and renown ; of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, or

Mercury aad Venus, honour and wealth. Fixed ftars in angles, give

admirable preferment, and many great gifts ; and elevate from poverty to

an extreme height of fortune..


The SIGNIFICATION of FIXED STARS in DIRECTIONS.


The afcendant, a planet therein, or its lord, directed to Ultima in ala
Pegafi, Oculus Tauri borealis, Lucida pedis Gemini, in femore Leonis, |
fhew unto the native good fortune,, worldly happinefs, with the love of

, women,


€


246 ANY DWLIUSeTrR AT EO N


women. To the Pleiades, Hyades, Caftor, Pollux, or Prefepe, wounds
or burts in the face, arms, or eyes ; imprifonment, captivity, banifhment,
or other obfcurity; the native has often fore eyes upon thefe directions ;
falls into many troubles through luft; engages in quarrels, meets with
Jofs of reputation, and fometimes death itlelf, To the Afelli, a burn-
ing fever, lofs of eye-fight, efpecially the left eye, or forenefs of the
eyes through diftillations of fharp rheum; hurts. ‘by fierce and violent
beafts or quarrels, malicious flanders, and other inconveniencies. To Cin-
eula Orionis, Lanx Borealis, Axilla Sagitarii, Cornu Capricorni Auftralis,
Tibia dextra Aquarii, denotes legacies by inheritance, gain, by jovial men
and things, occafions inordinate love, and gives a kind of gravity. To Al-
debaran, Regulus, from Scorpio, Antares, Humerus precedens Orionis,
Humerus fequens Orionis, honour and wealth in a large meafure, eftima-


tion among perfons noble and great; yet thefe direCtions fhew fome dan-
ger to the native’s health, and may give him acute fever, or other


violent difeafe. To Arifta, honour and renown inthe church, ecclefiaftical
pteferment, applaufe and eftimation among all men; it makesthe native
ingenious, induftrious, honourable; and beloved. To Cauda Leonis,


much worldly happinefs, but accompanied with melancholy, troubles,


and difcontent. To Lucida Maxilla Ceti, Genu Caftoris, Genu Pollucis,
Ventre Gemini, or Cynofura, fhews danger of life, honour, or eftate, by
evil men, thieves, and the like; yet thefe direttions often give the native
poffeffions, inheritances, and legacies. To Lucida Colli Leonis, Ala


‘Leonis, Dorfo Leonis, Lanx Auftralis, Genu & tibia dextra Ophinci,


Deneb, Ultima in Dorfo Capricorni, Sinifter humerus, & cubitus dexter


Aquarii, makes the native folicitous about houfes, poffeffions, buildings,


mines, or the like; gives him much labour, care, hazard, difturbance,


and vexation, and a melancholy difpofition ; with difgrace, flander, and


fcandal, through women. Jo Hircus, it makes the native eminent, in


amartial affairs, and ftirs him up to valour, making him fubtle, witty,


and difcreet, but a mere diflembler ; {pending and wafting himfelf. upon
dufts and wantonnefs, which ruins his credit and eftimation, reduces his
trade if hehas any, and at laft brings him to thieving, {windling, robbing,
and the like def{perate purf{uits. |


The*medium ceeli, planets therein, or its lord, directed to Ultima in ala
Pegafi, Zona Andromeda, Pes Andromedz, Oculus Tauri Borealis, Lu-
cida pedis Gemini, in femore Leonis, or Lucida Corona, gives the native
honour, glory, and renown, and makes his fortune generally rife by means
of women. ‘To the Pleiades, Hyades, Humerus Orionis fequens & pre-
cedens, Caftor, Pollux, Procyon, or Prefepe, brings the native’s honour into
queftion, wounds his reputation, involves him in many troubles and contro-
verties ; portends. danger of a ftab, of imprifonment or of fome tragical end

| ‘1 of
t


OF} @Sh RO L -O GY. 24%
of his life. To the Afelli, Caput Hercules, Marchab, Dexter humerus


Aurige, forefhew an everlafting wound in the native’s honour, and more
efpecially if the Dragon’s Tail be near them; he then runs himfelf into
every fpecies of fin and wickednefs. To Cingula Orionis, Lanx Borealis,
Axilla Sagittarii, Cornu Capricorni Auftralis, Tibia dextra Aquarii, Caput
Andromeda, Collo Serpentarii, fhews honour, glory, renown, the favour of
great men, clergymen, ecclefiaftical preferment; and, if a tradefman or mer-
chant, a good trade, and happy returns from fea, with great profit. To Al-
debaran, Frons Scorpii, Antares, Hircus, Syrius; thefe are profperous di-
rections, and exalt the native infinitely, both in wealth and honour; he
proves of an ingenious, magnanimous, and noble, mind; gains favour from
princes and noblemen, and authority over others ; becomes governor over
an army, town, fort, or caftle; and performs great actions with honour
and applaufe. To Rigel, Arifta, Regulus, Arcturus, Fomahaut; thefe
are the beft direCtions that can ever happen to any native, for they not
only raife him to honour, glory, renown, and wealth, to the enjoyment
of pleafure and riches, and to the favour of kings, princes, prelates, and
eminent ladies; to power, authority, and dominion, with a healthful
conftitution of body; but alfo crown him with an immortal name. To
Cauda Leonis, Caput Algol, Cor Hydra, extreme danger by reafon of
murder, robbery, or fome fudden death, from the hands of others; or
the native acting the fame upon others; thefe are very evil direétions.
To Lucida Maxilla Ceti, Genu Caftoris, Genu Pollucis, Ventre Gemi-
ni, Cynofura, finifter humerus & dexter cubitus Aquarii, Lucida Vul-
turis, Scheat Pegafi, Cauda Ceti Auftralis, fhew unto the native many
troubles, ftrife, contention, much difhonour, the lofs of the favour of
fome great or noble man, or eminent friend ; gives the native many ene-
mies, and much difcontent. To Lucida Colli Leonis, Ala Leonis, Lanx
Auftralis, genu et tibia dextra Ophinci, Deneb, Ultima in Dorfo Capri-
corni, -forefhew ftrife and contention with ancient men, lofs of eftate,
or good name; the falfity of eminent and ancient friends, with many
other troubles, if not imprifonment. To the fecond ftar in ala Siniftra
Leonis, Lucida Perfei, Dorfo Leonis, Vindemiatrix, honour and preferment
among fcholars, learned men, and governors of towns or cities ; it may
be the native may become mafter of a {chool in the country, or fellow of
a college in the univerfity, or a magiftrate in a-city or town corporate.


The fecond houfe, its lord, or planets therein, to Ultima in ala Pegafi,
Oculus Tauri Borealis, Lucida pedis Gemini, in femore Leonis, fhew an
increafe of the native’s fubitance. To the Pleiades, Hyades, Caftor, Pol-
lux, Prefepe, lofs of fubftance and eftate by quarrelling, contention, en-
vious neighbours, kindred or relations, tedious and vexatious law-fuits, and
whoredom. To the Afelli, thefe are the worft of all directions, for they

No. 12. | 3M fignify


248 AN PLLUST RATION


fignify the confumption of an eftate, though it confifted of mountains of.
gold. To Cingula Orionis, Lanx Borealis,. Axilla Sagittarii, Cornu Ca-
pricorni Auftralis, tibia dextra Aquarii, an increafe of fubftance, great
gains, gifts, legacies, and augmentation of wealth, by the means of great
Yadies and honourable women. To Aldebaran, Regulus, Frons Scorpii, -
Antares, Humerus precedens Orionis, Humerus fequens Orionis : an.aug-
mentation of fubftance by honours, preferments, or fome office or dig
nity, by the means of great and noble perfons ; by military perfons, &c.
To Arifta, an increafe of fubftance by means of the church, ecclefiaf—
tical perfons, or to ecclefiaftical preferment by ingenuity, induftry, and
honourable women.. To Cauda Leonis, an increafe of wealth, but with. -
much care, labour, and forrow ; if the direCtion happen. near the dragon’s
tail, or the quartile or oppofition of Saturn or Mars, it proves almoft
fatal to the native’s eftate. To Lucida Maxilla Ceti, Genu Caftoris, Genu
Pollucis, Ventre Gemini, Cynofura, an evil and hurtful time, a time of
lofs, of cares, of forrows, troubles, and vexations, the native’s eftate wattes.
he knows not how. To Lucida Colli Leonis, Ala Leonis, Dorfo Leonis,
Banx Auftralis, genu & tibia dextra Ophinci, Deneb, Ultimo in dorfo
Capricorni, finifter humerus & cubitus dexter Aquarii, gain by houfes,,
lands, inheritances, by buying and felling of them, &c. yet with care,.
pains, induftry, and much labour. To Hircus: this fhews gain by mar-.,
tial men and things, arts, fciences, and the hke; if the direction falls in.
the third, by kindred, neighbours, friends, travels, religious affairs, 8c.


The Sun to the laft ftar in Ala Pegafi, Oculus Tauri Borealis, Lucida
Pedis Gemini, in femore Leonis, fhews the beginning of good fortune,.
martial command, and warlike honour ;. but in the end the native lofes. alk
again, honour, eftate, and liberty. To the Pleiades, Hyades, Cattor,
Pollux,, Prefepe, dangerous.and violent difeafes, contentions, quarrellings,,
he commits murders, rapes, or other infolencies.;, he will bein danger of
death by the fhot of a gun, the caft of a ftone, or a flab, or may be be-
headed, or banifhed, or wrecked ; I have known thefe direGions-to caufe
violent fevers, and Sol to the Pleiades, a peftilential difeafe of which the
native afterwards died ;, but to Prefepe, danger of being murdered ;. to.
the Afelli, ficknefs, and fharp burning fevers ; in. danger of fire, lofs of
honour and fortune ; mifchiefs. from martial men.; the native may be in
danger of hanging, beheading, or imprifonment. To Cingula Orionis,.
Lanx Borealis, Axilla Sagittarii, Cornu Capricorni Auftralis,. tibia dex-
tra Aquarii, thefe fignify a noble, healthful, pleafant, and: profitable,
time,, and all things go according to the native’s defire. To Al-
debaran, Regulus, frons Scorpio, Antares, Humerus precedens &:
fequens. Orionis: thefe directions prefage ficknefs to. the native, it

’ may,


ig


OF ASTROLOGY. hice


may be fome violent or putrid fever; they often exalt him to the top of
honour and preferment, but make him factious and proud, and thereby en-
danger the lofs ofall his happinefs. To Arifta: this certainly gives the
native eminent honours, with a great augmentation of his fortune and
eftate ; if. Arifta culminates, and the Sun comes to it by dire@tion, it
fhews ecelefiaftical preferment, or fome eminent place under govern-
ment. To Cauda Leonis, though no very! good direction, yet it aug-
ments the native’s eftate, and raifes him to fome honour, but withal de-
ftroysitagain, caufing much melancholy, and difeafes from thence. To
Lucida Maxilla Ceti, Genu Caftoris, Genu Pollucis, Ventre Gemini,
Cynofura : thefe direCtions forefhew much evil to the native’s body, ef-
tate, honour, and liberty ; and betoken, if not the deftruction, yet the
injury, of them all, as ficknefs, lofs.of money, fcandal, and danger of im-
prifonment. To Lucida Colli Leonis, Ala Leonis, Dorfo Leonis,. Lanx ©
Auftralis, genu & tibia dextra Ophinci, Deneb, Ultima in dorfo Capri-
corni, Sinifter Humerus, & Cubitus dexter Aquarii ;. thefe directions pre-
cipitate the native’s honour and credit, and make him go under many
evil reports, to his great prejudice. - To Hircus,.it fhews martial prefer-
ment,. honour in. war, exalts the native both in wealth and dignity,
makes him ingenious, and apt to find out many rare inventions..


The Moon to the laft ftar in Ala Pegafi, Oculus Tauri Borealis,. Lucida:
Pedis Gemini, in femore Leonis, forefhewsa healthful time, with aug-
mentation of wealth and honour. To the Pleiades, Hyades, Caftor, Pol-
lux, or Prefepe, make the native fuffer the fcandal of evil tongues,.
vexes and afflicts him with crofs neighbours, law-fuits, and other trou-
bles. To the Afelli: this direction afflicts the body with many evils ;.
and, if it falls near the oppofition of Saturn and Mars,. or the Sun, it is
much if the native be not blind ; or have fome continual diftemper in
the eyes, or pains in the head. To Cingula Orionis,,Lanx Borealis, Ax-
illa Sagittari1, Cornu Capricorni Auftralis, Tibia dextra Aquarii, new
friends, the acquaintance of ladies. and noble women, and gifts by their
means. To Aldebaran, Regulus, Frons Scorpii, Antares, Humerus pre-
cedens & fequens Osionis ; thefe directions forefhew honour, glory,
renown, and wealth from the king and other noble perfons, give the na-
tive a command over others, and’ make him: famous in his generation.
To Arifta, honour, glory, and preferment both in church and ftate,. the:
overcoming of an’ adverfary ; dominion over the common people, and:
gain by them. To Cauda Leonis, gives honour, and a good eftima-
tion among the vulgar, but withak threatens fcandal, lois, and con--
tempt. To Lucida Maxilla Ceti, Genu Caftoris, Genu Pollucis, Ventre:
Gemini,. Cynofura, {candal, odium, and {corn even of the common fort ;;
the ill will of fome eminent lady or woman.;. danger. of thieves, and:

fuch-


210 AN JL 2UGT RR Aw oiw


fuch like perfons. To Lucida colli Leonis, ala‘ Leonis, dorfo\Leonis,
Lanx auftralis, Genu'& tibia dextra Ophinci,-Deneb, Ultima in dorfo Ca-
pricorni, finifter humerus & cubitus dexter Aquarii; thefe are evil di-
rections, giving the native melancholy difeafes, efpecially in thofe parts
fignified by the fign in which the ftar is ; the goes alfo under {candal and
reproach. ‘To Hircus, is a very noble direction, and may fignify the ad-
vancement of the native in all things, chiefly in military affairs ; yetin-
volves him in feveral vices and troubles with women ; and bids -him be-:
ware of: fome fevere wound by’a fall, blow, or flab. The fignifications
of the part of fortune, being directed in like manner, are altogether the
fame with what we hintedin the directions’ of the fecond houfe.


In all thefe directions we muft have great.regard both to the fign and the
houfe. In directions which concern the body, we have re{pect to the fign,
becaufe that moft commonly indicates the part afflicted ; fo alfo does the
houfe; for, if the direCtion falls in the afcendant, the affliction falls in the
head, .as-on the eyes, nofe, ears, or brain ; if in the fecond, in the throat, ,
ec. In direGtions which concern ‘the . eftate, honour, or fortune,, we
chiefly take notice of the houfe, for that indicates the means by which the
thing fhall be attained ; the nature of the ftar, the quality of the perfon;
af in the third, by a kinfman, or by travel ; if in the feventh, by a wife,
or ‘woman. spotvi oll


In directing any planet to thefe fixed ftars, confider whether the ftar.,
fympathizes with the fignificator in nature and quality, or not ; if it does,
the dire€tion may be good, although it be to anevil ftar; for {weet to {weet
is {weet ; like to like breeds no difcord ; an union and agreement of natures
takes away the evil effects ; for, if the lord of the afcendant was Saturn,
and he fhould be directed to Cauda Leonis, a ftar of his own nature,. this
could be no evil direction, nor any way afflict the native either, in body
or eftate ; but would have famous and glorious effects, both for health and
wealth, according to the place it falls in. In thefe direftions we are
principally to regard the magnitude of the ftar; for ftars only of the firtt
. amagnitude prefage things eminently glorious or dangeroufly deftructive;
and thofe which are of the fecond.come very near them. Then the place
of the direction is to be noted ; for, if it falls in an angle, the direction
will not only be famous and eminent, but alfo manifeft itfelf with a great
deal of life and vigour, and that ona fudden; in a fuccedent houfe, the ,
effects will be more languid ; in a cadent, not only weak and flow, but it
may be a queftion whether they will ever operate at all. Regard mutt
alfo be had to the latitude; for ftars having fouth latitude operate not
fo much upon our northern hemifphere as thofe which have north ;
thofe which have no latitude thew their effect, be they good of evil,


1 with


OF ASTROLOGY. 251
with ftri€t equality ; and thofe which have north latitude manifett their
force with great vigour.


The fign alfo in which the ftar is pofited is much to be confidered ; for
fixed ftars in cardinal figns exceed the others in power by fo much as
their place is more excellent and remarkable. And if a direGion to any
eminent fixed ftar falls in fextile or trine to the places of any of the for-
tunes or of the luminaries, or coheres with any other eminent direction
at or near the fame time to the body or afpeét of any planet of the nature
of the fame ftar, the effects will aot only be indubitably evident, but

alfo very ftriking and wonderful.


The durability of their effe@ remains only to be confidered ; wherein
muft be noticed, whether there be a continued feries of direCtions attend-
ing, of the fame purport and effect ; for, if there be, and nothing contra-
dis their influence, the effects of them will, we may fafely conclude,


be durable and lafting.


APHORISMS for guiding the JUDGMENT upon NATIVITIES and
HORARY QUESTIONS.


Confider the degree afcending, Sol and Luna ;‘and fee whether they are
afflicted, or not; if they are extremely afflicted, or either of them, it isan
argument of fhort life, and therefore it will be in vain to form long di-
rections for fuch a nativity. Thefe points are faid to be afflicted or un-
fortunate, when either the conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the
infortunes vitiate their places, or when many violent fixed ftars of the
nature of the lord of the eighth afcend with the degree afcending or with


the luminaries.


Confider the lord of the afcendant alfo; for, if he be effentially ftrong,
free from the affliction of the infortunes, not combuft nor retrograde, nor
impedited by the lord of the fourth, fixth, eighth, or twelfth, houfes, but
encreafing in number, light, and motion, it fhews long life. If the Sun
in a birth by day, or the Moon in a birth by night, be ftrong, free from
affliction, and affifted by the fortunes, it {hews long life; but thofe who
are born exactly upon the very change or full of the Moon feldom live
long; the Moon befieged between Saturn and Mars argues fhort life.


‘That planet which has moft dignities effential and accidental in a
figure is the lord of the geniture, more efpecially if he be lord of the


afcendant alfo.
No. 13. 3N NED The


252 AN #2 p'U's'7i re a7. ON


The planet or planets in the afcendant are the chief fignificators of man.
ners; but, if no planet be in the afcendant, then the planets from which
the Moon feparates, or to which the applies, fhall be the fignificators,


The fignificator of manners in Aries, fhews one witty ; in Taurus, one
laborious; in Gemini, a lover of learning ; in Cancer, inconftancy; in Lec,
fobriety and difcretion ; in Virgo, covetoufnefs; in Libra, inconftancy
and conceitednefs; in Scorpio, wifdor, fubtilty, and boldnefs ; im Sagit-
tarius, valour; in Capricorn, lafcivioufnefs ; in Aquaries, complacency and
kindnefs ; in Pifces, a mere hypocrite.


Mercury and Luna in conjundtion, fextile, or trine, in any fign, fhews
ingenious perfons ; the quartile fhews wit, but more turbulent; the op-
pofition fhews one feditious, ftubborn, imprudent, and deftructive. Mer-
cury in Taurus or Capricorn, in,a cadent houfe, and retrograde or com-
buft, or afflicted by Saturn or Mars, fhews the native to be fimple, and of
rude underftanding. Mercury in his own houfes, or in Aries or Aquaries,
in reception with Mars or Saturn, fhews a fharp wit, and one of an admi-
rable invention. Mercury received of the Moon, either by houfe or ex-
altation, gives a fertile genius. Mercury in conjunction, fextile, or trine,
of Saturn, fhews a wary conftant wit; of Jupiter, an honeft upright mind ;
of Mars, aconfident opinion; of Sel,.a proud heart; of Venus, a pleafant
wit; and of Luna, a ready and piercing wit.


If many planets be ftrong and effentially fortified, efpecially Saturn,
Jupiter, and, Mars, or Sol, the native will enjoy a manifeft and ample for-
tune, live nobly, and. in great efteem,, above the ordinary quality of his.
birth, managing the actions of his whole life with glory and fuccefs ; and
this judgment will be more confirmed, if moft or all the planets be effen-
tially fortified at the fame time. But, contrariwife, when moft of the
planets are in their detriment or fall, peregrine, cadent, retrograde, affli@-
ed, or combuift, the native is then continually involved ina thoufand mif-
fortunes, one.upon the heels of another, and his whole life is nothing
but a vale of mifery., But.a mediocrity of teftimonies fhews a-various for-
tune, fometimes miferable, fometimes extremely happy, according to the
times of evil.or good directions.


Saturn fignificator of fubftance fhews riches by building, hufbandry,
gardening; Jupiter, by the church, religion, government, trutt, clothing:
Mars, by war, inftruments.of war, law, furgery, or phyfic; Sol, by ho-
nour, command, office, dignity, or preferment; Venus, by friends, gifts,
or women; Mercury, by arts, {ciences, learning, oratory, merchandife;
Luna, by navigation, by the common people, or women, |


The


OF ASTROLOGY. 253
The Moon fortunate in the afcendant gives wealth and eftimation all
the life long. The Sun and Luna in trine, and he in his exaltation, free
from the afflidion of Saturn or Mars,: are ample teftimonies of a large
fortune ; the fame if Jupiter or Venus be in the fecond. The difpofitor
of the part of fortune in the eighth, or the lord of the eighth effentially
fortified in a good houfe, promifes the native an eftate by the death of
friends. The Moon combuft, or in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition,
of Saturn, deftroys an eftate though never fo large, reduces the native
to poverty; the fame happens if the lord of the fecond be fo.


If the fignificator of fubftance be effentially fortified, well pofited, free
from affliction, or in a fixed fign, the native’s fabftance will be firm and
durable all his life. An infortune in the fecond, ftrong, thews, that the
eftate may continue, but with great difficulty ; but, if weak, iBat i it will
come to nothing ; ; if a fortune be there, the native’s eftate will be firm.
If no planet be in the fecond, confider the lord of the fecond, and the dif-
pofitor of the part of fortune, and judge by them, and by theie diréctions
to good or evil promiffors. ‘The fignificators of fabfiaiee oriental and
{wift in motion fhew the native will be rich quickly; but occidental, flow
in motion, or both, or retrograde, not till old age.


The lords of the afcendant, and third houfe, in good, afpect or mutual
reception, fhews concord among brethren, kindred, and neighbours, but,
if in evil afpe@t, the contrary. If e cabe or Mars be peregrine in the
third, or the Dragon’ s Tail be there, the native and his kindred will be at
perpetual variance, and by them he will receive many crofles and loffes.
If Saturn or Mars, or the Dragon’ s Tail, bé in the third houfe, or in
conjunction, quartile, or oppoiition, of the lord of the third, the native
lofes by travel, and will always be in danger of: thieves or robbers upon
the highway, and. will have many evil neighbours, :


The Sun or Moon in Via Lactea, affli@ed with the conjunction, quar-
tile, or oppofition, of Saturn and Mars, or with nebulous ftars, portends
bindnefs, if both luminaries afflicted ; if the Sun only be afflicted, it is
the right eye; if the Moon, the Icft.. The fame if the Moon be in con-
junction, quartile, or oppofition, with Sol or Saturn, with nebulous. ftars,
or if Sol be in conjunction with Mars in the eighth.


The Sun in-good afpect with Saturn or Jupiter itv a'diurnal geniture,
or the Moon fo conjoined in'a noCturnal, efpecially in the fecond or fourth,
or if they have dominion in the fourth, fignify a good inti to de-
fcend to the native, and an sbiscs:. jar ati of hig’ pateriial inheritance, But
the Sum afflicted. by’ Mars by day, or by Saturn by night, and not affitted
by the fortunes or Luna'by night ; decreafing and afflicted by mht or

2 ars,


254. ANY. Belg Ly UySaTy Re & Ted O N


Mars, or both; or if the lord of the fecond, or the. fourth houfe or its
lord, be afflicted in like manner; it thews the native will wafte his father’s
eftate and bring it to nothing. ‘The fame if Saturn be in conjundtion
with the lord of the fourth in the twelfth; or the infortunes in the fourth
in conjunction with the lord of the fifth; fo it is alfo if Mars be in con-
junction with Sol, and peregrine, afflicting the fecond.


-In a diurnal genefis, Sol and the lord of the fourth fignify the father,
and the Moon the mother; but, in a nocturnal, Saturn, with the lord of
the fourth, the father ; and the Moon the mother. Now, if thefe behold
the afcendant or its lord by fextile or trine, there will-be a concord and
love between the native and his parents ; bat, if by quartile or oppofition,
much ftrife, difcord, and contention. . The fignificators which -caft the
beft or greateft afpect to the afcendant or its lord thew that the, perfon
fignified by them will love the native beft..


Saturn in the fourth, in his houfe or exaltation, direct, fwift in mo-«
tion, and in fextile or trine with Jupiter, Venus, or the lord of the fecond;
the lord of the fourth in reception with either luminaries, and they in
good afpect to the fourth or planets therein ; thew an ample fortune by
* managing quarries, mines of metal, coals, ftones, minerals, &c.


The lord of the afcendant in the fixth or twelfth, and he or the afcen-
dant afflicted by malefic planets, fhews a fickly perfon. If the fign af-
cending and all-the planets be in figns of one triplicity, the native will
always be afflicted with difeafes of the nature and quality of that trigon;
if the fiery, with fevers and inflammatione; if the airy, furperfluities and
difeafes of the blood; if the watery, drop{fy, and other watery difeafes ;
if the earthy, confumptions, malancholy, and the like.


The Sun in the fixth, feventh, eighth, or twelfth, houfes, and aflided
~ or afflicting the lord of the afcendant, gives few years, with much fick-
nefs, and many afflictions. ‘Ihe Moon applying to conjuntétion of Sol
fhews lean and infirm people, afflicted with fuch difeafes as the phyfician
can neither cure nor difcover. ‘The Moon afflicted by the conjun@tion,.
quartile, or oppofition, of Saturn or Mars, in conjunction with the Dragon’s
. Pail in the afcendant or fecond, fhews the falling ficknefs, or the native’s
“whole life to be fickly ; and fixed ftars of the nature of Saturn being join-
ed with the luminaries da the fame, making the perfon alfo lean and pale.
Mars in the afcendant fhews difeafes in the head, and {cars and wounds
in the face; Saturn in the medium ceeli, fudden hurts by falls, bruifes,
and the like, as alfo lofs of honour; but, in the afcendant, pains of the
teeth. The Moon afflicted by the oppofition of Saturn, Mars, or Mer-
cury, fhews madnefs or folly; the fame if Saturn and Mars be in partile
oppofition, or applying to it from angles,


If


OF A BYR OL OG ¥., , 255


If Mercury.be lord of the fixth, or:the planets in the,fixth be ftrong,
eflentially fortified, and in good afpect with the afcendant, or fecond, or
their lords, it fhews that the native’s fervants will be honeft, juft, and
profitable to him; the fame if the fignificators be angular ; and fo con~
trariwife. A fortunate planet in the fixth or twelfth fhews good fervants,
and profitable ; but the Dragon’s Tail, Saturn, or Mars, in the fixth, and
peregrine, denote bafe, fordid, and thievifh, fervants. :


Planets in the fifth, and the Moon and Venus, or their difpofitors, free
from affliction ;, figns upon the afcendant and fifth, and figns in which
their lords are, being fruitful, fhew many children’; the fame if Venus
or the Moon be in the afcendant ; or Jupiter in the‘feventh. Jupiter or
Venus, or the lord of the fifth, in trine to Luna, in humane or fruitful
figns ; all or moft of the planets in fruitful. figns, and in good afpect to
the lord of the fifth, or planets therein, thew a plentiful iffue. Saturn in
the fifth declares ftubborn and undutiful children; Mars, fuch as will be
bold and daring ; but Solin conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of Saturn
in the fifth or eleventh, fhews barrennefs; the fame if the lord‘of the fifth
be retrograde, or combuft, or in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of
Saturn or Mars, and they peregrine. Saturn or Mars, or both, peregrine
in the fifth or eleventh ; Solin the fifth joined to an infortune; Sol, Sa-
turn, Mars, or Mercury, in quartile or oppofition of Lunain the medium
celi; Jupiter in oppofition of Saturn or Mars or both ; the lord of the
fifth in the eighth, or twelfth ; or in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition,
of Saturn or Mars ; are all certain arguments that the children will die,


_ In marriages, obferve the motion of the fignificators; for, if they are
direct and {wift, the native marries early ; but, if retrograde and flow,
or ftationary, they prolong the time very much. The particular time of
marriage is difcerned by direct and converfe directions of the afcendant,
or medium cceli, or their lords; or the Sun or Moon to the conjun¢tion,
fextile, quartile, or trine, of the lord of the feventh, or planets in the fe-
-_venth, or by directions of the afcendant or medium cceli or their lords
to the conjunction, fextile, quartile, or tripe, of Jupiter, Sol, Venus, or
Luna ; and, if any of them are in the feventh houfe, or afcendant, con-
joined to many planets, they fhew many wives ; and fo alfo does the lord
_of the afcendant in configuration with many. The Moon configurated to
one'planet only, fhews but one wife ; and, if the Moon be ftrongetft, the
man out-lives his wife; but, if the planet with whom the Moon is con-
joined be ftrongeft, he dies firft,


_ The Moon applying to Saturn, well-affected, fhews a ferious, induf-
Atrious, fober, laborious, woman ; but, being ill-affected, a fufpicious,
No. 13. ry RIG Gey. crofs,


256 AN ILLusTRAT1I0 N-

crofs, envious, froward, woman, indolent and carelefs ; applying to Ju-
piter well-affegted, a fober, honeft, godly, religious, chafte, and virtuous,
woman, and a good houfewife; but, being ill-affected, the woman may
have virtues, but they are generally clouded; applying to Mars well-
affeGted, it fhews one of a lofty, honourable, open, and generous, mind ;
a true friend, yet fcorning to receive any affront or injury, and one that
will defire to be mafter ; but, being ill-affected, an evil, quarrelfome,
proud, petulant, woman; applying to the Sun, being well-affected, fhews
an honourable and truly noble creature, full of generofity and humanity,
affecting high and great things ; but, if ill-affected, the will be idle,
vain, foolith, proud, infulting, and domineering ; to Venus well-aftected,
‘a beautiful, fair, pleafant, civil, courteous, loving, good conditioned, and
virtuous, woman; but, if ill-affected, fhe is an impudent, bold, arro-
gant, prodigal, talkative, luftful, bafe, woman; laftly, the Moon applying
to Mercury well-affected, fhews a loving, neat, ingenious, pleafant, well-
fpoken, careful, woman; but, if ill-affected, an intruding, ‘prattling,
inconftant, diffembling, turbulent, creature.


‘The lords of the tenth and feventh, or fecond and feventh in each others
houfes of the figure, or in mutual reception, fhew a good wife; but the
lords of the fixth or twelfth in mutual reception, or pofition with the
lord of the feventh, fhew a very mean, obfcure, ill-bred, woman. ' Sa-
turn or Mars in the feventh, very ftrong, fhews a good and rich‘ wife,
yet her fubftance not attainable without trouble; if peregrine there, it
fhews one of low birth, poor, and ill-conditioned ; if Jupiter, Sol, or
Venus, be there, the contrary. If the fignificators of man and wife bein
quartile or oppofition of one another, or in quartile or oppofition to the
Moon, there will be many quarrels, and that upon very flight occafions ;
the contrary if they be in-conjunction, fextile, or trine, orin mutual re-
ception or pofition; or if the Moon makes any tranflation between them
by good afpeét. ‘The lord of the feventh in quartile or oppofition to Sa-
turn or Mars, fhews an evil woman, immodeft and fhamelefs ; and, if the
Jord of the feventh be in the twelfth, although in trine with Venus, the
woman will prove inconftant to her hufband. , u


If Mercury and Luna be in conjunction or reception, or the lord of
‘the ninth be in theafcendant, or the lord of the afcendant be in the ninth,
or Mercury or Luna be in the afcendant, third, or ninth, or mutual re-
‘ception of their lords, or conjunction with them, the native will‘ tra-
vel beyond fea, or take many long journeys. ‘The caufe of the journey
appears from the nature of the fignificator, and the houfe in which he is
pofited; if Saturn be fignificator, the caufe is from fome inheritance, le-
'* gacy, or things and commodities faturnine; if Jupiter, the caufe is from

: 3 > religion,
\


* WORT A StITR OU aAG 267


religion, ecclefiaftical preferment, -honour,. or law; -the like of the other
planets. If the fignificator be in the afcendant, the native is poflefled with
‘a natural defire of feeing {trange countries ;-in.the fecond, he travels for
a defign of enriching himfelf ; and fo of the other houfes.


- Ifthe Jord of the ninth be in the afcendant, the native will travel much ;
ifin the fecond houfe, he will gain confiderably by his travels ; if in the


third, he will cohabit with ftrange women, and often fhift his refidence ; -
ifin the fourth, his parents will have fome occult infirmities, and he will


die on-his travels ; if in the fifth, he will have:children in another coun-
try ; if in the fixth, he will gain by ‘his flaves or fervants, and his cat~
tle will fall fick in his travels ; if in the feventh, he will obtain a good
and obedient wife. ‘When the fignificators.of journeys are eflentially


itrong, well pofited, and free from affliction, and in fextile or trine of a


‘good planet, they denote honour, profperity, and fecurity, in travels, guod


capax, according to the quality of the perfon ; and contrariwife, if Sa-


‘turn or Mars afflict the fignificators, it fhews, in the twelfth houfe,
danger of imprifonment ; in the.fecond or third, treachery by kindred or
neighbours, or danger by common thieves ; but, in this judgment, Saturn
‘fhews rather poverty and want of money ;~Mars bodily wounds. ‘The
countries into which the-native had beft travel, are chiefly thofe fubjeCct to
‘the figns of the afcendant, fecond, ninth, tenth, and eleventh ; or thofe
figns in which Jupiter, Venus, Part of Fortune, or Dragon’s: Head, are


pofited ; but thofe fubjea to the figns in which the infortunes or Dragon’s ~


Tail are pofited, will prove unfavourable to the traveller; and fo alfo will
thofe that are fubjet to the figns of the fourth,’ fixth, feventh, eighth,


or twelfth, houfes. :


Saturn, Mars, or the Dragon’s Head, in the ninth, or Saturn or Marsin
the third, oppofite to the ninth, Jupiter being peregrine, cadent, and af-


flicted, fhews either pernicious fectaries of no religion, or atheifts. But
Jupiter, Venus, or the Dragon’s Head, in the ninth, fhews a truly reli-

gious perfon; the fame ifSol, Mercury, Luna, or Part, of Fortune, be ~
therein fextile or trine with Jupiter or Venus. If no. planets arein the ©


ninth, confider its lord and Jupiter ; if they or either of them be effen-


tially fortified and ftrong, or angular, or in reception with Sol or Luna,»


‘or with the lord of the afcendant or planets therein, or pofited in the af-
cendant, the native will be truly pious, honeft, and religious ; and fo con-
trariwife: Saturn.in the ninth, effentially ftrong, fhews {trong zeal, chaf-
tity, and faith ; Sol there, fhews piety, and makes an excellent preacher.
If Sol or Jupiter hath dominion in the ninth houfe, or in the afcendant,
and hath‘dignities in the places of Mercury .or Luna, the words. of the


‘native will be like oracles.
: . The.


258 AN PDE UD StTIRIAT1O N


The fignificators of honour in their houfes, exaltations, or mutual re-
ception or pofition with the lord of the afcendant, or angular, being alfo
free from affliction, beftow on the native honour, glory, truft, and com-
mand. Jupiter, Sol, Venus, or Luna, in the mediumceeli, the fame;
more efpecially if they are effentially fortified. The Sun and Moon in
the degree of their exaltations, not afflicted, thew, quod capax, the great-
eft preferment. The light of time culminating, and in fextile or trine
with Jupiterand Venus, or with the other light, fhews great honour.
But thofe who have neither of the luminaries angular, or in a mafculine
fien, or in fextile or trine of Jupiter or Venus, will all their-days be ab-
jet and poor, and of the vulgar fort.


If the’planet or planets which have dignities in the places of Sol, Luna,
or fign afcending, fhall be ftrong and effentially fortified, and if it be |
~ Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, oriental, or if it be Venus or Mercury oc-
cidental; the native fhall raife himfelf, though. low, to a very high
condition. So: alfo'Sol culminating in Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius ; or
Sol and Luna in reception, or in fextile, or trine; or if the Sun or light -
of time bein conjunction with Aldebaran, Regulus, Arifta, Pleiades, An-
tares, Rigel, Hircus, Cor Hydra, Arcturus, Fomahaut, .or Marchab,
and more efpecially if thofe {tars culminate alfo,; the Sun, Moon, and
- Jupiter, in trine with each other; the Sun and Mars in mutual reception,
or in trine from fiery figns; Jupiter, Venus, and Luna, in conjunction or
partile trine, efpecially in angles; Jupiter and Venus in conjunction in
any angle, but chiefly in the tenth, with the Dragon’s Head there ; areall
teftimonies of eminent honour.


The Sun in Cancer, the Moon in Scorpio in conjunction with Jupiter,
‘or in trine with him from Pifces, are arguments of great preferment.
The Moon in the afcendant, near the full, or in conjunction, fextile, or
trine, with Jupiter, Sol, or Venus, or with fixed ftars of their nature, and
of the firft magnitude, fhews great encreafe of honour and preferment.
Sol or Luna in conjunction with Regulus or Arifta ;. or in conjunction
with the Dragon’s Head and Jupiterin the tenth, in trine.to them, or to
Mars or Venus, will raife the native from obfcurity to fit with princes.
‘Whatfoever preferment is fignified, if Saturn or Mars caft their quartile |
or oppofition to the tenth houfe, its lord, the Sun, or Jupiter, it will be
loftagain. Ifthe lord of the tenth and afcendant apply. one to another,
and are both oriental, and in their effential fortitudes, the native will be
great, and be beloved. |

x . | '

Saturn in the tenth’never lets the native enjoy his honour and: prefer-

ment long, but cafts him down headlong, whengleaft expected ; from
. which


%


DIES AS TR OL OG FY: 259


which dejection he never rifes. The lord of the afcendant in fextile or
trine with the Sun, and oriental, or in trine or fextile with the lord of
the medium ceeli, the native will attain to honour and dignity, and be be-
loved of kings, princes, and noblemen. The lord of the afcendant in the
fign afcending, or in his own dignities, he will rife to honour and efteem
by his own induftry ; more efpecially if he applies to a planet angular and
in his own exaltation, The quality of the preferment is difcerned from
‘the planet or planets which apply to the luminaries, or to which -the la-
minaries apply; if Saturn be that planet, preferment comes by means of
an eftate, inheritance, pofleffions, or favour of anceftors; if Jupiter, by
-means of virtue, honour, or learning, or honefty, gravity, juftice, reli-
gion, or wealth. If Mars, by valour, or by merit as captain or general
in the army, or by being a phyfician, furgeon, chemift, &c. If Venus,


by courtfhip, pleafantnefs, or through the means of women, If Mer- |


cury, by wit, judgment, oratory, or learning ; by the law, merchandize,
&c. wherein alfo confider the houfe in which this planet is. If no planet
beholds the luminaries, or is beheld by them, then confider the planet in
the tenth, and the ftrongeft planet there, if there be many; if no planet be
in the tenth, confider the lord of the tenth, and difpofer of the light of
time, or that luminary which is either above the earth or ftrongeft, and
judge ut fupra, for if the planets fhewing the preferment be effentially
{trong, free from affliction, and affifted by other planets in quartile or
trine, the native’s honour will be permanent, otherwife not,


Mars in his detriment, and in oppofition to the.afcendant, fhews an un-


fortunate and infamous man. Mercury in quartile or oppofition to Sa-


turn, caufes an impediment in the tongue or fpeech ; in conjunction,
fextile, or trine, to Jupiter, makes excellent orators, of great reafon, under-
flanding, and juftice, and gives him great friends.among churchmen and
lawyers; in afpect with Mars, he inclines to phyfic, furgery, chemiftry;
in quartile or oppofition of Sol, to coining money; in fextile or trine
with Luna, gives him a good underftanding, and inclines him to the
knowledge of things to come, to arts'and fciences, as philofophy, phi-
lology, mathematics, medicine, &c. if her application be in Virgo or
Scorpio, the native proves a.lover of the mathematics. Mars in afpect
with Sol, gives the native power, authority, and magiftracy, making him
famous. Jupiter, Sol, Venus, or Luna, in the eleventh, effentially forti-
fied, and in conjunction, fextile, or trine, with the lord of the afcendant,
fhews great and good friends, and contrariwife if Saturn and Mars be
there and weak. ‘The Dragon’s Tail,in the eleventh always fhews falfity


in friends, which is found never to fail; in the third the fame. Fortunes .


in the firft, fifth, feventh, ninth, and eleventh, houfesy many friends 5 in-
fortunes in the twelfth or in angles, many enemies.
No.1. aie ’ Thofe


&
ca a a
. <


260 AW Vo tusTnR aw OD


Thofe planets which are in oppofition to the luminaries, lord of the af-
cendant, or are pofited in the twelfth houfe, fignify the native’s enemies ;
no planets. in. the twelfth or feventh, or in oppofition of the luminaries,
few or no enemies. ‘The lord of the afcendant in the feventh or twelfth,
or the Jord of the feventh or twelfth in the afcendant, argue many enemies,
'[hofe planets in feptima, or in oppofition of the luminaries, will difcover
their malice openly ; thofe in the twelfth or cadent, will aét their malice
clofely and cunningly. The lord of the afcendant either difpofing of the
fignificator of enemies, or much ftronger in effential dignities, and angular,
the native overcomes all his enemies, and contrariwife. Significators of
enemies cadent, peregrine, retrograde, or combuft, argues mean perfons.
Either of the Juminaries afflicted by conjunction, quartile, or oppofition,


Saturn or Mars in angles, and difpofed of alfo by the faid infortunes, ar-
-gues imprifonment ; fo if Sol or Luna be in the twelfth in conjunction
with Saturn. Saturn and Mars in conjunction, out of their own digni-


tics, or dignities of the luminaries, the fame; the fame if Sol and Luna be
in conjunction in the eighth, in any fign, except Taurus, Cancer, or Leo,
The lord of the afcendant combuft in the twelfth, imprifonment and ma-
ny forrows: in the tenth, death by fentence of a judge: in the eighth,
forrows, and an infamousend. The lord of the afcendant in quartile or op-
pofition of the lord of the eighth, or any planet therein, or in conjunction
with evil fixed ftars of the nature of the lord of the eighth, or in the
fourth, fixth, eighth, or twelfth, in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, —
of Saturn, Mars, or combuft, and out of all his effential dignities, are
all demonttrations of a violent death. If thefe configurations happen in
fiery figns, it may be by beheading; in airy figns, hanging; in éarthy figns,
by falls, blows, or the like ; in watery figns, by water or drowning ; in
angles, the death will be more honourable; fuccedent, by accidents;
in cadent, very fhameful. If the fignificators of manners be with Ca-
put Medute, the ‘native will be of a violent nature, even to murder or be
murdered ; if with Aldebaran, he will be fierce and given to warlike ac-
tions ; if with the Pleiades, he will be ambitious, turbulent, and libidi-
nous; if with Cingula Orionis, he will-be witty, of great underftanding,
and have a vaft memory; if with Regulus, he will be magnanimous, no-


“ble, generous, and aiming at rule and dominion; if with Antares, he


will be rafh, headftrong, without rule or government, obftinate even to
his own deftruétion; if with Hercules, he will be rath, bold, impudent,
cruel, fubtle, crafty, with a thew of valour and honour; if with Arifta,
he is noble, generous, and ‘brave, of a gentle, affable, and courteous, dif-
pofition, juft, honeft, faithful, true-hearted, {tudious, and ingenious ; if —
with Lyra, wanton and luxurious; but pretending to gravity and honetfty ;
if with Aquila, bold, confident, and valiant. 83)

ani Done ne a baa Saturn

> ae ie —


O.F sAS FR OuL. 0G Y-., 261


_ Saturn oriental, or inthe afcendant, gives a ftature fomewhat above the
middle fize ; occidental, a mean ftature, inclining to brevity. Jupiter ori-
ental gives a tall, .large,.and comely, perfon; occidental, middle fized, but
large boned and well fet. Mars oriental gives ap ‘indifferent large cor-
porature and: ftrong body ;.occidental, one of a middle fize, but full body.
Sol gives a large and comely corporature ; Venus oriental gives a tall,
ftraight, and flender, perfon ; occidental, one fhort and well fet ; Mercury
oriental gives acompleat, tall, upright, ad flender, body; Mantientat. one
low.and fmall. The Moon increafing gives a full, fat, plump perfon,
inclining to tallnefs; decreafing, a fhort, low, fquat, body. Planets hay-
ing north latitude fhew large and grofs bodies, but of a more dull and
fluggifh nature; planets having fouth latitude thew lefs proportion, and
fuch as are nimbleand active. Saturn fhews along vifage, {warthy, black,
or tawny, and lowring; Jupiter, a fair, full, comely, vifage. Mars a full,
fun-burnt, or ruddy, vilage. Sol a full me face, high bold forehead,
and tawny complexion; Venusa fair beautiful vifage ; “Mercury accord-
ing as he is conjoined: of himfelf he gives a long {warthy complexion ;
Luna full-faced if increafing ; pale, wan, and long, vifaged, if near her
change. If Saturn is lord of the geniture, or in the afcendant, the na-
tive is melancholy, envious, fearful even of his own fhadow; if Luna
is in quartile or oppofition of him, he proves ambitious, and fills his ful-
Jen fancy with glorious conceits ; but, if Mars, it is much if he proves not
mad ; if Mercury, an enthufiaft or diviner. If Saturn be in the medium
ceeli, it deftroys the native’s honour and fame, though ever fo great, and
he ever fo deferving ; fo much the more if he be in quartile or oppofition
to Sol or Jupiter; but, if Jupiter or Venus be there under fortunate di-
rections, he may with much labour preferve it ; yet at laft it will be-de-
ftroyed. Saturn in conjunction with Luna in an angle, though the native
_were ever fo rich, yet fhall he be reduced to poverty ; fo the Dragon’ s Tail
in the fecond deftroys the native’s eftate and fortune, be it never fo great,
and he will bedriven to many exigencies and wants ; and Saturn or Mars
retrograde, peregrine, and cadent, being in quartile or oppofition to the
fecond houfe or its lord, makes the native perpetually poor. Saturn in or
lord of the afcendant in one man’s nativity, being upon the cufp of the
feventh in another’s, forethews perfect hatred, and the latter will be the
injured perfon. Saturn in the afcendant, in Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Ca-
pricorn, or Aquaries, in good afpect with Mercury, makes {cholars and
learned men; with Jupiter, divines and lawyers; if he be in the eighth,
in a naeturest geniture, he forefhews a violent, death: Satucit lord of thes
feventh, makes the native long before he marries; fcarcely before thirty,
unlefs Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, or Luna, be in ‘the afcendant ; or fome
of the other three, and the lord of the afcendant be in good ‘alpect of
Luna. Saturn in quartile or oppofition with Sol or end fromeangles,


~ ~ % .


° ; * + : . ”


- & ite


262 Ay NOSE Ea OTT RR Ae TO
portends blindnefs; the fame if the luminaries be in quartile or oppofi-


tion of Mars. Saturn in the imum cceli, although in a fortunate genefis,
forefhews an evil end to the native, though he be a prince,


_. Jupiterlord of the geniture, or in the afcendant, makes the native of a

noble and brave fpirit, aiming at good and honeft things, without the
fenfe or leaft imagination of evil. But if either of the luminaries, or
Saturn or Mars, be in quartile or oppofition tohim, he proves proud,
treacherous, and a perfect villain, who under the notion of fanctity may
fhroud a thoufand enormities. Jupiter or Venus pofited in the afcendant .
or medium ceeli, free from affliction, makes the native beloved of all forts
of perfons, though his birth be ever fo mean; and gives him a juft, up-
right, and honeft, foul. Jupiter, Venus, or the Dragon’s Head, in the
fitth, ina fruitful fign, fhews many children ; and, if Luna be in any good
afpect with them alfo, fhe fhews {till the greater number,


Saturn or Mars in the ninth, and Dragon’s Tail in the afcendant, gene.
rally makes the native an atheiftin‘judgment, though a prieft by profef-
fion. Saturn upon the cufp of the fecond, makes the native always poor,
let him have what affiftance foever; unlefs he be effentially fortified there,
and in good afpect of the fortunes. Saturn and Mars in oppofition to
equinoctial figns, makes (if a king) a great tyrant; and, if they be in quar-
tile with Jupiter, he may bean obferver of law and religion, but it will
be for his own ends. Saturn in oppofition to Luna, or Mars in oppofi-
tion to. the afcendant, makes an abfolute knave and a traitor. #


Mars lord of the geniture in the afcendant effentially fortified, makes
acourageous perfon, a good foldier, furgeon, or phyfician, and one honour-
able in his profeflion. Mars {trong in a nativity, and lord of the fe-
venth, in no good afpedt to the luminaries or afcendant, the native will
be unfortunate in war, controverfies, and law-fuits ; for the feventh houfe
fignifies his enemies, and in this refpect‘they will be too powerful for
him. ‘Mars in the medium cceli brings fcandal and difhonour to the
native in many things, whether he deferves them or not. Mars in Aries,
. Scorpio, or Capricorn, in theafcendant of anativity, makes the native in-
vincible ; and this more efpecially if he be in good afpec& of the lumina-
ries, or planets effentially fortified. Mars in conjunction, quartile, or
oppofition, to Luna and Saturn, in the fame afpect.of Sol from angles,
fhews a violent death. - If fo pofited in violent figns, though out of an-
gles, the fame. Mars and Sol in the fecond houfe, effentially fortified, the
native may have a good eftate, but will have ways enough to fpend it; but,
if they be weak, peregrine, or afflicted, the naga be driven to want,

\ ; | Mars


’ i. >.


“——.. 2 @


* t


MOE. A Se FR Gk OSG. | 263


Mars and Sol in afcendant, in aereal or fiery figns, make proud, fcorn-
ful, prodigal, perfons, conceited of themfelves. Mars in oppofition to ~
Jupiter or Venus deftroys the iffue. of the native, though ever fo great and


numerous.


Sol lord: of the geniture, or {trong in the afcendant, makes the native
aim at fovereignty, rule, and dominion ; who, quod capax, will be very
famous; the fame if Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius, afcend, and the Sun be
{trong and in trine with Jupiter. Sol in the afcendant makes a great
boafter and very proud perfon; Mars there, denotes a notorious liar, ro-
mancer, and inventor of fables, anda contriver of mifchief, given over to
perjury, violence, and cruelty. Sol or Luna in quartile or oppofition to
Saturn or Mars. from angles, chiefly the medium cceli, fhews a violent
death ; if to Mars only, and in humane figns, the native will be flain by
the hands of his enemies ; if to Saturn, he will either have a great fall,
be imprifoned, or ftarved to death in a prifon. Sol and Luna afflicted in
watery or airy figns afflict the native greatly with the gout. Sol and Lu-
na in conjunction of Venus in Cancer or Capricorn give the native a great
fancy and a large underftanding.. If Sol, Luna, or the medium cceli, be
direCted to the conjunction, fextile, or trine, of Jupiter or Venus, the na-
tive, if in years, generally marries. Sol, Luna, or the afcendant, being
Hyleg, directed to the conjunttion, quartile, or oppofition, of Saturn, and
the’ direction ‘being in Aries, Cancer, or Leo, the native rarely efcapes
death when thefe directions come up, becaufe thofe figns reprefent, the
‘moft vital parts in man’s body, and Saturn in the oppofite figns has moft

ower to do mifchief. Soland Mercury in conjunction in the third or
fourth makes.the perfon {kilful in} occult arts and f{ciences.. Sol, Luna,
or the afcendant, in a geniture of fhort life directed to the Dragon’s Tail,


generally proves mortal. :


Venus, lady of the geniture, or ftrong in the afcendant, makes the na-
tive a great lover of pleafure, of an upright, juft, honeft, heart; but, if
fhe be weak, and afflifted by Saturn or Mars, the native is libidinous,
fenfually and beaftly inclined, and will be afflicted with venereal dif-
eafes.. Venus and Mercury in conjunction in Gemini, Libra, or Aqua-
ries in the: afcendant, in trine. with Jupiter in the ninth, make great
{cholars, and learned men. Venus.and Mercury pofited in the medium
ceeli, either in Aries, Gemini, Virgo, or Scorpio, make the native very
eminent in artsand feiences, Venus in the.afcendant, and Mercury lord
‘thereof, in reception with her, denotes a good underitanding, and a wor-
thy honeft man, Venus pofited in the medium coeli makes the native,
whether man or woman, marry very advantageoully..

S


No. 13. Ps i: 8 Q. Mercury }
. fs. : A
O& >. . x ‘
ae rt Bee
« r j


264 AN ILL U Sr R ATION


Mercury lord of the geniture, or ftrong in the afcendant, gives the na-
tive an admirable fancy and great elocution ; if he be in good afpect with
Luna or Venus, or in reception with either of them, he provesa famous
orator; if in good afpect or reception with Saturn or Jupiter, he makes
an excellent philofopher or divine; if with Mars, a good phyfician, far-


a


geon, or mathematician. Mercury in cafimi, and in his own dignities,


makes the native a great orator, or fubtle counfellor, in the eftimation of
all men. Mercury in fquare or oppofition of Mars gives a fharp, but
a turbulent and troublefome, wit and underftanding ; one never content,
but always feeking out new things and f{trange inventions. Mercury in
an angle in Pifces, afflifted of Mars or Sol, and the Moon in an angle,
afflicted of Saturn, makes a fool or’a madman; for thefe configurations op-
prefs the brain, and reprefent a thoufand fancies. Mercury in Cancer, re-
trograde, in fquare to Mars and Jupiter, and they in oppofition to each
other in the nativity of a divine, makes a great enthufiaft. If Mercury be
afiitied by Saturn in thofe genitures where Cancer, Scorpio, or Pifces,
afcend, the native is either dumb or has a very great impediment in
his fpeech; the fame if Mercury be with the Dragon’s fail; if afflicted by
Mars in fuch a genefis, the native ftammers very much. Mercury free
from affli@tion in genitures where Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius,
or Aquaries, afcend, gives the native a graceful {peech and an excellent
elocution. Mercury and the Dragon’s Tail in the afcendant in Libra, and
the Moon in Aries in the feventh, make’ the native a promoter of {candal
and falfehood. Mercury in either of the houfes of Saturn gives a found
underftanding ; and, if he be in fextile, trine, or reception, of Saturn, the
native comes into great repute by his ingenuity. Mercury in the houfes
of Mars, in good afpecdt of Luna and lord of the afcendant, gives an ex-
cellent underftanding.


Luna being lady of the geniture or itrong in the afcendant, the native
loves novelties, is fubject mutation, and defirous of travelling to fee dif-
tant countries; of a gentle natureand difpofition, and timorous; if fhe bein
afpect with Mercury, the native will be mafter of many languages. Lu-
na in conjunction with the Pleiades, and in quartile of Mars from an
angle, fhews great defects in the eyes, if not total blindnefs. Luna in
conjunction or oppofition of Sol in any genefis, fhews that the: native
will live but a fhort time; unlefs the Moon has great latitude ; for that
fometimes may make the conjunction or oppofition eight or nine degrees
diftant. Luna in conjunction of Saturn in an earthy fign, and an earthy
~ fignafcending, makes the native very melancholy and low-fpirited. Luna
in reception and trine of Mercury gives a good underftanding, and makes
the native able to overturn the arguments of moft men. Luna in the
twelfth, in quartile to Caput Algol in the medium, ceeli, thews lofs’ of

2 honour,


>


t.


oe?


ORL Al sr HR © 0 OG Yn | 265


honour, if not captivity, or death in prifon, Lunain Via Combufta, and
Sol in Via Laétea, denote great danger to the eyes ; if the infortunes be in
the afcendant, or in oppofition thereto, it prefages blindnefs. Luna, Sol,
or the afcendant, directed to the conjunction of Mars, fhew the frail

ox or meafles in children; in men it denotes malignant fevers; and, in
elderly people, death. Luna in good afpect of the almuten of the medium
ceeli, and in the fame with the lord of the afcendant, gives the native
eminent honour.” Luna or Sol, or both, or the afcendant, afflicted by
the body or partile afpect of the infortunes, denotes that they will be of
a very fhort and fickly life. gt


Fixed ftars of the firft or fecond magnitude in the afcendant, or medium
cali, give the native extraordinary fame and honour, make fee eminent
and profperous, and one whom the world will admire. Fixed ftars of a
violent nature, upon the cufp of the medium ceeli, and its lord pofited
with fuch, fhew-deftruction to the native’s honour and fame. Fixed ftars
are to be angered: in general pofitions or directions, in refpect of their
alpects, as well as the planets.


Tlie medium coeli afflicted by the Dragon’s Tail, and both the lumina-
naries afflicted by Mars, in a violent fign in the fourth, fhew a wretched
end, both to the honour and life of the native. The Poet ri coeli well
foetifed gives the native not only great honour, but fuch as fhall be fixed
and durable ; though: fometimes upon bad directions it may be fubject
to interruptions. ‘Lhe medium ceeli directed to promittors never ie
unlefs-in the genefis there be figns of a violent death.


All the planets, or moft of them, above the: earth, make the native;
of whatfoever ‘capacity, eminent and famous beyond it; and, if they fhall
be fo pofited in their dignities, he fhall, like a ‘comet, out- thine all others
in the place where he lives. All the planets in a nativity retrograde, and
under the earth, though the native be of great and noble birth, thew him
not of arifing, but of a falling, fame and fortune. The lord of the afcen-
dant ftronger than the lord of the feventh fhews the native always over-
comes his adverfaries, and fo'contrariwife. Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius;
afcending, and the lord of the afcendant in the medium cali, ‘fhews
the native will always be aiming at things beyond the capacity of his
birth or prefent fortune.


The inferior planets many times fhew great honour to the fame of a
native, but will not be of long continuance. ‘The fortunes in the ninth
make famous churchmen, lawyers, and rich merchants; the fame, if the
benevolents trine the ninth or Jord thereof. Many planets in the ninth,

In


:. =


Le Chal


S66. ANY Prue tie ATO N


in the nativities of any clafs of perfons, gives them the higheft honour and
dignity in their profeffion. If Virgo afcend, the native is generally very
ingenious, unlefs Mercury be.in Sagittarius or Pifces; and then the native
is generally confident and conceited of his own abilities, though a mere
fool. . The lord of the medium cceli in the twelfth, and the lord of the
twelfth in the afcendant, denote captivity or imprifonment ; the like if


the Moon or lord of the afcendant be pofited in the twelfth. The greater.


the planets’ dignities are,the more fplendid and glorious are the native’s
honour and fortune ; the greater their debilities, the more obfcure will
be his. Ifthe medium ceeli be ae the body of Saturn, he being
pofited in the tenth or eleventh houfe, the native will lofe all his honour
and offices, and will {carcely ever rife again to preferment ; and, if in fuch
genefis there be fignifications of a violent death, the aforefaid direction
puts an inglorious period to the native’s life.


A continued feries of good directions makea bad nativity fometimes
very good ; but that good lafts not long. ‘T'wo, three, or more, planets
in the eighth, upon good directions unto them, encreafe greatly the na-
tive’s fubitance by wills and legacies of the dead. The eleventh houfe,
fortified by the prefence of good planets, fhews many great and powerful
friends, but, by the prefence of evil planets, and they ill-affetted, it
fhews few and faithlefs friends. The lord of the eleventh ftronger than


the lord of the feventh declares the native’s friends to be more powerful


than his enemies.


All the planets under the earth, when they promife honour, dignity,
and fortune, which is chiefly when they are effentially fortified in noc-
turnal genitures, generally perform it in the latter part of the native’s life.
All the planets in a nativity out of their effential dignities, fhew obfcure
perfons ; who, if they ever attain any honour, glory, or renown, in the
world, never long enjoy it. A fortunate planet in the eighth houfe always
denotes a natural death ; the lord-of the eighth in the medium ceeli fhews
the native will die by the fentence of ajudge. Such as have a fatellium,
or croud of planets in angles, have at fome time or other of their lives
prodigious fuccefs or detriment, according to the occuring direttions.
Many planets in reception, or in good afpect of each other, give the native
many and good friends. Planets {quaring or oppofing each other from
angles and cardinal figns denote great misfortunes to the native, and that
at laft he fhall diea violent death. Cardinal figns poffefling the angles of


a nativity make the native, if of any capacity, moft eminentand famousin _


his generation, andtodo fuch aéts as that after-ages fhall admire him. Di-
rections to the bodies or afpetts of planets the defcending part of heaven,
although they denote the greateft happinefs, yet it provesnot very durable,


In .


> &


Oy TART IRC Oh 6 G ¥) 267


Ina feminine genefis, the lord of the feventh being pofited in the af-


«cendant, makes her govern over her hufband; and if the lord of the


afcendant bea fuperior planet, and the fign thereof commanding, the will
‘be a great virago, and hector over him. Allowance is many times'to be


given in the meafure of time in directions, when tranfits of weighty pla-


nets, contrary to the nature of the directions, fhall near that time occur;
for good and evil dire€tions may be eith:r anticipated or continued by the
force of the tranfits. Some perfons, although they have bad genitures,
rife wonderfully, becaufe their genitures fympathize with the nativities
of thofe by whom they are raifed. The greate(t fympathy that can bein
any two nativities, is by having the fortunes in one upon the places of


the luminaries in the other; and the luminaries in the latter upon the


places of the fortunes in the former, ‘The greateft antipathy is, where
the infortunes in the one poflefs the places of the luminaries in the other;
and the luminaries in the latter poffefs the places of the infortunes in
the former ; the fame happens if the lord of the afcendant in the one be in
oppofition to the lord of the afcendant in the other, and fo contrari-
wife. ‘lhe lord of the afcendant in the radix in. conjunétion with the
lord of the eighth, in the revolution, and in the eighth houfe, will be
very dangerous to the life of the native.


Mercury peregrine, and in detriment or fall, retrograde or combuft,
in quartile or oppofition of Luna from angles, flow in motion, cadent, or
in via combutfta, or afflicted by Saturn or Mars, fhews the native not to
be wife, but rather ftupid, and dull of underftanding, impertinent, trou-
blefome, a diflembler, and very filly creature ; but the quartile or op~
pofition of Mars and Mercury caufes a turbulent and unquiet wit, and
makes the native the author of many inventions.


RUDIMENTS of the DOCTRINE of HORARY QUESTIONS.


Let the radix be drawn into a fpeculum, and, being fully and com-
pleatly directed with obfervations of all the current tranfits, draw forth
the revolution alfo of the year. Then, confider the matter about which
the queftion is propofed, whether it be tranfient or durable. Confider
alfo to what houfe the thing belongs, what planet is the fignificator
thereof, the afcendant and its lord, and the planets which may confirm,
impede, or deftroy, the bufinefs. What planets are hurtful to the fignifi-
cator of the thing, and confequently to the querent,. which are fuch as
the lords of the feventh or twelfth houfe, or fuch as are in quartile or
oppofition to them in the radix. Then if the lord of the afcendant come
by direction or tranfit to the body or good afpect of the lord of the houfe
fignifying the thing, or planet pofited therein; or they contrariwife to

No. 13. a the


Y


263 A WF Eels TRA pT TaOAN


the good afpedct of the lord of the afcendant, the matter thall come to
pafs, or take effeét. So if. a planet by direction or tranfit hath lately
deparated from the fignificators of the thing, and immediately applies
to the conjundtion, fextile, or trine, of the lord of the afcendant, or pla-
net therein, it fhews the fame. If the fignificators of the thing, or lord of
the fourth from the houfe fignifying the fame, fhall tranfit the afcendant,
or come by direction thereto, it fhews good. If the radical and revolu-
tional fignificators apply by good afpect in the Ephemeris, or are in
reception, or another planet makes a tranflation or collection of their
light, it fhews the perfection of the matter. If the aforefaid tranfits or
directions happen to be in mutual reception to the lords of their radical
places, it fhews fo much the more eminent good. And, whether the fig-
nificators be {trong or weak at the time of the direCtion or, tranfit, if
they were ftrong in the radix, their fignifications will be the more firm.


If any planet collects the light of both fignificators, and at that time tran-.


fits the afcendant or houfe fignifying the thing, it perfects, the matter.
The fame if. by direction or tranfit they come to one another’s places in
the radix, or to any eminent fixed ftar, upon the cufp of the eleventh
houfe, or medium cali. . Confider what houfe the planet which tranf-
lates or collects the light of the fignificators is lord of, and pofited in,
for according to the nature of the things fignified by thofe houfes fhall
the matter terminate. If the Sun, Moon, or Part of Fortune, tranfit the
medium ceeli, or houfe fignifying the thing, or come thereto by direc-
tion, it fignifies good. But, if there be neither direction nor tranfit,
nor fignificators of good or evil, it is requifite to fufpend judgment to a
future day.


Ifit be a weighty and durable thing which is defired, it will {carcely
be performed without a good direction or tranfit ; yet you may judge
thereof, according to the next that comes, as it is either good or evil.
But, if the oppofite evil to what we have ftated fhould ha pen, then judge
of it by the contrary rule ; but, if both good and evil happen, judge ac-
cording to the more weighty and greater number of teftimonies. And
whatfoever we have faid of the radix, if the fame configurations happen
in the revolution, they import the fame, but not with fuch powerfuleffect.


Laftly, confider to what points in the revolution the radical fignifi-
cators approach by tranfit or direction ; or contrariwife, to what points
in the radix the revolutional fignificators apply ; and accordingly, as it
is either good or evil, join all with the other configurations aforefaid,
and accordingly judge. |


RUDIMENTS


GS


“
A


}


OpF + #Sp TOR: O- LO \G"Y. 269


RUDIMENTS ofthe DOCTRINE of RADICAL ELECTIONS.


If any thing be really intended to be obtained, the time of the be-
ginning and undertaking thereof ought to be elected from the radix:
of life, and nothing elfe. For at that time, once for all, the great God
deputed every fignificator to a certain purpofe or fignification, and firmly’
eftablithed the fame, forever unalterable by the power of aature. There-
fore, in making an election, firft correctly learn what planet is the true
and real fignificator of the thing defired, for without the true knowledge
thereof all is in vain; fecondly, confider the nature and quality of the
thing, whether it be proportional to the capacity of him who defires it,


er impoffible.


Confider aifo to what houfe of heaven the fame doth appertain, and
what eminent fixed ftars were upon or near the cufp thereof, and what
planets in the radix beheld it by friendly afpett. Note, likewife the re-
volution, what fignis upon the cufp of the fame houfe, what planet is
lord thereof, or beholds it by good afpe&. Confider the promiffor, or
planet, or houfe fignifying that or them, by or from whom the thing’
hoped for is to be obtained or performed. ‘Then confider in every elec-
tion the fourth houfe, from the houfe fignifying the thing, its lord, and
planet pofited (if any be) therein; for that hath fignification of the end


of the matter.


Let the radix be directed with afpeculum completely fitted, thereby
readily to obferve, with a glance of the eye, all the tranfits of every
fignificator, whether good or evil. ‘This done, obferve at what time the
fignificators come by direction ortranfit to the body or good afpect of the
promiffor in the radix, or to the lord of the fourth, or planet pofited ©
therein, or eminent fixed ftar of the nature of the promiffor, or at what
time there is any tranflation made by the promifior, Sun, or Moon, by
good afpett, to the cufp of the afcendant, lord thereof, or planet pofited
therein ; asalfoat what time in the Ephemeris they come to any good
afpect, and make your election for the fame accordingly.


Obferve when thofe radical fignificators come by direGion or tranfit
to the body or good afpect of the aforefaid revolutional promiffors.—


~ Obferve alfo when the cufp of the fourth from the houfe fignifying the


thing, or its lord, by direction or tranfit comes to the body or good
afpect of the afcendant or its lord, or tranflates the light of the fignifi-
cator or promiffor thereto; or comes to the houfe or lord thereof figni-
fying the thing. Note alfo, when the revolutional fignifieators come


by tranfit to the body or good afpect of the aforefaid promiffors, aia
3 radica


a0. , ALN SUL Lvs TR AUT LON


both or ‘covalaindiate and whether: there be noevil axeoien or tranfitaty
the fame time, neither radical or: revolutional, rege ap verte ‘the ‘etd ¢
faid configurations. 0° © : eit ie


‘Let the ‘fanuneatort. ‘but efpecially. the promiffors, be effentially ert
fied, or in conjunction,:fextile, or trine, with their places in the radix, if
poflible... . Let.the medium ceeli in the radix, as alfo the Sun and Moon
and lord of the eleventh, be free from all affliGtion, and haftening by di- .
rection or tranfit to fome good.configuration. And Jet the fame fign and
degree if poffible. afcend, at.the undertaking, which did in the radix, for
then the fignificators are the fame; if that cannot be, let thofe upon the
cufp of the houfe fignifying the thing, afcend ; or-let the Sun or Moon
be pofited in the houfe fignifying the thing, taking heed that the radical
infortunes. may be,cadent if poflible, and not angular. Obferve if there .,
be any reception between the radical fignificators and promifiors; the .
_ fame obferve.in-the,revolution ; or whether the.radical and revolutional.

. fignificators are. in reception one with another at the time of the directions. ,
‘or tranfits, for that is very promifing ; and thofe afpetts only are propi-
tious to make elections in.


Laftly, if the radical fignificators be weak or unfortunate, there can
be no ftrong orfirm election made‘for the native’; for what good can be
expected to’ ‘proceed ‘from weak, afflicted, impotent, and unfortunate,
promiffors’ or helps’? It‘is true there may be an accidental good, but that
never can-overcome the power’of an efiential or radical vite yet, if an
election be made for fuch a one, let the fignificators be effentially {trong .
at theitiine of the election, and if poffible 1 in tring to’ their radical’ places. ‘


Now; if the: aan time ‘be required in which any’ ‘thing fignified fhould ©
come to pafs, that muit be found by’the ditection of each’ ‘figniticator to
their refpective promiffors both by progreffiveand converlé operation ; 3 or!
by drawinga fpeculum for the mundane afpects, which will at firft’ fight:
point out'the year,’ month, and day, in which ‘all the matetial accidents of ~
human life fhall appear, and be made manifeft.’ If you would know how
many ‘children the'native fhall have, you mutt have confideration to the
fifth, feventh, : ‘ninth; eleventh,’ fick, and third, houfes, for thefe fignify
the native’s childrén, for; as the fifth from the MtbéHdant fignifies children, phe
fo it fignifies the firft and feventh child ; ‘the feventh fignifies ‘the fécond''*
child, for it is the’houfe of brethren itroha the fifth ;' the ninth fignifies”
the third child, becaufe it is the third'from the feventh; and fo in like
manner the eleventh fignifies the fourth child; ‘the firft,’ the fifth child; %
the third, the fixth child; the fifth, the feventh child/as'aforefaid ; the « ‘
feventh, the eighth child ; and foon. The {ex of the infant is difeovered
by the nature of the fignificators. -

. In


‘ z- - ; ." a"
: 4


<2 OF ASTROLOGY. 271


te ee regulating and afcertdining thefe judgments, the difcreet Aftrolo-~
 gian muft likewife underftand, that all fiery figns incline men to be cho-
Teric, hafty, furious; quarrelfome, revengeful, proud, ambitious, impe-
tious, importunate,-hardy, and ravifh; involving themfelves in many trou-
bles and misfortunes:; yet they are moftly ingenious, but often changing.
their opinions -and-purfuits. |


Airy. figns-fhew men cheerful, affable, courteous, liberal, free-hearted, -
faithful, good-natured, and loving mirth, fuch as finging, dancing, mu-
fic, and ail civil recreations; of modeft deportment and manners, and
of found reafon and underftanding.


Earthy figns denote perfons of referved thought, flow in fpeech, and”
deliberate in all their undertakings, keeping clofe their counfel and in-
tention. ‘They alfo frequently prove to be very fraudulent, covetous,
and fufpicious, feldom forgetting or forgiving injuries ; often forrowful
and low-fpirited; loving no man’s efteem but their own; for the moft
part pradent and careful, but auftere and furly in their manners.and de--_
portment..


Watery figns make them cowardly, luxurious, wanton, mutable, dull,‘
and fluggifh; with low, effeminate, whining. voices, very timorous and
fearful, having much deceit in them. They are ufually pretty much
given to the fchools and nurferies of Venus, which often prove a great
injury to them, and fometimes their total rain.


It muft alfo be remembered, that Saturn is extremely cold and dry,’
Jupiter is remifsly hot and moift, Mars extremely hot and dry, the Sun:
is meanly hot and dry, Venus is hot and moift, Mercury is remifsly cold
and dry, the Moon is meanly cold and moift. If Saturn be in Aries, his
drinefs is increafed, and his coldnefs abated, or he is intenfely dry, or re-
mifsly cold; In Taurus he aéts with a double force, viz. he is intenfely
cold and dry ; in Gemini he is remifsly cold and dry, in Cancer he is in-~
tenfely cold, fo that if Saturn afpect the afcendant from any of thefe
figns; he varies his influence, according to the ign heisin. A planetin
his houfe, as the Sun in Leo, retains his own nature, and is well'affected
in his influence, but if in his detriment, as in Aquaries, he is then ill
affected or deprivéd. If he be only peregrine, he is meanly affected as to
good or evil, viz. neither effentially ftrong nor weak); if in his fal], be
flags in his motion, and is a man indifpofed and uneafy, ‘Therefore a
planet in his fall or detriment effects no good to the native, if any, itis
cepraved, and confequently dangerous-or pernicious.


No. 14. 435 - cae A pla.


oe = *
iy: : @ P 2 aie : =


a


” ms z ,
Pad , .” " : , # a


3

22 A NYY DALYUPSHTERS ATT ON # Oe

A planet dire@ and {wiftin motion, or on the contrary, is as thofe very if
terms import; therefore their celerity, orientality, and their pofition, iff
fuperiors, fupra terram, makes then: more manifeft and powerful.” Aries
afcending gives a martial wit and inclination, but, if the Sun be in: par-
tile, trine, or fextile, to it, or its lord, or in conjunétion-of Jupiter, wha
may. be in platic fextile or trine to either of them, ‘then it is made folar
and jovial, but chiefly folar. Underftand the like in other figns afcend-
ing, according to their refpective nature, and the nature alfo of thofe pla- _
nets that behold them. |


The nature and ftate of every planet muft be attended to; for a pla-
net may be confidered in relation to the portents or fignification of any
» fign or manfion of heaven; thus, Firft as to pofition; fecond, dominion ;
third, exaltation; fourth, afpe@; fifth, oppofition thereunto; as for ex-
ample, Saturn in Aries muft be confidered as Martialized and Solalized,
becaufe Aries is the houfe of Mars, and the exaltation and triplicity of
the Sun, and fo in others. ‘The afcendant in any nativity is to be ob-
ferved, alfo the lord of the afcendant and his-pofition, or'a planet pofited
therein ; all which are to be confidered by the reader or ftudent-as to the
portents or fignification of the afcendant. The fixth houfe fignifies dif- ‘
eafes, but yet the twelfth fhall be a configurator in all corporal afflic-
tions, as being in oppofition thereto.
From the lord.of the afcendant, or in any other houfe, proceeds the chief
virtue or moft powerful parts as to the fignification’ of that houfe; if Sa-’
turn and the Sun be in conjun@ion in Leo in the tenth houfe, the latter
being’ neareft to the cufp thereof, then the native arrives to fome degree
of dignity or honour from the analogy, pofition, dominion, or forfitude,
of the Sun, as alfo his propinquity to the cufp.. But Saturn being of a
‘contrary, nature, and adverfe to what the Sun portends, alfo hating ‘the
place of his refidence, and partly. afflicting the Sun, will therefore caufe
{ome unhappy misfortune to arife, and cloud the glory promifed’ by the’
Sun in the ends. Saturn in conjun@tion with Jupiter in Virgo is’ moft®
powerful, and overcomes in his effects ; but, if they are conjoined in


Aries, then Jupiter is ftrongeft, and becomes vitor. ‘This reciprocally
by each being in his fall.


The luminaries are to be confidered as more powerful and fignificant
than the reft of the planets; and therefore any of the fuperiors.in conjunc-»
tion with the Sun in Leo influences'much power and honour to the na-
tive by virtue of the Sun, &c. So if Saturn be in conjunction with Ju-'
piter in Sagittary, the houfe of Jupiter, then Satarm a@ts’in dependance
to his difpofitor. Any planet {trong in a good houfe is of good fignifi-


cation,


ra ee "


2 2


”


© MOP CRSHTRREGILLONG yy & ayy


cation, but much better if the planet be a fortunate one by nature. A
malefic planet, weak in the tenth houfe, denies honour, if they. behold.
either the cufp or the lord thereof by any malevolent afpe& ; then many.
impediments or ob{tructions prejudice or hinder the native’s advancement.
Mars in the mid-heaven, ftrong, ufually portends military prefermenty
dignity, or profeflion. oO. ee

Saturn or Mars, ftrong in a good houfe of a figure, are as difcords in
mufic, correéted to effect a concord or harmony in founds; for, being
well affeéted, they caufea perfect good, though it be attended with dif-
ficult means or methods to accompany it. In fine, their good is always
tempered with fomething of evil, becaufe they are naturally more propenfe.
to effe& evil than good as for example, Saturn in the fecond houfe, or -
lord thereof, and ftrong, gives riches by rapine and covetou({nefs; in the
feventh he denotes the death of the wife. A malefic planet meanly af-
fe€ted in a good houfe oftentimes obftrudts or prevents what is naturally
fignified thereby, or at beft but meanly effects a good. As for example,
Saturn meanly affected, viz. peregrine in the fecond houfe, gives not
riches, yet retains them when gathered, by being {paring and penurious.
Mars fo pofited and ill-effected, diffipates or deftroys an eftate by prodi-
gality, and fuch other imprudent expences. Saturn, debilitated in the
eleventh houfe of a nativity, produces trouble with or by the means of
friends unrelated ; and the analogy is according to the debility of the pla-
nets, and how they are beheld, and mitigated by fextiles and trines, or


7 - + =


contrarily inflamed by quartiles or oppofitions. ©


An infortune in conjundtion with a fortunate planet, is either impeded
or deprived of the good fignified ; for, though the fortunate planet be in
his own houfe, yet he partakes fomething of the nature or analogy of
the malefic, with whom he is conjoined. Three planets or more in

conjunction, att jointly and feverally according to their refpedtive na-
tures, and to their heavenly ftates, but principally according to the nature
and ftate of the moft {trong and ruling planet. If an infortune, efpecially
Saturn, be placed between two planets which are in. conjunction, he pre-
vents or retards the good promifed by the other two planets; the nature
or kind thereof is difcovered by the houfe of heaven wherein fuch a con-
grefs is made.


The lord of the afcendant applying to the conjunction of the Sun in
any nativity, fhews the native apt, or delights to converfe with honour-
able perfons, grandees, and fuch-like; as alfo will be ambitious of fame,
» honour, and dignity, dc. If he apply to Saturn, the native effects to
converfe or affociate himfelf with perfons of an inferior rank, viz. ruf-

yaks 3 ; tics,


274 A NUM EoLIU)S @ RSART- ON, | 4


- tics, plebeians, &c. He is fubject to envy, fear, penfivenefs, and co-


vetoufnefs. Two planets in reception act or difperfe their influence in
an amicable method, and, if benevolent by nature, their virtues are the
more powerful. Many planets in cardinalfigns in any geniture, always
effect fome great things; if in one houfe, the native receives or fuffers
an excefs of good or evil, according to the nature of that houfe. The
benevolent planets Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury alfo, retrograde in any
nativity, is of eminent import, adding to the felicity of a native, and this
is the more powerful if they are applying to the conjunction of theearth
but the retrogradation of Saturn or Mars in angles, is eyer attended with
difficulties and unhappineffes, from which politions I fhall always pray,
Libera nos, Domine.


END of th FIRST PART. ;


@
y


any N..


i


TLLUSTRATION


grid 9 ia 6 5D NS


oO”


“CELESTIAL SCIENCE


O F A Aa Qian


A ool R ©. 1 OG. X.


PART tHe SECOND.


CONTAINING THE
DOCTRINE or NATIVITIES,
AN D “THE


ART or RESOLVING HORARY QUESTIONS;
TOGETHER WITH


A Corzection of Nativitises of the moft eminent and remarkable


Persons, Twins, Dwarrs, Grants, &c.


By E. SIBLY, M.D. F.R.HLS.


PRINTED IN THE YEAR M.DCC.XCIII.


AN


iy Mie i: Ge Md sar et ae a


Of the CELESTIAL SCIENCE of


ote gsc Sah 9 il Bh it a
PART rHe SECOND.


The ART of RESOLVING HORARY QUESTIONS.


T is an obfervation moft true, that all people endued with reafon are
fi folicitous to know their future eftate and condition ; but, as fome
perfons find it impoffible to procure the exact time of their birth, aftro-
logy fupplies that defect by the doctrine of Horary Queftions. So that
from a queftion ferioufly propounded almoft as much {atisfaction may be
given thé querent, upon many fubjects of enquiry, asif his nativity were
actually known. For, as the nativity is the time of the birth of the body,
the horary queftion is the time of the birth of the mind ; and there are
few perfons living but are in fome way or other fubjett to horary doubts,
which, being ferioufly propounded in the fhape of aqueftion, may be fatis-
faGtorilyrefolved. ‘This doctrine feems to be founded upon that miraculous
fympatby in natare, which is admirably manifefted between the Moon
and the fea ; by which that amazing body of water is conftantly drawn
after her, though no man fees, or can conceive, how. In thefe fympa-
thies there can be no doubt but the vegetive foul of the world invifibly
carries and unites a fpecific virtue from the heavens hetween one thing
and another, every where working thofe fecret effects, which no mortal
can fail to admire. And in the prefent cafe, who is to determine what
this foul cannot effect between the heavenly bodies and the animal
{pirit of man, working fuch fympathies, as that a queftion. of impor-
tance'to our welfare cannot ftart from the mind but ina point of time
when the planets and figns governing the perfon’s birth are acting up-
on the very fubject that engages his thoughts and attention. “And hence
the birth of the queftion, like the nativity of a child, carries the ftory of

| the


278 AN ILLUSTRATION


the whole pes an Hand: ‘upon its Phen: Maer hence alfo follows
- thitefkiflsia natpraltpréedictions by? whig¢het heparcift is enabled fo déman-
\itrate the "partioulars“of the event: fequired); “and? this’ as>avell by- théftars
dio heavenyas: i iatbnar the pict was of oid hen seed to do® by i shel of


iothe epbods


at 4 i ae a ee eS a ra i. s 5 <b) 54 + ‘ ;


uBut; Selle the predi@ions that are made froin dhe queftionary’ way
-are by’no means fo ented and correct as thofe deduced from nativities ;
ce therefore J recemmend all jadgménts of: futurity td be made Frori\ ha-
tivitees, whew! they*eat be procured>-tather*than from: horaty4 queftions,
Bat! at the fame time I am very confident that the omnifcient Creatorisnot
at all wanting for any pofliblecarein his.contrivance of the works of nature,
for the fupply of agh ourmoderate wants and enquities. ¢ Ana, ifrit be oe
{ential to-mayt’s: welfare: to be. forewarned ‘of the time and the judgment, as
Solomon declares it is, and that. the wife man {ball know it*, then it is
..plain that God has-afforded meansto obtain this,.knowledge withouta mi-
_facle 5, and, this means may? durely be by. the, ftars of -heaven, efponding
our borary.qucftions ; and experience continually affirms, day by day, that
it is fo...Notthat I, believe, the trivialyconcerns\and accidents,of mankind,
as fome. Writers: have pactended, may be. thus deduced, as, if,a glove, loft: br
hidden j fia. {port ‘and. ,wantonaefs, fbould. be fo. watched. and. attended, by
the ‘heavenly. imtelligencers, that, they. mutt needs: point; out,, where. this
piece of. leather. were.to be,found.; or that queftions propounded. out.of |
mere curiofity. or diverfion, are. to be refolved by.thear., No;, God’s works
‘are ferigus and not.to be made. the fport: and ridicule oft the gay. panda incon-
fiderates, For, although the. heavenly contrivance anay. aptly. refpond our
(crious, and. important . concerns,.as when. David, -anxtonily, defied: to, k tok now
whether be Soould 10. up, uta any of the. cities of Judah, and which. of them?
yet ‘that. they, fhould as aptly fatisfy our jntemperate, defires, , and, be fub-
fervient to. our frolios, vis too ‘ridiculous to. imagine. . »There,i 15\.N0, doubt
‘but the. he cavens are able, to thew. us, more Jearning , than. ‘we mQ¢ tale ae
“this, fa fe of frailty and: corruption, can, ever attain to cunder(tapd ; cf UMhtt
7 1s a great ‘Bounty. of God that. we know, fo, much, as. we do 5, theref are, it
highly. ‘becomes. every, wife. and good. Man -t0., -glority. the Maker, of all
ings for the, little, ato he can, and doth attain, and to be careful


sy 0b sian iets are. lorie and aig come bree io da Eo
stk “horary queftion,, suf necellanily vrelate , either to, things par. pln
fent, OF £9 come; Ot to concerns that once were, now are, or may, be beregfterss
‘and the an{wer to fuch. queftions, muit. be either ¢ffential or, accidental,


The, effential anfwer is is. always one of the, three CHD gS following, to le


{.& f yg
; f : } Juve eu


"ihe Com ug 27 y j ‘ bist i
aa iE “‘® Ecclef. viii. 12 and Ve 6. We ey ok ae
7 A. that
: "9 TRS (i aay 3 RR SHARK. ©) : ide. OF, bd me Meee Tek eke A) rh et ba BERD OI


A
;


OF ASTROLOOGY. 279


that the matter concerning which the enquiry is made, is firft, to dé, or
not to be; fecond, either good or bad; and third, either true or fale.
Therefore, if the queftion be real, and the matter rightly, ftated,. the
true anfwer, which is always. fhort, will be eafily difcovered by the fol«
lowing rules. The accédental an{wer is that which appertains to the
accidents of the bufinefs in hand ; and is always defined by where, when,
how, oc why. And whoever attempts to extend his judgment béyond
thefe limits, ftrains art beyond its bounds, and forces it to fpeak that
which it is totally incapable of, and by this means many pretenders te
Aftrology fail egregioufly in their undertakings. ‘To avoid this, let the
following queries be attended to,


QUERY I. Is the Sudje of Enquiry To uz, or NoT TO BE?


Here the firft thing to be attended to is the perfection or deftruction of
the mattér under confideration. ‘The perfection or completion of the
fubjet of enquiry may be effected four feveral ways, viz. by the wp
plication, tranflation, reception, and pofition, of the planets; and thefe are
determined and defined by the proper and refpective fignificators of thé
fubjeéts of enquiry, which are, firft, the lords of thofe houfes which re~
fate to the matter in hand; fecondly, planets near the cufps of thofe
houfes ; thirdly, planets exalted or dignified therein ; and fourthly, the —
confignificators of thofe houfes. The /ords of the houfes are thofé planets -
which are lords of the figns that happen to fall upon the cufps of the
houfes. The confgnificators, of each: houfe are as follow: of the firft
houfe or afcendant, Satarn and Mars; of the fecond, Jupiter and Venus ;
of the third, Mars and Mercury ; of the fourth, Sol and Luna; of the
fifth, Venus and Sol; of the fixth, Mercury alone; of the feventh, Lu-
na and Venus; of the eighth, Saturn and Mars; of the ninth, Jupiter
alone; of the tenth, Mars and Saturn; of the eleventh, Sol and Saturn;
and of the twelfth, Venus and Jupiter. From: hence it appears that
each houfe hath a primary and fecondary confignificator ; the firft where-
of arifes frem the order of the planets, the other from the'order of the
figns. mee gerber


The confideration of the matter propofed is taken from that houfe
which hath relation to, and fignification of, the fame; and this figni-
fication of the houfes is either {imple or compound. ‘The ftmple figni-
fication of the houfes is that which hath relation fingly to the perfoa
of the querent; compound fignification is that which hath relation to
the matter or quefited. The querent is he'or fhe’ that afks the queftion ;
the matter, or quefited, is that about which the queftion hp Oe
The fimple fignifications of the houfes are as follow: tee firft houfe
fignifies the querent’s life and perfon; the fecond, ,his fubftance; the

Now 14s | 30 third,


aio * A NY FOLOLTUSS AT REART T° N
moi} foe has eel faesiow] _qswte? Ja.aHoil of smal? ;

third, his kindred, neighbours, and fhorr journeys; the fourth; his grave,”
father, and lands; the fifth, his pleafures’ and ‘offspring ; ‘the fixth’ his?
Gigknefs, feryants,.and {mall cattle ; the feventh, his wife, public ened
mies,.and law-{uits; the eighth, his death, and legacies ; the ninth} his:
réligion,, long voyages, and learning; the tenth, his mother, trade, and?
honour; the eleventh, his friends and hopes ; the twelfth, his private’
enemies,. great cattle, imprifonment, and croffes. “The compound figni+'
fication is derived from the fimple, by confidering what houfe that is”
which fignifies the matter or quefited; and accounting that, ‘be it what-°
foever. houfe it may, for its afcendant or firft houfe; and fo afcribing
the fignification of the firft houfé of the figure to it: doing’in like man-
ner to all the other houfes in order. So that, if a queftion relates to. a bro-
ther,or relation, .the third houfe is then his afcendant or firft houfe, and
Aignihes, his life‘and perfor; the fourth houfe (which is in this cafe his:
{ecodd), his {ubftance or eftate; the fifth houfe-(his third) his \relations’
and thort,journeys; the fixth (his fourth) his father; the feventh his chil-’
dren; the eighth his ficknefs ; the ninth ‘his wife, &c¢. and the fame of all
others. ; ‘hefe things being laid as a foundation,’ we now come to thew
the:perfection' of the matter by the different affe@ions of the afpedts.’


jp RAPE PPL poe Be qn sip DEN ¢ } é Psi dase ey f rahi wc let 3 Da Fark
, Application is when two planets haften' to cobjundibn of afpet OF one
another, , The light planets only apply to the’ more weighty. So Saturn’
applies to-none; Jupiter only to Saturn; Mars te Saturn and Jupiter ;
Sol te Saturn,» Jupiter, and Mars ;, Venus to Satarh, Jupiter, Mars, and
Solis, Metcury.to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, and Venus. and Luna to
themall. ,, But, ifany of the higher planets be retrograde, they nay thea
apply to alighter by retrogradation.. ‘Thus Saturn may apply to Jupiter,
Mars,:Sol,, Venus, Mercury, or Luna; Jupiter to Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury,,or; Luna; Mars to Sol, Venus, Mercury, of Luna;: Venus to
Mercury,,.or, Luna; and, Mercury to Luna, when retrograde.. In this
application, the lords ofeach houfe are not only to be conifidéred, but alfo
- the confignificators of the fame; for, if they alfo apply together by good
afpect, swe. may, give,the more probable judgment. | Thefe applications
may be always difcerned by the Ephemeris ;' wherein may ‘not only be
feen when the Moon applies to any afpect, but alfo when any of the other


planets apply to one another.


_ "Franflation is when a planet feparates from the body or afpeét of one
planet, and immediately applies to the conjunttion. or afpect of ‘another,
And. the, planet tranflating is always lighter, except in retrogradation,’
thanjthe, planets. from or to. whom the tranflation is made. So Luna
may. tranflate.the light of the other planets from one to another ; Mercury
may tranflatethe light of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, and Venus, from
my 4 ; . - » : - one


y thy ‘ UR tik € P28 ia ; is f
ei


QB LAIST REO jojot yi.) |. as


one to-another; Venus the light of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Sol, from
one to another ; Sol the, light of Saturn, Japiter,. and Mars, ‘from ‘¢ one ta’
another ;; Mars the light of Saturn and Jupiter. from one to another 5” but
Jupiterand Saturn, without retrogradation, can make notranflation.. “This
tranflation isto. be, confidered, between the lords of the houles figuifying
the matter, the; :planets near the cufps, and the confignificators: of the
fame.\ (So, if, the queftion. belong : tothe feventh ‘houfe, and’ Sagittarius be
on the afcendant,,.then Jupiter is lord of the afcendint, ‘and Mercury of
the feventl; Saturn is the frft confignificator of the afcendant, and’ Mars
the fecond ; “Luna is the firft confignificator of the feventh, and Venus 1 is’
the fecond. , And,,if the tranflation be between Jupiter and’ Mercary, ‘or’
Saturn and Luna, or, Mars and Venus, it may pofhbly perform the tat’
ter; but, it there be a tranflation between them all, as alfo between
planets pofited vear the culps of the houfes, the thing will uridobbt-
edly: be..brought. to. pafs, the fame.as by application, “A more weighty’
planet: may alfo make a‘tranflation by feparating in retrogradation from
a weightier than himfelf, and- applying to a lighter than him@lf:’ So’
jJup ater, being retrograde,’ may’ feparate from Saturn or his’ afpect, and
Piste his light and virtue to Mars, Sol, bes Mercury, | oF, Luna.’


Reception is either fingle or mutuaJ. A fingle reception is when
but’ one of the fignificators receives the other into his-dignities, ,viz. his:
houfe, exaltation, or triplicity ; 3; this is but of fall’ force, and is called
difpofition. Mutual reception is when two planets: are in-each other’s
dignities ; as Mars in Gemini, and Mercury in Aries.’ ‘This reception
is threefold, either by hovufe, exaltation, or triplicity. ‘By houfe, ‘wher
Saturn is in the houfes of Jupiter, and Jupiter in the houses of Saturn.
By exaltation, 4s when Saturn is in Aries, “the exaltation of ‘Mars ;' and
Mars in Libra, the exaltation of Saturn. By triplicity, as when Saturn
is in Leo, the triplicity of Mars, and Mars in ‘Taurus, the triplicity: “of
Saturn. ‘Ihere is alfo another reception of dignities ; and that‘is-wher
one, planet isin, another planet’s houfe, and that planet in the other’s
| exaltation. or triplicity. As Saturn in Taurus, the houfe of Venus, and:

Venus {i Libra, the exaltation of Saturn, or in Virgo, his. triplicity :
_ Thefe receptions are remarkably {trong and forcing, if ‘they -fall’cither
in the ancittions of each other, or in or near: ‘each other's fextile. of trine.


Pélition is’ when sidhien: the lands: of two -houfes' concerned, or the
confignificators ‘of the fame, ‘or both, are pofited in each other’s houfes ;
or the lord of the afcendant, or its confignificator, or both, are pofited
in the houfe fignifying the thing; or, laitly, when’ the lord or configni~
| ficators of the Agee Agnifying. the shit are for ae in “the alcendant.
a hap Ge ~ S05


ek. |


Vas peud Pa 4 %
” ! ’


98a ANY BLL Ws TR oAnT & ON


So, if the queftion ‘belongs to the medium ceeli, if the lord-of the afcen~
dant be foundin the medium creli, or lord of the medium ceeli in the af-
cendant, or in mutual polition, iz perfects the thing defired, ‘This pofi,
‘tion is eminent, and, if the faid fignificators be pofited in the antifcions
or other dignities of each other, or of the planets fignifying the thing, it
abfolutely denotes the full completion of it; more efpecially if the faid
fignifieators by pofition are in fextile or trine to cach other; or to Jupi-
ter, Sol, oc Venus, or to lords of good houfes. ‘The power of antifct-
ons are equal to a fextile or trine, chiefly if they fall near thofe points, |
or in the dignities of their proper planet, er both. Thefe antifcions are
to be.confidered in all the ways aforefaid.; to wit, in application, tranf-
lation, reception, and pofition, in which they effect much more than
otherwife could be imagined. If there be application of one or beth fig~
‘nifieators, though to no afped&t, but to the antifcion of the other figni-
ficators ; or reception by antifcion with good afpedct, or.a real pofition
in antifcion of the one, with a good tranflation to the other fignificator,
it perfects things beyond expectation... And thus, by any vor. all of. the
* foregoing circumftancés, may the fubje&t of enquiry be brought to pafs,
and-com pleted. ere bre ee


The matter isideftroyed by prohibition, which.is when the fignifica-
tors are-applying ito an) afpect, and before.they. can come to that afpect,
the lighter or applying planet: comes to the conjuaction or:afpect of ano-
ther ; which planet deftroys what is defired. . Or. by fruftration, .which
is when fignificators are coming to an aipe&t, the more weighty. planet,
before they can make that alpect, meets with the conjunction or afpect
of another planet, and theceby fruftrates:the former.afpect. . Or by. re-
franation, which is when two fignificators are coming to an afpedt, and,
before they can make that afpect, the applying planet falls retrograde, .
if direét’; or, ifretrograde, he becomes direét before he can make the faid
afpect. , |


Things are alfo deftroyed by afpeft, which is when the -fignificators
apply to the quartile or oppofition of one another, without reception ;
or by the conjundtion of the Sun, which is called combuftion, and is the
greateft affliction of all. Alfo by {¢paration, which is, when the fignificators
of the querent, and thing propofed, have lately been in afpect, and are
“newly {eparated, though never fo little ; and.this denotes the full and
abfolute deftruction of the matter, which we feldom or ever find to fail,
The quality of the afpc& likewife thews the condition of the thing or mat-
ter lately pafled, if it was good,’ good; if evil, evil; and it 1s either
totally deftroyed, or at leaft brought to pafs with much difficulty, if the
tranflation be made by quartile or oppofition, But more efpecially if

Pe a another


OF, ASTR ALG Ye 4 283


another planet at. the fame.time fhall_tranflate the Hiatus or light of both
fignificators to Saturn or Mars, or to the lords of evil houfes. 57
~ “Tf there be'a tranflation between the fignificators by-quartile or oppofi-
tion, or by fextile or trine, ‘and, . before the tranflation can be made, one
or both.of the fignificators fhall go into another fign, the matter will
come to nothing. If there be prohibition, fruftration, refranation, evil
afpect, feparation, or evil tranflation, by quartile or oppofition, without
- qutual reception, it.is enough to deftroy the matter, but more efpecially
aif fome or all of them happen to be in‘fixed figns, and in a fuccedent_or
cadent houfe of the figure, or from, the, houfe fignifying the thing, Move-
able figns are Ariés,.Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn ; fixed fignsare Tan-
tus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquaries ; common figns are Gemini, Virgo, Sa-
gittary, and Pifces; angles ‘are the firit, fourth, feventh, and tenth ; fue-
¢edents are the fecond, fifth, eighth, and° eleventh, houfes'; cadents


are the third, fixth, ninth, and twelfth, houfes. BE SiR
QUE RY Th * Is the Matter GOOD or EVIL?” e
Confider the houfe.to which the thing belongs, its lord, and planets
therein; and the houfe fignifying the matter of the end, its lord, and pla-
nets therein; and; if the houfe: fignifying the thing be fortified:by the
prefence or beams of good planets, or:eminent fixed ftars of the firtt or
fecond magnitude, or af the Dragon’s Head be ‘there, it fhews good, but
the contrary, evil. The fame more particularly, “if the lord of the houfe
fignifying the:thing be angular, ftrong,: and effentially -fortified’s:‘or in
good afpect:to the cufp of that houfe fignifying the matter of theend, its
lord, or planets pofited therein ; but the:contrary;:sevile S30n8 *


»» Likewife mutual pofition.or reception, and the fignificators in good af-
pect, with, the fuperior planets, or planets more. weighty than themfelves,
are all teftimonies of good. But the fignificator of the thing peregrine,
flow in motion, retrograde, or feparated from the lord or planet in the
houfefignifying the matter of theend, are all fighificators-of evil. ( The
houfe fignifying the matter.of the end is always that which relates to the
thing or.things expected from the queftion propofed ; for example, if the
queftion, was; Is .it.good to remain ?. here.the;end of the query ‘is to be un-
derftood, whether it.be for health, wealth, preferment,, or the like. if for
shealth, the afcendant fignifies the matter of the end;.if wealth; the fecond
Houle ;. if preferment, the tenth, andforom 6: do... ae


 »QUERY I. Is the Report TRUE o FALSE? ~
“*Thefe judgments are drawn from that houfe; its lord, and planet
‘therein *pofited, “ftgnifying the matter or thing concerning which the re-
wrING: 1:4, Xx phd


284. ANS 2 GU SU RANT TO oN»
portis.' So, if it’be’of a brother orotherrelation, jadgment isdrawn from
the third; if ofa father, from the fourth ; if of a child, from the fifth ;
if ofa fervant, from the fixth:; if of a wife, enemies, or war, from the fe-
venth s if of a’king or prince, from the tenth ; if a lawyer or clergy-
man, from the ninth, and fo on. Tf any planet whatfoever bein thehoufe .
fignifying the thing concerning which the report is, or the Dragon’s
Head be there; or ‘the lord of the fame honfe be angular, or in conjunction
or afpect of any planet, the matter or report is true. But, if the report
was good, and the faid fignificator or planet pofited in the faid houfe be
retrograde or flow inmotion, or combuft, or peregrine, or in evil afpec&
of 'a more weighty planet, or cadent, or in conjunétion with the Dragon’s
Tail, or the Dragon’s Tail pofited in the faid houfe, it certainly fignifies
the report is premature ; and fo contrariwife. ;
~The Moon angular generally fignifies the report to be true ;_ more ef-
pecially ifithe report be evil, and the be in evil afpeét with malign pla~
nets ; or if good, and the be in good afpect of the benign. ‘The Moon |
ina fixed fign, and in conjunction of the Dragon’s Head, fhews truth ;
but moveable, void of courfe, and in conjun¢tion of the Dragon’s ‘Fail,
falfehood. Laftly, if it be concerning the furrender of a city, or conqueft
. either by fea or land 5, confider the afcendant of the given place, and up-

on what cufp itis pofited in the figure, and accordingly judge in ail.re-
fpeéts as if that houfe was the’ real and eflential fignificator of the thing
concerning which the report was made. Hitherto of the effential anfwer
of a queftion : we now come to the accidental.


. QUERY IV.” Wuere, or wHich way?

« Wherever the fignificator is, there is the thing ; the. houfe where the
fignificator is pofited fhews the quarter of heaven, or point of the com-
pafs, which way the thing may be. If the houfe and fign cohere, this
judgment is fo much the more firm ; if they difagree, confider the pofi-
tion of the Moon, and with what fhe agrees moft, and give §udgment
from‘her. If the Moon agrees neither with the fign nor houfe in which
the fignificator is pofited, then confider the part of fortune in the fame
manner as before you confidered the Moon, and accordingly judge. And;


if this anfwers not, confider laftly the difpofitor of the Part of Fortune;
and determine by that. '


The diftance is difcovered from the proximity or diftance of thevignific
cators to body or afpect, confidered as they may happen to be either an-
gular, fuccedent, or cadent, refpect being had to their latitude, whether


little or great, north or fouth. Great latitude fhews obicurity,. and great


- difficulty


OFA 8. TROFEO 6 Yui BBs


difficulty in finding what is fought for; if the latitude be-north, it fhews
difficulty only, not impoffability ; but, if fouth,, then all the labour of
feeking will be in vain, unlefs the fignificators, be angular: and near in af,
pect. Angles fignifying nearnefs,; fuccedents farther off ; and cadents
beyond thought or imagination,


The fignificator angular and without latitude fhews fome. paces; if it
_ hath north latitude, fome furlongs diftant; if fouth,. fome miles. ; The
fignificator fuccedent, and without latitude fhews fome furlongs ; if. it
hath north latitude, fome miles; if fouth, tome leagues. ‘The fignificas:
tor cadent and without latitude-fhews fome miles ;: if it hath north la-
titude, fome leagues ; if fouth, fome degrees. But thefe rules are chiefly
to be confidered in things having life ; the former give the knowledge of
the way and diftance in genera], and the latter-meafure it out diftinly
by numbers, If it be required to know the true number of paces,
furlongs, miles, leagues, or degrees, of diftance, confider the number of
degrees and minutes between the body or afpect of the fignificators,
and according to the number of degrees which are, between the conjunc-
tion, fextile, quartile, trine, or oppofition, fo many paces, furlongs, miles,
leagues, or degrees, is the thing fought after diftant from the place from”
whence it was loft, or from the perfon making enquiry. And, fo many
minutes as adhere to the degrees, fo many fixtieth parts of the. fame de~
nomination of the meafure which one degree fignifieth are to be accounted
and added to the former number... -


QUERY V. Wuen, or IN wHaT Time?


The limitation of time is taken, firftly, by houfe and fign; fecondly, by
afpett ; thirdly, by tranfit; or, fourthly, by direction, he firft three are
ufed in horary queftions, or elections ; the two laft only in nativities
and annual revolutions. If the fignificator hath latitude, the meafure of
time hath its limitation from houfe and fign. Whether things are to be
brought to pafs or deftroyed, the time, if it be fignified, by the houfe and
fign, mutt be confidered as the fignificator Ys angular, fuccedent, or ca-
dent, having moveable, fixed, or common, figns. Angles fignify the
fudden performance of the matter ; fuccecents, long time and with much
difficulty; cadents, fcarcely at all, or at leaft when all hopes are paft, and
with care and vexation. Angles fignify, if they have moveable figns,
fome days ; if common figns, fome weeks ; and, if fixed figns, fome
months. Succedents fignity, if they have moveable figns, fome months ;
if common figns, fome years; and, if fixed figns, when all hapes are paft,
if at all. If it be required to know the certain number of days, weeks,
months, or years, confider the number of degrees and minutes rik

a 04 the


66 - AN UGDEUSTLA TUM N


the body or afpedt of the fignificators, and according:to the number of de-
grees which are between their conjunction, fextile, quartile, trine, or op-
pofition, fo many days, weeks, months,. or years, fhall it be before the
anatter enquired aftér fhall be fully accomplifhed or quite deftroyed,
Great fouth latitude often prolongs the time beyond the former limita-
tion ; north latitude often cuts it fhorter ; but, if the fignificators have
no latitude, the limitation of time is made fimply by the afpect.


The time fignificators meet ‘by afpect is found out in the Ephemeris ;

to wit, the month and day thereof in which the fignificators meet. Tran-
fits thew the progrefs of the matter, whether the fignificators have lati-
tude or not, and point out the moft probable times in which the matter
may be forwarded or impeded.
In obfervations of tranfits, the figure muft be drawn into a fpeculum.
Find what configurations, viz. what conjunction or afpeét, it is by
which the matter may be brought to pafs, or deftroyed ; and, laftly, ob-
ferve in:the Ephemeris when the chief fignificators come in the fame
fign, degree, and minute ; for that is the time in which the matter will
be completed. And by the tranfits in the fpeculum may conftantly be
found the'good and evil days that affect the matter, until it is either per-
fected or become fruftrate. ,


QUERY VI. HOW or WHY?


The planets which make the prohibition or fruftration, whether by
good or evil afpett, are the hurting, deftroying, or impediting, planets ; to
wit, the planets that fignify he, fhe, or that thing, which fhall hinder
or deftroy the bufinefs. “Che man, woman, or.thing, is difcovered from
the impediting planet, by confidering what houfes he is lord of, and
what he is pofited in. ‘The houfe he is lord of denotes the.quality or
relation of the man, woman, or thing; the houfe he is pofited in, the
matter ; and the houfe in which the prohibition or fruftration happens,
the caufe or reafon.


If the impediting planet is lord of the fecond houfe, it is a matter of
eftate; if the third houfe, kindred, neighbours, &c. if of the fourth
houfe, inheritances or fathers ; if of the fifth houfe, gaming, pleafures,.
children ; if of the fixth houfe, ficknefs, fervants, {mall cattle; if of the
feventh houfe, enemies, law-fuits, wives ; if of the eighth houfe, lega-
cies, wives portions, death ; if of the ninth houfe, religion, churchmen,
voyages at fea, arts, fciences ; if of the tenth houfe, mothers, great men,
trade, honour, offices, employments ; if of the eleventh houfe, hopes,

3 ‘ - friends,


sd #


© °F TA S’TIR O'LIO G YA. 287:
Friends, acquaintance ; ‘if of the twelfth houfe, great cattle, difeafes,
private enemies, imprifonment, &c. Then confider whether the pla-
net is good or evil, tmafculine or’ feminine, or whether in a mafculine
or feminine fign and houfe; and accordingly judge of: the effects more
-remifs or ‘exact, as they may be brought to pafs either by man, woman,
-or thing ; judging always in this cafe by the fuperior teftimonies. And
-obferve, laftly, that, whatfoever has been faid of the impediting or hin-
-dering planet, the fame is to be underftood of the planet adjuvant, oc
helping. tinted.


The next thing to be confidered, is the propriety of the queftion pro-
pofed, and the’ fincerity of the querent; for it fometimes happens that
queftions are improperly and incorrectly {tated ; and at others, that they
are put through knavery and impertinence, with a view to injure and
difgrace ‘the artift. In thefe cafes, the queftion not being radical, no
anfwer can be obtained ; ‘and therefore he who attempts to refolve them _
will bring fhame upon himfelf, and difgrace upon the’ fcience. . Every
gueftion, to be radical, ‘muft be fincere and natural ; and, unlefs they are
fo, they cannot be refolved. Therefore, to afcertain their fincerity on
the one hand, and their fitnefs or unfitnefs on the other, the following
rules muft be obferved.


Ere& the figure as before directed ; and, if the fign afcending and the
planet in the afcendant defcribe exactly the perfon of the querent, the
‘queftion is radical, and fit to be judged. But, if either the very begin-
ning or extreme end only of the fign afcends, it will not be proper to
give judgment; for it denotes the querent to be a knave, and the queftion
a forgery, propofed merely out of ridicule and intemperate mirth. This
‘rule I have often verified in practice, by direétly charging the querent with
fuch defign ; and the effect this unexpected difcovery had upon them has
ufually produced an acknowledgment of it. The fame thing is indicated
‘by the quartile or oppofition of the Moon with the lord of the feventh
houfe; or by the Moon being void of courfe, or combuft; which pofitions
likewife denote the queftion’ to be improperly andincorre(tly ftated. Sa-
turn in the afcendant, impedited and afllicted, fhews the queftion propofed
to be either falfe, or without ground, or the fubject of it paft hope; and
whenever the lord of the afcendant is found combuft or retrograde, it in-
dicates the fame thing, and fhews the queftion is propofed to anfwer fome
abfurd or knavifh purpofe, and therefore ‘not to be meddled with,


Any queftion may be deemed radical, when the lord of the afcendant
and the lord of the hour are of the’ fame nature’and triplicity... Thus,
“fuppofe Leo afcends npon the horofcope at the time the queftion is pro-
' No. 14. BY.) pofed,


288 A NYDLSL 00s oT RAT. £0 N


pofed, and Mars happens to be lord of the hour, the queftion will be.
radical, becaufe the Sun, which is lord of the horofcope, and Mars, are
of one nature, viz. hot and dry. So, if Jupiter be lord of the hour,

the queftion will be radical, becaufe the Sun and Jupiter are of the fame

triplicity ; and this obfervation extends to all the other planets, anduni-

formly thews the queftion proper to be judged. Bat, whenever the tef-

timonies or fignificators in the figure are found equally ftrong for and

- againft the matter propounded, it ought notto be adjudged ; for the artift

knows ‘not which way the balance may yield, and therefore judgement

fhould be deferred to afuture time.


‘There is one rule by which the radicalnefs of a queftion may be afcer-
tained with greater certainty, or at leaft with lefs. probability of mif-
take, than by any other; and this is by the moles with which every .
perfon is more or lefs marked. It is really an aftonifhing fact, and no
lefs extraordinary than true, that thefe moles or marks are all uniformly
diftinguifhed by the figns and planets which prevail at the time of birth,
if not abfolutely produced by them. It was the troth and univerfality
of this obfervation which firft led to the difcovery of that affection and
government which the celeftial figns have upon the different members of
man’s body; a fact fo obvious, that, notwithftanding all endeavours to
refute the idea of planetary influence, yet this fact is annually recorded.
in every almanac, and finds a place in almoft-every other aftronomical
publication. iit


According to this rule, whenever a perfon comes to propound a quef-
tion, let a figure of the twelve houfes be erected for the querent; then
note what fign is upon the cufp of the afcendant, and in the part of the
querent’s body which that fign governs, if, the queftion be radicai, the
querent will have a mole. For.inftance, if Aries be the fign afcending
at the time, the mole will be on the head or face; if ‘Taurus, on the neck
or throat ; if Gemini, on the arms or fhoulders ; if Cancer,-on the breatft;
and fo uponvany other part of the body which the fign afcending {hall
govern, Obferve next, in which of the-twelve houfes the lord of the
afcendant is pofited, and in that part of the body the figa governs which
happens to fall upon the cufpof that houfe will the querent have-another
mole. Next obferve the fign defcending on the cufp of the fixth houfe,
and in whatever part of the body that fign governs the querent will find
another mole; and upon that member alfo which is fignified by the fign
wherein the lord of the fixth houfe is pofited will be found another,
Obferve alfo what fign the’ Moon is pofited in, and in that part of the
body which is) governed by it fhall the native or querent, find another
mole. If the-planet Saturn be the fignificator, .the mole is either black.

or


OCF, # & Be Os 0 Gey.y 289


or of a dark colour; if Mars be fignificator, andin a fiery fign, it then re-
fembles a fear, cut, or dent,.in the flefh ; but inany other fign it is a red
mole. If Jupiter be the fignificator, the mole is of a purple or bluith
catt; ifthe Sun, itis of an olive or chefnut colour ; if Venus, it is yel-
low ; if Mercury, of.a pale lead colour; if the Mogan, it is whitith, or
participates of the colour of that planet witb which fhe happens to bein
afpect. And, ifithe planet which gives the mole be much impedited or
afflicted, the mark. or mole will be Jarger and more vifible.


If the fign and planet which gives the mark or mole be mafculine, it:
is then fituated on the right fide of the body; but if feminine, on the
left fide. If the fignificator or planet which gives the mole be found a-
bove the horizon, that is, from the cufp of the afcendant to the cufp of
the feventh, either in the twelfth, eleventh, tenth, ninth, eighth, or f{e-
venth, houfe, the mark or mole will be on the fore part of the body; but
if the fignificator be under the earth, that is, in either the firft, fecond,,
third, fourth, fifth, or fixth, houfe, it will be fituated .on.the back
or hinder part of the body. If only a few degrees of the-fign afcend upon
the horofcope, or defcend-on the fixth ;: or if the lord of the afcendant,
lord of the fixth, or the Moon, be pofited in the beginning of any fign ;.
the mole or mark will be found upon the upper part of the member thofe
figns govern. If half the degrees of a fign afcend, or the fignificators be
pofited in the middle of any fign, the mark or mole will be in the middle,
of the member ; but, if the laft degrees of a fign afcend, or the fignifica-
tors are in the latter degrees of a fign, the mark or mole will then be fi--
tuated on the lower part of the member fuch fign governs.


If the queition be radical, the time rightly taken, and the querent fin-
cere, and of fufficient age, this rule will feldom or ever-be found to fail.
In afcertaining the exact time of any perfon’s nativity, I have found it of
excellent ufe ; never having been once deceived by it in the {malleft de-
gree. In company I have frequently tried .the.experiment upon a ftran-
ger, and ever found it correfpond, to the aftonifhent of all perfons
prefent ; and it is anexperiment which any reader may eafily make upon
himfelf “or friends. But in the months of ‘November and December,
when figns of fhort afcenfions are upon the afcendant, great care mutt be
taken to be exact in point of time ; for.in thofe months the Sun is fre-
quently not vifible, and clocks are not.always to be depended upon ;
therefore without .proper care-the right. afcendant.may.eatily be miffed,
for Pifces. and Aries both afcend in the {pace of fifty minutes, and Aqua-
ries and Taurus in littlemore: than an hour; but, if thetime be taken ex-
act, no one need ever'miftruft the certainty.of thefe rules, and the .exact


conformity of the marks or moles.to the figns and planets which repre-
fent


290 ANS Le US TR Amon

fent them. Thus, by looking ata per(on’ s nativity, ‘and attending: to thele
rules, the reader may exactly point out and defcribe the moles in any part
of the native’s body, though it bea perfon he never faw or converfed
with; and, if he is correct to time, he may fafely venture his life upon
the matter. “And by the famekind of fimple, eafy, and certain, rules, are
all predictions in aftrology managed; fo that, inftead of calling in the aid
of any fupernatural or infernal compact, it only requires to be:correct to
time and calculation, and to know the true nature and influence of the
planets, and by thefe alone are the events and contigencies of fancy
demonftrated and foretold. mow


As thefe rules-hold good.upon the bolly re every querent, {0 tahey
mutatis mutandis, upon the body of the quefited ; for example, Suppofe
a perfon enquires concerning a wife or fweetheart, then.the feventh houfe _
will be her firft oraicendant, and the twelfth her. fects: and in thofe parts
of her*body which the figns upon the cufps of thofe aes govern fhall
fhe have moles ;'and:fo by the Moon and other fignificators. It is alfo
found by denGant obfervation, that: an infortune pofitedin the afcendant
always marks theface with a mole or fear; for the afcendant or firft houfe
always reprefents the face, let what fign foever afcend,; the fecond repre-
fents the neck, the third the arms and fhoulders, the fourth the breaft,
and fo on, every houfe and fign in order, according to: its fucceffion. It
is alfo obfervable, that, if the Moon-be in. conjunction or oppofition of the .
Sun, in an evil afpect to Mars, and.in angular houfes, the querent has.a
natural infirmity or blemifh in or near ene of his eyes. hus having
fhewn how to difcover whether queftions are proper and radical, or orien
we fhall now dire& how to give judgement upon them.


QUESTIONS proper'to-the FIRST HOUSE.


The firft houfe has fignification of the life of every perfon, and expref-
fes the ftature and temperature of the body ; and in Horary. Queftions
thefe Following are proper unto its


1. Of the length of the Querent’s i ifs
2. aes the good or evil attending life.
3. When or in what time fhall thenative undergo a change § 2
i What part of the Querent’s life is likely to be moft profperous 2
. Toward what part of the neg bos yey he direct bis affairs to profper in
them ?
Mc * Fale’ | perfon having a defire to peak with another, ha he jn him at home?
7. Of an abjfent party, if dead or alive.


g Of afhip at fea, ber fa my or deftruction.
Thefe


YE 7 Kone v- Z Mt ee eA ; |? Ae y a
7 a ae Lo


O Fe A 8S TROLOG Y. 291


Thefe partioulars, being explained, will give light fufficient to the aftro-
logian, whereby he may judge of any other queftion proper to this houfe,


Of the Length of the Querent’s Life.


To refolve this queftion, obferve the fign afcending, the lord thereof,
and the Moon,; and if they are found free from the malignant beams of
the infortunes, or of the lords of the fourth, fixth, eighth, and twelfth,
thoufes, and not combuft, the querent’s life will not be fhort; and, if
the fignificators are not .afflicted by the prefence of violent fixed ftars, it
may be ftill further prolonged; but if the lord of the afcendant be com-
buit and retrograde, and in an evil houfe of heaven, the querent is not
likely to live long. When the fignificators are unfortunately afpected
from ‘good places of the figure; or the benevolent planets interpofe their
rays, the malevolence threatened will be fomewhat abated; but if it be
from evil houfes in the horofcope, and the benevolent planets afford no
help, danger of a fhort life is much to be feared. .


Of the Good or Evil attending Life.


The good or evil that attends ‘each -perfon is diftinguithed ‘by the for-
tunate and unfortunate radiations in the figure, When benevolent pla-
nets pofflefs the afcendant, or the principal places of the figure, they in-
dicate much good to the querent through the whole courfe of his life.
And iif the Jord of the.afcendant and the Moon be friendly afpected by the
beams of the fortunes, although from malignant places of the fcheme,
yet it:prefages good to the native, inafmuch as an accidental evil cannot
rebate or withftand an effential good. But when the infortunes poffefs
thefe places, or by evil afpect afflict the fignificators, the querent will be
fabject toa troublefomelife. If Saturn poffefs the afcendant, the querent
will ‘be melancholy and .penfive, and fubject to perplexities from aged
men. If Mars, he will be choleric, and liable to oppreflion by knaves
and {windlers, and fometimes by the treachery of kindred; if the Dra-
gon’s tail be in the afcendant, he will never be free from fcandal and dif-
grace. When the afflicting planets are lords of unpropitious houfes,
the evil will be longer durable ; but, when the affifting planets are lords
of good houfes, the good will be the more permanent. Note alfo the
houfes ‘thofe planets :govern; :for from thence is difcovered by what
means the querent fhall be fortunate or unhappy. And, as the malignant
beams of ithe evil planets prevent or eclipfe the good that is fignified, fo
the benevolent rays of the fortunate ftars reverberate much of the mif-
chief portended : by duly confidering which, according to the ftrength of
the planets affitting or afflicting, 'the extent.of the-good or evil that attends
each querent’s life may be nearly afcertained. |
No, 15. 32 ake In


292 AN ddb 0 $ TR AGE L0(N


In what Time the Native may expect a Change.


Whenever this queftion is ferioufly propounded, and the nativity of
the proponent not attainable, (for, if the nativity can be had, horary
queftions are ufelefs,) erect the figure, and draw it into a fpeculum, aad_-
direct the feveral fignificators to their promittors, as ina nativity. Find
the true diftance of each fignificator from its promittor, and turn it into
time, as in a nativity, and according to the effects of the directions judge
of it. But.this method is only to be taken when queftions of weighty
concern are propounded; upon any trivial or ordinary bufinefs it is wholly
unnecefiary. In matters of little importance, it is fufficient to ob-
ferve the degrees of diftance between the fignificators, either of their
bodies or afpe@ts, which will point out the time correétly enough. When
fixed ftars of a violent nature occupy the principal parts of the figure, -
the afcendant, mid-heaven, or place of the Moon, they prefage fudden and
unexpected mifchief; but when fixed ftars, of a noble and generous na~
ture, poffefs thofe places, they demonftrate f{udden and permanent good to
the querent. ia


What Part of the Querent’s Life is likely to be moft profperaus.


To refolve this queftion, it only requires to obferve in what part of the
figure the fortunate ftars are, and according to their pofition judge of it.
‘If the propitious planets are in the afcendant, the twelfth or eleventh
houfes, the native will profper moft in his younger days. ‘Ifin the tenth, ©
ninth, or eighth, in the middle part of his age. If in the feventh, fixth,
or fifth, after his middle age, If in the fourth, third, or fecond, his
latter days will be the moft comfortable and happy. The time is afcer-
tained by reckoning for every houfe fituated between’ the fortunate
planets and the afcendant five years, if the fignificators of life be weak ;
if moderately dignified, fix; but, if the fignificators of life are remarka-
bly ftrong and well dignified, then feven years may be reckoned for every
houfe. | .


Toward what Part of the World may the Querent dired# bis Courfe to
profper.'


It is a misfortune not very uncommon for perfons to undertake long
journeys and voyages, much to their prejudice and difadvantage ; for, al-
though all places are alike to him that made the earth, yet they are not fo
to men that poflefs it; therefore it will be requifite for thofe who judge
gueftions of this kind to obferve the following rules, or at leaft as many
«f them: as may be neceflary. The whole canopy of the heavens is di-

; — yvaded


OiFr. AS TROLOG ¥. 293


vided into four quarters eaft, weft, north, and fouth ; and thefe four
quarters are again’ fubdivided, viz..the firft houfe is full eaft, and the
‘twelfth houfe, being in afcenfion next unto it, is eaft by fouth ; theele-
venth next unto that, fouth by eaft ; and the mid-heaven fouth, &c.
Now according to thefe quarters of the heavens, thus divided and fub-
divided, look for the benevolent planets Jupiter, Venus, Luna, and the
part of fortune, or the moft of them, and direct the querent in his affairs
thither. For example, fuppofethefe planets fhall be in the mid-heaven,
that being fouth, direct the querent fouthward ; if they be in the ninth,
it is beft to go fouth-weft. If in the weft, it is his intereft to go full
weit ; and fo of the reft. Confider alfo the nature. of the querent’s de-
fire, whether it be for health, riches, honour, friends, &c. that he en-
gages in his undertaking ; for, by rightly underftanding the queftion, the
querent’s defire fhall be the more readily anfwered, If it be for health
he would remove his habitation, obferve where or in what quarter the
lord of the afcendant and the Moon are polited, and direct: him that
way. If, for riches, take notice of the lord of the fecond and the part of
fortune. If for honour, confider the Sun and the lord of the tenth. If
for friends, the lord of the eleventh ; and fo of the other fignificators.


4 Perfon having important Bujfine/s with another, foall he find him at Home ?


The truth I have always found in the anfwers to this queftion princi-
pally induced me to give it a place here ; for I have often tried the ex-
periment both for myfelf and others, and have never known it to fail.
‘The rules are thefe: If you would fpeak with a perfon that you have fa-
miliar and conftant dealings with, but no way related, take the feventh ©
houfe and his lord to fignify him, that is, the feventh from the afcendant ;
for the afcendant always fignifies the querent. If the lord of the fe-
venth be in any of the four angles, viz. in the firft, fourth, feventh, or
tenth, houfes, the perfon you would fpeak with is certainly at home. If
the lord of the feventh be in any of the fuccedent houfes, viz. in the fe-
cond, fifth, eighth, or eleventh, he is not then at home, but is near it,
and may with a little diligence be found; but if the lord of the feventh
be in any one of the cadent houfes, viz: the third, fixth, ninth, or
twelfth, the party is far from home, and confequently cannot be fpoken
with if foughtfor. If the lord of the afcendant apply to the lord of the
feventh by a friendly afpect at the time of enquiry, the querent may per-
haps meet the quefited, or accidentally hear of him bythe way. Or, if
the Moon or any other planet transfer the light of the lord of the feventh
to the lord of the afcendant, it denotes the fame thing. The nature and
fex of the planet transferring the light denotes what manner of perfon


fhall give notice to the querent of the perfon he enquires after, accord-
s Ing


Zo AN ILLUSTRATION


ing to the fign and ‘quartér‘he is pofited in. But, if the perfon enqui-
red after ‘be a ‘relation, then the lord of the feventh is not to be‘taken,
but the lord of that houfe which ‘fignifies fuch relation; as, if it bea
brother, then the lord of the third muft be referred to ; if a father, re-
gard muft be had to the'lord of the fourth ; ‘if'a fon or daughter, ‘obferve
the lord of the fifth, and fo on; and, according to their pofitions, judge as
above {pecified.


Ifthe Party long abfent be dead or alive.


Herein alfo muft be confidered what relation the querent hath to the
party quefited, and take the fignificator accordingly: But, if there be no -
relation between them, then take the afcendant, his lord, and the Moon,
to-fignify the party that is abfent; and judge thus: If the lord of the
af{cendant, or the Moon, be in conjunétion with the lord of the eighth,
ora planet in the eighth, and no benevolent teftimonies concur, the ab-
fent party is certainly dead. Or when the Moon, and the lord of the
afcendant, fhall be in oppofition to the lord of the eighth, from the fe-
condand eighth, or from the fixth and twelfth, houfes, the abfent party
is likewife dead. If the lordof the afcendant be in the fourth, -and the
Moon in the feventh, in quartile to him, it fhews great ‘danger ‘to the
quefited, if not abfolute death. -When an-evil planet fhall tranflate the
light of the lord of the eighth unto the lord-of the afcendant, or of the
lord of the afcendant to the lord of the eighth, it is moft probable the
abfent party is dead. If the lord of the afcendant and the Moon be in
the fourth houfe from the afcendant, or in the houfe of death, and either
combuft, or in their fall, or joined with the lord of the eighth, the par-
ty quefited is undoubtedly deceafed ; butif none of thefe pofitions hap-
pen, and on the contrary you find the Moon, and the afcendant, and its —

lord, ftrong and well fortified, the abfent party is alive and well. If the
lord of the afcendant, or the Moon, feparate trom the lord of the fixth,
the abfent party hath been lately fick ; if from the lord of the eighth,
he has been in danger of death; if from the lord of the twelfth, he has
been in prifon, and fuffered much anxiety of mind. And, by thus vary-
ing the rule, his condition, according to the application and feparation
of the fignificators, will be correctly found.


Of a Ship at Sea, her Safety or Deftruction.


This queftion, although attributed by the ancient Arabian and Latin
aftrologers to the ninth houfe, becaufe it relates to voyages, yet the
judgments hereof being fuch-as.properly relate to the firft houfe or afcen-


dant,


‘


dant, I have for that reafon referred it thereto. The parts of the fhip
are thus divided according to the figns of the zodiac*.


x The breaft of the fhip « That part above the breaft in
x Under the breaft toward the the water

water m Where the mariners abide
‘ma ‘The rudder or ftern ft The mariners
os The bottom or floor ye The ends of the fhip
s The top above the water wr The captain or mafter
m The belly of the thip * The oars.


The afcendant and the Moon are generally fignificators of the fhip, and
_ the burden fhe bears; but the lord of the afcendant is fignificator of the
perfons that fail inher. And if in a queftion all thefe appear fortunate, they
denote profperity to the fhip ; but if on the contrary they are found im-

edited and afflicted, the veffel and allin her are in imminent danger, if not
abfolutely loft. When a malevolent planet, having dignities in the eighth
fhoufe, fhall be found in the afcendant, or the lord of the afcendant in
the eighth, in evil afpect with the lord of the eighth, twelfth, fixth, or
fourth, houfe, or if the Moon be combuft under the earth, all thefe are
indications of danger, and prefage the fhip either to be loft, or in a very
defperate condition. But when all the fignificators are free, and no way
impedited, it denotes the fhip to be in a very good and profperous con-
dition, and all the perfons and things on board her. If the afcendant and ~
the Moon be unfortunate, and the lord of the afcendant ftrong, and ina
good houfe, it indicates the fhip to be in an ill condition; but the men,
&c. that are on board her, will do well, and come home in fafety. But
if the afcendant and the Moon {hall be fortunate, and the lord of the af-
cendant unfortunate ; it fhews that the veffel will do well, or that it is in
fafety ; but that her crew are in great danger of being deftroyed by fome
putrid difeafe, or of being taken by an enemy.


If any perfon enquires what fuccefs a fhip fhall have in her voyage ©
upon her fetting fail, you muft then note the angles of thé figure ; and
if the fortunate planets and the Moon (for fhe is lady of the feas) are
found therein, and the unfortunate planets cadent, or in an abject con-
dition, it forefhews the fhip and her lading will go very fafely unto the
intended haven. But if the infortunes be in angles, or in fuccedent
houfes, fhe will meet with fome accident in her voyage ; and the mis-
fortune will fall upon that part of the fhip, perfon, or thing in the fame,


* Da Signumy, pectoribus Navis; %, ei quod eft fub peStoribus modicum verfus aquam; 0,
gubernaculo-navis ; 9, fundo navis ; §L,fummitati nayis que ftat fuperaquam 5 ™, ventri navis 5
&, ei quod fublevatur et deprimit de pectoribus Navis in aqua; m, loco ubi morant Nauta; f,
ipfi Naute ; 4, finibus exiftentibus in Nave 3 «, Magiftro Navis; #, remis.—Haly de Judic.
Aftrol. parts tertia, cap. 14. fol. 115.


No. 15. AA fignified


296 AN RDU WSITIRTA T LON


fignified by the fign where the infortune is pofited. And, if the infor-
tune threatening this danger fhall be Saturn, the veffel will either be
fplit or funk, and moft of the crew either drowned, or fubject to many
hardfhips. But if the infortune be Mars, and he in any of his effential
dignities, or afpecting a place where he hath ftrength, or pofited in an
earthy fign, he portends the fame mifchief, with the additional misfortune
of the crew being either taken by an enemy, imprifoned, or carried into
flavery. But if the fortunes caft their friendly beams unto either of the
aforefaid: places, andthe lords of the angles, particularly of the afcendant
and the difpofitor of the Moon be free, it denotes that, although the fhip
fhall undergo much damage, or be loft, yet the major part of the men and
goods fhall be faved. But if Mars affli&t the lords of the angles, and dif-
pofitor of the Moon, the men and the fhip will be in danger of pirates,
or of a public enemy. And, if any other evil affections appear in the figns, —
there will be quarrelling and contention, or fome dangerous mutiny, in
the fhip ; and this will chiefly happen when the infortunes are located in
thofe figns which difpofe of the parts in the upper divifion of the fhip.
But, if Saturn afflict in the fame manner as above recited of Mars, there
will be many difturbances in the fhip, but no bloodfhed. And, if the in-
fortunate figns fignify the bottom or lower part of the fhip, it prefages
drowning by means of fome dangerous leak. If fiery figns be in the mid-
heaven, near violent fixed ftars, and Mars prove the afflicting planet, the
fhip will be burnt, either by fome accident within her, or by lightning,
or by the falling of fome inflammable meteor. But, if Mars be in anhu- |
man fign, the burning of the fhip will be occafioned by fome engagement
with an enemy ; and the danger will begin in that part of the fhip fignified
by the fign wherein the infortune was placed in the figure. If Saturn be
the threatening planet inftead of Mars, and pofited in the mid-heaven,
the veffel will be caft away, or damaged by the motion of violent ftorms
and winds, or by reafon of leaks, or bad fails; and the danger will be
either greater or lefs, in proportion to the dignity or power of the infor-
tune, and his diftance from the beams of the benevolent planets. _


If the lord of the afcendant in the figure be fortunate, the thip thall
return with fafety and good fuccefs ; but, if he be unfortunate, the thall
fuffer much lofs and damage. If the lord of the eighth houfe thall af-
fliét the lord of the afcendant; orif the lord of the afcendant be in the
eighth, it denotes the death of thecaptain or mafter of the fhip, or fome
of the principal officers belonging to her. And if the Part of Fortune
and part of fubftance, and their lords, fhall be affli@ed, it denotes lofs
in the fale of the goods that are in the fhip. But if, inftead of this afflic-
tion, they fhall be in fortunate pofitions, it denotes much gain, and a


profitable


OFS ASTROLOGY. 297


profitable voyage. When the lord of the afcendant, and the difpofitor
of the Moon, {hall be flow of courfe, the fhip in all likelihood will make
along and tedious voyage; more particularly if the lords of thofe places
be flow alfo. But, if the fignificators be quick in motion, the fhip will
make a fhorter or quicker voyage than may beexpected. If in the figure
there be enmity in the pofitions between the lord of the afcendant, and
the difpofitor of the Moon, and no reception between them, nor any aid
from benevolent planets; the feamen will contend one with another, or
there will be difcord between the captain, or mafter, and the crew; and
he whofe fignificator is ftrongeft, fhallovercome: that is, if the lord of
the afcendant be moft powerful, the feamen will prevail; but, if the
difpofitor of the Moon be beft fortified, the mafter or captain will over-
come. If the lord of the fecond fhall be remote from:his own houfe,
and the fecond houfe from the Moon, and the lord of ‘the part of for-
tune from the part of fortune, in cadent houfes, or in quartile or oppo-
fition, it prefages want of neceflary provifions ; and, if they be found in
aquatical figns, it fhews want of frefh water, and great danger of death by
hunger and thirft. 7


QUESTIONS proper to the SECOND HOUSE.


The fecond houfe being the houfe of fubftance, the queftions proper to
it are as follow: |


. Shall the Querent be rich or poor ?

. By what Means shall he attain riches?

. The Time when? |

. Shall be obtain the Goods or Money lent ? )

. Shall be obtain the Wages or ftipend due to him? *


mp OON 4


Shall the Querent be rich or poor 2


In refolving this queftion, obferve the fign of the fecond houfe and his
lord, the planet or planets located therein, and cafting their rays to the
cufp, or the lord thereof ; the part of fortune alfo, and its difpofitor ; and,

‘if all thefe fignificators are free, and afflifted by the bodies or afpects of
the benevolent planets, the querent will attain a very confiderable for-
tune; and fhall efcape poverty. But when the fignificators are afflicted,
and the fortunate ftars afford them no affiftance, it denotes the perfon ia-
terrogating will be poor all his life-time. If the lord of the afcendant,
or the Moon, be joined to the lord of the houfe of fubftance; or the lord
of the feventh houfe to the lord of -the afcendant ; or if the lord of the
houfe of fubftance be pofited in the afcendant ; or if the lord of the af-
cendant, and the Moon, be in the houfe of fubftance; or if the Moon,

. or


298 AN foe US TRA TH WON


or any other planet, transfer the light of the lord of the fecond houfe’ to
the lord of the afeendant, or of the lord of the afcendant to the lord of
the fecond houfe; the querent will attain riches, and live in good efteem,
according to his fituation or birth. But, if none of thefe pofitions hap-
pen, then note Jupiter, the natural fignificator of fubftance; or Venus,
who alfo is a fortune; or the Dragon’s head, which always portends
good; and if they be free from the ill beams of the infortunes, or happen
to be pofited in the houfe of fubftance, the querent will moft certainly be
rich, and will bear great {way in the place where he lives. When Saturn,
Mars, or the Dragon’s tail; are pofited in the fecond houfe, or afflict the
Jord of the fecond, Jupiter, Venus, or part of fortune, itis an argument
that the querent will not attain riches ; or, if he were in a good capacity,
he will be reduced to a very mean fituation. The fignificators of fub-
ftance {wift in motion, and in good parts of the figure, and free from af-
flittion, fhew the querent will he rich of a fudden; but, if they are flow
in motion, though not afflicted, the querent will attain riches but flow-


ly; particularly if the planets fignifying riches are ponderous, and in
fixed figns.


By what Means fhall the Querent attain Riches ?


The fignificators of fubftance, their feveral locations, and the houfes
they govern, are in this queftion to be particularly attended to; for
from thence is known by what means riches come. If the lord of the
fecond houfe, or the other fignificators of fubftance, be fortunately placed
in the afcendant, the querent will attain great riches without much la-
bour, in a manner unexpectedly ; but, if the lord of the fecond be in the
fecond, it fhews the querent will obtain an éftate by his own induftry.
The adjuvant planets fituated in the afcendant, or the lord thereof, denote
the querent will advance himfelf by his own induftry.. If the lord of the ~
fecond be in the fecond, he acquires wealth by merchandize, and b
properly managing his bufinefs; if in the third, or lord of the third, he
gains by brethren, kindred, or neighbours. The moft affured teftimonies
upon queftions of this nature, are thefe: If the lord of the firft and fecond,
and Jupiter, be in conjunction either in the fecond, firft, tenth, fourth,
feventh, or eleventh, houfes; or if they apply by fextile or trine to each
other with mutual reception ; but if they apply by quartile or oppofition}


with reception, the party will then alfo thrive, and have an eftate, though
with much labour and difficulty.


The Time when a Man may attain Riches?


Confider ferioufly the application. of the Moon, or lord of the afcen-
dant, unto the planet or planets fignifying the fubftance of the querent ;


for


O'FT AS TFTRIGOL OG ¥: / “1299


for they denote the time when the querent may acquire riches. Then
find the degrees of diftance between the fignificators, and turn them
into time, which will fhew the true diftance of time in which riches, or
the goods of fortune, are attainable by the querent. . Fixed figns prolong
the bufinefs; but corporal fhew an indifferency, or that the time will
neither be long nor fhort. Moveable or cardinal figns haften the matter.
In all queftions that relate to time, the fureft way is, to take the right or
oblique afcenfions of the fignificators, and direct them to their feveral
promittors, as in a nativity; and thus the time of a man’s obtaining
‘riches may be exactly known ; but, if the queftion be of {mall confequence,
obferve the degrees of diftance; and, according to the figns they are in,
meafure out, the time in years, months, wecks, or days, as before


directed.
Shall the Querent obtain the. Goods or Moncey tent ?


In this queftion the lord of the afcendant, and the Moon, are figni-
ficators of the querent; and the lord of the fecond denotes his. fubftance.
But the feventh houfe and its lord reprefent the perfon of whom you
enquire; and the eighth houfe, and the lord thereof, his fubiftance. -Ob-
ferve whether the lord of the afcendant or the Moon be joined to the
lord of the eighth, who is fignificator of the fubftance of the party en-
quired after; for if either of them be joined to, or in good afpect with, a
planet in the eighth houfe, and the planet therein happens to tbe a benefic
ftar, the querent fhall then obtain'the goods or money enquired after.
And if it fhall fo happen, that an infortune be either in the eighth houte,
or lord of the eighth, and receives either the lord of theafcendant or the
Moon, the per(on enquiring fhall obtain what he expects. But not
without reception... When the lord of the eighth is pofited in the firft or
fecond hoafe, and the lord of the fecond fhall receive him, it denotes the
perfection of the bufinefs enquired after. But, if the lord of the feventh
or eighth fhall be pofited in the firft or fecond, and be not received by
either the lord of the afcendant, the Moon, or lord of the fecond, it
fhews the querent will not only go without his defire, but, if he purfues
the bufinefs, will fuftain much lofs and detriment. If the lord of the
afcendant. or the Moon be joined to one .of the. fortunes, which have
dignity in the fign afcending, it denotes the difpatch of the-bufinefs en-
quired after; or if either of them be joined to an infortune, having dig-
nities in the afcendant, and receives the Jord .of the ,afcendant, or the
-Moon, it denotes the accomplifhment of the matter or bufinefs enquired
after. And, if the fortunes be in powerful places of the figure, and
joined to the lord of the afcendant or the Moon, the matter or bafinefs
will be accomplithed, although there be no reception.


No. 15. 4B if


300 AN AT & BGS TR A THLioO N
If the Quyerent fhall obtain his Wages, Salary, Penfion, or Property, due


either from Government or from an Individual.


Behold the afcendant, the lord of the fame, and the Moon, for they
have fignification of the querent; and the fecond from the afcendant,
which is the querent’s houfe of fubftance, and its lord. And note the
tenth houfe and its lord, which are the fignificators of the quefited. And
the eleventh houfe, and its lord, fignify the fubftance of him or them.
If in the figure the lord of the afcendant or the Moon be joined to the
lord of the eleventh, or to a fortunate planet in the eleventh houfe, with-
out let or impediment, the querent will certainly obtain the wages or |
-falary. And if it fhall happen that the Moon or lord of the afcendant
be joined to a malefic planet, and an unfortunate planet receives them,
the querent will then obtain his defire, although it will be after long
waiting and with many folicitations. But if there be no reception be-
tween the lord of the afcendant, the Moon, and the infortune, notwith-
‘ftanding any oppofition between them, yet the querent will rarely ob-
tain his money or falary enquired after. If the fignificators are in friendly
afpect from good houfes of heaven, and this without impediment or hin-
drance, the querent will be fuccefsful; but, if infortunes impede the
fignificator of the querent’s good, confider what houfe he is lord of, and
that will point out the perfon or thing that obftrudts it.


JUDGMENTS proper to the THIRD HOUSE,


This houfe appertains to brethren, fitters, kindred, and neighbours; to
inland journeys, and rumours ; and therefore thefe queftions are particularly
moft proper to it: ;


Shall the Querent and his Brethren, Sc. or Neighbours, accord ?
. Of the Condition and Eftate of an abfent Brother ?

. Shall the Querent’s inland ‘fourneys be profperous 2 a

. Reports and Rumours, whether true or falfe ? ae:

. Of the Advice of a Friend, &c. if good or bad?


Mb w bd &


. Many other queftions may be propounded, that properly pertain to this
houfe ; but whoever underftands the manner of judging thefe, may with
~ eafe anfwer any other that may be propofed.


Shall the Querent and bis Brethren, Sc. or Neighbours, accord?


The Moon, the afcendant, and its lord, are the fignificators of the
querent ; and the third houfe, and its lord, of the quefited. The queftion
is refolved thus: If the lord of the third houfe be a benevolent planet,


and


OFTASTIROLWAG ¥% jor


and in the afcendant, or the Moon be in good afpe& with a fortunate
planet in the third, the querent and his brethren and neighbours will
agree well. When the lord of the afcendant and lord of the third are in
_ fextile or trine to each other, and in mutual reception; or the lord of the
third cafts a fextile or.trine to the cufp of the afcendant ; and the lord of
the afcendant or the Moon cafts the fame to the cufp of the third houfe;
it is an argument of great unity, love, and concord, between them. When
a fortunate planet is in the afcendant, and the lord of the afcendant be-
holds the cufp of the third, or applies friendly to the lord of the third, it
is an argument of a good difpofition in the querent, and {peaks him willing
to accord with his brethren, kindred, and neighbours. And if a fortune
be in the third, and the lord of the third apply in harmony to the lord of
the afcendant, the brethren, kindred, or neighbours, are moft indulging.
Thofe perfons whofe fignificators do not apply are moft imperious, and
apt to difagree ; and thofe, whofe fignificators make application, are flexi-
ble, willing, and yielding, and defirous of agreement and concord. When
Saturn, Mars, or the Dragon’s tail, in fuch a queftion, fhall be in the
afcendant, it denotes the perfon enquiring to be obftinate, and averfe
to a friendly agreement; but if they, or either of them, are pofited in
the third houfe, the brethren, neighbours, and kindred, are of a malicious
difpofition. And, if it happens that Saturn or Mars be peregrine, re-
trograde, or combuit, the malice and mifchief they threaten will be the
more dangerous. When Saturn or the Dragon’s head are in the third,
the neighbours are obftinate, and the kindred covetous and fparing. If
Mars, the kindred are treacherous, and the neighbours difhoneft. And
this is more certain, when they are out of their effential dignities.


Of the Condition and Eftate of an abfent Brother 2


To refolve this queftion, confider the lord of the third:houfe, for that
hath fignification of brethren ; and.the houfe where he is pofited, becaufe
that fhews the {tate and condition of the quefited. For if the lord of the
third be in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the infortunes, or in
evil afpect of the lords of the obfcure houfes, the condition of the brother
is forrowful ; but if on the contrary he bein good afpe@ with the for-
tunes, and in propitious places of the figure, his condition is good and
profperous, If the lord of the third be pofited in the fourth, in‘no evil
afpect of the malevolents, the brother that is abfent hath an intention
to enrich himfelf in the place where he is; for the fourth houfe is the
fecond from the third. If the lord of the third be pofited in the fifth,
in conjunction with the lord of the fifth, with or without the reception
of the fortunes, it-fhews the abfent brother to be in health and very happi-
ly fituated. Butif the lord of the third houfe be in the fifth, void of courte, °


1 or
*


12. A) DPW STR a re Os,


er in corporal conjunction, or malicious afpec of the infortunes, and
this without reception, and the unfortunate planets themfelves im-
peded, it declares the abfent brother in a bad condition, indifpofed in
health, and not contented in the place where he is. But if he be found
io any of the obfcure parts of the figure, which are naturally evil, as the
fixth, eighth, or twelfth, houfes, the abfent brother is not well, nor in
a profperous fituation. When the lord of the third is found ia the eighth,
cither in conjunction, fextile or trine, of one of the fortunes, the abfent
brother is not well; or if the lord of the third be joined to evil planets
in the fixth houfe, or in conjuction with the lord of the fixth, he is
then in an infirm and fickly condition; and if the lerd of the fixth be in
the third, except the lord of the third be well difpofed, it denotes the
fame. Then note whether the lord of the third be in conjunction with
the lord of the eighth, or in combuftion; for fuch a configuration de-
clares he will die of theinfirmity. But, if the lord of the third be in the
feventh, the brother is in the fame country he went intoat firft, and con-
“‘tinues there ; and his condition is neither well nor ill. If the fignificator

bein the eighth, the abfent brother is in danger of death, particularly
if he be combuft, or in conjundtion with the lord of the eighth, in con-
junction or afpeét of the infortunes; for thefe are trong arguments of
death. When-the lord of the third is in the ninth, it denotes that the
abfent brother is removed from the place he firft went to, and is gone
into amore remote country. Andif he bein the tenth, in conjunction
or good afpect of the fortunate planets, and with reception, it denotes
him to have acquired fome honour, office, or preferment, in the place
where he lives. But if he be in conjunstion, quartile, or oppofition,
of the infortunes, combuft, or any other way infortunated, it is to be
feared the abfent brother is dead. If the lord ‘of the third. be in the
eleventh houfe, in conjunction, fextile, or trine, of the ‘fortunes, or in
conjunction with the lord of the eleventh, it denotes the abfent brother
to be at the houfe or place of fome friend, where he is happy and well;
but, if he be malicioufly beheld of the unfortunate planets, he is not
pleafed with the Gtuation he is in, but is grieved and perplexed. The
fignificator of the abfent party, in the twelfth houfe, in conjunction or
good afpect of the fortunes with reception, and the fortunes themfelves
no way impeded, fhews he will deal in merchandize, and gain -riches.
But, if he be infortunated in the twelfth houfe, either by ithe ibad afpes
of the malevolents, or by the lord of the eighth, or in:combuftion, it fhews
the abfent brother to be difcontented, troubled, and perplexed, and not
likely tofee the land of his nativity again.


Shall
ee


OF ASTROLOG ¥.
Shall the Querent’s inland fourneys be profperotts.


Perfons who travel much in the country where they live, and have not
their nativities to direct them, may have occafion to enquire the event of
fome intended journey; for we know thofe that travel much do not al-
ways travel fafe; but fometimes are in danger either of thieves, ficknefs,
or accidents, upon their journeys, that may occafion them to repent the un-
dertaking of them. Now, for the prevention of fuch accidents, and to en-
able the reader to refolve queftions of this nature, let the following rules
be obferved : Give the afcendant and his lord, and the Moon, to the que-+
rent; the third houfe and lord thereof to fignify the journey; and if the
fignificators be {wift in motion, or in the effential dignities of each other,
or in conjunction, fextile, or trine, to each other, in good places. of thé
figure ; the journey will be good and profperous. Or if the Moon be
in the third, in fextile to the afcendant, or the lord of the third caft a
fextile or trine to the afcendant, or be in the fame; and the lord of the
 afcendant well dignified, in the third, they alfo denote a fafe and plea-
fant journey. If the lord of the afcendant or Moon apply to any planet
in the third houfe, or the lord of the third to a planet in the afcen-—
dant, it likewife denotes the journey enquired after to be pleafant. Or,
if Jupiter or Venus be in the third houfe, it fhews a profitable and de-
lightful journey ; particularly if they caft a fextile to the afcendant. The
Dragon’s tail in the third houfe, fhews the fame. When Saturn, Mars,
or the Dragon’s head, are pofited in the third houfe, or afiliG the lord
thereof, or the Moon, it portends an unlucky journey to the querent, and
very ill fuccefs therein. Saturn fhews the querent to be melancholy and
penfive in his journey; Mars and the Dragon’s head {hews him to be in
danger of thieves and robbers; and, if they are in human figns, or fiery,
it denotes him to be lamed or wounded in his journey. When the lord
of the afcendant is retrograde, the querent will return again before he
hath gone to the place he intended ; and, if the fignificators be flow, he
makes but little hafte or {peed in his journey. If the lord of the fixth
afflict the fignificators, the querent will fall fick by the way; if the lord
of the twelfth, he. will be impeded by malicious people; and, if the lord
of the eighth be the afflicting planet, it fhews danger of death; particu-
larly if the fignificators are near violent fixed ftars.


Reports and Rumours, whether true or Salfe.


This queftion may be anfwered thus: Obferve the lord of the afcen-
dant and the Moon, and the difpofitor of the Moon, and fee if either of
them be in an angle or fuccedent houfe ina fixed fign, or in good afpect
with Jupiter, the Sun, or Venus ; for ufually, Upowsach configurations,

No, 15. 4C , the


A AN thy Yh & PR eT YO ONT


the reports and rumours are true. But if the lord of the afcendant or
the Moon be afflitted of Saturn or Mars, or cadent from an angle, al-
though they. be flrong in the fign where they are, yet the: rumour is falfe.

Rumours are alfo true and good when the angles of the figure are fixed
figns, and the Moon and Mercury in fixed figns, feparating from the in-
fortunes, and applying to a fortune pofited in any of the angles of the
figure. So alfo when theangles of the tenth and fourth houfes are fixed,
_and the Moon fhall be received in either of them, although the rumours
and reports be of an evil nature, yet they will hold true. If the fortu-
nate planets Jupiter and Venus fhall be in the afcendant, and the Moon
at the fame time unfortunate, let the rumours or reports be ever fo mif-
chievous and unlucky, they will be fure to prove falfe, and come to no-
thing. Mercury being retrograde or otherways afflicted, declares ill ru-
mours to be falfe; the like doth the affli@ion of that planet to-whom
Mercury or the Moan applies. If the lord of the afcendant or the Moon
{hall be under the Sun beams, the truth of the rnmour is kept fecret by.
men in power, and few thall know the truth thereof., If the Moon. be
void of courfe, or in quartile or oppofition of Mercury, and neither of
them caft their fexile or trine afpects to the afcendant, the news or ru-
mour is vain and falfe, and may be fafely contradicted.


The Advice of a Friend, whether good or bad?


It fometimes happens that neighbours or friends, in fundry difficult or
em barraffed circumftances, will advife and perfuade a perfon what he had
beft to do in fuch a cafe; and, if it be required to know whether they intend
faithfully, or perfidioufly, by fuch advice, erect. your figure’ to the mo-
ment of time they firft drop their counfel, and judge as follows: Be-
hold the mid-heaven, that being the houfe fignifying advice, and fee if
there be any fortune ftar or planet pofited therein; for then the counfel
or advice is ferious and good, and will be proper to follow. But, if an
infortune be found in the tenth houfe, the friends that pretend countfel
act dpe a and intend knavifhly.


JUDGMENTS proper to the FOURTH HOUSE.


The fourth houfe gives judgment on poffeffions, inheritances, lands, or
houfes ; and of things loft and miflaid ; of the father, &c. and hath thefe
queftions proper to it, viz,


1. Shall the Querent purchafe the Houfe or Land defired ?

2. Of the Quality thereof, and fhall the Quyerent da db to take it ?
4. If it be beft for one to remove, or abide where he ts 2

3s Of hidden TPeafure, if attainable?


Cri ASPROI GG A 305


g. Is there Treafure hidden in the Place fuppofed ?
6. Shall the Querent enjoy the Eftate of bis Father ?


Thefe quettions, being once refolved, will lead the artift to the under-
ftanding of any thing of the like nature.


Shall the Querent purchafe the Houfe or Land defred?


To refolve this queftion, give the afcendant and his lord, and the Moon,
to fignify him that enquires; the fign of the fourth houfe and lord
thereof to fignify the thing quefited. If the lord of the afcendant, or the
Moon, be in the fourth houfe, or the lord of the fourth in the firft, or if
either of them are in conjunCtion with the lord of the fourth; or in fextile
or trine to him with reception, it:declares the accomplifhment of the.
thing withoutimpediment or hindrance.» But if they are joined without
reception, or in quartile or oppofition with perfect reception, the ‘que-
rent may poflibly obtain his defire.. Or if the fignificators be not joined
together, either by body or afpect, yet, if there bea tranflation of light be-
tween them, either by the Moon, or another planet, it fhews a poflibility
of the purchafe, though with much difficulty and trouble.


‘The following is alfo a good method to judge of this queftion. Give
the fign afcending, and the lord thereof, and the planet from whom the
Moon is feparated, to the querent or purchafer; the feventh houfe and
his_lord, the planet or planets pofited therein, and the Moon, to fignify
the thing to be bought or purchafed; and the mid-heaven to fignify the
price thereof. And if in your figure the lord of the afcendant behold the
lord of the feventh, and the lord of the feventh apply to the lord of the
afcendant, the feller hath a great defire to deal with the buyer ; andif they
chance to be in each others dignities, or any good tranflation of light hap-
pen between them, or if they apply to corporal conjuction, the que-
rent will agree with the feller without much difficulty or trouble.
But, if the application or tranflation of light be by quartile or oppolition,
the buyer and feller will at laft agree; but it will be with much labour
and lofs' of time, and after many probabilities of breaking off. If the
lord of the afcendant, or the’Moon, apply to the lord of the fourth ; or if
the lord of the fourth, or the Moon, apply to the lord of the afcendant ;
or if the lord of the fourth alone fhall apply to the lord of the afcen-
dant, and there bea reception between them ; or if the lord of the afcen-

‘dant, or the Moon, be in the fourth, or lord of the fourth in the afcen-
dent ; they denote the party enquiring fhall buy or purchafe the land or
inheritance enquired after. But, if neither of thefe happen, yet, if the
Moon fhall transfer the light of one fignificator to the other, it ane, .

= j ‘ that


306 AN TLL @S: FRAT O-N


that the thing will be perfected by the mediation of friends, or by meffen-
gers. But, if there be noapplication, reception, or tranflation of light,
between them, then it is improbable that any thing fhall be concluded
between them. |


Of the Quality of the Purchafe, and whether the Querént does well to take it?
UGLY


Take the fourth houfe to refolve this interrogatory ; and if the two
unfortunate planets are pofited therein, either potent or peregrine, the
thing enquired after will be wafted by the buyer; and at prefent is in no
very good condition. If the lord of the fourth be infortunated, either
by retrogradation, detriment, fall, or peregrination, it denotes the houfe
or land to be bad, or fo encumbered that it will never continue long
with the purchafer. But if the fortunate planets, or the Dragon’s tail, be
in the fourth houfe, it fhews the bufinefs enquired after to be good ; and
the buyer or purchafer fhall be a gainer thereby. When the fortunate
planets caft their benevolent rays unto the fourth houfe, and the lord of
the fourth fhall be pofited in a good houfe, in fextile or trine to the fe-
cond houfe or his lord, it is an argument that the bargain is good, and
the purchafer fhall bea gainer thereby. If Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius, be
upon the cufp of the fourth houfe, it denotes an eftateto be hilly, hard, and
dry. If Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn, the land is level, and very good.
If Gemini, Libra, or Aquaries, the ground 1s fome part high and fome
low ; and isin quality neither very good nor very bad. If Cancer, Scor-
pio, or Pifces, it abounds, with much water. An unfortunate planet in
the fourth, retrograde, fhews the land or houfe will turn out very un-
lucky, and not be worth the taking, and will be accompanied with many
infelicities ; but if a fortunate planet be pofited there ftrong, the land is
good, and may well invite the querent to goon, for he will have a good
bargain. ;


If beft for a Perfon to remove, or abide where he is?


In this queftion give the afcendant and the lord. thereof. to fignify
the querent; the feventh houfe and lord thereof, to fignify the place
to which he would go; the fourth houfe and his lord, the fubftance of
the querent ; and the tenth houfe and his lord, the profit of removal,
The lord of the afcendant or fourth in the feventh,. and the lord of the
afcendant and feventh, fortunate planets, {wift in motion, {trong and’ po-
tent where they are, the querent then will do well to remain where he is;
and not remove. But if the lord of the feventh be with a good planet,
and the lords of the afcendant or fourth with an evil one, the querent had
better remove, for he will get little by continuing where he is. Fortu-


a I nate


OF ASTR*OLOGY: 307


mate planets in the afcendant or fourth may invite the querent to remain
where he is. If the lords of thofe houfes are in conjunction or in good
afpett with fortunate ftars, it denotes the fame. Unfortunate planets
in the afcendant or fourth fhew the querent it is good to remove; and’
if the lords of the afcendant and fourth be afflicted by the malefics,
either by body or afpect, it denotes the fame. Obferve the afflicting
planet or planets, and the houfe or houfes they govern, for from thence
the occafion of the mifchief that the querent fuftains is known; the
like obferve of the affifting or friendly planets, whence’a rational anfwer to.
the queftion propofed. will be: eafily obtained.


Of treafures hid, whether attainable or not ?


It-is not uncommon for penurious perfons to hide treafure in their
life-time, and to go out of the world without informing their heirs or
executors where to find it. Whenever this is fufpetted. to be the cafe,
and a queftion is grounded upon it, erect your figure, and confider what
application, reception, tranflation, 6c. there may be between the lords:
of the afcendant and fourth houfe. If there be a friendly application
and reception, the perfon enquiring fhall obtain the treafure he enquires
after; but, if there be a quartile or oppofition between the fignificators;
without the reception, the treafure will rarely be found. When
the. fignificators apply to each other corporally in a fixed fign, there are
great hopes of finding and obtaining the fame fpeedily; particularly
if the application be ina good houfe. _ Both or either of the luminaries in
the afcendant no. way unfortunate, or friendly beholding the fame,
argues a fpeedy recovery. of the treafure hid; but, if they fhould
happen to be cadent, or in quartile or oppofition thereto, it gives
but fmall hopes. If the part ef fortune be in the afcendant, beheld
by fortunate planets, or by the luminaries, the querent will have a
fair profpect of acquiring his wifhes ; but, if the part of fortune and
the luminaries be cadent,. particularly the Moon; and- neither of the
lights caft a friendly afpect. to the part of fortune, or to the afcendant ;
nor the lord of the afcendant beholding the afcendant ;. itis an argument
that the querent. will not obtain. the treafure hid. Lalways find, in quef-
tions of this nature, when fortunate} planets are in the fourth, or
govern the fourth, that there is treafure; and, if the lord of the at-
cendant, or the Moon, be in good afpec with thofe planets, the que-
rent generally attains it by diligent fearch. But, on the contrary,
if infortunes be in the fourth houle, or the luminaries weak therein,. it
_is an. argument. of irrecovery; or fhews that it has been taken away
hefore..


No. 15,. 4.D. Es:
*


308 A Ne OES LUSSIER OMT Toon
Is the treafure hidden in the Place Juppofed ?


A queftion being thus in a general way propounded, give the lord of
the afcendant and the Moon to the querent for his fignificators ; and
the fourth houfe, and the planet or planets pofited therein, will fignify —
the treafure enquired after. When Jupiter, Venus, or the Dragon’s |
head, are in the fourth houfe, they declare the treafure to be in the
place fuppofed ; and, if they be in their eflential dignities, it is very
certain that there is great value there. Or if any of the other planets
are pofited in their own houfes, or in the fourth houfe without impedi-
ment, it thews that there is treafure in the place fuppofed. But if the
fourth houfe be infortunated with the Dragon’s tail, or Saturn or Mars
be there, and no way effentially dignified; or if Saturn or Mars caft a
quartile or oppofition thereunto, there is no treafure at all. ‘The lord of
the fourth, or the Moon, feparating from good planets, fhew that there has
been treafure hid in the place fuppofed, but that it is gone.


Shall the Querent enjoy the Eftate of bis Father ?


This queftion is oftentimes of great importance'to the proponent, and
therefore ought to be contemplated with more than ufwal acutenefs. If
in the figure, judicioufly erected, and correct to time, the lord of the fe-
cond and lord of the fifth are found in the mutual dignities of each
other; or the lord of the fecond in the fifth, or the lord of the fifth in
the fecond ; the querent will enjoy the eftate of his father. But if the
lord of the fifth houfe be retrograde, or affli¢ted by fome malevolent pla-
net, it prefages that much of the eftate which the querent’s father intend-
ed for him will be wafted, or otherways difpofed of. When the lord of
the fifth difpofes of the part of fortune in the afcendant, or fecond
-houfe of the figure, there is no fear but the querent will enjoy what he
expects from his father. The lord of the afcendant, or fecond houfe,
difpofing of the lord of the fifth, fthews the thing enquired after to be fo
fecured to the querent that he cannot be deprived of it, The Moon tranf-
_ferring the light of the lord of the fifth by fextile or trine, to thehoufe of
the fecond, or Jord of the afcendant, declares the queftion enquired ‘af-
ter fhall come to good; or if Jupiter or Venus in the fifth fhall friendly
behold the lord of the fecond, or a planet in the fecond, it fignifies the
fame. If the lord of the fecond and fifth apply to a.good afpe@, ora cor-
poral conjunction by retrogradation, the querent will receive fome of
his father’s eftate very fhortly, and in his father’s life-time; but if the
lord of the fourth be in afpeét with an infortune, or an infortune in the
fourth, it denotes the father will not part with any thing till his death.


¥ JuDc-


r (OP PA Str Rro LO GLY, 309
“JUDGMENTS proper to the FIFTH HOUSE.


This houfe appertains to the birth of children, embatliea: mefiengers,
écc. and hath thefe queftions proper to it. :


. Whether a Woman fhall ever have Children ?
. In what Time fhall fhe conceive ?

. Whether a Woman enquiring be with Child ?
. Whether fhe be pregnant with a Boy or Girl?
. Shall fhe have Twins ?

. When will the Birth happen ? |

. Ofa Meffenger fent on an Embaffy ?


NSE QUA Bo BH:


And, by knowing how to refolve thefe queftions, the reader will be
able to anfwer any others belonging to this heufe.


Whether a Woman foall ever have Children 2?


To anfwer this queftion, carefally obferve the afcendant, its lord,
and the Moon ; and, if either of them be joined to the lord of the fifth,
the querent.fhall have children. But, if neither of thefe happen, note
whether any other planets transfer the light of the lord of the afcendant
to the lord of the fifth; for that is an argument that the querent may
have children. Confider alfo whether the fign upon the fifth be fruitful,
and whether the lord of the fifth, the-Moon, the afcendant, and its
Jord, are in prolific figns ; for, if fo, it is an affured argument that the
querent will have iffue. Ifthe lord of the afcendant, or the Moon, be

ofited in the fifth houfe, the querent will have children; or, if the lord.
‘of the fifth houfe be in the afcendant, it declares the fame. - If neither
the lord of the afcendant, northe Moon, apply to the lord of the-fifth,
yet, if there bea tranflation of light and virtue between them, the que-
tent need not doubt of having children. But if all the fignificators be
in fterile figns, and in defective degrees of thofe figns, the querent will
sarely have iffue. Soalfo, if Venus, the general fignificatrix of children
‘or iffue, be afflicted, either by the prefence of Saturn, Mars, or the
Dragon’s tail, or combuft of the Sun, the querent will not have chil-
dren. Saturn or the Dragon’s tail in the fifth, or affli€ting the lord of
the fifth, generally denies iffue; and if Satern or Mars be in quartile or
-oppofition to the fifth houfe, or its Jord, it portends the fame. Laftly.,
confider the planets Jupiter and Venus; and, if you find either of them

in the fifth, third, firft, ninth, or eleventh, houfes, free from all impe-
diment, the querent will certainly have children. a


gto ANT PReLivs "Ri AT RON
| In what time fhall the Woman conceive ?


Having before found a poffibility of iffue, it may be afked when the
time fhall be; to anfwer which, obferve in what figa-the lord of the
fifth houfe is pofited, and what planet or planets are in configuration.
with him; for, if he be in the afcendant, fifth or eleventh houfes, in
fruitful figns, and with fruitful planets, the querent may {pecdily coa-
ceive. If the lord of the fifth be in the firft houfe, the querent may:
conceive in the firft-year ; if in the fecond, the fecond year ; if in .the
tenth, the third year ; if in the feventh, the fourth year; if in the
fourth houfe, the fifth year; and foon. Or; having noted the capacity _
and condition of the querent for conception, obferve: the diftance be-.
tween the friendly afpects of the Moon, or lord of the afcendant, with
the lord of the fifth, and Jupiter or Venus, and judge of the time thus :-
If they are in moveable figns, their degrees of diftance fhew weeks os
days; in common figns, months or weeks; in fixed figns, years or
sponths, &c. as before direéted in queftions that.relate to, time..


Ifa Woman enquiring be with Child ?’


It fometimes happens that a woman has reafon to believe the is with
child; and yet, owing to fome internal complaint, may be in doubt,
about it,. and by that means be led to.afk the queftion, whether fhe be |
ornot? The queftion is found by thefe rules :. If the lord of the afcen-
dant, or the Moon, behold the lard of the fifth with, any good afpe& or
tranflation ;. or they, or either of them, happen to be pofited.in the fifth.
houfe;. the. woman: enquiring is with child. And, when the fignifica--
tors apply friendly, or are: pofited in. fruitful figns, and.in fruitful houfes
alfo, as the fifth, eleventh, and feventh, the party enquiring is with
child... The lord of the afcendant, or lord of the fifth,, afpecting a pla-~
net with reception in an angle, and the Moon in reception with a planet
eflentially fortified in.an angle, alfo fhews the querent to be. pregnant.
Jupiter, the natural fignificator of children, in the afcendant, fifth, {e-
venth, or.eleventh, houfes,.no way afflicted of the infortunes, denotes the
querent to be with child. But, if Jupiter be afflicted, or cadent, the wo-
man. enquiring is not with child. If the lord of the tenth, and the Sun,,
be in good, places of the figure, and in friendly configuration with the
benefics,, the woman enquiring is with child. Likewife, if the. Moon,
and the lord of sthe triplicity fhe is.in,, be well located in figns, of many
children, as Cancer, Scorpio, or. Pifces, the woman.has conceived.
So alfo, if Jupiter, and Venus be pofited in,angles, free from.the ma-
licious beams of the infortunes, the woman:is certainly with child. But,
ifthe fignificators are afflicted of Saturn, Mars, or the Dragon’s tail,

Sy aire ea the:


¢ OF ASTROLOGY: 4 gu


the woman is not with child, but is troubled ‘with fome* complaint,
which fhe hath miftaken for conception. The pofitions of Saturn,
Mars, or the Dragon’s tail, in the fifth, likewife thew non-conception ;
but, if it happens that the teftimonies for her being with child are, the
greater in number, they then threaten abortion ; and the fame when they
afflict cither Venus, the Moon, or the lord of the fifth houfe, or the
afcendant.


Whether the Woman be pregnant with a Boy or Girl.


To.anfwer this queftion, obferve the afcendant, and its lord, the fifth
hhonfe, and the lord thereof, together with the Moon, and planet to which
the applies ; for, if they, or moft of them, be in the mafculine figns, the
querent is with child of a boy; but, if in feminine figns, it is a girl.
The faid fignificators, though in feminine figns, yet if they are in afpect
with mafculine planets, and in houfes: mafculine, and with ftars of a
mafculine nature and difpofition, the woman will have a male child.
Mafculine planets are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and the Sun; the feminine
are Venus and the Moon; Mercury is in its nature convertible, and is
either mafculine or feminine according to the planet‘or planets he is in
afpe&t with. Signs of a mafculine aifpofition; or nature, are Aries, Ge-
mini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius, and Aquaries. “And feminine figns are
Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn, and Pifces; which being
well obferved, the‘fex is eafily difcovered. |


Shall foe have Twins, or more than one-®


 Confider the fign upon the afcendant, and where the lord thereof is
pofited, and what fign is upon the cufp of the fifth houfe; for, if the
dignificators are in bicorporal or double-bodied figns, the querent will
wery probably have two children. If Jupiter, Venus, or the- Dragon's
head, be in a fruitful fign, either in the fifth or afcendant, it is poffible
for the querent to have three children; particularly if the Moon lends
her affiftance. But, if thefe planets are not pofited in the afcendant, or
fifth houfe; yet, if they caft their friendly rays to either of them, it is
an argument that the querent will have twins. But, if fixed figns, or
moveable, poffefs the cufps of the afcendant or fifth houfe, and the Sun
ot Moon be pofited therein, it is a-certain argument that the woman is
breeding with but one child.


When, or inwhat Time, will the Birth happen.


To refolve this queftion, regard mutt be had to the fignificators as well
of the child as of the perfon enquiring ; and to the part of children alfo, (as
No, 16. 4 E will


ogre AN ‘ILLUSTRATION “


will be explained hereafter,) which muft be directed by the oblique afcem.
fions, &c.) to the degree of the fifth houfe or its lord; or to Jupiter,: of
to his good afpeéts ; and by allowing a day to each degree of diftance, the
time of birth will be nearly found. This is difcovered by confidering
what direction or tranfit there may be either to the fifth houfe, or to Jus
piter, Venus, or the Moon, for at thattime the woman may be delivered ;
particularly if the true tranfit or dire€tion falls in the fifth, eleventh, or
afcendant.


Of a Meffenger fent on an Embaffy, or on any important Bufine/fs.


When, this queftion is propofed, give the afcendant and its lord to
him that fent the meffenger; the feventh houfe and its lord to fignify |
him to whom the meflenger is fent; and let the Moon fignify the mef-
fage itfelf ; and the lord of the fifth the meflenge>, and his management -
or ordering of the bufinefs. When the lord of the fifth houfe thall fepa-
rate from the lord. of the feventh, and apply to the Jord of the afcendant,.
then judge the meffenger hath effected hisebufinefs, and is returning again.
And, if he feparates from the lord of the fecond, he then brings money
with him, let the fignificator of that houfe be either a fortunate or infor-
tune. If the fignificator of the meflenger feparates from fortune pla~
nets, it is an argument he has been honeft, and will bring good tidings
of the bufinefs ; but, if he feparates from the malevolents, it fhews the
meffenger has done his bufinefs lamely, or has been hindered in the per-
formance of it. Jf the fignificator of the mefflenger applies to an infor-
tune by quartile or oppofition, and this before he can feparate from the
lord of the feventh, it fignifies that the meflenger has met with fome
impediment in the bufinefs he went about from the party to whom he
was fent. But, ifthe fignificator of the mefienger hall go to the quar-
tile or oppofition of either of the infortunes, after he is feparated from
the lord of the feventh; the meflenger will receive fome prejudice or
impediment in his way home. If there be found an infortune in the
ninth, the meffenger will not travel fafe, but will be in danger of high-
way robbery, and bodily hurt; but if, on the contrary, a benefic be in
the ninth, he will travel fafe. If the lord of the afcendant and lord of
the fifth are in reception, or in good afpett from good places of the figure,
the meffenger is faithful, juft, and honeft ; particularly if he be either a
fortune, or in good afpect with a fortune. But, if there be no reception or
af{pect, and the configuration be with or in the dignities of an infortune,,
the contrary may be expected. If there happens a reception between
the lord of the feventh and the lord of the fifth, the meffenger will be
seceived; and, if at the fame time the lord of the fifth or Mercury
tranflates the virtae of the lord of the feventh to the lord of the afcen-
- 3 ‘ dant,,


%


‘ OFTASRUR AOWAG We « 337


dant, the querent obtains’ whatfoever he hoped, for by the méffage; which
I have found true in ‘a variety of inftances. |


“JUDGMENTS proper to thé SIXTH HOUSE.


The fixth houfe gives'judgment on ficknefs, fervants, and, {mall cattle,
&c. and the following queftions are commonly attributed to it:


. What Part of the Body.1s afflicted?2.

Is the Difeafe in the Body or Mind, or both?

. Shall the Diflemper be chronic.or acute ?

. What is the, Caufe of the Diftemper ?

. Shall the fick Party recover, or die of the Difeafe ?

. Of Servants, [hall they prove juft, or difboneft ?

. Of fall Cattle, hall the Querent thrive by them or not ?


An & Bow


NI


Ia ih &


What Part of the Body ts afflited ?


Having erected the figure, obferve the afcendant, the-fixth houfe,. and
place of the Moon, for they are natural fignificators of the difeafe ; and
then judge as follows: The horofcope afflicted by the prefence of an evil
planet, or by the pofition of the Dragon’s tail, indicates that the diftem-
per lies chiefly in the head, and in that member or part of the body re-
prefented by the fign afcending. If the Moon be afflicted by the infor-
tunes, the fick party is indifpofed in that part of the body the afflicting
planet governs from his own houfe. If the afcendant be Scorpio, and
Mars and Venus be in the afcendant, or fixth houte, the difeafe lies in the
head, bowels, and fecrets, becaufe Mars governs thofe members in either
place; which rule holds good withall the other figns and planets,


Is the Difeaft in the Body or Mind, or in both?


The afcendant and the difpofitors of the Sun and the Moon bear figni-
fication of the mind, and the lord of the afcendant and the Moon
of the body. Now, if the afcendant, its lord, the Sun, or the Moon,
be afflicted, it fhews the diftemper hath feizéed the whole body and mind
~alfo of ‘the: fick party. If the afcendant and the difpofitors of the Sun
-and the Moon be afflicted, the difeafe impairs the mind; but, if the lord
of the’afcendant.and the Moon be, afHiéted, the difeafe affe&s only the
body, and the mind is free. If Saturn afflict the afcendant, and the
difpofito,.


3 AN 2PLUSTRATION “


difpofitorof the luminaries, and the Moon be at.the fame time in) quar
tile or oppofition of him, or in-quartile or oppofition of the lord of the
af{cendant, the fick party is afflicted in mind, concerning the things of
this world, and about loffes in his bufinefs or eftate. . If Jupiter, by be-
ing lord of evil houfes, afflict the aforefaid fignificators, the querent is
a¢oubled in mind about religious tenets. If Venus, by difappoiatments
in love; if Mars, or Mercury, by a too intenfe exercife of the mind, by
ftudy, or by application to fcience or philofophy.


Shall the. Difeafe be chronic or acute ?

To know this, confider the.complexion of the perfon, his age, and the
time of the year; for the knowledge of thefe conduce much to the dif-
covery of the certainty of the matter propounded. Difeafes in autumn
and winter are ufually reputed chronical or long; but longer in winter
than in autumn. In fpring and fummer, acute or fhort ; but more acute
in {pring than in fummer. So infirmities afflicting young perfons, or
thofe in the firft half of their.age, are fhorter and lefs dangerous than
thofe in elderly perfons, or thofe that are in the laft part of their age.
Likewife, melancholy and phlegmatic perfons are fubjec&t to chronical
difeafes ; but fanguine and choleric perfons, to acute. Saturnine difeafes,
which are cold and dry, are ufually long and tedious; the Moon and
Venus are protracters of the infirmity ; Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, and
Mercury, fignify difeafes of no long continuance, but fuch as may re-
turn fpeedily ; but, by being lords of evil places, or otherwife afflicted,
they may have fignification of chronic difeafes. The figns poflefling the
afcendant, fixth “houfe, or place of the Moon, being fixed, declare a
chronic difeafe’; common figns fhew difeafes neither very long nor very
fhort ; moveable figns denote the difeafe to terminate. quickly, either
‘ane way or the other. An infortune being lord of the fixth, and in the
fixth, prefages a lafting ficknefs; but, if a benefic be lord of the fixth,
and in the fixth, the difeafe will admit of an immediate cure. The lord:of
the afcendant, the Moon, or lord of the fixth in conjunction, fextile, or
trine, of the lord of the tenth, denotes the difeafe to be of no long conti-
nuance; and if they be in conjunétion, fextile, or trine, of the fortunes,
the fame. But if the faid fignificatiors, or any of them, be in conjunc-
tion, quartile, or oppofition, of the infortunes, the difeafé will be both
long and tedious ; and, if this fhall happen in fixed figns, it argues the
duration or continuance to be {till the longer.


What is the Caufe of the Difemper?

The caufe of the diftemper isiknown from the pofitions of the fignifica~
tors of ficknefs, before defcribed, in either of the four trigons or triplici-
ties ; for therein .they fhew the humour that is predominant. If thefe

figni«


OF ASBTROL OG ¥. Vi


‘the moft of them are pofited in fiery figns, they declare the diftemper to
have its origin from choler, whence fevers and all fuch-like difeafes pro-
ceed. But, if the fignificators be in airy figns, blood is then predomi-
nant in the body, and the difeafe is thence caufed; as gouts, leprofies,
&c. When the fignificators of ficknefs are in earthy figns, they declare
the caufe of the difeafe to have its origin from melancholy, and thofe
difeafes are ufually long and tedious, as confumptions, agues, &c. And
the fignificators of difeafes in watery figns denote the infirmity to pro-
ceed from cold and moift caufes, as phlegm; and thefe difeafes principally
are coughs, phthyfic, and all difeafes of the ftomach. When the pofitions
of the fignificators do not thoroughly point out the nature of the diftem-
per, note the fixed flars in the figure, and they will aflift in the difcovery
of the caufe of the difeafe.


Shall the fick Party recover, or die of the Infiruuty affléting ?


If the Moon deflux from the infortunes, and apply to the benevolents
without fruftration, prohibition, or refranation, there is great hopes the
infirm party will recover; fo the fignificators of ficknefs, no-way af-
flicted, but free from the ill beams of the malevolents, declare great
hopes of the recovery of the fick. If they are in fextile or trine of the
luminaries, or in any friendly. reception with them, or either of them,
the fame. The Moon, encreafing in light and motion, and being potited
in good houfes of heaven, in fextile or trine of the lord of the afcendant,
denotes great hopes of life; if the lord of the afcendant be an infortune
in this judgment, it will no-way affect the fick party. When the Moon
fhall either be found in the afcendant, or in any of her dignities, or fhall
caft a fextile or trine thereunto, it is a great argument the fick will not
die of the difeafe affiding. ‘The lord of the afcendant and the Moon
combuft of the Sun denote death, unlefs there be fome reception. be-
tween the Sun and them; and, if they fhall be in conjunction with
the lord of the eighth, except Jupiter or Venus interpofe their friendly
beams, it fhews the fame. The lord of the eighth in an angle, and the
Moon and lord of the afcendant cadent, or afflited of the infartunes,
prefage mortality ; the application of the lord of the afcendant or the
Moon unto the lord of the eighth by evil afpe&, fhews the fame; and,
if he be an infortune, it puts the matter paft all doubt. The lord of
the afcendant in the eighth, or lord of the eighth in the afcendant, de-
clares the irrecovery of the fick. If the lord of the eighth be in the tenth,
and the lord of the afcendant in the fourth, fixth, or feventh, houfes, any-
way afflicted, it portends death to the fick party. The lord of the afcen-
dant and Moon with violent: fixed ftars, according to their latitude, ge-
nerally denote death unto the fick.

No. 16. Bye 4. F Of


316 AN TLLUS TRA THON. .


Of Servants, fhall they prove jup or difhoneft ?


When this queftion is put by the mafter, give the lord of the afcendant
and the afcendant itfelf to fignify the querent; the fixth houfe and its
lord to fignify the fervant. And, if the lord of the fixth commit his
difpofition by any friendly ray to the lord of the afcendant, the fervant
will prove juft and honeft. If the Moon transfer the light of the lord of
the fixth to the lord of the afcendant, by a good afpect, it {peaks the ho-
nefty of the fervant. The lord of the fixth in the dignities of the for-
tunes in fextile or trine to the afcendant, pleads for the honefty of the
fervant. If he be near fixed ftars of a benevolent nature, the fame. But
if the lord of the fixth fhall be in conjundtion of the infortunes, and in
quartile or oppofition to the afcendant or lord thereof, the fervant will
not prove honeft. The Moon in the fixth, in quartile to the lord of the
fixth in the fecond, fhews the fervant to be a pilferer, and fuch a one as
the querent will never grow rich by. If the principal fignificators are
void of all reception, and there be neither good application or tranflatign
of light to be found among them, the fervant is not to be trufted. When
Mercury, the natural fignificator of fervants, fhall be in the dignities of

‘ Saturn or Mars, and in quartile or oppofition to the afcendant or fecond
houfe, or either of their lords, it gives great caufe to fufpett the fervant.


If the Dragon’s tail be in the fixth, or doth affli@ the lord of the fixth,
it denotes the fame.


Of finall Cattle, fhall the Querent thrive by them or not?
By fmall cattle are meant hogs, fheep, and the like.—If the lord


of the fixth and the lord of the fecond are in conjunétion, in a

_ good houfe of heaven, the querent may thrive by them; or, if they bein
textile or trine, the fame. The lord of the fixth cafting a friendly afpect
to the part of fortune, or being in. good configuration with the difpofitor
ike -denotes much good to the querent by dealing in fmall cattle.
The lord of the fixth in the fecond, in the dignities of Jupiter or Venus,
and Jupiter or Venus cafting a fextile or trine to the fecond, or in the fe-
cond in conjunction with him, argues great gain to the querent by deal-
ing in final] cattle. But if, on the contrary, the lord of the fixth be un-

» fortunate, and in evil afpett with the lord of the afcendant or fecond, or
~ eaft malignant rays to either of their cufps, the querent will lofe by deal-
ing in fmall cattle. Ifthe lord of the fixth be in quartile or oppof-
tion to the difpofitor of the part of fortune, or the Moon, the querent
cannot thrive by dealing in {mall cattle. The fameif the lord of the fixth
be afflicted either by at a Mars, or the Dragon’s tail; or be found either
setrograde, combuft, cadent, or peregrine, The Dragon’s tail and oe

I new


*


"O:-F* AST R OL OG Yu 317
fhew much lofs therein by knaves and thieves, and ill bargains, &c. and
Saturn denotes much damage by the rot or murrain.


INTERROGATORIES proper to the SEVENTH HOUSE.


This houfe refolves queftions concerning marriage, partnerfhip, law-
fuits, public enemies, war, &c. thefts, fugitives, and {trays ; which, be-
caufe they are of feveral diftin natures, are treated of under three diffe ©
rent heads; and firft, of marriage.


. Shall the Querent marry ?

. At what Time fhall the Querent marry ?

. Shall the Querent marry more than once ?

. What Manner of Perfon fhall the Querent marry ?
. Shall they accord after Marriage ?

. Shall the Marriage be confummated or broken off ?


Own Bw bb He


: Sball the Querent marry 2


To know this, confider the pofition of the lord of the afcendant, the
~ Moon, and Venus, ‘and the part of marriage, and their pofitions ; for they
all have fignification of the party enquiring in this cafe. If all or the
greater part of them bein prolific or fruitful figns, itis a great argument
that the party enquiring will marry. Ifthe Moon or lord of the afcen-
dant be in good afpect with the Sun, or either of the fortunes, or near
fixed ftars of their natures, the party enquiring may marry. When the
lord of the afcendant, the Moon, or Venus, are in the feventh houfe, or
in the dignities of the lord of the feventh, and the lord of the feventh
either in the afcendant, or in fextile or trine to the faid fignificators, the
querent will certainly marry. If none of thefe arguments appear, but
on the contrary all the fignificators of marriage are in fterile figns, and
in quartile or oppofition to the lord of the feventh, or feventh houfe, the
party enquiring 1s averfe to marriage.


At what Time fhall the Querent marry?
The fignificators of marriage applying to each other by a friendly afpe@_


or by conjunction in the oriental or meridional parts of heaven, denote *.
the querent will be married fuddenly; but, if in the occidental part of
heaven, or feptentrional, it will be much prolonged, and a great while
before accomplifhed. All the fignificators-above the earth, and {wift in
motion, accelerate or haften the matter, particularly if in moveable figns ;°
but, if they are under the earth, and flow in motion, the marriage will


be retarded. The degrees of diftance, either in body or afpect, between the
: lord


918 A Ny BYU STR 4 TAQ Ne


lord of the afcendant and the lord of the feventh, the Sun, or Venus,
{thew the time of marriage ; if there happen a good tranfit to bring on
the bufinefs. In this judgment, moveable figns give weeks or days; bi-
corporal give months or weeks; and fixed figns years or months: and,
if the fignificators are flow in motion, and in fixed figns, the degrees of


diftance will be fo many years; if {wift in motion, then fo many months ;
fic de ceteris. ; :


Shall the. Querent marry more than once ?


The fignificators of marriage in biscorporal or double-bodied figns de-
clare the querent, be it either man or woman, to marry more than once.
The fignificators of marriage in conjunction, fextile,.or trine, with. many
planets, portend marriage to the querent more than once; particularly
from the fifth, feventh, or eleventh, houfes. Many planets in the feventh
houfe, in fextile or trine to the luminaries or lord of the afcendant, denote
the querent will be married more than once. But, if the fignificators of
marriage are in fixed figns, and in afpect with not above one planet, it
prefages that the querent will marry only once.


What Kind of Perfon foal the Querent marry, and how qualified ?


Obferve what planet the lord of the afcendant, or Moon, is neareft in
afpect with, and the fign he is in, and. defcribe the perfon, either man
or woman, accordingly ; for fuch.a one the querent will marry. If the
lord of the afcendant or Moon be in conjunction or afpect with Venus,
the perfon is pleafant and affable; if with the Sun, he is noble, of a
great {pirit, and imperious ; if with Mars, the perfon is many times rafh
and furious, and fubject to choler and paffion; if with Saturn, he is in-
clinable to melancholy, but prudent and grave; if with Jupiter, the
perfon is juft, honeft, and religious ; if with Venus, fubtil, cunning,
&c. Note the fixed ftars that are near the fignificators, for they often
alter the quality of the planets. By thus confidering the dignities and
debilities of the planet or planets aforefaid, the fhape, qualification, and


temperature, of the perfon whom the querent fhall marry may be
known and difcovered.


Shall they accord and be happy after Marriage 2 ,


The lord of the afcendant, or Moon, in conjunétion, fextile, or trine,


of the lord of the feventh or Venus, argues much pleafure and delight


after marriage, and {hews the parties fhall agree well, and not quarrel ;
but, if they are in quartile or oppofition unto each other, it fhews much


quarrelling
. SJ
€ % . a
%
" e.-* ws a M m a oo” ¥


“0 FR MSETIRED Lio. G ¥% 319


quarrelling: and contention after marriage ; and, if they be in quartile,
conjunction, or oppofition, of the infortunes, in any places of the figure,

it fhews the fame. Saturn, Mars, or the Dragon’ s tail, in the aicehaiee:
fhews the querent to be’ imperious after’ marriage, and by his or her
obitinacy will. oceafion much difcontent and ture. But, if they are’
polited in the feventh houfe,’ the perfon ‘whom the qucrent marries
will be the oceafion of the trouble and difcontent. Benevolent planets
potteffing the feventh houfe, and a friendly reception between the lord
of the feventh.and lord of the afcendant, denote good agreement after
marriage. if there happens to be a reception, through they are in
quartile, it implies the fame.


Shall the Marriage be effected, or broken off ?


The perfon, who enquires concerning the concluding or breaking off
an intended marriage, muft have the ined of the afcendant and moon for
fignificators ; and the perfon quefited muft have the lord of the KNEE
and the planet from which the Moon is feparated. If the lord of the al-
cendant or Moon be joined to the lord of the feventh, or in fextile or
trine to him, in any of his effential dignities, the marriage intended
will be brought to perfection, particularly if it be from good houfes of
the figure. rie a quartile or oppofition happens between the fignifica-
ters, shid no reception, the intended marriage will be broken off, and
come to nothing. When there is no afpect between the feriucatcs
yet, if there be any good tranflation of light between them, and this by
a benevolent planet, the marriage may be effected by a pede reprefented
by the houfe that planet is lord or governor of. So alfo, if. the fighis
ficator of both parties apply to a friendly afpect, and, before the aipe
be made, an infortune interpofes his malicious rays, the marriage iil
be obftruéted by a perfon fignified. by the houfe the interpofing "planet
islord of., If the interpofing planet be lord of the third, a kiniman. of
the querent’s, or a neighbour or brother,. fhall break off the bufinets ;
if he be lord of the tanehi or fourth houfes, the father or mother of the
querent will obftruG the marriage intended; and {o of the other houies.


Of ParTNeRsuip, LAaw-SvuITs, War, &c.


The extent of this part will be better underitood by being .digefte]
into the following particulars ;


1. Shall two Partners agree and be cee iful in ebriv Partnerfhip ?
2. Shall the Querent, or bis Adverfary, quertome mma Law-Suih ?
3- Shall a Perfon return fafe from War ?

4. Shal] the City, Cafile, or prong Hold, befieged, bc taken?


No. 16. 4. G Shal/}
; “


320 AN! Lig Lit, SiTrrRam? LON


Shall two Partners agree and be fuccefsful in their Partuer[hip ?


The lord of the afcendant and feventh, being friends according to
nature, and in reception or good afpect with each other, declare. the
partners fhall agree in their partnerfhip, and, gain confiderably by their
undertaking. If they: are enemies by nature, and void of good
rays toward one another, and in no reception, it is an argument that
they will never agree, but willbe perpetually jangling, and injuring
each other. Ifthe lordof theafcendant bea more weighty planet. than
the lordof thefeventh, and better dignified, it fhews the querent will
_ thrive beft in the partnerfhip; but, if the lord of the feventh be moft
ponderous, the ‘quefited gains moft. Marsor Mercury lord of the fe-
cond, afflicting the lord of the eighth, fhews the querent will cheat
his partner; but, if either of them be lord of theeighth, and afflict the
lord of the fecond, the partner will cheat the querent. He whofe fig-
nificators are ftrongeft, and in good places of the heavens, will thrive beft
inthe partnerfhip; but he, whofe fignificators are weak and in evil places
of the figure, will be injured bythe partnerfhip.


Shall the Querent, or bis adverfary, overcomein a Law-Suit ?


If the lord of the afcendant be more potent than the lord of the fe-
-venth, or the afcendant better fortified than thefeventh houfe, either by
the good afpects.or the prefence of the fortunate planets, there is great
probability the querent will be fuccefsfulin the fuit at law, and overcome
his adverfary. But, if the lord of the feventh be more powerful in digni-
- ties than the lord of theafcendant, and the feventh houfe better guarded
by the prefence or rays of the fortunate {tars than the afcendant, the ad=
verfary will overcome. If the lords of the afcendant and feventh be
afflicted by the infortunes,. neither party will fucceed, but. both will be
injured, if they go on with the fuit. If they fhould both be affifted by
the fortunate planets, poflibly fome friend will make up the breach
between them. Both fignificators in their effential dignities, and in
angles, thew both perfons to be too high to hearken to a reconciliation.
If they apply friendly to each other, the matter will be taken up among
themfelves ; and he, whofe fignificator doth apply, will be the firft to
make overtures of friendfhip and peace.


Shall a Perfon return fafe froma Cruize or Campaign ?


The lord of the afcendant flrong and potent, free from the evil beams
of the infortunes, is an argument of great fecurity to the querent, and
that he fhall return fafe froma cruize or campaign. If he be pofited with a

“ 43 e good


SO Be ASD. Onc als i) gan


good planet, in a propitious houfe, it fhews the fame. If the lord of
the afcendant be combuft or cadent, or in his peregrination, or if Mars
be weak in the figure of the queftion, the querent will gain no honour
or reputation in "rhe war. If the lord of the Pennant be in afpect
_ with a good planet, and at the fame time the lord of the feventh be
with an evil one, he may return home again ; but he will fuffer great
prejudice before his teturn, Saturn being in the firft, or with the lord
of the firft, prefages much lofs and damage to the querent by war. If
Mars fhall be with the lord of the firft, Bier by conjunction, quartile,

or oppofition, and weak, and Saturn locally i in the afcendant, the querent
will be wounded. But, if Mars or the Dragon’s tail fhould ill-dignify
the afcendant, the querent will be mortally wounded; and, if the

lord of the afcendant and the Moon fuffer affliction at che fame time,

he will be killed on the fpot.


Shall the City, Town, Caftle,. or flrong Hold, befieged, be taken ?

- The afcendant and lord thereof reprefent the befiegers, and the fourth
houfe the befieged; the lord of the fourth, the governor ; the fifth and
its lord, the ammunition, foldiery, and the affiftance they either have
or may expect. If the lord of the afcendant be ftrong and fortunate,
and joined to the lord of the fourth in the afcendant, or with the Moon
or lord of the tenth houfe, in reception ; it is an argument that the
befiegers fhall prove viétorious. Or, if the lord of the fourth be ‘in
houfes not beholding the fourth, or impeded of the infortunes, it is
an argument. that the garrifon will be taken, and the governor thereof
fubject to danger.. If the unfortunate planets, or the Dragon’s tail,
happen ‘to be in the fourth houfe, and the fortunate planets interpofe
not their benevolent rays, it willbe taken by treachery and bafenefs in a
fhort time. If the lord of the fourth commit his difpofition and. virtue
to the lord of the afcendant, it fhews the governor has been’ tampered
with, and for a confideration will furrender the garrifon. But if none
of thefe afpetts happen, and on the contrary the fourth houfe and its lord.
fhall be fortunate, and free from all impediments, and the lord of. the
fourth be in no reception with the lord of. the firft, the garrifon, &c,
then befieged, fhall be taken by the army that invefts it. .


Of Turerts, FuciTives, Strays, &c.
1. Of Fugitives or Strays, fhall they be found or not?
2. Which Way are they gone, and to what Diftance ?
3. Things loft, if recoverable or. not ?
4. Whos the Thief? The Age and Sex of the T seit ?
5. Are there more than one concerned 2
_ 6. Be they Strangers or Familiars ?
72 In what Time fhall the ee Jtolerhe recovered ? “18
Ve


3z2 AN WME DS TR AMT aw


We thall now confider thefe intheir order, and fo conclude the judg
ments belonging to the feventh houfe.


Of Fugitives or Strays, jhall they be found or not?

The Moon fee Mercury are naturally fignificators of fugitives and
ftrays: but the feventh and its lord are particularly fignificators there-
of, inlel fs the thing ftrayed be a horfe, &c.. If the tact of the feventh
be retrograde, the perfon abfconded thall return again of his own accard,
before he goes far from the atin s houfe. The lord of the aichotiaat
or Moon in good afpect with the lord of the feventh, and the lord of the
feventh in application, declares him to be returning home again. If the
feventh do not apply, the querent may find him by enguiry. But if the
fignificators behold each other by. quartile or oppofition, or from no afpect
at all, it denotes the perfon will not return again. If the Jord of the
feventh be in the third or ninth, it denotes the fame. If an horfe, ox, or
cow, be ftrayed, obferve the lord of the twelfth, and, if he be found re-
trograde, the {tray will return of his own accord ; and_obferve the fame
rules as above, only changing the Jord of the houfe. If the Moon tranf.
fers the light of the lord of the fugitive or {tray to the lord of the afcen-
dant, it argues hopes of recovering them again, If the transfers Mer-
cury’s light or virtue, it fignifies the fame, The Moon in good con-
figuration with Jupiter or Venus, or cither of them cafting a good
afpect to the afcendant, or its lord, from good houfes of spa figure,
fhew hopes of recovery. The lord of the feventh, either in the twelfth
houfe of the figure, or combuil, denotes the perfon to be under bonds
of reftraint, perhaps in prifon; Mercury fo pofited argues the fame.,
When the planet feparates from the houfe of the Moon, it fhews the
flray is taken into cuftody, and driven away and fold; and, if any planet
be found to feparate from the lord of the fecond, it thews the fame. If the, -
Moon, or fignificator of the ftray, &>, apply to the lord of the eighth from
his afcendant, or be pofited in the eighth, itis dead. If the difpofitor
of the Moon, or fignificator of the beaft, be pofited in the eighth houfe
applying to the guartile or oppofition. of an infortune in the fourth,
the fame. The Jord of the fixth or twelfth, pofited in. the fixth, or
twelfth, or in the ninth or tenth, argues the beaft frayed to be either
in the pound or in the cuftody of fome perfon. The lord of the
feventh, or fixth, fortunated by the good beams of Jupiter or Venus,
in the fecond, fifth, or eleventh, houfe, or the Sun cafting a trine un-
to them, denotes they are likely to be found again.


Which Way are they gone? and to what Diflance ? .
The Moon, or fignificator of the fugitive or ftray, in the tenth houfe,
fhews they are gone fouth ; in the fereaue weft; in the fourth, north ; :
. 4 7 In:


OF RST ROL OG YK iy 323


in the afcendant, eaft. If the fignificator of the ftray be in watery figns,
they are northward, and in fome moift moorith place. If in airy figns,
they are weftward, and in mountainous and high places. If in earthy
figns, they are fouthward, and in copfes or woods. If in fiery figns, they
are eaftward, and in the open fields. The Moon in the fame quarter with
the lord of the afcendant, and not more than one fign diftance between
them, fhews they are near the place from whence they went; but, if
they are diftant above ninety degrees, then they are gone far from the
querent, If the Moon be diftant from the fignificator of the fugitive or
ftray, either by body or afpeft, enly-one degree in a moveable figa, they
are diftant above feventeen furlongs from the owner; if in common or -
fixed figns, ftill lefs; fo that the diftance is to be apportioned according
to the number.of degrees the Moon andMignificator are from each other.


‘Of Things loft, if recoverable or not?


Fortunate planets in fextile or trine to the lords of the afcendant or
fecond houfe, and the difpofitor of the part of fortune pofited in the afcen-
Gant or fecond houfe, declare a recovery of the goods loft. Either of the
fortunes in the afcendant, having dignities in the fecond houfe, or the
Moon in the feventh, in fextile or trine to the lord of the afcendant, are
very certain arguments of recovering the thing or things’ loft. The
Moon in the tenth, in trine to a planet in the fecond; or in the fecond,
in trine to the lord of the fecond; the difpofitor of the part of fortune,
er the lord of the afcendant, in the fecend; the luminaries in trine to
each other, or in trine to the cufp of the fecond heufe; or the lord of
the fecond in the eleventh or fourth houfes; are all arguments of reco-
very. The lord of the eighth in the afcendant, or with the lord of the
afcendant, denotes a recovery of the goods loft; and Jupiter, Venus,
or the Dragon’s head, in the eleventh houfe, give great hopes of the
fame. The Moon, the part of fortune, or its difpofitor, or the lord of the
fecond, in the eighth houfe, are great arguments that the goods loft
cannot be recovered. When both luminaries are under the earth, the
thing loft is hard to be recovered ; and, if the fecond-houfe er its lord be
any way afflicted, it denotes the fame. But the greateft arguments of
irecovery are the pofitions of Saturn, Mars, or the Dragon’s tail,
out of their eflential dignities, in the fecond houfe; or the lord of the
fecond in combuftion, or in the eighth houfe; or the lord of the
fecond in quartile or oppofition with the lord of the eighth. If
the lord of the feventh be in conjun@tion with the lord of the eighth ; or
if the lord of the fecond behold not the firft houfe, or lord thereof ; or
the Sun and,Moon not afpetting each other, nor the part of fortune; or
if they are both under the earth, there can be no reftitution of the
goods loft,

No. 16, 4. H Who


ES aa eae
324 ANyv TE LALIws7rT RAV T FO WN:


Who is the Thief ?—the Age and. Sex of the Thief.


A peregrine planet in an angle is to be taken for the fignificator of
the thief; particularly if the peregrine planet hath dignities in the
feventh houfe, or is lord thereof; or afflicts the houfe of fubftance, or:
its lord; or the part of fortune, or its lord. But, if no planet malici-
oufly afpetts the aforefaid fignificators, then admit the lord of the feventh
to fignify the thicf, becaufe he hath natural fignification of thieves. ——~
Or, if the planet afflicting the fubftance, or part of fortune, or their
lords, be peregrine, or efientially dignified, he will fignify the thief.—
if the planet afflicting the fubftance, &c. be mafculine, and’in a mafcu-
line fign and quarter, it denotes the thief fo bea man. If the planet be
feminine, and’ in feminine parts of the figure, it denotes the thief is.
feminine, of a woman. Saturn fignificator of the thief fhews him to be
old, except in the beginning of figns; the Sun, Mars, and Jupiter, about.
thirty, or fomewhat more;. Venus and Mercury, youthful; the Moon,.
according to her age; in the firft quarter fhe fignifies young; in her fe-~.
cond, between twenty and thirty ; in her third, between thirty and forty-.
five;.in her fourth, between forty-five and fixty. .


Are there more concerned in the Theft than one ?


_ Many planets afli@ing the fignificators of fubftance, whether pere-
grine or not, fhew many thieves, or more thieves than one. If the:
fignificator of the thief be in fextile or trine with other planets,.and in
double-bodied figns, there are more thieves than one, although but one
be found to afflict the fignificators: of fubftance. The angles of the-
figure fixed, and the fignificator of the thief fixed, in-no afpect-with.
any planet, except the lord of the fubftance, or the difpofer of the part.
af fortune, whom he afflicts, denote that only one perfon is concerned in,
the theft. or robbery. ee:


fs the Theft commitied by Strangers.or Familiars 2


The luminaries beholding the afcendant, or its lord, or the lord of the-
firft in the firft, in conjunction with. the lord of the feventh, denote the:
thief to be a familiar, or one well known to the lofer: When the Jumi-.
naries are in their proper houfes, or in the houfes of the lord of the afcen=
dant, or in the triplicity of the lord of the afcendant, they. denote the
thief well known to the querent or lofer.. ‘The fignificator of the thief
firong in the afcendant,. denotes a brother or kinfman, particularly if he:
chance to be lord of the third :. if the lord of the feventh be in the fe-
venth,,he is one of the family. The lord of the afcendant, in the third,

bi we hes ‘- OF


‘lie
“ap
‘ &


a


. €
‘


© BT AAS STOUR OF) Ofc “Y:! 325°


or fourth houfe, denotes the thief to bea fervantin the family. The
fignificator of the thief, in the third or ninth from his own houfe,
thews the thief to bea ftranger; and if the lord of the afcendant and
the feventh, or fignificator of the thief, be not of one triplicity, it de-
notes the fame. Mars or Mercury, fignificator of the thief, prefage him
to be a common pilferer, unlefs they govern a houfe of relation ; which
if they do, they then point out who itis. If the thief be a doreiie®
he is known thus: The Sun fignifies a father or mafter; the Moon, a
mother or miftrefs; Venus, a wife or woman; Saturn,:a fervant or a
ftranger’ coming there by chance; Mars, a fon, brother, or kinfman ;
Mercury, a youth, familiar, or friend.


In what Time fhall the Thing ftolen be recovered ?


If teftimonies of recovery appear in the figure, the time may be known
thus: Obferve the application of the two planets fignifying recovery,
and confider the degrees of diftance between their body and afpeét, and
turn the diftance into time. If they happen to be in moveable figns,
then allow as many weeks or days as there are degrees of diftance for the
fpace of time in which it may be recovered ; if in common figns, allow
months or weeks ; if in fixed figns, years or months. When the Sun
and Moon together behold the afcendant, the thing: loft will {peedily
be recovered ; for they fuffer nothing to lie long hid or obfcured: . And,
if at the- fuviie tinte the lord of the fecond be. in the afcendant, it wills
be had again very fpeedily. The fignificators increafing in light and
motion, ana pofited in fortunate places of the figure, prefage a: ifeddents


recovery of the goods loft or aired
JUDGMENTS ut nee to the EIGHTH HOUSE.


This is called the Houfe of Death, becaufe we enquire from it con~
cerning death, and of the manner of it. It has alfo fignification of the
dowry ofa wife, being the fecond houfe from the eighth. The queftions


proper to it are thefe:


1. Of the Time of the Death of the Querent ?
2. What Manner of Death fhall he die ?
3- Shall the Querent obtain the Wife's Portion?


4. Sball the Querent or gs Wife die firft : a


And each of thefe fhall be treated of BAU AEF th in-a feparate and
diftinct fection..
| A oF


e | ; q
o26 A NYT ALG LAUS AT IR BART. FO) N


Of the rime of the Death of the Querent ?


To anfwer this queftion, let the lord of the afcendant, the afcendant
-utfelf, and the Moon, fignify the querent; the eighth houfe, lord |
thereof, and the part of death, together with the planet or planets in
the cighth, fignify the death of the querent. If the lord of the af-
-cendant and the Moon be free from the beams of the infortunes ;. or if
no infortune, nor the Dragon’s tail, be pofited in the afcendant ; they
argue no danger to the querent, but fhew him to be of a long life. If
the faid fignificators, or either of them, be in conjunction or good
afpett of the fortunes, or the fortunes pofited ‘in the afcendant, and the
‘part of life free ; they prefage the querent, according to nature, may
live to a confiderable age. ‘Fhus, finding all the fignificators free, the
querent will live as many years as there are degrees between the con-
janction, quartile, or oppofition, of the lord of the eighth houfe and the
lord of the afcendant. Or if, before the lord of the afcendant receives
this affiiction from the lord of the eighth, he happens to be combuft of
the Sun-in the fourth, eighth, twelfth, or fixth, houfes, the degrees of
diftance between the Sun and the fignificator will fhew the years the
querent may live, before he fhall conclude this life. But, if the figni-
ficators be afflicted, either by the infortunes, or by the lords of the
fourth, fixth, eighth, or twelfth, houfes, the querent’s life will be of no
very long continuance. In the meafure of time, allow for degrees of
diftance, &c. in moveable figns, weeks ; in common figns, months ;~
and in fixed figns, years ; which will thew the length, according to na-~
tural caufes, of the querent’s life. When queftions of this nature are
propounded, draw the figure into a {peculum, and direét the fignificators
sina nativity ; and when the afcendant or Hyleg fthall come to any
malicious direction, according to the folar meafure of time, adjudge the
perfon enquiring may be cut off from the land of the living. But this
is.only to be done when the nativity of a perfon is not to be had; for
no abfolute confidence can be placed in predictions that relate to death,
but fuch as are grounded upon the genethliacal figure of birth, for reafons
that will hereafter be given.


What Manner of Death foall the Querent die ?


Either the lord of the eighth or planets pofited in the eighth thew the
‘kind of death the querent fhall be fubject to, reference being had to the
planets beholding him or them. If the fignificator be Jupiter or Venus,
ie their effential dignities, they portend a gentle death to the querent,
except violent fixed flars benear them. If Saturn be fignificator, he de-
notes death by fome fevere ague, dropfy, or confumption; Mars, by fe-
vers or wounds ; the Sun, by pleurifies, or by fome obftruction of ae

» vitals 5


OF; A SHT sR: O.L O 6 -¥. 927


witals ; Mercury, by the phthyfic, frenzy, madnefs, lethargy, rc. and the
Moon by drowning, or by difeafes proceeding from cold and moitfture.


Shall the Querent obtain his Wife's Portion ?


Every querent is fignified by the afcendant, and. the fecond houfe fig-
nifies his {ubftance ; the quefited is fignified by the feventh houfe, and
the eighth houfe hath fignification of his fubftance in this queftion.—
The lord of the eighth in the eighth, no way impeded or afflicted by the
unfertunate planets, declares the querent will have a good eftate with
his wife, and take poffeffion of it without trouble. Jupiter, or Venus,
or the Dragon’s-head, pofited in the eighth houfe, or on the cufp of the
eighth, inthe terms of the fortunes, the lord of the eighth being no way
impeded, argues the querent fhall have his wife’s portion without any
manner of trouble.’ The part of fortune in the eighth houfe, in the
dignities of Jupiter or Venus, and they cafting their fextile or trine af-
petts thither, argues not only that the querent fhidl have the dowry of
his wife, but alfo fhews it to be confiderable. If there happen a friendly
-afpect between the lord of the fecond and eighth, with reception ; or, if
the lord of the eighth be in the fecond, or the lord of the fecond in the .
eighth ; they denote the querent will obtain his wife’s dowry without
difficulty. But, if there be a quartile or oppofition between the fignifi-
cators, and no reception or tranflation of light ; or if the lord of the eighth
be combuft or retrograde; the querent will not obtain the portion of his
wife without great trouble and difficulty. If Saturn or Mars be in the
eighth, and peregrine, very little of the wife’s portion will be obtained ;
and, if any, there will be great and violent contention about it. The Dra-
-gon’s tail in the eighth portends the fame. Ifa woman enquires concern-
ing the eftate‘of a man fhe expects to marry, thefe rules will ferve fuffici-
ently; for, the afcendant reprefents the woman, if a woman enquires ; and
the feventh houfe muft then be for the man, and the eighth for his eftate,


shall the Man or bis Wife die firft 2


In this'queftion particularly note the lord of the afcendant, and the
lord of the feventh, and obferve which of them goes to conjunction, quar-
tile, or oppofition, ‘of the lord of theeighth houfe, or to combuftion of
the Sun, or to afpetts of the unfortunate planets, and’thence judge. If
it be the lord of the afcendant that firtt fuffers that affliction, the man,
if a man be querent, fhall die firft ; if the lord of the feventh goes firft
to thofe afflictions, the woman will die firft, © But'it is always to be ob-
ferved,' that the fignificator which is ftrongeft and moft powerful in the
figure denotes the party reprefented by him/fhall live the longeft. This .
queftion, however, fhould never be decided but by infpection of the
nativity of each of the parties, properly rectified and duly confidered.


No. .16. 41 JUDG-


328 ANGE Popa sr RA OUN
JUDGMENTS proper to the NINTH HOUSE,


We judge of voyages at fea, their profperity or jafelineey’s ; of {cience,.
&c. and of perfons and things religious ; by the ninth houfe: and thefe
queftions are the moft common unto it.


1. Shall the Voyage be profperous or not ? .

2. Will it be long or foort ? ~

3. May the Querent profit by the Setings intended ?

4. Shall a Clergyman obtain the Benepe he enquires after ¢ ?


Thefe queftions properly explained’ and refolved will give _sbehetene
light to enable the reader to refolve any others, of the like nature and
import, proper to this houfe. ‘


id the Payage be profperoas or not 2


When the ninth houfe or its lord fhall be ‘unfortunately sfoebied, it
denotes many hazards and dangers to-attend the voyage. If Saturn be
the afflicting planet, the perfon, enquiring will be fubject to ficknefs,
and lofs of goods ; but, if Mars or the Dragon’s tail affliét either the
ninth houfe or its lord, they declare danger by enemies.or pirates. If
the ninth houfe or its lord be fortunate and ftrong, much good and —
> great fuceefs are promifed to the querent in. the voyage, and that he fhall
make a happy and fafe return. ‘The lord of the afcendant and lord of
the ninth in conjunction, fextile, or trine, with each. other,. particularly
if there be any reception between them, or pofition in. each others
houfes, argues:an admirable voyage, and a propiticus | and fafe return;
but, if they be in quartile or oppofition, void of all reception, or if
there happen no good tranflation between them, the querent will have
ais unaufpicious voyage, and, before he returns home again, will have
seafon to with he had let it alone. (If ithe Jord, of-the afcendant or, the
Moon be in conjunction with a;fortunate planet in the tenth houfe;
that being the fecond from the ninth, the querent thall gain great ftore
ef wealth by the voyage he undertakes, and enjoy remarkable health of
body. But, if the lord of the afcendant or the Moon be in abject
places of the figure, or with the lords of abject houfes, or in quartile or
oppofition to them, either peregrine or combuft of the Sun, the perfon
will fall fick in the journey, and the voyage will be unfortunate. to
him ; and, if they be with’ violent fixed ftars of: the frft wah it
will be worfe.


W. ill


OF ASTROLOGY: "429


Will the Voyage be long or fhort ?


The fignificators of the perfon enquiring, and of the voyage, fwift in
motion, oriental, and in moveable figns, denote the voyage to be fhort
and quick; but, if occidental, they thew fome obftructions. When
the lord of the afcendant applies to the lord of the ninth, or the lord of
the ninth to the lord of the afcendant ; or if a-fortunate planet transfers
the light of the one to that of the other; they are good arguments of a
fafe return, and a fhort and fpeedy voyage. The lord of the ninth ina
fixed fign, and the lord of the afcendant and Moon in fixed figns, denote
a very long voyage to the querent ; if in common figns, the voyage will
be indifferently good ; if in moveable figns, he returns fpeedily. If the
lord of the afcendant be retrograde, or if either he or the Moon apply to
a planet that is retrogtade, it fignifies the perfon that goes the voyage
will return home in a-ihort time, or perhaps before he goes to the place
intended.


"May the Querent profit by the Science intended ?


Give the afcendant, its lord, and the Moon, to fignify the querent ;
the ninth houfe, the lord thereof, and the planet pofited therein, to fig-
nify the fcience enquired after; and, according to their pofitions and
_ configurations, judge of the queftion. The Jord of the afcendant and

lord of the ninth in conjunétion, or in fextile or trine unto each other,
either in or from angles or fuccedent houfes, give great hopes to the
querent that he fhall gain or profit by the art or f{cience he intends ta
follow. If fortunate planets poflefs the afcendant or ninth houfe, and
thence fhall friendly behold either the cufps of each houfe or the lords of
them, it isan argument that the querent will profit by the art or fcience
intended. Ef the Moon be pofited in the ninth, in iextile to the lord
of the afcendant or ninth houfe in the eleventh,, particularly if a recep-
tion happen, there is no doubt but the querent will gain by the fcience
intended, and prove a good artift therein ;, but, if none of thefe things
appear in the figure, but on the contrary there happens a quartile or oppo-
{ition between the fignificators, the party enquiring will not profit by the
art or fcience intended. When the unfortunate planets or Dragon’s tail
are pofited in the afcendant or ninth houfe, or afflict their lords, or the
Moon. or if an unfortunate planet happens to be Jord of the ninth, and,
pofited in an evil place of the figure ;, the perfon enquiring will not gain
much by the {cience,

. Shalt


330 AN) LU Le SoTeRe AT. 1 OON


Shall aClergyman obtain the Benefice be enquires after ?


Give the afcendant and its lord, and the Moon, to fignify the clergy-
man; and let the ninth houfe fignify the living, or other ecclefiaftical
preferment, fought after. The lord of the afcendant or Moon, joined to
the lord of the ninth by body or good afpeft, gives great hopes that the
minifter or querent may obtain the benefice defired. If the Moon or
lord of the afcendant be in the ninth, or lord of the ninth in the afcen-
dant, or in reception with each other,.they are very good arguments
that the querent or minilter fhall obtain the parfonage or church-prefer-
ment defired. When the lord-of the afcendant, or Moon, are joined to
the Sun or Jupiter; or in fextile or trine of either of them, in the af-
cendant or ninth houfe; it denotes that the querent will obtain the be-
nefice enquired after, If the principal fignificators be in fextile or trine,
with reception, the preferment or benefice comes with little trouble ; if
they be in.quartile, and at the fame time in reception, the benefice may
be obtained, but_it will be with great trouble and delay. The bufinefs
may alfo be brought to pafs by tranflation of light; for, if a planet fepa-
rates immediately from the good afpect of the lord of the ninth, and ap-
plies to the lord of the afcendant ; or if he feparates from the lord of the
aicendant, and applies to the lord of the ninth; the benefice or prefer-
ment will be obtained, and by the means of a perfon fignified by the
planet that thus transfers the light of the fignificaters to each other.—
But, if none of thefe teflimonies happen, it will be a very difficult mat-
ter to obtain the benefice defired. ‘The lord of the afcendant retrograde,
combuft, or cadent, and he or the Moon in quartile or oppofition of the
infortunes, or of the lord of the ninth houfe, without reception, declares
the deftruction of the matter enquired after, and fhews that it fhall come
to nothing. Infortunes in the ninth houfe, or in the afcendant, or-afflict-
ing the lord of the afcendant or ninth houfe, or the Moon, fhew much
trouble and vexation to the perfon enquiring after the benefice, and an im-
poflibility of obtaining the bufinefs at laft. Obferve that planet which
cafts a quartile or oppofition either to the lord of the afcendant or Moon,.
and take notice of the houfe he is lord of ; for by that means may be dif-
covered what or who will be the occafion of preventing the bufinefs from
taking place. The afflicting planet, being lord of the third, denotes a
neighbour to be the impeditor of the thing; if of the eleventh, fome
pretended friend; if of the tenth, the patron hath no good opinion of
him ; if of the feventh or fifth, he is confidered a contentious and im-
proper perfon. Fortunate planets in fortunate places of the figure, be-
friending the fignificators, give hopes of the bufinefs enquired after ; but,
if maleic planets, in unfortunate places of the figure, afflict the fignifi-
cators of the bufinefs, it will never come to any thing,


3 JUDG-


:


OPLMARAROUaAG wa se
JUDGMENTS proper to the. TENTH HOUSE.


The honour, office, dignity, and profeflion, of each querent, are known
from the tenth houfe ; and thefe interrogations are Common to it.


1. Shall the Querent obtain the office or dignity defired ?
2. Shall he remain in the employment be poffelfes ?
3. What profefion will be beft for any one to follow ?


Thefe queftions properly anfwered will inftrect the ingenious reader
how to judge of any other of the like nature.


_ Shalt the Querent obtain the Office or Dignity defired ?


Still remember to give the afcendant, its lord, and the Moon, to fignify
the querent, let him be a perfon either of high or low condition; and the
tenth houfe and the lord thereof, and the Sun, becaute he is the natural
fignificator of honour and dignity, to reprefent the office, honour, or
dignity, enquired after. If the lord of the afcendant or Moon be joined:
to the Sun, or to the lord of the tenth, or if they behold the tenth by a
fextile or trine, the querent fhall obtain the dignity fought after, by his
induftry, and by the means he intends to ufe. If the lord of the afcen-
dant or the Moon be in the tenth, or the lord of the tenth or the Sun be
pofited in the afcendant, and neither of them impeded, the querent. fhall
obtain the honour or office he feeks after. The fignificators in ‘fextile
‘or trine to each other, or a fortunate planet tranflating the friendly beams
‘of one to the other, give affured hopes of fucceis. to the quesent,. Hor,
tunate planets in the tenth, or in conjunction, fextile, or trine, of the
lord of the tenth, having dignities in the afcendant, declare the querent
will obtain the office or dignity defired. If Satarn or Mars be ftrong in
the afcendant, and joined to the lord of the tenth, either by body or good
afpect, it prefages hopes of the prefermenr fought after, and that it
will be gained, although with much trouble. A fortunate planet tranf- |
ferring the light of the lord of the tenth to the lord of the afcendant,
denotes the querent will obtain the dignity or honour fought after, by
the means of the perfon reprefented by that planet who thus transfers the
light of the lord of the tenth. If the Suan’s light be fo transferred,, it

ortends the fame. But, if none of the aforefaid configurations re-
ceptions, or tranflations, happen among the fignificators, the honour and
preferment fought after by the querent will not be obtained; although
‘he may Have the greateft promifes, and moft. probable’ hopes that can
pofiibly be conceived.
ase yA A K ; Shalf


232 A- Ni TAL OY StTOR TAT ta N


Shall a Perfon remain in the Employment he poffeffes ?


When a perfon is in an employment, truft, or office, and is jealous of
being turned out of the fame; obferve whether the lord of the afcendant
or Moon, and the lord of the tenth, are going to conjunction, or to any
friendly afpe€t, as a fextile or trine ; or if there be any reception between
the two chief fignificators: for, if fo, the querent fhall hold and keep the
employment he poffeffes. If the lord of the afcendant be in fextile or
trine to either of the two fortunes in the tenth houfe, and no affliction
happen from the infortunes, the querent will long enjoy the place he
pofieffes. The lord of the afcendant in the tenth, or lord of the tenth —
in the afcendant, denotesthe fame. But, if the lord of theafcendant or
the Moon be in quartile or oppofition with any planets, and the fame
planets in conjunétion, fextile, or trine, with the lord of the tenth, or the
Sun, the querent will lofe the employment he poffeffes; and fuch_per-
fons as are fignified by the planets in conjunction, fextile, or trine, with -
the lord of the tenth, or the Sun, are endeavouring to prejudice him in
the bufinefs. The lord of the afcendant retrograde, and combuft of the
Sun, fhews the querent to have incurred the difpleafure of thofe that
have power over him, and that they will therefore take away the office
or employment he holds. If the Moon or lord of the afcendant be in

quartile or oppofition with the lord of the tenth or the Sun without re-
ception, it portends the querent to be in danger of lofing the office or
employment he holds or poffefles. The lord of the afcendant or the
Moon feparating from the lord of the tenth or the Sun, declares the
querent in danger of lofing the office or employment he holds ; parti-
cularly if from their feparation they apply to the malicious afpetis of the
infortunes.


What Profeffion will be beft for the Querent to follow 2
This queftion is only fit to be propounded by mechanics, and not by


thofe who live and move in a higher {phere; and, when a proper perfon
propounds the queftion, he may be an{wered according to the following
tules. Confider the lord of the afcendant, and the Moon, for the perfon
enquiring ; and the lord of the tenth houfe, and the planets Mars and
Venus, for the trade and profeflion of the querent, and obferve the afpects
between the fignificators according to the figns they are pofited in, and fo
judge of theprofeflion of the querent. If the fignificators, or the great-
er partof them, happen to bein fiery figns, the querent will do well in
any profeffion that relates thereunto, according to his capacity of birth;
as a phyfician, chemift, furgeon, goldf{mith, filverfmith, jeweller, apo-
thecary; or, if of a meaner condition, he may make a good cutler, {mith,
baker, glafs-maker, or the like. The fignificators in aereal figns, ac-

A cording


OFLA STROLOG Ye 333


cording to the birth of the querent, denote he will make a good law-
yer, arithmetician, accomptant, furveyor, fcrivener, clerk, aftronomer,
&c. otherwife a good haberdafher, milliner, painter, draper, or one
that may deal in retail commodities. But, if the fignificators be in
earthy figns, the querent may make a good farmer or hufbandman, gar-
dener, grafier, coach-maker, joiner, carpenter, &c. The fignificators of
trade or profeflion, in watery figns, denote the querent to do well in
brewing, malting, or in felling wines and fpirituous liquors. When
the lord of the afcendant is in fextile or trine to either of the fignificators
of trade, and they are pofited:in angles or other good houfes of the figure,
the querent may do very well inthe trade or profeffion he follows. If
the Moon be in the like good configuration with any of them, it portends
the fame. But, if the fignificators of trade be afflicted in cadent places of
the figure, and the lord of the afcendant or the Moon in quartile or op-
-pofition to them, the querent will not thrive by the trade or profeffion
he is about to follow.


JUDGMENTS proper to the ELEVENTH HOUSE.


This houfe gives judgment relative to the friends of each querent,
their bafenefs or fidelity, and of his hopes, &c. ‘The queftions that are
moft common to it are thefe :


1. Shall the Friends of the Querent prove faithful to bim 2
2. Shall the Querent obtain what be anxioufly defires ?


All other things particularly relating to this houfe are comprehended
under thefe two. }


Shall the Friends of the Querent prove faithful to bim ?


The afcendant and its lord reprefent the querent, and the eleventh
houfe and its lord the friends of the querent. Now if any benevolent
afpect is found between the lords of the afcendant and the eleventh houfe,
or any friendly reception or tranflation of light between them, the friend
of the querent is not to be fufpected, but he will prove faithful. If
the Moon be in friendly afpect to the lord of the eleventh, or there
happens any good tranflation of light or reception between them, in
good places of the figure, the friend proves juft and faithful. The dif-
pofitor of the part of friends, ia conjunction, fextile, or trine, or in good
reception with the lord of the afcendant in good houfes, and configurated
with ftars of a benevolent nature, argues the querent’s friend to be jutt
and faithful to him. ‘The lord of the afcendant or the Moon in the
eleventh houfe, and the Jord of the eleventh in the afcendant, fhews a

reciprocal


334 AN TDD LUSTRATION.


reciprocal affeclion between the querent < and his friends. Tf either of the:
fortunes caft their friendly beams to them both at. the fame time, it ar
eves the. fame, On the.contrary, if the lord of the afcendant or the Moon
be in quartile or oppofition of the infortunes in-the eleventh, or of the lord
oft the eleventh, the friends of the querent are not faithful to him. If
there be no reception between ther, ‘this judgment is the more certain.
The Dragon’s tail afflicting the eleventh houfe, or the lord thereot, fhews
the friends of the querent to be very ‘deceitfuly let them pretend ever fo
fair. The fame if the lord of the eleventh be near violent fixed ftars,
as Caput Algol, Oculus Taurus, Serpentarius, the Chele, &c. Ifthe
fignificators of the querent and his friends bein quartile or oppofition
from fixed figns, and in angles, it declares the friends, or at leait fuch as
pretend to be fo, faithlefs ; and that perpetually. If the natural fignifi-
cators of friendfhip, which are Jupiter and Venus, be pofited in the af-
cendant, or caft a friendly afpect thereto, or to the lord thereof, or the
Moon, the friends of the querent will prove faithful. But, if they caft a
quartile or oppofition to the Moon, or lord of the afcendant, or to the afcen-
dant itfelf, it admonifhes the querent to beware of pretended friends.


Shall the Querent obtain what be hopes for or defires?


When a perfon hath hopes of a thing, and is unwilling to declare what
dt is, yet would with to be refolved what the effect may be, and accors
dingly propounds the above queftion, the afcendant and its ford are to figni-
fy him, and the eleventh houfe and its lord, with the fortunate planets
th lerein, are to fignify the matter or thing Habe If the fignificators
are in reception, or in good afpeét with each other, the bufinefs or matter
hoped for is poflible to be obtained ; or, if there be any. good tranflation
of light or reception in houfes, it argues the fame thing. If the lord of
the afcendant and. lord of the eleventh receive each either 3 in angles, or

{hall be received of the fortunate planets in angles or in fuccedent “houtes,
the thing that the’querent hopes for fhall be “accom plifhed. Either the
lord of the afcendant or the Moon received im fixed ligns, fhews the que-
rent {hall obtain the bufinefs that he hopes for, and that completely; if
in moveable Jigns, he will obtain eatin or nothing of what he hope S
for; and, if in bicorporal figns, he will have only a part of what he de-
fires to obtain. But if on. the contrary the fignificators are in quartile
or opel tion, and void of all manner of reception, having no good
tranflatien of light, or if they be combu(t, cadent, peregrine, ‘or retro-
grade, or with fixed ftars of an evil influence, the\matter defired will not
be brought to perfetiion. But, if the querent in propounding ‘ the quef-
tion telis the particular thing hie hopes to attain, then the fignificators
thereof muit be taken from their proper place, and the rules varied as
the fubject may require.

JUDG.-.


OFLA ST ETROU OG 335
JUDGMENTS proper to the TWELFTH HOUSE.


By this houfe we judge of private enemies, captivity, and imprifon-
ment; and the queftions belonging to itare,


1. Hath the Querent private Enemies?
2. Who are they, or bow may be know them ?
3. Of a Prifoner or Captive, when may be be freed : E


-Thefe queftions being refolved, will enable the reader to anfwer any
ethers of a fimilar fhape and tendency.


Hath the Querent private Enemies ?


_ Ifthis queftion, is indifferently propofed, obferve what afpec& there

be between the lord of the afcendant and twelfth houfe, and from what
houfe of heaven it happens ; and {fo judge of the querent’s private enemies.
Tf the afpect be by quartile or oppolition, and out of malignant houfes of
the figure, the querent hath private enemies ; and if the lord of the twelfth
be a fuperior planet, as Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, and any way dignified,
the enemies are the more to be feared; but, if they are inferiors, they are
not fo dangerous ; the more powerful the fignificators of the enemies are,
the more injury will.the querent fuftain by them ; thelefs powerful, the
lefs evil and mifchief will they be able to do him. If the lord of any other
houfe befides the twelfth be in quartile or oppofition to the lord of the .
afcendant or the Moon, or to the afcendant itfelf, from obfcure places of
the figure, the querent hath private enemies. But if the afcendant, and
the load thereof, and the Moon, be veid of the evil afpects of any planct
or planess, and are befriended by the good rays of the fortunes, and the
lord of the afcendant and the Moon in fortunate places of the figure, they
denote the querent hath no private enemies.


’


Who are his eaarare Enemies, and how may be know them ?


To refolve this queftion truly, obferve the pofitions of the lords of the
afcendant and twelfth houfe; for, if the lord of the twelfth afliG the
lord of the afcendant, or the afcendant from the third houfe, the lord of
the third affifting, the querent’s greateft private enemies are thofe that live
near him, or are nearly related to him; that is to fay; either a brother,
kinfman, or neighbour. The perfon is to be defcribed by the planet af-
flicting, and the fign in which he is pofited. If the lord of the twelfth
afflict the afcendant or his Jord from the fourth houfe, the father of the
querent is his enemy ; if in the fifth, his children or -fome occafional

No, 17. 4.1L vifitor


336 AN. ad GLU SUT) RAT 160 N.


vifitor will prove his private enemy. If in the fixth honfe, his fervants,
eran uncle. If in the feventh houfe, his wifeor partner {hall prove fe-
cretly mifchievous to him. The perfonor perfons fignified by that hovfe
where the Dragon’s tail is pofited will be malicious and prejudicial to
the querent; particularly if the lord thereof afflict the lord of the afcen-
dant, the afcendant itfelf, or the Moon, atthe fame time.


Of a.Prifoner or Captive, when fhall be be fet at Liberty?

The lord of the afcendant or Moon,, {wift in motion, denotes freedom
from imprifonment in a fhort time; if either of them commit their vir=
tues or difpofitions to any planet or planets in the third or ninth houfe, or
to the lords of them,. not being pofited in angles, it argues a releafe from.
imprifonment ina fhort time. If the lord of the afcendant or the Moon:
be more potent in’ the figure than the lord of the twelfth, or be feparating
from the ill afpeéts of the lord of the twelfth, or the difpofitor of the part
ef imprifonment, particularly in moveable fiigns, and thence immediately
applying to the friendly beams of the fortunate planets Jupiter or Venus ;
the prifoner or captive cannot remain long in the prifon where he is, but
will be releafed. The lord of the afcendant or the Moon in the fourth,
fixth, eighth, or twelfth, honfes, or under the Sun-beams, or retros
grade, or unhappily afflicted of Saturn or Mars, fhews the perfon uns.
der reftraint will not be releafed from confinement for along time. And, if
the infortune happens to be lord of the eighth, he will die: in prifon. Tf
the lord of the-afcendant or the Moon feparate from the lord: of the
fourth, and immediately apply to Jupiter or Venus ; or if the lord of the

fourth feparate from the lord of the afcendant; they argue good hopes
that the captive or prifoner fhall not’ continue long in prifon. A fixed
fign afcending at the time of the queftion, and the lord thereof a-ponder-
ous planet, and in-an angle, portends a tedious time of imprifonment.
If common figns, the affliction will not be fo long ; if moveable;- it
will be very fhort ; if the lord of the afcendant be cadent from his

‘ houfe or exaltation, and the Moon happen to be in Scorpio: or Aqua-..
ries, it prefages long imprifonment. If the lord of the hour in which
the prifoner was taken by an unfortunate planet, and unfortunately
placed in the heavens, 1¢ declares a tedious imprifonment, and very
long captivity; but, if he be a fortune, the imprifonment cannot be
long. The only way to difcover the length of time in which a prifoner
er captive fhall be releafed, is, by obferving the degrees of diftance
between the fignificators and the fortunate planets, or the Sun; and ac-
cording to the figns they fhall be found in, whether:fixed; common, or-
moveable, meafure the days, weeks, months, or years, of the prifoner’s.

captivity, as heretofore directed, : ee ke


OF ASTROLOGY. 397


Having thus given rules and dire&ions how to folve any kind of quef-
tion proper to each of the twelve houfes, I fhall next proceed to illu
trate thefe rules further, by giving examples of a variety of true and re-
eent queftions whichI have refolved for different perfons, moft.of whom
are now living, and ready to confirm any fact that may be difputed by
the incredulous reader. I fhall begin with fuch as properly belong to
the firft houfe, and-fo pafs on regularly to the others, and give an exam-
ple or two from each of them.


QUESTION I. On the LENGTH of LIFE.


A: gentleman of eminence and fortune in his Majefty’s navy, having an:
inclination to lay out,a fum of money on life-annuities, applied to me
with avery preffing folicitation to inform him whether his life would be
long or fhort, that he might thereby determine whether fuch a purchafe
would: be to his advantage. Not being able to procure his nativity, 1
took down the time of the day when the . queftion was propofed, and,
having rettified it by a correct regulator, I immediately projected the -
following fcheme. of


Will the
| QUERENT’s ‘Lire %

| BE,
| LONG or SHORT?


RD AdaAAS OS


3 aeaaray My


998 A ND DAA sPTrR) auTr Ho ow


My firft bufinefs was to examine the figure, to find whether it were
radical, and fit to be adjudged, which I found to be the cafe, becaufe
the lord of the afcendant and the Jord of the hour are of one nature and
triplicity ; and the fignificator of the querent exattly defcribed his perfon,
which is of a middle ftature, fanguine complexion, and of an acute un-
derftanding, denoted by Mercury’s pofition in the fign Aries, the houfe
of Mars. ‘The Moon ‘being in oppofition to the fun, fhews him to have
a mark. orfcar near the left eye ; which was alfo true; and therefore, as
I found all circumftances to concur in proving the queftion to be well
and ferioufly grounded, and free from all impofition, I gave him my
judgment ,upon.the figure as follows. ;


‘The princely fign Leo, the.querent’s fignificator, occupies the afcen-
dant; and the Sun, .the lord thereof, and giver of life, is pofited near
his meridian altitude in the medium cceli, and in the fign Aries, his
houfe of exaltation, ftrong, powerful, and in full dignity, free from the
evil rays of the lords of the fixth, eighth, fourth, or fecond, houfes,
which neither impedite the Sun nor the afcendant with any evil afpect.
But the Moon, ‘lady of the twelfth, is in oppofition to the Sun, making
at the fame time a quartile mundane afpect with the afcendant, and a fex-
tile afpect with Saturn in the zodiac; frem which pofitions I inferred the
following particulars. ©


The affliction of the lord of the afcendant, by the oppofition of the
Moon in Libra, the houfe of Venus, and Venus difpofitor of the Moon
in her.own houfe, and in the feminine fign Taurus, going to a femifex- >
tile with the Sun, denotes that he will receive fome canfiderable injury
from a female connection, now exifting under the fpecious pretence of
friendfhip and fond attachment ; and this is declared by the Moon being
lady of the twelfth, the houfe of private enemies, which difpofes of the
part of fortune, and thereby indicates that he will lofe fome part of his
fortune by her means.


The Moon’s mundane quartile afpect to the afcendant, in an airy fign,
declares that he will be attacked with a fevere fit of the wind cholic,
or fome dangerous complaint in the bowels and reins; but it will not
prove fatal to him, becaufe the Sun, the lord of his afcendant, is more
ftrong and powerful, and in greater dignities, than the afflicting planets ;
and therefore, according to natural efficient caufes, they will prevail over
all f{ubordinate effects,


From


OF ASTROLOG ¥. 309


From a confideration of thofe parts of the figure which relate to the
circumftances of his paft life, 1 informed him he had improved his for-
tune, and been fuccefsful in fome important voyage, becaufe the Dra-
gon’s head is fituated in his ninth houfe; but that he had lately fuffered
greatly by a violent hurricane, that threatened deftruction or thipwreck;
which is denoted by the oppofition of Saturn to the part of fortune, and
the Moon having lately feparated from an oppofition with Mercury, lord
of the third houfe, where the Dragon’s tail is pofited. “This circum-
{tance I had the pleafure of hearing him acknowledge to be true; and
that the ftorm arofe only eight days before the fhip came into port.


He requefted me to afcertain the time when the above illnefs would
happen. Iaccordingly took the number of degrees between the Sun and
Moon, by fubtracting the lefs fum from the greater; and found the
diftance to be eleven degrees fifty-nine minutes. I then fought the
Moon’s latitude, and found it one degree thirty-three minutes fouth,
which, addedtothe above, make thirteen degrees thirty-two minutes ;
and, as the fignificators are in moveable figns, I computed the time by
weeks and days, and predicted this illnefs would befal him about the
20th of July following; and that, after he fhould be reftored to health
again, he would go on, without fultaining any other ferious indifpofition,
until the fixty-ninth year of his age; about which time I conceive the
functions of life will be naturally extinguifhed, by a complication of in-
firmities.


I have lately had the pleafure of converfing with the gentleman on the
fubjeGt of this queftion. He informed me, that towards the middle of
july, 1783, he was attacked with a kind of bilious complaint in his
{tomach, which brought on violent fits of the cholic. That, towards
the latter end of the fame month, he found an obftruction in his bowels,
and his phyfician declared it next to a miracle that his life was faved.
He now appears to be in perfe& health, and has funk a confiderable fum
of money in life annuities, which he declares was done in confequence of
the verity he found in thefe predictions.


QUESTION II. On the FATE of a SHIP at SEA.


In the year 1781, a gentleman called upon me who had a confiderable
fhare ina privateer, which had been completely fitted out and fent to
fea.a long time before, and the proprietors could not obtain the leaft
‘information of her, . He therefore requefted me, if in my power, to give
him fome probable account of what had befallen her. After convincing
myfelf the queftion was radical, and no trick or impofition intended,

No. a7. 4 M which


400 AN bib UST RAT WO N


which is always neceflaryto be carefully enquiredinto by the rules already
laid down for that purpofe, I proceeded to give my judgment on the fol-


lowing figure, rectified to the precife time the queftion was propoun~
ded.


WSuiep at Sea,


! HER
SAFETY or DESTRUCTION.


Here the afcendant and the Moon are fignificators of the fhip-; and
Venus, becaufe the ign Taurus, the houfe of Venus, is on the afcendant,
is fignificatrix: of the crew; and Mercury, with the Part of Fortune,
denote her flores and all the other materials on-board her.. The hip itfelf
appears well found and fubftantial, but not a fwift failer, as is deman-
{trated by an earthy fign poffefiing the cufp of the afcendant, and the


fituation of the Dragon’s. head in five degrees of the fame fign. The pla-
net Mars is fignificator of the enemy.


Now the Moon, which reprefents the thip,-being fituated in the eighth
houfe, the houfe of death and difappointnsent, and at the fame time be-
fieged by the two: malefic planets Saturn and Mars, denotes her to be
overpowered by the enemy. Mars, lord of the feventh, the houfe of


open.


OTT ASWTRECGuaAG Tt for


open enemies, being pofited with all his dignities therein; and in re-
ception of Jupiter, lord of the enemy’s houfe of fubftance; and being
alfo difpofitor of the Moon, Mercury, and Venus, which reprefent the’
fhip and crew, obvioufly declares them to be in the hands of the enemy.
The fignificators, being pofited in fiery figns, indicate an engagement to
have taken place; but the fuperior ftrength of the malefic rays of the
infortunes declare it to have been of fhort duration, and of very unequal
force. The crew being reprefented ‘by Venus, who is difpofed of by
Mars in the twelfth houfe, the houfe of imprifonment and afflidtion,
plainly thews them to be imprifoned in the enemy’s country. And as
Mercury is retrograde, and fituated alfo in the twelfth houfe, with the
Moon’s fortunate node, it is apparent that the-fhip and ftores will never
be reftored to the owners, but will be appropriated to the ufe of the cap-
tors, or difpofed of for their advantage. ‘The Moon’s pofition in the
eighth houfe declares the fhip to have been taken at a confiderable dif-
tance from home: and Sagittarius poflefling the cufp of the eighth, which
is a fouth-weft fign, and fituated in the fouth-weft part of the heavens,
denotes the capture to have been made in a fouth- weft part of thé world,


The querent left me with ftrong hopes of finding this judgment erro-
neous; and appeared fo extremely averfe to believe there could be any
truth init, (becaufe perhaps it operated fo much againft his own intereft, )
that I would noi fuffer him to: leave the room until he had promifed
upon his honour to Jet me know the refult. Accordingly, in about fix
months afterwards, I received a fhort note from him, informing me that
the owners had received advice from the captain of the privateer, that he
had fallen in with a French frigate of twenty-four guns, which being
vaftly fuwperior to: him, he was obliged, after a fhort refiftance, to ftrike
his colours, and was carried prifoner, with the reft of the crew, into
France.


QUESTION III. Of an ABSENT SON, whether DEAD or ALIVE.


A poor woman applied to me in the greateft diftrefs of mind, on ac-
count of her fon, who had turned out wild, and went to fea without the
confent of his friends. He had been abfent a confiderable time, with-
out ever once fo far reflecting on the difconfolate fituation of his parent,
as to be induced to addrefs a line to her, to remove her anxiety, or to
{tate his own profpects and purfuits. It was the woman’s conftant practice
to make enquiry after him among the feafaring people, till at length fhe
heard an imperfect ftory of fome engagement abroad, in which her fon

3 was


“r


402 ACN 2 GY us TR AT BON


was reported to be killed. Upon this unpleafant news, fhe requefted
me to inform her, by the rules of Aftrology, whether her fon was dead
or alive ; or whether the account fhe had heard was true or falfe. Her
uneafinefs of mind was too apparent for me to doubt her fincerity, or to
fuppofe the queftion not fit to be adjudged, and therefore I erected thes.
figure, and gave my opinion thereon as follows : ;


ABSENT Son,


WHETHER


July 9, 8h. som. A. M. 1781.
D dia.


Sub. lat. 50° 50


wr e
O- >
- a (33 -
ge e 2°


In this figure Virgo rifes upon the afcendant, and Mercury, lord
thereof, and fignificator of the querent, is pofited in the twelfth houfe,
the houfe of affli@ion and forrow. The fifth houfe of the figure is here
confidered as her fon’s firft or afcendant, and Saturn, lord thereof, is
his fignificator , and is pofited in the fourth angle, or imum ceeli, which
reprefents the grave and termination of all things. Saturn is alfo in
conjunction with the part of fortune in the fourth, both of which are
difpofed of by Jupiter, and Jupiter by Mars ; which malefic planet
polfefies the fon’s firft houfe or afcendant in his exaltation, and in
,oppofition to the Sun and Venus in the feventh, which is the houfe of
open enemies and war,

From


OF AS TR OLOG Y. 343


From thefe confignrations I drew the inferences following; that
Mercury, the querent’s fignificator, by being pofitedin the twelfth houfe,
plainly fhewed her fears were too well grounded, That Saturn, figni-
ficator of the quefited, and the part of fortune, being both difpofed of by
Jupiter, and this planet difpofed of by Mars, indicates all their benevo-
lent effects to be deftroyed by the malignant influence of this infortune.
Mars being in the fon’s afcendant, in his exaltation, and in oppofition to
Sol, is a ftrong argument of a violent death ; the kind and manner of
which is thus defcribed. Saturn, his fignificator, is pofited in the fiery
fign Sagittarius ; and Leo, which occupies the cufp of his eighth, and
Aries the cufp of his fourth, are alfo of the fiery triplicity; the Sun,
the giver of life and light of time, is pofited in the watery fign Cancer,
difpofed of by the Moon, in the watery fign Pifces, and the Moon by
Jupiter in the watery fign Scorpio ; and the whole of their influences are
transferred to the fiery planet Mars, in his afcendant. From thefe cir-
cumftances it became obvious to me that the youth was no longer in ex-
iftence, that his death happened upon the water, by means of fome fatal
warlike inftrument, and in fome defperate engagement with an open
enemy.


The querent then afked me if I could give her any fatisfactory account
how long ago this happened. I took down the degrees and minutes of
the two principal fignificators, viz. the Sun and Mars, and fubtracted
the one from the other, which gave four degrees five minutes for the re-
mainder; and this being converted into time by the rules before laid
down for moveable figns, in which the above fignificators were pofited, I
informed her the accident had befallen her fon fomewhat more than a
month before the heard the news of it. Some time afterwards a fhip ar-
_ rived with an account of this engagement, which happened on the coatt
of France, and confirmed the whole of this judgment, by proving every
fact I had mentioned to have literally come to pafs.


QUESTION IV. On the Profpectt of RICHES.


A gentleman called upon me to enquire, whether any remarkable
_ change of circumftances would ever happen to him in refpect of riches,
and the time when. © Conceiving his defire to arife froma ftrong impulfe
of the mind, I took the exact time of the day, and erected the follow-
ing figure to refolve this queftion.


No. 17. | 4N The


344 AN ILLUSTRATLON


Shall the


RICH; anp WHEN?


{| Mar. 5, soh. 30m. A.M. 1781.


wn;
0 I OO OO


The lord of the afcendant, and lord of the hour, being of one nature
and triplicity, fhews the figure to be radical. And, as Gemini occupies
the cufp of the afcendant, Mercury is its lord, and the querent’s fignifi-
cator; and being pofited in the eleventh houfe, in a watery fign, and in
trine to Jupiter, lord of the feventh, who is here pofited in the fixth, is
a ftrong argument of riches by means of fervants, or of perfons ina fub-
ordinate capacity. The Moon, who is lady of the fecond, being in her
exaltation, in trine afpect to the Sun, and applying toa trine with Jupi-
ter, and a dexter trine afpect with Mercury, declares a great and fudden
flow of riches to the querent, and that unexpectedly.


_ Being much prefied to fpeak to the particular point of time when this
good fortune fhould come up, I confidered what might be the gentle-
man’s occupation; and obferving Mercury to be his fignificator, and po-
fited in a watery fign, I told him that I judged he belonged to the fea,
and had fome employment on fhip-board, in a capacity where writing or
accounts were principally concerned. ‘This he acknowledged, by faying


he was captain’s fecretary. I then obferved that his principal fignifica-
. 2 tors


OF AS TROL OG Y. 345
tors of wealth and riches were alfo pofited in watery figns, as the’ Moon
_ in Cancer in the fecond houfe, and Jupiter in Scorpio in the fixth, and
the Sun and Mercury in Pifces in the eighth, all in trine afpect of each
other, which plainly indicated thefe riches were to come by the fea ; and
as they were to be fudden, and’as it were inftantancous, I concluded they
would arife by the capture of fome rich prize, in a fouth-eaft direction
from London, which is denoted by the part of fortune being in the
twelfth houfe, and Venus, its difpofitor, in Aquaries, a fouthern fign,
in quartile afpect to the Part of Fortune; and the Part of Fortune being
oppofite to Jupiter, lord of the feventh,, the houfe of public enemies,
alfo declares the querent’s fortune fhould come that way; which is ren-
dered itill more apparent, by the Part of Fortune being in fextile to the
Moon and Mercury. When I had mentioned thefe particulars, he
frankly told me, his fhip was under failing orders, and he expected to be
called on board every hour.


Toafcertain the time. when thefe riches fhould be acquired, I parti-
cularly noticed the application of the Moon to the lord of the afcendant,
and found them nineteen degrees diftant from a partile trine afpe@. But
the Moon, being fwift in motion, with three degrees north latitude, and
Mercury having no latitude, I deducted three degrees from the Moon’s
place, which I fet down at-twelve degrees ; and then, by fubtratting twelve
degrees from twenty-eight degrees three minutes, which is Mercury’s
place, there remains fixteen degrees three minutes ; which, as the Moon
is in a moveable fign, and Mercury ina common fign, is equal to fix-
teen weeks, or thereabout ; and therefore I concluded this good fortune
would happen to him in nearly that diftance of time. And I have fince
had the fatisfaction of hearing, from the gentleman’s own mouth, that
this prediftion was litetally verified, by the capture of arich prize, with-
in the time fpecified.


QUESTION V. On the Succefs of a JOURNEY.


Being applied to bya trade{man, who was going a journey on fome
particular bufinefs, to. inform him whetherit would be profperous and
fucgefsful ; 1 took the time of the day, and projected the following fchem@
to correfpond with it. AOE


Here


346 ANY ELL Us T RAT 1QOON


@ 26.50
x D 13-50
8 7.

e 8


" Shall the
Querent’s Journey


BE
PROSPEROUS?


April 16, 6h. gom. A. M. 1784
2 dia.
§ hor,


Lat. 51? 32


Here I find four degrees fourteen minutes of Gemini upon the cufp of
the horofcope, and confequently Mercury is the querent’s fignificator,
which being pofited in the twelfth houfe, the houfe of anxiety and dif
appointment, combutft of the Sun, and difpofed of by Mars, the impli-
cator of private enemies, in the querent’s houfe of fubftance; thefe
pofitions plainly thewed the obje€t of the journey to be concerning the
adjuftment of fome accounts, or other money matters. The Moon, lady
of the third, fignifies the journey ; and the feventh houfe and its lord,
i. e. Jupiter, reprefents the place and perfon the querent is going to.


Now the Moon having lately feparated from a partile conjunétion of
fer fortunate: node and Jupiter, and applying to a quartile of Mars, and
then to a conjun¢tion of Venus, tend to prove that his journey fhould
be fafe and unimpeded ; but at the fame time denotes that the object of it
fhould not be accomplifhed, which is further confirmed by the pofition
of Mars in the fecond houfe. I informed him that he would moft pro-
bably meet with unpleafant treatment from fome lady, refpecting money


concerns, and that they fhould part in anger, which would terminate to
his


OF. yAiS4T oR 10; 1, 0 Gy Y. 347_


his prejudice ; and this I conceived from the application of the Moon to

a quartile afpect with Mars, followed by aconjunction with Venus. It

further appeared to me that his journey would be far from pleafant or

agreeable ; but that on thecontrary he would meet with great vexation,

trouble, and difappointment. This is indicated by the Moon’s unfor-

tunate node, or’ Dragon’s tail, being pofited in the-fifth, or houfe of.
pleafure and delight, at the fame time that the querent’s fignificator oc-

cupies the houfe of difappointment and trouble. Hence I perfuaded

him to poftpone his journey to a future day, becaufe, if he did go, I was

perfedtly fatished he would lofe more than he would gain, exclufive of .
being difappointed in the principal object of it. He then left me, and

went home with an undetermined mind; but has fince told’ me that his

neceflity got the better of his reafon, and therefore he went the journey

contrary to my advice, and fouhd the event, with all its contingencies,

exactly as I had predicted them. :


Some months after, he came to me again, faying he withed to take
another journey on the fame bufinefs; but, as my former predi€tion had
fo exattly correfponded with the event, he was now determined to act
implicitly by my advice, and,therefore requefted me-to erect a figure to
know whether there were better hopes of fuecefs in his prefent under-
taking than in the former. To oblige him I drew out the figure to
the exact time of propofing the queftion, and, finding the benevolent af-
pects all inthe querent’s favour, I told him he had no time to lofe; for
that, if he haftened away, fuccefs would crown his labours. He went,
met the parties at home, fettled his accounts, and returned with his
pockets full of money, and his heart full of content ; and a few days
afterwards he thanked me for my fervices. :


QUESTION VI. On Paternal INHERITANCE.


A young gentleman in the navy, who had been rather wild, and was
in confequence under the difpleafure of his parents, having been threat-
ened to be difinherited, came the inftant he received this- unfavourable
news, and enquired of me whether he fhould, or fhould not, enjoy his
father’s eftate.. To refolve his doubts, I projected the figure following.


No. 17. 4 0 The


348 A Noo OL 4S rR AAT FO N


Shall the
o QWEREN T


we Enjoy his
ye *


eee,
Il e


FATHER’s ESTATE?


* ; O&, 20, 2h. 4om. P. M. 1780.
‘0 2 dia.


The afcendant and its lord reprefent the querent, and, as Aquaries oc-
cupies the cufp thereof, Saturn is his fignificator. The father is repre-
fented by the fourth houfe, and Mercury, the lord thereof, is his fig-
nificator. The fecond houfe and its lord fignifies the querent’s fub{tance ;
and the fifth houfe.and its lord the fubftance of his father. Here we
find Mercury in conjunction with Jupiter in the eighth houfe, which
is the father’s fourth, and implies. a fubftantial fortune, particularly as
the fun is pofited in the fame houfe, with mutual reception between
the two fignificators of fubftance ;_ whereby it is evident that the fon will
inherit the father’s eftate and fortune.


The conjunction of Jupiter with Mercury, the father’s fignificator,
is alfoa ftrong argument of paternal regard on the fide of the father ;
and therefore I informed him that there appeared to me no doubt but
he would fucceed to the eftate of his anceftors, provided he acted at all
confiftent with the duty and obedience of a fon, and would ufe proper
endeavours to regain his father’s good will and forgivenefs, and aim to
be mere prudent and careful in {pending his income ; for the pofition of


Jupiter


OFTASTTROUGEG *¥i 349


Jupiter declares him to be regardlefs of money among his companions
and acquaintance, and extravagantly generous and good-natured. The
conjunction of Mars with Venus likewife fhews his defire after women,
and denotes that they will be a continual fource of misfortune and ex-
pence to him, and will help off pretty faft with his money; but’ the
pofition of the fortunate node of the Moon in his fecond houfe fuffici-
ently indicates that he will have a competent provifion during life.


QUESTION VII. On.a CHANGE of SITUATION.


A perfon had fome time been fettled in bufinefs, without meeting with
fo much encouragement as he expected ; and; an opportunity offering of
fettling in the fame lineof bufinefs in another place, he came and requeft-
ed my advice upon the matter, whether it would be moft to his advantage
to embrace the prefent offer, or to continue in his former fituation.
To fatisfy him in this particular, I erected the following figure,


Will the
QUERENT
IG AIN or LOSE


By achange of Situation?
eA May 20, 10h, 23m, ALM, 1748. f


Leo


3450 AN. JLbUUS TRATION


Leo, being upon the cufp of the afcendant, gives the Sun for the que-
rent’s fignificator ; the fourth houfe and its lord reprefent his prefent
fituation ; and the feventh houfe and its lord the place to which he has
thoughts of removing. Now the Sun, the querent’s fignificator, being
on the point of leaving a fixed. fign, and.entering upon a common fign,
clearly implies a {trong inclination in the querent to travel, or to remove
from one place to another; or rather, that he had almoft determined in
his cwn mind to change his prefent abode for the one under contem-
plation ; and, on putting the queftion to him, he frankly confeffed it.


The feventh houfe having no benevolent afpec, and.Saturn, its lord,

being pofited in the fixth, indicates affiGtion and prejudice by open
enemies, if he removed to the place intended ; and that he would fuffer
great lofs and injury thereby, if he removed. But finding Mars, lord
of the fourth, in trine afpect to the fourth, which reprefents his pre-
fent place of abode ; and Venus, lady of the tenth, the houfe of trade
and profeflion, ftrongly dignified therein, and applying to a fextile afpect
of Mars, denotes an encreafing and profperous trade to. the querent,
provided he remained in his prefent fituation ; -which for thefe reafons
I greatly prefled him todo. He took my advice, and has lately thanked
me forit, having already found an increafe of bufinefs. I told him he
need not doubt of {till greater fuccefs ; for when the effects of the fextile
afpeét of Venus and Mars hall begin to, operate, which will be about
‘the end of Odtober;.as is demonflrated by the degrees between thefe
two fignificators, at which time they will alfo be in a mutual reception,
his encreafe of trade will become more vifible’; particularly as Venus,
the principal fignificatrix of bufinefs, will then have feparated from a
conjun@ion with Mercury, and will apply toa conjunction of the Sun,
the lord of the afcendant, and-the fignificator of the querent..


QUESTION VIII. On CHILD-BEARING.


A lady having been fome time married, without having any reafon to
fuppofe herfelf pregnant, and being very defirous of children, came to
enquire whether fhe fhould ever breed. Having every reafon to believe
the queftion fincere and radical, I took down the precife time of the day,
and erected this figure to correfpond with it.


No


OF AS TROL OGY. act


ee eee De te


¢ Shall the
QUERENTYI
iAH MA VE
¢ Hal D-RVE IN?


March 3, 10h. P. M. 1783.


No pofition of the planets, perhaps, could be more favourable to the
defires of the querent, than thofe in the above {cheme. As Libra rifes
upon the afcendant, Venus is lady thereof, and fignificatrix of the que-
rent; and, being pofited in the fifth houfe, in her exaltation, having
the fruitful fign Pifces upon the cufp thereof, is one infallible proof
that the querent will have children. The Moon, which is the author of
all radical moifture, is feparating from the conjuntion of the Sun, the
author of all vital fpirit, and applies to a fextile afpect of Jupiter, a be-
nevolent and prolific planet, and from thence forms a conjunction with
Venus, the querent’s fignificator ; and then applies to her fortunate node.
From thefe confiderations I hefitated not a moment to inform the ques
rent that fhe would be the mother of a large and numerous offspring.
This is declared by the pofition of Venus in the fifth houfe, which
gives three children; and, being lady of the afcendant, in conjunction
with the Dragon’s head, or fortunate nede of the Moon, gives three


The Moon, being likewife in conjunG@ion with them, adds three


more.
more, and makes the number nine. And, as thefe configurations are
P all


No. 18. 4
a


352. AN 612.0 01S TR APE TIOIN


all pofited in the double-bodied fruitful fign Pifces, it doubles the num-
ber, and declares there fhall..be eighteen children. This judgment is
ftrengthened. by Jupiter’s fextile afpe&t with the above fignificators,
and thereby adds two more to the number; -which induced me to in-
form the lady that the would in all probability be the mother of twenty
children, } 9:


This is an extraordinaty inftance. of .the. pofition ‘of the heavens to
give fruitfulnefs and fecundity, and, what I have rately found either in.
genitures or horary figures ;\and, taretotas I would wifh the reader to
note, in order to enable him to judge of other fh dr of the like: na-
ee that, if the/lord of the:afcendant be in the fevénth houfe, ar. thé lord
of the fifth isthe firft, or the lord of the firft in the*fifth ; or, if theford
oftthe fifth\bein: the feventh,. or the lord of the féventh in the fifth or
the Moon, pofited with ther, or good planets in the afcendant, of ‘with
the lord of the fifth, or fituated in any of the anglegs there is in nbie of
thefe inftances any lane Of doubt but that the lady}ayit! conceive. ‘But,
when none of thefe teftimonies ‘Concnt and bar igns or evil gianets
occupy the above- mentiofied places-of the figure, fhe fiver Has, no Hever

will conceiye. When good and evil planets are proshifcuoufly dined
together, fhe may perhaps conceive, and have children, but they’ ‘will
not live, nog) {cazecly ever come to maturity.—But to return :—the} lady
then pretice ing’ ‘to inform’ hér, how long A thought: it-might De. tehore
fhe fhould ; conceive: with-berfirft-chitd: “Te~fatisfy-her-on—this) thead,
I referred & ‘the figure;-and- obferved the Moon-within-tacaepeees afty-
one minutes of .a partile conjunction with Venus, the querent’s figni- |
ficatrix; and, the Moon being in a common fign, I computed the time
‘to be at ‘fix weeks-and two days, and, defiring her to take notice of the
time, had no, doubt but, #5 would foon. after have reafon to believe
herfelf lo RISBRARE:


It is not lefs Baer le than true, iene exaétly as I had predicted the
event turned out; for the lady, fome months after, very politely called
to thank. me for tie information I had. given her, and declared her con-
ception to chave taken, place.as near as, pofible from. the time I had men+
tioned... During this conyerfation, fhe defired me to inform her ‘whe-
ther fhe was breeding with a boy or a girl; and, finding her ferious in
the demand, I folved it by the following Misi ae


o Te


Oi ;


iP. 7 - ” é Ae tre “ : ' eb esd dd t fr


SHE Iori < Here


QUERENT|
Hoe Jae PREGNANT WITH A
GIRL on BOY?B


% July 5) ghe om. P.M, 1783.8


Here the firft thing to be confidered is the lord of the afcendant,.
which fignifies the n other; and the lord of the fifth,’ which reprefents.
the child; ‘together with the afpetis of the planets to the above fignifi-
cators, and the angles of the figure; and, whether mafculine-or femi-
nine; and fo judge by the greater, teftimonies. In the above figure the:


angles are feminine; and. the Moon, which: isa feminine planet, is


pofited in a feminine fign, feparating from a fextile afpect with the Sun
in a fign of the fame nature, and applying. to an oppofition ‘with Mars,


lord of the afcendant and fifth, in a feminine fign alfo, at the fame-time: |


that the is forming a platic trine with Jupiter, who is alfo pofited in a
feminine fign ; fo that we have five teftimonies that the lady was pregnant
with agirl. And therefore, as there are but three teftimonies in favouf of
a boy, viz. the fextile of Jupiter to Mars, which is mafculine, the figa
upon the cufp of the fifth houfe, which is alfo mafculine, and the lord
of the fifth houfe, which is the fame, I informed the lady fhe might reft
perfectly affured of having a girl; and fo the event. proved; for inca

2 M thefe


e


354 AN ILLUSTRATION


thefe rules have never been known to fail in determining queftions of
this nature.


But, for a more general mode of afcertaining whether a lady be preg-
nant with a boy or girl, ‘take particular notice of the afcendant and its
lord, and of the fifth houfe and its lord; and note whether the figns
upon their cufps be either Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius, or
Aquaries, for thefe figns always import a male; but, the other fix give
afemale. If the lord of the afcendant be in a mafculine fign, and the
lord of the fifth in a feminine, then have recourfe to the Moon, and, if
fhe applies to a planet in a mafculine fign, fhe gives a boy; but, if a fe-
minine, a girl. ~Always remember that the mafculine planets are Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, and the Sun; and the feminine, Venus and the Moon.
*. Mercury, as he happens to be pofited either with a mafculine or feminine
planet, inclines accordingly ; but, when he is oriental of the Sun, he is
reputed mafculine; and, when occidental, feminine.


The querent will fometimes afk how long fhe hath conceived. To
refolve this, have regard to the Moon, the lord of the fifth, and the lord
of the hour, and note which is neareft from the feparation of any planet,
and from what afpect this feparation was; if froma trine afpedt, the is
in the third or fitth month of her conception; if from a fextile, fhe is
either two or fix months gone; if the feparation was from a quartile,
fhe is in her fourth month; if from an oppofition, fhe hath conceived
feven months; but, if from a conjunction, her conception has been only
one month.


QUESTION IX. On taking SERVANTS.


. A merchant of my acquaintance having lately an occafion for an up-
per clerk, to fuperintend a bufinefs of confiderable truft and impor-
tance ; and, being recommended to a perfon for this undertaking, of
whofe ability and induftry he was fomewhat in doubt, called to afk my
advice and opinion on the matter, whether he was likely to anfwer his
purpofe or not. | |


~


The


OP AS TROL OG Y: 355


Shall the


w° £ 4
‘ QUERENT Bie |
Val
% "

“9 ms

. 7 & f <)
Ate db dd dd 4h ed \
%

2 tee vy -& 2

ae erik ka af
° 5 Ko y

?Wh17.49R *”


= S = = = = - FA


rs


7


Zz


4


The firt houfe reprefents the querent, and the fixth the quefited:
Venus, who is the querent’s fignificator, is fituated in her own terms;
and Mars, who is fignificator of the fervant, is fituated in her own term of
Jupiter, accompanied with the part of fortune, in the eleventh houfe,
which is the houfe of confidence and truft, and of friends and friendthip ;
and is anjitrefragable argument of mutual concord and good faith. Mars
is alfo lord of the querent’s fecond, as well as of the fervant’s fixth, and
denotes that great advantages fhall accrue to the mafter by the fervant’s
means ; Saturn, in the third houfe, isin partile afpect to Mars, and denotes
that the dealings which maybe conducted by the fervant fhall be very
beneficial, though attended with great labour and difficulty, as is evi-
dently:demonftrated. by Saturn’s pofition in the fign of Capricorn. The
oppofition of the Sun and Jupiter in a watery fign indicates that fome
little inconveniencies may arife by the fervant’s drinking rather too freely ;
but, as the Dragon’s head, or fortunate node of the Moon, is pofited
in the fourth houfe, which fignifies the end or termination of the bufi-
pefs, it is felf-evident that all matters entrufted to the care and manage-

No. 18. 4 Q_ ment


356 AN 2hLUWSsTR A THO N


ment of this fervant will terminate to the mafter’s fatisfaGtion and ad-
vantage. 1 therefore advifed him by no means tothefitate in taking him.
into his fervice. by bain ese |


QUESTION X. On COURTSHIP and MARRIAGE.


A young lady having for fome time received the addrefles of a gentle-
man of fortune, during which a variety of circumftances had occurred
to put off the much-wifhed-for day of confummating their nuptials ; and
being alfo in doubt whether her lover had not fome attachment to an-
other lady, who fhared in his affections, and fought for his company,
fhe was induced to come to me for my advice and opinion, whether the
above gentleman was really finceredn his profeffions to her, and whether
their marriage fhould ever -be confummated, and when? Finding her
perfectly fincere and earneft in her wifhes, and the queftion truly radi-
cal, I gave her my judgment as follows :


Shall the
QUERENT
MARRY


THE
Gentleman fhe loves?


Jan. 1, 6h. 17m. P. M. 1781+


Ia


OF AS TROLOG Y, 357


dn this figure the Sun is fignificator of the lady; and Saturn, lord of
the feventh houfe, is fignificator of the gentleman, It mutt alfo be ob-
ferved that in this, and in all queftions relative to matrimony, Mars and
the Sun are the natural fignificators of a woman’s marriage ; and Venus
and the Moon are thofe of aman’s. Now Saturn, the gentleman’s figni-
ficator, is remarkably well pofited in the fifth houfe, and has Venus.
within his orb, applying to him by conjunction.; which is a very pow-
erful indication that his affeGtions are fincere and honourable, and that
his mind is fully bent to the marriage-ftate, The Sun likewife, being
in a fextile afpect with Mars, the lady's fignificator of marriage, plainly
fhews her inclination to matrimony to be ftrongly fixed, and her affec-
tions perfectly fincere,


The. next thing to be confidered, is, whether there be any fruftration,
or impediting afpett between thefe fignificators; and, I find the Moon
and Venus, the gentleman’s fignificators of marriage, are applying toa
quartile afpe& with each other. ‘This is an evident proof that the
marriage is prolonged by the interference of fome other woman of this
gentleman’s intimate acquaintance, becaufe the afpect is made in a femi-
nine fign; .but as the Moon, in feparating from Venus, applies to a per-
fe&t trine with Mars, the querent’s principal fignificator of marriage,
and alfo to a fextile of the Sun, ‘her natural fignificator in the figure, it
totally removes the evil effects of the malefic afpe@t, and leaves the path
free and unobftructed to the gates of Hymen. This opinion is greatly
ftrengthened by confidering the mode in which their fignificators are
feverally difpofed. Saturn difpofes of the Sun, who is pofited in the
term of Venus ; and Venus, Saturn, and the Moon, are all difpofed of
by the benevolent planet Jupiter, who is himfelf difpofed of by Mars,
the principal fignificator of this lady’s marriage, and who thus triumphs
over every obftacle to the celebration of their nuptials. I therefore could


+ not hefitate in declaring to the lady, in the fulleft and moft fatisfa€tory


terms, that the gentleman who courted her had a fincere and tender regard
for her; and that, though fome circumftances might have happened ra-
ther unfavourable to her wifhes, yet fhe might reft perfectly affured that
he was the man allotted to be her hufband..


Apparently well fatisfied with thefe declarations, the proceeded to en-
quire in what length of time this defirable circumftance might come to
pafs. To gratify her wifhes in this particular, I referred again to the
figure where the Moon, the gentleman’s principal fignificator of mar-
' riage, wants upwards of eleven degrees of forming a perfect fextile ape
, 1 wit


358 AN ILLUSTRATION


with the Sun, the lord of the afcendant, and the fame to Mars, her figni-
ficator of marriage; and therefore, by converting the degrees into time
by the rule heretofore given, I fixed her!marriage’at about the ‘end of
three months, affuring her it would not exceed that time.’ The event
has fully proved the truth of the predi€tion; the lady and gentleman have
both done me the honour of a call fince the celebration of ‘their nuptials,
and I found they were married precifely at the time I had predicted; I
have likewife the additional pleafure to find, that my affurances to the
lady were productive of frefh efteem and clofer attachment to the» man"
of her heart, and that they now live a pattern of conjugal felicity.


QUESTION XI. On WAR and BATTLE.


During the trial of a certain noble Commander in Chief, at the Go-
vernor’s houfe in Portfmouth, a company of gentlemen one day called
upon me, and requefted I would take down the pofitions of the planets
at the time that much-talked-of action commenced, and give them my
judgment upon it, according to the rules of planetary influence. Wil-
ling to oblige them in a matter which I conceived could be of no pre-
judice to any party, fince no advantage could be taken from it;. and alfo
deeming it a fit fubject whereby to manifeft the fublimity and excellence
of this art, I hefitated not to promife them every information in my
power. For this purpofe I erected my figure, not to the time this
queftion was propounded, for, it related to an event that had long been
pafled by, and not to any matter that was hereafter expected to happen;
and therefore I projected the {cheme to correfpond with the exact time
when this extraordinary ation commenced, and at. which moment the
heavenly bodies were under the remarkable configurations delineated in
the following fcheme: : :


re


The


0. Fy A SATARGOUL, OFG). Y. 359


Engagement at Sea.


Which fhall have


Vi LeC+1l OR Yas
: July 27, rth. 15m. A, M. 1778


Uthant, Lat. 49.


The afcendant, the Moon, and Venus, reprefent the Britith fleet;
Mars and Aries denote that of the enemy. ‘The firft thing to be con-
fidered is the afpect thefe two fignificators bear to one another, which is
a partile fextile, a well-known indication of imperfect love ; and, as it
fhews that Mars and Venus have not in themfelves an inveterate hatred,
fo itimports that the two commanders in chief did not behold each other
in an afpect of perfect and direful malignancy and wrath. Venus, lady
of the afcendant, is pofited with Jupiter in his fall, a benevolent planet
and a lover of peace; and, as he is in this figure lord of the third houfe,
and within fifty degrees of the afcendant, it indicates that both com-
manders have a defire to promote peace, by acting principally upon the
defenfive, and by guarding and protecting their refpective coafts, without


a defire of any clofe or decifive action, or of venturing to any great dif-
tance from home.


The cool, cautious, deliberate, planet Saturn, is fituated in the firft


houfe, and indicates not fo much a defire for hot and precipitate action,
No, 18. 4R . as


360 A. N.Y POLL BOOS AT URC ANT FON.


as for felf-prefervation, or the.protection of national wealth; and this is
plainly exemplified inthe Britith Admiral’s watchfulnefs ‘and care in
covering and. protecting the homewardabound India: fleet, as well as in
the French Admiral’s retiring after he found his views upon that rich
and unguatded flota were completely fruftrated. The pofition of Mer-
cury, being combuft of the Sun, and difpofer of the Moon, Venus, and
Jupiter, ahd lord alfo of the twelfth houfe, the houfe of private enmity
and maticé, indicates private rancour and enmity in a fubordinate com-
mander; and, as Mercury is pofited between the two fignificators, Venus
and Mars,: evilly dignified, and combuft, fo he denotés the perfon repre-
fented by bim will infallibly be governed by malevolent principles, and
ufe his influence to retard the object of the bufinefs in hand.» The truth
of this indi€ation has, I'think, been too well €ftablithed to need any
further iluftration from ‘me.


The enemy, as I havethefore obferved, is reptefented by Mars, who
is pofited in the tenth.howfe, ‘the houfe of honour,’ and in the fign of
his triplicity, but in the-dfgaities of Jupiter; and this fhews that the
enemy would as muchyas poflible avoid clofe aétion, but would take the
advantage to fhift from fighting ; and Mars, being in his fall,, deprives
the enemy of their honour, and clearly proves, that, if a clofe and well-
connected action had been kept up, and continued without ceafing, a
decifive victofy would have followed on the part of the Englifh, becaufe
Jupiter is tn conjunction with-Venus and the Moon, which difpofes of
Mars; but,-as Mars-has the watery triplicity afligned him, he thews the
enemy fhould take the advantage of that element to run away.


We find alfo, in the above figure, a quartile afpect of Saturn and Mer-
cury, a configuration which is always known to produce tempeftuous
weather and {trong winds; and this we find was the cafe off Ufhant

at the time of the above engagement. ‘The pofition of Mercury-in the
 firft, where Saturn is fituated, plainly indicates thefe winds to be highly
conducive to the fafety of the enemy, but of dangerous tendency to the
Britifh fieet, in cafe of a purfuit.


After duly weighing the natural influences and effetts of the configu-
rations in this figure, which are the true and genuine {tate of the hea-
vens at. the time of the engagement, I hefitated not to declare, that both
commanders had.a ftronger inclination to preferve peace than to break it,
and that a clofe connected and decifive action was not to happen, owing
to Satarn being in the afcendant on the fide of the Englith, with~too
much thought and deliberation; and to Mars being in his fall in the

: 2 : dignities


iB SAAS ROM ONG’. 361


dignities of Jupiter, on the part of the French, which declares. their
watchfulnefs to run away. This judgement is likewife further confirmed
by the two principal fignificators not forming a warlike afpect, but
operating by one rather inclined to tranquillity and peace.


Whoever contemplates the preceding figure, and defines its afpedts by
the rules laid down in this or in any other Treatife on Aftrology, will
find no point ftrained to effect the tendency of the foregoing judgment.
The meaning put upon them here is uniform and natural, and no more
than what they are and have been allowed to bear from the earlieft ages,
and fuch as every profeflor of the art muft allow to be confonant to the
ftricteft rules of the fcience. If this be admitted, I think it muft ftrike
the fenfe of every intelligent man, that this pofition of the planets, on
the famous 27th of July, could not have been configurated to defcribe
the particular turns of that action, by mere accident, nor without hav-
ing fome influence upon it.—A {trong proof of planetary operation, as
well as of the moral certainty of preditling by their means.


QUBSTION. XII, Oa THEFT,


Being once on a journey through the Weft of England, and particular
bufinefs detaining me ina {mall town where fome of my friends lived,
an atrocious robbery and burglary was, during that time, committed ia
the neighbourhood, in the houfe of a poor old blind decrepid man, who,
by hard labour and rigid economy in his younger days, had faved up
‘three hundred pounds to-divide among his children at his death. This
money was kept in a {trong cheft by the bedfide where the poor old man
lay; when fome villains, watching an opportunity in the abfence of his
family, made.their way into his apartment, broke open the cheft, and
carried off all the money undifcovered. My friends hereupon made it
- known that I had fome knowledge of the occult fciences, and, if applied
to, might poflibly give fome account how the money went; in confe-
quence of which I received a letter the next day from the poor man’s
eldeft fon, earneftly entreating my affiftance in making a difcovery of
the robbers, and to endeavour to get reftored to his father fome part at
leaft of the little all he had been years labouring to fave up for his chil-
dren. Moved with compaffion:at fo cruel a circumiftance, I determined
to do my utmoft to ferve this diftrefled family, and for this purpofe
projected the following figure.

se


The


362 AN vyULA Pet R AM HOON


March 21, 7h. 30m, A.M. 1783.


Sub. Jat. ixex) if


The fign Taurus, occupying the afcendant, gives Venus for the querent’s
fignificatrix ; the Moon, lady of the fourth, reprefents the querent’s
father, and the feventh and tenth houfes are to denote the thieves ; and,
the reafon I allot two houfes for them is, becaufe the feventh houfe of
the figure is the natural fignificator of thieves to the querent, who was
heir to part of the money, and had been promifed it by his father, and

_confequently bore a fhare in the lofs; and the tenth houfe being the
father’s feventh, reckoned from his firft, or fourth in the figure, natu-
rally denotes thieves to him; and therefore, as the fon is querent, and
the father had the principal fhare in the lofs, both thefe houfes muft be
well confidered, before any account can be given of the thieves.


Here I find Jupiter, lord of the eighth and twelfth houfe, pofited in
the tenth, out of all his effential dignities, in*his fall, and confignifica-
tor with Mars; wherefore, I declared two perfons to be concerned in the
robbery, and defcribed them according to thefe fignificators, viz. a mid-
dle ftature, with dark brown hair, pale complexion, of a furly difpo-

; fition,


QF PA;SMRIOWL-O'G Y. 77%: 363


fition, one fomewhat fhorter than the other; and appeared to be fons of
a perfon who had worked with or for the querent’s father.


My next bufinefs was to confider what was done with the money; and,
as there are two fignificators in refpect of the queftion, namely, the fe-
venth houfes and their lords, fo there muft be two to reprefent the dif- ~
pofal of the money; and thefe are the fourth houfes and their lords,
Accordingly I find the Moon, who governs the querent’s fourth houfe,
pofited in Scorpio, a watery fign; and, being alfo underneath the fign, I
declared fome part of the money was buried underneath a rock or ftone
over which the tide flowed, and near the habitation of the thieves, ©
which I judged was nat far diftant from the fea-fide. Again, I find Mars
lord of the father’s fourth, pofited in Capricorn, a beaftial fign, in con-
junction with Jupiter, who governs corn, and with Saturn, who rules
the fruits of the earth; and, as Mars is the lighter planet, and applies to
Jupiter, and as Jupiter is in the term of Saturn, I concluded that an-
other part of the money had been paid away to fome hufbandman or far-
mer, who refided about the diftance of eight miles fouth from the place
where the robbers lived. .


When thefe circumftances were all thrown together, and each duly
confidered, fufpicion fell upon two perfons, who were brothers, in every
refpect anfwering to this defcription, and who, upon enquiry, they found
had paid one hundred pounds to’a farmer three days after the robbery
was committed, who lived in the fituation above defcribed, and who
had for. fome time threatened the parties with an action, on account of
their backwardnefs or inability to pay him.. Upon this I was afked if
the parties were taken up, whether any of the money would be recovered ?
To anfwer this, I referred again to the figure, and noted the fituation
of the two luminaries, both of which are affli@ed. The light of time
_ is pofited in the twelfth houfe, in conjunétion with Venus, lady of the
afcendant, and fignificatrix of the querent, which affords one ftrong ar-
gument againft recovering the money. The Moon is alfo greatly afflict-
ed in the fixth houfe, and in no afpect either to the Sun or to the
afcendant, but on the contrary is applying to a trine of Mercury, lord
of the fixth, and this to a fextile of Saturn, lord of the father’s fixth,
and alfo the fignificators of the two thieves; all which pofitions give the .
ftrongeft proofs of an utter impoflibility of recovering any part of the
property, particularly as both the fignificators of the querent and his
father are greatly aflicted by accidental pofitions, as well as by the
part of fortune being in conjunction with the Moon’s unfortunate

No. 18. 45 node,


364 ANSP LOS T RAGE Bg N


node, or Dragon’s tail; wherefore I judged the money loft beyond
recovery. : |


Many circumftances, however, afterwards concurring, to confirm this
fufpicion of the two brothers above alluded to, they were in confequence
taken into cuftody, and examined before feveral of the county magif-
trates, who found fufficient grounds to commit them for trial at the
next affizes. They were in confequence arraigned; but, though fuf-
picion fell heavy upon them, yet, as no pofitive evidence could be
adduced to prove they were caught in the faét, or to identify the money,
they were both acquitted, notwithftanding the long train of well-con-
nected and concurring circumftances, which came out upon the trial,
left them guilty in the eyes of all the court.


QUESTION...XII, On LEGACIES.


A perfon of a free and convivial humour called upon me to enquire
concerning a legacy which his wife’s mother had often promifed to
leave them at her death; but, having had fome high words, in confe-
quence of his loofe way of living, fhe had lately refcinded her former
promifes; and, as this lay upon his mind, and had vexed him for fome
days paft, he was now defirous to know, by the celeftial intelligencers,
whether this legacy would be left him or not. Finding the man fin-
cere in his wifhes, and, deeming the queftion perfectly radacal, I pro-
eceded to give my judgment upon the matter as follows.


Mercury |


OF ASTROLOGY, 365


\ ii F
6 -

Mae a |

w #6 P 42
g ° » \
f
fee estes At
Shall the ge ~ a
rQUERENT % \
3 2 :

fe) :
receive the BR Be 2 j
| Legacy PromiseD? | a ms)
April 6, 4h, P. M. 1782. ht |
%y
Lad ¥, ne b ate
ay ye % % eS \
w v ee Ns. s ;

7 (ed AS bad > .
° » ast 25 f

%


Mercury is here lord of the afcendant, and fignificator of the querent ;
he is fituated in the feventh houfe, and difpofes of Jupiter, the fignifi-
cator of his wife, who is pofited in the fourth, his own houfe, ftrong
and powerful, and in trine afpect to the Sun. The Moon’s fortunate
node likewife falls in the. wife’s fecond houfe, in fextile afpect to the parg,
of fortune in the querent’s fecond ; all which are very powerful tetti-
monies that the querent’s wife would not lofe her inheritance. . This


pinion is alfo ftrengthened by the pofition of the benevolent planet


Jupiter, who is lord of Pifces, and the wife’s fignificator, and lord alfo’
of the wife’s tenth, and fignificator of the mother, viz. the fourth houfe
in the figure; which evidently fhews a mutual love and attachment be-
tween the mother and daughter, that nothing but death can efface, and
to which inheritance will follow.


The querent’s fignificator being in his fall in Pifces, a watery fign,

d in conjunction with Venus, fhews him to be a man given up to
drinking and conviviality, and perhaps to other {pecies of intemperance,
oot as


06... A N.VIOLCL C6 IR AAT FO


as is denoted by the quartile of Jupiter and Mercury; and further fhews
that it has in fome meafure been the means of alienating the wife’s affec-
tions from him. And, as Mercury is difpofed of by Jupiter, in a femi-
nine fign, and pofited with a feminine planet, and being alfo controver-
tible in his nature to the quality of any planet he is in configuration
with, plainly manifefts the querent to be of.an effeminate mind and {pi-
rit, content to give up all rule and government to his wife, fo he has
bat the enjoyment of his friend and his bottle.


The fituation of the Sun and the Dragon’s head in the wife’s fecond,
or querent’s eighth, denotes that he had heretofore received a legacy by
the death of his wife’s father; which being mentioned, he readily con-
fefled that it was fo. . This legacy he appears to have fquandered away,
as is manifefted by the part of fortune being in conjunction with the
Dragon’s tail in the fecond houfe, And now,, taking all the foregoing
afpeéts together, and noting that the Sun, the natural fignificators of
fathers, is pofited in his exaltation, with the Moon’s fortunate node,
and free from all fruftration or affliction; and notwithftanding the que-
rent had fquandered away the firft legacy by the father, and had lately
fallen out with the mother; yet I hefitated not to declare, that, accord-
ing to the beft of my judgment, he would be certain of the legacy by
the mother alfo; not out of any regard or love to him, but purely
through her affection and anxioufnefs for the welfare and happinefs of
her daughter. .


QUESTION XIV. On the Succefs of a FLEET.


At the time Admiral Rodney fet fail for the Weft Indies, with a
grand {quadron under his command, and a convoy of above three hundred
fail of merchant fhips, exhibiting at once the pride, the glory, and the
riches, of this great commercial empire, I was applied to by fome naval
gentlemen, who particularly requefted me to give them my opinion on
the fuccefs of the Admiral’s expedition, and the fafety of his fleet.
Many opinions had for fome time been in circulation relative to this
equipment, and many of the firft-rate connoiffeurs in politics had un-
dertaken to declare it too weak for the object of its deftination, and that
it would fall an eafy prey to the enemy ; I was therefore the more rea-


dily prevailed upon to projett a figure for this queftion, upon which I
delivered my judgment as follows.


I fy . The


*4@


© Pk FRO L.o-€ Yi 367


Weft-India Fleet,
UNDER ‘
AADMIRAL RODNEY,

Prive SUCCESSFUL?


December 28) 1779»


The watery fign Aquaries, falling upon the afcendant, gives Saturn for


the Admiral’s fignificator; and, as Pifces alfo falls intercepted in the
firtt houfe, Jupiter, lord thereof, muft have confignification of all thofe
that accompanied him. The ninth houfe reprefents the voyage, the firft
houfe or afcendant the port or {tation from whence they fet fail, the fe-
venth houfe the quarter to which they are deftined, and the lord thereof
denotes the obftacles or enemies they fhall meet with ; the fourth houfe
reprefents the completion of the voyage, and the aecomplifhment and
termination of the object or bufinefs of the expedition; the whole of
which are to be feparately and diftinctly contemplated. .


Saturn, the fignificator of the commander in chief, is pofited in the
medium coeli, the houfe of preferment and honour; and, being at the


fame time in Sagittarius, a fign of the fiery trigon, and contrary to his .


own nature, defcribes him to be a man of a free, generous, and noble,
fpirit, ambitious of glory and applaufe; and, having been lately in con-
junction with the Moon’s unfortunate node, and now in the very degree
of its exaltation, fhews him to have been under great anxiety and dif-

No. 18. 4 T trefs,


#&,


368 ANS PLL sor R Ath ON


trefs, in regard to his private circumftances. But this affliction appears
only as a dark cloud, which, when the ftorm is over, quickly gives way
to the all-cheering and enlivening beams of the refrefhing Sun. And
this is evinced by the Admiral’s fignificator having juft feparated from
this malignant configuration, and afterwards forming a propitious fextile
afpet in the zodiac, and a mundane trine afpect to the fecond houfe, the
houfe of profperity, fortune, and riches, aided by Mars, the lord there-
of, who is fituated in the firft houfe, and in his own triplicity.


In examining thefe fignificators, I find Saturn, who reprefents the
Admiral, is difpofed of by Jupiter, lord of the tenth houfe, the houfe of
- princes, which fhews his appointment came from the king himéfelf. °

Venus, lady of the enemy’s houfe of fubftance, as well as all the fignifi-
cators of the enemy, and part of fortune alfo, are difpofed of by Saturn,
lord of the afcendant; and Mars, the natural fignificator of war, and
lord of the Britifh Admiral’s houfe of fubftance and riches, is pofited
in the afcendant, in trine to Scorpio, his own fign, in the ninth, the
houfe of fea-voyages; and, being alfo in his own triplicity, fhews that
this voyage fhall be profperous and important.. This judgment is greatly
ftrengthened by the pofition of the propitious fixed ftar Fomahaut,
in the firft houfe; which, being of the nature of Venus and Mercury,
and of the firft magnitude, and joined with Mars in Pifces, declares
great riches,. honour, and preferment, fhould be acquired by this voy-
age, and fuch as fhould place the noble commander above the frowns
and malice of both his public and private enemies.


The fign on the feventh houfe, and the intercepted fign Virgo, thew
the deftination of the fleet; and the Sun and Mercury reprefent the
_ enemies they fhall meet with; and, as the lord of the feventh is pofited

in a fign that has more planets within its degrees than one, fo it points
out that the Admiral fhall be engaged with more fleets than one. Here
is alfo a moft remarkable reception between Venus and Mars in exalta-
tion ;- Mars being pofited in the fign of the exaltation of Venus, and
Venus in the fign of the exaltation of Mars; and, as Venus is lady of the
enemy’s houfe of fubftance, this reception declares that the Britith fleet
will capture many rich and noble prizes, and make great havock with
the fubftance or riches of the enemy. Mars being in fextile afpect with
the part of fortune, and the Sun lord of the feventh, fhews thefe prizes
fhall be taken with much fighting. And that the victory fhall declare
itfelf on the fide of the Englifh, is manifefted by Venus, fignificatrix
of the enemy’s fubftance, being difpofed of by Saturn, the lord of the
afcendant, and fignificator of the Britifh Admiral. |


After


*


OF ASTROLOGY. 369


After duly weighing the probable tendency of all thefe propitious
afpects, and reflecting that the Moon, whofe influence is confiderable,
is pofited in the dignities of Saturn; and that Jupiter and Saturn difpofe
of all the planets in the figure; and likewife that Jupiter and Saturn
are the grand fignificators of the Britifh Admiral and fleet, I boldly’ af-
firmed this expedition would prove fortunate and fuccefsful, crowning
its commanders, and all under them, with honour, glory, and riches,
and adding immortal fame to the annals of the Britifh page. This is a
fact that has accordingly happened, and fuch as comes within the cogni-
zance of every individual. |


QUESTION XV, On PLACES and PREFERMENTS.


A gentleman who had for fome time been foliciting for promotion in
the army, and having met with feveral unpleafant rebuffs, which made
him almoft defpair of fuccefs, came to afk my opinion whether, if he
perfevered in his folicitations, he fhould eventually obtain the prefer.
ment he fo much defired. I gave my judgment of this queftion from
the following figure. .


Shall the


% e i } ry i
Be BT EOR ENT Ey
ATTAIN THE : Lo
eee tage romotion defired? } ZAt
i
?
2 Lt. ; 9
F, qo
Ss 8 ay
. eG
RAAAAG OOP eS nN { '
x
2 .
& Ka oe ik as \
A Mg “f
° SS) 22 y)
NN b |
lg SZ.


* Here


aa


$70 A Ny dAL i Use TOR AST EO: Ne =


| 2 :

Here the celeftial Crab afcends upon the horofcope, and the Moon,
fignificatrix of the querent, is pofited in the fign Leo. - The tenth houfe
bears fignification of the querent’s honour and promotion; and the ele-
venth denotes his friends and patrons. The Moon, lady of the afcend-
ant, being pofited in the fecond houfe, out of all her effential dignities,
declares the querent to be in diftrefled circumftances, and that his failure
hitherto has been greatly owing to the want of.money. His patrons in.
the prefent bufinefs are defcribed by Venus, who being pofited in the
fign Pifces, in every degree of her exaltation, fhews them to be of fuf-
ficient weight and intereft to accomplifh his defires; and as Venus is,
alfo in a propitious fextile afpect with Mars, and in trine to the afcen-
dant, it indicates that his petition fhall be attended to, and his withes
gratified.

This judgment is abundantly confirmed by the following confidera-
tions. The Sun is pofited in the medium ceeli, the houfe of his ex-
altation; and the fortunate node of the Moon.is conjoined with him
in the tenth alfo, which is an irrefragible argument of honour and pre-
ferment. It is alfo to be obferved that the Sun is lord of the fecond'
houfe, and difpofes of the Moon, the querent’s fignificatrix ; and thus
fhews that his preferment fhould be in the military line. And as a
watery fign rifes upon his afcendant, and occupies the cufp of his ninth
- houfe, and as Mercury, lord of his third houfe, is pofited in his ninth,
it declares he fhall be fubject to an employment upon water; and, being
in Scorpio, a fixed fign, denotes the querent thall be fubject to a long
continuance upon the water, and at a great diftance from home. Venus
being likewife in the fame fign, in the triplicity of Mars, and Mars in
the triplicity of Venus, and in fextile afpect of each other, denotes he
fhall hereafter meet with a number of friends, and prove remarkably
fortunate in his poft. This poft is reprefented by the fituation of the
Moon in Leo, and Mars in Taurus, and the Sun in Aries, to be a com-
mand on board fhip, over foldiers or marines; and this he acknow-
ledged was what he had been foliciting for, and what I told him he
would certainly fucceed in. )


He then requefted me to afcertain the length of time in which I fup-
. pofed this command would be given him, I took notice of the degree

the Moon was in, and what applications the had made. I obferved the
had lately been in trine afpect of the Sun, which ftrongly prompted the
querent to pufh forward for promotion; and her next application, being
to a trine with her fortunate node, declares this promotion fhall be
very thortly attained, though with difficulty, becaufe the is at the fame


1 time -


or ye


OF AS TROL 0 Gy, 371


timé forming a quartile afpect with Mars, which fhews that fome per-
fon of confequence is endeavouring to exclude him, in order to make
way for another perfon. I further informed him that the men under
his command would prove faithful and obedient; and that he himfelf
would be fortunate and fuccefsful in executing his commiflion, and gain
confiderable honour and applaufe. The truth of this prediGtion was
very foon after exemplified in the rapid progrefs the querent made in
all the acquirements of honour and profperity, and I have frequently had
the pleafure of receiving his thanks for the information I gave him on
the above occafion.


QUESTION XVI. On IMPRISONMENT.


A perfon of credit, during the late war, being taken up on fufpicion
of giving private information to the enemy, or of aiding and aflifting én
fuch a tfaiterous correfpondence, was committed for trial at the enfuing
affizes ; and his wife, under all the horrors of diftrefs and affliction, came
to enquire of me how the matter would terminate, whether her hufband
would fuffer death, or be acquitted of the crime laid to his chargé.—
The anxiety of the poor woman was a fufficient proof of the fincerity
of her defire; and therefore, having taken down the precife time of the
day, I erected the following fcheme to refolve the queftion :


Shall the


QUERENT’s |
HUSBAND


be found


GuiLTy, or RELEASED?


Sagittarius


372 A Net DO St TOR ACT T.OON

. Sagittarius ‘being upon the cufp of the-afcendant, Jupiter is lord:
thereof, and the querent’s fignificator. Gemini defcends: on the cufp
of the feventh, and gives Mercury as fignificator of the hufband; the
twelfth houfe fignifies the prifon, and the prifoner’s. profecutors ;° the
tenth houfe and its lord denotes the judge; and the fourth houfe de-
clares the trial, or termination of the matter.


Now Mercury, the lord of the feventh houfe, and fignificator of the
hufband, is pofited in the twelfth, the houfe of imprifonment, and is
difpofed of by Mars, the fignificator of private enemies, who is pofited
in the tenth houfe or medium cceli, which here fignifies the houfe of
juftice and mercy. The afcendant denotes the. prifoner’s open enemies
or accufers ; and, as Jupiter is pofited therein, {trong, and in conjunction
of. Saturn, lord of the fecond, it fhews his profecutors are perfons of
rank and power, who are poflefled of every ability to carry on the profe-
cution againft him. The Moon, lady of the houfe of death, being in the
fourth, in trine to the afcendant, fhews_that the accufation. or indiét-
ment is of fuch a nature as threatens the prifoner’s life. But,-finding the
Dragon’s tail in the tenth, and the part of fortune in the fixth, difpofed
of by Venus, and at the fame time in oppofition to Mercury, the pri-
foner’s fignificator, I was clearly of opinion that the diftribution of
money among thofe whe appeared to be his friends, would greatly
tend to fave his life, and facilitate his enlargement.


Finding the Moon, lady of the eighth houfe of the figure, pofited
in the fourth, and going to.an oppofition of Mars and Venus, I hereby
imagined the prifoner would run a great hazard of his life in attempting
to efcape out of prifon, by being fired upon; and this I found after-
wards happened, though no further mifchief enfued. I next confidered
the application of the Moon, after her feparation.from the above afpects,.
and I find her going to a propitious trine afpect with Jupiter, the figni-
ficator of his enemiés, and from thence applying to an oppofition of the
Sun, and to a fign of Saturn; and as Saturn is lord of his eighth
houfe, and the Moon lady of his fecond, I judged that he fhould efcape
the hand of juftice, by being admitted an evidence, which in the courfe
of a few months afterwards really happened, to the prefervation of his
own life, and to the deftru@ion of that of his accomplice. ~


Thus have I given fufficient examples of the verity and utility of
-Aftrology in the queftionary way; which, though not of fo much im- °
portance, nor always attended with fo much certainty, as the genethlia-
cal, yet it is not-to be wholly difregarded, fince in many cafes, as we have


abundantly


COUR OA YS DT ROL. OvGt YS: & 973
abundantly fhewn, it may fafely be relied on. I. thall therefore difmifs
this part of the fcience, with once more obferving, that horary queftions
fhould never be made ufe of when the querent’s nativity can be had;
as fo much more certainty depends upon the one than upon the other,
and of courfe affords greater fatisfaction to every perfon who bends his
mind to the knowledge of futurity.

a


' Before I enter upon the management of nativities, it will not be im-
proper, in this place, to give the rules, by which the reader may be
enabled to afcertain the kind of perfon each planet reprefents, when fig-
nificator, in all or any of the twelve figns of the zodiac. By the help of:
thefe, it is eafy to determine what kind of perfon the new-born babe
will be, when it arrives to years of maturity; and we can alfo, by the
fame means, as truly defcribe the ftature, complexion, make, and dif-
pofition, of a perfon we never faw, provided the true time of birth be
previoufly known. Thefe rules are therefore abfolutely neceffary to be
well underftood by every perfon who is defirous of calculating a nativity. -


PERSONS defcribed by SATURN in the TWELVE SIGNS of:
F the ZODIAC... .-,


_ SatTuRwin the fign dries reprefents a perfon of a frefh ruddy com--
plexion, fpare, and large boned, full face, deep voice, dark hair, .with
little beard ; addicted to felf-commendation and praife; and given to
boafting of valour and courageous undertakings, when there is. but little
caufe; being generally a contentious quarrelfome bravado, and confe-
quently very ill-natured,


Saturn in Taurus defcribes an uncomely perfon, of a heavy; lumpith,
aukward, appearance, with dark hair, rough fkin, middling flature, of
a rugged uneven difpofition, inclinable to vicious and fordid actions,
unlefs the fortunate ftars, by their propitious rays, modify and temper
this otherwife baneful influence.


Saturn in Gemini reprefents a perfon.of a moderately tall ftature, of a
dark fanguine complexion, oval vifage, and well proportioned body, the
hair either dark brown or black. The native is generally very ingenious,
but unfortunate in moft of his undertakings; his difpofition is naturally .
perverfe, felfifh, and crafty, and therefore warily to be dealt with.


ee: ; . 7 j ‘ : A ‘ c ;
Saturn in Cancer denotes one of a weak and infirm conftitution of


body, of a thin middling ftature, rather ill-proportioned, and fometimes
I crooked ;.


>


374 AN ILLUSTRATION


‘crooked ; a pale’ meagre countenance, fad brown hair, and languid eyes;


\


of a morofe and jealous difpofition, leaning to vicious inclinations, and
very deceitful in his dealings.


Saturn in Leo gives a perfon of a moderate large ftature, broad round
fhoulders, wide cheft, light brown hair, of a furly auftere afpe€t, ra-
ther, lean, and hollow-eyed, large bones and mufcles, and bends or
ftoops forward in going. The qualities of the mind and difpofition are
tolerably good, and carry an*appearance of noblenefs and generofity ;
though fomewhat paffionate, and eager of revenge, but neither courage-
ous nor valiant when put to the teft.


Saturn in Virgo reprefents a perfon of a tall {pare body, fwarthy com-
plexion, dark brown or black hair, and much of it; along vifage, and
folid countenance, but generally an unfortunate perfon, much inclined
to melancholy, and retaining anger long; a projeCtor of many curio- |
fities to little purpofe; ftudious, fubtle, and referved; and, unlefs fome
other configurations of the planets contradict, is too much addicted to
pilfering and indirect dealing.


Saturn in Libra defcribes a perfon above the middle ftature, tolerably


» shandfome, brown hair, an oval face, a large nofe and forehead, a mode-


rately clear complexion, yet not beautiful; not willing to entertain low
or mean thoughts of themfelves, fomewhat prodigal in expences, and
confequently rarely leave any confiderable eftate behind them for their


children to enjoy; they are eafily moved to controverfy and debate, and
often come off vittors.


Saturn in Scorpio reprefents a perfon of a middling ftature, a {quare
thick well-fet body, broad fhoulders, black or dark hair, and ufually
fhort and thick ; very quarrelfome and contentious, delights to create


mifchief, and to promote violent and dangerous actions, though to his
own detriment and infelicity.


Saturn in Sagittarius ufually gives a full ftature, brown hair, the
body very conformable and decent, the complexion not much amifs; a
difpofition fufficiently obliging, not courteous, but moderately frugal,


_ garely profufe, but fomewhat choleric, and by no means able to bear


an affront, yet willing to do good to all, and fometimes too apt to com-
ply, and rafhly make fuch promifes as cannot conveniently be performed
without prejudice; areal lover of his friend, and merciful.to an enemy.


Saturn


¥


OF ASTROLOGY, B75


Saturn in Capricorn perfonates a lean raw-boned perfon, with dark
brown or black hair, a rough fkin, a middle ftature, rather inclined to
brevity. than tallnefs, an ob{cure fallow complexion, little eyes, long
vifage, and an ill pofture in going ; for the qualities of the mind, Sa-
turn fo pofited, and fignificator, ufually gives a difcontented, melan-
choly, peevifh, perfon, covetous of his goods of this life, not addicted
to ufe many words, a lover of the earth, and all things of profit pro-
duced from thence, fearful, fubject to retain anger, and rarely wants a
reafonable portion of gravity.


Saturn in Aguaries reprefents a full ftature, a large head and face, ‘the
body rather inclinable to corpulency: than otherwife, dark brown hair,
and a clear complexion, a fober graceful deportment, very affable and
courteous, of an excellent fearching fancy, and generally avery happy
proficient in what he labours after, whether in fciences or curious arts ;
apt to conceit and think well of his own powers and abilities, and
therefore fubject_ to no ill-becoming pride ; but naturally a perfon of a
very pregnant genius, .


Saturn in Pi/ces reprefents a perfon of a middle ftature, pale conaplex.
ion, with hairtending to blacknefs, a large head, and a full eye, fome-
times the teeth diftorted, not very comely, yet active, and too much in.
clined to diflimulation, contentious, malicious, and prone to many ilf
ations, which abate as the perfon grows in years; not loquacious,
but very deliberate ; in fine, it denotes an uncertain fickle perfon in moft
things, one that is able to prefent a good outfide, but will prove in the
end fradulent and deceitful, and therefore warily to be confided in.


PERSONS reprefented by JUPITER in each of the Twetve Srens.


Jupiter in Aries defcribes a middle-ftatured perfon, of a ruddy com-
plexion, with light brown or flaxen hair, quick and piercing eyes, a
high nofe, and fometimes pimples in the face, an oval vifage, the body
rather lean than-corpulent ; but generally a perfon of a noble and free
difpofition, one that loves a good outlide, and to demean himfelf with
much generofity amongft his friends and affociates, and confequently:
very obliging and complacent. .


Jupiter in Taurus gives aperfon of a middle ftature, well fet, a {ware -
thy complexion, brown rugged. hair, fomewhat curling or frizzled, a
well-compacted. body, but not decent, the difpofition reafonably good,

No, 19. 4% Ps


376 AW FLL VST RA: TIRION


the judgment found, and a perfon of no contemptible deportment ; a
lover of the female fex, and generally good-natured, and free to fuch
objects as deferve charity and compafiion. :


Jupiter in Gemini reprefents a decent well-compofed body, with fan-
guine complexion, not very clear, a perfon above a middle ‘ftature, rather
tall than otherwife, brown hair, full becoming eyes, a graceful deport-
ment, very affable and courteous, a gentle, mild, obliging, perfon, an
admirer of the female fex, efpecially thofe of the moft refined wit and
beauty, a general lover of learning; but, if Jupiter be near violent fixed
ftars, it renders the perfon rath and unftable.in his ations, and confe-
quently inimical to himfelf, and unacceptable to others.


Jupiter in Cancer gives a perfon of a middle ftature, a pale, unwhole-
fome, fickly, complexion, flefhy, or inclinable to corpulency, dark
brown hair, an oval face, and the body moftly difproportioned ; .a bufy

loquacious perfon, too apt to intermeddle-with other men’s affairs, con-
ceited and high, has no mean thoughts of his own abilities, a great lover
of women; fortunate by water, and delights to be thereon, and yet a


perfon of very little courage or valour, unlefs his fignificator be well
beheld of Mars. ! |


Jupiter in Leo reprefents a ftrong well- proportioned body, tall of fta-
ture, light brown or yellowifh curling hair, ruddy complexion, full
eye, anda perfon fufficiently comely ; in difpofition very noble minded,
courageous, magnanimous, lofty; delighting in valiant warlike actions
and atchievements he proves a terror to his enemies, and a perfon that
{corns to bend to an adverfary, but will encounter with any danger or
hazard for the fake of. honour.


Jupiter in Virgo gives a perfon of a reafonable full ftature, brown
hair tending to blacknefs, ruddy complexion, but not fair or clear, a
well-built perfon, and one we term handfome, having a due proportion
and conformity in all the: members; in difpofition fomewhat choleric,
and ambitious of honour, inclinable to boafting, ftudious, yet covet-
ous, and through rafhnefs fubject to loffes in eftate ; in fine; not eafily
wrought upon by any perfon. |


Jupiter in Lzdra perfonates a compleat body and inviting countenance,

a moit clear complexion, a full eye, an upright ftature, rather tal] than
otherwife, not grofs but flender,.an oval face, light brown hair, fome-
tei hoy stk Bd ah seid times

ee a“ ,


OF tA SITTRAO) L' GG YU A 377
times flaxen, fubject to pimples in the face; of a very mild difpofition
and winning behaviour, a great delighter in noble exercifes and recrea-


tions, obliging to all perfons; and confequently gains much honour
and efteem. | aR


Jupiter in Scorpio reprefents a perfon of a middle ftature, a well com-
patted body, brown hair, a full flefhy face, a dull complexion; but,
in difpofition, a lofty, proud, ambitious, perfon ; one that defires and en-
deavours to bear rule over his equals, refolute, and ill-natured, cove-
tous, and guilty of too much fubtlety in all his aGions; and therefore
ought warily to be dealt with by thofe who fhall be concerned with
fuch a perfon.


Jupiter in Sagittarius gives an upright tall ftature of body, chefnut-
coloured hair, oval face, ruddy complexion, much beard, a good eye,
a perfon every way decently compofed; in difpofition very courteous
and affable, of a moft noble graceful deportment and behaviour, juft in
all his actions, and injurious to none, generally a great lover of horfes ;
and, in fine, a moft accomplifhed perfon, deferving commendation and
more than ordinary refpect from all perfons with whom he converfes and
aflociates. |


Jupiter in Capricorn gives a mean ftature of body, a pale complexion,
thin face, little head, not much beard, a {mall weakly perfon generally,
yet ingenious ; brown hair, fometimes the beard lighter of colour than
the hair of the head; in qualities and conditions not very commendable,
low-fpirited, peevith, not very active nor fortunate in the world, unlefs
fome other teftimonies affift; in fine, a very helplefs, indigent, harm-
lefs, perfon. ;


Jupiter in Aguaries perfonates a middle ftature, brown hair, indif-
ferently well fer, a clear complexion, rather a corpulent body than
otherwife, and well compacted; in difpofition chearful and affable, hurt-
ful to none, but obliging to all, delights in decent and moderate recrea-
tion, very-juft and merciful, even to thofe that are enemies; in fhort,
a very good-humoured, laborious, induftrious, perfon, rarely guilty of
any extravagance, but generally of a very commendable difpofition and
' deportment.


Jupiter in Pi/ces defcribes a perfon of a middling ftature, of a dark
complexion, fiefhy body, and light brown hair, a harmlefs creature, yet
sf I ftudious
%,


378 AN 1LLUSTRATION


ftudious in profound matters, and endowed with very excellent natural -

arts and acquirements, fortunate upon the water, and one that gains
ie from thofe he hath converfation with, fometimes proves a reafon-
able good friend, and delights in good company, if the Moon dart her
quartile or oppofite afpects.


Jupiter ufually fgnifies good teeth, as Saturn doth the contrary, and
fometimes produces fome apparent mark in the fore-teeth ; Jupiter, in
an airy fign, gives broad fore-teeth ; in a fiery fign, crooked, or dif-
torted; in an earthy fign, foul teeth; but, in a watery fign, the teeth
decay fuddenly, and grow black and rotten ; and this the more certain
if Jupiter be in any bad afpect of Saturn or Mars, or in conjunction
with the Dragon’s tail.


When Jupiter is fignificator, and pofited in a watery fign, the perfon
is fat and comely ; in an airy fign, more ftrong and corpulent, with a
decent comelinefs and proportion of body; in an earthy fign, a. well-
‘compofed body, not fat nor lean, but a mediocrity, provided he has not
much latitude, and in no afpe&t with other planets; but, if ina fiery fign,
the body is.rather fquare than corpulent. If Jupiter be fignificator, and
pofited in a watery fign, the perfon has fome impediment in his fpeech,
or {peaks with great deliberation ; this is the more certain, if in quartile
or oppofition to Mercury.


PERSONS defcribed by MARS in each of the TWELVE SIGNS.


- Mars in ries reprefents a perfon of middle ftature, of a {warthy
complexion, well fet, large bones, light hair, or fometimes red and cur-
jing, and auftere countenance; if Mars be occidental, the complexion is
more ruddy and the body more {mooth ; if oriental, the perfon is taller of
ftature, and the complexion not fo fwarthy, and it renders the native
- more comely and valiant ; in difpofition, Mars in Aries ever fhews a bold,
confident, undaunted, perfon, choleric, lofty, defirous to bear rule over
others, and fcorns to fubject himfelf to any perfon; a true lover of war,
and often gains preferment and great advancement thereby,


Mars in Zaurus gives a middle-ftatured perfon, well fet, rather fhort
than tall, pretty corpulent, of no clear complexion, brown or black rug-
ged hair, a broad face, wide mouth, generally a well-fet body, fometimes
ruddy, and marked in the face; it reprefents a profligate perfon, one that
gives himfelf much liberty in all manner of vicious ations, .as gaming,
. phaaa drinking,


ys


OF ASTROLOGY. "379


drinking, wenching, 6c. and, in fine, a very treacherous, debauched,
/ qilenatured, unfortunate, perfon, unlefs the fortunes interpofe their
friendly rays. If Mars be near the Pleiades, this defcription is ag-
gravated,


Mars in Geminé perfonates a reafonably tall ftature, black or brown
hair; the beginning of the fign gives it lighter; if it falls near Aldes
baran, the complexion is tending to fanguine, the body well proportis
oned, and the members conformable, but a very unfettled perfon in
moit of his a€tions, yet ingenious in many things, though unfortunate
in all; and generally lives in fome mean condition, fhifting here and
there, exercifing his wits for a livelihood. ee


_ Mars in Cancer gives a fhort perfon, of bad complexion, brown hair,
and much of it; a difproportioned body, fometimes crooked, and the
condition of the mind for the moft part as crooked; a dull fottith per-
fon, of few or no commendable actions, unfortunate, always engaged —
in fome fervile or mean employment, and is rarely capable of better.


Mars in Leo gives a ftrong able-bodied perfon, of a fun-burnt com-
plexion, tall, with light flaxen hair, large limbs, and great eyes; a hafty
choleric perfon, whofe paflion teo often over{ways his reafon; delights ©
in warlike exercifes, as fhooting, riding, fighting, &c. but naturally a
noble generous free-{pirited perfon, efpecially to fuch as obferve him,
and endeavour to oblige him.


Mars in Virgo give a middle-flatured well-proportioned body, black
or dark brown hair, the complexion fwarthy, and fometimes a {car or
blemifh in the face; a hafty revengeful perfon, too fubject to paffion,
and apt to retain an injury a long time in his memory; very humourfome
and difficult to be pleafed, conceited, but generally unfortunate in all
or moft of his a€tions,


Mars in Libra gives a well proportioned body, fomewhat tall, light
brown hair, oval face, and fanguine complexion, a brifk chearful af-
pect, a lover of the female fex, conceited of his own abilities, inclin-
able to boafting, delights in noble recreations, loves neatnefs in his ap=
parel, and is generally beloved of women, but often to his prejudice.


Mars in Scorpio gives a well-fet middle ftature, black curling hair,
broad face, corpulent body, and fwarthy complexion ; in difpofition a
No, 19. 4 Y very


a,


380 A NOI TELUS TOR AT oe


very ill-humoured perfon, paflionate, quarrelfome, unfociable, rath, re-
vengeful, and ungrateful; but, notwith{tanding his ill-nature, he has
fome good qualities intermixed with them; a perfon of quick and rea-
dy apprebenfion, and becomes excellent in any thing his active fancy
leads him to the infpection of.


Mars in Sagittarius gives a tall perfon, with a well proportioned body
neatly compacted, fanguine complexion, brown hair, oval vilage, quick
eye, a perfon of a large heart, and of a choleric hafty difpofition, yet
a chearful, merry, jovial, companion, active, courageous, loquacious, de-
lights in neatnefs, and loves to hear himfelf applauded by others, and
is in fine of no contemptible humour or temper.


Mars in Capricorn gives a mean ftature, a lean body, an ill complexion,
and black Jank hair, a thin face, little head, but an ingenious perfon, and
of a reafonably good difpofition, a penetrating fancy, and generally very
fortunate and happy in moft of his undertakings.


Mars in Aguaries de{cribes one of a well compofed body, reafonably
corpulent, reddifh or fandy-coloured hair, a moderately clear complexion,
‘middle ftature, but of a turbulent fpirit, too much addi¢ted to contro-
verfy, many times to the detriment of body and eftate, if other tefti-
monies do not occur.


Mars in Pi/ces gives a mean ftatured perfon, rather fhort and flefhy
than otherwife, no handfome body nor good complexion, a light brown
or fair flaxen hair, a fottifh kind of debauched perfon, very dull and


ftupid, yet a lover of women, a mere diflembler, an idle companion,
not a friend to himfelf or others.


If Mars be in conjun@ion, quartile, or oppofition of Saturn, or with
the Dragon’s tail, and they in angles, then the native is more fierce and
violent ; in fiery figns he is choleric and hafty, and many times hath a
falling in of the cheeks; in other figns the face is more full and flethy ;
Mars in earthy figns renders the native of a fullen temper, not courte-
ous or affable ; in airy figns, more free and obliging; in watery figns,
fomewhat ftupid and fottifh, unlefs he be well beheld of Jupiter, Sol,
or Luna; their friendly afpetts do fomething meliorate the aforefaid
fignifications, which muft be warily confidered by the ingenious artift
in his judgment; as alfo the nature of thofe fixed ftars that are joined
to the particular fignificators. ih bins


3 PERSONS


#


Q) BR. YASS gf RZOyL <07G; gu. 3 381


PERSONS defcribed by the MOON in each of the TWELVE SIGNS.


The Moon in Aries defcribes a perfon of an indifferent ftature of
body, a round face, light brown or flaxen hair, reafonably corpulent or
fiethy, and a moderately good complexion ; in difpofition a mutable
‘perfon, rafh and paflionate, ambitious of honour, and of. an afpiring
fancy, but rarely fortunate, or at leaft continues but a fhort time in fuch
a condition.


The Moon in Taurus gives a well compofed body, of a middle ftature,
rather inclinable to brevity, a corpulent ftrong body, of ‘ho clear com-
plexion, brown or’ black hair; a perfon of a gentle difpofition and
obliging temper, of fober carriage and deportment,' juft in ‘all his ac-
tions, and confequently gains refpect from all perfons he converfes with ;
and alfo eafily attains preferment in the world, fuitable to his degree and
quality of birth. | |


The Moon in Gemini perfonates a well’ compofed body, and tall,
brown hair, good complexion, not fanguine or pale, but between both "
the members well proportioned, and the body very upright and comely ;
the difpofition not commendable, but rather offenfive ; an ingenious
fubtle perfon, remarkably crafty, yet generally unfortunate, unlefs other:
teftimonies aflift. |


The Moon in Cancer reprefents a middle ftatured perfon, well pro-
portioned and flefhy, a round full face, brown hair,’ pale dufkith com-
plexion ; in difpofition flexible, jocular, and pleafant ; often addicted to
good fellowfhip, very harmlefs, and generally well beloved ; fortunate.
in moft affairs, yet mutable and, uncertain in his refolves, but free from
paflion or rafh actions. © J ; :


The Moon in Leo denotes a perfon fomewhat above a middle ftatures
a well proportioned body, {trong and large boned, fanguine complexions
light brown hair, full faced, Jarge eyes ; in difpofition a lofty, proud,
a{piring perfon, very ambitious of honour, defirous to bear rule over
others, but abhors fervitude or fubjection, and rarely proves a fortunate


®


perfon. shi ee


The Moon in Virgo fignifies a perfon fomething above the middle fta-
ture, brown or black hair, an oval face, fomething of a ruddy complex-
ion ; in difpofition an ingenious perfon, melancholy, very referved, co-


vetous, unfortunate, and rarely performs any commendable action.
: ' The


ave


482 A NY PLOL U8 TR ACT PON


The Moon in. Libra fignifies a well compoted: body, neatly compact-
‘ed, moderately tall of ftature, fmooth light bree Pitas and fanguine
complexion mixed with white ; the difpofition no lefs pleafant, a very
jocund perfon, a lover of mirth and recreation, as alfo very well re{pecied
of the female fex in general, If a woman, fhe will be admired, or at
leaft courted by many lovers; yet fubje@ to misfortunes, unlefs Venus
be well placed, and in good afpect to the Sun, Moon, or Jupiter.


The Moon in Scorpio reprefents an ill-fafhioned perfon, thick and
fhort, flefhy, and of a. very ob{cure complexion, brown or black hair,
and in fhort a very ill-difpofed perfon, and rarely qualified. with any
good humours; fottifh, malicious, and treacherous, unlefs alleviated
with geod education, or the Moon be in fome good afpect of the fortunes ;
If a female, fhe rarely lives free from fevere cenfure, and not without
defert, except the Moon be befriended by fome benevolent configuration
of good planets.


The Moon in Sagittarius gives an handfome. well proportioned body,
an oval face, bright brown hair, and fanguine complexion ; a generous
free-fpirited perfon, paffionate for a fhort time, ambitious, aiming at
great things, and generally of an obliging temper, and confequently
gains refpect of {uch perfons as he or fhe affociates with,


The Moon in Capricorn fignifies a perfon of a low ftature, and of an
ill complexion, a fpare thin body and face, brown or black hair; fome-
times a defect or weaknels in the knees, and at beft no ftrong bodied
erfon; one of fmall attivity or ingenuity ; inclinable notwithftand-
ing to debauchery and mean attions, which renders him a perfon of
but low efteem; yet if the Moon receives the friendly rays of Jupiter,
the Sun, or Venus, from good places of the figure, the difpofition is
thereby much corrected. Bis hh


' The Moon in Aguaries gives a perfon of a middle ftature, not tall nor
fhort, but between both ; the body well proportioned, but rather cor=
pulent, brown hair, and clear fanguine ‘complexion ; an ingenious
perfon, of a very affable courteous difpofition, inoffenfive to all, loves”
Curious and moderate recreation, apt for invention, which confequently
fhews an active fancy, a pregnant brain, and is rarely guilty of any un-
worthy action, }


The


Os ASTRO LO G-¥: 933


The Moon in: Pifees defcribes a perfon of amean or low ftature of
body, and the complexion rather pale than otherwife, the hair a bright
brown, the body plump or fat, a perfon not much celighting in attion,
unlefs ‘thofe of the worft kind, and unfortunate in moft undertakings,
neither good for himfelf or others; the difpofition may be fomewhat
meliorated, provided the Moon be pofited in a good place of the figure,
and in afpect with good and adjuvant planets, which muft alfo be con-
fidered of all the planets in their particular fignifications, efpecially of
the difpofitions. and qualities of the mind, throughout all the twelve
figns.


PERSONS reprefented by VENUS in each of the Twetve Stens.


Venus in Aries gives a middle flature, rather flender than grofs bo-
died, light hair, and ufwally fome marks or fears in the face; a good
complexion, but generally a very unfortunate penfive perfon, neither
lucky to himfelf or to any other he has concerns with ; the reafon is be-
caufe Venus receives her detriment in Aries. ae


Venus in Taurus givesa comely perfon, of mean ftature, a ruddy com-
plexion, but not clear, brown hair, and plump body, not grofs, but de-
cently compofed, a mild-tempered perfon, of a winning difpofition,
fortunate in moft of his actions ; injurious to none, but rather obliging
to all, thereby gaining a general refpect from moft perfons he con-
verfes with. |


Venus in Gemini ufually gives'a perfon above a middle ftature, reafon-
ably tall, a flender, well-compofed, ftrait, body, brown hair, and a mo-
derately clear complexion; in difpofition a good-humoured loving perfon,
very liberal to fuch:as appear fit objects of charity, and is eafily wrought
upon to do good, being a lover of ali juft actions, and rarely guilty of any
thing which is difhonourable or unworthy.


Venus in Cancer generally reprefents a fhort ftature, round face, fick-
ly palescomplemion, light coloured hair, and a reafonably corpulent bo-
dy ; in difpofition an idle flothfal perfon, too much addiGted to good
fellowfhip: and: recreations of the» meaner fort; but puts the beft fide
outward, and feems to be in earneft when he is not; in fine, it fhews a
very mutable inconftant perfon in moft of his ations.


* . * - > ’
Venus in Leo gives areafonably tall perfon, and the members well


compacted, clear. complexion, round face, full eye, fometime freckles
- 3 -


No. 19. 42 in
a


*


384 AUN EU ST CRS AT oN


in the face, light brown or flaxen hair, and rarhatitdes of a fandy red ;
in difpofition not to be difliked, moderately paflionate, foon angry, and
quickly pacified ; of a generous free difpofition, a little addiGted to pride,
but not in the extreme ; often indifpofed in body, but not much pre-
judiced thereby ; a fociable good-humoured perfon in general.


Venus in Virgo gives a tall well-proportioned body, an oval face, fad
brown or black hair, dark complexion, an ingenious perfon, and a good
orator, but fomewhat unfortunate in moft of-his affairs ;. a fubtle active.
perfon, of an afpiring fancy, but rarely attains his defires.


Venus in Libra gives an upright tall perfon, a decent-compofed bo-
dy, and a conformity in all the members ; fanguine complexion, brown
hair, fometimes freckles im the face, and dimples in the cheeks ; in dif-


pofition, a perfon of an obliging deportment, and generally well beloved
of moft he has any dealings or converfation with.


Venus in Scorpio reprefents a well-fet body, reafonably corpulent, a
broad face, dufkifh complexion, and fad brown or black hair; but in
difpofition a very debauched perfon, too fubje& to contention and en-
vy; guilty, of many vicious ations, and this the rather if Venus hap- ©
pens to be in any ill afpe&t with Saturn or Mars.


Venus in Sagittarius gives a perfon rather tall than otherwife, of a
moderate clear complexion, tending to fanguine, brown hair, oval
vifage, and a very proportionable body in general ; in difpofition very
generous, one that aims at no mean or bafe things ; a commendable
deportment, fomething proud, anda little paffionate ; yet in general of
‘a good temper, and no way to be difliked, delighting in harmlefs re-

- creations ; and, in fine, a very obliging fortunate perfon.


Venus in Capricorn reprefents a mean ftature, rather inclining to
brevity than otherwife ; of a pale fickly complexion, thin faced, dark
hair, tending to black ; in difpofition none of the beft, a general lover
of women ; or, if a woman, a delighter in the courtfhip and dalliance
of men; one that loves pleafure ;» not fortunate, but too fubject to
change his itation, and fuffer fudden cataftrophes in his affairs.


Venus in Aguaries perfonates a handfome decent compofed body,
reafonably:corpulent, clear complexion, and brown hair generally, but
fometimes of a faxen colour; in quality and difpofition exceeding good


2 and
ps


— Pa ey oh


+


OF ASITROLOG Y. 385


and commendable ; a very affable courteous perfon, inclinable to few
Or no Vicious actions, one that loves civil recreation, a peaceable quiet
' perfon, obliging to all, fortunate in his affairs, and well refpected by

his friends and acquaintance in general. .


Venus in Pifces perfonates a middle-ftatured body, of a moderate
good complexion, between pale and ruddy, a round face, brown hair
fometimes flaxen, with a dimple in the chin, a flefhy plump perfon ;
in difpofition, a good-humoured creature, juft in his attions, very mild
and peaceable ; ingenious, but fomewhat mutable'in his refolutions, and
moderately fortunate in the world.


PERSONS detepiben by MERCURY in each of the TwELVE SIGNS:


4 . s
" wT Sea @ bP add : : Pe t
Mercury in dries gives a body of a mean ftature, fpare and thin, an
oval face, light brown hair, fubject to curling ; no clear complexion,


a very ill-difpofed mind, and much addicted to theft, and fuch-like un-
worthy actions. .


Mercury in Taurus gives a perfon neither tall nor very fhort. of
ftature, but a well-fet corpulent body, of a fwarthy fun-burnt com-
plexion, brown hair, fhort and thick ; in difpofition a very flothful
idle perfon, one that loves his eafe and his belly well, and takes pleafure
amongft women to his own detriment and misfortune.


Mercury in Gemini gives. a reafonably tall perfon, an upright ftrait
body, every way well compofed, brown hair, and good complexion ;
in difpofition very ingenious, a good orator, and fometimes becomes a
very cunning lawyer, or’a perfon dealing in books, &c. In fhort, Mer-
cury in Gemini gives a perfon that well underftands his own intereft,
and is rarely overcome by the moft fubtle politician, or deluded by the
moft crafty knave that he may have occafion to encounter with ; but
generally out-wits the moft cunning fophiftry, efpecially if Mercury be
no way afflitted. |


Mercury in Cancer perfonates a low or fhort ftature of body, of an
ill complexion, fad hair, thin face, fharp nofe, and little eyes ; and in
difpofition, a mere diflembler, a fottifh kind of pot-companion, and
light fingered ; alfo an ill-natured perfon, unlefs the Moon and Jupiter
be in good afpect with Mercury.


+.
”
+


* Mercury


* °
d
my “i. ‘
- afte > ~ « i. 7


986 A Nesbido Lb WAS Tek AT 20 N


Mereury in Leo gives a perfon of a pretty large ftature of body, but
no clear complexion, rather fwarthy or fun-burnt, light brown hair,
round face, full eye, and a broad or high nofe ; in dilpofition a hafty
choleric proud conceited perfon, ambitious of honour; a boafter, and
too often fubject to contention.


Mercury in Virgo defcribes a tall, flender, well-proportioned, perfon,
dark brown or black hair, no. clear complexion ; a long vifage, and an
auftere afpect; in difpofition and qualities of mind a mo{t ingenious
perfon, a profound wit, and fearching fancy, capable of attaining divers
languages, befides other rare accomplifhments ; and this in a greater
degree, provided Mercury be free from affliction. But it muft be under-
ftood, that every perfon who has Mercury for their fignificator, and
fo pofited, muft not expect fuch qualifications ; for the capacity of birth
parents, and education, muft alfo be confidered, and guide every judi-
cious artift in his judgment.


Mercury in Libra defcribes a decent compofed body, rather tall than
otherwife, light brown fmooth hair, ruddy or fanguine complexion,
the body reafonably corpulent; in difpofition a very juft and virtuous
perfon, prudent, a lover and promoter of learning. In (hort, a perfon
mok happily qualified with both natural and sae pane


ments.


Mercury in Scorpzo ante a perfon of a mean ftature, well fet, broad
fhoulders,, fwarthy complexion, fad brown hair curling, with an ill-
compofed body ; fuch a perfon is very fubtle, a lover of the female fex,
inclinable to company, and does many atts of good fellowthip, inge-
nious, and ftudious for the promotion of his own Cigeccert


Mercury in Sagittarius perfonates a tall ftature, a well-fhaped body,
not corpulent, but rather large-boned and fpare, an oval face, brown
hair, ruddy complexion, and large nofe ; for qualities and conditions,
)paffionate, but foon appeafed ; too rath in his actions, which many times
occafion his own detriment ; but good-conditioned in general, and de-
lights in noble things, yet rarely attains his ends.


Mereury in Capricorn fignifies a perfon of mean ftature, thin face,
brown hair, and dufkifh complexion, fometimes bow-legged, or fome
defect in thofeé members; in:difpofition peevifh, difcontented, and un-
fortunate, without other teftimonies concur; in fine, an impotent de.
jected perfon. . ai
t ... Mercury


OP - ASTROLOGY. | 487


_. Mercury in Aquaries denotes a perfon of an indifferent ftature of body,
reafonably corpulent and flefhy, a good clear complexion, brown hair,
full face; in difpofition an ingenious obliging perfon, inclinable to the
ftudy of arts and {ciences, of a pregnant wit, and apt to find out many
curious inventions.


Mercury in Pi/ces gives a perfon of a low ftature, brown hair, thia
face, of a pale or fickly complexion, generally very hairy upon the
body; in difpofition a repining difconfolate perfon, yet a lover of wo-
men, and addicted to drinking; and confequently the greateit enemy to
himfelf. .


PERSONS defcribed by the SUN in each of the TWELVE SIGNS.


The Sun pofited in Aries, which is accounted his exaltatfon, defcribes
a perfon of a reafonable ftature of body, ftrong and well compofed, a
good‘eomplexion, though not very clear, light hair, flaxen, or yellowith,
a noble fpirit, very courageous and valiant, delights in all warlike ac-
tions, gains victory and honour thereby, appears a terror to his enemies,
and makes himfelf famous in his generation, fometimes even beyond
his capacity of birth.


The Sun in Zaurus reprefents a fhort well-fet perfon, with browna
hair, not very comely, a dark complexion, wide mouth, great nofe, -
broad face, a good confident bold perfon, fufficiently ftrong, and not a
little proud, delighting much in oppofing others, and generally becomes
cnnqueror.


The Sun in Gemini reprefents a well-proportioned body, of fanguine
complexion, above the middle ftature, brown hair, a perfon of a good
difpofition, affable and courteous to all, not very fortunate in any af-
fairs, fubject to the checks and controulment of others, and patiently
_ paffes over flight abufes, which fhews him to be a very mild-tempered

perfon. ‘


The Sun in Cancer perfonates or reprefents a mean ftature, of an ill
complexion, with fome deformity in the face, very unhealthy afpect,
brown hair, and an ill-proportioned body, but very harmlefs and inno-
cent; chearful, and a lover of the females; alfo an admirer of mufic,
dancing, and fuch kind of recreations ; but cares not to follow any em-
ployment, to all kinds of which he appears undifpofed and averfe.


| No. 19. ‘a 5 A The


388 AN PEL UST R AT TO W


The Sun in Leo givesa ftrong well-proportioned perfon, of a very fan=
guine complexion, light brown or yellowifh hair, full face, and large
eyes, fometimes a mark or fcar in the face, a very honeft perfon, faith-
ful to his friends, punctual in the performance of his promife, yet de-
lights to take his pleafure, is ambitious of honour, whether in war or
otherwife; and ufually promotes all things in order thereto.


The Sun in Virgo gives a perfon fomewhat above the middle ftature,
a well-proportioned body, not corpulent, but rather flender ; good com-
plexion; the hair brown, and much of it; in difpofition an ingenious
chearful perfon, enjoying all decent recreations, particularly thofe which
delight the ear and the palate. — |

The Sun in Lidra gives an upright ftraight body, an oval face, and
ruddy chearful complexion, light hair, full eyes, and fometimes pimples
in the face. The Sun in Libra fignifies a very unfortunate perfon_ in all
er moft of his actions, ef{pecially in warlike affairs ; for therein heus fure
to come off with difhonour, if he efcapes other dangers, unlefs his figni-
ficator be befriended by fome potent benignant planet.


The Sun in Scorpio gives a {quare body, full face, cloudy complexion;
fun-burnt, brown hair, a very plump flefhy body in general; in difpo-
fition an ingenious perion, but of a rugged nature ; ambitious of honour ;
ohe that would not willingly admit of an equal; fortunate upon the
{cas or in the practice of phyfic.


The Sun in Sagittarius gives a tall, well- proportioned, comely, perfon,
with an oval vifage, fanguine complexion, and light brown hair; for
qualities and difpofition, a very lofty proud-fpirited perfon, aiming at
great things, and too fevere in the exercife of his power; yet fome ho-
nourable exploits are performed by him, which add much to his com-
mendation, and render him confpicuous,


~ The Sun in Capricorn ufually reprefents a mean ftature, a. fickly com-

plexion, brown hair not curling, an oval face, a {pare thin body, not
decently compofed, but rather a difproportion in the members thereof; -
in difpofition very juft in his actions, thereby gaining love and friend-
thip ; fometimes paffionate, a favourer of the female fex, and in general
a good-humoured perfon to thofe he hath converfation with;


. The Sun in 4guaries defcribes a perfon of a middle ftature, a corpu-
lent body, decently compofed, a round full face, light brown hair, and
3 | generally


At


OF <AiS ROL 0.G_Y. 389


generally a clear complexion ; the difpofition moderately good, but fub-
ject to oftentation, and defirous to bear rule, but free from malicious
actions again{t any one.


The Sun in Pi/ces gives a perfon rather fhort of ftature ;-a round face,
and an indifferent good complexion ; light brown hair, fometimes flaxen,
a reafonably plump or corpulent body ; a general lover of the female
fex, and of all kinds of pleafure ; addicts himfelf to gaming and feafting,
many times to his own detriment; yet a perfon very harmlefs to others,
and one who injures none but himfelf, which he often does by too much .
extravagance and prodigality.


Brief OBSERVATIONS in drawing a Defcription from the PLANET
. that is LORD of the ASCENDANT. ,


I. If no planet be in afpeét with the lord of the afcendant, then judge
of the native by the lord of the afcendant wholly, without any regard
to the fign in which he is pofited.


IT. If the lord of the afcendant be retrograde, or in his fall or detri-
ment, then defcribe the native with due reference to the nature of that


fign in which he is fo pofited.


Ii]. If the lord of the afcendant behold the Sata dant at the time of
birth, then judge of the native by the quality of the fign upon the cufp
of the afcendant. ; |


IV. If two planets happen to be in afpe& with the afcendant, take
your judgment from him who is moft perfect in partile, and pofited in
his own houfe, rather than from him who is in his exaltation.—Thefe
obfervations are to be confidered as well in regard to the difpofition and
qualities of the mind as in the defcription and formation of the body.


The


399 ANUILL US TRAIT LON


The ART (of (CABCUEATING NATIVITTES


made PLAIN and EASY,


NATIVITY, or Geniture, .is the very moment of birth, or precife
time of the child’s coming into the world, and in which he is
made a vifible member of the creation. In this moment it is that the
ftars begin to act and operate their influence upon the new-born infant,
by the power or intervention of thofe angels who rule and govern the
conftellations then level with the horizon, or that afcend. upon the ho»
rofcope, according to that faying of St. Jerome, in his comment'upon
the eighteenth chapter of St. Matthew, where he fays, Great is the dig:
nity of * fouls, Sor every one at their fitft coming into -the world have an an-
gel appointed for their cuftody and fafety. And, as it is from thefe confi-
gurations that we are enabled to point out the incidents of the native’s
future life, fo is it abfolutely neceffary that the very inftant of birth
fhould be welland minutely afcertained, in order to arrive at correctnefs
and certainty in thefe fpeculations. It muft be obvious to every one
that the celeftial bodies are in perpetual motion, and therefore every
quarter of an hour muft confiderably vary their pofition ; as’ does alfo
different parallels from any one given point of the heavens ; and hence
it is that the latitude, as well as the true time of birth, becomes fo
abfolutely neceflary in calculating or. Mas kg up the direétions of 3 a
Nativity. i
By knowing the place of birth, the latitude is eafily afcertained ;
but to determine the precife time of a native’s emerging from the womb
is a circumftance that has been always found difficult and precarious ;
not only on account of the inattention of nurfes and midwives to this
moft interefting event, but alfo by reafon of the difference and uncer-
tainty of almoft all clocks, watches, and dials, in reference. to the
Sun. Wherefore the ancient profeffors of this art, to remove the
errors in the common or eftimate time of birth, have contrived fe-
veral ways of rectifying: a nativity ; and have given fuch rules for this
purpofe, that the true time of birth may be thereby correctly afcertain-
ed. This rectification may be effected three different ways ; firft, by
the Trutinam Hermetis, or Trutine ofHermes; fecondly, by ‘the Ani-
moder of Ptolomy; and, thirdly, by the matural accidents of the native.
Thefe three methods I fhall explain fully, when I come to treat of the
rectifications of nativities ; fuffice it here to fay, that the method moftly
in ule, and which is found liable to the leaft error, particularly in the
genitures


4


eae paretl


ew


4
ie.


ih


392 A Ny PULAU SHTIRaAT 1 O° N


to the variety of their afpects with the Sun, unite with, or refift, his in-
fluence, agreeable to the nature and force of fuch afpe&ts. This hap-
pens moft. frequently, and moft forcibly, with the Moon, at all the
changes. But thefe affections in the ftars operate more obfcurely, and
employ longer time, according to their declination, or as they appear or
difappear in our horizon. Hence then, by the rules of nature, and the
teftimony of our own reafon and experience, it muft be admitted, that
of all the planets, the influence of the Sun is the moft powerful; and
that the influence of the other planets have moft energy, when the
beams of the Sun co-operate with them. The Moon ‘likewife, by rea-
fon of her {wiftnefs, and proximity to the earth, modifies and conveys
thefe influences to fublunary bodies, with a force fuperior to all the
other fiars. And thefe influences are always moft powerful, and moft
vifible in their effects, when this mediation of the Moon is exercifed in
conveying the influences of the ftars to the Sun, or of the Sun to the
other ftars, and thence to the earth. But, in defining thefe varying pro-
perties and effects, particular regard muft be had to the latitude, decli-


nation, rifing, and fetting, of the ftars, both fixed and erratic, efpecially
thofe which approach neareft to the ecliptic.


Whoever contemplates thefe premifes, and attentively obferves the
afpects, will find that not only conjoined bodies are {ubjec& to the confi-
gurations of the ftars, but alfo the buddings and perfection of feeds are
framed and formed according to the quality with which the heavenly
matter and circumambient air is endued. The obfervant hufbandman
and fhepherd preconjeCture the proper feafons for feed-fowing, planting,
and procreation of animals, by confulting the {tate of the winds and
the face of the fky. The fkilful mariner likewife prepares againft the
dangers of an approaching ftorm by fimilar obfervations; but they are
frequently deceived for want of better experience, and an adequate know-
ledge of the courfes and effects of the heavenly bodies, which, when ex-
actly underftood, conduce to an almoft certain prefcience herein. For
it is found, that he who corre&tly knows the motions of the ftars, and
their configurations with the Sun and Moon, and is not ignorant of the
times, nor the place, nor the afpetts, and is well fkilled in the fimple
ways of nature, can admirably foretel, in any feafon, the proper ftate
and temperature of the air ; as that it willbe hotter and moifter, or colder
or drier, according to the nature and properties of the refpettive rays
of the ftars and Moon configurated with the Sun. And, as thefe fpecula-
tions are founded upon the moft fimple principles of nature, as that the


Sun is hot and dry, and the Moon is cold and moift, and the obferva-


tions


OF ASTROLOG Y, 393


tions deduced herefrom are feldom known to vary ; fo, by fimilar qua-
lities and obfervations, and by rules equally well founded, we obtain a
legal and an extenfive prefcience refpecting man. For, from the natural
ftate of the ambient and heavenly matter at the time of the conftruction
of the body, itis eafy to know in general, the quality and temparature of
each perfon born; that fuch fhall be the formation of his body, and
fuch the difpofition of his mind, and fuch the future events, advantage-
ous or difadvantageous, of his life, according to the ftate of the heavens
at that particular time, whether qualified for the prodution of fuch a
temper, or whether inimical toit. Thus, a prefage is not only poffible
by the laws of nature, but proper and neceffary to the wifdom and well-
being of focicty.


The errors of thofe who do not underftand the fundamental princi-
ples of this learning have doubtlefs afforded ftrong and plaufible reafons
to the bulk of mankind for difcarding it altogether, and for confidering
thofe events which others have more fuccefsfully afcertained, to be the
effe€ts of mere chance. But furely a doctrine is not to be rejected, bee
caufe fome of its followers are vicious or ignorant. In this f{peculation,
above all others, reafonable allowances fhould be made, as well for the
weaknefs of human comprehenfion, as for the great and undefinable ex-
tent of the contemplation. Much depends upon the ability of the phy-
fician, in modifying and proportioning his prefcription, not only to cor-
refpond with the ftate of the difeafe, but alfo with the temperature and
conftitution of the patient. In the fubje&t under confideration, a judg-
ment no lefs fagacious is abfolutely neceflary ; becaufe the quality of the
heavenly matter is often conjectural, and the mixtures of different af-
pects and influences are fometimes fo complicated, that the brighteft
underftanding can {carcely arrange them with precifion.


But the confideration of Nativities, in points which relate to the par-
- ticular temper and difpofition of refpective perfons, hath other caufes
in nature too apt to be forgotten, or perhaps lightly paffed over as cir-
cumftances of no moment. But it is undeniably true, and muft be ad-
mitted on all hands, that the place of birth will often make confidera-
ble difference in thofe who are born ; and though the feed be the fame
from which they are procreated, and though the conftitution of the
heavens be the fame, yet the diverfities of countries wherein they are
born will naturally produce a difference in their bodies and minds. Be-
fides this, a different education and cuftom will form a different difpo-
fition and manner of life; as does alfo the different fituation or claffes

1 in


394 A: Nip Eye OS TRA CIMA SN


in which mankind are brought up, and to which they are accuftomed.
Therefore he who does not attentively confider each of thefe diftin¢tions,
and unite them judicioufly with the caufes produced by the ambient and
heavenly matter, will meet with great uncertainty in his conclufions.
For, although the power of heaven is confefledly the greateft, and with
thefe all the others are conceived as adjuvant caufes, yet they do not al-
ways aflume the circumambient matter as a concaufe ; confequently
thofe who attempt to predict from the motion of the heavenly bodies
alone, without due reference to thefe confiderations, will entail contempt
upon themfelves, and difgrace upon the fcience.


But that aftrological predi@tions are poflible, and to be defined with
great precifion, when properly managed, is an affertion moft true,
and which, I flatter myfelf, I have already made manifeft) It remains,
therefore, that we fpeak of the advantages of this benevolent difpenfa-
tion of Providence ; for, if a foreknowledge be advantageous. or necef-
fary to the fafety and future happinefs of the foul, what can be more foin
re{pect of the body, fince it affords not only temporal delight, happinefs,
and pleafure, but, enables us to underftand things both divine and hu-
man? Whatever happens in the courfe of nature, either neceffarily, or
accidentally that materially affects our profperity or adverfity, and either
prolongs life or deftroys it, if they happen fuddenly and unexpectedly,
confound with fear, or tranfport with joy; but, if they are foreknown,
they fortify the mind. by fuch foreknowledge, and prepare it for fuftain-
ing the beft or worft occurrences-with calmnefs and, ferenity. In what
reipect therefore is man fuperior to the irrational part of the creation, if he
cannot bear to know the hour of his diffolution ?. The terms of our ex-
iftence, as every day’s experience repeatedly fhews, are that we mutt
fuffer death. Where then, to minds fraught with reafon and integrity,
can be the horror, thediftrefs, or calamity, of knowing the time when
that certain event fhall take place? To men of a virtuous habit, fuch
a knowledge mult be invaluable ; and ta thofe of lefs fcrupulous prin-
ciples, it cannot be unwelcome, provided reafon or philofophy make up
any part of their conftitution. To men of the moft exemplary conduct,
it affords fit opportunity of adjufting their temporal concerns, and re-
lieves them under the diftreffes and afflictions of this life, by afcertain-
ing the period of their fufferings, and by giving them hopes of retribu-
tion and reward in that which will fucceed. To the inconfiderate and
worldly minded, it not only gives the fame advantages, but begets in
them a proper fenfe of the more important concerns of that endle{s {tate
of exiftence, ** from whence no traveller returns.” For thefe grand


- ~purpofes


OF VASIT ROO: L'O G Yz 395


purpofes chiefly, the all-wife and benevolent hand of Providence feems
to have pointed out to mankind the Art of Prefcience and Prediction ;
not to fay any thing of the innumerable lefs important concerns of hu-
man affairs, which may oftentimes afford fingular advantage and happi-
nefs to individuals, as well as to ftates and focieties, by being thus time-
ly forewarned of what fhall hereafter come to pafs. And furely I need
not mention a ftronger inftance of the advantages of prefcience, than
what will naturally arife from the obfervation of every man of experience
when he looks back upon the occurrences of his paft life, and recollects
but half the loffes and inconveniences he has fuftained, only for want of
that foreknowledge in worldly affairs which the art of prediction fupplies.


Weare not however to believe, that the ‘accidents and events of life
fo 'befal men, as though a law were fet over them by fome indiffoluble
caufe from ‘above, by which ‘they are of neceflity brought to pafs, no
other caufe being able to oppofe or prevent them. It were unphilofo-
phical and abfurd thus to imagine ; for the motion of the heavenly bo-
dies is immutable by divine Jaw, and the mutation of earthly ‘things is
difpofed of and revealed by a natural generation and order, which the fu-
perior caufe follows by accident. It is alfo to be obferved, that many
things happen to man, not only by reafon of the natural and proper qua-
lity of the heavenly matter, but alfo by the operation of fome more uni-
verfal caufes ; as by great mutations and mixtures of the elements, plagues
and peftilences, and floods and conflagrations, are produced, by which
multitudes are at once {wept away, and perifh under one common fata-
lity. Thus greater caufes always overcome the lefs, and the ftronger
the weaker ; and, whenever the {tronger power prevails in any great mu-
tation, the more general effets we have been fpeaking of happen.———~
Other things likewife happen to individuals ; becaufe the natural proper-
ty of each is overcome by the contrariety of the circumambient matter,
whether the antipathy thereof be {mall or fortuitous. Now, this being
admitted, it becomes apparent that of thofe things which happen gene-
rally and particularly, be the accident whatever it may, whofe firft
caufe is ftrong and irrefiftable, and no other caufe having power to with-
ftand it, come to pafs wholly by neceffity. But thofe accidents
which have a weaker caufe are overthrown, if any other cau(e, able to
withftand it, is found; and, if fucha refitting caufe appears not, then
thofe accidents happen‘agreeable to the nature and impulfe of their firft
caufe; and they are produced, not through the ftrength of the caufe, nor
by neceflity, but becaufe the antipathy by which it might have been
deftroyed is neither known nor to be defined. Thus it happens to.
all things that have a natural caufe and beginning, as metals, ftones,

No. 20. 5C plants,


396 A NY DIO UI Us SiTSRA ALT TON,


plants, animals, wounds, ficknefs, affections, &c. fome of which work
neceflarily, and others not, except when fomething) is found of fuffici-
ent ftrength to oppofe their efficient power. _ Hence it is demontftrable,
that, though fimple caufes have natural properties peculiar to themfelves,
yet there are other caufes equally fimple, which operate in contact with —
thofe of the former, and by which the bare fimple nature of each is
changed by mutation into a third quality which differs in nature from
either of the former; according to which fuch fimple natural proper-
ties are either partly or wholly changed, or otherwife fruftrated or di-
verted. As for example, in the weather, the Sun, in his own fimple
nature, is the fountain of light and heat; but, being joined with Saturn,
never fails, if not prevented by fome other apparent caufe, both in win-
ter and {ummer, to produce cold and cloudy weather. But, if Mars hap-
pens to be joined in configuration with them, the cafe is altered, and,
inftead of cold; the weather will not fail, in fummer, to be hot and ful-
try, though at the fame time cloudy, corrufcuous, ‘and diforderly; and,
in winter, remarkably clofe and warm, though lowering and turbulent ;
more efpecially if attended with a new or full Moon. Thefe are facts
founded upon a rational: hypothefis, and: proved by long experience and
conftant obfervation. 1


Thefe preliminaries being laid down, and confidered as the ground-
work of Aftrology, it follows that thofe, who would with to be proficient
in it, fhould learn topredict futurities after a natural way, by fuch prefci-
ence as nature has pointed out, and not by an inconfiderate or vain opi-
nion that this fhall happen, becaufe it hath many great and efficient
caufes which it is impoflible to refift; or that this fhall not happen,
becaufe it hath refifting affeCtions. Calculators of nativities, therefore,
when they {peak of thofe things which may come to pafs, can do it in
no other way, conformable to truth and nature, but by the power and
effects of the circumambient matter or afpects, which, being more or
lefs inclined to fuch a temperature, will produce fuch an accident, fta-
ture of body, or difpofition of mind. -As when a phyfician afferts that
an ulcer will eat away or putrefy, or a naturalift that the loadftone will
attract iron; not becaule it is neceflary that the ulcer fhould eat away
or putrefy, or the load{tone attract; but, if the contraries are not known
nor their effects. prevented, thefe circumftances will affuredly happen,
according to the caufe and confequences of things, as they have been
from the beginning of the world. Thus it happens, and thus we ought
to judge, in the calculation of nativities ; for thofe events which per-
petually fall in upon all human affairs, are produced according to the
fucceffion of natural order, either becaufe things that may oppofe and.

prevent


OF) A SkTR OL; 0 6 Ye 397


prevent are not found, or becaufe they are not known. And again,
events known naturally, and according to order, and thofe things being
found which difagree and oppofe, they are then either wholly prevented,
or elfe come to pafs with very {mall effect, and are fcarcely vifible in


their operation.


Now, feeing there is bothin generals and particulars fuch a confe-—
quence, it is curious to remark, that though many people believe in
generals, and.allow it is poflible to prognoiticate upon that fyftem, and
alfo think it advantageous towards prefervation and health; yet in par-
ticulars they will not allow the fame operations to have any force. For
many confefs they know the proper feafons, and the fignification of the
fixed ftars, and the afpects of the Moon, and they obferve them for the
eftablifhment of their health, and to reduce their conftitutions to a good
and regular temperature, in fummer by cooling medicaments, and in
winter by heating. They alfo obferve the fignifications of the fixed
ftars, for the purpofes of navigation; and they plant, and fow, and for-
ward vegetation, by obferving the different afpects of the Moon; and
no one fuppofes thefe general effects either impoffible or ufelefs. But
in particulars, as of cold or heat, which increafe and decreafe in their
proper temper, and by the properties and mixtures of other matter, they
neither believe it poflible to foretel, or conceive that we may be pre-
ferved from, the confequences attending them. But the caufe of this
opinion, is the difficulty of knowing particulars, and the management
of them, with precifion and truth ; and becaufe men are feldom found of
{o penetrating a comprehenfion, that one of the contraries be hidden
from their view ; hence, the oppofing power of influence for the moft
part not being joined with a foreknowledge in the effect produced by firft
caufes without impediment, they judge of things fimply, as though
immutable and impoflible to be prevented. But as in the art of predic-
tion its poflibility appears worthy of confideration, although it is not
altogether infallible, this prefervative part is certainly worthy of parti-
cular regard, fince it may bring relief to many, though not a perfect cure
toall. For this reafon the Egyptians, finding the efficacy of this art,
every where joined phyfic to prognoftic aftronomy; and hence it is ap-
parent, that, if they had thought futurities could not be removed or di-
verted, they would never have prefcribed certain remedies and perferva-
tives again{t the effect of the ambient, prefent or to come, whether in
general or particular cafes ; they therefore fought out a method at once
advantageous and profitable, that by aftrology the quality of the fubja-
cent temperaments, and the accidents which come to pafs by the influ-


ence of the heavenly bodies, might be difcovered and known; but
i the


993 AN PLRELUSTRATION


the medical art, to diftinguifh the fimpathies and antipathies of each,
and to underftand the natural cure of prefent difeafes, and the true
mode of préefervation from future. For without this f{pecies of aftro-
nomic knowledge the medical art is foundin many ‘cafes to fail; though
I am ready to allow that there are not remedies to be found for all bodies
and difeafes.


Thefe obfervations become clear and obvious, from a confideration
of the planets and their afpects. ‘The Sun is found by nature to caufe
heat and drinefs in a moderate degree. His power and influence is moft
vifible to our fenfes, by reafon of his magnitude, and the manifeft mu-
tation of the feafons; for, by how much the nearer he approaches to
our vertical point, by fo much the more he ftirs up heat in us, and
fubjecis us to his ‘nature. But the nature of the Moon is chiefly moitt-
ening; for, being nearer the earth, fhe exhales the vapours of all moitt
bodies, and thus evidently affects all moift things, and putrefies them ;
but, becaufe of her analogy with the Sun, the moderately participates of
heat. The planet Saturncools and dries, becaufe he is far diftant from
the heat of the Sun and vapours of the earth; but he cools moft abun-
dantly, and dries moft moderately. The other planets alfo receive
virtue according to the configurations they make with the Sun and
Moon. Mars drieth much, and burns, becaufe of his hot and fiery na-
ture; but the influence of Jupiter is temperate, becaufe he moves be-
tween the coldnefs of Saturn and the heat of Mars. Venus hath nearly
the fame temperature, but in a different meafure, becaufe of her vicini~
ty to the Sun; fhe moiftens moft, as does the Moon, through the great.-
nefs of their light, by which they affume the moifture of the vapours of
the earth. Mercury fometimes dries, and fometimes moiftens, according
to his pofition and configuration with other ftars. Hence arife the four
principal humours, from whence all bodies are engendered. Two of
them are generative and active, the hot, and the moift ; for by thefe are
all things joined together, and increafed; and two are corruptive and
hurtful; the dry, and the cold; for by thefe all things are diflolved,
and deftroyed. Wherefore two of the planets, viz. Jupiter and Venus, are
defined to be benefics, becaufe of their benevolent temperature, and
becaufe heat and moifture equally abounds in them; and likewife the
Moon, for the fame reafons. But Saturn and Mars, being of an oppo-
fite nature, are defined to be of a malevolent and deftruétive influence, by
reafon of the extreme cold of the one, and the violent heat of the other.
But the Sun and Mercury, being of a controvertible nature, are found to
produce both thefe influences, according to the nature, force, and quality,
of the afpects or configurations they make with other bodies.


As


OsF; A$ TeR OcL OGY. 2


As there are four-diftin@ humours.or qualities incident to the planets,
fo are there two primary, fexes by which they are diflinguithed, namely,
the mafculine and the feminine... The feminine planets partake prin-.
cipally of moifture ; therefore the Moon and Venus aretermed feminine,
betaufe moifture chiefly abounds in them. But Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
and the Sun, are mafculine, becaufe they heat and dry with the greater
energy. Mercury, in point of f{ex,,is confidered indifferently, becaufe
he equally dries or moiftens as occafion may be: The {tars are likewife
confidered, as to fex, according to.their pofition with the Sun. When
they are oriental, and going before the Sun, they become mafculine ;
but, when they are occidental, and follow the Sun, they are feminine.
The two apparent diftinctions of time, called day and night, are alfo
divided into fexes, The day, becaufe of its heat and activity, is termed
mafculine ; and the night, becaufe of its moifture, and, conveniency for
reft, feminine ; therefore the Moon and Venus are nocturnal, and the
Sun and Jupiter diurnal; but Mercury isin this refpeét alfo indifferent,
diurnal when in an oriental fituation, and nocturnal when occidental.
But the two malevolent planets, Saturn and Mars, are confidered diur-
nal and nocturnal, not according to their quality and nature, as heat to
heat, but contrary; for a good temperament, taking its like, maketh
the. good greater ; and unlike, mixed with evil, deftroys much of that
evil ; therefore Saturn, as cold, is joined to the heat of the day ; and
Mars, as dry, to the moifture of the night. So each of them, becoming
moderate in their influences, will. appear confonant to the conditions
which give the temperament. It is alfo to be remarked, that a planet is
diurnal, when in a, diurnal nativity above the earth and in a no@turnal
nativity under the earth ; but xodfurna/, when in a notturnal nativity above
the earth or in.a diurnal nativity under the earth,


Now the influences and ‘effeéts of the planets have {maller or greater
force, according to their afpeéts:and configuration with the Sun ; for
the’ Moon along her increafe, from her firft appearance to the firft
quarter, is moiftening ; from the firft quarter to her full, fhe warms ;
from the full to the laft quarter, fhe dries ; and, from the laft quar-
ter till fhe is hid, fhe is cold. The planets matutine to the firft fta-
tion are more moift; from the firft ftation till they rife at night,
they are more heating ; from their rifing at night to the fecond ftation,
they. dry more ; and, from the fecond ftation, they cool more. The firft
ftation is when a planet begins to be retrograde; and the fecond ftatior
when from retrogradation it becomes direct ; and they begin to’ rife at
night when in oppofition to the* Sun. Thus the power of thefe va-

rious


* The rifing and-fetting of the ftars are threefold 5 cofmical, achronical, and heliacal.——
Cofmical rifing is, when a ftar or planet. afcends the horizon with the fame:degree and mi-
No. 20. 5D nute


400 ANY HbLALstss FeR AT F-OON


rious affections, being mixed among themfelves, produces many diffe-
rences of quality in the circumambient matter which continually fur-
rounds us; the proper and diftinct power of which, alternately prevail-
ing, is changed more or lefs by the force of other configurations. To
thefe effects, the operation of the fixed ftars in general contaibute not a
little. TThofe of the greateft magnitude are the moft powerful and ef-
ficacious ; and thofe in or near the ecliptic have more energy than thofe
remote from it. The bright ftars have more influence than the dull
and Janguid ; thofe of a red colour partake of the quality of Mars ;
thofe of a lead colour operate with fimilar effect to Saturn ; and fo of
the others, according to their affinity with the planets, as hath been al-
ready explained. Stars which have northern latitude and declination
affect us moft ; and with South Latitude, the more fouthern. -Thofe
fituated in the zenith influence more than thofe which are more re-
mote ; and fuch as are in partile conjunction or antifcion of any planet,
or which rife or fet, or culminate, with any planet, have a more than


ordinary power and influence: but of themfelves the fixed ftars emit no
rays.


The four angles of the horofcope, or cardinal houfes of heaven, from
whence the general winds take their rife, muft likewife be confidered.
The oriental angle is poffeffed:of great drinefs; for, when the Sun ar-
rives there, thofe things which were moiftened by the night begin to dry ;
and the winds which blow from thence, commonly called eaft-winds, are
very drying, and without moifture. The angle of the fouth is moft hot,
becaufe the Sun, being there culminate, burns and heats with greater
energy, becaufe our mid-heaven declines to the fouth ; wherefore the
winds proceeding from thence, commonly called fouth-winds, are hot
and filling. But the occidental angle is moift, becaufe, when the Sun
arrives there, thofe things which were dried in the day begin to bé
moiftened ; confequently the winds blowing from thence, commonly
called weft-winds, are free from thicknefs or moifture. The northern
angle or point, lying towards the Bears, is moft cold, becaufe the culmi-
nating Sun, in refpect to that part of the earth which we inhabit, declines
moft from it ; for which reafon, the winds blowing from that quarter
are generally cold and freezing. ‘The perfect knowledge of thefe things
is very neceffary to enable us to diftinguith the mixture of particulars ; for


; it


nute of the ecliptic in which the Sun is ; and cofmical fetting is, when a ftar or planet fets exaclly
when the Sun rifes. Achronical rifing is, whena ftar rifes above the horizonat Sun fetting ; and
achronical fetting is, when a ftar fets with the Sun. Heliacal rifing is, when a ftar, which before
was hidden by the rays of the Sun, begins to appear inthe eaft ; and heliacal fetting is, when a ftar,
which before was.feen, is hidden under the Sun-beams, and difappears.


OF ASTROLOGY. 407


itis apparent, that, according to the conftitution of the feafons, of ages,
and of the angles, the efficient power and influence of the ftars vary ;
and, when there is no contrary conftitution, the ftars have a longer
influence, becaufe it isunmixed ; for, in heating, they that are moft hot
are moft powerful ; and, in moift conftitutions, thofe are the moft pow-
erful which are of a moiftening nature. But, when the conftitution is
contrary, they are weaker, by reafon of the temperament and mixture of
contrariety, affected: by the heating {tars in cold conftitutions, and by
the moift in dry. In the fame manner each of the other conftitations
have power, according to the proportions of their mixtures. To thefe
we may join the mutual properties of the twelve figns of the zodiac ;
for their general temperatures are agreeable to the feafons fubjett to each
fign ; and they obtain fome other qualities arifing from their analogy to
the Sun, Moon, and ftars; and thefe confiderations of the agreement or
difagreement of the natures and mixtures of the various influences of the
ftars, figns, and parts of heaven, are of no {mall confequence in aftrolo-
gical contemplations.


Of the twelve figns, fome are termed tropics, fome equinoétial, fome
fixed, and others bicorporal. The tropics are two; the firft from the
fummer folftice, the thirty degrees of Cancer ; and the other from the
winter folftice, the thirty degrees of Capricorn. Thefe are called tro-
pics, becaufe, when the Sun is pofited in the beginning of thefe figns, he
turns back out of the courfe of latitude or declination to the contraries,
making fummer by his entering into Cancer, and winter by his paffage
into Capricorn. There are alfo two of the figns equindétial ; one from
the vernal equinox, which is Aries; the other from the autumnal
equinox, whichis Libra. Thefe are fo termed, becaule, whenevever the
Sun eters the beginnitig of them, he makes the days and nights equal
all the world over. ,


Of the other eight figns, four are fixed and four bicotporal, The fixed
are thofe which follow the tropical and equinottial ; becaufeé, when the
Sun is pofited in any of thefe, the cold ‘or heat, or drinefs or moif-
ture of the feafons, which began while the San was in the tropics or
equinoctials, mote ftrongly affétts us, and thé conftitution of the fea-
fons is moré forcibly fele ; not becaufe their condition is naturally fuch,
but becaufe we, being no longer under fucha conftitution, béconie moré
fenfible of its power. The bicorporal follow the fixed ; and, becaufe
they are between the fixed and the tropics, they partake of thé nature of
both conftitutions.


1 Again,


402 AN LLLUS TRATION


Again, fix of the twelve figns are named. mafculine and diurnal ;and,
fix feminine and nogturnal. © And becaufe the night’ isalways next to.
the day, and the feminine is.joined to. the mafculine, they are: placed.
one after another by turns. The beginning is taken from Aries, be-
caufe the moifture of the fpring is the beginning of the feafons; and
becaufe the mafculine virtue is predominant, and the active power before,
the paflive ; therefore the figns, Aries and Libra are efteemed mafcu-
line and diurnal ; for thefe defcribe the equinoGtial circle ; and the prime,
mutation, and ftrongeft motion of all, is caufed by them. The other
figns are alternately placed one after another in their proper order ; and,
from the form and quality of them, fome are termed four-footed, others
terreftrial ; fome commanding, and.others fruitful, And, to renew them
in the mind of the reader, it may not be improper -to diftinguifh them
here. Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius, and Aquaries, are maf-
culine and commanding. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn,
and Pifces, are feminine and obeying. Aries, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius,
and Capricorn, are four-footed. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, are
terreftrial. Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifces, are fruitful. Again, Aries,
Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, are termed moveable. Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, and Aquaries, fixed. Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pifces,
common.. Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, vernal. Cancer, Leo, and
Virgo, eftival. Libra, Scorpio, and Sagittarius, autumnal. Capricorn,
Agquaries, and Pifces, hyemnal. Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, are hot,
dry, andfiery. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, are cold, dry, and earthy.
Gemini, Libra, and Aquaries, are hot, moift, and airy. Cancer, Scorpio,
Pifces, Gemini, and Leo, are moift and_watery ; and Virgo is barren,


Now from this difpofition and temperature of the figns are brought
about the great ends and purpofes of nature, by means of the afpects and
pofitions of the planets configurated in them; and it is upon thefe
afpects and configurations that the art of predicting is grounded, and
the events of futurity fought out and known. Thefe afpects are of two
forts, or clafles, viz. zodiacal and mundane. The principal zodiacal
afpects are the fextile, quartile, trine, and oppofition ; and, though the
conjunction cannot properly be termed an afpect, yet it may-come un-
der the more general name of a familiarity, common to all the afpects,.
The conjunction is formed by two planets being. bodily joined, or meet-
ing in the fame degree and minute of a fign. The fextile is formed b
two planets when they are two figns, or fixty degrees, afunder ; the
quartile, when three figns, or ninety degrees, afunder ; the trine, when
four figns, or one hundred and twenty degrees, afunder; and the oppo-
fition, when fix figns, or one hundred and eighty degrees, 2yenoe

which


OF ASTROLOGY w 403


which being juft one half of the great circle, places the planets exactly
facing one another, The fmaller or inferior zodiacal afpects are the
femiquadrate of forty-five degrees; the quintile, of feventy-two degrees ;
the fefquiquadrate, of one hundred and thirty-five degrees; and the
biquintile, of one hundred and forty-four degrees. And thefe are either
partile or platic; partile, when the conjunction or afpect is made in
the fame degree and minute, and platic when not configurated in the
fame degree and minute, but only within the orbs of the afpecting pla-
net. Moreover, thefe afpects are either dexter or finifter; dexter, when
contrary to the fucceffion of the figns, as a planet in Leo cafts a fextile
dexter to another planet in Taurus, Sinifter afpects are according to
the fucceflion of the figns; agreeable to which, a planet in Aries cafts
his trine finifter toanother in Leo; or one in Leo cafts a trine finifter


to another in Sagittarius.


Mundane afpects are thofe which are made in the meridional circle,
in reference to the earth, and confift of only the fextile, quartile, trine,
and oppofition ; though there are other familiarities which we call pa-
rallels, and thefe both mundane and Zodiacal. Of thefe familiarities,
the conjundtion is good with benevolent ftars; but with malevolent bad.
The quintile, biquintile, fextile, and trine, are alfo good and fortunate;
but the femiquadrate, fef{quiquadrate, quartile, and oppofition, are evil
and unfortunate. Thefe good and evil influences proceed more from the
nature and quality of the flars, than from the nature of the figns they
poffefs ; for it is found that even good afpetts of malefic planets will pro-
duce mifchief, though not in fo great a degree as the evil configurations.


Zodiacal parallels are what are commonly called Antifcians, and are
nothing more than parallels of declination, or two points in the hea-
vens at equal diftances from the beginning of any of the tropics, or
equinottial points: For example; one planet in ten degrees of Aries,
and another in twenty degrees of Pifces, are in zodiacal parallel to each
other ; of, in Other words, one planet in twenty degrees of Pifces cafts
its antifcian, or one parallel, to ten degrees of Aries, and its contra-anti-
{cian, or another parallel, to ten degrees of Libra. But, in taking thefe,
particular attention mutt be had to each of the planets latitude, for want
of which, great errors have been frequently made. For, fuppofe the
Moon to be pofited in twenty-two degrees of Taurus, with five degrees
of north latitude, her antifcian, or zodiacal parallel, taken in the com-
mon way, would fall in eight degrees of Leo, and her contra-antifcian
in eight degrees of Aquaries; whereas the true antifcian falls in ten
degrees of Cancer, which is no lefs than twenty-eight degrees from that

No. 20. 5s E obtained


404 A NO D:D: 0 Us Si eR AS Titoo |N
obtained in the common way, for there is exactly that difference bes
tween the ecliptical longitude of twenty-two degrees of Taurus, with-


out latitude, and twenty-two degrees of Taurus, with five degrees of
north latitude.


A planet thus confidered, as having latitude, hath four zodiacal paral-
lels ; onevat its body, one at its antif{cional point, and the other two at
their oppofite points. And hence, according to the example above
ftated, the Moon’s parallels at her body fall in twenty degrees of Ge-
“mini, and at the antifcional point in ten degrees of Cancer; and_.their
oppofite points or contra-antifcians, fall in twenty degrees of Sagitta-
rious, and in ten degrees of Capricorn. Thefe antifcians, and contra-
antifcians, are always of a benign and friendly nature, when formed by
the benefic planets ; but they are equally unbenign and unfortunate, when
made by violent and malevolent ftars.


As zodiacal parallels are only equal diftances from the tropical and
equinoctial circles, fo mundane parallels, by a parity of reafon, are no-
thing more than a like equal diftance from the horizontal ,or meridional
points or circles. For example, a planet on the cufp of the. twelfth
houfe is in parallel tothe cufp of the fecond houfe, becaufe it is exactly
at the fame diftance from the afcendant or horizon that the twelfth is ;
and likewife in parallel to. the eighth houfe, as. being exactly the fame
diftance from the tenth houfe or meridian that the twelfth is. And, as
the zodiacal parallels are meafured by the circle of the zodiac, fo the
mundane parallels are meafured by the diurnal or noCturnal arches; for
juft fo long as the Sun or any other planet will be in proceeding from
the cufp of the twelfth houfe to the cufp of the tenth, juft fo long the
fame Sun or other planet will be in proceeding, on the fame day, ‘from
the cufp of the tenth to the cufp of the eighth houfe; and juft fo many
hours and minutes of time as there are between the {un-rifing and noon,
juft fo many hours and minutes are there, the fame day, between noon and
{un-fetting ; hence the diftance between the Sun’s rifing and fetting is nc-
thing but the diurnal arch, which the meridian, or Sun’s place at noon,
cuts into two equal parts; and the diftance between the Sun’s {etting and
rifing conftitutes the nocturnal arch. Thefe mundane parallels have a
two-fold confideration in directions ; firft fimple, and according to natural
order ; and fecondly, according to the rapt motion of the earth, or primum
mobile, both of which mutt be attended to,in the calculation of nativities.


Now there are figns diffociate and feparate; and thefe are fuch as
have no familiarity by any of the ways before mentioned ; for they nei-
ther


Q) Pip Al STEROL LL O.G YW, 9 405


ther command nor obey, nor mutually behold each other, nor are of
equal power, but they are configurated by one or five figns, and do not
at all partake of the afpects, either by ‘oppofition, trine, quartile, or
fextile- Hence they are termed imjucf; for, being configurated by one
fign’s diftance, they are as it were diftorted from each other; and thofe
which behold by five figns divide the whole circle of the zodiac into
unequal parts, The figns under this defcription, are Arics, Gemini,
Libra, and Sagittarius, which have no familiarity or afpects with Taurus
or Scorpio; and the figns, Cancer, Virgo, Capricorn, and Pifcés, have
no familiarity with Leo or Aquaries. i


: 4

But the planets have familiarity with all parts of the zodiac by
Houfes, Trigons, Exaltations, and Terms. Cancer and Leo, approaching
nearer to our vertical point than either of the others, and’ thereby pro-~
ducing heat and warmth, are for that reafon defined to be the houfes of
the two great and primary luminaries: Leo is attributed to the Sun as
mafculine, and Cancer to the Moon as feminine. Hence the femi-
circle of the zodiac from Leo to Capricorn is termed folar, and from
Aquaries to Cancer lunar, in order that each planet fhould poffefs one
fign for its houfe in each of its femicircles ; the one bearing configuration
to the Sun, and the other to the Moon, according to the motion of the
fphere of each, and to their natural qualities. Saturn, therefore, being
in nature cold, and inimical to ‘heat, occupying the higheft orb, and
being at the greateft diftance from the luminaries, takes for his houfes
the figns which are oppolite to Cancer and Leo, namely, Aquaries and
Capricorn, becaufe thefe figns are by nature cold and wintery, and the
afpects which are made by oppofition, do not combine to any good or
benevolent purpofe. Jupiter, becaufe his orb is next below that. of
Saturn, affumes for his houfes the two next figns, Sagittarius and Pifces,
which are windy and fruitful, by reafon of their trigonal refpett to the
luminaries, which is a fituation proper for the prodution of goody
Mars, being next in order to Jupiter, and dry by nature, takes for his
houfes the two next figns, Aries and Scorpio, which are fimilar in their
effects to Mars, by having malefic and mifchievous radiations with the.
luminaries. Venus, being temperate, has for her houfes the two next
figns, Taurus and Libra, which are of a fruitful and prolific nature,
and correfpond with the luminaries by a fextile ray, and is never- more
than two figns diftant from the Sun. Mercury, being circum{cribed by
the orbs of all the other planets, takes for his houfes Gemini and Virgo,
and is never more than one fign diftant from the central Sun, being the
firft planet next him.


The


406 AN PLEUUST RATION


The familiarities by triplicity are next to be confidered by calculators
of nativities; for whereas a triplicity and figure of equal fides obtains
an agreement, fo the circle of the zodiac is circumfcribed by three
circles, the equinotlial and the two tropics, and is divided into four
equilateral triangles, which conftitute thefe triplicitics, The firft is
formed by the three mafculine figns, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; and
it has for its lords, the Sun, Jupiter, and Mars; but Mars being of a
contrary nature to the folar influence, he is excluded from bearing any
government in this triplicity, and therefore the Sun has the rule by
day, and Jupiter by night. Aries occupies the equinoctial circle, Leo
the eftival, and Sagittarius the winter. This trigon is principally
northern, by reafon of the dominion of Jupiter; and it is windy and
fruitful. It is alfo north-weft, and receives a mixture of the north-weft
winds, becaufe it is the houfe of Mars, which planet ftirs up and governs
thofe winds.


The fecond triplicity, which confifts of Taurus, Virgo, and Capri-
corn, is under the government of the Moon and Venus. The Moon
governs by night, and Venus by day. ‘Taurus is in the eftival circle,
Virgo in the equinodctial, and Capricorn in the winter. This triplicity,
becaufe of the dominion of Venus, is fouth; for this ftar, being endued
with a warming and moiftening power, produces fouth winds; and be-
caufe Saturn has his houfe in Capricorn, in this triplicity, it likewife
partakes of a mixture of the eaft winds ; for Saturn, being familiar to the
oriental parts, by reafon of the condition of the Sun, produces and go-
verns the eaft winds.


The third triplicity is formed of the figns Gemini, Libra, and Aqua-
ries, three mafculine figns, and is placed under the government of
Saturn and Mercury; Saturn rules by day, and Mercury by night;
Gemini is fituate in the fummer circle, Libra in the equinoctial, and
Aquaries in the winter, This triplicity is chiefly ecaftern, on ac-.
count of the government of Saturn; but it becomes partly north-eaftt,,
by the influence of Jupiter, on which account it aflumes a mixture of the
north-eaft winds.


The fourth triplicity, confifting of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifcés, is
chiefly under Mars, who derives an influence here, on account of
having his houfe in Scorpio ; but, becaufe the figns in this triplicity are
feminine, the Moon by night, and Venus by day, rule jointly with
Mars, and intermix their qualities and influence together. ‘Caneer is
fituate in the eftival circle, Scorpio in the winter, and Pifces in the

3 equinoctial.


OF. A'S: TR OL OG Y. 407


This triplicity is weftern, becaufe of the dominion of Mars and the
Moon ; but, affuming a mixture by the rule of Venus, it becomes in
fome meafure fouth-wett.


The familiarities by exaltation are thus occafioned ; the Sun, when
he enters Aries, makes his tranfit into the high and northern {emicircle ;
but, when he enters Libra, he paffes into the low and fouthern femicir-
cle. For this reafon, the Sun has his exaltation in Aries, in which the
days begin to lengthen, and the heating nature of the Sun begins to in-
creafe ; and forthe contrary reafon he receives his fallin Libra. Saturn,
being of an oppofite nature to the Sun, has an exaltation in Libra, and
his fall in Aries; for, wherefoever heat is increafed, cold is diminifhed ;
and, where there is an augmentation of cold, heat is leffened. So the
Moon, becaufe fhe makes her conjunction with the Sun in Aries, and
makes the beginning of the increafe of her light in the firft fign of her
triplicity, which is Taurus, that is afligned for her exaltation. So Ju-~
piter, the producer of northern and fruitful winds, when in Cancer, be-
comes more northerly, and acquires a greater increafe of power; he
therefore takes Cancer for his exaltation, and Capricorn for his fall. And
fince Mars is chiefly of a burning nature, and becomes moft heating in
Capricorn, becaufe he is then in his moft fouthern-declination, he hath
his exaltation in Capricorn, oppofite to that of Jupiter, and his fall in
Cancer. Again, Venus is naturally moiftening, but moftly fo when in
Pifces ; for which reafon fhe aflumes her exaltation in that fign, and
takes her fall in Virgo. But Mercury being of an oppofite nature, and
moftly dry, takes the oppofite fign Virgo for his exaltation ; for then
autumn, the drieft part of the feafon, appears ; and he has his fallin the


fign Pifces.


Familiarities by terms have been already largely explained in the
former part of this work. But it is neceffary to remark, that the be-
ginning of the figns, and of the terms alfo, ought to be made from the
beginning of the equinottial and tropical figns ; and this is manifeft, be-
caufe we fee their natures, and powers, and familiarities, have not any
other caufe, but from the tropics and equinoxes ; for, if other begin-
nings are appointed, we {hall either be neceflitated to ufe the nature of
the figns no longer in the theory of judgments, or, if we do admit them,
we fhall commit error by corrupting the diftances, and dividing thofe
from which influences are afforded them.


Befides thefe familiarities of the ftars and figns, they alfo poffefs what
are called their faces, thrones, and the like. Their proper face is when
No. 20. gF each


408 ASN «VIVO S FR ALT ON


each flar keeps the fame figure with the Sun and Moon which its houfe
bears to their houfe. This is done when Venus makes a fexangular
figure to the luminaries ; to the Sun when fhe is occidental, and to
the Moon when oriental, according to the fucceflion of houfes. They
are alfo faid to be in their thrones, when they have a power in the place
they poffefs, according to the foregoing prerogatives, by two or more
teftimonies; for then their energy and influences are increafed, becaufe
the familiarity of the ambient twelve figns co-operates therewith. They
are likewife faid to bein their joy, when, although they have no fami-
liarity with the ambient figns, yet are fo in refpeét to others of the fame
condition with them, and by which likenefs there is found a communi-
cation by fympathy. So again, when they are found of an unlike and
contrary condition, much of their power is diminifhed by a new and
mixed virtue arifing from the different temperature of the ambient figns.
Hence let it be underftood, that, when Mercury is one fign diftant from
the Sun, he is in his face ; Venus, when two figns diftant ; Jupiter,
when four figns diftant ; and Saturn, when five figns from the Sun.—
The fame obfervation holds good in refpect of the Moon, but then the
rule muft be made in figns antecedent to her; as, if the Moon were in
Virgo, then Mercury would be fo dignified in Leo, Venus in Cancer,
Mars in Gemini, &c. The thrones of the planets are thefe : Saturn’s
throne isin Aquaries ; Jupiter’s in Sagittarius; Mars’s in Scorpio; the
Sun’sin Leo; Venus’s in Taurus ; Mercury’s in Virgo; and the Moon’s
in Cancer. . i


The familiarities, by application and feparation, are likewife to be con-
fidered in the Doétrine of Nativities. Thofe planets which precede
apply to thofe which follow ; and they that follow feparate from thofe
which precede. Thefe applications and feparations are likewife to be
confidered with refpeét to their latitude ; for the fmaller the latitude of
planets in conjunction is, the more powerful will be their influence ;
and, if two planets in conjunction have confiderable latitude of different
denominations, their influence will be thereby much leffened. This
obfervation likewife holds good in direttions; for, the nearer any pla-
net is to the ecliptic line, the greater will his*influence be. Moreover,
their effecis are either ftrong or weak, in refpect of the horizon; for,
when they are pofited in the mid-heaven, or pafs into the place fucce-
dent to the mid-heaven, they are very ftrong and powerful ; the fame
alfo if they are in the horizon itfelf, or in any of the fuccedent houfes,
and more particularly when in oriental parts. But, when they are in the


imum ceeli, or otherwife pofited under the earth, their influence is very
weak, and of but little effect.


1 From


O(Pi A'S) TE R1 OG O GAY. 409


From all the foregoing confiderations, it is evident that the efficient
power of the ftars is deduced from their peculiar and natural afpects.
or proportional diftances, confidered in refpe€&t of the Sun, the angles,
and the quality of the ambient figns; and by the power and influence of
thefe afpecéts are all aftrological {peculations governed. But how thefe
afpects were firft difcovered, and their virtues and proportions afcertained,
does no where appear; though it might be no difficult tafk to account
for both upon: philofophical and mathematical principles, fince nature
every where, as well in the motions and effects of the heavenly bodies,
as in all other arithmetical and geometrical refpects, particularly cele-
brates thofe proportions above all others: Picus, fpeaking of the afpects,
thinks mankind were led to the knowledge of them by obferving the
different phafes of the Moon; for, when fhe is new, horned, in her
quarters, gibboflity, or at full, her forms are ftill changed at thefe
proportioned diftances from the Sun ; befides which, it is to be obferved,
that in her annual revolutions fhe is conftantly found about the trine of
her own place in the beginning of the former year.


Other aftronomers, of eftablifhed reputation, have likewife obferved,
that nature particularly points to every configuration, while we confider
the motions of the other planets. Abohazer judicioufly affirms, that
the two inferior planets, in their ftations, defcribe the arch proper to a
quartile afpect ; and Pliny alfo recommends to our obfervation the trine
afpect, conftantly formed by the ftations of three fuperior planets.
But, above all, it cannot be confidered without great admiration, how
wonderfully nature. hath nobilitated all the afpects in the motions of
Saturn and Jupiter. For, as their conjunctions are rare, and happen but
once in twenty years, fo hath nature evermore difpofed thefe conjunc-
tions in the moft remarkable parts of the zodiac, that is, in fuch figns
only as behold each other in an equilateral triangle infcribed. For, be-
tween any two great conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, there are nine-
teen Egyptian years, three hundred and eighteen days, and thirteen
hours, in which fpace of time thofe planets are moved from the place
of their former conjunctions eight figns and almoft three degrees ; which
exce{s of three degrees is the caufe why, after ten conjunCticns, they pafs
from one triplicity to another, and one triplicity continues one hundred
ninety-eight equal years, two hundred fixty-five days, (the intercalary
day of every fourth year omitted,) and ten hours. But the revolution of
allthe triplicities is finifhed only once in feven hundred ninety-four
equal years, three hundred thirty-one days, and fixteen hours ; or other-
wife in feven hundred ninety-four Julian years, one hundred thirty-
three days, and fixteen hours ; which, being doubled, amounts to one

thoufand


410 AN 7 DH U.8 TRAE TON


thoufand five hundred and eighty-eight, which number of years thofe
authors are thought to have refpected who confidered the year 1588
from the birth of Chrift would prove fo fatal.


From hence therefore it is, and not without fufficient caufe, that
they are termed great conjunctions, both happening rarely, and abiding
in one triplicity almoft two hundred years together, and not compleat-
ing all the triplicities of the zodiac in much lefs than eight hundred
years: confequently they have not yet gone through all the triplicities
eight times fince the beginning of the world. Neither are the other
afpects formed by thefe planets to pafs unnoticed ; for whoever obferves
when Saturn and Jupiter behold each other by an oppofition or quartile
afpect, they will evidently perceive that they ftill carry fuch a regard
to the figns or places of their preceding and next conjunctions, as ever-
more to irradiate the one and the other with an oppofition, fextile,
quartile, or trine afpect; which I think is a fufficient proof that nature
hath allured us to the confideration of the archs formed by thefe afpects
in the particular motion of each refpective planet.


To confirm the virtues and effects of thefe afpects, we need only con-
fider what phyficians are taught by experience, namely, that the crifis
of all acute difeafes has a palpable and extraordinary fympathy with
all thefe five configurations of the Moon, made to her place at the be-
ginning of the difeafe. Or, asa further proof, we need only refer to
what has already been faid relative to the tides, which conftantly
obferve the motions of the Moon, their {pring and higheft floods al-

ways concurring with their conjunction and oppofition to the Sun, as
' the neaps and loweft tides always do to her quarters. And it is
equally remarkable that the feas, in their daily ebbing and flowing upon
every coaft, have refpect only to fuch azimuthal circles, as are in a
quartile pofition when the Moon paffes by them. Again, the Sun moft
evidently manifefts great effects by the quartile afpect, fince he modi-
fies and governs the viciflitudes of feafons, or four quarters of the
year, by his ingrefs into the four equinoctial and tropical points of
the zodiac.


The power of thefe afpects is not injudicioufly ftated by Julius
Firmicus, in the arithmetical obfervation which he makes of the num-
_ ber of figns agreeable to the afpects, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, anfwering in pro-~

greflive order to the conjunction, fextile, quartile, trine, and oppofi-
tion ; for thefe numbers only, and no others, will divide the zodiac,
- confifting of twelve figns; for which reafon he makes them the only


aliquot


OF AB TROLOGYY. 4M


aliquot partsof acircle. Ptolomy alfo added not alittle to the dignity,
of thefe irradiations, when he firft difcovered the geometrical propor-
tion which the fubtenfes of each of thefe archs bear in refpett to the
diameter of a circle. Others again, with no lefs ingenuity, have ob-
ferved, that, amongft all regular or ordinate figures that may be in{cribed
in acircle, though the fame be infinite, there are none whofe fides and
angles carry away the prerogative at the circumference and centre, but
thofe whofe fides and angles are anfwerable to the fubtenfes and archs
of their afpects; For, amongift all ordinate planes that may be infcribed,
there are no two whofe fides joined together have pre-eminence to oc-
cupy afemicircle, but the hexagon, quadrate, and equilateral triangle,
an{wering to the fextile; quartile, and trine irradiated. The fubten{e
therefore of a fextile afpect confifts of two figns; and, joined to the fub-
tenfe of a trine, compofed of four, being regular and equilateral, take
up fix figns, which is a complete femicircle. In like manner, the
fides of a quadrate infcribed, fubtending three figns, and, twice reckoned,
alfo occupy the moiety of a circle. And what the foregoing figures are
faid to perform, either doubled or joined together, may alfo be found
in the afpect of oppofition ; for the diametrical line which paffes from
the place of conjunction to the oppofite point, divides a circle into two
equal parts, a circumftance which cannot be found in any other inicripts.
For example, the fide of a regular pentagon fubtends feventy-two de-
grees; of anoctagon but forty-five; the remainders of which archs, viz.
one hundred and eight, and one hundred and thirty-five, degrees, are not
fubtended-by the fides of any ordinate figure.


And thus, as the fubtenfes of. thefe afpects are the fame with the fides
of the foregoing infcripts, and only take up the circumference of a
circle; fo it is evident, that the angles at which they concur are the
fame wherewith the ordinate planes take up the whole {pace about the
centre, For, if we confider the angle of a fextile afpect at the earth, it
is all the fame with that of an. equilateral triangle confifting of fixty
degrees, and contains two-thirds of a right angle; but fix times two
thirds of aright angle make four right angles; wherefore fix fextiles,
equal to fix equilateral triangles, fill the whole fpace about a point,
which is equal to four right angles. Secondly, every angle of a
quartile is a right angle, and the fame with the angle of a rectangle
quadrilater figure, four of which fill a whole {pace. ‘Thirdly, the angle
which two ftars in a trine make at the centre of the earth, is meafured
by an angle of one hundred and twenty degrees, which is equal to the
angle of a regular hexagon, confifting of a right angle and one-third;
and, taken three times, makes four right angles; whereof three equila-

No, 21. Ot ay tera]


412 AYNS CSE A ouet OR AO me Ny


teral hexagons, or three trine afpedts, alfo fill the whole fpace about the
centre. Tothefe we may likewife add the afpe& of oppofition ; which
confifts of two right angles, and therefore being doubled will perform
the like operation with the reft; whilft any other figure of many angles,
however joined together, will either fall fhort of four right angles, or
elfe exceed them. For inftance, the angle of a pentagon contains a right
angle and one fifth over, wherefore three fuch angles placed about a point
will fall fhort of four right angles by two fifths of a right angle ; whilft
on the other hand four fuch angles will exceed four right angles by
four-fifths.


Thefe fpeculations therefore duly confidered, it were fenfelefs to ima-.
gine that nature hath fo many ways diftinguifhed thefe remarkable irra-
diations of the ftars in vain, or admonifhed us to a particular regard of
them, by fo many rare and fecret operations, as well in the motion of
the planets, as in their effects and proportions, if they were not endued
with more force and virtue than any of the others. Hence it has given
{cope to the ingenuity and abilities of the learned to affign a caufe, why
thefe few configurations, above all the others, fhould be endued with
fuch extraordinary efficacy. Nor has any reafon yet been given, with
more apparent probability, than that thefe proportions, whereof the
afpetts are found to confift, are precifely the fame with thofe which are
found in harmonical concords; for which reafon it is fuppofed no lefs
probable, that the rays of the ftars in thefe proportioned diftances, fhould
powerfully affect the matter of all fublunary things, by the fame rule
that the like geometrical fymmetry in founds and voices fhould ftir up
the fenfe and paflions of the hearer. And it is an eftablifhed obfervation
throughout the productions of nature, that, where due proportion is
not wanting, there fhe never fails to endue all her effects with fuch an
height of perfection, as cannot but firike the fenfe and underftanding of
every obferver. And thus it is even in artificial compofitions, and in
medicines; for we know thefe only to be moft kind and fovereign,
which obferve a competent fymmetry or temperature of the active and
paflive qualities. With great propriety, therefore, and with every ap-
pearance of truth, moft of the learned agree with Ptolomy, that the caufe
of this wonderful efficacy in the foregoing afpetts, proceeds in a great
imeafure from harmonical proportion, © .


But more clearly to demonftrate this fimilitude or affinity between
the proportions of the afpects, and the like diftances obferved in mufical
concords, we muft underftand that all harmony whatfoever originally
fprings from three fuch terms of numbers as refpect each other in fuch a

manner,


OP “Re S39 RO). LPOG Y. 41


manner, that their differences invariably retain the fame proportion as
is found between their extremes. For inftance, in thefe three numbers,
6, 4, 3, anfwering to the figns of the oppofition, trine, and quartile
configurations, it is evident, if we compare the extremes with the mean,
that 2 will be the difference between 6 the firft, and 4 the fecond,
number; and 1 is in like manner between 4 the middle or fecond,
and 3 the third, number; but 2 being double in proportion to 1, there-
fore 6, the firft number, refpects 3, the third number, with the like
proportion. The analogy of which proportions, as before ftated, is
found to be the bafis of all mufic, arifing wholly from thefe three
fimple concording diftances, which by muficians are termed diapente,
confifting of a feiquialter proportion, as 6 to 4; or, which is all the
fame, of three or two; diateffaron, compounded of a fefquitertia, as 4.
to3; and diapa/on, confifting of a double proportion, as 6 to 3, or 2 to
1; andis equal to the two firft diftances and proportions put together..
For a fefquialter added to a fefquitertia, according to the rules of pro-

ortion, will produce a diapafon, or double proportion, exactly fuch as
is found between the former extremes. compared together, .viz.- as 6-to
3. In like manner, by comparing the diapafon with both thefe parts,
that is, with the fefquialter and fefquitertia, according to the cuftomary.
manner of. fupputating proportions, we are brought to the two other:
compounded or imperfect concords, fo conftituting the five firft’and na-
tural diftances in harmonical founds, that, being diverfly and judicioufly.
varied between themfelves, produce an infinite. variety. of all Kinds of.
melody.


After the fame manner we find it with regard to the light and in-
fluence of the heavens. For, although there are other afpecis attributed
to the ftars, both zodiacal and mundane, yet thefe five were anciently, and
are even now, obferved as being moft apt to action, and moft powerful in
their effects, namely, the conjunction, oppofition, trine, quartile, and
fextile ; and there is nothing more certain, than that. by the harmonical
mixture of thefe proportioned beams, the generation and corruption of
this mortal world is infinitely varied and governed. Wherefore, as the
force of all harmony, fo likewife the-effectual reafon of all action in the
influence of the ftars, is properly deduced from the aforefaid. fymmetry
of thefe diftances. But, more fully to illuftrate that the angles of the
afpects, compared between themfelves, concur with thefe harmonic pro-
portions in mufic, let it be remembered, that ftars in an oppofite or dia-
metrical afpect are disjoined by the fpace of two right angles, which
are meafured with the arch of fix figns, or one hundred and eighty de-


grees of circumference; and that the trine, confifting of four figns, or
one


Ald AM: BDIgntei§ -TeRoA. Td ON
one ‘hundred and twenty degries, conftitutes one right angle and one


third of another; alfo, that the quartile afpect takes up one entire right
angle, and is fubtended with the arch of three figns, or ninety degrees ;
and likewife that a fextile is conftituted but of two figns, or fixty de.
grees, which is two thirds of a right angle. This being admitted, if
we now compare the two right angles of the oppofition, taken toge-
ther with the angles of the reft of the afpects, and either the trine placed


* between the oppofition and the quartile, or the quartile between


the oppofition and the fextile, we fhall find either way three num-
bers which admit all the Jaws of harmonic proportion, as becomes evi-
dent by the following figures *.


The firft figure fufficiently explains itfelf; but in the fecond, let the
oppofition be compared with the fextile, and it will be found to have a
triple proportion to the fame, compounded of a double and fefquialter
proportion, as diapente is with diapafon in mufic; and hence it is found:
no fimple or perfect afpect, but exactly anfwerable to B flat, the firft
imperfect or compounded concord in mufic, being a fixth from G fol re
ut; which is neverthelefs in fome refpects efteemed perfect, becaufe it
bears the fame divifion, compared to D /o/re, as the perfect concords do;
for itis half a fifth, and fituate in the centre between r uz and D /o/re.
Again, the fextile afpect compared with the trine, is juft one half there-
of, which ‘has been already proved to be in a fefquialter proportion to
the oppofition, as D /o/ re is tor uf, and therefore exactly correfponds
with the diapente in mufic, which I here take occafion to mention


* The firft figure proves the three concords to have three perfect afpects; and the fecond


fhews the fextile to be an imperfect afpect, agreeable to diapente cum diapa/on, that is, a triple pro«
portion, as 60 is to 80, th


again


OH TAASST RAOUL MONGLY.4 A 415"


-again, becaufe I may hereafter allude to it when I come to fpeak of the
new afpects. What I have already faid will fuffice to thew the philo-
{ophical f{peculation of \thofe who have afcribed the efficacy of the pla-
Netary irradiations to the harmonical proportions which are found between
them; and, fince it isebvious that thefe afpects do really bear the fame
mutual ref{pect one towards another as all harmonical concords are found
to retain among themfelves, what reafon can be affligned, why nature’s
operations in the lights and influences of the heavenly bodies fhould not
be governed by this fymmetry of proportion, in the fame manner as we
find to be univerfally admitted in the fcience of mufic? |


But all this rather ferves to illuftrate a fimile, and to prove that nature
has indeed diftinguifhed thefe proportions with extraordinary virtues
above any other, than to fatisfy the mind wy, in the infinite variety of
founds and lights, thefe proportions only fhould correfpond fo fweetly
in mufic, and be moft effectual in the Operations of nature. Kepler,
with a fhew of plaufibility, has endeavoured to demonftrate, that God, in
the creation of the world, obferved the fame proportion in the magni-
tude and diftance of the celeftial fpheres that is found in the regular
folids which in geometry have their origin from the ordinate planes ;
and therefore concludes, that the motions of the heavenly bodies cor-
ref{pond moit {weetly, and co-operate moft powerfully together, when
the nature of fublunary things, endued, as he fuppofes, with a fenfitive
faculty, apprehends and receives the beams of the ftars by their con-
currence at the centre of the earth; which anfwers to the ordinate
planes, from whence the regularity of thefe proportions is derived, as
the impreffed characters of that admirable fymmetry which God is faid
to have obferved if the creation of the world. And hence he fuppofes
that, as often as any earthly fubftance meets with thefe proportions, it is
affected as it were by this idea, and exercifed in fuch a manner, that
what it but ordinarily performs at other times it will-now produce
with much more effect. Not that thefe proportions work any thing of
themfelves ; for, in mufic, it is neither the founds, nor the proportion
of the concords, that work any thing of themfelves, or beget any de-
light in the hearer; but the foul, approaching to the organs of fenfe,
there firft entertains the founds inwardly, then regards their proportions,
and, finding the fame good and geometrical, laftly exhilarates itfelf, and
moves the body wherein it is as with an object wherein it takes delight.
Such alfo is the fympathy between the heavenly influepces and all fublu-
nary matter, animate, or inanimate. |


No. 2I. Subd But,


a6, AN ILLUS TRATION

But, be this conceit of Kepler’s as it may, we are not without fuffi-
cient geometrical demonftration, to fhew the reafon why thefe propor-
tions or irradiations of the ftars are more effectual than any others. For,
fince it is admitted that an union of beams affords the greateft influence,
fo it is allowed that the conjunction and oppofitien are, for this reafon,
the moft potent and powerful configurations of all others, as is fhewn


by the following figure, where we find the beams, as well incident as re-
flected, to be united,


For, let A be fuppofed in conjunction with B, it is firft manifeft thae
all the beams flowing from G and E,, the points of touch in the circum-
ference of A, fhall unite themfelves with the beams that are fent from
B to C,, the earth’s centre. Sccondly, we are alfo to obferve, that in
this cafe the beams AC, or B C, coming from the centre of the ftars,.
reflect only into itfelf, as being perpendicular ; whereas thofe beams
which are fent from the points E and G make an acute angle at C, and
reflect the one into the other at equal angles ; as G.-C reflect from C to
E, andEC from € to G. Laftly, the union that happens in an oppofi-
tion is manifeft without any illuftration, where the beams fent from the
oppofite points make but one ftrait line, as GF, and EH, in the
foregoing figure.. | .

n


OF ASTROLOGY. 417


In like manner, in my contemplation, the configurations of the fex-
tile and trine have a concurrence of their beams at the earth, and a mu-
tual reflection of the one intothe other, and fo an union by reflection; as
in the following figure is manifeft.


For, admit A BC to be three ftars, A and B in a fextile configuration,
and A C inatrine; then, for fo muchas B F, the beam incident of the
fextile, falls obliquely in refpect of A F, and makes an acute angle there-
with, it is evident, to any one who has the fmalleft underftanding in
optics, that BF fhall reflect to C, and fo be united to CF, the inci-
dent of the ftar C, which is in a trine configuration with A. For the
fame reafon, C F fhall reflect to the {tar in B, and be alfo united with B
F, the incident of the ftar at B. And hence arife the grounds of that
familiarity in thefe archs of heaven, which Ptolomy has laid down as the
moft apt for the apheta of life, or the houfes of the figure.


But the quartile afpect, whofe beams only cut each other ad angulos
reétos, and fo reflect into themfelves, derives its principal virtue from
the exact proportion of its angles in taking up the centre of the earth ;
and hence the myftery of thefe configurations wholly confifts in this, that
thefe irradiations only, and thofe that are derived from them, are pro-
portionable unto all patible matter, and therefore moft effectual. . For
that thefe irradiations only are every way proportionable, has been al-
ready abundantly proved, whether we refpect their taking up thecircum-
ference, the power, and proportion, of their fubtenfes, unto the diameter,
or, laftly and principally, their occupying of place at the centre of the
earth by their angles, whereby they. muft needs fhinc upon all elementiry

mat.er


418 AN “PF areuls tet alr oan


matter with a due and even mixture of light and influence. And, fince
no other archs, fubtenfes, or angles, are found to enjoy thefe preroga-
tives, it is evident that thefe, above all others, have that fymmetry of
proportion which is neither defective, interrupted, nor redundant ; ‘but
fuch are thearchs, fubtenfes, and angles, of thefeirradiations, that thefe,
and no other, are exactly proportionable. Now as that which is. defeétive,
and wants equality of proportion, leaves the action fruftrate and with-
out effect ; fo that, which on theother hand offends in excefs, muft needs
incur the contrary fault, and overcharge that which either nature or art
intended to perform ; whereby it will neceflarily follow, that, wherever
there is no defect, nor excefs, but an equal and juft mixture of the in-
fluence of the ftars in thefe irradiations, thefe only can be apt and pro-
per to produce perfect and agreeable effects in the formation and tempe-
_ rature of all fublunary things. For it happens in thefe effects which are
produced by the mixture of light and heat, juft the fame as in chemi-
cal operations, where a defect of heat produces nothing ; while, on the


contrary, excefs will deftroy the whole, either by fublimation, vitrifica-
tion, eruption, or the like.


Having thus fatisfactorily fhewn how the points of the ordinate planes,
whereunto thefe configurations have been compared, often reiterated, do
take up place, I fhall now fet forth how the beams of any two ftars in
any one of the former configurations fhall occupy more fpace than that
which is comprehended between their incidents.or beams of true motion;
and how by their beams, either incident, reflected, or oppofite, they
occupy and poffefs the whole centre of the earth at one inftant with pro-
portionable angles. .To demonitrate this, in refpect to the conjunction
and oppofition, whofe force rather depends upon union than proportion,
I need only refer the reader to a view of the laft diagram but one, where
he will find that the united beams of fuch ftars as are in conjunction and
oppofition furround the centre, and all elementary matter whatfoever,
fubject to the actions of heaven. With regard to the quartile, whofe
beams incident and oppofite traverfe the centre of the earth at four right
angles, viz. at AFG, GF I, AFH, and’ H F1; and. feeing four
points of a rectangle quadrilater figure hath been already proved to occu-
py place; [likewife need no other proof, in this configuration, than that the
reader will in the laft figure obferve how thefe four right angles, made
by one quartile afpect, take up the centre of the earth. But, concerning
the trine and fextile afpects, we have yet more to confider; for, fuppofe
two ftars, Aand B, in the laft diagram, irradiate the earth with their
fextile beams ; although it be true, that, by protracting the oppofite
beam from B to F, the centre of the earth feems occupied with propor-


3 tionable


OF * A SiTeR: Of le OG -Y, 419


tionable angles, B F A being fubtended by the ark of fixty degrees,
which is before declared to be the angle of an ordinate equilateral trian-
gle, and fo leaves the outward angle B F I equal to the angle of an ordi-
nate hexagon, fubtended here by the ark of one hundred and twenty de-
grees, which is the ark of a trine ; and the like being alfo found in the
angles made by the oppofite beams ad verticem; yet, neverthelefs, we
muft here confider how the incident beam of B, viz. BF, reflects into
C, and fo takes up the whole femicircle A B C I with three fextiles, viz.
AFB, BFC, andC FI. Inlike manner, if we fuppofe C to be in
a triangular configuration with A, it is evident that as the oppofite beam
of A, viz. F I, makes a fextile with the incident beam of a ftar at C, viz.
CF; fo CF, being the beam incident of the ftar at C, reflects alfo to
the point B, and fo makes the fame three fextile afpects wherewith the
aforefaid whole femicircle is occupied, as above demonftrated. Thefe
confiderations will undoubtedly fatisfy the reader how any two ftars, in
either of the afpects above alluded to, proportionably occupy the whole
centre of the earth in the fame moment of time, without reiterating the
fame angle.


I have hitherto only fpoken of what are termed the old configurations,
which are indifputably the moft excellent; but I fhall now mention
what are called the new ones, as introduced by the ingenious Kepler,

namely, the quintile confifting of feventy-two degrees ; the biguintile,
of one hundred and forty-four degrees ; and the /e/guiquadrate, of one
hundred and thirty-five degrees ; which afpects, being added to the for-
mer, make eight configurations, anfwering to the eight confonant ftops
in a monochord.. Thefenew additions are byno means improperly made,
fince many eminent practitioners of this fcience have experienced their uti-
lity in fpeculations on the weather and meteors; as well as in bringiag
up the accidents of a nativity. Neither is there any want of philofophi-
cal or mathematical demonftrations to fupport them; for as in mufic
there are but three perfect concords, namely, the diapafon, diapente,
and diateffaron ; fo in aftrology there are but three perfect afpects an{wera-.
ble to them, viz. the oppofition, the trine, and the quartile ; the fextile
having already been proved an imperfect afpect, anfwering exactly to B
flat, the firft among the imperfect and compounded concords. Where-
fore, confidering that the firft three perfect concords are found to have
their perfect afpects anfwerable unto them, and that B flat, being an im-
perfect concord, is alfofound to agree exactly in proportion with the
{extile, being an imperfect afpect, this undoubtedly gave Kepler fuffici-
ent reafon to conceive that the other harmonical proportions contained in
the fame monochord might alfo have their afpects, namely, the quin-

No. ai. gl tile,


420 ANe Oe LY s'TiR alae, N


tile, biquintile, and fefquiquadrate, which are precifely found to cor-
refpond with them, and are in a fimilar degree effectual in their mode of


operation.


Thus having explained what the afpects or configurations of the pla
nets really are, and proved that their power and influences are grounded
upon philofophical and mathematical principles, I fhall now proceed to
fhew their applications in the iffues of human life, from the conception


to the grave.


#


Iris, I believe, univerfally admitted, that the beginning of human
generation takes place at the time of conception ; and therefore we ought
to be exact in afcertaining this time, and in confidering the effective

ower of the configurations of the ftars, asthey then happen to be pofited,
and from thence contemplate the qualities of the mind and body. For
in the beginning, although the feed at once affumes a quality by the
communication of the circumambient matter, which at other times of
‘its formation and increafe becomes different ; yet naturally, as it in-
creafes, it retains its own proper matter, and is rendered more like the
peculiar nature of the firft quality, with which it was impreffed at the
time of conception, But, if it be of fome importance to know the time
of conception, it is infinitely more fo to know the true time of birth ;
for by the firft, the accidents only before birth are known; but by the
fecond, thofe incident to our whole lives are to be difcovered. Where-
fore one may be called a beginning, and the other an after-beginning ;
the firft, the generation of human feed ; the fecond, that of man. For
in this ftate the infant aflumes many things which it had not when in the
womb, and thefe peculiar to human naturealone, and the formation of
the body. And although the properties of the celeftial and elemen-
tary matter feems to confer nothing at the time of birth in refpect tothe
formation of the child, yet it operates moft forcibly upon it in other re-
{pects ; for nature, after perfecting the formation, difpofes the eniuing
effect according to the ftate of the former at the beginning. Hence it
is reafonable, in thofe whofe time of conception is unknown, that the
configurations of the ftars formed at their birth, fhould be fignificative ;
not that it wholly contains an effective power, but becaufe it neceflarily
hath a power by nature fimilar to the effective. But it is always bett, if
the time of conception can be had, to compare it with the time of birth;
for the time of conception fhews what fhall happen to the infant while in
the womb; as whetherit fhall be {trong or weak, firm or infirm, perfect or
imperfect, maleor female, fingle or twins ; or whether it fhall arrive to
the full and perfect time of birth. But ‘the occurrences of life after birth
are to beconfidered from the pofition of the heavens at the birth only.

e Now


OF AY sate RAO DO GY: 421


Now, fince nothing can be predicted in aftrology without this funda-
mental guide, namely, the radix, or true time of birth, various me-
thods have been invented, in different ages, for the purpofe of afcertain-
ing this point with precifion, after the eftimate or fuppofed time is
given. And this is termed the rectification of nativities, becaufe the
time ufually noted down by parents or midwives is feldom correct, either
through inattention, or errors in clocks; but, by thefe rules, the diffe-
rence between the eftimate or fuppofed time, and the real, is difcovered
and correfted. This rectification is done by various ways; firft, by
the Trutine of Hermes; fecondly, by the Animoder of Ptolomy ; and,
thirdly, by accidents of the native’s life, which are alfo fivefold; firft,
according to Argol ; fecondly, according to Kepler; thirdly, according
to Morinus ; fourthly, by the luminaries; and fifthly, by a new and
more correct method.


By the Trttine of Hermes, erect the figure to the eftimate time of
birth, and rectify the Moon’s place thereto; then take her diftance from
the afcendant, if fhe be under the earth ; or fromthe feventh houfe, if
above the earth, by fubtracting the angles from the Moon’s place ;
adding thereto the three hundred and fixty degrees of the zodiac, if fub-
traction cannot be made without: then with theremainder enter the fol-
lowing table under the column of Moon’s diftance, and even with it, in the
fecond column, if the birth was in February ; in the third column, if in
January or December ; in the fourth column, if in April or September;
orin the fifth column, ifin March, May, June, July, Auguft, Oftober,
or November; will be found an equation of days to be added to, or fub-
tracted from, theday of birth, according to the letters A or S, at the
top of each refpective column, whofe fum or difference gives the day of
the month in the month of conception ; always-obferving, that, if the
year of birth be aleap-year, one day more mutt be added.


THE


422 A Ny ‘bh lar th SoTeRs A, Td ON


») ditt) A. | A A | ee oe ditt) AtA | Ail A.
Ox 92Ohy 3 | 2 aly phy Vier? Dveies Qh Dash beh dyn? be
O 343 | I S I Sah hea rel Re 2

| ih a is es p= NL
a Lied, WS uhh otale sty alaw4 cae bh oS end ees: far
bs bivQtelidcke 2 Beta Wald rOr ah tag 0: 7
2 AE dB bsfeaF Ra WPS. Olle aed 08
Bye U7] eB sft dod Sob Ral 18 ont Shy Ccletszulae 9 og

S aL aoe coh pommel Were SITES CL STTe
19 T) Ob Ao See Orbs Tene! MOL iN ial OE 50 sedi
BBs Egy $2) CO.den2als Bbela 17a wk Oo post rg
ak 26h 6. fog Zot s 8 bo9 |= |2 Al. OtleEO 4:40: )512
hs 4 yi 7otly Bens Qn) -12 S|! 21) 10.4 Fd oh 12 10 19
| | 21); 8 9 | 10 | Tl 1 9 WM bo UR a 2 42


Oh Th Add 25012 dd CMa i OO WS ee Ne CO ey,


If the birth was in January, the month of conception was April; if
February, the month of conception was May; if March, June; if
April, July ; if May, Auguft; if June, September; if July, October ;
if Auguft, November ; if September, December; if October, January ;
if November, February ; and, if December, March. Then bring the
Moon’s place, the day of conception, to the fign, degree, and minute,
afcending, at the eftimate time, for the true time of conception. Or
thus: fubtraét the right afcenfion of the Sun at the eftimate time of con-
ception, from the rightafcenfion at the eftimate time of birth, (taken in
the Table of Houfes right againft the Moon’s place, under the afcendant,
adding the three hundred and fixty degrees of the zodiac, as before, if
fubtraGtion cannot otherwife be made;) the remainder, converted into
time, is the true hour and minute of conception. The degree and mi-
nute of the fign in which the Moon was pofited at conception is the
true degree and minute afcending at birth, according to the Trutine of
Hermes. »

To


ee


«e
OORT VATS 2@-E-O UU O-G VY. m® 423


To rectify by the Animodér of Ptolomy, erect the figure as near as
poffible to the eftimate time of birth, and confider in what fign, and ip
what degree of that fign, the new Moon happened that laft preceded the
birth; or, if a full Moon-more neatly preceded the time of birth than a
new, then note the degree of the fign wherein either of the luminaries
were pofited that were above the earth; but, if one of the luminaries be
exaCtly rifing, and the other fetting, prefer that whichis rifing. Then
obferve which of the planets hath moft dignities by triplicity, houfe, ex-
altation, termi, or configuration, in the degree of fuch preceding new
Moon, or.iw.the degree of the luminary above the earth, or that afcends
at {uch preceding full Moon ;, and alfo what fign and degree then afcend
upon. the horizon, or that. culminate or pofiefs the cufp of the tenth
houfe; and if the degree of the planet, dignified as above, be fituated
nearer the degree afcending than to the degree culminating, place the
fame degree in number of the fign afcending upon the cufp of the
afcendant that fuch ruling planet pofiefled of the fign he was in. But,
on the contrary, if the planet be nearer the degree on the cufp of the
tenth houfe or medium cceli than to the afcendant, then the degree
culminating, or poflefling the cufp of the midheaven,- muft be made
the fame with the degree the faid planet was in; and fo, according to
the fign and degree thus afcertained, muft the other houfes of the
figure be varied ; and this will be the true time of the native’s birth.
But, if it fhould happen that two planets have equal dignities in the
degrees aforefaid, prefer that which is pofited the neareft tothe afcen-
dant. Ptolomy further obferves, that what fign the Moon is in at the
time of birth is the very fign which afcended at the conception ; and
again, whatever fign'the Moon is inat conception, that, or the oppofite,
will be the fign afcending at birth.


To rectify by. accidents, according: to the method of Argol, fet the
fcheme exattly to the eftimate time, and draw it into a fpeculum; then
run down the columns in the fpeculum belonging to the afcendant and
medium cceli, confidering what directions might moft probably fignify
the accidents given, obferving the’afcendant for accidents befalling the
body ; the medium cceli for things relating to credit or reputation, as
trade, honour, difhonour, preferment, 8c. and convert thé time of the
accidentinto an arch of direction, by Naibod’s meafure of time; and then,
finding the true, right, or oblique, afcenfion of the promiffor with lati-
tude, if he hath any, from which fubtracting the arch. of direction, the
remainder will be the right afcenfion of the medium cceli, or oblique
afcenfion of theafcendant. If it be the oblique afcenfion of the afcen
dant, fubtract-ninety degrees from it, the remainder willbe the righ

No: 21. ; | 5K . afcenlio”


404 Ag: OG OU 86T PN 2 a OON


=


afcenfion of the medium cceli corrected, between which and the right
-afcenfion of the medium cceeli of the fuppofed time take the difference ;
which add or fubtract to or from the fuppofed time, according as the right
afcenfion of the medium cceli did ,increafe or decreafe, and the fum or
difference is the true time of birth required.


Secondly, according to Kepler, gather a table of the Sun’s place for -
eighty, ninety, or one hundred, days, more or lefs, immediately fucceed-
ing the day of birth; then, having the time of the accident, number fo
many days of the Sun’s motion as there were years elapfed from the
birth, making proportion for the odd days, and find the Sun’s place at
that time, with the right afcenfion thereof, which fubtract from the
oblique afcenfion of the promiffor denoting the accident, added to two
hundred and feventy degrees, the remainder is the right afcenfion of time
corrected ; where note, that, having fet the figure to the eftimate time,
calculate the Sun’s place thereto, and find the difference between that
and his place at noon the day of birth; which, if it exceeds his place of
birth, fubtract the aforefaid difference from his place at noon, agreeing
with that day fignifying the number of years in which the accident
happened; but, if it be lefs, add; fo fhall the difference or fum be the
Sun’s direction for years complete; then, for the odd days of the acci-
dent, if any be, find: the Sun’s diurnal motion, in the {aid collection,
againft the day fignifying the faid number of years, and fay, as three
hundred and fixty-five days fix hours are to the Sun’s diurnal motion,
fo are the faid odd days to the odd minutes, which are to be added to the
Sun’s direction aforefaid, which fum is the Sun’s true place at the time
of birth. But, to rectify it by an accident compared with the medium
ceeli, fubtract the right afcenfion of the Sun, found by the former rule
for the year and day of the accident, from the right afcenfion of the pro-
miflor, (by adding three hundred and fixty degrees, if {ubtraction cannot
be made without,) and the remainder is the right afcenfion of time cor-
rected.


Thirdly, according to Morinus, to rectify the afeendant or medium
eceli by a direction to the conjunction or oppofition of the promiffor of
any accident is exactly the fame with Argol; but, if it be to the fextile,
quartile, or trine, of any fuch promiffor, firft find their latitude, and
then in all refpects follow the fame method as is above given in the di- ~
rections of Argol.


To rectify by the luminaries, proceed as follows: If no direction.of
either angles will anfwer to the accident given, and it be eminent,
, confider


OF 1, AsSHOR 10% O1G Y: 425


confider the pofition of the luminaries, and fee what direCtion of either
of them might moft probably fignify the fame; which done, find the
luminaries pole of pefition exattly for its place in the eftimate figure,
under which pole direct the faid luminary to the faid probable promiffor,
and find the difference between that and the time of the accident convert-
ed into an arch of direction; then make a fecond fuppofition, at the
pole of pofition, working as before; and, noting the difference between
the arches of the twodire¢tions, fay, as the difference of thefe two arches
is to the difference in the poles of pofition, fo is the firft aforefaid dif-
ference to the difference between the firft fuppofed pole of pofition
and the true pole\of the luminary propofed; but it is neceflary here,
that the eftimate time be given pretty exact. Thus, having found the
true pole of pofition, it gives the true oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of
the luminaries, with its diftance from the meridian ; by which may be
found the medium cceli correct, and thereby the true time of birth.


Befides thefe, there are feveral new methods of rectifying nativities
by accidents. For inftance, fet the figure to the eftimate time, and
draw a fpeculum thereto ; in which, befides the afpects of the planets,
infert alfo the afpects which the afcendant and medium ceeli make with
every fign; this done, confider what promiffors occur to a conjunétion,
fextile, quartile, trine, or oppofition, of the afcendant or medium cali,
and for every year account one day in the Ephemeris to the year current
in which the accident happened, find that promiffor’s place (in that
day adhering to the year current) for the eftimate time of birth ;

'faying, as twenty-four hours is to the planet’s diurnal motion, fo are
the hours and minutes elapfed from noon to the minutes to be added or
fubtracied to or from the planet’s place at noon that day according as
the faid planet was either direct or retrograde; then, laftly, as three hun-
dred and fixty-five days fix. hours are to that promiffior’s diurnal motion,
fo is the number of days elapfed from the birth (at the termination of
which the accident fell out) to the minutes to be again added or fub-
tracted to or from the aforefaid place of the faid promiffor, as he was
dire€t or retrograde; to which very degree and minute the afcendant or
medium cceli muft be brought. But, if there be no direction of the
afcendant or medium ceeli to fignify that accident, confider what other
fignificator, being dire¢ted to any likely promiffor, might effect the
fame ; and, in-the Ephemeris, again{t that day fignifying the number of
the years current, for the eftimate time of birth find the place of the faid
promiffor; then fay,.as three hundred and fixty-five days fix hours are
to twenty-four hours, fo are the days elapfed (in which the accident


happened from the birth-day) to their proportioned part: fecondly, as
. twenty-four


426 A OT OLOL Us TOROAAT. FON


twenty-four hours are to the fignificator’s diurnal motion, fo is the afore-
{aid proportional part to the minutes and feconds, which are to be fub-
ducted out of the*place of the aforefaid promiffor ; and the remainder is*
the exact place of the faid fignificator at the true time of birth. In this
cafe it will be neceffary to have the eftimate time very near, and that
the Sun, Venus, Mercury, or the Moon, be fignificators; and Saturn,
Jupiter, or Mars, or their afpects, promiflors ; otherwife, if the more
weighty planets be fignificators, take the diurnal motion of the promiffor
and’ work as before; fubducting thefe: minutes and feconds from the
fignificator, and the remainder is the exact place of the promiffor at the
true time of birth. If yet no direction appears, which may fignify the
given accident, confider the Moon’s directions on the right-hand page of |
the Ephemeris, againft the day fignifying the year current in which the
accident happened ; and, allowing two hours for a month, fubtra¢t the
days elapfed from the birth-day from the hours and minutes, adhering
to the lunar afpect, and the remainder will be the hour and minute of


birth corrected. The fame obfervation likewife holds good with re{pect
to the mutual afpects. :


But the fhorteft, eafieft, and moft fimple, way of rectifying a nativity,
and which includes all the perfections of the foregoing, provided the
eftimate time does not exceed two hours’ of the real, is as follows.
Havingerected the figure to the eftimate time, obferve whether either of the
luminaries be pofited in the centre of any one of the three prime angles,
namely, the afcendant, medium cveli, or feventh houfe, or near them;
and, if fo, bring either of them to the cufp of the angle, and the
degree and minute they were in is the true time of birth. But, if
neither of thefe are found thus centrically pofited, nor near the cufps of
either of thofe angles, then bring them to a right parallel from angles,
and that will be the true time. If their pofitions will not admit of
this, obferve the two benefic planets Jupiter and Venus, and note
whether either of them are fituated as above f{pecified, namely, in the
centre of the angles, or in’a right parallel with either of the luminaries,
that is to fay, with the Sun by day, or the Moon by night; and either
of thefe brought to the cufps as before, will give the true time of
birth. So likewife either of the malefic planets Saturn and Mars, if
found -pofited in the centre of the angles, or near their cufps, or in
parallel to either of the luminaries as above, will be the prorogator of
life, and likewife fhew the true time of birth; but thefe laft pofitions
are “rarely if ever found in the ichemes of grown perfon’s nativities,
becaufe their influences, if not corrected by the rays of benevolent


3 k £0 fars,


OFT AS TR OL 6-6 VY. 427
ftars, are of fo deftru€tive a tendency, that they generally cut off life
ina fhort time, either in infancy, or at leaftin the firft ftage of life.


ew having brought a nativity from its eftimative or fuppofed time
to that of the real, we are next to confider its proper and contingent
parts and fignifications, fo far as they relate to accidents before birth, and’
to thofe after the fubje&t comes into the world; as alfo to parents,
brethren, and relations, of the native. The particular confiderations
before birth relate to fex, as whether the infant be male or female;
and likewife to number, as whether there be twins or not. The caufes
of deformity, of monfters, and of thofe which perith in the womb for
want of nourifhment, are alfo included in this part of the do@rine of
nativities. But the particular fubjects of enquiry after birth relate to
the length of life and form of the body; to bodily difeafes, and
accidental hurts and blemifhes of the members ; to the faculties of the
mind and mental affections. They likewife include the future fortune
of the native, as well in. poffeflions as in dignities; and alfo in the
quality of his actions. Then concerning marriage and procreation ; the
harmony of friends, and animofity of enemies; next of travelling;
and, Jaftly, of death.—But the confideration concerning death is natu-
rally joined to that which relates to the {pace of life, fince it fhews the
quality and mode of its termination.


It may naturally be afked, how thefe events are feverally and refpec-
tively diftinguifhed ? To explain this, let it be always remembered, that,
for any particular event, we are to refer to fuch peculiar place in the
zodiac as is proper to that fpecies of action in the geniture concern
ing which we are about to enquire. And, whatever itar is found to
have dominion in fuch place, either by triplicity, houfe, exaltation,
term, or.configuration, fuch ftar fhall have dominion of the event. But,
if twoor more ftars fhall be found in thefe feveral pofitions, then that
ftar which has familiarity by moft ways, namely, that has the majority
of dignities, fhall-be taken as ruler of the event, and fhall affume the.
dominion accordingly. The quality of the event is always known from
the nature of thefe ruling ftars, added to that of the figns in which thofe
ftars are pofited, and the familiarities they have with the other fignifi-
cant parts of the heavens, The extent and importance of the event is
known from the lordfhips and dominions of thefe ruling ftars, according
to their ftrength or weaknefs in re(pect of their afpects in the world and
the geniture. They are {trong in refpect of the world, when they are
in proper places, or oriental, or augmented ; and in refpect of the ge-
niture, when they make their tranfits on the angles, or fuccedent houtles;


No. 21. ’ 5 L . but


nak Gi ILLUSTRATION


but particularly when they occupy the cufps of the afcendant or mid-
heaven. And they are deemed weak in refpect of the world, when they
are in occidental places, and flow, retrograde, and diminifhing their
courfes; but weak in refpect of the geniture, when they are in cadent
houfes, or falling from the angles. The general time of the event is
known from thefe ruling ftars being orientally or occidentally pofited in
refpect of the Sun and the horofcope, and from their being in the angles
er fuccedent houfes; for, when they are matutine or angular, they are
quick ; but, when occidental or vefpertine, flow.


Thefe things being premifed, it follows that the firft confideration upon
the face of a geniture is that which relates to the parents of the'native,
The Sun, therefore, and Saturn, reprefent the perfon of the father; and
the Moon and Venus that of the mother; and, as thefe are found
afflicted among themfelves, or otherwife, fo we underftand the accidents
appertaining to parents will be. The ftars that are configurated with
the luminaries fhew what relates to their fortunes and pofleflions; for, if
they are furrounded by the benefics, and by -fuch as are of the fame
nature, and in the fame figns, or the fucceeding, their fortunes will be
illuftrious and fplendid; particularly if the Sun be configurated with
oriental ftars, or the Moon by occidental. If Saturn.and Venus be ori-
entally pofited, or angular, they forefhew happinefs according to the par-
ticular circumftances of each parent. If the luminaries are vord of cour/e,
and in no good afpect with the fortunate ftars, a low condition, or an
ignoble life, is prenoted: but, if the luminaries are varioufly configu-
rated with good and evil ftars, a mediocrity and inequality in the fortunes
of the parents is thereby demonftrated; as when Mars afcends to the
Sun, or Saturn to the Moon, and the benefics in different conditions.
Again, if the part of fortune in the nativity is found in a good pofition,
with the ftars configurated with the Sun and Moon, the affairs of the
parents will be profperous ; but, if it be difcordant, and fituated in a bad
place of the figure, with. malefic ftars, their concerns will turn out inju-
rious and unprofitable,


The length and fhortnefs of life muft be confidered from other confi-
gurations. If Jupiter or Venus areany way joined in afpect with the Sun
or Saturn, or if Saturn hath an harmonizing configuration with the Sun,
that is, if they behold each other by a fextile or trine, and ftrongly dig-
nified in other refpects, they promife long life to the father. But if
thefe pofitions are found weak, with Mars dignified above the Sun, and
Saturn in quartile or oppofition, the father will be taken off in the early
pact of his life. The diftinctions which relate to the mother are thefe.


3 ar If


t


O F east of a aa 429


If Jupiter is configurated to the Moonor Venus, or Venusalone beholds |
the Moon by a fextile or trine afpect, the mother will enjoy health and
longevity; but, if Mars be pofited in any of the angular or fucceedent
houfes, beholding:the Moon or Venus with a quartile or oppofition; or
if Saturn is thus configurated with the Moon, flow in motion, and de-
clining from angles; they induce the direct contrary effects, and pro-
claim a difeafed and fhort life to the mother. Thus from the nativity of
a child may the principal concerns of the father and mother.be fought
out, and afcertained ; and fuch is the fympathy exifting by this bond of
nature and confanguinity, that little difference will be found, if com-
pared with the proper nativity of each parent,


But, to give judgment in fuch cafes with correttnefs, feparate fchemes
muft be erected for the father and mother, by the following rule. In
the figure erecied for the father, if the nativity be diurnal, note the
degree in which the Sun is pofited in the child’s nativity, and make that
the degree afcending upon the horofcope for the father; and conforma-
ble to that order the cufps of all the other houtes, by the rules hereto-
fore laid down. If the figure be erected for the mother, then take the
degree of Venus, inftead of the Sun, and proceed in all other refpects
the fame. But, if the nativity be no¢turnal, take the degree of Saturn for
the father, and that of the Moon for the mother. And in all thefe cafes
it muft be obferved, that the nativity of the firft-born is to be pre-
ferred, then that of the fecond, and fo on.- And that whatever is pre-
noted in relation to the parents from thefe figures, is only fuch as fhall
happen to them after the birth of the child, and not to any thing before.
The time in which any or each of thefe events will happen, is to be
fought out by the archs of direction, or diftances of that ftar which hath
the dominion in refpe& of the Sun and the angles of the world; and

this I fhall make perfectly eafy to the meaneft underftanding, when I
' come to treat of directions in general.


Now the next confideration in the native’s geniture is the place of
brethren, and this is taken from the fign on the mid-heaven, and the
maternal place, which is the pofition of Venus by day, and the Moon by
night; for, as this can only relate to children born of the fame mother,
this fign, and that which fucceeds it, being maternal, naturally contti-
tutes the place of brethren. This place, therefore, being configurated by
benevolent ftars, denotes plenty of brethren, becaufethe increafe of bro-
thers and fifters happens according to the multitude of ftars, and from
their being fituated in double-bodied figns, or in thofe of one form.—
But, if the malefics have fuperiority in number or power, or are adverfe


by


, wf :
430 ony. ILI UW SHTTReART 1-0 N


by oppofition, paucity of brethren will happen, particularly if unbe
nign ftars circumfcribe the Sun. If the contrariety of afpects be in ar
gular houfes, efpecially in the afcendant, Saturn will procure thofe chat
are firft nourifhed, and firft born ; and Mars will induce to fewnefs ait
death. Moreover, if the ftars which give brethren are well-affected ac-
cording to mundane fituations, the general fortunes of the brethren will
be glorious and famous; but mean and obfcure if the contrary pofitions
happen. If the malefics be fuperior in number and ftrength to the
{tars which give brethren, their conftitutions will be puny, and their
lives fhort. .

And here alfo we may obferve, that from the geniture of one brother
the principal incidents of the life of another may be difcovered, by con
ftituting the place of the given planet as an horofcope, that is Ra
which has principal rule in the houfe of brethren, whether by A or
night. The method is to place this ruling planet, with the ES ds
gree he is found in, upon the afcendant, furnifhing the cufps of all the
other houfes by this ftandard, as before ftated in the cafe of parents. It
muft however always be remembered, that mafculine ftars He ate
males, and feminine females. Alfoif the ftars which denote Weenie and
that which has rule in the houfe of brethren, agree by any harhidgiods
configuration, they will be well-affected towards each other, and live in
friendfhip and concord; but, if thefe ftars are found in ‘contrary pofi-
tions, and in figns inconjunct, enmity and hate will mark their diy
towards each other. —

The foregoing fpeculations are deduced from an inveftigation of th
pofition of the heavens at the time of birth; but, in order - know wihiee
ther the infant be male or female, during the ftate of pregnanc xa
time of conception only muft be confidered. For this purpote eh
particularly obferve the pofition of both the luminaries in refpect to the
horofcope at the time of conception, together with the fituations of
all the ftars which have a regard to them; and whether the ruline ft F
are conftituted of a mafculine or feminine nature. Forthe aE rc
- males and females is according to the diftinction of mafculine and fe
minine ftars, which I have already fhewn proceeds from the natur “9
the figns in which they are pofited, and from their mutual and miundetee
refpect; for, being oriental, they are mafculine; but, occidental, fe 4
nine. The fame likewife in refpect to the Sun; for, being eet coe
are referred to the male; and, occidental, to the female. ‘Therefore cate
which have the greateft powerin thefe refpects at the time of conce al
will give fufficient grounds to conjecture at the fex of the infait for


months before it is born.
So


OOP ASTROLOGY. 431


So likewife the fame confiderations hold good, in fome refpeéts, cons
¢erning twins, or more ; for herein we are principally to regard the two
luminaries, and the afcendant. Forit happens through the mixtures
which are occafioned when thefe poflefs bicorporal figns, or when the
ruling planets are fituated in them, and many prolific ftars caft their rays
to the fame, that it will be a plural, conception, The number then
generated is known from the ftar which induces the propriety of the
number; but the fex is determined by the ftars configurated with the
Sun, Moon, and horofcope. For we find from obfervation, that, when
both the luminaries are in the mid-heaven, twins are procreated ; when
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, have configuration with the afligned places
in bicorporal figns, three males are generated; but three females, when
Venus, Luna, and Mercury, are configurated in the fame manner. Saturn,
Jupiter, and Venus, thus difpofed, produce two males and one female; but
Venus, Luna, and Mars, two females and one male. Thefe configa-
rations but rarely happening at the time of conception, render it a kind
of phenomenon whenever they occur ; and hence’ we generally find the
births that follow’ in confequence are ranked amongit the wonders of
the day in the public prints, though the caufe has a radical foundation
in nature. And hence too it is, that, as thefe configurations are more or
lefs imperfectly made, fo will be the quality of the conception, either
bringing all into life uniform and perfect at the birth, or elfe bringing
one with good conformation, and another with puny, imperfect, or mon
ftrous, members,


There are alfo certain configurations of the ftars, which abfolutely pro-
duce moles or monfters in every conception that takes place under
them, Thus it happens when the luminaries decline from angles, and
fall cadent, without any kind of afpeét to the afcendant, and when the
cardinal houfes are occupied by the malefic planets. But, to defcribe
the fpecies of unnatural birth, it is neceffary, in thefe configurations, to
obferve the place of the laft full Moon preceding the time of conception,
together with the ruler thereof, and the lord of the luminaries; for, if
the places of thefe fignificators have no familiarity with the place of the
faid preceding full Moon, what is then generated will be of unnatural
conformation. If the luminaries are at the fame time pofited in four-~
footed figns, and the two malefic planets in angular houfes, what is
then conceived will not be in human fhape; but, if Jupiter or Venus in
terpofe their benevolent rays, and give teftimony to the luminaries, then
what is conceived: will be of human conformation, but of a fierce and
favage nature. If Mercury correfponds with the luminaries, the dif-
pofition will be agreeable to nature, but the form of the body will be

No. 22. 5M unnatural ;


438 Ag Tl dB U.8 TRA I90aNn


unnatural; or, if the luminaries be in human figns, and the ruling planet
difcordant, then the offspring will be of proper conformatioon, but mon-
ftrous in quality. If one of the malefic ftars give teftimony in any of
the foregoing pofitions, what is then generated will be irrational, or of
ungovernable qualities; but, if Jupiter or Venus give teftimony, the
offspring will naturally poffefs the mental accomplifhments, with an her-
maphroditical conformation. If Mercury alone gives teftimony to the
aforefaid pofitions of the luminaries, that which is procreated will be
deaf, and perhaps dumb, though intellectually well qualified, and. in-
genious. Thefe {peculations are doubtlefs abftrufe, becaufe fuch con-
figurations feldom happen, and the refult of them is very little known;
but, to confirm their effect, I have only to recommend to thofe who
have their doubts, to be guided by obfervation, and to decide by the re-
fult; for, the more we enquire into the pathlefs ways of nature, the more
readily we deduce a radical caufe for all her productions.


But here I muft not omit to remark, that the time of conception, and
that only, is to be referred to for the conformation or accidents of the
child in the womb ; and the time of birth for what fhall happen after ;
notwithftanding there is always fuch a concurring agreement between
the cdnception and birth, that whatever is produced by the former. is
ina great meafure to be difcovered from the latter, though not wholly
correct, or to be relied upon as infallible. Thofe therefore, who are
born in their natural fhape, and afterward become crippled and lame,
even to a monftrofity, yet, fince not brought into the world with the na-
tive, they fall under the defcription of blemifhes, or bodily infirmities,
rather than the refult of monftrous and unnatural conformations.


Diftin& from this fpecies of conception, is that which, though per-
fe&ly natural and well conformed, yet is void of ftamina, and hence
termed anembryo not nourifhed. ‘This kind of conception happens when
one of the luminaries, in an angular pofition, is joined with a malefic
ftar, and that luminary giver of life. So likewife, if the parallel of
longitude between the malefic planet and the luminary be partile, or
according to a figure of equal fides, and none of the fortunes correfpond-
ing, andat the fame time the lord of the luminaries be pofited ina dif-
cordant place, what is then generated cannot be nourifhed, but decays
in the womb, or expires foon after the birth. Or, if they are not equi-
laterally configurated, but the two malefic planets nearly irradiate the ~
places of the luminaries, afflicting both, or only one of them, no matter
whether the malefics be fuccedent or oppofite, fo one or both of them be
in partile configuration with the luminaries; for- whatever is born sane

3 uc


f


OF “A‘S*T ROL. ONG Ya 433


fuch influences will be of no duration, fince the greatnefs of the power
of the malefics will deftroy what fhould neceflarily conduce to the nou-


rifhment of life.


It is particularly to be obferved, that Mars afflicts the Sun by fuc-
ceflions, and. Saturn the Moon ; but by oppofitions the contrary hap-
pens; for in thefe the Sun is afflifted by Saturn, and the Moon by Mars ;
and this affliction is the more eminent when the malefic ftars are fignifi«
cators, and by that means become fuperior both to the luminaries and
the horofcope, From thefe obfervations, fubordinate effects have been
afcertained ; for, when there are two oppofitions of the malefic ftars, and
the luminaries fituated in angles, whatever follows that conception will
be ftill-born. But ifat this time the luminaries are feparating from the
benefic planets, or are in any other afpect with them, cafting their
beams at that time in a converfe direction, the fcetus will obtain anima-
tion, and be found alive and perfect at the birth; but will live only fo
many months, days, or hours, as there are degrees, minutes, or feconds,
of the folar motion, between the beams of the Apheta and the neareft
malefic planet. Butif the malefics caft their beams to the parts preced-
ing the luminaries, and the benefics tothe degrees following, what is
born will fuffer great afflictions, and ftruggle much. with infirmities, but.
fhall recover and live..


And hence the confideration that naturally follows regards the dura-
tion or {pace of life, which, taking in the whole compafs of human pur-
fuits, and the duration and viciffitudes of them, doubtlefs becomes the
moft interefting part of the doctrine of the ftars. The mode of afcer-
taining this important point, namely, the {pace or duration of the na-
tive’s life, is defined from a comparifon of the aphetic, hylegiacal, or
prorogatory, places, with the killing or anaretical places in the genethliacal
figure, at the time of birth. The aphetic place is the fituation of the
Apheta, Hyleg, Prorogator, Significator, or giver of life, for they have
all the fame meaning; and, the anaretic place is the fituation of the
Anareta, or killing planet ; and, whenever thefe thall meet together, or
be conjoined in a bodily afpect, the native will find a.termination of life;
confequently the length of time, in which the Apheta and Anareta,
as pofited in each refpective figure of a nativity, will be in forming a
conjunction, or coming together in the fame point of the heavens, is the


- precife length of the native’s life ; and this period is afcertained by what


we term arches of direttion, equated by the folar motion, and reduced
to common time. The method of afcertaining thefe aphetical and


anaretical places, of finding the arches of direction, and of reducing
them:


as AM ILLUSTRATION


them to the common meafure of time, fhall be copioufly explained
after we have taught the mode of afcertaining the particular occurrences


of the native’s life, from the face’ of the horofcope, or genethliacal
figure, |


Of the FORM and TEMPERATURE of the BODY,


If the {pace of life appears likely to exceed childhood, we are next to
confider and define the fhape and figure of the native’s body, according
to the rules heretofore laid down. ‘The parts of the body are formed
before the foul ; and, becaufe it is infinitely more grofs, hath a connate
and almofl apparent endowment of temper, But the foul, not bein
communicated tothe body till the entire conformation thereof be wholly
perfected, manifefts by degrees an aptitude proceeding from the. firft
~.caufe, but much later than thofe of the external accidents ; and therefore
it requires fome length of time before the nature and progrefs of this
mental aptitude can be known, As to the form and temperature of the
body, that is generally defcribed from the oriental horizon, and from
fuch of the planets as bear rule init, or have the dominion thereof;
together with their particular and refpective configurations with the
Moon ; for according to the quality of thefe two places, and the nature of
the ruling ftars, the formative virtue, and the temperament in each fpe-
cies, with reference to the declination of the afcending fixed ftars, is the
particular formation of bodies defined, ;


To what has been already faid, concerning the effects of each planet
re{pectively, in giving fhape to fuch infants over whofe nativities they
prefide, we muft likewife add the peculiar force and operative faculty of
the luminaries, with which they may then happen to be configurated.—
If the Sun co-operates, it contributes much towards the production of a
more comely and majeftic perfonage, and of a mild and good habit; and
the Moon, when fhe withholds her defluxion, caufes a more propor-
tionate, flender, and moift, temperament; but varioufly, according to the
nature and qualities of her feveral quarters. Again, if the luminaries
correfpond with oriental rays, they add to comelinefs and ftature ; or, if
ftationary, they make the native ftrong and robuft. But, when they


occidentally concur, difproportionate formations and evil temperaments
are commonly the refult.


In this fpeculation, the different effects of the four quadrants are
likewife to be confidered ; that from the vernal equinox to the fummer


tropic


O ft AS*TFRiLOOLI OG Y% 435


tropic gives the native an excellent complexion, comely, of a good
ftature, abounding with heat and moifture. But the quadrant from the
{ummer tropic to the autumnal equinox gives but an indifferent com-
plexion, though the body is well proportioned, healthy, and vigorous,
abounding with heat and. drinefs. That from the autumnal equinox to
the winter tropic gives a fanguine complexion, with a flender, lean,
and fickly, habit, abounding with drinefs and cold. ‘The quadrant from
the winter folftice to the {pring equinox gives a dark complexion, with
a moderate ftature, fquare and ftrong, abounding with cold and moif-
ture. This is to be underftood in reference to the figns afcending, and
in which the Moon and other fignificators refpeGlively bear rule. But
it is more particularly to be obferved, that the figns which are of hu-
man form, both in the zodiac and without it, make bodies of a moft
excellent fymmetry and proportion; while thofe which are not of hu-
man form aé contrariwife, deranging the proper, rules of proportion,
and influencing from the properties eflential to an elegant fhape to that
of difproportion and deformity.


Of the radical Caufe of BLEMISHES and BODILY
DIOS EVA'S bose ;


From a fimilar hypothefis to the above, we derive the obfervation of
external blemifhes and bodily difeafes, with all the common accidents
of the human frame, to which the native is expofed during the courfe of
his life. The moft approved mode of afcertaining and diftinguifhing
thefe is by regarding the eaftern and weftern angles of the horizon, but
particularly the weftern, and the part preceding, which,is the fixth
houfe, for that is inconjuncé with the oriental angle.) Thefe angles
being properly taken, we fhould next obferve the malefic ftars, and how
they are configurated ; for, if both oreither of them are pofited upon the
afcending parts of the faid angles, either bodily or by quartile or oppo-=
fition, there will be external blemifhes, or bodily infirmities, infe-
parable from the perfon then born. Or, if both the luminaries, or only
one of them, be angular, as above defcribed, either in conjunction or
oppofition, with a malefic ftar afcending, they will produce fuch infir-
mities or blemifheés as the particular places of ‘the horizon and figns then
afcending, and as the nature of the malefic and ill-affected ftars, fhall
refpectively manifeft ; for in this cafe, as in all fimilar ones, the: degrees
of the figns which are upon the afflicted: part of the horizon will thew
the particular part of the body wherein theinfirmity is, whether it bea
blemith or difeafe, or both; and the nature: of thofe ftars will likewife
point out the caufe and quality of the fymptom. |

No, 22. 5 No Blemithes

‘a


436 ACN PML WSitTR A TaD N


Blemifhes and bodily hurts for the moft part happen. when the male-
fics are oriental; but difeafes when occidental. And, as their caufe is
different, fo alfo is their effet; for hurt or blemith fuffers pain only
once, and is not prolonged; but a difeafe frequently comes by fits, or
continually affects the patient, inducing a long and lingering diffolu-
tion, or confumptive habit. Thefe are general confiderations; but the
more particular doctrine of blemifhes and difeafes hath another {pecu-
lation of figures, by which, for the moft-part, fimilar accidents follows
For blindnefs of one eye is indicated, when the Moon is pofited in either
of the aforementioned angles by herfelf, or at the precife time of be-
coming new or full; or when fhe is configurated in a quartile afpect,
and applies to any of the nebulous converfions inthe zodiac. The fame
misfortune happens when Saturn or Mars, being oriental, afcend to the
Moon, pofited in an angle; but, whenever they are thus configurated to
both the luminaries, either in the fame fign or in the oppofite, and
orientally pofited in refpe&t of the Sun, but occidental in refpect of the
Moon, they caufe blindnefs in both the eyes. Mars ufually denotes
blindnefs by the effe€ts of a blow or thruft, and by lightning, burning,
&c. but, if configurated with Venus, it generally proceeds from an ac-
cident in play or exercife, or from the fudden attack of affaflins or def=


peradoes.


Saturn produces blindnefs by cataracts and colds, or by pin and web,
and by fuch like accidents ; but, if Venus be pofited in any of the above-~
mentioned angles, particularly in the weft, configurated or joined with
Saturn, and Mars at the fame time elevated, or in oppofition, the males
then born will be incapable of propagating their {pecies, and the females
either wholly barren, or fubject to abortion, or to the bringing forth of
ftill-born children, or to fuch as adhere to the womb, and are obliged to
be feparated by manual operation, or brought away in pieces. ‘This moft
commonly happens in the figns Cancer, Virgo, and Capricorn. But if
the Moon be at the fame time in the afcendant, configurated with Mer-
cury or Saturn, and applying to Mars, what are then born will partici-
pate in the nature of both fexes, and perhaps be void .of a natural paf-
fage. It is likewife found, that, if the Sun be configurated with Mer-
cury, and both the luminaries difpofed after a mafculine manner, the
Moon decreafing, and the malefic ftars afcending in the following de-
grees, the males will be deprived of the members proper for generation,
or be irreparably blemifhed or infufficient in them, particularly in the
figns Aries, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn, and Aquaries ; andthe females will


be naturally barren all their lives.
3 Impediments


OFT AS TOR Ol OG Ya 437


Impediments or blemithes in the fpeech are found to arife from the
configurations of Saturn and Mercury with the Sun, in the aforefaid
angles; particularly when Mercury is pofited in the weft, and beholds
the Moon either by an oppofition or quartile afpect. And, if thefe con-
figurations happen to be made in mute figns, as in Cancer, Scorpio, or
Pifces, the impediment will prove confiderably greater. Again, if the
malefic {tars are pofited in angles, and the luminaries afcend to them
either by conjunction or oppofition; or if the malefics afcend to the
luminaries, and the Moon be in her node in hurtful figns, as Aries,
Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, or Capricorn, the defects of the body will be
by lamenefs, gibbofity, diftortion, or luxation. If the malefic ftars are
in conjun&ion with the luminaries, thefe affections will take place from
the birth ; but, if they are fituated in the mid-heaven, elevated above the
luminaries, or in oppofition to them, they will arife from the concur
rence of various accidents, fuch as falls, blows, wounds, and the like,


during their progreis through life.


Blemifhes happen for the moft part when the Moon is in tropical or
equinoétial figns. In the vernal figns they are chiefly occalioned by
morphew; inthe fummer, by tetters; in the autumn, by the fcurvy;
and, in the winter, by biles and other morbid eruptions. But difeafes
moftly happen when the malefic ftars are configurated in the aforefaid
angles, but contrarily as to the luminaries, viz. occidental to the Sun,
and oriental to the Moon. In thefe pofitions Saturn induces to unufual
coldnefs in the belly and reins, and fubjeéts the native to phlegmatic
humours, bloody fluxes, jaundice, and the whole train of hyfterical
affe@tions. Mars occafions melancholy, difeafes of the lungs, fiftulas,
hot ulcers, and putrefactions. If Mercury co-operates with either of
thefe ungracious planets, it is for the increafe of evil, adding frefh vio-
lence to the diforder, and perhaps fooner inducing a fatal determination,


But the properties of fome bodily difeafes arife from the variety of
figns which poffefs the foregoing configurations upon the two angles.—
For inftance, Cancer, Capricorn, and Pifces, caufe difeafes from putre-
faction, tetters, fcurvy, or king’s evil ; but Sagittarius and Gemini by
falls, epilepfies, falling ficknefs, and the like. Ifthe planets are in the
latter degrees of thefe figns, they produce bodily difeafes and blemifhes in
the extremities, by reafon of luxations or injuries, from whence arife
elephantiafis, gouts, cramps, and rheumatic complaints. And here it
muft be carefully noted, that, if none of the benevolent planets are con-


figurated with the malefics which poffefs the caufe of thefe various difor-
ders,


ane AN ILLUSTRATION


ders, nor to either of the luminaries in angular pofitions, then thefe
bodily difeafes will be wholly incurable, and the blemifhes never to be
removed ; but, if the benefics poffefs a confiderable fhare in the configu-
rations which induce the caufe, or overcome the malefic rays by an equal
or fuperior power, then the difeafes will be much more moderate, and
the blemifhes not fo obvious, if more than barely difcernible. It mutt
here, as in all other cafes of the like kind, be obferved, that the ftronger
any ruling planet is, whether benefic or malefic, the more eminent and
powerful its effects will be; and alfo that a planet is ftronger when ori-
ental than when occidental ; wherefore a mailefic planet orientally pofited
gives blemifhes ; but an occidental, difeafes. It is likewife to be re-
marked, that, if the pofition.of the planet inducing the caufe be very
ftrong, the defe& will be from the birth; but, if weak, it will arife
from fome accident after birth.


OF the natural BENT and QUALITY of the MIND,


Such is the doétrine of bodily accidents, as deducible from the face of
a genethliacal figure; but the qualities of the mind, as rational and
mental, are judged of from the conftitution of Mercury with regard to
different figns and planets. That which appertains to the fenfe alone,
or that renders it irrational, is confidered from the more corporeal ftate
of the luminaries ; that is, of the Moon and ftars configurated by fepa-
ration or application. But, fince the animal inclination is various, this
{peculation is contemplated from many and divers obfervations, accord-
ing to the diverfity of figns which contain Mercury and the Moon, or
the ruling ftars which have dominion in them, and that confer their in-
fluences to the temper and quality of the mind; together with the con-
figurations of thofe ftars which have refpect to the Sun and the angles
confidered as to the proper and diftinét nature with which each of
them a€t upon the mental motions of each individual. It is there-
fore generally found that tropical figns render the native’s mind highly
ingenious, full of invention, eagerin the purfuit of moral and political
knowledge, and of great fortitude and perfeverance. Double-bodied
figns agitate the mind with a variety of whimfical and very ufelefs pur-
fuits, lead the tongue to loquacious habits, and induce to negligence and
folly. Fixed figns fortify the mind with prudence and virtue, and give
a bias to ceconomy, chaftity, and temperance. Again, oriental confi-
gurations produce mental qualities of a ftrong and ingenious nature, free,
open, and undiffembled, quick of apprehenfion, conftant, judicious,
benevolent, and chafte; but the occidental ones a& upon the mind


in


@ EF ‘rAsS dP 7R20;L,07G Y.,., 439


It is likewifea juft obfervation, that if the ftars which have dominion
are pofited in good places of the figure, and well.configurated, they rendér
the mental endowments, exquifitely perfect, and induce to a general good
fortune. This is moft, remarkably .obvious in_ thofe Bante: woe
shave Mercury well configurated, and. joined with the feparation or ap-
-plication of the Moon. But, if, Mercury and the Moon are not thus
difpofed, or are afflited by the evil rays of the malefics, they will even
then imprint the quality of their natures upon the foul, though not fo
ftrongly, but in’ alefs }obvious and more ob{cure degree 3 not tending
fo much” to good fortune!and advancement in the common concerns of
life. | Hence the property of the ruling planet, whether‘ good or ‘evil,
inftils its own nature ‘into the animal -{pirit, with a power and energy
equal to its predominancy in the\heavens at the hour of birth; and this
energy.is either ftrengthened ‘or diminithed, according to the force and
action of fubordinate configurations);, for thofe, who, by reafon of {trong
malefic rays, are prone to violence and injuftice, have not their vicious, in-
-elinations hindered, unlefs thefe evil rays are oppofed, by fome contrary
effect ; but, if-a contrary afpect oppofes this, familiarity of the malefics,
the evil inclination is then proportionably corrected, and the mind ‘is
more eafily brought to:4. proper \fenfe of its, intemperate purfuits.- By
. the fame rule, thofé who-are good and, juft,..becaufe born under a fami-
liarity of benefic ‘ftars, »willingly:,and chearfully purfue a life of recti-
tude and virtue; and, being naturally; fortunate, as well as prudent, their
undertakings generally prove advantageous and profitable ; but, if a con~
trary afpe@t oppofes this happy familiarity of the benefics, either a lefs
exemplary condutt, or a more unprofitable purfuit of worldly concerns,
-is fure to markothe character. of the native through all the different
‘ftages of his life. aaa tigate


- Thus far we have confidered the influences of Mercury and the Moon '
_upon the mind of man, in a general way, unconnected with the ope-
ration or effeét of any particular planet, which may happen to affume the
dominion, and thereby imprint its own peculiar influences upon the
mental faculties, in proportion toits fuperiority over the other planets.
Let us now turn our obfervation to that prodigious variety of affections
of the animal or intellectual part of man, which each diftinct planet is
a to’ produce, when ‘they alone govern the mind at the time of
itth. .


-No. 22. | 50 saturn


440 KN PLE sel Re AST. Pat N

' Saturn having alone the dominion of the mental faculties, and ruling

Mercury and the Moon, if he be eligibly fituated in refpeGt of the world

and the angles, will induce the native to an imperious and covetous

difpofition, remarkably fordid, felf-fufficient, and envious; but, if he
be but indifferently pofited in refpect to the angles and the world, he
difpofes the mind to. treacherous inclinations, fraught with fuperftition,

cowardice, ahd meannefs. If he is found in a concordant familiarity

_with Jupiter, and both in good pofitions of the ‘figure, they qualify: the
-mind with better inclinations, and difpofe it'to.acts of benevolence,

“prudence, and magnanimity ; but, if they are configurated in evil places
of the figure, they work a contrary effect, difpofing the mind to turbu-

lence and cruelty, and to various acts’ of hypocrify and fraud.’ If Saturn

be in good afpeét with Mars, and well pofited in’ the figure,’ he difpofes
‘the inclination to great and arduous undertakings, remarkable for in-

trepidity and courage in war, and fora watchful, laborious, inflexible,

_and collected, mind, though much difpofed to acts of violence, tyranny,

“and oppreffion ; but, if they are found in bad pofitions of the figure, they

‘ produce a mind ‘given up to.every {pecies of fraud and impofition, and

"wholly abandoned’ to ‘impiety ‘and ‘wickednefs.: If united to Venus, in

elevated pofitions, he'tenders ‘the mind libidinous and luftful, given to

diffipation and intemperance, but: fubje&t to fufpicion and jealoufy in

refpect of women‘; “but, if unhappily difpofed in the houfes of the figure,

he will induce the! mind to the’moft filthy uncleannefs, and to other acts

of the bafeft and’ moft reproachful kind... If Saturn hath) familiarity with

“Mercury, ina good pofition; he addiéts’ the mind ito the fober ftudy of
“the polite arts, or bends the’inclination to the purfuit of fome particular
improvement: or new difcovery in ‘the fciences; and in general: renders

the difpofition fedate,' careful, and induftrious ; but, if they be confi-

‘ gurated with each’ other ‘in evil places, they: incline to treachery and

““unfaithfulnefs, difpofe-the mind to the recollection ‘of paft injuries, and

urge to malice and premeditated revenge. This variety’ of mental af-

_ fections chiefly proceeds from the influences of Saturn, but they are

“moderated, and differently difpofed, according tothe nature and force

of thofe rays, which; -as ‘we have feen, are. refpectively contributed by


 # ,


the’ prefence of otherplanets.: ./95
‘Jupiter having alone the dominion°of theimind, :and being well pofited
in the figure, influences the! animal foul tothe moft:noble and exalted
“ ideas of honour and rectitude, difpofing to magnanimity in;the caufe .of
morality ‘and virtue, and leading the: operative faculties: to every praife-
worthy act of generofity and benevolence, but, if Jupiter is pofitedjin any
_aifcordant part of the figure, his influences have lefs effect ; for, though
3 I ' o¢ .o}4 they


OF ASTROLOGY. 441


they imprint the fame natural impulfe upon the mind, leading to all good
and moral purfuits, yet it isin a much more faint and ob{cure manner,
being accompanied with a great degree of indolence and inattivity. If
Jupiter hath configuration with Mars in a good pofition, he produces a
fiery and impetuous difpofition, bold, daring, and courageous, and given
to the-purfuit of great and arduous enterprifes ; but, if evilly difpofed
with Mars in the figure, he induces to an unmerciful, feditious, and
unftable, mind, prone to turbulence and faction, and given up to all the
irregularities of an evil and diffipated inclination. If Jupiter be in
familiarity with Venus, and well pofited, he difpofes the mind to fenti-
ments of liberality and juftice, gives ingenuity and perfeverance, and
ftrengthens. the intellec&t by a capacious memory; but, if placed in
. difcordant parts of the figure, he difpofes to the purfuit of fenfual and
Jafcivious pleafures, and gives a turn for loofe and diforderly converfation.
If Jupiter hath configuration with Mercury, and in good places, he
difpofes the mind to the purfuit of learning and wifdom, and gives.
thofe natural endowments of a refined intelle@t, which produce the moft
accomplifhed: politicians, orators, poets, painters, or mathematicians ;
and is indeed one of the moft happy configurations. that actuate and
govern the mental faculties; but, if he hath an evil configuration with
Mercury, he induces the mind to vanity and enthufiafm, leads‘to {elf-
conceitednefs and fuperftition, and gives levity, loquacioufnels, and fu
perficial. ideas..


Mars haying alone the dominion of the mind, and well pofited in the
figure, produces a bold, confident, and intrepid, fpirit, given to violence
and war, impatient, tyrannical, and arbitrary, intermixed with an ex-
ternal fhew of rectitude and generofity; but, if unhappily difpofed, he
influences the mind to barbarity and malevolence, given to implacable
hatred and inhuman revenge, and difpofes the foul to the perpetration
of the moft dark and malicious atts of cruelty and fraud. Having fa-
miliarity with Venus, and happily fituated in the figure, he gives a
mind fraught with liberality and chearfulnefs, difpofed to fincerity and
friendfhip, to circum{pection and fobriety, and fond of. mirth and plea--
fure; -but, if in an évil pofition of the figure, he inclines to drunkennefs
and debauchery, and furnifhes a mind given to treachery, deceit, and
every {pecies of immorality. If Mars hath familiarity with Mercury in:
a profperous ftation, he gives a mind happily formed for the conducting
of military or naval affairs, farnifhes the foul with a thirft for great and
noble aGions, and fortifies it with temper, deliberation, coolnefs, con-
fidence, and magnanimity ; endowing the mind, at the fame ‘time, with
the fineft feelings of honour, generofity, humanity, and benevolence; but,

| if.


‘442 AN PRLUSIT KE &ATI@D NW
if evilly difpofed, he furnifhes a carelefs and inconftant mind, prone to
wicked and mifchievous pra€tices, and fond of difcord, ftrife, and


fedition.


Venus alone having government of the intellectual faculties, and well
placed in the figure, endows the mind with complacency and: foftnefs,
renders the fentiments delicate, modeft, and well difpofed, and the man-
ners {weet and engaging; ‘but, contrarily fituated, fhe induces to wan-
tonnefs, floth, and effeminacy, fraught with cowardice and profligacy.
Having familiarity with Mercury, and in a profperous pofition, fhe leads
the mind to a relifh for philofophy and fcience, gives elequence and in-
wenuity, and forms an intellect for divinity, law, or phyfic ; but, evilly
difpofed, fhe gives a treacherous and unftable mind, ‘bent on. perverfenets
and contention, and given to flander, hypocrify, and imtemperance.


If Mercury alone hath-the dominion and government of the mind, he
inclines it to the purfuit of prudence and wifdom, gives a. turn: for.in-
genious {peculations, and a tafte for poetry and {cience; the retentive
faculty is generally ftrong, and the wit lively and penetrating ; -but, if
he be pofited in an unpropitious part of the figure, he difpofes the mind
to forgetfulnefs and indolence, and influences to the purfuit of mean and
crafty objects ; rendering the native mutable and unfteady in mind and
judgment, and in moft cafes rath, inconfiderate, and fubject to error.


The luminaries likewife have their peculiar operations upon the mind
and mental faculties of the native; for the' Moon, being in»her greatett
north and fouth latitude, renders the motions of the animal foal more
various, crafty, and mutable; but, when fheis in her nodes, fhe makes _
_them more quick, active, and fprightly. In oriental pofitions, and in-
creafing in light and motion, fhe gives a more open, free, and ingenuous,
mind; but, if decreafing, fhe renders the imagination dull, languid, and
heavy, and the temper changeable and uncertain: ‘The Sun contributes
his effeéts according to the familiarity or configuration he makes with
the planet which is ruler of the mental faculties. If the afpe& be good,
and in a fortunate part of the figure, he conduces to form the. mind more
honourable, juft, and perfect ; but, in the contrary pofitions, he influences


toa more abject, cruel, and unworthy, difpofition. |


From the foregoing premifes, the ingenious {tudent will readily infer,
that the qualities and affections of the mind are confidered, firft, from
the places and pofitions of Mercury and the Moon; fecondly, from the
lords of the different places of the figure; «thirdly, from ‘the nature and
| conftitution


OFT ASP ROL OG Y. 443


conftitution of the planets with thofe places, or their refpe& to the Sun
with their lords; fourthly, from their oppofition in refpett to the angles ;
fifthly, from the nature and property of each {tar in conjunction with,
or beholding, thofe places ; and, fixthly, from the power or debility of
every fuch frgnificator refpedctively confidered. Nor ought the fixed ftars
of the firft and fecond magnitude, in or near the ecliptic, or that are
nearly vertical to the place of birth, and in conjunction with the figni-
ficators, to be in any wife neglected.


We may likewife add, that Mercury in conjunction with the Sum
produces a mind fitly formed for the prudent and fuccefsful manage-
ment of any kind of bufinefs; but, if they irradiate each other at a dif-
tance of twenty or.twenty-four degrees, the mind will be altogether
‘unfit for bufinefs, or any active line of life, but moftly difpofed to ftudy,
er to a fedentary calling. In equinodtial or tropical figns, Mercury has
the fame incitement to activity and public bufinefs as when bodily
configurated to the Sun ; but in watery figns he atts contrarily, in other
figns more varioufly, but always beft where beft dignified. .


If Mercury be afflicted with malevolent planets, the wit is always
dull, flow, and ftupid; if fwift in motion, he renders the mind quick,
but inconftant; if retrogade, dubious and unfixed; if under the Sun-
beams, the mind will lean to the purfuit of ufelefs and unprofitable {pe-
culations ; if pofited in oriental houfes, the difpofition will be open and ~
ingenuous; but, if in occidental, it will be wily, fubtle, and diflembling.
If Mercury be better dignified and ftronger than the Moon, the reafon-
able faculties will be ftronger than the fenfitive, particularly if Mercury
be in figns of long afeenfion, and the Moon in thofe of fhort afcenfion ;
but, if Mercury be in commanding figns, and the Moon in obeying, the
native’s intellect will be naturally ‘weak and impaired; and, if the Moon
chance to beat the fame time irradiated by the affliiing rays of either
of the infortanes, the native will be irrational and a perfect ideot.


Of the NATURAL DISEASES incident to the MIND.


The affections and properties of the mind are.of a feparate and diftinét
confideration from the di/eafés of the mind, fuch as madnefs, infanity,
the falling ficknefs, and the like; but are equally deducible from the
face of the native’s geniture, For this purpofe we muft again refer te
the configurations of Mercury and the Moon, and obferve how they are
pofited in refpect of each other, and in reference to the angular houfes,


No. 22. itt and


a AN TLBU 8 HRAE IN


andalfo to the malefics. For, ifMercury and the Moon are in an ine
conjunct pofition in refpeét of themfelves, or the oriental horizon, and
are irradiated by contrary and malefic configurations, whereby fuperiors
rule or oppote, they thus conftitute various difeafes in the qualities of the
mind; the particular fpecies of which is known from the qualities of the
ftars which pofflefs the places. Hence it is obvious that the more mo-
derate difeafes of the mind have their radical caufe from an excefs or
defect of thofe operations which induce the mental qualities; for, the
predominancy of fuch qualities naturally promotes an excefs of evil, and
conftitutes a difeafe, in proportion as the ambient matter is unmixed, and
above or below a proper mediocrity; but the more obvious and fatal
difeafes of the mind arife from a difproportion or defedt of matter infinite
ly greater, and wholly befide.nature. 3
Thofe who are born when Mercury and the Moon are, inconjuné,
either in refpect of themfelves or the oriental horizon, Saturn and Mars
being angular, and beholding the configuration, Mars by night, and
Saturn by day, will benaturally fubject to the falling ficknefs all their
lives; but, if Saturn happens to take this pofition by night, and Mars by
day, the native will be fubjett to phrenzy and madnefs, more efpecially
if the afpect fall in Cancer, Virgo, or Pifces. Again, if the Moon,
being in her phafis, is overcome by malefic rays, namely, by the con-
currence of Saturn when approaching toa new, or by Mars at her full,
either in the figns Sagittarius or Pifces, whoever is born under fuch con-
figurations will be fubject to lunacy. Therefore the malefic ftars, over-
coming or predominating in any configuration, induce a variety of
mental difeates, which are either remarkably violent, or obfcure and la-
tent, according to the nature and energy of each refpective ruling planet.


If the benevolent planets Jupiter and Venus have familiarity, in ori-
ental pofitions, and angular, with the malefics occidentally pofited,
thefe mental difeafes, though ftrong and violent, will be curable; ‘if
Jupiter prefides, they will be moved by medical help; but, if Venus,
by the natural ftrength of the mental faculties. But, if thefe pofitions
happen to be reverfed, the malefic ftars angular, and in oriental ftations,
and the benefics fetting, the difeafes will become more manifeft, and
be wholly incurable. Hence we derive the caufe of the ever-varying
mutation of the animal fpirits, which are always more or lefs affected
in proportion as Mercury and the Moon are agitated by the good or evil
- influences of other concurring and adjuvant caufes.


Such


a es


£1) 0, P ARS ITOR VO (L:01G Y.r & 445


Such are the morbid affeétions in the active part of the rational foul,
produced by the planetary configurations, but the great change which
arifes in the patient, that is, in the irrational part of the foul*, is in-
duced chiefly from excefs or defect, according to the particular confor-
mation of male or female, in which they either exceed, or are deficient, in
the parts proper to their fex. For it is found, that, if the Sun be configu-
rated with the Moon in the place of Mercury, and Mars and Venus have
familiarity with them, the luminaries being in mafculine figns, the
men will exceed in that which is natural, having thofe parts in excefs
that are proper to man; and the woman will have a conformation of
parts preternatural and mixed. But, if Mars and Venus fhould be one
or both conftituted with them after a mafculine manner, the men will
be fubject to mixtures of fex, and the women to violent Juft and intem-
perate wantonnefs. If Venus alone be difpofed after a mafculine manner,
this fenfation will be lefs ftrong, and the parties will conduct themfelves
with more decency and modefty ; but, if Murs and Venus both are fo
conftituted, they will be moved to carnal embraces by the moft violent
and irrefiftible fenfations.


If the luminaries alone are configurated in feminine figns, the women
then born will be of immoderate conformation, and will have ftrong and
continual defires after men; but the men then born will be changed to
that conformation which 1s inferior to naftre, and will inherit an effe-
minate and tender conftitution of body and parts. And, if Venus be
difpofed with them in a feminine manner, the women will be more la-
{civious and prone to venery; and, in whatever line of life they chance
to glide, this paflion will always be prodominant, and moit probably
fubject them to difgraceandinfamy. The men under this conftitution
are {till more effeminate and impotent; but, if Mars be thus conftituted
inftead of Venus, they become robuft and vigorous, and luft after women.
The oriental or diurnal configuration of Mars and Venus contribute
to a more mafculine and robuft conformation, but the occidental and
vefpertine to their being more effeminate and debilitated. If Saturn
happens to be configurated with them, he contributes to more luft and
wantonnefs, but in an unnatural way; if Jupiter irradiates the afpedct,


* To prevent the reader from being innocently led aftray, and the defigning critic from ex-
plaining away the author’s meaning, it is juft neceflary to remark,. that what is faid here of the
mind and foul is not to be underftood of the /upernatural foul, which never dicth, but of the
intellectual rational part of the animal foul, which is formed, ruled, and wholly governed,
by thefe fupreme and fole fecond caufes, under God, the ftars; but principally by the Moon :
and Mercury.


he


ge. . AN PLL AS R AT Y OLN


he conduces to more modefty and decency ; but Mercury inflaences to a
greater mobility of paffion, to a frequent change of objects, and toa cone
tinual love of variety, whether the native be male or female.


Of WEALT Hand RICHES.


We have hitherto confidered only fuch parts of the native’s geniture
as relate to the accidents of his body and mind, ‘and the general qualities
incident to them, as well before as after the birth. From thefe the
f{peculations naturally follow which regard the contingencies of them ;
whereof thofe appertaining to temporal poffeflions feem peculiarly to
agree with what concerns the body, and thofe which relate to honour
and dignity feem more particularly to flow from the qualities of the
mind.


To afcertain, therefore, the kind and quality of worldly poffeffions,
in any rational degree, we are to confider of the pofition of the Part of
Fortune, with the nature and ftrength of the planet which rules it, to-
gether with his configurations and pofitions in refpect to other {ftars,
For, whatever planet affumes the lordfhip of the Part of Fortune, if ftrong
and well dignified, he will affuredly contribute wealth and riches, but
more abundanty and lafting when the luminaries give teftimony to him
by irradiating the place of his pofition. Itis to be obferved that Saturn
gives an increafe of wealth by the improvement and cultivation of lands,
or by buildings or navigation. Jupiter contributes riches by the con-
fidence and love of friends, which produce legacies and patrimony ; alfo
by preferment inthe church. Mars conduces to wealth by warfare, in-
trepidity, and good generalfhip. Venus, by friendthip, gifts, and mar«
riage. Mercury by {cience, oratory, or perfeverance in bufinefs.


Saturn having familiarity with the part of Fortune, and configurated
at the fame time with Jupiter, promifes lands and hereditaments; par-
ticularly if pofited in a fuperior angle, and Jupiter occidental ina double-
bodied fign, or in application with the Moon; for then, being adopted,
the native will become the heir of others. And, if thofe ftars, which are
of the fame.nature with the fignificator of the Part of Fortune, give tefti-
mony of dominion, the poffefiion will remain with the native; but, if thofe
of a contrary quality are elevated above the lord which has dominion, the
poffefiion will be of no duration, and future riches. precarious.. The ge-
neral time of thefe events is taken from the inclination of the ftars which
produce the caufe in refpect to the angles and fucceedents, It may ae

3 e


OF ASTR©O-L 0 GY. 447


be further obferved, that if thefe lords of the Part of Fortune, commonly
called fignificators of riches, are in an angular pofition, the acquifition of
wealth will happen in youth ; and, if on the cufps of thofe angular po-
fitions, ftill earlier. If they are pofited in fuccedents, the riches will
prefent themfelves at a middle age; if in cadent houfes, either late or
in extreme oldage. The fame circumftances are likewife produced by
oriental and occidental pofitions, in refpect of thé Sun and the World.


Of DIGNITIES and HONOURS.


Things which relate to honour and dignity are deduced from the
difpofition of the luminaries, and the familiarity of the ftars by which
they are furrounded. Wherefore, if both the luminaries at the time of
birth are found in mafculine figns, angular, and attended by the five
planets, the Sun by oriental ftars, and the Moon by occidental, thofe
perfons willafpire to extraordinary power and dignity, and exercife au-
thority and dominion over others, from whence great tribute and ho-
nour will flow. And if thefe forrounding planets are angular, or con-
figurated to a cardinal houfe above the earth, they will be great and
powerful in afuperior degree; but {till more fo, if the attending planets
make a dexter configuration to the angles above the earth, with the Sun
in amafculine fign, and the Moon in a feminine ; for then the native
will arrive to a power like that of princes, having abfolute dominion and
government, difpofing, in a comparative degree, of the iffues of life and
death.


But if the luminaries happen to be thus pofited, and none of the fur-
rounding planetsare inangular ftations, nor giveteftimony tothe angles, the
native will be great and honourable as a magiftrate or general, but not
as having dominion or princely dignity. Soif the furrounding planets
are fome or moft of them in angular ftations, or configurated to the
angles, yet, if the luminaries are not in angular pofitions alfo, the native
will not arrive to fuch illuftrious preferment, and will but moderately
excel in dignity and honour. But, if neither of the attending planets is
configurated to the angles, the native will be obfcure, and pafs his whole
life without promotion or dignity ; and if neither of the luminaries are at
the fame time found ina mafculine fign, nor angular, nor attended by
the benefic rays of good planets, the native’s life will be abject and mife-
rable, and his fortune hard.


No, 22. (50mg Thus


+


&.


sa», “AN HE U8 T&A T1en


Thus the general confideration and mutability of dignity and honour. |
is fought out and determined. But many things between the two ex-
tremes of dignified ftation. and abject fervility muft be taken into the
account, before any reafonable judgment can be formed from the native’s
geniture ; for we muft recollect, that every perfon born under the fame.
propitious configuration cannot alike arrive to the felf-fame height of
dignity and hongur, becaufe the. difference of birth and ftation will at. .
once deftroy the poflibility of it ; not to fay any thing of crofs afpetts,
and other-baneful familiarities, which may either cut the thread of
life, or tend to leflen the grateful influences.of benefic configurations.
It therefore follows, that we are not only to judge of perfonal honour
and dignity, under certain reftri€tions, from the nature, quality, and
place of birth, but likewife from a due confideration of all occurring and
fubordinate rays, which may in any fhape be/liable to affeé the fignifi-
cators of dignity. We muftnot however forget, that, when thefe fignifi-
cators are fo dignified in a nativity, that no evil rays, either mundane
or zodiacal, or any fubordinate parallels, con{pire to afflict or diminith their
good influences, and the prorogator of life is {trong and durable, be the
quality of. birth what it may, and the obfcurity of the parents ever fo
remarkable, yet the infant.thus brought into the world fhall be exalted to
a degree of eminence and grandeur infinitely beyond whatever could
have been expected. And it is juft the fame in ref{pe& of riches, plea-
fure, wedlock, children, friends, enemies, travelling, and all other
events common to human life; for, if the place of the nativity proper to
either of them be thus ftrongly and happily configurated, the effects will
be produced in an eminent and glorious manner ; but, when there hap-
pen crofs and latent familiarities to oppofe and afflict the refpective fig-
nificators, and particularly if there are teftimonies of fhort life, death
will of courfe enfue, and all inferior or dependent incidents naturally
ceafe, and-are prevented.


Of natural INCLINATIONS or PROFESSIONS.


Since the confequences of the fall produced that unalterable decree of.
heaven, that man fhould eat bread by the fweat of bis brow ; and {ince the. -
increafe of‘mankind upon the face of the earth rendered a variety of
profeflions neceflary ; fo it is natural to believe, what obfervation has
long confirmed, that the bent of every man’s mind is more or lefs dif-
pofed towards the purfuit of fome particular avocation, by which the calls
of nature may be fupplied, and the decrees of heaven fully accomplifhed.
And hence it is that the ftars, as fecond caufes under God, derive the |

power


OF (AST RIOUL-/O.4G: Y. 449


power of influencing mankind ta a natural choice of thefe profeffions ;
our propenfities to which are fo deeply rooted, and fo ftrongly imprinted
onthe mental faculties, that no human bias is able to counteraét them,
nor the moft elevated {tation in life, not: even that of majefty itfelf, fuf-
ficient to repel'the inclination from an attachment to fome branch of me-
chanifm or {cience, by which an advantage might in fome meafure be de-
rived, either univerfally or individually.


To enter upon this fpeculation, we muft confider the lord of the
profeffion .or planet: that affumes the dominion, which is taken, two
ways, either from. the Sun, or the fign upon the midheaven; where.
fore we ought to obferve the ftar that makes an oriental appearance: next;
to the Sun, or midheaven, but more particularly when approached by
the application of the Moon; and if one and the fame: planet pafles
both, or-makes the neareft approaches to the Sun. or mid-heaven, we
take that planet for lord of the profeflion.: Butifione planet be pofited
before the Sun, and another in the mid-heaven, having familiarity with
the Moon, both are to be confidered, and that.only preferred, as fignifi-
cator, which is apparently the moft {trong, and:beft dignified. In cafes
where no planet is found approaching the Sun, nor pofited in the mid-
heaven, then that fhall’be taken’ which hath dominion, or is lord of the


mid-heaven.


To endeavour to afcertain the very profeffion or mechanical trade each
native will follow, is-an idle andvabfurd attempt, and favours of folly
and fanaticifm. For, though it is:poflible todeferibe the kind and qua-
lity of the profeflion in refpect to its general tendency and genus, yet it
is impoflible to afcertain particularly whether aman fhall) be a. common
carpenter, a wheelwright, or cabinet-maker. What we are able to dif-
cover is made known by the properties of the three planets, Mars, Ve-
nus, and Mercury, confiderediin refpect of the figns in which they are
pofited. Mercury influences to the love of literature, and the polite
arts ; and, if he be lord of the profeffion, will naturally incline the adtive
qualities of the mind to fuch purfuits as are conformable thereto, and
-which come under the various branches of the fciences and philofophy.
He therefore produces excellent orators, ftudents in law, phyfic, or di-
vinity ; eminent poets and hiftorians; together with the whole train of
dependent and inferior avocations of this. clafs, which are difcoverable
by the prefence or, aflifting rays of the other planetary configurations ;
for, if Saturn gives teftimony to Mercury, the profeflion will be of an
inferior order; but, if. Jupiter, they will be more exceilent and ho-


nourable. .
2 If


450 A NY WoL jUpS TP ROAL TOT OWN


If Venus affumes the dominion of the profeffion, the will difpofe the
native to the ftudy of flowers, and of botany in general, and confequently
to the knowledge and preparation of unguents, tinctures, effences, {pices,
aromatic waters, wines, cordials, and other produétions of herbs and
flowers, fome or other of which the native will probably deal in. If
Saturn gives teftimony to her, fhe makes chemifts, apothecaries, dealers
in dyes and colours, or fuch as deal in wearing apparel, or the
materials of which they are compofed. But, if Jupiter gives teftimony,
the native will afpire after fome eminent office, or place of truft under
government; or to fome poft of honour, or official department in the
ftate ; or will obtain fome honourable profeffion in the navy or army by
a perfeverance in that line. |


If Mars is ruler of the profeffion, and irradiated by the Sun, he leads
to all thofe branches of the mechanics which are wrought by the
operation of fire; whence he produces all the artificers in brafs and iron,
and the workers and refiners of metals. But, being in conjunction with
the Sun, he influences to hufbandry, agriculture, and working in wood
andftone. If Saturn gives teftimony to him, he carries the inclination
towards a feafaring life, or to aloveof gain by travelling, or by traffic
in foreign countries, or by dealing in flaves or cattle. If Jupiter gives
teftimony, the native’s profeflion will be that of the army or navy, or
fome place, office, or employment, dependent thereon.


Tf Mercury and Venus are fo configurated in the geniture as to be-
come joint rulers of the profeflion, they will produce excellent mufi-
cians, and good compilers of mufical pieces ; alfo, mufical inftrument
makers, compofers of fongs and glees, and admirable fingers ; likewife
comedians, opera dancers, tumblers, and all the tribe of exhibitionitts.
And, if Saturn gives teftimony; he will make jewellers, toymen, and
dealers in ornaments and precious ftones. But, if Jupiter gives teftimony
to them, he will difpofe the mind to the ftudy of politics, or of national
and conftitutional law ; or he will make the profeffion that of a teacher


or fchoolmafter, or the ruler and manager of fome public feminary of
learning.


If Mars and Mercury are joint lords of the profeffion, they lead the
inclination to the choice of painting or drawing; to ftatuary, {culpture,
carving, engraving, and fuch-like ingenious arts. But, becaufe the hap-
py configurations which confpire to the production of talents proper for
thefe purfuits are not often to be found in any geniture, without fome _


malevolent


”


OPA STR O LO GTY. gst


malevolent or afflicting rays, whereby the native’s genius is impaired, it
feldom happens that we find very-high perfection, or fuper-extraordinary
merit, among the numerous profeffors and followers of the polite arts ;
whence comes the foundation of the common faying, fo ftrictly confor-
mable to truth and reafon, that painters, poets, and muficians, mutt be
fo born; that is, muft inherit from nature a ftrong bias for either of
thefe profeffions, to make any extraordinary progrefs in them. Andit
is remarkable, that, if Saturn gives teftimony to this joint rule of Mars
and Mercury, all the above ingenuity and tafte will be deftroyed, and
the native become. wholly untractable and indolent, and given up to
theft, fwindling, fharping, and other {pecies and fraud and violence, for


the means of a fubfiftence.


If Mars and Venus jointly take dominion of the profeflion, they pro-
duce workers and dealers in various kinds of metals; likewife hufband-
men, apothecaries, and phyficians, and all profeflions in the nature of
plants and herbs. If Saturn gives teftimony to them, they will make
ignorant pretenders to mufic and divinity ; and, in all other profeffions
under this configuration, the native will betray a want of ingenuity and
capacity. But, if Jupiter gives teftimony, the contrary effects will hap-
pen; and, in whatever purfuit the native engages, proper tothis mixture
of the ruling planets, he will have the fatisfaction of deriving both ho-


nour and profit from his labours.


It muft alfo be obferved, that the quality of the figns in which thefe
congrefles are made, and wherein the lords of the profeflion are pofited,
confers to the variety and advantage of fuch profeffion. ‘Thofeof human
fhape conduce amazingly to the perfection of all thofe {cien¢es and avo-
cations which are for the improvement and information of the mind.
Four-footed figns contribute to the greater perfection of metallic arts,
navigation, and architecture. Tropical and equinoétial figns forward
the purfuits of hufbandry, agriculture, the mathematics, chemittry,
and theology. Earthy and watery figns to the perfection of phyfic and
furgery, to the art of conftructing fhips, and to the profeffion of a


merchant. — :


Again, if the Moon pofleffes the place of the profeflion, having confi-
guration with Mercury, at her conjunction with the Sun, either in
Taurus, Capricorn, or Cancer, fhe will conduce to greater fagacity and
penetration in whatever profeffion the native happens to follow. If this
configuration happens in Sagittarius or Pifces, it conduces to a melan~=
choly and timid purfuit of bufinefs, and burthens the mind with enthu-


_ No. 23. aR fiattic


- boldnefs, loftinefs, and prefumption ; wherefore both act in oppofition


452 AN OYLE Oe oR AA TOON


fiaftic and fuperftitious affections. If it happens in Virgo or Scorpio, it
contributes profound wifdom and knowledge to the profeffion of phy-
ficians, lawyers, or divines; and to the followers of fcience or philofo-
phy, Ifin Libra, Aries, or Leo, it makes enthufiaftic preachers, and


fills the mind with idle and immoderate tdeas of gain by each refpective
bufinefs or avocation,


Thus the kinds and qualities of profeffions are to be fought out in a
general way, and defcribed accordingly ; but the importance and extent
of them muft be confidered from the ttrength and dignity of the ruling —
ftars. For, being oriental or angular, they make the profeffion eminent
and profitable; but, if occidental, or declining from angles, it will be
unimportant, mean, and unprofitable. If the benefics are fuperior, the
profeffion will be eminent, honourable, and conducive to great riches ;
but, if the malefics are fuperior, it will be mean, inglorious, and wholly
unprofitable. Saturn is found to deftroy the benefits of an attive pro-
feflion by tardinefs, indifference, and inadtivity: but Mars through


to the fuccefs and advantage of the native’s profeffion. But the general
caufes of the failure or profperity of bufinefs muft be judged of from
the difpofition and quality of the ftars which produce this effect; and
this in reference to the oriental and occidental angles. The eaft angle
denotes the beginning of life; the weft angle the end; and the mid~
heaven the middle part, from about thirty to forty years: and, as the
fignificators are difpofed in the radical figure, fo will the effects thereof
be at the fet time of life conformable thereto.


It muft be ever remembered that the doctrine of profeffions here laid
down, and the effects arifing from them, relates only to fuch as are fol-
lowed in confequence of the’ natural impulfe of the mind ; in which cafes
alone we are to feek for adequate fuccefs and perfection in the profecu-
tion of them. Among the obfervations we make of the common occur-
rences of life, we too often find youth configned to fuch employments,
by the will or caprice of their parents, as they are neither defigned for
by nature nor have the leaft inclination to follow. And hence it
is that fo many bunglers rife up inall trades and profeflions, who, finding
their bufinefs a continual load of oppreflion and perplexity, either aban-
don it altogether, or elfe become indolent, fottith, and inactive, to the
utter ruin to their families and to the general annoyance of the more
induftrious part of mankind. From this confideration, parents and
guardians fhould be careful to educate and bring up the rifing generation,
as far as. prudence will admit, according to the natural bent and geni

¥


us


of .


OFLA S THR O.L:O GC. Y. 453


of their own inclinations, which is the only dire€t road to excellence
and perfection. This I think is a fa& that needs no further illuftration,
fince the obfervations of -moft men will furnith them ‘with inftances of
perfons being regularly bred to fome profeflions, which even at an ad-
vanced time of life they wholly abandon, in purfuit of fome other calling
more confonant to their nature and abilities, and in which they oftea
fucceed, to the aftonifhment to their competitors.


Of MARRIAGE,


To what has been faid follows the confideration of marriage, or the
fit conjunction and living together of man and woman, according to the
divine ordinance of the fupreme Being. And, as this law was evidently
eftablifhed from the beginning of things, as well for the propagation of ©
the f{pecies as for the mutual comfort and happinefs of the fexes, it were
fenfelefs to fuppofe human nature void of the impulfe of reciprocal love;
or that the involuntary actions of the foul, by which it is moved towards the
object of its affections, have not a radical caufe in the order of nature.
If this be admitted, it cannot furely be deemed a fubject of ridicule, to
believe that this, aswell as the other important tranfactions of our lives,
may be fought out by a contemplation of the celeftial bodies. :


To inveftigate this point, therefore, in refpect to men, let the pofis
tions and conftitutions of the Moon be particularly confidered, For,
when fhe is found in the oriental quadrants at the time birth, the
influences the native to the confummation of marriage at an early period
of his life; but, if pofited in the occidental quadrants, he will probably
live fingle till the approach of old age, and then marry a very young
woman. If the Moon be afflicted by the Sun-beams, and in configura-
tion withgSaturn, in eitherof thefe pofitions the native will never marry
at all. Ifthe be found in a fign of one form, and making application to
one planet only, the native will marry but once; but, if pofited in a bi-
corporal or fign of many forms, and making application to feveral {tars
in the fame fign, he will be feveral times married. And, if the ftars
which receive the Moon’s application, either by a conjunction, fextile, or
trine, are benefic, the wives will be good and virtuous; but, if the ap-
plication be made to malefic pints and by evil configurations, they
will be altogether of an oppofite defcription. Therefore, if Saturn re-
ceives the Moon’s application, it indicates a laborious, but fullen, fro-
ward, and ungovernable, wife. If it be made to Jupiter, fhe will be free,
open, and generous, truly virtuous, and a good houfewife, If to Mars,


fhe
oe


ASA AUN. \¥ E)te) U; 8) TY RE ARE TO EN


fhe will be bold, ftubborn, and refractory. If to Venus, chearful,
complacent, affable, and chafte. If to Mercury, wife, prudent, loving,
and conftant. But, if Mars irradiates the place, fhe will be furly, pal:
fionate, ‘talkative, and unfteady.


For the particulars of marriage in refpe&t of women, we are to confider
the pofitions of the Sun, inftead of the Moon; for, if he be fituated in
the oriental houfes, at the time of birth, the*native will either marry very
young, or elfe at an advanced time of ‘lite to.a young man; but, if the
Sun be found in the occidental houfes, fhe will marry late, or to a man
far advanced in years. And alfo, if he be fituated in a fign of one form,
fhe will marry but once; but, if ina fign of many forms, or configurated
to many oriental ftars, fhe will have more hufhands than one, who will
partake of the fame nature and qualities as the ftars to which the confi-


er: gurations are made. Thus, Saturn, if configurated to the Sun, will


indicate fober, grave, and laborious, hufbands, but cold and phlegmatic.


“Jupiter difpofes them to more opennefs of mind, .and generofity. Mars


makes them violent, warm, unruly, Det Aate: and arbitrary. Venus
forefthews them to be indulgent, fond, good-natured, and handfome.
Mercury difpofes them to be careful, prudent, Canute and faithful.
But, if Saturn be joined with Mercury, they will be churlith and re-
ferved; if with Venus, they will be dull, four, and inconftant: if with
Mars, quick, lively, luftful, and fond of variety. ‘Thofe are here to be
confidered the oriental quarters in refpect of the Sun, which Preine the
oriental and occidental fign of the zodiac ; and, in refpect of the M

thofe from her new and full to her other quarters ; and the occideltal
houfes are thofe which fall oppofite to the foregoing.


As to events that occur after marriage, that is a different {peculation,
and requires great attention to the following particulars. Whenever the
geniture of both hufband and wife have the luminaries configurated i in
mutual agreement, that is, in trine or fextile to each other, they will
live together in comfort and harmony, and fora long continuance of
time, if the luminaries happen to be in mutual reception. And this du-
ration will ftill be more firm and lafting, if the pofition of the hufband’s
Moon agrees with that of the Sun in the wife’s geniture. But, if the
pofitions of the luminaries are placed in figns inconjunét, and configu-
rated by quartile or oppofition, they will either live together in difcord ”
and enmity, and be rent by violent jealoufies and contention, or. wale be
fully and finally errapacd from each other.


Ren,
‘ 3 ep


-*


OF ASTROLOGY. bee


Again, if the benefic rays of the fortunate planets behold the configu-
rations of the luminaries in mutual reception, the marriage will be
durable, conftant, happy, and profitable; but, if the malefic planets
irradiate thofe ‘places, the marriage will be unhappy, contentious, and
miferable. If the luminaries are not configurated in mutual reception,
yet if the benefics give teftimony to them, the marriage will be mode-
rately happy and durable; and, when ftrife and difagreements happen,
the fame will wear off, and reconciliation will take place between them ;
but, if the malefics give teftimony to the difcordant pofitions of the lu-
minaries, inconftancy and infidelity will enfue, and the marriage will
be-diffolved with fcandal and difgrace. If Mercury be joined with the
malefics, the feparation will be for hatred and diflike, and by mutual
confent; but, if Venus gives teftimony to them, it will be a divorce, by
due courfe of law, for infidelity and adultery,


- Marriages, in other refpects, are confidered from the familiarities and
connexions of Venus, Mars, and Saturn. For, if thefe are all three
configurated with the luminaries, the marriage will be good, domettic,
and profitable; by reafon of the affinity which the benefic planet Venus
‘hath with Mars and Saturn; with Mars, becaufe of youth and florid coun-
‘tenance, feeing they have exaltation in mutual trigonal figns, as Mars in
Capricorn the triplicity of Venus, and Venus in Pifces the triplicity
of Mars; or Mars in Pifces the exaltation of Venus, and Venus in
Capricorn the exaltation of Mars. So likewife Capricorn and Libra are
common to Saturn and Venus; for Venus in Libra hath houfe, and Sa-
turn triplicity ; and in Capricorn Saturn hath houfe, and Venus tripli-
city; and hence fhe bears relation to Saturn by an older complexion,
feeing they have their houfes trigonal to each other. Wherefore Venus
with Mars conduces to make the inclinations more fond and amorous ;
and Mercury, giving teftimony to them, qualifies the paffions, and keeps
the fenfual appetite within rational bounds. If Venus be found in any
of the above familiar and promifcuous figns, fhe indicates marriages be-
tween kinfmen and relations; or, if fhe be with the Moon in a mafcu-
line geniture, it predicts that two fitters, or near relations, will be mar-
ried to the fame man; but, if fhe be thus configurated to Jupiter, or the
Sun, ion a feminine geniture, it fhews the woman will marry two bro-
thers, or two men that are nearly related,


It is likewife obfervable, that, in all cafes where Venus is thus con-
figurated to Saturn, in the place of marriage;*the connubial: ftate
will be blifsful and happy to the native; and, if Mercury be joined
with them, he adds profperity ; but, if Mars be fubftituted in his place,

No. 23. ‘ 5 8 ) the


46 AON PSE 6 To RCA MET OON


the marriage will be altogether wretched, contentious, and unhappy.
If Mars be configurated to Venus, Saturn, and Mercury, the native’
‘marries with a perfon-nearly of an equal age; but, if he be pofited in an

oriental or eafterly ftation, the native marries with a perfon much youn-
ger; and, if in an occidental or wefterly ftation, with a perfon much older.
ff Venus and Saturn be found in promifcuous figns, fuch as Capricorn
or Libra, the native will marry among his own kindred ; but, if this
configuration is made upon the cufps of the horofcope or mid-heaven,
irradiated by the Moon, and the geniture be mafculine, the native will
luft after his own fifter,, aunt, or mother-in-law; or, if the geniture be
feminine, fhe will have defire unto her own brother, uncle, or daugh-
ter’s hufband. Should the Sun irradiate the place, inftead of the Moon,
then the males will have defire toward their daughters, or fon’s wife ;
and the females to their fons, nephews, or fifter’s hufband.


Obfervation likewife proves, that, if Venus and Saturn are configu-
rated neither in a mafculine nor feminine fign, but in thofe of an oppo-
fite quality, which are alike in fex, but contrary in nature; or in thofe
that are ruled by places of a contrary nature, as Capricorn is ruled by
Saturn and Mars, and Pifces by Jupiter and Venus; the native will be
prone to luft, of a loofe converfation, and immodeft carriage ; more par-

‘ticularly if the configuration be made in the firft’ or latter degrees of
Aries, near the Hyades, in the latter degrees of Leo, or upon the face
of Capricorn. And, if thefe planets occupy the two principal angles,
namely, the afcendant or mid-heaven, thefe libidinous affections will be
the more ftrong, open, and offenfive, making the party glory, as it were,
in lafcivioufnefs and debaucheries; but it is a moft extraordinary cir-_
cumftance, that the fame afpects in the northern and weftern angles not
only conduce to an oppolite difpofition, but render the native either
barren, deficient, or of evil conformation, in refpect to the parts necef-
fary to generation.


The difpofition of men, as to modeft or vicious habits, very much de-
pends on the pofition and configurations of Mars ; for, if he be feparat-
ing from Saturn and Venus, ‘and applying to Jupiter, men born at that
time will be difcreet and modeft, decent in their intercourfes with the
other fex, and difpofed only to the natural ufe. If Jupiter and Venus be
configurated to Saturn and Mars, the native will be eafily moved on, and
have a fecret defire to acts of venery; but will havean external thew of
chaftity, and labour to avoid the fhame. If Mars and Venns are alone
configurated together, or if Jupiter bears teftimony, the native will be
openly lafcivious, and indulge in the moft luxuriant enjoyments of. the


oppofite


a
4 4.
ee iD


6.F MAS TRO E O'G Y. 457


oppofite fex. If one of thefe planets be oriental, and the other occi-
dental, he will be difpofed towardsmen as well as women; but, if both
are found configurated in the occidental quarters, the native’s company
fhould be avoided, for he will burn with unnatural defires after men or
boys; more particularly if the afpect falls in mafculine figns, in which
cafe the inclination is moft aftonifhingly moved towards this infamous
and fhocking practice. It is likewife to be remarked, that, if Venus be
alone in an occidental pofition, the native will for the moft part have
intercourfe with none but the meaneft and moft proftituted part of the
fex; but, if Mars be alone in this pofition, he influences to greater delicacy
and faftidioufnefs, and marks the character witha defire after married wo-
men, or to the more continent and modeft among the fingle ones. .,


Such are the caufes which vary the fenfual appetites of men; we will®
now confider thofe peculiar to women.—If Venus be configurated to
Jupiter, and Mercury gives teftimony, the native will be fober, pure,
and moderate in her defires after men; but, having familiarity with Mer-
cury alone, fhe will privately give herfelf up to fenfual embraces, though
remarkably coy and referved in public. So likewife, if Venus be con-
figurated to Mars alone, the native will be wanton and lafcivious ; and, if
Mercury has familiarity with them, fhe will be wholly given up to luft-
ful pleafures and proftitution. If Jupiter concurs in this afpett, and
Mars be combuft of the Sun, the native will be mean and abje@t, fub-
mitting to the ufe of the moft vulgar and loweft clafs of mankind; but,
if Venus be combutt inftead of Mercury, fhe will fubmit with more re-
ferve and caution, and moftly with decent and genteel-perfons. If thefe
planets be configurated after a feminine manner, the fen{ual appetite of the
native will be only paflive; but, if difpofed after a mafculine manner, it
will be active alfo. Saturn, having familiarity with thefe configurations,
adds to the greater luft and licentioufnefs ; but Jupiter to a greater fhare
of modefty, decency, and external decorum.


Ofer ft tay RRO N,


After the confideration of marriage follows that of children. This {pe-
culation is deduced from the ftars configurated in the midheaven, or
fuccedent, which is the eleventh houfe; but, if none of the planets are
found in thefe places, then the oppofite ones are to be confidered. The
Moon, Jupiter,.and Venus, are the givers of children; but the Suan,
Mars, and Saturn, occafion fterility, or paucity of children. Mercury,
as in all other cafes, contributes his influences according to the nature
and quality of that ftar or planet with which he is configurated ; adding
to the increafe of children when in the eaft, but to fterility and barren-


nefs


458 ANY DoB-b $F RAE BON


nefs when occidental, or inthe weft. When therefore thefe ftars which
are givers of children, are thus pofited, and by themfelves, they fore-
thew only one child to the native; but, if they are formed in double-bo-
died or feminine figns, they caufe the generating of twins: fo likewife, in
fruitful figns, as Pifces, Cancer, or Scorpio, they will produce two or
three children at a birth. If they are of a mafculine nature, by being
configurated to the Sun, and in mufculine figns, they caufe males ; but,
if they are difpofed after a feminine nature, they give females. If they
are overcome by malefic planets, and pofited in barren places or figns,
fach as Leo or Virgo, they will give children, but not of any ftability
or duration; they will be naturally weak and puny, by being void of a
proper fhare of vital heat and nourifhment. If the Sun and malefic ftars
jointly poffefs the midheaven or eleventh houfe, in mafculine or fterile
figns, without either of the benefics concurring, they indicate perpetual
barrennefs to the native, and fhew an utter want of children? but, if they
be in feminine or fruitful figns, or aided by the benefics, they forefhew
the produGtion of children, but fuch as are either hurt or blemifhed in
their bodies, or of a fhort and unhealthy life. . .


In all thefe cafes it muft be remembered, that whenever the malefic
ftars have the dominion, and the benefics give teftimony, being configu-
‘rated in,*or having refpect to, prolific figns, there will happen a rejection
of children according to the excefs which the ftars giving teftimony have
in each condition, either of all the children, or of a few, or moft, as they
are found more powerful, by being more oriental or angular, or more ele-
vated or fuccedent. If therefore the lords of thofe figns, being givers of
children, are oriéntally pofited, or in good places of the figure, the chil«
dren will be fortunate and afpiring, and will arrive at fingular fame and
honour: but, if the pofition be occidental, or in evil places of the figure,
the children will be altogether mean and obfcure. Moreover, if they
agree with the part of fortane and horofcope, they forefhew mutual love
and confidence, and a good underftanding always to exift between the
children and parents, and that they will become the heirs and inheritors
of their fortunes; but, if thefe be found unconjoined and difagreeing, the
children will be vicious and incorrigible, lofing the eftcem, and wearing
out the patience, of their parents, and thereby perhaps miffing the inhe-
ritance of their. fubfiance. If the ftars which aflume the dominion of
children are agreeably configurated among themfelves, they forefhew love
and harmony among brothers and fifters, and that they will help and
affift one another during their lives, But, sas to other particulars rela~
tive to the fortunes and general purfuit of children, they are to be fought
out by placing the fign.and degree in which the fignificator of children

1 1$


6 & TAD SATARTO? DI OIG! ¥. +4 459)
is found, upon the! afcendant, and making the figns upon the cufps of
all the other houfes agreeable thereto, in the fame manner as if it was
the proper nativity of each child, and then judge of the difpofition of
the figure, according to the rules heretofore laid down.


Of FRIENDS and ENEMIES.


The. things which relate to friendfhip and enmity are confidered by
obferving the principal places of the geniture wherein the fignificators
thereof have familiarity or afpect, together with the weaknefs or f{trength
of them. The great and more durable familiarities or differences of thefe
ftars are termed fympathies and enmities; and the fmall and temporary
familiarities:are called focieties and conténtions. ,To‘difcover thefe, we
mutt carefully obferve the places of the Sun and Moon, in refpect to the:
horofcope and part of fortune; for, if thefe happen in the fame figns, or
if they change places when rifing, and not more than feventeen degrees
diftant, they forefhew long and faithful friendthip; but, if they are in-
conjunct, or pofited in oppofite figns, they produce great and implacable
enmity and hatred. If the luminaries are not found in any of thefe’ fi-
tuations, but are only configurated in figns, either by trine or fextile,.
they thew flight and precarious friendfhip; but, if by quartile, {mall and
impotent enmity. Hence it happens that friendfhips ceafe and appear
as it were at an utter end, while the malefics tranfit the configuration ;
and yet, when~thefe are over, the friendfhip is again renewed, and
mutual civilities and good offices take place, as if no fuch circumttance
had happened. So in like manner the malicious objects of. hatred and
enmity feem to ceafe and lie dormant, when the benefic ftars are making
their ingrefs upon the configuration; but are renewed with freth ran-


cour foon after thefe ingrefles are at an end.


Friendfhip and enmity.are therefore confidered under three kinds ;, for
men are obferved to be fo difpofed either by election, or for profit, or
for forrow or pleafure; and when cither all or moft of the forementioned
places have familiarity with each other, friendthip is conftituted by thefe
three kinds; but, if thefe places are found unagreeable, then enmity ariles
in a fimilar manner. When the places of the luminaries alone have fa-
miliarity, friendfhip will arife from election, involuntary choice, or nam
tural regard, which is the moft firm and lafting; but, if the places of the
luminaries are contrarily difpofed, hatred is in the fame manner pro-
duced, and is the moft inveterate and fatal. When the place of part of
fortune hath familiarity, or is otherwife found, then thefe affections


No. 230 5 T ariie


460 AN TLLUS TRATION


arife from motives of felf-intereft or gain; but, when they are from the
horofcope, they are produced by thofe actions of the mind which arife
from melancholy and choler, or from vivacity and good humour. But
in all thefe cafes we muft particularly obferve the ftars elevated above or
configurated with each of thefe refpective places ; for that place fhall give
a higher degree of friendfhip or enmity than any other, to which the
elevation or fucceffion of ftars is the neareft, whether in the fame fign
or the adjoining. But the place which pafies the ftars in configuration,
if the ftars are friendly, denotes advantage and intereft to be the caufe of
friendfhip ; or, if difcordant ftars-occur, enmity will arife from interefted
motives, which will expire with the caufe of it. —


The foregoing obfervations are applicable to the moft extravagant and
lafting inftances of friendthip and enmity; but thofe which arife from
more: temporary and trivial caufes have a different {peculation. The
common occafions of friendfhip or animofity, which arife in the general.
purfuit of bafinefs or pleafure, or which arife from mixing with the
world, are only to be deduced ftom the motion of the flars taken in
both genitures, in order to find when the fignificators in one. nativity
Thall come to the fame point in the other nativity ; for at fuch periods
there will arife particular friendfhips or enmities, which will have du-
ration no longer than the refpective familiarity or connexion of thefe
ftars exift. Saturn and Jupiter, coming in this manmnerto each other’s
places, caufe friendthip by meeting in focieties or company; or by agree-
ment in hufbandry and agriculture, or by the joint inheritance of for-
tunes. Saturn and Mars produce ftrife and contention, and often fore-
fhew premeditated fraud and villainy. Saturn and Venusdenote love and
friendfhip through the interference of kindred, bat it hath no duration.
Saturn and Mercury produce friendfhip by converfation or connexion in
bufinefs, {cience, or confederacy. Jupiter and Mars produce enmity by
politics, improper perferment, or interefted meafures of government.
Jupiter and Venus occafion friendfhip through the interference of wo-
men, ecclefiaftics, or teachers; Jupiter and Mercury through’ mutual
attachment to literature, fcience, and philofophy; Mars and Venus
caufe friendfhip by a lrke difpofition to lafcivioufnefs, diffipation, and
intemperance; Mars and Mercury produce enmity by fimilar interefts
in bufinefs, or by the fame parties following ‘the fame avocation ; but


Venus and Mercury by means of jealoufy, learning, corre{pondence by
letter, or love of women.


The increafe or decreafe of friendfhip and ‘enmity is difcerned from the
nature of the poffeffed places of ‘each fignificator, compared with the


I firft


yO FE PASS @PqR OL 10 1G ¥, 462
firft four principal places of the figure ; for, if they apply to the place of


the part of fortune, or to the luminaries angular, they render the friend-
fhip or enmity more confpicuous; but, feparated and disjoined, they
make them obfcure and fecret. To know whether thefe affections fhall
be moreor lefs injurious or advantageous, we are to obferve the force
and power of the ftars which behold the above-mentioned places, and
judge according to their quality and difpofition either to good orvevil.
But, if it relates to good or evil from fervants, the place of the ruling
difpofition in refpect of them in the figure muft be taken from the fign
in the twelfth houfe, and from the ftars which behold the place in the
geniture itfelf, with the ingrefles or oppofition; but more particularly
when the rulers of the figns have either familiarity with the principal
places. of the geniture, or are contrarily and unhappily configurated ;
from which judgment muft be made accordingly.


Of the Natural INCLINATION for TRAVELLING.


The circumftances which relate to travelling are confidered from the
pofition of the luminaries in refpect to the angles, but chiefly from thofe,
of the Moon; for, ‘if fhe be found in the feventh honfe, and declining
from angles, fhe denotes a continual difpofition for travelling, and perpe-
tual change of place, to the mative. Mars himfelf being occidental, or
declining from the midheaven, and having an .oppofite or quartile pofi~
tion to the luminaries, will produce the fame inclination in a fomewhat
lefs degree. But, if the part of fortune falls in the fame fign with the
fignificator of travelling, the principal part of the life and actions of
the native will be {pent in a foreign country.


Whenever the benevolent planets irradiate the above-mentioned places
of the luminaries, or Mars, or the part of fortune, or fucceed to them,
the native’s travelling will be glerious and profitable, and his return
fafe and without impediment; but, if the malevolent ftars behold or
fucceed, the contrary effects willbe found to happen. Inall thefecafes, |
however, the quality and temperament of the fmaller familiaritics, asthey
add to or take from the power and force of their. configurations, muft
be invariably attended to. If the luminaries incline or fall to the ori-
ental quadrants, the travelling will be towards the eaftern or fouthern
parts of the globe, confidered in refpeCt to the place of birth; but, if
they are found in the occidental quadrants, the peregrination will be to-
wards the north or weft. If the figns in which the fignificators of tra-
velling are pofited be of one form, either in refpect of themfelves, or
of the ftars which have the lordfhip over them, the travelling will be

far,


462 A N* FPLYLYOVS “Ff AR oAVT FON

far, but at intervals;. but, if the figns are double-bodied, or of two
forms, it will be perpetual, and of vaft extent. It muft however be’
here obferved, that, though the caufes and fuccefs of travelling are in-
fluenced by Mars and the part of fortune, yet the quarter towards’
which the peregrination fhall be is only to be known from the pofi-
tion of the luminaries.


‘{f Jupiter and Venus are rulers both of the luminaries and places of
the figure which induce travelling, the journeys will not only be com-’
pleted without danger, but they will alfo be pleafant, healthy, and
agreeable; for, by the good government of the countries he vifits, and~
the accidental meeting of friends, he will meet with hofpitality and kind-
nefs'; the conftitution of the air, and the plenty of neceflary accommoda-
tions, contributing at the fame time to his health and-prefervation; and,
if Mercury be joined to the aforefaid configuration, an additional fhare of
honour, profit, and information, will be derived from the journey; but,
if Saturn and Mars poffefs or govern the places of the luminaries, at a
great diftance from each other, they will occafion great dangers and a
variety of ill fortune in the courfe of the journey. Being in moift figns,:
they denote misfortune by fhipwreck, or falling into defolate and inac-»
ceflible places; in fixed figns, by precipices, or tempeftuous and cons
trary winds; in tropical and equinodtial figns, by want of provifions,
by a fcorbutic or epidemic diforder, or by a fickly temperature of the air ;
in human figns, by the fudden attack of mountaineers and robbers, of
favages, or ambufcades; in earthy figns, by the attack of wild and fe-
rocious animals, or by falling into pits, or fubterraneous places ; but
if Mercury gives teftimony in any of the foregoing cafes, the danger
may arife from venomous creatures, or by poifon, or fome villainous
accufation. ,


Thefe are the general confiderations ; but the more particular, fuch as
relate to the peculiar advantage or injury of each event, muft be deduced
from the nature and property of ‘the principal places and fignificators of
profeffion and fubftance, of dignity and honour, or of bodily and mental
endowments, according, to the rules already premifed. But the know-.
ledge of the times when thefe various incidents.are to happen is only to
be acquired from the refult of the directions of each refpeCtive fignifi-
gator, by the method which we fhall prefently recommend.


Of


OT # es piRZOVL OG! y, 463


Of the APHETA, HYLEG, PROROGATOR, or SIGNIFICATOR
‘of LIFE, and the Places proper thereto.


The aphetic, hylegiacal, or prorogatory, places, are thofe particular
places of the figure, or of the heavens, from whence the apheta, hyleg,
prorogator, or fignificator of life, is to be taken. Thefe appellations
have all the fame meaning, and fignify that planet or ftar which is lord of
life. The firft is derived from the Greek, the fecond from the Hebrew,
and the latter from the Latin. 3


The hylegiacal or prorogatory places are in number five, viz, the
afcendant, the feventh, ninth, tenth, and eleventh, houfes, and are ta-
ken from the five degrees next and immediately above the cufp of the
afcendant to the twenty-five degrees below the cufp of the fame, com-
puted by oblique afcenfion. In the fame-manner the prorogatory places
are determined in the feventh, ninth, tenth, and eleventh, houfes ; for
inftance, it iscomputed from the five degrees in the eighth houfe, to
the middle of the eleventh houfe, towards the twelfth ; which middle
is eafily found, by adding half the femidiurnal arch to the right afcenfion
of the medium cceli, and where that ends is the middle of the eleventh
houfe ; the part beyond which is not hylegiacal or prorogatory. Now
thefe only are the places in which the planet who affumes the power of
hyleg or giver of life can be found; for whatfoever is under the earth
is not fit for fuch dominion; nor isany pofition above the earth, which
hath not configuration to the horofcope.. The twelfth houfe, therefore,
which is called the evi/ ange/, is not prorogatory, becaufe it not only de-
clines from the angle, but alfo makes the influence of the ftars pofited
therein of an evil tendency, fince it difturbs, and as it were deitroys, the
thick vapour proceeding from the moifture of the earth, whereby they
become contrary to nature both in colour and magnitude.


If the native’s birth be by day, the Sun fhall be taken for hyleg, pro-
rogator, or giver of life, if he be found in any of the foregoing hylegiacal
places; if he be not, then obferve whether the Moon be pofited in either
of them, and, if fo, then fhe fhall be taken for fignificator of life. But
if neither of the luminaries be fo found, then any planet whatfoever, that
hath moft dignities in the place of the Sun at the preceding conjunction
with the Moon, and inthe horofcope, fhall be preferred as fignificator of
Jife. It muft however be remembered, that this planet muit be dignified
three ways or more, in one of the above-mentioned places, to be fo pre-
ferred; but, if no planet fhould be found fo dignified, or, if dignified, not
in an aphetical place, then take the afcendant for giver of life.


If the time of birth happens to be by night, the Moon fhall be pre-
ferred for giver of life, if the be pofited in any of the aphetical places of
No. 23. py the


464 AN ooI-LeL ou, ST ROA Ted © N


the figure. If fhe be not, then the Sun fhall be preferred, if found in
any of thefe places; but, if neither Sun nor Moon be fo fituated, then any
planet whatever, which was moft dignified in the place of the preceding
full Moon, and in the place of the part of fortune, fhall be preferred. If
none fuch are found in the geniture, the afcendant fhall be taken for
giver of life, if a conjunction preceded ; but, if it was a full Moon, then
the part of fortune muft.be preferred. If both the luminaries, or feveral
of the planets which aflume the power of fignificator of life by the
above-mentioned conditions, are found together in the aphetical places,
and feem to contend for dominion of prorogation, then that fhall be pre-
ferred which is found in the moft principal place of the luminaries, whe-
ther it be the Sun, Moon, or any other planet whatever. The princi-
pal places of the luminaries are thefe: firft, in the medium celi; next,
in the afcendant ; then, in the eleventh houfe; next to that, the feventh ;
and, laftly, the ninth houfe. According to this order, therefore, by the


genetbliacal figure at the time of birth,. fhall the fignificator of life be
fought out and afcertained.


Of the ANARETICAL or KILLING PLANET, and of the
QUALITY of DEATH.


The anaretic or killing places are the places of Saturn and Mars,
which kill according to the direction of the hyleg to the fucceeding figns,
when they meet either bodily, or caft their rays from any place of the
figure, whether it be by quartile or oppofition; and fometimes it hap-
pens by fextiles, when they proceed from figns obedient or bebolding,
becaufe they have then the fame efficacy with the quartile or oppofition.
So likewife a quartile, configurated from the following or {ucceeding
figns to the aphetic place; and alfoa fextile evilly affected, when in
figns of ‘long afcenfion; and even the trines, in fhort afcenfions, have
fufficient force to kill, .when unimpeded by benefic rays; as will alfo the
folar place, if the Moon be hyleg. But it muft be remembered that
thefe places are only anaretic when they are evilly affected; for their
anaretic or killing power is impeded or deftroyed, whenever it falls in the
terms of a benefic ftar, or whenever the benefics caft a fextile, quartile,
trine, or oppofitional, ray to the very anaretical point, or to thofe points
which follow. Hence life is generally found to be preferved, when Ju-
pitetis not above twelve degrees diftant from the anareta or killing pla-
- net; or when Venus is not more than eight. The zodiacal afpects of

the anaretic or killing ftars will be likewife of little force, whenever the


Jatitude of the apheta, or giver of life, and that of the anareta, or de-’
Rroyer of life, doth not correfpond.


When


OM #53 FRO o Gy. 465


When the affifting and anaretic rays are found two or more on each fide,
we muft obferve which of them exceed moft in number and power, which
is to be underftood when the benefics or anaretas are fome of them in
proper places of the figure, and others not; particularly when fome are
oriental, and others occidental, either in refpect of the Sunor the figure
itfelf; for in general no planct under the beams of the Sun hath power
to kill or fave, unlefs when the Moon is giver of life; in which cafe the
place of the Sun, being afflicted by fome malefic planet joined to it, and
receiving no help from benefic rays, will certainly produce death ; but,
if any benevolent configuration irradiates the place, the native’s life will
be preferved.


To define the caufe and quality of death, we muft confider whether it
is likely to happen by means of the beams of the malefic ftars being caft
orientally ; for the place of the malefic or anaretical planet, if joined by
body, or, if not, the place of the afpect, ought carefully to be obferved,
in order to judge of the quality of death. If thefe deftructive beams flow
occidentally, confider the occidental place of the ftar; for, fuch as they
are which have dignities in the anaretic place, fuch will be the quality
of death; or, if no planet hath dignities therein, then fuch as before others
are carried by their motions to thefe anaretic places are to be efteemed
the caufers of death, and our judgment fhould be regulated thereby; the
configurations of the ftars made thereto being likewife confidered, to-
gether with the nature of the figns and the terms in which they fall.


Saturn, poffeffing the dominion of death, caufeth death by chronie
diftempers, phthyfics, fluxes, agues, difeafes of the {pleen, dropfies,
iliac and hyfteric diftempers, and, in a word, by all thofe diforders
arifing from abundance of cold. Jupiter produceth death by the quinzey,
inflammation of the lungs, apoplexy, cramps, and cardiac affetions, and
by thofe diforders which happen with vehement and ftinking breath-
ing. Mars caufeth death by continual fevers, femi-tertians, fudden ftrokes
and nephritic affections, {pitting of blood and hemorrhage, by abortion
and birth, and St. Anthony’s fire, and by all diforders which arife from
abundance of heat. Venus induceth death by affections of the fto-
mach and liver, ringworms, and bloody flux; alfo by putrefaction and
fiftulas, and giving of poifon; and, in a word, by all thofe complaints
which proceed from abundance of moifture, or through want or wafting
thereof. ‘Mercury deftroys life by madnefs, extafy, and melancholy ;
falling ficknefs, coughs, and {pitting affections, and by thofe which hap-
pen fimply through much drinefs, ora want thereof. And thefe deaths

. happen


&*
466 AN oy 3 oD?h U's: T RAM WOON


happen naturally, when the rulers of death are in their proper and natu-
ral quality, and none of the malefics concur.


Violent and remarkable deaths happen when both the malefics are
lords of the anaretic places, or when both or one of the two are joined to,
or f{quare, or oppofe, or evilly affect, both of theluminaries, or the Sun
alone, or the Moon; forthen the mifchievoufnefs and violence of death is
produced by the evil affections of the malefics. But the remarkablenefs
and extraordinary circumftances of the death proceed from the teftimony
of the lights; and its quality is known from the reft of the afpecting
ftars, and the figns containing the malefics. Saturn therefore in quar-
tile or oppofition to the Sun, orientally, and in fixed figns, caufeth death
by fuffocation, tumults of the people, or by hanging or ftrangling; in
like manner he doth the fame if he be occidental, and the Moon follow;
or, if he be in beaft-like figns or places, he caufeth to perifh by beatts ;
and Venus, being jointed to them, caufeth death by poifon, or by the
treachery of women. If he is in Virgo or Pifces, or in moift figns, con-
figurated to the Moon, he will caufe death by water, by being fuffocated
and drowned; if he be about Argo, by fhipwreck; if he be in tropical or
equinoétial figns, the Sun being with him, or oppofing, or if Mars be
there, he will caufe death by the effects of a fall; if they are in the tenth
honfe, death will happen by precipitation from on high ; thus Saturn
caufes thefe effects, being configurated to the luminaries.


Mars in quartile or oppofition to the Sun, and the Sun or Moon ori«
ental, in figns of human form, will caufe death by flaughter, either
civil or hoftile, or by laying violent hands upon himfelf. If Venus give
te{timony, death will enfue by means of women; if Mercury be configu-
rated to them, death will enfue by robbers, and evil doers, and pirates.
If he be in mutilated or imperfect figns, or with the Gorgon of
Perfeus, he will induce to death by beheading, or by the effect of ampu-
tation. Being found in Scorpio or Taurus, he will caufe death by me-
dical cutting and burning, or by contractions ; but, if he be found in the
midheaven, or oppofite to the midheaven, he will caufe death by hanging;
particularly if he be found about Cepheus and Andromeda. If he be found
~in the weft, or oppofite to the horofcope, he will caufe death by fire ;
but, if he be found in fourfooted figns, he will caufe death by falling, or
by the breaking of limbs. If Jupiter gives teftimony to Mars, -and he
evilly affected, death will happen through the anger of princes, or by
condemnation. If the malefics efpecially agree together, and both of
them evilly affect any of the faid places, they make the cruelty of the
death the greater. The quality of death, and the ruling thereof, always

will


- OW FA sat RYO; L)0}G_Y¥. 467
will be thewn by the ftar that is in the anaretic place; but death will
happen in ftrange places when the ftars which poffefs the anaretic point
fall from angles; and efpecially when the Moon is either found with, or
in quartile or oppofition to, the faid places.


Thus the caufe and quality of death are to be fought out, and the ex-
“tent of life known, by the refult of the directions of each refpective fig-
nificator, either direct, by which the anaretic point is carried to the
place of the giver of life; or converfe, by the hyleg being carried to
the weft angle, which alone of all converfe directions hath power to
cut off life,


OfMeD wl teal -OSbP als OaN v's:


A dire&tion, or an arch of direction, is the pathway or track defcribed
in the heavens by any planet that is fignificator, or that affumes the do-
minion or government of life, or any other incident or event peculiar
to the native, from the moment of birth to its meeting or forming an
afpect with the anaretas, or promittors, at which time the event, be
it what it may, that is indicated thereby, comes to pafs. For, as all the
heavenly bodies conftantly move in circles, their progrefs, whether fora
long or fhort time, will neceflarily form arches, the content or degrees of
which, beingaccurdtely found, and meafured, or equated by the folar mo-
tion, will defcribe the length of time, whether it be years, months, ‘or
days, which the fignificator will be in forming the arch of direction
which produces the event. Now thefe directions are known by the
following rules, and are of two diftind clafics, the firft of which is zo-
diacal, or according to the circle of the zodiac; and the fecond, mun-
dane, or according to the motion of the planets round the earth, or in re-
lation to their proportional diftance from the feveral houles of the figure.


CV Owl) dat Gv Ay io: | DAlsB oe CTT ONS,
How to direét the SUN, being in or near the Midbeaven, namely, when be
is either on, or not more than three degrees from, the cufp of the Houfe.


Firft, Take the right afcenfion of the Sun, and then the place of the
afpect to which it is tobe directed, viz. the right afcenfion of the afpect,
whether it be a conjunction or oppofite; the latitude in this cafe is to
be neglected if he hath not greater latitude than his orb; if he hath, it
is not to be neglected; this is the difference between the horizontal (or
mundane) and zodiacal afpetts, becaute they are made from the greateft

No. 23. 5 x nearne{s


o at, »« , —


&:
468 AN ul sot R got) Ome


nearnefs to the greateft diftance of the flars amongft themfelves; and
-above the real path of them in the zodiac. The greateft nearnefs hap-
pens in the fame partile longitude, although they are diftant and differ
according tolatitude; unlefs, as Ihave faid, the latitude, in either oppo-
fition or conjunGion, exceeds the greatnefs of theirorb; af it be greater,
_ then is the conjunction or oppofition in the zodiac of {mall force; now |
fubtra€t the right afcenfion of the Sun from the right afcenfion of the
planet’s afpeét, and the remainder in the arch of direction. As for ex=
ample, fuppofe the medium ceeli, in eight degrees fifteen minutes of Scor-
pio, and the Sun in eight degrees twenty-one minutes of the fame fign,
to be directed to the conjunction of Venus in twenty-two degrees forty- —
five minutes of Sagittary. The right afcenfion of the Sun istwo hundred
fifteen degrees fifty-eight minutes, the right afcenfion of Venus is two
hundred and fixty-two degrees eight minutes; fubtract the right afcen-
fion of the Sun from the right afcenfionof Venus, and there remains for-
ty-fix degrees ten minutes, which is the true arch of direction; and which,
if equated, or turned into time, according to the folar motion, by the rules
hereafter laid down, will thew the time when this afpedt will be formed.


How to diredt the SUN, being near the Horofcope or feventh Houfe.


Take the oblique afcenfion of the Sun, in the latitude of the place, if
it be in the afcendant, and near the cufp thereof ; but, if near the cufp of
the feventh houfe, his oblique defcenfion or the oblique afcenfion of his
oppofite place ; then. take. the oblique afcenfion or oblique defcenfion of
the afpects, under the fame pole, ftill neglecting their latitude if it be
not greater than their orb; then fubtraé& the oblique afcenfion of the Sun -


from the oblique afcenfion of the afpeét, and the remainder is the arch
of dire€tion required.


How to direct the SUN above the Earth, being far diftant from any of the
cardinal Houfes. If the Sun be above the Earth, and above three Degrees
diftant from the Cufp of the cardinal Houfes, do thus :—


Take the diftance of the Sun from the midheaven in rightafcenfion, and
from that fubtract the right afcenfion of the afpeéts, which we call the
 firft diftance ; then get the femidiurnal arch of the Sun, ahd alfo of the
afpedts, and by the rule of proportion fay, “if the femidiurnal arch of the
Sun gives that right afcenfional diftance, what fhall the femidiurnal arch
of the afpect or promittor give? the product fhall be the fecondary


. right


OF 1 Ags AEIR GOUL' 0G! Yi 469


right afcenfion; and, if both be made in the afcending part of heaven,
fubtract the fecondary afcenfion from the primary, and the remainder is
the arch of direction.


- . : Another Way.


* Take the elevation of the pole of the Sun, and therein the oblique
afcenfion of the Sun, and likewife the oblique afcenfion of the afped:
fubtract one from the other, and the remainder is the arch of direction.
For this reafon, I have fet the table of the eleventh, third, twelfth, and

 fecond, houfes, from thirty to fixty degrees of north or fouth latitude.


How to take the Pole of Pofition, commonly called the Circle of Pofition; of the
' SUN or any other Significator.


Firft obferve whether the fignificator be above or under the earth: if
above, get his femidiurnal arch; if under, his feminotturnal ; which,
being obtained, muft be converted into degrees and minutes, whereof
one third part is the pole of one houfe; then take the ftar’s diftance from
the neareft houfe to which he is placed, and by the rule of proportion
fay, if the third part of the femidiurnal or feminoéturnal arch of the fig~
nificator gives the pole of the other houfe, what fhall his diftance give ?
which if it falls in the third, fourth, ninth, or tenth, houfes, the remain-
der is the pole of pofition; but, if,it falls in the firft, fecond, fifth,
fixth, feventh, eighth, or twelfth, houfes, add or fubtract it to or from
the pole of the fucceeding or preceding houfe; as for example: the
Moon’s femidiurnal arch 1s eight hours fifteen minutes ; a third part is
two hours forty-five minutes; which, converted into degrees, give forty-
one degrees fifteen minutes for the {pace of one houfe; the Moon’s dif-
tance from the tenth houfe in right afcenfion is thirty-three degrees fifty
minutes, the pole of the eleventh houfe is twenty-three degrees ; then by
the rule of proportion fay, if forty-one degrees fifteen minutes, being the
{pace of one houfe, give twenty-three degrees, the pole of the eleventh
houfe, what thall thirty-three degree fifty minutes give? It gives eigh-
-teen degrees fifty-two minutes for the Moon’s true circle or pole of pofi-
tion. But, becaufe it is near nineteen degrees, I take nineteen degrees
for her pole; and note, that, if odd minutes at any time exceed thirty,
accept of it as a whole degree; but, if they be under.thirty, then reject
them entirely. :


How


470 A No I Lob U.S-T1R eT BON


-How to dire the SUN to any Afpect, being under the Earth, in the Space
of Twilight.


The Sun, being found in the fpace of twilight, ought to be dire€ted
above parallel circles to the horizon, and not above horary circles, as
when the Suf is above the earth. If the Sun be found in the morning
twilight, firft direct the Sun to the degree of the afpe& under the lati-
tude of the place, although the Sun is not there, and afterwards take ~
‘the diftance of the Sun from the horofcope, in oblique afcenfion, which
call the Sun’s primary diftance ; and be careful that this diftance be not’ .
greater than the parallel of twilight, which does not exceed eighteen de-
grees, for, if it be, the Sun is notin that parallel, andin this cafe you muft
work by the following rule; but, if the Sun be in the parallel of twilight,
‘then, with the diftance of the Sun from-the horizon above taken, enter
the table of twilight under the latitude of the place, which is in the top
of the table, and with the fign and degree in the head or foot of the table:
and in the angle of meeting, or body of the table, find the diftance of
the Sun from his rifing, and obferve the degree of the parallel of twi-
light, which the Sun poffefles in the firft column, taking the proper-
tional part of the Sun’s place to degrees; and under the fame parallel
look out the diftance of the direCtion, that is to fay, what diftance the
Sunis from the horofcope, in that parallel of twilight ; andthis diftance
call the fecondary diftance ; then, if both the firft and fecond diftance are
equal, the true arch of direction is that which was firft taken in the
horofcope; but, if they are not equal, fubtract the lefs from the greater,
and the remainder call the oriental diftance ; and, if the fecondary diftance
be greater than the primary, then fubtract the oriental diftance from the
arch of direction, and the remainder is the true arch of direction, which
is to be equated as before. In feeking the primary diftance of the Sun
from the horofcope, in the tables of twilight hereafter inferted, it.is
{ufficient to take the proportional part of the degree only, rejecting the
minutes, which, when taken, note the degree of the depreflion or paral-
lel of twilight, and in the right line with parallel diftance find the
neareft. proportional diftance, which when found by proportional parts,
the firft primary natural diftance of the Sun may be neglected, for itis not
neceflary to take the degrees and minutes of the depreffion of twilight, but
it is only the greateft and the neareft degree of the Sun’s longitude with the
proportional part; as for example: the Sun directed to the quartile of
Mercury in no degree of Cancer, Mercury being in no degree of Aries at
birth ; at the fame time eleven degrees of Pifces afcend. In the latitude
forty-four degrees, the Sun being in Aries, fifteen degrees forty-fix mi-


nutes,


OP AUSRTERLO! LO. GUN Gaga


nutes, the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant in that latitude is three
hundred forty-nine degrees forty-five minutes, the oblique afcenfion of
the fun, with the circle, is three hundred and fixty-eight degrees twenty-
eight minutes, the difference is eighteen degrees forty-three minutes ;
enter the table of twilight in the latitude of forty-four degrees, and
there look for-this diftance, eighteen. degrees forty-three minutes, and
alfo for:fixteen degrees of Aries, which cannot be found; but there is
ten degrees and twenty degrees, whichis nearenough; now under ten de-
grees of Aries is eighteen degrees thirty two minutes; and under twenty
degrees, I find nineteen degrees one minute, the difference is twenty-
nine minutes; then I fay, If ten degrees give twenty-nine minutes, what
fhall fix degrees give? anfwer, feventeen minutes, which, being added to |
eighteen degrees thirty-two minutes, make eighteen degrees forty-nine
minutes, and againft that in the firft column is the parallel of twilight
_thirteen degrees required.


Now the Sun’s primary diftance, viz. eighteen degrees forty-three mi-
nutes, being neglected as aforefaid, I take eighteen degrees forty-nine mi-
nutes; then looking out the afpect, which falls in no degrees of Cancer,
under the latitude forty-four degrees, and thirteen degrees parallel of twi-
light, I find twenty-four degrees forty-five minutes, which is the fecon-
dary diftance, and is greater than the primary by five degrees fifty-fix
minutes; the oblique afcenfion of the Sun is eight degrees twenty-eight
minutes, and the oblique afcenfion of the afpedt is fixty-five degrees ten
minutes, and both under thelatitudeof forty-fourdegrees. Now I'fubtratt
the oblique afcenfion of the Sun from the oblique afcenfion of the af-
pect, and the difference is fifty-fix degrees forty-two minutes. And, be-
caufe the fecondary diftance is greater than the primary, I fubtract five
degrees fifty-fix minutes from the aforefaid fifty-fix degrees forty-two
minutes, and thereremains fifty degrees forty-fix minutes, the-true arch of
direction required, which is to be equated as before. If the Sun is tobe
directed at evening twilight, all things mult be noted as before, but juft
contrary in all the operations, or elfe taken in oblique afcention to all the
oppofite places. |


To direct the Sun, being Sound beyond the Parallel of Twilight, under the
Earth.


If the Sun be found under the earth, whether oriental or occiden-
tal, out of the parallel of twilight: Firft take his femino¢turnal arch,
and from thence fubtratt his whole arch of twilight, and keep the re-
mainder, which is the obfcure arch; afterwards take the feminodturnal
arch of the afpect, from whence fubtraét his whole arch of twilight,

No. 24. 4 Y and


\


472 AINY IeGSL1 UYSeE! RUART DON


and the remainder is the obfcure arch of the afpect. Next take the
diftance both of the Sunand afpect from the fourth houfe in right afcenfion;
then by the rule of proportion fay, If the whole arch of obfcurity of the
Sun gives his diftance from the fourth houfe, what fhall the arch of
obfcurity of the afpect give? which diftance being found, obferve the
fame rules as in directing the Sun above the earth, and confider the arches
of obfcurity the fame as the femidiurnal or feminocturnal arches:


va


For Example;


_ Let the Sun, in eleven degrees forty-five minutes of Aquaries, be di-
rected to an afpect in twenty-two degrees thirty-five minutes of Pifces;
the feminocturnal arch of the Sun is feven hours feven minutes, the whole
arch of twilight being fubtracted, which is one hour forty-three minutes,

the remaining five hours twenty-four minutes is the arch of obfcurity ;
the Sun’s diftance from the fourth houfe, in right afcenfion, is forty degrees
eleven minutes: Now the feminocturnal arch of the afpect is fix hours ele-
ven minutes, and his archof twilight is one hour thirty-nine minutes, which
being fubtracted from the feminocturnal arch, leaves four hours thirty-two
minutes for the arch of obfcurity. The diftance of the afpect from the
fourth houfe in right afcenfion is feventy-nine degrees ten minutes; then
by the rule of proportion fay, If five hours twenty-four minutes give forty
degrees eleven minutes, what fhall four héurs thirty-two minutes give ?
thirty three degrees forty-four minutes, the arch of direction required.


To dire the Sun to Zodiacal Parallels, being found ‘in any Part of the
Heavens. ; | |


Firft find the declination of the promittors, with latitude if they have
any, and-fee what degree and minute of the Ecliptic anfwers to that
declination, which is its parallel; if the Sun be near the cardinal houfes,
his direction is as aforefaid, but, if farther diftant, then direct under his
proper pole of pofition, as above fpecified.


To direct a Significator, having Latitude, to any Conjunction or Afpeét.


As the Sun keeps his true courfe in the Ecliptic, fo the reft of the
planets which have latitude, when they come to be directed to any
af{pect, move in their own fpheres according to their fucceffion of la-
titude, We call it fucceffion, becaufe it is not always the fame, but is
changed according to the greateft diftance or nearnefs that they are to
he nodes ; therefore it follows, thata Significator having latitude when
he is to be directed to any afpect, the latitude of the afpect is to be neg-


lected,


4


Dee AM ROL O1CrY.268, 473


lected, and: the latitude, which the fignificator hath at that place where
the afpect falls is to be taken; and the directions are the fame as the
others; only neglecting the rule of the Sun’s direCtion under the earth,


it


To direct a Significator, having Latitude, to Parallels.


Firft find the declination of the ftar, to whofe parallel you would di-
re€t a fignificator with latitude, which when found, enter the tables of
declination with the latitude the fignificator fhall have in that place, un-
til youcome to the degrees and minutes of the promittor’s declination:


As for Example. ;
I would dire the Moon to the Parallel of Saturn.


Suppofe Saturn to bein thirteen degrees of Pifces, and his latitude one
degree fouth; his declination will be found to be feven degrees thirty-
feven minutes, which in the Ecliptic anfwers to about ten degrees of
Pifces; the Moon is in twenty-four degrees of Leo; .now I enter the
tables of declination under Virgo, the oppofite part, in that place where
the Moon meets with this parallel. The Moon’s north node is in nine-
teen degrees of Cancer, fo in that place fhe will have three degrees fifty
three minutes north latitude, with which I enter the table of declination;
and againft ten degrees of Virgo, and four degrees north latitude, I find
eleven degrees thirty-three minutes, which is too much; fo under the ©
faid four degrees of latitude I come to twenty-one degrees of Virgo, a-
gainft which I find feven degrees fifteen minutes, and under five degrees
north latitude I find eight degrees ten minutes, in which faid twenty-
one degrees of Virgo I find what latitude the Moon will have, and by
her diftance from her node I find the hath four degrees twenty-three mi-
nutes north latitude. Now the difference between feven degrees fiftee:
minutes and eight degrees ten minutes is'fifty-five minutes; therefore
I fay, If fixty minutes give fifty-five minutes, what fhall twenty-three
give? anfwer, twenty-one minutes, which, added to feven degrees fifteen
minutes, will make feven degrees thirty-fix minutes, which thews, that
twenty-one degrees of Virgo is the irue parallel of Saturn.


How to direct a Significator to bis own proper Afpetts.


Firit find his longitude, that is, the longitude of his afpect in the
Ecliptic, if it be the Sun; and according to her latitude, if it be the
Moon; always obferving the latitude that the hath at the place of her af-
pect, which is found by her diftance from her nodes, as before taught;

| - then


a AN ILLUS TRATION


then take the right afcenfion or oblique afcenfion of the afpect, both in
latitude and longitude, and work according to the former rules; but
note that neither the afcendant nor medium cceli are to be directed to any
of the planet's afpects in the Zodiac, but to thofe in the world only; nor
to parallels in the Zodiac, but to thofe in the Horizon or world, and to
thefe always direct, and never converfe.


na


| Of MUNDANE DIRECTIONS,


“The afpects in the world are proportional diftances by their motion
about the world; for a ftar, that fhall be diftant from the Horizon a third
part of his diurnal arch, fhall caft his fextile to the afcendant ; and, if he
be half his diurnal arch, he will caft a quartile to the afcendant; and
two third parts of his arch isa trine, and his whole arch is an oppofition;
therefore the firft houfe is in fextile to the eleventh and third, and in
quartile to the tenth and fourth; in trine to the ninth and fifth, and in op-.
pefition to the feventh; and fo of the reft. And, although the diurnal and
nocturnal arches differ among themfelves, yet the houfes have no dif-
tinction, property, nature, or force, of themfelves, but what they re-
ceive from the ftars, and in the divifion of the houfes by double horary
times, according to the method andrules of Ptolomy. The houfes have
no more refpect to the Ecliptic than if there were no fuch thing; for
they have only refpect to the femidiurnal and feminocturnal arches of the

“ftars; and the afpedcts they make in the world, to any houfe or from any

‘ houfe, have no refpeét to the Ecliptic but according to their femidi-
urnal and feminocturnal arches, or according to their motion about the
world; which being rightly confidered, and well underftood, will render
the whole mundane art of directions very eafy.


To dirett the Mid-heaven or the Afeendant to the sextile, Quartile, or Trine, -
} of any Star. ; :


If you would direét the mid-heaven to a fextile of any ftar that is
placed either in the twelfth, afcendant, or fecond houfe, you have only
to do’thus: take the oblique afcenfion of the cufp of the twelfth houfe,
under its proper pole, and under the fame pole the oblique afcenfion of
the promittor; fubtraét the one from the other, and you will have the
arch of dire@ion. For obferve, that, when the houfe is directed to the
body of any planet, at the fame time the mid-heaven comes to the fex-~
tile, and, when the afcendant comes to the body of any ftar, at the fame
time the mid-heaven is direéted to.the quartile thereof; and, when the


cufp of the fecond houfe is directed to the body of a ftar, then the mid-
heaven


OF TASRTIRE OF LION G YY: 475


heaven comes to the trine; fo that, by always obferving this rule, it will
be impoffible to err; for thefe afpects in the world are not made by their
 diftance in figns, degrees, and minutes, but by their diftance according
to the order or fucceffion of the houfes, which diftances are afcertained
by the femidiurnal or feminocturnal arches. nia


The fame rule is alfo to be followed in dire€ting the afcendant as was
obferved in the mid-heaven ; for, if it be required to direct the afcendant
toa fextile, we have no more to do than to dire the cufp of the eleventh
houfe if the promittor be above the earth, or.the cufp of the third
houfe if he be under the earth, to his body; in both of which cafes
the afcendant will be found to come to his fextile. If it be required to
dire€t the afcendant to a quartile, obferve whether the promittor be
above the earth ; and, if fo, direct the mid-heaven to his body; but, if un-
der the earth, direct the cufp of the fourth houfe to his body, either of
which operations will bring the afcendant to his quartile ; but, if the
afcendant is to be directed to atrine, then, if the promittor be above
the earth, direét the cufp of the ninth houfe to his body; but, if under
the earth, the cufp of the fifth houfe, which will in the fame manner
bring the afcendant to his trine. By an attention to thefe rules, the
angular houfes may at all times be directed with fingular eafe and exact-
nefs; for, having found the cufp of the houfe required, we are to dire&
under the pole of that houfe, let the pofition of the ftar be where it will; *
which if rightly done, the direction will never fail of being true,


To direct the Afcendant or Medium-celi to the Conjunction or Oppofition of
any Star. :


To direct the medium-ceeli toa conjunction or oppofition, take the
right afcenfion of the tenth houfe from the right afcenfion of the ftar,
with latitude; and after the fame manner the conjunction, with con-
trary latitude; the remainder is the arch of direction fought. But, in di-
recting the afcendant to the conjunction of a ftar, fubtract the oblique
afcenfion of the afcendant from the oblique afcenfion of the ftar, with
latitude, if any ; and in the fame manner for an oppofition, only with
contrary latitude, and’ the remainders will be the arches of direction


required.
Another Way to direct the Afcendant.


Subtract the femidiurnal arch of the ftar from his right afcenfion,
and from the remainder fubtract the right afcenfion of the medium-
No. 24s , 54 ceeli,


e


476. A NY DIGEFUYSIT RE AAT 1 O.-N


coli, and there will remain the true arch of direction of the afcendant,
as before. By the fame operation the afcendant may be directed to any
of the fixed ftars.


Another Way to direct the Medium-ceh, toa Sextile, Quartile, or Trine.


Firft enter the tables of declination with’ the ftar’s place, and take its
declination according to its latitude, obferving to what degree of the
ecliptic that declination anfwers ; if it be above the greateft obliquity,
work by the tables of afcenfional difference, and find its femidiurnal
arch ; but, if the declination be within twenty-three degrees thirty mi-
nutes, enter the tables of femidiurnal arches, and look for the corref-
ponding degrees in the ecliptic, and againft it will be found the femi-
diurnal arch in hours and minutes, which muft be converted into degrees
and minutes of the equator, whereof two thirds make a fextile, which
muft be added to the right afcenfion of the ftar, if it be pofited in the
occidental part of the heavens ; but, if it be in an oriental pofition, then
fubtract the two-thirds of the equator: for example, fuppofe the right
afcenfion of the medium-ce@li to be two hundred and twenty degrees,
which anfwers to twelve degrees twenty-feven minutes of Scorpio, anda
planet were in twenty-cight degrees of Sagittarius, havingeleven minutes
of north latitude, his declination will be twenty-three degrees twenty

minutes, which anfwers to twenty-three degrees of Sagittarius ; with this
Ienter the tables of femidiurnal arches, under the latitude of the place,
viz. fifty-two degrees, which I find to be three hours forty-fix minutes,
and, being converted into degrees and minutes of the equator, make fifty-
two degrees thirty minutes. Now two-thirds thereof is thirty-feven
degrees forty minutes; which, being fubtracted from two hundred and
fixty-feven degrees forty-nine minutes, the planet’s right afcenfion, leaves
two hundred and thirty degrees nine minutes for the right. afcenfion of
the fextile of the planet ; from whence the right afcenfion of the medium-
ceeli being fubtracted, there will remain ten degrees nine minutes, the
true arch of direction to the fextile. The directions toa quartile or trine
are performed in a fimilar manner.


Another Way to. direct the Afcendant toa Sextile, Quartile, or Trine, Afpedt
w of any Planet.


If the afcendant is to be directed to the afpect of a planet aban the
earth, divide the femidiurnal arch of the planet into three equal parts,
and add two of thofe parts to the oblique afcenfion of the planet, taken
under the pole of birth, and from that fubtract the oblique afcenfion of
the afcendant, and the remainder is the arch of direction toa fextile.

hs By.


a We TAIS Poe 07D. O.GTY: 477


By the fame operation the afcendant is directed to the quartile and trine
' afpects ; only obferving to take four of thofe parts for a trine, and the
whole femidiurnal arch for a quartile. It is proper juft to remark, that
the afcendant and mid-heaven are never to be directed to zodiacal a{pects,


but to thofe only in the world.
Another Way to direc the Afcendant.


. Take one-third part of the femidiurnal arch of the planet from its
right afcenfion, and from the remainder fubtract the right afcenfion of
the mid-heaven, and the refidue is the true arch of direction to the fex-
tile afpect, as before. Ifthethird part of the femidiurnal arch of the
planet be added to its right afcenfion, and from that .fum the right af-
cenfion of the mid-heaven be deducted, there will remain the true arch


of direction to a trine.


But it muft be carefully remembered, that, inall cafes where directions
are to be brought to the afpects of planets under the earth, weare to divide
the feminocturnal arch of the planet into three parts, and to work by
the right afcenfion of the fourth houfe, inftead of that of the mid-heaven, —


but in all other refpects the operation is the fame.


Another Way to dire the Afcendant to a Quartile AfpeF.


Take the oblique afcenfion of the planet; under the pole of birth, ~
with latitude if any, and to that add its femidiurnal or feminocturnal
arch, according as the planet may be pofited, either above or under the
earth; from this fum fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant,
and the remainder is the arch of direction to the quartile afpect. By a
proper attention to thefe fimple and eafy rules, the whole myftery and
difficulty of the art of directions, which has fo long embarrafled modern


aftrologers, will be entirely removed.


How to dire? the Afcendant or Medium-cel toa Semiquartile, Quintile,
Sefquiquadrate, or Biquintile, Afpect.


The fame operation is to be followed in thefe directions as are "given
above for the fextiles, quartiles, and trines, with this difference only,
that abfemiquartile, being only half the quartile, and the quintile only a
fifth part, are to be fubtracted in that proportion from the femidiurnal or
{:minocturnal arches ; the fefquiquadrate is the femidiurnal or feminoc-
turnal arch, and half the fame added, thereto; and the biquintile is a
quintile doubled, as appears fully and diftinttly by the tables of afpects,
which follow at the end of theie rules for directions. =

L pe


478 AN ILLUSTRATION


The true Method of directing a Significator to any Afpect or Promittor, either
direct or converse.


If the fignificator and promittor happen both’ to be pofited near the
eufps of houfes, what hath been obferved in the rules for directing the
afcendant and mid-heaven may ferve here ; forit only requires to bring
them both to the cufps of the houfes to which they are near, and it will
form the afpect that is between the houfes. But in cafes where the fig-


nificator and promittor are differently pofited, the following rules muft
be obferved. dh


Suppofe a fignificator to be pofited in the tenth houfe, and to be di-
rected to the fextile of a promittor in the twelfth or eighth houfe ; firft
take the diftance of the fignificator in right afcenfion from the tenth
houfe, which call the primary. diftance ; then take the diftance of the
promittor from the twelfth houfe, which referve ;. next take the femi-
diurnal arch of the fignificator, and alfo of the promittor; add the two
arches together, and fay, by the rule of proportion, If two arches give
the diftance of the promittor from the twelfth houfe, what fhall the
femidiurna) arch of the fignificator give? which when found, add it to
the primary. diftance of the fignificator, and the fum will be the arch
of direction required. But it mufthere be obferved, that, if the fignifi-
cator had been placed beyond the cufp’ of the tenth houfe, or in the
ninth houfe, then the primary diftance muft be fubtracted from the fe-
condary, and the remainder will be the arch of direction... The fame
ruleis to be followed for the quartile afpect, if the promittor be in the
aicendant; but, if the promittor be pofited either in the fecond or fixth
houfe, then the fame rule muft be followed for the trine, always remem-
bering to take the feminocturnal arch inftead of the femidiurnal, when
the direction is to or from aplanet under the earth.


Another Way.


If a fignificator be pofited within three degrees of the mid-heaven, take
his right afcenfion, and the right afcenfion alfo of the promittor’s body
or oppofition, together with his latitude;- but, if the Gignificator be with-
in three degrees of the afcendant, then take the oblique afcenGonm both
of the fignificator and promittor, under the pole of the houfe, and fub-
tract the fignificator from the promittor, regarding his latitude if he hath
any, and the remainder is the arch of direction required ; which, if right-
ly performed, will never be found to err. |


It


OF TASS°T R°O'L O'G YE . 479
It may here be remarked, that, ‘if the fignificator’and promittor be


upon or within three degrees of the cufp of any other houfe, the diree-.


tion is the fame with. the houfe; and may be directed under the pole of
that houfe,; or by right ‘afcenfion: if upon the mid-heaven as before ;
but, if they are in’the! defcending part, then ufe the oppofite places. For
example: f{uppofe the Sun: were ‘to be direéted to a fextile of Jupiter, the
Sun being on the cufp of the ninth houfe, in five degrees ‘of Leo, and
Jupiter in eighteen degrees of Cancer, the pole of birth being forty-four
degrees. NowlI takethe oppofite fign and. degree, becaufe the Sun and
Jupiter are both in the defcending part.of the heavens; the poles of the
ninth and third houfes ‘are eighteen degrees, and the oblique afcenfion
of the Sun’s oppofite placeis three hundred and fourteen degrees nearly ;
from whence I {ubtract fixty ‘degrees, and the remainder, which is two
hundred and fifty-four degrees, is the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant.
Now the oblique afcenfion of Jupiter’s oppofite place, under the pole of
eighteen degrees, is two hundred ninety-feven degrees ; from whence I
fubtraét the “oblique afcenfion of the afcendant, viz. two hundred and
fifty-four degrees, and there remains the arch of dire€tion required,.


which is forty-three degrees; becaufe, by the motion of the primum *


mobile, when the afcendant comes to the oppofite place of Jupiter, the

Sun at the fame time comes to his fextile. . pet}

To direlt a Siznificator, being above three Degrees diftant from the Cufp of
any Foufe.


! ;
Find the femidiurnal arch of the planet if above the earth, or the


feminocturnal arch if below, the earth, with. his diftance; from) the. pre-

ceding or fucceeding cufps of. the houfes,, either, of which will anfwer

the purpofe; then take the femidiurnal or femino@urnal.arch.of the pro-

mittor,, as his pofition either above or, below.the earth.fhall require ; for,

‘if the afpect be above the.earth, the femidiurnal arch mutt. invariably be
taken, but, if under the earth, the feminocturnal ; and this may always

berreadily known by the houfes themfelves ;:forthe tenth houfe, hath the

eighth and twelfth houfes in, fextile, the Srftand feventh in.quartile, and

the fixth and fecondin trine ; and) fo of all.the.reft, which -is abfolutely

neceflary to be thoroughly underftood, to render. thefe mundane. afpetts

familiar and intelligible, and therefore | mentionit again here. Having

_af{certained the arches as above required, fay, by.the rule. of proportion,
If, the femidiurnal or feminocturnal. arch of the fignificator gives his

diftance from the cufp of the houfe, what, fhall the {emidiurnal, or. femi-

nocturnal arch of the promittor give ?,.which when. found, call it the

{econdary diftance of the promittor from the cufp of the preceding or

No. 24. 6A  fuc-


4%


480 A My KHIGlaUoS ari AAT FO N--


fucceeding houfe, according.to which the fignificator and promittor were
taken from; if they are both taken from houfes which precede, or follow,
then in either cafe fubtracé the lefs from the greater, and the remainder
is the arch of dire@tion fought. But, if the fignificator betaken from the
cufp of a preceding houfe, and the promittor from thercufp of a fueceed-
ing, or vice verfa, then.add|the two numbers together, and the {um will
be the arch of direction required, as before,


To dirett a Significator to bis own Afpeéts.


This is only applicable to the Sun and Moon, for no other fignifica-
tor can be directed this way; but when either of thefe happen to be the °
fignificator, and come to their own afpects, they are productive of very
remarkable effects. ‘The operation is quite eafy ; for to bring up the di-
rection of either the Sun or Moon to their proper fextile is no more than
finding the content of two third parts of their femidiurnal or feminoc-
turnal arches, according to their pofition either above or below the ho-
rizon, and that will be the true arch of direction to the fextile.. For. .


the quartile, the content of the whole femidiurnal or feminoéturnal arch


as to be taken; and, if a fifth part of the whole femidiurnal or feminoc-
turnal arch be added to the fextile, it will be the direction to the quintile
afpeat; and thus, by taking fuch a proportion of thefe arches as corre-
{ponds with each refpettive afpect, may the true arches of direction of all
of them be found.


To direct a Significator to Parallels inthe World.


Parallels in the world fignify nothing more than the pofition of two
planets, when equally diftant from any one of the four cardinal houfes ;
for example, fuppofe one planet to be upon the cufp of the eleventh
houfe, and another upon the cufp of the ninth houfe, they are then in
exact mundane parallel, as being both equally diftant from the mid-
heaven, or tenth houfe. Solikewife a planet upon the cufp of the ele-
venth houfe is in parallel with a planet upon thecufp of the third houfe,
being both equally diftant from the afcendant. Again, a planet, when
placed on the cufp of the eleventh houfe, is in parallel to a planet upon
the cufp of the fifth houfe, becaufe they are both equally diftant from
the tenth and fourth houfes ; which rule will hold good with regard to
the other houfes. Now thefe laft-mentioned are parallels by their po-
fition ; but, if one planet fhould be“pofited upon the ninth houfe, and
another upon the twelfth, they are ‘not in parallel till by the motion of
the primum mobile they are brought to that equal point of diftanct,

| te alta


oop A sf R-O LO G YY. 1484


that one fhall bejuft fo far paft the mid-heaven as the other wants to it,
and, when they are fo, they are in exact parallel. And, further, if two
planets are placed either in the eleventh or twelfth houfe, they will, by
the motion of the primum mobile, be brought to that equality of diftance
fo as to be in exact parallel ; for, fuppofing them to be fituated one in
twelve degrees and another in fixteen degrees of the fame fign, when the
fourteenth degree comes to be upon the cufp of the mid-heaven, the
parallel is then made ; becaufe both planets are then juft two degrees
diftant from the mid-heaven. The fame rule is to be applied to all the
four angular houfes ; but, becaufe directions to thefe parallels may be
fomewhat difficult to a learner, I fhall here give an example at large of
the eafieft and moft correct method of taking them.


Find the declination of that planet which is neareft to the angle from
which it is taken, with latitude if he hath any ; then obferve what’ de-
gree of the ecliptic anfwers thereto, and take the femidiurnal or feminoe-
turna! arch, according as the planet is fituated either above or below the
horizon. Ufe the fame operation with the other planet, which is fartheft
from the angle; and, having found the content of both their arches, ‘add
them together; then find the diftance from the angle, with this precau-
tion, that, if itbe from theafcendant, take the diftance by oblique afcen-
fion; if from the feventh houfe, by oblique defcenfion, or by the oblique
afcenfion of the oppofite point; but, if ‘the diftance be from the mid-
heaven, or the fourth houfe, it muft be taken by right afcenfion, and,
_ when found, call it the primary diftance; then take the difference of the
right or oblique afcenfion. of the two planets, and by the rule of propor-
tion fay, If the two arches give that difference of right or oblique afcen-
fion, what fhall the femidiurnal or feminocturnal arch of that planet
give which is neareft the angle? and the product fhall be the fecondary,
right, or oblique, afcenfion ; which, if the planets are fituated one before
the angle, and the other after it, fubtract the primary diftance of that
which is neareft the angle from the fecondary diftance, and'the remain-
deris the arch of direction requirea ;- but, if both planets fhould be po-
fited fhort of the cufpof the houfe, then add the primary diftance to the
fecondary, and the {um will be the arch of dire€tion, as before.


It may not be improper in this place to remark, that, when a fignifi-
cator comes to the parallel of Jupiter or Venus, in good places of the
figure, thefe parallels produce very powerful effects, and are nearly of
equal force with their iextiles and trines; fo that, if afignificator, par-
ticularly the giver of life, comes to the parallel of the lord of either the

. fourth


48.2 ANASE US TR AT 1q0cn


fourth or the cighth houfe, it moft certainly produces death, unlefs fome
other direction, of an equally powerful but benefic nature, falls in with it
at nearly thefame point of time, and impedes its malefic effect;. By the
famerule, if a fignificator comes to the parallel of the lord of any. other
houfe, being evilly placed in the figure, it produces vexation and. mis-
fortune, according to the nature of the houfes they govern ; and, fo,.on
the contrary, if the parallel be made in fortunate places of the figure, they
denote an increafe of profperity and happinefs, according tothe nature.of
the houfe that the promitter is lord of. Thefe parallels are always made
by the motion of the primum mobile from. eaft. to weft.


Another Way of direting to Parallels inthe World.


If the fignificator and promittor are in parallel above the earth, take
their diftance from the right afcenfion of the medium ceeli, which call
the primary diftance; then by the rule of: proportion fay, If the femi-
diurnal arch of the fignificator gives his diftance from the medium-cell,
what;fhall. the femidiurnal arch of the promittor give ? which having
found,- work by the fame rule before laid down for directing the Sun a-
bove the earth in the zodiacal afpeCts, and the refult will be the arch of
direCtion required. .


When the fignificator and promittor are both under the earth, their
diftance muft either be taken from the fourth houfe or from the horizon,
but the operation inall other refpects is precifely the fame as the foregoing ;
but, if one planet be above the earth, and the other below, take the dif-
tance of the one from the mid-heaven, and of the other from the fourth
houfe, and work as-before; or otherwife take the oppofite place of the
planet under. the earth, in manner before {pecified. Great care mutt
however always, be taken, in bringing up the directions, not to miftake
the femidiurnal for the feminocturnal arch, but in all cafes to take the
{emidiurnal arch if the planet be above the earth, and the feminoGurnal
when the planet,is under the earth: for by thefe parallels in the world,
we conceive the fignificator to remain immoveable in the horary: circle of
his pofition, becaufe, in'a nativity, the virtue of the fignificator as wellas
the promittor in the fame primum mobile is imprinted ; and thefe virtues
are brought to by its motion from eaft to weft.


Lo direct the Sun, being under the Earth, to any Afpeét.


If the Sun be in the fpace of twilight, firft find the direGtion of the
Sun to the afpect of the promittor, whether it be a fextile, quartile, or
2 trine,


Or AS HR OL 66 ly, 483


trine, in manner already taught, which arch call the feigned arch; then
find what degree of the zodiac the Sun comes to at that time, by taking
his pole, and then his oblique afcenfion ; to this add the feigned arch
above-mentioned, and the fum will be the oblique afcenfion of the degree
of the zodiac,to which the Sun comes on both fides. Then with the
Sun’s primary diftance from the horizon, find what parallel of twilight
he poffefles, and therein his fecondary diftance, to which the feigned di-
rection fhall come; and by the rule of proportion fay, If the feminottur-
nal arch of the Sun give his fecondary diftance from the horofcope, what
fhall the femidiurnal or feminocturnal arch of the promittor give? the
fourth number fhall be the fecondary diftance of the promittor from the
cardinal or any other houfe of the genethliacal figure, from whence we
are to feek the proportional diftance, and thereby obtain the true arch of


direction required.
e


To direct the Sun, out of the Space of Twilight.


Obtain the feigned place of the afpeét, as taught in the preceding rule,
and find what degree of the ecliptic the Sun comes to by this direction ;
then fay, If the arch of obfcurity of the Sun gives his primary diftance
from the fourth houfe, what hall the obfcure arch of the ecliptical de-
gree give, which the Sun comes to by this direction? the product will
be the fecondary diftance from the fourth houfe. Now, if the Sun be
pofited in the third or fourth houfes, ufe this diftance; but, if he be in
the fecond or fifth houfes, fubtract from this diftance a third part of the
Sun’s feminoéturnal arch, and the remainder is the Sun’s fecondary dif-
tance from the third or fifth houfes ; then fay, If the feminocturnal arch
of the Sun gives his fecondary diftance from the determinate houfe, what
diftance fhall the feminocturnal arch of the promittor give from that
houfe alfo? which when found, proceed as in the foregoing rules for


the arch of direction required. .


Method of directing a Significator to all Afpects converfe, that are made in
the World.


Directions are eafily brought up to afpetts which are made converfe,
by confidering the promittor as fignificator ; for, if a fignificator be pofi-
ted in the eleventh houfe, and the promittor in the twelfth, the fextile
will fall in the tenth houfe; and to direct a fignificator from the ele-
venth houfe into the tenth is contrary to the fucceffion of both houfes
and figns, wherefore the afpect is called converfe. Now the beft way
to manage thefe afpects is certainly to direct the promittor to the figni-

B


No. 24, ficator


484 AN ALG VS FR AT L,0,N


ficator in all cafes where the directions are converfe, which may be done .
with the greateft exactnefs by the preceding rules; only obferving to take
the femidiurnal and feminocturnal arches of the promittor firft,, inftead
of thofe of the fignificator, and perform the operation throughout .as if
the promittor were fignificator. But remember that neither the afcen-
dant, mid-heaven, nor any other of the houfes, are-ever to. be directed


converfely ; for they have.no motion whatever to any preceding planet
or ‘afpect. fey. . |


How to equate the Arches of Direttion, whereby to afcertain the Length of
Time in which the Events denoted by them will be in coming to pafi.


The art of bringing up the directions of a nativity, from.the difufe
which this fcience has for fome years paft fallen into, is a matter that has
puzzled moft of its prefent followers; and the method of equating thefe
directions when found, by a meafure that fhall in all cafes correfpond to
truth and nature, has been the fubject of many controverfies and difputes
among modern authors; arifing, I conceive, from their ignorance of the
plain and genuine fyftem handed to us by the immortal Ptolomy, and
from a want of reflecting that the revolutions of all the heavenly bodies,
as well as the periods of all earthly events, are. only reducible to one uni-
verfal ftandard-meafure of time, namely, the Sun’s geocentric, motion in
the ecliptic.. It is therefore furprifing that fo many inventions fhould
have arifen, and fo many errors in confequence adopted, in equating di- .
rections; finceit muft be evident to the moft unlettered mind, and a fact
beyond the reach of contradiction, that the fame rule which eftimates the
days, months, and years, of a man’s life, from the moment. of his -birth,
likewife eftimates the progreflive motion, in days, months, and years, of
every luminary within our cognizance, in the vaft extent of {pace! This
rule is nothing more than the Sun’s apparent progrefs through every de-
gree and minute of the ecliptic, meafured by the degrees of the equator;
to which unerring ftandard every matter that refers to any defcription or
portion of time muft be ultimately brought, or all our labour, and all
our accuracy, will prove abortive and premature.


According to the common adage, ‘* when the difeafe is known, the cure
is half performed ;” and fo we may fay of the meafure of directions; for,
when the ftandard is known, the procefs is eafily accomplithed, as follows.
When the true arch of direction is found, by any of the foregoing rules,
and isto be equated, take the right afcenfion of the Sun’s place at the time

| san OF


OF ASTROLOGY. 485


of birth, and add the arch of direction to the Sun’s right afcenfion ; with
this fum enter the tables of the right afcenfion, and find what degree and
minute of the ecliptic anfwers thereto; then take the Ephemeris for the -
year of birth, and note how many days: and hours the Sun will be, from
the time of birth, in coming to that degree and minute of the ecliptic ;
and for every perfect day, which is twenty-four hours, account a year,
and for every two hours over and above the even days, a month, and fo
in the fame proportion for minutes and {econds of time, and the arch of
direction will be truly equated; as will be thewn by pepagted examples,
in equating the directions of the following nativities.


I flatter myfelf that the viles given in this fyftem of directions, if
carefully attended to, will be amply fuffitient to familiarize any of my
readers in this important branch of the occult fciences, without the aid of
which, little or nothing ‘can be done in the calculation of nativities.
For though it be admitted, that a ftudent may make great advances in
the knowledge of futurity, by acquiring an adequate comprehenfion of
the nature and effects of the various configurations and familiarities of the
celeftial bodies, and of their particular influence both benefic and ma-
lefic upon the human race; and though we may by this means attain to |
know. that fuch and fuch, events will certainly come to pafs; yet even
this acquifition in the fcience muft be confidered incomplete, without
the ability of pointing out, by fome. fixed and certain rule, the precife
time when thee events fhall happen. This is not to be attained by the
methods ufed in the vulgar Aftrology, as already laid down in the former
part of this work, where the commom Aftrology is treated of, but with
great rifk and uncertainty, and was therefore only introduced for thé pur-

ofe of anfwering horary queitions, where correctnefs, i in this: particular,
is little attended to by any modern profeflbrs, :


This grand acquifition is therefore not to be obtained by any other
mode, than that of bringing up the arch of direction of each re{pective
fignificator in the native’s figure of birth, to the afpect which denotes
each re{pective event; and this arch of direction, as I have before ob-
ferved, is nothing more than the track or circle in the heavens formed
by the fignificator in moving from that particular point in the heavens
where he is found at the birth; fo the precife point where he forms the
“afpect with the promittor that indicates the event, which, righ his ar-
rival therejis tohappen. It is con nfequently apparent, that if this track
or circle can be found, and its content in degrees and minutes accurately
taken, and recguced into-common time according to the motion of the


Sun, which regulates. all our accounts of time, it will fhew us at one
¢ view,


486 ANS Prt es TR AST EON


view, the exact time when the event, according to the common courfe of
nature, fhall infallibly come to pafs.


In this procefs confifts the whole myftery of afcertaining the period of
man’s life, which is thought fo wonderful a matter by fome, and confi-
dered altogether impoflible by others; and yet it is no more than a fimple
operation of nature, deduced from an intimate knowledge with fecond
caufes. For this is a rule that will never be found to fail, if our arith-
metic be true, that at the very time the principal fignificator in a nativity,
that is, the giver of life, fhall arrive at the anaretical point of the afpect
of the killing planet, the native fhall furely depart this life; provided
no benefic rays at the fame time irradiate the place, or in any afpect con-
cur to impede the killing force, which may always be known from the
difpofition of the benefic planets in the nativity. If this aflertion be
true, which has been proved by innumerable examples in all ages of the _
world, and which I truft will be confirmed by the nativities following,
it is evident that we can, by the foregoing rules, bring up the directions
with fufficient accuracy to afcertain the precife length of time in years,
months, and days, in which the fignificator of life will be in moving to
the anaretical or killing point; and juft fo long will be the life of that
native. Where then is the myftery or impoffibility of afcertaining the
period of human life, and with extraordinary precifion? But this accu-
racy wholly depends upon the true time of birth being obtained ; for a
failure here in the radical point will deftroy the whole calculation, and
nothing predicted therefrom can poflibly happen but by the effect of


whance,.


But it is here neceffary to remark, that in fuch nativities as are vital,
and afford fufficient teftimonies of a ftrong and healthful conftitution,
one direction alone is feldom found to kill: for in fuch nativities there
is required a train of malevolent directions to concur to death; and the
interpofition of one fingle direction of the benefics, even if it be a quar-
tile or oppofition, irradiating the very anaretical point, will moft times
preferve life. But where feveral malevolent directions of the malefic
{tars concur together, without the aid or interference of the benevolent
planets, they never fail to deftroy life. And here it muft_be obferved,
thatin fuch trains of directions we are to diftinguifh between the Ad/iing
planet and that which is the cau/er of the quality of death ; for one pla-
net doth not fhew both. The foremoft of the malefic train is the killing
place, and fhews the time of death; but the following directions, though
benevolent, fhew the quality of it. If this train falls all together, and


none follow, then obferve thofe which precede, though at a diftance,
and


OF ASTROLOGY. 487


and benefic, for the guahty of death; for, though the benevolent ftars
contribute to the prefervation of life, yet they frequently {pecify the dif.
eafe which is the caufe of death, as we have already abundantly fhewn.
And with thefe concur the configurating ftars, the quality of the ftars
and figns, and the termsin which the ruling planets happen to be pefited,
But in violent deaths the genethliacal pofitions of the luminaries are to
be obferved, and how the malefics affeCt them, and arealfo connetted by
directions in the quality of death,


Of SECONDARY DIRECTIONS.


All the directions hitherto treated of are termed primary direCtions,
becaufe they are the firft and moft important of any thing of the kind
in the doétrine of nativities ; and without the aid of thefe, all aftrologi-
cal calculations would be vain and delufive, as muft appear obvious from
what has been already premifed. But /econdary directions are by no
means of fuch an extenfive confideration ; nor of any great utility in the
{cience, that I have as yet been able to dilcover, particularly if accuracy
and truth are to be preferred in thefe {peculations. For, by the ufe of
the primary directions in the calculation of nativities, we are not only
enabled to judge of the quality and influence of the afpects, but can
likewife trace them to the precife time of their operation; whereas the
fecondary dire@ions at beft only afford the artift matter for fuperficial en-
quiry and vague conjecture. I thall neverthelefs explain the nature and
ufe of them in this place, fince it is the plan of this work to comprehend
every practice hitherto introduced into the fcience of aftrology, with a
view to enable the reader to diftinguifh the ufeful and rational from the
inutile and redundant part of it.


By fecondary directions, then, we are to underftand thofe configurations
and familiarities of the planets which arife daily from the time of birth,
and are applied to the prediction of events that are to come to pafsin the
fame fucceffion of years from the birth as correfpond with thofe days. For
example, allafpects of the ftars, both to the luminaries and cardinal houfes,
that happen on the firft day after birth, are applied to the firft year ; thofe
of the fecond. day after birth to the fecond year; thofe of the third day
to the third year; thofe of the fourth day to the fourth year; and fo on,
in progreflive rotation, as far as this {peculation can extend,


Inthe management of thefedirections, weare principally toobferve what
configurations the Moon has to the other planets ; for, if the be joined
with benefic ftars, or irradiated by their good afpects, or even by the

No. 24. 6C good


488 AN (VLIW STi R A TATOO N


good afpetts of the infortunes, it denotes a happy, healthful, and prof-
perous, year to the native, in nature and quality peculiar to the principal
fignificator in each configuration, and to the houfes and figns in which
they fall in the radical figure. Buton the contrary, if the Moon be
joined to malevolent ftars, or irradiated by them, or in parallel declina-
tion of the infortunes, it forebodes, to thofe years pointed out by the
days in which thefe evil configurations happen, great afHictions either
in mind, body, oreftate; and, if a primary direction fhouid correfpond
with them, of the fame malignant nature, a complication of temporal
misfortunes will moft probably enfue. .


In the confideration of thefe directions, we are particularly to attend
to the critical days and climacterical years ; for at thofe times the good
or evil configurations of the planets are’ moft powerful in their opera-
tion. If upon either of thefe occafions the Moon be found in quartile
or oppofition to the place in which fhe was pofited at the time of birth,
and an evil primary direction of the fignificator of life correfpond there-
with, death is then at the door, or at that time very much to be -appre-
hended, even in the ftrongeft conftitutions. And fo likewife, if the Sun
or Moon in the fecondary directions are afflicted by the malignant rays of
inaufpicious configurations with an evil primary direction, with which
both the revolution and tranfit agree, it is confidered an irrevocable indi-
cation of death to the native.


Thefe fecondary directions, I underftand, have always been in reputa-
tion among the Arabs and Egyptians, who, incommon practice, prefer
this method of predicting from the genethliacal figure to the more com-
plicated and laborious mode of calculation by the primary directions.
The former practice has doubtlefs the advantage in point of expedition ;
for by the ufeof it in thofe countries, they will, upon the bare inf{pect-
tion of a nativity, give an account of the general and particular incidents
during the whole courfe of the native’s life ; and yet, by repeated trials
of it myfelf, I have found it in many inftances erroneous, and therefore
not to be adopted in the ferious inveftigation of nativities, where accuracy
and truth are to be defired. It it is a doctrine much ona level with that
of horary queftions, and may be ufed to give a general idea of the native’s
figure of birth, and of his probable bent of fortune, where time or cir-
cumftances will not admit of particular calculations.


But, upon delivering judgement upon either {pecies of directions, whe-
ther prinary or fecondary, it is abfolutely neceflary to pay the greateft
attention to the nature and quality of the afpects we direct to, as well

thote


DiFLUA & FR OL. 0.G'Y: 489.


thofe in the world as thofe in the zodiac: for it often happens that a
zodiacal afpeét may import much good, when at the fame point of time
a malignant mundane configuration may come up, of fo {trong and pow-
erful a nature as to fruftrate all the beneficial. effects portended by the
former, The want of attending to, or knowing, this, has frequently
confounded our modern practitioners ; who, confiding in the benignant
tendency of fome extraordinary good afpects in the zodiac, have promifed
an advance of fortune to the native, which has never come to pafs, becaufe
counter-afpeéts in the world, which have the ftrongeft and neareft rela-
tion to fublunary things, have confpired, at the fame inftant of time, to
fuperfede the beneficial effects of the zodiacal configurations ; and which
would perhaps have been felt in an extraordinary degree of malignity,
were it not that the above-mentioned falutary afpects were oppofed to


them,


Hence it muit appear to every rational mind, that the ftricteft caution
and the utmoft deliberation are neceflary, in forming our opinion upon the
directions of anativity ; for, if at laft we errin this, all oar labour is loft,
and the unfortunate enquirer is deluded with vain expeCtations of a happy
run of great good fortune, or terrified with the approach of {ome dread-
ful cataftrophe, neither of which, by the nature of the ftars, was ever
intended to happen. That this want of judgement has of late years been
too commonly practifed upon the public, cannot be denied, nor too fe-
verely reprobated. But ftill, let not the relentlefs unbeliever of.Aftro-
logy raife his exalted creft too high on this occafion; nor infift, becaufe
thefe errors have been common, that the fcience of prediction has no ex-
iftence in truth and nature; his unbelief muft clearly arife from a want
- of inclination to contemplate the curious effects of fecond caufes,


. Brute creatures may perhaps enjoy the faculty of beholding vifible
things with a more penetrating eye than ourfelves ; but fpiritual objects
are as far out of their reach as though they had no being. Neareft,
therefore, to the brute creation, are thofe men, who fuffer themfelves to
be fo far governed by external objects, as to believe nothing but what
they fee, and feel, and can accommodate to thefr own fhallow imagina-
tions. Let fuch men doubt whether they have a foul in their body, be-
caufe their eyes never faw it; or that there are ftars in the firmament at
noon-day, becaufe the appear not; or that it is not air in which they
breathe, becaufe nothing appears’to them but an infenfible vacuity.
Surely all that know they poffefs a foul muft of neceffity believe the
rule and government of angels, which they fee not; and, if from no


other ‘grounds, they muft, 1 think, from that.apparent analogy which
| ) they


,


ye °


490 AN -T5b2).U8 T R’A ET TION

they cannot but perceive between the greater and the lefs world ; for,
as the little world man confifts of an outward vifible body, and an in
ward fpiritual foul, which gives life and motion to the organical frame,
fo poffeffing all parts as to be wholly in all, and in each diftinG part
wholly; fo muft it be alfo in the great univerfe, the fenfible and mate-
rial part whereof hath being and motion from thofe fpiritual powers
which dwell in, and wholly fill and aétuate, it; therefore the Aftrologian
regards nature with the eyes of St. Paul, 2 Cor. iv. 18. he Loks mot at
the things which are feen, but at the things which are not feen: for the
things which are Jeen are temporal, but the things which are not feen are
evernal,


Having now completely laid down the rudiments of the Science of
Aftrology, in as comprehenfive, plain, and intelligent, a manner as pof-
fible, I fhall immediately proceed to teach the application thereof, in
calculating the following nativities, It is my with to perform this tafk
in fuch a manner as to enable the moft fuperficial reader to accompany
me through every minute procefs in the bufinefs, and to follow me in
bringing up every direction to their proper afpects, as they fhall refpec-
tively occur in the genethliacal figures. If I can do this, I have no
doubt of foon convincing the moft obflinate unbeliever of the fcience,
that it has both utility and truth on its fide; and that the beings of rea-
fon, who bear the image of their beneficent Creator, are not wholly left
without the help of forefight and foreknowledge, in a very ample and
extraordinary degree, if they will but adopt the neceflary means of ace
quiring it. ,


The nativities that follow fall immediately under my own obfervation
and knowledge, and I have chofen them in preference to any that have
been before publifhed, or to thofe of perfons not now living, becaufe I
would avoid putting it in the power of any perfon to fay, that our calcu-
lations are at all founded upon enquiries into the people’s way of life, of
their good or ill fortune, of their ficknefs or health, of the particular
incidents of their life pait, or of the external caufes of their death; for,
if the rules that I have laid down will not enable us to accomplith all
this from the fituation of the planets in the figure of birth, our {cience
is indeed a mere delufion, andits followers nothing better than jugglers
and impoftors.


But, to.make this enquiry eafy to my readers, and to fave them as much
as poffible the trouble of long and tedious calculations, I fhall in this
place introduce a fet of tables, which are fo contrived as to refolve every

queftion


OF ASTROLOGY. a"


queftion that will arife inthe management of nativities or horary quef-
tions; as’well in refpect to the places and pofitions of the planets and
their afpects, as. to the bringing up their. proper dire@ions. I ‘hall
likewife add a fhort explanation of each diftinét fet of Tables, and
reduce them to practice, in -calculating the following nativities, in fuch.
a. manner as to make their ufe eafy and familiar; hoping by this means
to remove, if pofflible, that fudden impreffion of difficulty and embar-
raffment, which is felt by moft readers on the firft view of mathematical
Tables. Iam perfuaded ‘no difficulty whatever will attend the acqui-
fition of a competent knowledge of thefe, if a proper attention’ be paid
to them; without which, little progrefs can be expected. The moft
accomplifhed artift of us all could never yet beftow the gift of infpira~'
tion; and therefore, without fuitable endeavours, let none attempt the


intricate paths of {cience.


The Tables I fhall introduce in this place, are thofe for finding the
femidiurual and feminoturnal Arches ; Tables of Twilight; of Mun-
dane Afpects; of Right and Oblique Afcenfions ; of Declination, and
Afcenfional Differences; with fome others, calculated to make the ufe of
the above more comprehenfive and univerfal.


Of the TABLES of SEMIDIURNAL and SEMI-
NOCEURNAL ARCHES.
_ After what has been premifed in the foregoing Treatife on Directions,


the neceffity of readily finding the femidiurnal and femino¢éturnal Arches
muft become obvious. I have therefore calculated a Table of them to


every degree of the Ecliptic for the latitude of London, which, being


moft wanted, will of courfe fave the practitioner fome trouble. Under
the different latitudes in the other Tables, are fpecified the femidiurnal
arches of all the northern figns, proper to thofe latitudes; as Aries,
Taurus, and Gemini, at the top of the Table; and Cancer, Leo, and
Virgo, at the bottom of the Table. But, to find the feminoéturnal
arches proper thereto, it only requires to fubtract the femidiurnal arch
from twelve hours, and the remainder will be the feminodturnal arch
fought. So likewife the femino¢turnal arches for all the fouthern figns
are placed under the different latitudes in the Tables, having Libra,
Scorpio, and Sagittarius, at.the top of the columns; and Capricorn,
Aquaries, and Pifes, at the bottom; and, to obtain the femidiurnal arches
correfponding with them, add the amount of: the feminocturnal arch to
twelve hours, and the fum will be the feimidiurnal arch! required ; .many


examples of which will be fhewn hereafter. |


No. 25. 6D But,
¥ é ‘ alt

< a i a :

' ‘e ° * + .


492 ACN, (DE US, FoR. ATT OLN


But, fhould the femidiurnal or feminocturnal arches be required for
-any latitude not fpecified in the Tables, they may be found thus: Firft,
find the declination of the planet under the pole of birth; and, if the
declination falls in any of the fix northern figns, add the difference of
Afcenfion to ninety degrees, and the fum will be the femidiurnal arch, in
degrees and minutes; if the afcenfional difference be fubtracted from
ninety degrees, the remainder will be the femidiurnal arch. But, if the
declination fhould fall in either of the fix fouthern figns, then fubtract
the difference of afcenfion from ninety degrees, for the femidiurnal arch ;
and add the afcenfional difference to ninety degrees, for the feminoctur-
nal arch. If the arches thus found are divided by fix, they will give
the horary times, or true length of the planetary hours; and, if divided
by three, they will give the true diftance of one houfe, by which method
the true divifion of all the houfes may be obtained, according to the
rules of Ptolomy; two. of which parts make a fextile, as appears more
obvioufly by the Table of Mundane Afpects, wherein are f{pecified all the
afpects that are made in the world.


OF the) DR ABLE Sof: T: WA LIGHT,


The ufe of thefe Tables, in bringing up the arches of directions, hath
been already mentioned ; it will therefore be fufficient in this place to
inform the reader how to make ufe of them. The firft column on the
left hand contains the parallels of Twilight ; and the body of the Tables
fhews the diftance the Sun mutt be from the eaftern or weftern angles, that
is, from the afcendant or feventh houfe, to be in thofe parallels ; therefore,
whenever thefe Tables are ufed for any calculations, the following me-
thod muft be adopted: Take the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant
under the pole of birth, from whence {ubtraét the oblique afcenfion of
the Sun, and the remainder. will be its primary diftance, which is to be
fought inthe Tables as near as poflible to that degree which the Sun is
in; which being found, look in the column of Parallels of Twilight,
and fee what parallel correfponds with it, for under that parallel the
arch of Twilight muft be taken ; examples of which will hereafter be
frequently given.


Of the TABLES of MUNDANE ASPECTS.


The firft column of thefe Tables.contains the femidiurnal and femi-
nocturnal arches, from three to nine hours, calculated to every fix mi-
nutes. In. the next column, and oppofite to thefe arches, in a direét
line, is the fpace of the houfe that the femidiurnal or femino@urnal

arches


AOR FANS BE RLO LO; G, Yue is 493


arches refpectively give; and in the fucceeding columns are arranged all
the mundane afpetts anfwering thereto, truly calculated to the very de~
gree and minute, which are fometimes twice as much as at others; and
the reafon is, becaufe the femidiurnal and femino@turnal arches vary in
their content to full that amount.


Of-the=-TABLEStof REGHT: ASCENSION S.


To find the right afcenfion of a ftar, the longitude mutt be given,
with which enter the left hand column of the table; and under the fign
and latitude at the top of the columns, in the angle of meeting, is the
right afcenfion required, For example : Suppofe a planet to be pofited in
ten degrees of Aries, and to have two degrees north latitude ; enter the
tables of right afcenfion with ten degrees of ‘Aries, in the left-hand’
column, and in the angle of meeting, under two degrees of north lati-
tude, will befound the right afcenfion thereof, viz. eight degrees twenty-
three minutes.


Of the TABLES, of -DECLINATION.


To find the declination of a planet, the longitude muft be given, with
which enter the table of declinations on the left hand ; and in the column
of longitude, againft the degree of longitude, is the declination fought. If
- the ftar hath latitude, either north or fouth, enter the tables under the
latitude, as the titles direét, always remembering that, if the ftar be in
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, or Sagittarius, the degrees of longi-
tude to the left hand, beginning at the top of the tables, are to be
taken ; but, if the ftar be in Capricorn, Aquaries, Pifces, Aries, Taurus,
or Cancer, then the degrees of longitude to the right hand, beginning
at the foot of the table, muft be reiorted to. Example: Suppofe a ftar
in ten degrees of Virgo, with one.degree twenty-feven minutes north
latitude; I enter the table of declinations, finding Virgo in the head
of the table; and againft ten degrees under one degree of latitude [
find eight degrees forty-feven minutes, and againit ten degrees under
two degrees of latitude I find nine degrees forty-two minutes ; the dif-
ference is fifty-five minutes. Then, for the part proportional agreeing to
the odd minutes of latitude, I fay, If fixty give fifty-five, what {hall
twenty-feven give? It gives twenty-five; which, added tocight degrees
forty-feven minutes, leaves the declination of the point fought, nine de-
- grees twelve minutes. But, if the ftar had been in twenty degrees of
Aries, I muft have entered at the foot of the table; and, having the
fame latitude, the fame declination would emerge.

. Of


494. AN! WLVE U's TR AAT FON


Of the TABLES of th ASCENSIONAL DIFFE-
RENCES of th PLANETS:


The afcenfional difference is a certain‘arch of diftance, between the
right and oblique afcenfions of any ftar or planet, in any degree of the
Ecliptic; and, to find it by the following Tables of Differences, obferve
the following rules. Enter with the degrees of declination on the leit
hand of the Table, and under the circle of pofition in the head, im the
common angle of meeting, with equation, will be found the afcenfional
difference required. Example: Suppofe a planet to have ten degrees of
declination, and his circle of pofition be fifty-one degrees forty-two mi-

“nutes; I enter with ten degrees on the left hand under the circle of fifty-
one degrees, and there I find twelve degrees thirty-five minutes ; but,
having forty-two minutes more, I take the part proportional between

fifty-one degrees and fifty-two degrees, viz.


Declination ten degrees latitude. { a | re | -
Difference O 28


Then I fay, by the rule of proportion, If fixty give twenty-eight, what
fhall forty-two, the odd minutes of the circle of pofition, give? It gives
twenty nearly ; which, added to twelve degrees thirty-five minutes, vives
the true afcenfional difference, twelve degrees fifty-five minutes of the
point fought. ay


: Having obtained the afcenfional difference, the ufe of it, in the art of
directions, is as follows: Firft, if the declination be north, fubtra@
the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion, and the remainder
will be the oblique afcenfion ; but, if you add it to the right afcenfion,
the fum will be the oblique defcenfion. Secondly, when the'declina-
tion is fouth, add the afcenfional difference tothe right afcenfion, and the
fum will be the oblique afcenfion; but, if you fubtratt it from the right
afcenfion, the remainder will be the oblique defcenfion. And note,
that the afcenfional difference is only of fervice when the planet or ftar
hath latitude.


Of


OF ASTROLOGY, 498


Of the TABLES of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS. for
th LATITUDE of LONDON.


Enter thefe tables with the degrees of longitude in the left-hand co-
lumn ; and in the common area, under the fign in the top of the column,
is the true oblique afcenfion fought. For example, fuppofe the ftar to
be in ten degrees of Aries, and the latitude of birth fifty-one degrees
thirty-two minutes ; look for ten degrees in the fide column under Aries
in the head, and the oblique afcenfion will be four degrees ten minutes
of the point fought.


To find the oblique defcenfions by thefe tables,. obferve the following
rule; take the oppofite fign and degree, and, if it fall in any of the fix
northern figns, add one hundred and eighty degrees to the oblique afcen-
fion found, and the fum will be the oblique defcenfion of the point fought ;
but in the fix fouthern figns fubtra@tion muft be made, and the ob«
Tique defcenfion remains. Example: in the latitude of fifty-one de-
grees thirty-two minutes, I would know the oblique defcenfion of ten
degrees of Libra. © Now I take the oppofite point Aries, which is nor-
thern, and add thereto, one hundred and eighty degrees, as follows:


; deg. min.
Oblique afcenfion of ten degrees of Aries is 4 10
180 Oo
184 10


Thus the oblique defcenfion of ten degrees of Libra is one hundred:
and eighty-four degrees ten minutes ; but, for the oblique defcenfion of
ten degrees of Arics, I take the oblique afcenfion of the oppofite point
Libra, which is fouthern, and fubtract one hundred and eighty degrees
from it, as follows:


deg. min.
Oblique afcenfion of ten degrees of Libra is 194. 12
Subtract 180 fe)
FY the &


Thus the oblique defcenfion of ten degrees of Aries is fourteen de-
grees twelve minutes ; and the fame rule will hold good in all fimilar
No. 25. 6E operations


496 AN ILELBUSTRATIEON


operations for the latitude of London. I fhall likewife give a praxis for
finding the oblique afcenfions and defcenfions of every other latitude, by _
help of the aforementioned Tables of Afeenfional Differences.


It would be needlefs to enter into any further explanation, or to adduce
other examples in this place, to fhew the nature and ufe of the following
fet of tables, fince we fhall hereafter have frequent occafion to refer to
them in calculating and bringing up the directions of the following
Nativities, which will at once prove the facility and correctnefs with
which any calculations may be found by them, and initiate the young
practitioner into a more intimate knowledge of them, without labour. or
embarraflment. WhatI have already premifed on the fubject, has been
merely to demonttrate their general expediency, and to remove thofe fug-
geftions of difficulty and difguft, which are too frequently felt by
common readers upon the firft fight of a collection of tables, from an
iJl-founded apprehenfion that they fhall never be able to underftand
them ; and which confequently is apt to give a fatal blow to the further
progrefs of the ftudent. Now the fame objections might be made with
equal propriety to the ufe of the Trader’s Sure Guide, and the Ready
Reckoner, fince both of them confift of nothing but tables, calculated
to fhew the value of any quantity of goods at any given price, and are
now univerfally. made ufe of by perfons wholly unacquainted with the
theory of figures. If, therefore, thefe books can be ufed with fo
much advantage for the above-mentioned purpofes, by perfons utterly
incapable of performing the moft fimple rules in addition or multipli-
cation, why may not the following tables be reforted to with fimilar
-eafe, for folving any queftions upon the fubject before us ? the anfwer is

obvious, and the utthty of the plan unexceptionable.


AT AB DoE


; iF Tass TR OULJOUG Y.7 & 497

A TA BLE of Semidiurnal” and ‘Séthinofturnal ARCHES.
ae eT SS TITS RE SSE 2 SSRIS ASSES SSS 7 es a a oe ee ears
Pole of 44 degrees. || Poleof 47 deg. || Pole of 50 degrees.


Semid. | ¥& nm |Semid. v7} 8 nm ||Semid. v| 8 mW


eo


=<


Semin. | om PF (Semin. &l om | # [Semin =| m | Fe


6. 06 47l7 24] 6 © 016 511734) 6 0 16 567 44
6. 12 16 48I7 25] 6. 3 [6 °53i7935I. 6 2 6 58:7 45
6° % 4 16 %50/7° 26}. 26%!) 516 155)7°36] O° 4 6 59,7 47
6°26 6 % 11792719065. 7 1695717037 OFS 67.9 1177948
6 ''8 16 “s2\7°28) 86. 9 16 59/7938) 26." 8 7 37, 49
6° %'9 6 K4l7" 29) 26) “Fo '017 39186" He I7° 517 50
6tt1 YOSe 57-30? 6° SFAN7* 12 740 Gyja1 V7 7051
6° Fg V6 2567931)" 6: tg iz) 47° 41720, 13 17° 917 52
© 6594 16 \g8179 315 Oo Rs V7 N57 42H 20 Vers 1710/70 3
6° °Rs Vb Sol gai GP KEZ 7 © 371784 3/02 O\) hy 7 F217 5.4
6° 3617 0733) 6 F9°7" Bi7°43h 6! 19 17 1417 55
6° 18 "N76 217933) 6 (207° '9/7° 44) O° 21 17 °15/7 56
6 207 317 34| 6 ‘227 11/7 451 6 23 |7. 17/7 57
6 2174734] 6 247 F2\7°46]. 6 95 [7 1917 58
6 23 17° '67°35| 6 257 1317 46] 6 26 |7 20)7 58
60° 247717935) 6 27\\7 "1417 4 6 28 17'22'7 59
625 17 87 36) 6 29°77 16/7 48] 6 30 |7 248 ©
6 27°17 101736) 6 30 t7.18!7'48] 6 3217 258 oF
6 29 \7-1117° 37] §6 93217 1917 49) © 34 17 27)8 3
“16. 230 7 °rat7 37)! '6 33 7 2017 49] 6 36 17,.288) 2
‘6 327-2317 38] 6 34 \\7 2217 49] 6 38 |7 308° 2
6° 3g \\7 2417 38] (6 36 \\7 2317 sof 6 40 17 318 3
6 34 \l7 bsl7 38], 6 38 |7 2417 50] 6 42 17 33/8 3
6 3071717 38 6 39 17 267 50) 6 43 17 348 4
6 387° 287 38} 6 40-|7 27/7/51) 6 45 17 308 4
6 °39.7° 1917 ggl) 6 43 7 28\7 51) 6 47 |7 37/8 4
6 '40°7:20/7 39) 6 ‘447 2517 511° 6 49 |7 38/8 4
6 42.7\2117 39) 6 4617 30/7 si} 6 5117 40/8 5
6 (43°\7\29l7° 39] 6 -48°\7 3al7 si 6 53 |7 41/8 5
6 °45°17 2317 39] 6 49 17-3317 51) 6 54 17 4319 5
6 47\\7 2417. 39) 6 § 51°17 sat) 6 56 \7 44/8. 5]
Semid. me } se NSemid, n| u-| @ Isemid. ml) 2 | @ de
vp |


HE |. aw


Semin. x | ox


ee vp liSemin.


498
A TABLE of Semidiurnal. and Semino@urnal ARCHES,


feta
ig)
OQ


CON] Oin BG N FO


1; Pole of


Semid. | $ | m |\Semtd. v| ¥ au |Semid. wv) | Om
Semin


h.


is


mM. %| of | w lgemine *|


AN ILLUSTRATION


——— | eee


es | eee | memes | | mies SSS Re |


idea EES That


res | eee || ey Keay | Ge


up | Semin. x| i


. 21 Mm g WSemin. &| m tL WWSemin, .& ™ ld


eae Vee


m. |b.m.jh.m.f} h. om. |h.m.jo.m.) h.. m. jh.m.jh.m.
016 5817 48) 6 0 j7 017,52) 6 0.17 , 317 57} 30 ©
217 07 49] 6 2 17. 217554) 6 «217. 5/7 58) 29
447 2[7 54) 6. 4.17 417955). 6. 4 17. 7/89 9 28
687 V4 O52 Ge 6d 674 56lucbe!, 007 AGS a If 27
847 8 G7 ke BWecbe 8A Y 8l7A58locOe| e-8 A7 A118, 2 26
10-47 — 817 5 5h Oe Ody AO7AS91406-|.10.17-13/8, 4) -25
1247 1 O17%50)). 6c 42 a7 ob 9188 0-6 12 17 15/8. 6) 24
LA M7 EAT AS TI Oe pat] As Fier Ovlabe: Ag <h7i8 a 7b 23
16.17 13/7 58h. 6; 316 17 -.46|85 3]. -6 017.47 18/8, 38} 22
18.17 1517 sol 6. 18 17 47/8 4! 6. 19 17 -2018,, 9} 21
20:17 1718 of 6 20-17 19/8 5] 6 -21 17 22/8 10] 20
2217 1818 1) 6 22 |7 21/8 6 6 23-17 24/8 11) 19
24 (7 20/8. 21 6 2447.2318. 7\| 6 .25.4 -26/8.12) 18
26 |7 2218, gi 6.2647. 258. 7) 6-27-17 2818.13) 17
28 17 23/18 3) 6. 2847 27/8. Bil. 6. 30-17 308,14] 16
29 17 258 4) 6 3017 28/8 gl) 6 92-17 3918 15] a5
31 |7 2718 Ble (0% 932 i7v ZOIBS 10 6- 994 794/810) 14”
3517 28/8 5) G 34 7 32/8 11) 6. 36 17 3518.17] 13
37 |7 398 6) 6 36 17 34/8 11) 6 38 7 37/8 17) 42
89 |7 32/8 7). 6 38.7 35/8 12] 6 40 f7 39/8: 18] 11
4t 17 338 7| 6 40)7,378)12) 6 42.7 41/8 19} 10
43.17 35/8 8) 6 42:17 39813} 6 44:7 43/819] .9
45 |\7 37% 8) 6 44 17 40/8 13] 6 46.7 44/8 20 8
47 17 388 8) 6 46\7 428 13], 6 48 |7 46/8 20 7
49 7 39/8 9) 6 4817 438.14] 6 50.17 488 20 6 |
517 418) of 6 50:17 45/814], 6 5247 50/8 21) 5 |
53 7 42/8 9} 6 52.\7 47814) 6 54.\7 518.21) 4_
55 7 43/8 10], 6 5417 488 15] 6 57.17. 528,21) 3
56 17 45]8 5 6 5617 508 15) 6 59.17 548,22) 2
57 37 46,8 toll, 6.) §8 ser Bar sh. 9- 3 are Ba ooh a
58 \7 48/8 10] 7 of7 518 151.7. 3 etteg7 Oaeee 20
semid. ™) 2} @ \Semid. m| 2 | @ |Semid. m|\. | m_ deg.


OF AS TR OLOG Y. 499
A TABLE ‘of Semidiurnal and Seminotturnal A RCHE S.
Pole of 56 degrees.


Pole of 54 degrees. | Pole of 55 deg.


| |Semid. v\ % i lsemid: | gi a


Semin. =| m | ft |\Semin. =| m| # Semin.


| genres Pecans | CaS | eu ESS


deg. | hh. -m. h.m.jh.m4) bh. m. h.m h.m.j -h.


parece | EG | | en, | SEN | SERRE


Od beet 518th Oo O17 78 5] 6 .0 (7 9/8 12] 30
11 6 247 7/8 gh 6 2:17 88 7] 6 2 (7 11/8 14) 29
2 | -16) sig alz 89/8 ogily 6 5217) 208, 9}  G, 5 7 14/8 15) 28
3| 6 717 118 6) 6 7 \7 12\8 10} 6 7 |7 1618 i a
4 | 216: gaze agi8. 76 9 7 148 12 6 9 |7 18/8 19} 26
5 | 6 aty7 15/8 9 6 12 |7 17/8 13] 6 12 |7 20/8 20) 25
6:| 6. a9 47 87\8. 10]. G 244)7 198 15) 6 14 |7 22/8 22) 24
gil 2/6: alg 7 498.111 6 26 |7 24/8 16} 6 16''7 25/8 23) 23
8:} 6c 77 2218) 13] G 284)7 238 17/1 6 19 |7 27)5 25) 22
g| 6 192\7 24/8 14) 6 20/7 2<\8 18]| 6 21 |7 298 26) 21
101 6 22:17 268 15). 6 22.47 27/8 29 6 2g9i\7" 92/8 \29| 2p
11:| 6. 24/7 288 16 6 25°17 29/8 20) 6 26 17 348 29) 19
1oc| 6s 26317 'g0\8 171) 6 27°17 31/8 2i) 6 28 7-368 30) 18
137} 6 28 \7 328 28) 6 29/7 33/8 22) 6 3017 39/8 33) 17
ag} 6 grein 338 t9) O 32/7 358 23) 6 33.17 41/8 32) 16
a5 | (6 33:17 358 20] 6 34 7 37/8 24) © 357 43/3 33) 15
16| 6 3537 37/8 22 6 96.7 398 a3} 6 37 |7 458 34) 14
17 | 6- 37:17 398 22| © 39-7418 26) 6 39/7 488 35) 13
18 |. 6 392171418 23). 6 41°|7 43\8; 27) 6 41 17 508 36) 12
19} 6 i743 ea), & agiip4as&izs) 6 43°/7°52/8 37) ™
20 | 6 4417 45(8 25): 6 46:17 47/8/29] 6 46 (7 548 37) 10
311 6 46-7 47/9 25]. 6 48217 49/8 30) 6 48 17 568 33) 9
22.\- 6 48-\7 49/8 23]. 6 0°17 51/880 6 ‘50:17 588 38) 8
2g! 6 go |7 $o[3\26]) 6 g2:|\7 58880) 6 5217 595 39) 7
ay. |- 6 2 17 52/3 26) 0 54 Tisai gx): 6 Gop/B 11/8) 39 6
se |- 6 aga |7 54)8 26]. Ge 6117/5019 31) 5718 38 39) Be
26 | 6 7 :\7 35/8 27) 6 59/7 $88 32) 6 so 8 58 40) 4
a7 |. 6 9 7.579 271-7 1 8 -o8 a2} 7 28 78 40) 2
o8 | 32 le solerio? 28.8 28-aah7% - 48 988 40) 2
29 | 7 3 |8 O18 2717 6 |8 4/8 34) 7 6/8 20/8 41 1 |
30 | 7 15 |8 2/8 27). 7 7 \8 518 34) 7 g \8 12/8 41) ©

Semid. ™| % | @ \\Semid, m) R | & Semid. ™\ 2 | @ |deg.

Semin. %| = | w |semin. *| = | Semin. *| lw

oF


No. 25.


- 500 AN 1228 US TRM TIO N


OES eo


Shewing the Semidiurnal Arch to every degree of the Ecliptic.
Calculated for the Latitude of 51 degrees 39 minutés.” Fa


aan ae ft Vy os x
ideg h.m.h.m.|h m./h b.m.jh.m.|h.m.jhem.
| 016 06 sgi7 5118 41013 47\4 10/5 1

1:16 2/7 117 52/8 4 813° 47|\4 1115 2
216 47 317 538 4 713 47\4 1215 4
35 67 si7 548 5\4 5/3 4814 1315 ©
4\6- 87 7/7 558 34 413 48l4 15/5 8
516 107 9g\7 568 4 5214 33 4814 16\5 10
6:/6 127 1417 57/8 10/7 4.8), 5014 23° 49/4 18/5 12
7 \6 147 1317 598 10.7 4116 46|5 46\4 4814 13 4914 2015 14
8 |6 167 1518 O08 97 40/6 44l5 44lq 46\4 O13 50|4 21)5 16
g |6 187 17/8 118 97 8916 42/5 4214 4513 593 5014 23/5 18
10:16 207 20 28 817 38/6 4015 4014 43/3 5819 5114 25/5 20
1 6 227 23/8 38 817 37/6 38\5 3814 4113 5713 5114 27\5 22
12 |6 2417 268 48 77 3616 36/5 3614. 39/3 56/3 5214 29/5 24
136 26/7 288 48 717 356 34/5 344 3713 5513 5314 30|5 26
14 6 287 308 58 6)7 33/6 3215 324 363 54/3 5314 g2l5 28
15 16 30.7 338 6/8 617 316 3015 30/4 34/3 54/3 5414 3415 3°
16 6 327 358 O68 517 306 28/5 284 32/3 53)3 54i4 36/5 32
b17 6 3417 36/8 7/8 4\7 286 26/5 2614 3013 5313-5514 37|5 34
18 6 367 378 7/8 4\7 266 24\5 2414 2913 5213 56l4 3915 36
Hl 19 6 38/7 388 8/8 317 236 22)5 2214 2713 .51]3 57:4 41/5 38
20 6 40:7 39/8 88 217 20/6 20/5 2014 2513 5119 584 43)5 40
| 21 6 42:7 40/8 98 117 17/6 18l5 184 23/3 5013 sol4 45\5 42
22 6 447 4118 9/8 o}7 1516 16)5 1614 2113 50:4 ola 46\5 44
' ff 23 16 46:7 42/8 dl 59|7 12,5 1445 1414 2033 494° 114 48\5 46
24 6 48'7 43/3 1017 57/7 11]6 125 1214 1813 4914 214 sos 48
| 256 50/7 45/8 1117 5617° gI6 105 104 16/3 484 3l4 5215 50
4, 26 (6 52/7 468 1117 ssi7_ 7/6 85 84 1513 484 gla 53\5 52
2% 6 5417 47/8 1217 Saiz 516 65 64 1313 4814 sl4 53]5 54
28.16 567 488 1217 537 36 45 44123 474 J4-57\5 56
29 (6 5817 498 137 5277 16 25 24 1113 4714 84 5ol5 58
30 16 597 ae 5 5916 °F5 i 10\3 47|\4 Tols--4|6 Oo
| |


MmnAanAn & |


AARAAMAAAAANAnRAARHAnRAAAKHAA


SAPP P APPA AA LHP


OF ASTROLOGY.


Oo
> s aN
Co OCOW W OD WwW


)
I


ie)
Oo


_ N
oO. uo
C2 WW OO Od G9 GD GO


18/3
1713
15/3
14/3
1313


1 1)3
1013


A


ee Gees | eS ee) | eee eee | ome | eee | Ot er em


ey | ee | ee | ee | eee |


47
47\4


SIN NNN ON I TT WIT


Ly, 3B,


Shewing the Seminoéturnal Arch to every degree of the Ecliptic.
Calculated for the Latitude of 51 degrees 32 minutes.


Z hee


-o.m.!h.m.jh.m.,{h.


7 50/8 13/7 50
7, §2|8. 1317 49
7 53)8 137 48
PS kion £2


8 H

8 38°97

8 48 87

8% 58717 30

arora

8 68 67

8 7/8 617

87/8. $17

8 88 4\7

8 9/8 317 19

8 98 2717

8 108 17°15

8 10/8 O17 14
40/8 1117! 59/7 12
42\8 1117587 10
44/8 12/7 577 8
45/8 12:7 56/7
47/8 1217 557
48/8 13/7 537
49/8 13/7 527

7


52 A . 1 tee L Mi S i R A TION


S10} 20


ee, ee) ee ee) (Sn, ee, (Oy eS a |


315 O15 6) 4 59] -4 sol 4 41! 4 30
abso ret 6238! 6230176: 16) 59
5| 8 42) 8 39) 8 26) 8 11) 7 52) 7 34
O\10 32|10 26]10 11) 9 52) 9 30,9 8


alte 24/12 17|11 SQ\I1 36/11  Qg|10 43
814. 19/14 12/13 51119 22112 50]12 10)
9116 17/16 gl15 44}15 11/14 32113 55
1018 18/18 7/17 38/16 58116 14/15 33
11/20 23120 gitg 35\18 53/17 Sgit7 12!

. 12/29 931/22 17/21 38/20 46119 471/18 53
13\24 45/24 28/23 45/22 46|21 37/20 3519 42

14/27 5/26 44/25 14/24 44/23 3022 1921 1920 3320 119
15}29 32\29 10/28 1026 49125 24)24 6/22 5922 Ola1 go21
16/32 7/31 45190 32/28 50/27 2325 5424 38.23 41/22 5922 -
17}34 46134. 27)33 2/31 16)29 2527 4526 20/25 19)24 3023
32 32137 16/35 40193 38/31 39/29 3828 0126 55\26 325°


eres: OF | gees | Cee | cone | ene eee | eo en pee
go; [°8 20)) 10 fe) 820] I0 re) ¥ 20} 10 | fe)
re) 2I10| 20 re) mio| 20 fe) P10;} 120° bB01%


3} 4 10) 4 12) 4 13) 4 19) 426/435) 4 41) 4 48).4 53) 4
4-5 344 5 35| 5 37; 5 441.5 53) © 5] 6 13) 6 22) 6 28) 6
5, 6 58)'6 5817 1 7 917 20) 7 3417 44 7 56,8 3 8
6| 8 8 251 8 3418 47,9 319 15) 9 28) 9 3919
719-45 9 44) 9 48) 9 56)10°13H0 BIO 4slir oll 1oO\11
Sill - ONL YHI AQiaI-/21/11 39/11 59/12 14)12 3112 42/12
gl2 33:12 31/22 36112 4619 413.2513 42]14 1/14 13/14
| b5 115.3015 44lr5
n1]ty 23i0g 19/15 23lt5 35/15 54|10 17/16 49]16 solr7 PAIL
42/16 4846 43/16 47116 59116 19/18 .42)r8 6)18 28/18 49/18
13/18 '13)18 7/18 10/18 22:18 45119 9!19 32/19 56/20 22/20
19 31119 33/19 46/20 12/20 3620 §9!21 2424 4giai «
20 55|20 55/21 8/21 g4i2a 122 25:22 51/23 923
22 19/22 20/22 33/22 55:23 26123 51/24 17/24 36ja4

07|23 59123-4423 44/23 57/24 19245125 17125 4igi26 3/26
18/25 26125 gi25 8\20 20/25 43/2 15/26 42/27 10127 30|27


30 | x20 | 10 fe) mya a o | 0.) #20} 10 “6


310


33] 5 32


5
26] 7


20


mere | ees | ee Se
{


12) & 10


23 ite
16| 6 53} 6
1o} 8 47} 8
6\10
git
7\44
13/16


20/18


37


12)


28


3
46
43
58/35 932 2830
37/38 5134 5732


eee et | Games eeetsaauen | meee et
ees gp | ee es | ee


4517
16|19


13/22


50!23
2325


47/20 36|20 38/20 53/21


4/22
34/23
4/25


59 4
20/10 34)10

O12 3/12
ae 39/13
46lt5 O15
14|16 28/16
42\07 57118
11/19 25/19


5)22 21/22


34/23 49124: ,10)24
O\2¢ 17/25 41|26


57 26 36\26 30.26 45/27 40/27


———|—_——-|_ | —_|—. est | eee Te


a
6


44/25


fe)
O


AUST RO L.OiG Y.


593


, A TABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of 47 degrees.
fe)


™m10| 20 | 30


6 51 5


50,21
36l22
18)24


20/27 -0|2.5


#10


49 5 9 5
38) 6 49| 6
15 8
5110
27%
213


8} 10
45
20
58

33
40118 7
41

14)
47|
19/24
5026
48l27 21/27
18]28 solag


15
16
18
20
21


4 33] 4 |


13.


a>>,


37


30 31\29 3|27 39):


20


57| ©


29) 8 39] 8


er Sr eS A IA NL


504 AN--IlQL LU S TRA BEIO N


_ATABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of 50 degrees.
20%}. © RIO! 2O°} oO MIO} 20°} go
15 19 4 501 4 401 4 40]
6 58) 6 6 251 6 18| 6
8 46) 8 0; 7 43] 7:
710 31/10 4) -g 40) 9 28] 9
12 QOlLT AQIIT QQ1T giro 5
14 15}13 3. «O12 Qglr2
1517 1116 r0lrs | 43/13 16/14
B4)19 T7\18  O\t7 tojlr6 251g salts
5921 27/20 6/19 8117-3 3L7:
33/23 40/22 10120 g5119 51/19 14}t8
16/26 5 17122 37\20 ¢6}20
g\28 34/26 2624 28\22 38)22
13/31 10.28 43/26 46/25 18/24 20/23
37133 55/91 2 giz8 » 10/26 8)25
28/36 50/33 30130 57/29 3/27 53)27
46 O40 5/6 Zr 61/29 36)28


O % 20 204, 10


o | mio
14444 50 5 > IR S
6 18) 6 27| 6 ty 6 54] 7
so] 8 de ag Boag
26! 9 38] 9 57)10 3810
OIL 13/1 B4it 5512
go 8113 10.13. 34)14
6 4 46\15 O15
40 ae 49\07
14 5628 26/18
47 31/20 oj20 g8iar
16 §|21 98i22 15
39/23 13/23 50
13}24 4825 28
5 47\26 23/07 4
21/27 57/28 40
54;29 hi kaatice


®@10}| 20 20 20
20) 6 19] 6 351 5 19 48| 4 46)
4o} 8 33) 8 301 7 8 26] 6 20
O|10 51/10 59 4,7 58
26113 14|12 51jto 40] 9 34
5Q\LS 44115 As\12 21\/1T 10
39/68 21)17 41/13 5912 47
18j2a1r  6)20 ° AO|15 3
28/24 1122 A117 19|16
ass a i ih 4529
23130 39128 54121 44\19 18
389134 35) 32 | 229 57
1440 36/29 13/36 | 20/25 1122.37
15147 58135 23/40 44,277 5
16 46 10/29 4
17 50 48/31 28 35/27 41]
18 34144 16 30 23/29 25
o[ 30 | 720 10] Oo 10
"20- 2.0:


58} 5 8) 5 20] 5 33) 5
48} 7 5} 7 20 7 39) 7 5°

29} 8 4819 99
10}10 35/10 5611 1BjIT 13
48l12 10/12 41/13. 523-20}
26,13 $3)14 2514 sins 10
Alt 5 -93)16 716 36116 56,


56128 36\29 2330 5/30 3518
gi 031 43/92 14


,mnennnenl


o | 20:


e)


we 6 40
4) 9° 1
5\l1 29,
6114. 4
7|16 46
8119 37
gi22 41
10j\26. o
11/29 41
12/3354
13/39 2
14/45 30


% 5O


43


20


54
50


oO


8 10


20


45
4.4


oO


-
ONO CON Aww 1


18
af
ep
23
a
26
17/28


21/27 54
1830 8/29 35


ecm eo feces | ee


27 49
29 27:29


meee


(emecceae | eraeecnem | wera


ae oe


20


2| 4 56
pts ads <8)
poised 6
vie Ok a
56i11 36
42113 17
29/14 49
17|16 43
7,18 28

O20 13
54)21 59
48|23 46
35
eS
18
10


4
6
8


A TABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of 52 degrees.
Oo | mio


bie)


4
6


8
9


Ty


13
14
16
18
19
21
23
24
26
28


30


ee | Ge eee | tense | eee


8|30
48/32


53
3°


31
33


(oes | Searoeeey Ge | eee ee


OF AST R.O.0 0 GY. Fs,


ey


s A TABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of ¢3 degrees.
=| 0 | 10] 20 | ° aap} 20 | Oo | miol 20 |. go


3-7 6} 6 53) © 38) 6 17) 5 55) 5 86 5 2015 G5 3) 4
4) 9 35; 9 19) 8 58| 8 29) 7 sl 7 31/7 111 6 54] 6 46| 6
S12 LILI sort 23/10 4sj10 9 28) 9 o| & 40} 8 28! 8
6li4 §5114 34/13 $613 6112 13\11 2910 54/10 26}10 10/10
LT AGIL7 24416 35)15 30/14 26/13 30/12 48]12 14l11 g2'11
8i20 56/20 24119 24118 4116 44lig 38]14 45)14 4/13 38)13
gi24. 181/23 39/22 23/20 43119 6117 46116 43]15 54j15 22115
10j28 0/27 13/25 38/23 gojar 23119 57/18 4ol17 45/17 g|16

11/32 17/31 15|29 10|26 27/24 7/22 13/20 45,19 35/18 56|18

12137 30}36 1132 39129 40/26 49124 34122 51.21 34l20 44/20
13145 3142 18/37 36133 13/29 41127 Olas ol23 34/22 galar

43 37/37 14132 4629 3327 10/25 34\24 24/23


15 57 314% 0/36 7/32 1529 29/27 34|26 17/25
16 48 23/39 51135 431 509)29 38]28 11/27
17 44 10)38 634 21/31 46/30 lag


49 37/41 2536 5633 58/32 6)30


OS Mir a


% 20


SHO XPOS vai: 6
50, 8 8] 8 20.8
43:10 4}10 2110
3012. Of2 19l12
ASRS GS4\14 (ESE 4.
15\t5 46/16 gl16
017 36)18- o|18
10116 46|16 38|16 46/17 4117 3418 10:18 4919 25)19 sol20 |
11/18 29|18 19|18 26)18 44/19 Isltg s4iz0o 3521 14/21 4ol21
12\20 13120 0j20. 6/20 24/20 56/21 37/22 2023 1/23 31/23
21 57'21 41/21 4522 4/22 37/23 19!24: 424 47/25 18/25
23 4023 23/23 26/23 44/24 17\25 1125 4826 34'27  ¢l27
15\25 2825 5/25 6)25 24:25 57126 40le7 31,28 17/28 54/29
16/27 16,26 48.26 .48)27 4127 37\28 23129 13130 1130 36/30 5
17129 428 30.28 28/28 44/29 17/30. 4/30 55131 44/32 20)


3a 54130 16|30 9130 20/30 57:31 44:32 37133 27/134 3134 I


| ee | er | ee


30 x 20 | 10 | O |#20} 10 |, 9 !w20l 10
' No. 25. 6H 2


508 AN LLLUS TRATION


A TABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of 54 degrees.
© | #10].20 | o tn, 20.| o-4d mrot go 4d Bo |


31.717) 713} 4 55) 6 30
41 9 §6 9-48) 9 23) 8 50 7 22|7 5 6 54) 6 49
g]f2 4012 Z1lIr 57/11 13 o| 9°17) 8 54) 8 39} 8 30

» O15 3915. 24114 38119 4olr2 4411 ssitt 14/10 44/10 25]/10
3 |
8


5 3t
8


ty Es hes


18 4818 2617 28116 14115 214 > 5/13
(8122 1021 44.20 2918 gOli7 2716 15/15
9125 $925 2023 44/21 46/19 57.28 27)17
1030 1829 25\27 16/24 47\22 3420 44/19
1135 3534 1031 16/28 O25 1723 724
12.47 3049 3935 58:31 33|\28 1027 35/23


as |

16 42 5430 50}33
ae 48 2740 1535
| 18 57 3444 938
| 30 | m20/ 10 O 8 20} 10
LA z oo} mro! 20


ews 5 21) 5 34-5 50) 6 8 6
648 6 S47 5/7 297 44,8 © 8
8 51) 9 Fol g 3¢/10
1O 15/10 1410 2110 3610 58)1t 27/11
11 “58111 S542 412 QoT2 44d -a7|t 3"
813 40/13 3713 4514 4114 3015 O)15
| ots 26/15 4915 2615 47;16 15/16 54/17

1Q17 1117 O17 917 29/17 59:18 4olI9
11/18 5718 4618 S019 TO/lg 44:20 26/21
12'20 44120 29/20 9420 54/21 27/22 TO!23 °
19'22 3022 14/22 1622 36/23 1023 57
1424 18]23 58123 5924 18/24 5425 41
1526 8j25 44/25 4126 cla6 3627 25
16.27 58/27 2827 2627 40/28 18/29 8/30


occ | ane ee ees | ees eR Cem | amen eee em oeee


——~ =


OF UA*s TRILOGY. 509%


ru ne
=| A TABLE of TWILIGHT for the Latitude of ss degrees.
“} 0 | 10; Bo, © | HIO| Bo} oO |mIO]; 20} Bo


3\7 401 7 34) 7 16, 6 48) 6 20 5 59
alto 31|10 18] 9 51] 9 12] 8 35) 8 oO
slt3 2aclig 1012 35/11 4210 5ci10 8} 9g 30) 9 8 8 54 8 44

6116 41116 1915 2814 20
7|20 9/19 4018 gor7
8123 §9|23 20121 4919 56/18 12/16 46|15 40\14 lhe: 20/14 4
gj28 20/27 2625 2423 020 s501t9 9117 46/15 4916 rilis 50
10/33 44132 21/29 27/26 18 23 38/21 31/19 s6ji8 4818 S17 37
11/41 30.38 50134 14.29 57.26 34/24 0]22 10/20 49/19 57|19 26


12 40 24134 ‘5/29 46/20 40/24 27/22 52/21 52/21 15
13 38 56/33 10l29 26/26 48i25 0/23 47/23 5
14 45 3037 3/32 21|29 15/27 9125 4624 57
15 41 34/35 20/31 48/29 21/27 44/26 49
16 By ea? 47 638 54134 28/31 38/29 49.23 44
17 56 25/42 44137 18/33 59/32 52/30 40
18 47 10140 18/36 26/33 55/32 36


ee | eres | cee | eed Se nn | a || | |


fe) -10 20 fe) | mio | 20 fe) |. # 10] 20 30


17130 49)30. 1129 $5120 10/30 46/30 44132 44/23 41/34 24134 40
32 36/38 54/31 42/31 55139 33/33 28134 30/35 29/36 13130 3°


ALM


LLeL Ud: TeR Aut hON


37| 5 20} 5
30, 7 16) 7
2s) 9 7) 8 3
22|10 s8i1o
20}12 50/12
20114 44)14
2116 3916
2418 35
30/20 31
39\22
51/24.


55,7 11 i 18
9.735
49


37 28137 46!


B®


OoFy?'A § PRO EO Guy. git


A TABLE of MUNDANE ASPECTS.


Semidi-\Space of| Semt-| Sex- Quin-\ Quar-\Trine.| Se/qut- Biquin- Oppo-|t


urnalor| one \quar-|tile.| tile. | tile. qua- | tile. \htion.\\
| feminoc-| Houfe. | tile. Ve drate. |
turnal Smq.| * On|) ia A Sai) Bq. 3
Arches v4
3° @-\lg op 30130. 036 OM 5 0160 0/67, 30/72 o90 o
Hg 6 445 30/123 15/38 0137 12,46 30/62 0169 45/74 24193 Oo
3.12 |16 of24 0132 0/38 24148 0/64. 072 0176 48196 o
3.18 16 30/24 45133 0139 36149 3066 0174 15179 12199 0
3 24 117. 0l25 30134 0140 4851 068 0/76 30/81 36)102 o
3 30 117 30/26 15/35 0142 O52 3070 of78 45/84 ol1os o
ti 3 36 |18 = -ol27 0/36 0143 12/54 O72 Of81. 0/86 a4lr08 o
3.42 18 30127°4537 O44 24155 30174 083 15/88 48111 ©
3.48 |1g © 0l28 30/38 045 36\57 9/76 0/85 30/91 12)/114 0
3 54 119 30/29 15139 0146 48/58 3078 0/87. 45193 36/117 ©
4 © 120. 0|/30 O40 048 ol60> 080 o90 0/96 olf20 0
4 6 |20 30/30 45141 of49 12/61 30/82 0192 15/98 24/123 0
4 12 |21 © O}]31 30/42 olf0 24/63 O84 0194 320/!00 481126 Oo
4.18 [21 30/32 15/43 0151 36/64 30/86 ol96 45/103 121129 0
4 24 122 0/33 0144 0/52 48/66. 0/88 o]99 0/105 36132'0
4 30 |22 30/33 45/45 0154 0/67 30190. oif01 15}108 o13¢ 0
4 36 |23 0134 3046 O55 12/69 © C192 -O}103 ZoltIo 241138 0
4 42 123 30/35 15/47 0156 2470 30194 O105 45|l12 48/141 ©
4 48 |24 (0/36 048 0167 3672 0196 o108 O}115 12/144 0
4 54 |\24 30136 45/49 0158 48'73 30/98  0}110 15|117 36)147 0
§ 0 |25 01387 30150 0160 of75 O]foo oj1t2 apie OF 50 O
§ 6 \25 30/38 ws}51 O61 12/76 30/102 of114 45)122 24/153 0
§ 12 |26 0/39 ~ of52 O62 24/78 Ofrog aq 117 Off24 481156 0
5 18 126 30/39 45153 9163. 36/79 30/106 Of119 15/127 12159 0
5 24127 O40 30/54 0164 48/81 1108 of121 gollz29g 36162 0
5 30 }27 30/41 15/55 O}66 082 30/110 off23 451132 o16¢ 0
5 36 |28 042 0/56 0167 12/34 Of112 of126 ojf34 24/168 ©
5 42 |28 30142 45|57 01/68 2485 30/114 of128 15|136 48171 O
5 48 |29 0143 30158 0169 36/87 o]116 190 30/139 12174 0
5 54 |29 8144 15/59 9/70 48/88 zojr18 of132-45|141 36/177 Q
120 O]135 Ol144 (9)130 0


045 060 0172 oj90 Oo}


i
s LO
Go
(e)


612 ANGE? OS FR A TOrOON


A TABLE of MUNDANE ASPECTS.


Semidi=\Space of\Semi- |\Sex- | Quin= \- Quar-|\Trine.\Se/qui- |Biquin-\Oppo-
urnalor| one \quar=| tile.| tile. | tile. gua- | tile. | fation.
/eminoc-| Houfe.\ tile. drate.

turnal | Smq.| * Qi o A | Sfq. | Bq. | 8

| Arches. | ? :


a a a aasens:,ss««,-# Reese eel


(ea | enecemmmesseces | pees | eee | Semen | eee


O72 olfgO0 O120 O195 01144 Of180
O73 12/91 Joln22 0/137 15/146 24l183

0174 24193 01124 1139 30/148 48]186

O75 36/94 30)126 O|141 4o\151 12}18g

0176 45196 (0128 O144 0153 36)192

078 0197 3C|130 0/146 16156 196

0179 “12/99 0132 Of148 30/158 24\198

1 080 24)T00 3oj134 Olt 50 45|160 48)/201

4834 O51 0/68 o8r 36/102 0/136 O}153 0/163 12/204
O

fe)

°

fe)

oO

O

12)


82 48/103 30/138. 01155 16/165 36/207
84  oftOs oll4o O}l 57 30,168 oj210
85 12/106 Joll42 Ol15g 45,170 24/213
86 24)108 0/144 O]162 0172 48/216
87 36/109 30/146 0/164 15/175 I2\219
838 481111 0/148 0166 30/177 36|222
3 99  LI2 30,150 Of168 45180 ol22z5
361338 O67 «O76 Olgt §=1alt14 o152 Of176 off82 241228
42)\38 30157 45177 0192 24/125 30154 C1173 15/184 48]234
43/39 + 0158 3078 0193 36/117 0156 Ol175 30)187 12/034
54139 3°59 15:79 994 48)118 30158 0/177 45/189 36)237
0140 960 980096 120 0160 0180 o]192 o240
640 30160 4581 097 12/121 30/162 O|182 15/194 24243
12/41. 0/61 3082 098 241123 0164 0/184 30|196 481246
18|41 30/62 15/83 Ogg 36/124 30166 o|186 45199 I2le49

O

O


24142 O63 084 oj100 48)126 0168 0189 0201 36\2s2
30142 30163 4585 G102 of127 30170 O191 15204 lass
36143 0164 3086 103 19/129 OF72 O1193 30206 24'258
42143 3016g 1987 O104 24/130 90174 Ol195 45208 4hl26r
4844 0166 088 Orog 36)132 0176 0198 0211 12/264
54144 30/66 4589 F106 381133 30178 Oj200 15213 36)267
- O45 0167 oro8 o't35 0180 0202 30216 ol270


[O.0.0--9- 8-0 6-6-6 0-0 0:0 0 6 0-66 0-0 6-0'O0-90.90.0.9.0:.9:9


WIS G0 66 co 00 06 8 06 C0 00 CONTINENTS SINISE DDD AAA DAN DH
: iw)
aN
[ets)
~J]
0
Gn
Gn
WwW
(@)
a |
aS


OF ASTRO D.O' G ¥: §13
A Tasre of Riegut Ascensions.—North Latitude.


tee 2 3 4 5


en | Coca GOT een EER | A EE (meet | eC) SSeS | GR a ete: | SORE peo


eto da me) dem. bh d.- tn,


— eS


© © /359 37 |359 13 358 49 |358 25 |358 1 1357 37
© 32} 9 8 1359 44 |359 20 1358 56 |358 32
Segoe ts 1359652 1359 27
£734) F.10- | | O46 |) Q 22
349/'°3 17 | 2 A729 1 SF. Tees
4°12.) 3 324) 3 0} 2 36
7 | 4 abe es ese. 11 Nae oe
6 25..% 514] 4 50
6257 |, 63x) 6 9) Hag.) seat
P2201) 7 4 | G40 ||) GF 16
BE 2890 59 | wo ge Hoyt I
OF 18h) ) Be eel jo 8) ga
WO" PA Or Sat CO 27
10 46 | 10-22'| 9g 58
11. 18 | 10 54
12 14 | 15 50


1444 | 14 20 9 Bal | VR ro | Pa. 4 | p2: 22
15 40 | 15 16 TG 90 |\r4 6} 23> 42) 13! 18
Po ZOO | Tigh BD | Wee HH | Kg 1g
1D 27 | hg SO) Tig Fe ae 1


16 sq) 16 94 Pre 7
17> Gil). UA 2B | PR 4 |]
m8! 48] 18 a5 |. 18 1
20 8 | 19 45 | 19 22 | 18 58
21, “G | 20 Ae | 20 1g | 1g 55
BA, FOP | 621 WO) 2 52
22 36 | 22 19] 21 50
23 Sa-| 23 tae] 2a: 48
(25 16 | 24 44| 24 31} 24 g | 23 46
(26:13) 25 51 | 25 29 | 25 7 | 24 44
33 | 27 12 | 26 49 | 2627 | 26 5| 25 42.


514


O 1 2

ne Hh Gece itd. om. i} d.am,.
QO Ode G12 Bsl-) O47
Pri Siskel) Derssi tL 42
Saleh Posse: 21 EB 1.3037
9 |) 2/45), 3:8 || 3°32
4) 3491 4 3] 4027
51° 4.35 | 4 58 | 522
Oi) 563011 | Sa5ec) p28
7 | 6:25 || .6.49.}) 7:18
S| 72at) 744) 8 8
9:1'°8: 16.1) 8240.) 1-9 4
WO} OLA | 9988s) ) 9259
IM) }1@.-O 1110238 119554
12 [pt @ |) Idh2ig.| lags 49
19 |\-1ao 67 | }12-B0¢] 12.44
14} 12 53] 13 16 | 13.39
15 | 13 48 | 14 12] 14 35
16| 14 44) 15° 7 | 15 30
19¢|| Teh! Ae 110 % gy | LIOe 26
1Sr [pa Zr |) 16 e801 1p 20
19 | 17 31 | 17 54 | 18 17
go. 1) 18) 29rt) 18) gor) 10, 13
24: 1) LOs 2364) 19 40; |/20/ 9
22; 1) 20: FO; |) ZO. 4B | Qtr. 6
Boe Ae 2d Wot | 2. ZO. | 220° a
Bar| Agt E222). 368 | 2254
250 12Bt Dil ASS Ban). 23.43
26. | 24 6 | 24°28 | 24 50
271) 256 Br A5p 25x || 25247
28-125 59: | 260220] 26. 43
29 | 26 57} 27 19:| 27 40
28.16 | 28. 37


ha 3


| d. m.


byl 4

2° °@

3
3354


I


eee peer en Pees | rey meena ees
+ ‘


4.51 |


540
6 42


FESS


A NY Tyhy hb 0) Sv Ty Re A RON


A Tasre of Ricur Ascensions.—South Latitude.


12,13
1g). . 2
14. 8
14.58


ee Cree | ees


15,53
16 48
17 44
18 40


——


19 36
20 22
21. 28
22 24


23. 20
24 16
25 12
26. 9


28. 1


41 Tso Gem 0
é. m. | d..m. | d..m.
pS Sain SSS 23
B90.) | 2 ahd 3 18
3:25.11 3:49 144 13
4:20} 444] 5 8
RST $939-41 9° 3
6:19 || 6-34 | 6 68
FO | PeBee | Fe 53
Oo BA Beh | FO 48
8 56) 9 20} 9 43
9358-1 1Q41R 1 10 35
16,40 | 17,108 M439)
11 41 | 12 5 | 12 28
12 < 36 9 1'1347Or] IB 23
13 31 | 13.55 | 14 18
1An2Os) 1145 509) 4c § +13
16, Q1¢| 16.45 ¢)'16~.8
16 16 | 16 40 17 3
17 11. 17 35.1 17 58
18 7/18 go | 18 53
19 21] 19 25 | I9 48.
19 58 | 20 21 | 20 43
20 54 | 21 17 | 21 39
QA. SO, 22. 124! 22.94
22) 46-| 23>. 8.| 23.30
29: A421 QAs ij 24026
24: 38.) 25 Oy| 25r20
25 34 | 25 56 | 26 17
26. 30u) 26° gaa}/ 2757 3
27, 5 | 27.26 | 27 a8 | 28 9g
29° 22: 28! Aidt) 290° - 5


28° 58


29. 19


29 40 |
1 oe
as rhe
+


&


tT.
#*,
-


OF -a’S TR“O'L'O GY.


tA TABLE of Ricgut Ascenstons.—North Latitude, _


27 54
28 51
29 49
go 46


31 44 | 31 23 |
ye" 4h.) 3B 2a
33 4° | 33 20
34 38 | 34 18


re es | ee


35 37 | 85 17
36 36 | 36 16
37 34 | 37 15
38 33 | 38 14
39 14
49 13
41 13
42 13
43 13)
44. 13
45 31] 45 34
46 32 | 46 14
47 32 | 47 15
48 33 | 48 16
49 34| 49 17
59 35 | 50 18


— —


43 31
44 31


20
22


§I 36 | 51
g2 38 | 52
53 40 | 53 24
54.42 | 54 27.
5suga | 55 29
56 46 | 56 32
57. 43°|°57 35


26 49
27 57
Benge) 201.2%
29 43 29 21
3° 39 | 39 19
32° .O.1 ISL 40 1 Qt 18 30K E7
32 59 | 32 38 | 32 17 | 38 56
Get SSi3 8 37 ol Bante O265.
3254
34554


286 ali
27 25


Pi) a
a3
231
28 59


27 tt
28 8
29 6
3° 4


Ke bate:


29 58


guar erng ESSE) At ces


34:57 1 34 36 | 34-15
35 56 | 35 361.3515
36 55 | 36 35 | 36 15 | 35 54
975451375351) BReISY 30054
38 54 | 38 35°) 38 15 | 37 55 | 37 34
39 54 | 39 35 1-39 15 | 38 56 | 38 35
40 54 | 40 35 | 40 16 | 39 57 | 39 36
AI 54 |.41 36 | 41 17 |-40 53 | 40 38


—— (paeee


42 54 | 42 36 | 42 18 | 41 59] 41 39
43°55 )) 43 37°} 43°19] 43° O°) 42°49
44 56 | 44 38) 44 20] 44 1 | 43 42
4557 | 45 39) 45 21) 45 3 | 44 44


ee melee Alii ——s


46 58 | 46 40 | 46 23
47 59 | 47 42 | 47 25 47 5) 40 49
49 0) 48 44] 48 271 48 9 | 47 52
50 2] 49 46 | 49 29 | 49 12] 48 55


46 71} 45 46


sts 24 FO. 494 bo 92
52° OA Eh Ce PPOs | 57
53 9 | 52 54} 52 38 | 52
54 ao 53 57} 53 421 53
$545
56. 18


‘$721


50


54 14°
55 18
56 23


oO} 54.45 | 54 30
31.55 49 | 55 34
56 53.1 56 38


516 A’® LLf.0-5) R.A P10.N


A TABLE of Rigur AscEeNnsions.—South Latitude.


O | 27 54 | 28 16 | 28 37-| 28 58 | 29 19 | 29 40 |.30

1 28 51 | 29 13) 29 34 | 29 55 | 30 16 | 30.37 | 30 57
Bi} 29 494 BO 109) 539 B41.) 139.52 SIE hS 3) < 343s 154
Bt )30, 40430 CAL, 28 ul QL AQ ch 32.8 Os 92 231 Age Pot
4


eee eras


a=


—


eet


30.44 | 32).8 | 32.255) °32 46.4933. -7°1'38.274 33°47
5 1432 A2 of 33> 34 332301 38: 48:1 844044) 345240153444.
04133 40) 84 Tob BA Sel 1394842 4 35.0 Tal 135 21 Bg at
7 | 34 38 | 34 59135 19. | 35 39 | 35 58 | 36 18 | 36 38


Saku iah Wi aaaaamaaine KSAT Taaan MiG aoa eee coe | eee ee OE —_————


8135 37 | 35.57 36.17 | 36 37 | 36 56] 37 15 | 87 35

2 86.36} 96 9565) 87-15.) 37135-13744 BRIG 39, 32

37 34 | 87 54 | 38 13 | 38 33 | 33 52 | 39 11 | 39 29
11 38 33 | 38 53 | 39 121 39.3! | 39:59 | 40 9 | 40.27
12 + 39 33 | 39 52 | 40 11 | 40 30} 40 48 | qr 7 | 41 25
13 |)40..92 | 4O 1 | 41-104 428.441 46) 42 Pe) 42 23
14.141. 31,1 44 50] 42. 9) 42.274 42 454 43. 3043 21
15 | 42 31 | 42 50 | 43 8 | 43 26 | 43 44 | 44 2 |} 44 19


ee | ee eee |


ao | ta ee


7 pee | ees


16 | 43 31 | 43 49 | 44 7 | 44 25 | 4443) 45 01} 45 17 |
17 | 44 31144 49 | 45 61} 45 241 45 421] 45 59 | 40 15
13 | 45 31 | 45 49 | 46 6 | 46 23 | 46 41 | 46 58 | 47 14
19 | 46 32 | 46 49 | 47 61] 47 23 | 47 49 | 47 57 | 48 13


eon | eS BESS | geese spe |S ee


ee ees Fe | eee eee |


cee een | eee Se re et ee eee


20 | 47 32 | 47 49 | 48 6 | 48 23 | 48 39 | 48 56 | 49 12
a1} 48 33) 43 50/49 6 | 49 23 | 49 39 | 49 55 | 50 11
221 49 341 49 50 | 59 6 | 50 23} 50 38 | 50 54 | 51 1O
23] 5035 | 5951] st 6 | 5t 23] 51 38] 51 53] 52 9


A eso |


PAGE BO $1. 52.1 62074 CA ag ted BB Loo ea bee oe
25.1 $2 89. 4°$2 531.53 8 1.63, 24.153..39, 1 53 538 1.6468
26 |53 40] 53 55 |.54 9154 24} 54 38 | 54 531.55 7
27. 1542.42 1994.56. 1:95 041555 25 155 39.155 53 1 5Gag


56 26 | 56 40 | 56 54] 57.7
29 | 56 46157 0} 57 13 | 57 27] 57 41 | 57 54] 58 7
30 | 57 48 | 58 2 | 58.15 | 58 29 | 58 42 1.58 55.1 59 7


Cem eS | es ee


28 | 56 44.1 55 $8 | 56 12


OTT AGTROLVOS ¥ 517
A TABLE of RIGHT Ascensions.—North Latitude,
| ° | I 2 3 4 se 6
ee
a | ds ind. jai, ad. coy. Wd. ma ied. om: (od; mg. pds om.


— | neeenta cme | BR,


at


57 48 | 57 35 | 57 21) 57. 7 | 56 53) 56.38 | 56 23
58 51 | 58 38 | 58 24 | 58 30 | 57 57 | 57 42 | 57 28
59 53} 59 41) 59 27] 59 14] 59 1/| 58 47; 58 33
3 | 60 564 60 44 | 60 31 | 60 18 | 60° 5 | 59 52! 59 38


Aap OL::50 61) 47.) 64 95.) 6122, 161, 10 1°60 197 |, Go 44
Ge Og 2%) O2s54 4 62-39. 1°62 24 1°62 (15 [62 42, 61 50
64°64 76.4 03) 55.0' 69,42) 63532 169) 20 1:69°° 84. 62) 56
7| 65 9 | 64 59 | 64 47 | 64 37 | 64 25 | 64 13 | 64 2


ee Se cee ee eee ce SE pee


8 | 66 13 | 66 3] 65 52] 65 42 | 65 30| 65 19 | 65 8
916717 | 67 7} 66 57 | 66 47 | 66 36 | 66 25 | 66 14
TO} 68:21} 68.41 | -68"\-2 | 67 (52,1 67 42 1°67) 91. }'67 ‘21
11.| 69 25 | 69 16 | 69 7 | 68 57 | 68 48 | 68 38 | 68 28


———y ena ~-


12 | 70 29 | 79 21} 70 12 | 79 3} 69 54) 69 45 | 69 35
13} 71 34) 71 26/71 17] 71 9 | 71 0] 70 51] 70 42
14 | 72 38 | 72 31] 72 22 | 72 15 | 72 6 | 71 58} 71 49
15 | 73 43 | 73 36} 73, 28 | 73 21 | 73 13} 73 5 | 72 37


es | SE See | = -


16 | 74:47 | 74.41 | 74 33 | 742717419174 12|74 4
17) 75 52| 75 46 | 75 39 | 75 33 | 75 20) 75 19 | 75 32
18) 76 57 | 76 51 | 76 45 | 76 39 | 79 33 | 76 27 | 76 20
194 78:52 $77. 156 177. 6t N97: 454-77 49 1 77 84.097 28


rs pe ee es | ey ee


20179 7179 2| 78 57 | 78 52 | 78 47 | 78 41 |-78 36
at} 80 12 | 80 8| to 3 | 79 59 | 79 54] 79 49 | 79 44
Oe Shige 1 04.19 8h Oo Fy BE Ce PST 1a peso x6 | 8o°s2
23 | 82 22 | 82 18 | 82.15 1°82 31 | 82 8} 82 -4| 82 "0


ene | ee


83 18 83 15 | 83. 11 | 83 9
25 | 84 33 | 84 30 | 84 27 | 84 25 | 84 22 | 84 20 | 84 17
26 | 8s 38 | 85 36] 85 33°) 85. 32 |-85 29 | 85 28.) 85 25
27 | 86 44 | 86 42 | 86 40 | 86 39 | 86 37 | 86 36 | 86 34


| ee eee


_ 24 | 83 38 | 83 24 | 83 21


ee ee


28 | 87 49.| 87 49 | 87 46 | 87 46 | 87 44 | 87 44 | 87 42
29 | 83 55 | 88 55 | 88 53 | 88 53 | 88 52 | 88 52 | 88 51


39 + 90.50 | 90 -O} 90. ~0 }'90. (96.|°90 0} 90 O| 90 90


a


418 AN IDLUS TRATION.


o| 57 48] 58 2] 58 15 | 58 29} 58 42 | 58 55
1| 58 51159 4] 59 17] 59 39|-59 43 | 59 55
2159 53 | 60 6 | 60 19 | 60 31| 60 44 | 60 56
3 | 60 56} 61 8] 61 21 | 61 33) 61 460 61%


en as) eee eS Pe


———w


4.) 61550 | 62°11°T 62 23) F G2iigs') 6248? OaHe9
5, |, 63, 3.) 63 14} 63:25 16337 | 635 | 63. 59
6| 64 6] 64 17 | 64 28 | 64 39) 64 52 | 65 1
7 | 65 9.| 65 20 | 65 31 | 65 41 | 65 54 | 66 2


meee pes | meres Se | S Ce EE SR |


8 | 66 13 | 66 23 | 66 34 | 66 44 | 66.56} 67 4
9 | 67 17 | 67 27 | 67 37 | 67 46 | 67 58 | 68 6
10 | 68 21 | 68 30 | 68 go} 68 49 | 68 59 | 69 7


ed


12 | 70 29 | 70 38 | 70 469-70 55) 7I 3] 71 it
13/7! 34 [ 71 42] 71 49 | 71 58 | 72 5-| 72 13
14.) 72,38.) 72°A6} 72,53 6 73°01 73 8) 7s rs
cESMY Rel ial Enel FEN eS atoaleat HE leh jar ode
ht


16 | 74 47 | 74 54175 1) 75 7 | 75 141 75 20
17-175 52175 58 | 76 5} 76 11 | 7617 |76 23
LrBL POST Ps 3) ah Pane) 77 ao 77 20
19 | 78 2} 78 7 | 78 13 | 78 18 | 78 23 | 78 28


EY ee | ED eee |


20.4 JOT (9 22-119 47 | yet | 79, 26) 70534
21.| 80 12 | 80 17 | 80 21 | 80 25 | 80.29 | 80 34
22.) 81:17 | 81 21 | 81-25) 8r' 28 | Br 32 | Br 36
23 82 22 | 82 25 | 82 29 | 82 32 | 82 35 nies 39


ees oes


A TABLE of Rigutr ASscENSIONS,—-South Latitude.


7 .
cae!
6r 8
62 9


63° 9
64 10
65 11
66 12


67 13
68 15
69 -16


11 | 69 25 | 69 34 | 69 43 | 69.52 | 70 1) 70 9 | 70 17


71 19
72 2, E
79 23
74 25
75 27
76 29
77 31
re 33


79 35
80 38
8r 40
82 42


24 | 83 28 | 83 30 | 83 33 | 83 36 | 83 39 | 83 42 | 83 45


25 | 84 33 | 84 35 | 84 37 | 84 40 | 84 42 | 84 45
26 | 85 33 | 85 40 | 85 41 | 85 44 | 85 45 | 85 48


84 47
85 49


27 | 86 44 | 86 45 |.86 46 | 86 48 | 86 49 | 86 51 | 86 52


OE a OT


ene ee es Seen |S mes pees | QS SS | SED SF Serene


28.
29 | 88 55 | 88 55°) 88 55 | 88 56) 88: 56 | 88 57
30 !90 0 90 0!90 0190 0] 90 0190 090


——


87 49 | 87 50 | 87 50 | 87 52} 87 52 | 87 54 | 87 54


83° 57


go oO


OF A SHPiREO UL OG Y. 59


ATasre of Ricgut AScEeNsions.—North Latitude.


04.90 0490 20} 90 90} 90-9} 99 59 }.90 .0,} 90 0
LAT Oo 1COl Azote a Or 7} or. 811. 8
2192 9192 12] 92 14] 92 14|.92 15 | 92 16 | 92 18
31 93 16 | 93 18 | 93 20 | 93 20] 93 23 | 93 24 | 93 26


—2


4 | 94 22 | 94 241 94 27 | 94 28 | 94 30 | 94 32 | 94 35
5195 27195 391-95 33 | 95 35195 38 | 95 40] 95 43
6 | 96 32 | 96 26 | 96.39 | 96 42 | 96 45 | 96 48 | 96 50
7197 38 | 97 42197 45 | 97 49 | 97 52197 56] 938 o


mee eee | HED


8 | 98 43 | 98 47] 98 501 98 55199 0199 4] 99 8
9 | 99 48 | 99 52199 57 {100 9 100 7 |100 12 |100 16
IO |100 53 j100 58 j101. 3 {101 8 j101 14 {101 19 |IOI 24
11 |101 8 {102 4 |t02 g |102 15 {102 20 |102 26 |102 52


Se


re


12 |103 3 |103 9g |103 15 |103 20 |103 37 [103 33 |103 40
13 |t04 8 |104 14 j104 20 ]10427 |104 34 |104 40 |104 48
14 |105 13 |105 19 |105 27 |L05 33 |105 40 ]105 48 |105 56
I |106 hihi 24 |106 33 |106 39 |106 47 |106 55 |107 3


ress Coe


a a mn)


—=


16 |107 22 107 29 {107 38 |107 43 |107+53 4108 2 [108 g
17 |108 26 |108 34 {108 43 |108 53 |108 59 |t09 g [109 18
18 |109 go |106 39 }109 48 {109 57 |k10 5 |110 Ig {110 25
19 |110 35 |T10 44 |110 53 111 3 |L1E 12 |L1I 22

20 |I1I 3g-j111 49 |f11 58 j112 8.112 £8 [112.29
21) /612-4.3 4/1120 53°11 3) 95/119 ° 4781013 6244113 39
22 |113 47-|113 57 [114 8 114 18 ]114 30 -]114 40
23 )114 51 115 Oo 115 13 295023 195 35 J215 47


ee a ee | ee ee |


ee ee ee yas cee ee


~m mn | eee


24 |t1g 54 {116 5 |116 17 |116 28 |116- 40
25.116 57 117 Q |117 21 [117 33 1117 46
26 jr18 0 118 13 J118 25 [148 38 far8 5x
27. |\t1g 4 119 16 119 29 |119 42 [119 <5


—


28 [120 7 |120 19 |120 33 |120 46 |120 59 |121 13
2g |121 9g |120 22 |r2t 36 |121 50 |122 3 j122 18
30 122 12 [122 25 |122 39 j122 53 [123 7 (123 22


No. 26. 6L 3


520 ALN) RVD IUOS ST YR: ALT 1 OLN


A TABLE of RicuT ASscENSIONS.—South Latitude.


° 1 2 ees es ie


oes! pemen: memes ee es eee | eee ee | eet ee | eee ee


z.|-d, m.|d. m|d..m. | d. m. |od. ms | d. m. |-d. m.


fare) sce


—


—S


O90! To. 1°90 "O F190 "oO P90 MO1N90 49 4.90.0 | 90 %0
BOE 5 Oe SO 5 POTN AO a OT oS Ot es
2 O2 VO O2 FO t'92-'.O).y 02 a8 hO2 a5. i102 6 tO2 mG
3 | 93 16] 93 15 | 93 14) 93 12 | 93 9193 9) 93 8


ne ee res | ee


wees pres Jomer


4 | 94 22 | 94 20 | 94 19 | 94 16 | 94 15 | 94 12 | 94 9
SPOS 27 |'G5 25 105 23 4195 ‘204195 18 11.95 45 195 13
6 | 96 32 | 96 30 | 96 27 | 96 24 | 96 20 | 96 18 | 96 15
7.\%97 38 }'97.35 1907 GO 1697: 28 1097 125 }.97 ‘20 1.97 18


————— | Ee Ge | ee S| eT


ees | women


8 | 98 43 | 98 39 | 98 35 | 98 32 | 98 28 | 98 24 | 98 20
9199 48 | 99 43 | 99 39 | 99 35 | 99 3° | 99 26 | 99 22
10 1100 £3 |100 38 |100 43 \100 89 |100 34 |100 29 |100 25
11 |101 58 |10% §3 |101 47 {LOI 42 {101 37 |101 32 |101 27


et es ee ee eee


a


ercmmens | eae


12 1103 . 3 \10o257.]102 ‘co ‘Ifo2z 45/102 40 1102 34 1102 29
13 104 8 jr0og 2 |103 55 |103 49 |103 43 |103 37 {103 30
14. |105 13 |105 6 |104 59 |104 52 |104 46 1104 40 |104 33
15 |106 17 |106 10 |106 3 |105 56 |105 49 |105 42 |105 35


> se


———


16 ]107 22 |107 14 |107 7 |106 59 |106 52 |106.45 |106 37
17 1108.26 |108 18 |108 -g |108 -2 |107°55 |107 47 |107 39
13 |10g 31 |109 22 [109 14 {109 5 |108 57 |108 49 |108 40
19 LIO3e 1410586 1110517 4110; :84j110 0.1109. §1.|109 43
207111 O20 S111. GOTT E 20.4101 99 HDs <2 (110.53 JI1O, 44
21 W112 CARP 12 093 LI 209d 2012s AIT cA EE 45
22S haya 871199261498) 16A013 > 6 412. 60-1142 644
SPAETH IA 407/114! 207419) 044 5 S+1113)58 arg. 48


eee ee | ee


<=


os


——


ee eee


244115 54 |115 43 [115 32 |115 ponlanis IO |114 59 |114 49
26"1196°67 1196 46° 116; 95°1016) 29: 1116 42-116. 01a1 60g
206 |118!) OF127 49) JL17°37 {117 259/117 14/107 2, \4gOR GO
27 1100 ASG PsOUM 1S: 2901 Su 270108 Pro B. Saleen


—<-


en Gee eee | ee ee


28 |120 7 1119 54 |119 40 |119 29
29 121 g |120.56 |120 43 |120 30
RON roe 42) W2a¢e8r Pert Ar: |124990


119 16 |119 4 |118 52
120 47 |120, §.|119 53
121) 19512 tee 51120. 53


OF A, SamyRe 0; L; 0. G Y. Red
A TaBLe of RiguT Ascensions,—North Latitude.
| fe) I 2 3 4 5 6


=| ee


tee | EE Ce OE ne


mn Jud. dm. jack ie wed. ae ld. mm. h.de mm) deme d.nom,


> | eg Ss | Oh, So oe


-


——t


CL2D 120 22725 122.39 1122.53 1123 7 |123°22 |129° 37
I 1123.14 )123 28-1123 42.|128 §7 |124 9 |124 26 (124 42
2 1124 pees 30 |124 45 [125° O [125 15 |125 Bo |125°46
3 125.18 |125 33 |125.48 126 | 3 126 18 |126 34 1126 50


eee


4 |126 20 |126 36 |126 50 127 Git 27 22 ove iar ed
5 [127 22 |127 38 127 54 |128 9g |128 25 |128 42 [128 58
6 |128 24 |128 4o {128 56 |129 12 |129 28 1129 45 [130 2
7 1129 25 |129 42 |129 58 |130 14 {1380 30 |130 48 |131 5


KS a Ea al i ee ee


811900260180-43611 31 - 0137 16/191 33
9 {191 27 |L31-44.]132 0 4132 18 132 Oc s 2M oo a
TO j132 28 |132 45 |1383 2 |133 20 133 37 |133 55 |134 14
11 133 28 |133 46 1134 3 |134 21 |134 39 [134 57 [135 16


ee | nn ee Gr


EUeOuty Tots


12 |134 29 |134 47 |135. 4 |135 22 |135 40 |135 59 |136 18
Rerirg So2o. Beh ay g64 2) 1136 23°11 36 40 |197 Ont 37"30
14 {136 29 |136 47 |137. 6 |137 24 1137 42 |138 1 [138 21
15 }137 29 |137 47 |138 6 [138 24 |138 43 [139 2 [139 22


(Qe eernee Soe | Sean


|


16 [138 29 |138 47 [139 6 |139 25 139 44 [140 3 [140 24
17 {139 28 |139 47 |140 6 |140 25 |140 45 /141 4 141 25
18 |140 28 |140 46 j141 6 |141 25 [141 45 |142 § |142 26 |
19 141.27 141 46 |142 6 1142 25 |142 45 1143 6 |143 27


[ee
|


ee eee,


et


20 ]142 26 |142 45 |143 5 |143 25. |143 45 |144 6 144 27
21 |143 25 |143 44 |144 4 [144 24 144 45 |145 6 |145 27
22 144 23 1144 43 |145 3 1145 24 |145 45 [146 6 1146 27
23 |145 22 |145 42 {146 2 [146 23 1146 44 {147 5 |147 27


eg Ee


24 |146 20 |146 40 {147 © |147 22 |147 43 |148 4 [148 26
25 [147 18 |i47 39 |148 0 [148 20 |148 42 1149 3 /149 25
26 {148 16 |148 37 |148 58 |149 19 |149 41 |150 2 |150 24. |
27 {149 14 |149 35 |149 56 |150 18¥|1s50 39 |I51 .1 j151 23


oe ee -


28 |150°12 |1§0 93°|150.54 |Igi 15 \151 37 |151 SQ i152 20
AO TS LEr ONG DOnmg Tt. 5 eg 213 Se 35) ES aog7 153) 42
30 1g 6 |162 27 [152.49 |153 9 115333 |153 55 1154 18 i

EI DEES LEE 3 OLE,


AN’ TsL°LuU' S TER AUT I ON


A Taste of Ricut AscENSIoNS.—South Latitude.


G22


i


121 F312 bg Bons
122 FO f122 |) (6 j120 153
142.3 20 YAR3\ 16 47 Bla on 2
hes eee


LE


122 12 |121 58 |i21 45 {121 32
123 14 |123 0 {122 47 |122 33
124 JO {124.2 J123 48 412p 134
125 19 |125 3 |124 49 [124 30 |124 20 [124 7


eee oo ee ae


fea


ae SR


=


12in gio Oa ia 29
126 29719 26567 iE SIE co
127 22 |127 7 1126 52
$2022 188 5 27 14.27 0


Adie 32091260. cf 1t2ie opis Eh a5 124: 53
§ 20.22 119% 7 Jb2D ea. ta6 ao
6 128 co4 j128 . 8 11287 52 i127 “47
M129. 25.1120) O-t2R t4 ee eae


corer ae emag ee [oe eee


—


8 1130 26 {130 9g |129 54 |t29 37 |129 22 [129 6 }128 50
Del St a7 kOe IOI GO) $48 327 3 ao or a ea
10-1132 98° |192 101191 54°11 31-3749 31~20°131) 245930748
11.4799 08.1139 To 1132" $418 22027 hm 3a02o [1 e2) sa oer 147
12 |134 29 |134 11 (133 54 [133 37 133 19 [133 2 [£32 46
13/135 29 |135 11 [134 54 [134 36 [134 18 |134 © [133 45
14 |136 29 |186 11 |135 53 |135 35 |135 17 [135 © |134 43
15 |137 29 |137 10 |136 52 1136 34 [136 16 [135 58 |135 40


eee ey meen | Sa eee eee || SO Gente | OR es ee


es tee | eee ener en |


16 |138 29 |138 10 |137 51 1137 33 |137 15 |136 57 1136 39
17 |139 28 |139 9 [188 50 /138 32 [138 14 137 $5 [137 37
18 |140 27 |140 8 |139 49 |139 30 [139 13 [138 53 [138 35
Ig |141 27 [141 7 |[40 48 |140 29 |140 9g |189 50° |139 33
20 |142 26 l142
21 j143 24 143


oe


8 |140 49 [40 30


6 |141 27 (141 27 |141
4 [142 25 |142 25 |142 6 1141 47 |I41 28
143 23 [143 4 [142 45 [142 25


22 |144 23
23 |145 22


24 {146 20
25 |147 18
26 1148 16
27 |149 14


28 |150 12
29 |15r 9
HRQOUTG2 6


149 50 [149 29 |149 8 |148 47 |148 26 [148 6
150 47 |[50 26 |150 § |149 44 |149 23/149 3
Ig I 23 1g


44 3 [143 23
i345


er rs Se | Ce


Tit 44°34


145 59 145 39
146 57 |t46 37
147 55 |f47 35
148 53 [148 32


15i 44


Poameee | eee | een BT


144 20 |144 2 |143 42 [143 22


145 19 |144 59 [144 39 |144 I9
146 17 145 56 |145 36 145 16
147 14 |146 53 |146 33 |146 19
148 9g |147 50 |147 39 |f47 9


———


2 |150 40 l150 20 [149 59


1e)


2 1154


ESO (5°
157 48
158 44


ee


O |{52 6 [152 27
11153 4 |153 26
Oo |154 22
38 |'54 58 [155 19


ee ee te


Ig5 54 |156 16


18 1163 58
19 |169 54
20 |170 49
21 {171 44
,22 |172 39
23 1173 35


24. |174 30
25 |175 25


26 |i75 20


28 |178 10
29 1179 «§


No. 26.


ee ee er


|


27 |177 15 |!77 38


OjJFT A SUR RO Db OGY.


ATaBLe of Ricgut AScensions.—North Latitude.


2


I


od 3s
153 10
Be? es


1164 10
BOSE 7
40079
166 59 |


|


167 55
168 50
169 46
170 42
171 37 |
172 32
173 27
174. 22


PSG /


174 53
175 48
170 43 177. 7
178


178. 33


179 28 |179 52 |180 16
30 j180 0 /1t0. 23 |180 47 [181 10


176 12 |1706 36


2 1178 26


Any:
5S 33 4153 +55
154 39 154 $3
155 29 155 50


157 O
157 58 ~
is8 55
159 52 |


156 26 156 49


157 24 |157 47
158 20 |158 44


15g 18 |159 40


160 15 |160 38


1161 12 |161 35


KOZ. 0 162 32


1163. 6 {103 20


164 34
tHe "30
166 26
|167 22


164 2 \164 25

164 58 |165 20
165 54 |166 18
166 50 |167 14
167 46 |168 10


——|_— ee


168 18
169 14
heh ae
a! oS
V2 4.0
172 56
Ash oS)
i74 46


ee


175 40


179. 30.|


178 57 |179 20 179.45


168 42 |169 6
169 38 |170 2
NT O8S3 ETO 257
171 29 [171 $3
172 49
173 44
174 39
(75 34


Aa Ss
173 20
174 15
175 10
hei Pas
17 SO
177 56
478° 50


176 29
177 24
178 19
179 14


—


180 9
toi.
181.59


180 40
181 35


523;


ds “nay


154. 18
is5 16
156 14
Logs 12
158 10
Ws Meee
160 5
161 2


ee


161 59
162 56
£603 $3
164 49
105 45
166 42
167 38
168 34


169 30
170 26
£71.20


172 17


173.03. |
174 8 |
LIK bs 3
175 58
170. 53
177.49
178 43


A


N


PG GA Site RA PION


A TABLE of Ricutr AscEensions.—South Latitude.


10
Lt


12
13
14
15


ar ait


16 |167 7 |166 44
17 1168 3 4167 40°
18 |168 58 |168 35
19 |169 54 |169 30


en


e mM.


eZ a
O57; 4
Pea PO


ESN Deed
Looe
101/62
162 29


163 25
164. 20
a 16
166 12


—


ed


—


“1


a Fe Sep


151 44
ig2 40
153 38


159 18
160 14
161 10


162 6


16902
163 58
164 53
165 48


170 49 |170 26°
171 44 |171 20
17229 N72: 10-1171 52
SAN ARR OP gel of


neon eo


2


d.
Lev. 29
ia. 20
SRE


1.


154 58 1154 35 [154 13
155 54 |155 32 |155 10
156 §0 |156 29 |156 5
157 48 |157 25 |157 3
158 44 |158 22 |157 $9


oe | eee


1158 55
159 50
160 47
161 43


162 39
163 35
164 30
165 25
166 20
167 07
168 12
109 7


170 2
pede |


174 30 174 6 |173 42
175 25 |175 2 |174 38
176 20.|175 57 [175 33
177 15 |176 52 |176 28


ree Cae | seen meemeccernen oeenen | acme


28 \178 10 |177 47 1177 33 [176 59
29 1179 § |178 42 [178 18 |177 54
#30 1809 |179 87 1179 13 1178 49 1178 25 173 0 1177 37


3 4


d.


191 2 |150 40 |150 20 |149 59
1541 59 1151 38 151 16 |a50 ‘55
L562 So ilee Ba fice oegEs ttc 1
153 40 159 Botigs “Sige uy
154 48 |154 26 |154 4 1153 48

PSG a4 1255 12S. G55 ee a 39

156 40 j156 18 j1g5 56 \155 34

Ve7 BO 4167 14.4156 362 HERO BO
158
139
160
161


32 "i583 40.4167 148 i577 06
28 159 6 \158 43 |158 20
24 160 2 \159 39 |159 17
20 |160 58 |160 35 |160 12


——


162 16 \161 53 {161 30 {161 7
163 12 |162 49 |162 25 |162 2
164° 7 1103 444109 20 1162-67
166 21964 G0" TO4*1 5 163-59


165 57 \105 34
166 52 |166 29
167 47 |167 24
168 43 |168 19
169 38 |169 14 |168 50 |168 27
170 33 |170 9 |169 45 [169 22
171 28 [171 4 |170 40 |170 17
172023 (17d SO tae CAML elo


NS ree |


pa pi


165 10 |164 47
166° 5 |165. 42
167 0 {166 37
167 E55 167 32


B73 18 172541172430 1192914
174 14 |173°50 |173 26 |173 2
175), Dal ie AS iba ZO Tage 4
176 4 \175 40 |175 16 |174 52

£76 351170: 40 075 47
177 30 {177 6 {176 42


a


|


‘OF AS’ IR OE OG Y¥;-:
A Tasre of Rricur Ascensitons.—North Latitude..
gh 4 5
ome Bea’ cere


© |180 0 {180 23 [180 47-4181 10 {181 35
r |180 55 |r81 18 j181 42 |182 6 [182 30
2 1181 50 j182 13 |182 37 1183. 0 [183 25.
183 8 {183 32 [183 56 184 20

4 |183 40 |184 3 |184 27 184 so (185 15

5 1184 35 |184 58 |185 22 185 46 [186 10

6 {185 30: |185 54 186 18 186 42 |187 6

7 |186 25 |186 49 |187 13 187 37 |188 0
188 8 188 32 1188 56
189. 3 189 27 |189 50
189 58 |190 22 |190 46
6 |190 29 |190 53 ji9I 17 {191 AS
12 J19E Qiigr ee wor As 1192 13 (192 6)
13 |191 57 |192 20 |192 43 |193 8 |193 30
T4 |192 53 |193 16 |193 39 194 3 \194 26
15 |193 48 |194 12 |194 35 |194 58 ee


eee See eee


—


ewe eS ee


_°8 1187 20 [187 44

g {188 16 |188 39
10 {189 10 |189 34
11 |190


a eee fe


16 1194 44 [195 7 [195 80 |195 53 196 16
17 |195 40 |196 2 |196 25 |196 48 |197 10
18 |196 35 [196 58 |197 20 |197 44.|198 7
19 [197 30 '197 54 vee 17 |198 40 Eine e
27 1198 50 |199
23 |199 46 |200
20 |200 42 |201
16 |201 38 |202


20 |198
21 1199
22 |200
23 \201
24 |202 12 |202 35
25° (209 ‘9 1203: 30
26 |204 6 1204 29
27,|205 2 |205 25


13 |199 36 I199 58
g |200 32 |200 54
§ {201 28 j201 50
I [202 24 [202 46
202 §7 |203 20 |203 42
203 §3 |204 16 |204 38


204 50'|205 12 |20¢6 94
205 47 |206 9g “the 30


28 |205 59 |206 22 |206 431207 o |207 26
29 |206 57 {207 19 \207 40 |a08 5 |208 22
30-1207 54 |208 16 {208 37 |208 58 |acg 19


525


6


m.


d.


181 sg |182 23
182 54 |183 18.
183 49 [184 13


(84 44 |185


135
186
187
188


189 20
1go 19


8


191 10 191 33


192


193


5


192 28


es terememees


© }193 23


193 55 |194 18
194 59 |195 13
195 45 196 8


ey ee ese EY en


196 40 |197


3


197 35 |197 58
198 3o |198 53


19? 4 5-


200 20
201 16
202) 1.2
203 8
204 4
2054.0
205 56
ee 52


ie 48
208 44
209 49


199 48
200 43
201 39


\202 34


203 30


204 26
205 20
206 17
207 16
208 9


209 5
210.2 0


526


d.


0 180 © 1179 37 |179 13 [178 49
180 s¢. |180 32 |150
i181 50 |181 27 181
182 45 [182 22 |181 58 j181 34


A N
A Tasve of RIGHT Ascenstons,—-South Latitude, Teme
384


O


ne eee


ae


a


| ects TG Veta | ees


1183 40 189 17 |182.53 |182 29


8 1187 20


10


IZ


8


20
21
22


23 |


—


2.4.
25
26.


27 205


|
| 9/188 16
|


191
Lgl 57
4 1192 53
15 1193 48


py


189 10
11 |190 6 [189 42 |189 18 |188 55


2


202 12 201 50 |201 27 201
2.03
204 6 203 44 |203 20 |202 59 [202 36 |202 13
2 204 40 [204 19 [203 57 {203 34 |203 10


O45


lL Bees Sy: Thk


1


re Bat ce


i:


m. | Fa ange § 3h


—


8 1179 44 |
3 |180 39


oe


184. 12 |183 48. |189 24
185 7 |184 43 |184 19
186 2 185 38 |185 14
186 57 |186 331186. 9
187 52 [187 28 |187. 4
188 47° |188 23 |187 59


ee | ne rw


ee


190 14 |189 so
191 9g |190 46
192 5 |191 42
193 © [192 38
194 20 |193 57 |193° 34
195 16 1194 $3 1194 30


—- os


190 38
IOI 33
192 29
193 25


ae


196 12 [195 49 |195 26
197 8 |196 45 |196 22


ee teeters | EE ee ee


198 27 1198 4 |197 40 |197 18
199 23 |199


o 1198 37 |198 14


200 20 199 56 {199 33 |199 10
201 16 200 53 |200 3O |200


8


—


—


5


202 47 |202 24 j202.. 2


—— ee re eee


A. T2dQn:


177. 37 |
178. 32
rare Oo Ay sm
180. 22 |
11, 17
182 12 i
183 7 |
184. 2:4


178-25
179 20
180 I¢
181 10
19 2, }t5
[183 - 0
183 55 (183
184 50 |184 26


194 57 |
18552 |


185 45 |i85 20
186. 40 |186 16
187 35 |187 10
188 go |188 7
189/271 804. 73
190 22 |189 58
'g1 18 |190 54
Ig2 14 |191 50


et


19t 26


193 10. |192 46
194 6 1193 42
195 2 194 39
195 58 195 35


192 22
193 18
P9485
195 10


196 54. |196 30
197 50 |197 28
198 48 |198 25
199 45 }199 22


200 42 }200 19
201 39 \201 16


196 ap
197 4
193 oO
198 58


199.55
200 52
201 50
202 48


eee | =,


nauace 59 205 38 |205 16 |204 64 |204 30 |204 9 203 46


2g \200 57 206 35 j206 13 |205 50 |20§ 29


20 1207857 207 331207 10 1206 49 '206 27 1206 5 |205 42
SS


e


“e


*


OF ASTROLOGY. 527


A'Tasie of Ricut Ascenstons.—North Latitude.


Li ATE wis | { 2 3 were we
m dem. jd. m. d.m.. d.oma. jod¥ om. jad. m. d.
© |207 54.1208 26,1208 37 |208 58 |209 19 |209 40 |210 > 1


1 1208 51.1209 13 {20934 |209 55 210 16 |210 37 |210 57
2 1209) 49 |210; 10 |210, 31 [210 §2°/2f1 13/211. 34 [211 54
93.4210 46) 211: o7.j211 28,211 49 [212 10 212 34 j212 51


mers | ee SOPRA S)


213 7 1203127 4243 247
214 4 |214 1241214 44


me


——


W11/44,j212, 5. |212, 25/212 146
212-A41 1213. 6311213023 11213 43


Io
i


No. 26.


21340 |214 1
214. 38/214. $9


rhe


BAS E8 7s \2aS 3s 57h
216 36 \216. 56
217 34 \217 54
218, 33 |218. 53


214 21


219 11


204 CAL 295 201


21521


215 41 |


215 29 /215 39
216 17 |216 +37
217015 217 35
218 13 218 33


219 31


216 38
217 35
218 31
219 29
220 27


215 58 |216.18


216 +56 1217 yh 5
217° 54 (218 13
218-51 |219 11
219 50 .|220. g


6 N


12/219. 33-|219.51 1220 11/220 .30 lego AS (ear ¢i7 1221 5
13/220 31/220. §1.|291-10 {221 28 |221 46.222. § |222 23
14. j221°31,/221 60 |222- 9 |222 27 |222 45 |223 3/223 21
1§-|222 31-|222° 50 [223 8 223 26 1223 44.1224 I |224 19.
16/223 31 :|223 49. |224 7/224 25 |224.43 [225.0 |225 17
17 |224 31. |224 49:|225°,6 j225 24 |225-41 |225 59 |226: 15>
18.j225 31.1225 49 ,|226, 6 |226, 23 |226.41 |226 58 [227 14
19 |226..31-|226:49-|297 6 |227 23 |227 40/227 57 228 13
20-|227.31.|227-49 |228 6 |228 23/228 .39 |228 56 |229 12
21 1228 33,228 49 j229, 6 \229 23 4229 39 |229 55 |230 11
22/229 24: |229 50 [230 6 |230 23 [230-38 |230 54 /231 10
23 230.35 [230 51 |291 .6:1231 423/231 38 1231-53232 9
24.1231-36\231:51-|232 .7 |232,23 1232 38: 232 53 |233 8
25 |232- 331/232 53/233: 8 |233 24 j233 38 [233 53 |234. 8
26/233 40 233 55 |234) 9 |234 24.234 38 234 53 |235 7
27 |234.41, 23457235 11 .|235 25 /235 39 [235 53 [230 7
28 235 43 235 58 |236.13 |236.26 236 40 |236 54.1237 7
29.|236 46 |237 © |237:14 [237 27 |237 41 |237 54, |238 7
39 (237 48./238 1 [238-15 |238 29 |238 41 1235 55 1239-7 |


528 AN AGQGLOS TB A. TIO N
A Taser of Rigur Ascenstons.—South Latitude.


| « ©4207 .54.]207 33 1207 11 (206 49 1206 27 |206 5° \205 41
| 14208 £14208 30 4208 8 }207°47 1207/25 °\207 3°|206 40
} 2209.49 209 27 209 6 |208 45.208 23: }208  1°/207 38
3 1210 46 Jato 25 210. 4 1209 43 |209 21 |208: 59°\208' 37
} (4 21 qa ean 25 jot 19
fy fore ga jote-21 Her2 | 0 1241/99 |241 18210. 57 \210735
: 6 1213 40 \213 20 212 59 1212 38.212: 17 B11 56 211 34
7 Jatg «38 Jorg v8 21368 4273 097 1213 16 Je12° 55.212, 33


emeel tt


——o


oo


ee


8 ate 37 j2tg 17 [284 67 121496 244 152273 647/213 °33
9 1216 36 |216 96 245 56 J215° 36124515 b14 54121433
TO 4217 94 j217 15 \216 56 4246 35 [21615 |215/ 54 \215- 33 ||
W1 or8 331248444297 54 W207 35 2417) BS 216 54° 216-33


i Loemaaiachie aoe +
i


Pil SEIT ee es eres eh ETT


eae


eee | See coed eee


——


12 larg 33 219 14 j218 54-4218 35/218 15 j217 §5 1217 34
13 }220 91 {220 13 219 54 |219°35 \219 15 1218 56: j218. 36
921 13 |220 54 1220 35 |220 16 219 57 j219 36
22 §4 1221°36 1221 175)220458 “1290738


aa | ae


fee! cee


222 54122236 |222 18 |221 §9 1221° 39
224 (231833 165 2229-97 12290 29-1229 ) 0232 Y4o
/225 ‘14/224 §6 -|294°98 1224: 20 |224 17/223 41
son ic Ee ee eis ae Detail wile DDE tn Sica
226 58 j226 40 \226:23 |226 5 \225 46
227 SQ \227 41 |227\25 1227.4 1226 49
229 04228 .44:|228.27'|223- -9 \287° 51
230 “r |229 46 '\229'29'\229 211° 1228-55


ee a


ee | ee ee


Le | cael


231° 4 1230 \48 1230°31 B30'8s 229° 58
232.) °60 1232-51 71281 93.5 281 FeO See Aer
233-9 1232 6411232 38\|232-21'|232° 6
234 11 1233 57 |233 41/233 '26 |233 10


eee | ermens =


el


235 29 |235 15 |235 © |234 45 234 3° |234 14
29 |236.46 |236 31 |236 18 |236 3 235 49 |235 34 |285 18
30 [237 48 [237 35 1287 21 |237 7 1236 '53:1236_30 1230 23


OF ASTROLOGY. 529
A Tasre of Ricut AscENSIONs.—North Latitude. met
weal batel (Regs et) i 4 Sr Oa


dsm, Hf me dene 4 de thet -de te 4. di om.


oO ‘


— ~


—


237 48 238 \1 j238 15 |238 29 (238 41 238 55 |239 °7
4238 52 |239 4/239 17 1239 30 239 43 |239 55 |249 4
$39 63 \240 6 j240 19 |240 91 1240 44 1240 56 |24r 8
[24056 |241 9 |24t 21 1241 33 [240 45 [24t 57 1242 9


en ee eee


— os


- o— <


a4t 59 24a 11/242 23242 35 bea 46 \242 58 '243, 9
1243 3 1243 14 1243 25 243 37 [243 48 |243 59 244 10°
244 61844 17 (244 28° 244 39/244 50 |245 4 [245 11
245. 9 1245 skait [245 ~elhe an [245 i i ¥|246 11


| 124613 246 23 1246 34 + 246 44 [246 54 [egy 4 (347 13
BAF AD 47 OF 1247 197 247 47 1247 56 '24d\ - 6 1248.15

10. ]248 Br 1248 40 1248 40. }248 49 1248 58 i249 7 |249 16

heheh Ln 0 Abeba he PD ek ahha Deel id aM all ak DA |


to ——


12 1250 29 j250 38 |250 46 |250.'55 1251 3 \251 IF [251-19 |
ISIS OAISSH AV eew ag to51- 6S laos? gS izeaa 3 lege 21 ih
14 252 38 j252 46 j2c2 53 [253 1 [253 8 [253 15 [253 23

15/253. 43 |?53. 50 |253 57 [254 4 25F TE 254 1S 1254 Zap
16 1254 47 |254 54 \255 1 |255 7 \255 14 l255 20 la55 23>]
17 1255 51 (255 58 |256 5 1256 11 \256 17 1256 21 |256 29

18/1256. 57 [257 3 1257 9 |257 15-1257 19 j257 25 \257 31
19 j258 1.1258 7 4258 13 [258 18 i258 23 \258 28 [258 33 |


os


—


ee | nr eet


ee | eet et oe —


20 [259 7 1259 11 [259 17 |259 21 |259 26 |259 31 259 35
2t \260' 11 260-17 |260 2Fr |260 25 1260 29 |260 34 |260 38
22 126117 \261' 21 1261.25 1261 28 \261 31 1261 36 [261 4o
23 |262 21 [202 25° |262 ie 262.31 |262 35 |262 39 262 41


— eee eee ——


24 |263 28 203 3° [203 33 263 36 1263 39 |263 41 |263 45
25 |204 33 264 35 \264 37 |264 4o |264 41 |264 45 |264 47
26 |265 38 (265 40 \265 41 |265 44 |265 45 |265 48 \265 49
27 |266 44 \266 45 1266 46 |266 =e 266 49 |266 260 51 |260 51


es Ce


28 (267 49 |267 50 |267 50 |267 51 |267 61 B64 54 267 64
29 |268 55 |268 55 |268 55 1968 56 |268 56 [268 57 (268 57
0'|270' 0 |270 0 |240 o |270 0 |270 0 {270 |


Tape of RIGHT AscEnstons.~—South Latitude,


eg 7 ee eee | EE, Ee GSS Sn) Smee! SE


d. m. deme d. am. iid. pam. deems dd. pam ds gm:


*


ee a


9.237 48 |237 35 237 -21 [237 1 7 (236.53 [236 38 1236 23
1 |238 51 1233. 38 [238 24 288 10 |2gr 57 |237-41 |237 28

} 2 [239 53.1239 41 |239 28 |239,.14 [289.4 4238 47 |238 33 |

} 3 240 §6 [240 44 |240 31 \240 18 |240, 5 1239 51 1239.33


ee ee ee ee ee Cee) RS Eee Geert Se


ome beg


4 |241° 59.1241) .47 1241, 35 |241 21 241 10.4240 57 |240 44
© 5 1243). 3 1242 51.1242 39. (242 27 1242 15 \242 1 j241, 50

6 |244 6 1243 55 |243 43 |243 31 243 20 (243. 8 242 56 |
-7:'(245 9 1244.59 |244 47 [244 87 244 25 |244 13 |244 2


>
Poems,


I
eae FS —_


—


cme ee os —


8 j246 13/246 3 |245 51 |245 41 245 30 |245 19 \245 8
9 |247,17 1247. 7 |246 57 |246 47 |246 36.j246 25 |246, 14
10 |248. 21 |248 11 [248 1 (247 51 247 40 |247 31 |247 21

11 |249 24 [249 16.249 7 |248 57 |248 48 |248 38 |248 28


foe [ome


se Ce neiaenell - a |


12 1250 29 |250. 21. \250 41 250 3.4249 54 1249.45 [249 35
13 251. 34. |251, 26 |251 17, |251.. 9 |251 0 4250 51 |250 41

i) 14 (252 38 |252 31. |252 21 |252 15 .J252 6 |251 58.251 49
I. 15 |253 43 [253 36 1253, 28 [253 21 J253 13 \253° 5 |252 57


eel


16 las4 47 |254. 41 |254. 33. j254 27 |254 19 |254 11 \254.4
17312-55515 )205 46 |255 39 |255 33 |255 26 255,19 |255 14
18 256 57 |256 st |256 45 \256 39 |256. 33/256 27 [256 19
.19 1258 1 |257 56 1257 51 |257 45 |257-40 |257, 34 |257 28


ee ed


ome ort ee |


20 259 7 1259 1.|258 57 (258 51 |258 47 j258 41 j258 36
-21 |260 11 |260 8 |260 3 |259 59. |259 54 |259 49 |259, 44
22 \261 17 \261 13 \261 9 |261. 5 |261, 1: |260 56 |260 se
23 \262 21 \262 18 |262 15 |262 11. |262 8 |262 4 |262 .o


VS ee | ee me pe |


ee


24, |263 28 |263 24 \263 21 (263 18. |263 15: |263 11 |263. 9
25 |264. 33 264 30 |264 27 |264 25 |264 21 \264 19 |264 17
26 |265 38 \265 36 [265 33 }265 31 |265 29 j265 28 \265 26
27 |266 44 |266 41 |266 40 |266 39 |266 37 |266 36 \266 34


ee ee ce | ee ee


}| 28 |267 49.267 49 |267 46 |267 46 \267 44 |267 44 267 43

29 1268 55 268 54 |263 53 1268 53 |268 51 268 51 [268 51

30 |270 0 |270 0 |270 0 .]270 © |270 (0 [270 © [270..0
x mi , pa


‘


— 4 es


»


— all >


OF ASTROLOGY, $31
A TABLE of RicguT AsceNsions.—North Latitude.
I | 2 ore ht 4. | 5


Po ae ee Ce AU 2c 9 EN ee ea SS eR oe


[e)


ome Pee


9% dite A din: BM sen 4. m. | aan! Id. Sat


— — <3


270 0 |270 o |270 0 1270 0/270 0 |270 o
27H ag | eLia7ee C1 iaeie: 4118713 4) (271, §
{272 10 1272) 40.1272 10: (272) : 8.1272, ; 8/272, . 6
273 16 /273 15 |273 14 |273. 11 273.11 273 9


come 4 |


epee | OSES


274 21 /274 19 |274 19 |274 16 |274 15 [274 11 (274. 11
275 27 1275 25 275 23 [275 20 (275 18 [275 15 |275 13
276 31 |276 30 |276 27 |276 24 [276 ar |276 18 j276 15
277 38 (277 35 [277 3t [277 28 [277 25 J277 21 [277 18


eens Gee emeeey Se | Care) ate | Ge mee


meal


es


278 43 |278 39 |278 95 |278: 31 (278 28 |278 24 1278 20
279 48 |279 43 1279 39 1279 35 |279 31 |279 26 |279 21
280 53 1280 48 |280 43 |280 39 |280 34. |230 29 [280 25
281 58. j281 53 \281 47 |281 41 |281 97 |28r 31 [281 27


fe)
1
2
3
4
x
6
7
8
9


IO:
If


12 283) 3 |282 57
13 284 8 i284 1
14 285 13 [285 6
15 {286 Hiei dy 10
16 |287 21 |287 -14 [287 - 7 |286 59 286 51 |286 45 |286 37
17 |288 26 j288 18 |288 11 1288 . 1 j287 55 |287 47 1287 39
18 [289 31 |289 21 }289 14 |289 5 1288 57 |288 49 |2838 41
19 |290 35 |290 26 |290 17 |290 8 |290 0 |289 51 \289 43 |


282 sr |282 45 1282 40 |282 34 {282 29
283 55 \283 49 [283 43 1283 37 |283 31
284 59 1284 53 |284 46 |284 40 284 33
286 3 |285 56/285 4g |285 41 |285 35


emma ae | eee Seen | een Tee |: eee


ema =


20 (291 39 |\291 30 |291 20 |\291 a1 |291 I |290 §3 |290 44
21 (292 43 |292 33 |292 23 |292 13 |292 4 291 55 |291 45
- 22 293 47 |293 37 |293 26 [293 16 [293 © 292 56 292 47
23 |294 51 |294 40 |294 29 1294 19 j294 8 |293 58 |293.48


ee ee


24 295 54 |295 43 |295 31 |295 21 |295 10 |294 59 |294 49
25 |296 57 |296 46 |296 35 \296 23 |296 11 296 1 |295 50°
26 \293 1 297 49 |297 37 [297 25 [297 14 [297 2 [296 51 |
ahi 4 298 51 |298 39 j298 27 j298 15 |293 3 j297 5:

28 |300 7 299 54 |299 41 |299 29 |j299 16 j299 4 |298 52
I] 29 \30f 9 (300 56 }300 43 /300 30 |300 17 |300 § 1299 53
qi 30 [302 11 gor 58 j3or 45 {301 31 |301 18 [301  § ]300 53


_ No. 27. 60 cries


ere


en re ee


AN


532


FOU UST RATIO WN


A Tasve of Ricut AscENSIoNS.—SoutH LATiITuDE,


270° ©
ib 4
272 14
27 31 20


Sere /aleis. Sorin) oS
6'|276 32 \276 36 |276 39
7277 38 [277 41277 45.
8 278) 43 278 47 1978 eI
9 [279 48 [279 gt 1279 157
10 [280 53 |280 68 |281 3
11 j281 58 1282 4 1282.9


—


12 1283 3 |289 9 1283 15
13 |284 8 |284 14 {284 21
14°29 5-1 3) 138 5° 19: 1285.27
15 |286 17 1286 ail i 31


16 |287 21 1287 29
17. 1288. 26 1288 34
13 1289 g1 |289 39
LE Tag O 6 SS oot ae


287 38°
288) 43
289 48
AOS. 53


}} 20 |29t 39 |291 49 \291 58
21 1292 43 \292 53 |293 3
22 1293 47 |293 57 |294
23 1294 51 |295 1 \295°13
24 1295 54 |296 5 |296 27
25 |296 57 \297 9 297 21
26 |298 1 |298 13 |298 25
27299 4 \299 16 |299 29


een


28 |300


29 |301
a0 202-1 |


Z [30° 19 |300 33
8 |301 21 1301 36
302 26 1202 39


oe


Z7O> 091870) of1270 oO 124Q) 0 jf
yi», Sita sita7n. Sey OM
272 15 {272 16 1272 16 }272 48
273 23 |273 23 [273 24 |273 26 |}


27 42 BIN 27 4
275 88 [275
270 45 1276
AT PST N27 7


278 Gg 1278
280°. 6 {280
281 113 |281
282 20 |282


eed ———


3 A744 BU 1274: 34
38.1275 40 [275 43 |
45 |276 48 |276 51 |P
5 rege: 66-1298


59 279. 471279 «8

6 1280 11 1280 16
13 |281 19 |281 24 |f
20 |282 26 |282 3r


283 27: 1283 127 |283 33 [283 40
284 34 |284 34. |284 41 284 48
285 41 |285 41 1285 48 |285 56
286.47 {286 47 1286 55 \287 3
287 s4 1287 14 [288 ¥ [288 11 jf
28g 117 {289 : 0 1289» g {289 :18 If
290 56 |290 6 |290 15 |290 25 |f
agi ~i2oLi Lv Yeot 2hd2gh Br ||


eee | ree eee


292 8 292 18 |292 29 |j292 39
293 13 |293 24 [293 35 [293.46


8 1294 18 [294 30 [294 41/294 51 |]


295 58

297 4 |
298 10
299 16
300 22


———


295 23 |295 35


295 47
296 53
297 5°
299 3
300 8


—


296 28 |296 40
497 33 297 145
298 38 |298 50
290411209 255


300 46 /300 59
Bor so |302 3
B02 953 18034 7


3Or 13 |301.27
302 18 302.31


303 (211303 -37 |


OFT ASTRO OG


533


A Tasre of Rigut Ascenstons.—Nortu LATITUDE.


2 joa) | 4 5


a


© 1302, 11. |gor-.58 1301.45 |901 31 [301.18./301 5
I 1303 .14.4303, 0. 1302-47 |302. 33/302 19 |302 6
2/304. 16. }304. . 1. )303 48 |303. 34 303 20 |303 6
3 |305 18 895 «3 1304 50 1804 35.804 21.)304 7


4-}306; 20.1306. . 5.1305 51. 305 36 1305 21

5 1307. 21 |3907. 7,306.51 306 36./306 21

6 |308. 24.1308 .8 907 53 1307 37-1907 22
7/809 25.)309: 9. |308 54 308 37 ]308 22,

» 8.|910, 26.|310 10,/309 54 i309 3713099. 21
9|301. 27.|311. 10.1910 64.9310, 37.1310 21,\310. 5
TO. (312. 28. |342-415}311..54-1311.37-\811 21,311


395° -7
306 of
307. a7


eenene, | eee ees Gees | peer se =


12/314 29 [314 11 [313 54 [323.37 813 19 [313.2
13-1315 29 |315 11 1314 54/314 36,\314 18 j314 1
14 1316 29 |316 11 1315 53/315 35/315 17 [315 0.


eens EEE oe


eee queues


16,1318, 29 [318 10 [317 51, [317.33 817-35 11316 57
17,1319 28/319 9 |318 $0 /318, 34 (313 14 )317 55,
18 |320. 27. /3820 8 /319 49, |319)30 (319 11.4318 53
19.1321 27 1321 7 (320 48 |320,29 1320 10 (319 51


ee, | eee =|:


20, 1322526 922 OF 192 1- A7492I1- 27,
21 323525. 1323. 4 |322 45 |322 25 (322 6 [321 47
22 32423 4.3 |323. 43 |323 23) \323 4 [822 45.
23 (325 22/325 1 (324 41 1324 21 [323 51 4323 42


eel


325: 19


24/1326 20 1325 59 1325 39
25 1327 18 |326 57 |326 37 326.17 1325 56-325 36
26 [328,16 327 55 1327 33 |327 14-|326 53 1326 33
27 1329. 14,1328 53-1328 31 (328 11-1327. 50.1327. 30


—


-


Pe | a at oe teens


9-133° 47 |33° 26 |330 5:|329 44, |329 23
© 1331 44-1331 23 1331 1:(330 41


29 1331
3° |332


308 7


309 .6 |:


4 P
11.|313- 28-313 12 |912: §4.)312 37.)312 20.1312 3 (311 47}


15.1317, 29. |317 10:1916 51 |316, 34 1316 16.1315 58.


321 8.}320,49


(323 22


{
|


24. 59 |324 39°


28 |g30 11. |329-50.|329 29: 1929 .8-[328. 47. (328. 27.


330200 1329.59 |


312 46
BAS 45
214 42
315 41
346 39
317-37
318 35
349: BA


320 31 |
921. 28
Loe Dae 6


wee


aay 1 |
935.16 |}


(326 12 |
327,19


328 6
329 03


534 A. Nob Eb OSU RA TOR


A TABLE of R1GuT ASscENSIONS,—South Latitude.


© 302 12 |302 25 |302 39 aa 53. 303 7 303 21 [303 37
1 1303 14 1303 28 1303 42 |303 57 |304 11 1304 26 |304 44
2 1304 16 |304 31 |304 45 |305 © 305 15 |305 Bo |305 46
3/305 18 |305 33 |305 48 [306 4 1306 18 1306 34 [306 50


4 |306 20 }306 36 |306 51 i 6 |307 21 |307 38 |307 54


5 )307 22 |307 38 |307 54 |308 9 |308 25 [208 41 308 58
6 1308 24 |308 40 [308 56 |309 11 |309 29 |309 45 \310 1
7 |309 25) 309 41 |309 58 [310 hi 310 31 |310 48 311 5


eae? sco


eae


8 [310 26 310 43 \311 © |g1r 16 [911 34 |311 51 1312 8
Qs311 27° \811 44-1312 312° .18°1912°35°\312) 54) [919 at
10 |312 28 1312 45 |313 2 313 19 313 37 \313 55 \314 14
11 |313 28 |313 46 |314 4.|314 21 |914 39 |314 57 |315 16


eee ee | ee SE


315 2 315 40 |315 59 1316 18
13 1315 29 315 47 |316 316) 22°1916' 4Ihign 7. OnigI 7 19
14 \316 29 |316 47 1317. 6 |317 24 |317 41 1318 1 |318 21
1 S01347 298317 AT [ase Cert) ean gr O° tep ts4 Oe) 1 isa ge A


Sees | Cena pemecee | eet? pene | eens


* 16 1318 29 |318 47 |319 6 |319 25 |319 44 1320 4 |320 24
| 47 1319 28 )319 47 [320 6 |320 25 [320 45 1321 4 [g2t 25 |
18 1320 27 |320 46 \g21 6 |921 25 1921 45 \322 5/322 26
19 1321 27 1321 46 |322 6'\322 25%1322°45 1323. 6 }323. 27


24 |326 20 326 40° Ge7? TH R27l era 7 ad me 4 1928 26
25 1327 18 |327 39 [328 0 [928 ar |328 41 (329 4 1329 25
26 |328 16 328 37 (328 58 |329 19 |329 41 |930 1 1330 24
29/329" 245929 35 (329! 56°1330! 17) 1330. B91352" | Wa Red,


——>


pees eee | eee GS coe | es


28 (330 11 339 33 |33° 54 1331 15 1331 37 1331 59 |332 21
29/330 9 33% 8° 331 51 1332 14 /332 85 |332 57 |333 20
30 (332 6 |332 27 1332 49 1333 11 [333 34 1333 55 334 18


RR


335.55
1336 51
337 48
338 44
339 40
340 37
341.33
342 29


12343 25
13 [344 20


14°|345 16
15 1346 12


ooo


16 |347 7


17 1348 3.1347 4° 1347 17
18 |348 58 1348 36 |348 12
349 31 |349 a


- 19 1349 54


20 351 44
22 /352 39
23 1353 35


24 |354 3°
25 1355 25
26 |\356 20


OF ASTROLOGY.


A TABLE of Ricut Ascenstons.—North Latitude.


4


5


ee en


3315441331 23 1331, 2
332 41 |332 20 |331 59
333. 38 |333 17 |332 55
334 35 1334 13 1333 51


eee ee


335 32 1335 19. 334 48
336 29
337/25
338 22


339 18
340 14
341-10
342. 6


eee oan Beceee


9


=


343


344.53 :1344 3° 1344. 7
345 48°1345 25 1345


346 44 1346 21


1333 3° 1333 8


d.


d. m.


ae


m.


330 41 330 20 329 59
331 38 [331 16 1330 55
332 34 332 12 331 51
1332 47


et,


ce | eg eee


339 7 9335 441335 22
337. 3 336 40 1336 18 /335 56
337 59 337 30 337 14 |336 52


338 55 [338.32 [338 10 337 48
3839 5st \339 28 1339 6 \338 43
34° 47/340 24 |340

341 43 1341 20 |340 58 (340 35 (340 12


342 39 |342 16 1341 53 1341 3o 1341
343 53 1343 35 |343 12 |342 49 |342 25 342


334.26 1934. 4


333 43
335-0


334 39
335 34
336 30°


337 26
338 21
339 17


ees ee


2 1339 39 |


ed _——


2
343 44 1343 20 1342 57°


2 1344 39 |344 15 1343 52


345 57 1345 34 |345 19 1344 47


20 350 49 |350 26 350 2
353 (2d 1359.57
352 16 |35t 52 (351 28 1351
953 Sh 1352-147 35? BS 4357.50 (357.335.4351 42


ee es eee


355


346 52 |346 29 |346 5
347 47 1347 24 1347 0
348 43 1343 19 1347 55-


wane


349 38 |349 14 1348 50


354 © /353 42 353 18 1852 54 |352 30
1 1354 38 354 14 1353 50 1353 26
355 57 \355 33 (855 9 1354 45 [354 21


27 1357 15 [359 52 355 28


a | eee


28 1358 10 1357 47 1357 23 |356 59 |356 35 |356 15
18 1357 54 |357 30 1357
o 1359 37 [359 13 [358 49 [358 25 [358


| 29 1359 5


No. 27.


30 }360


353 42 [358 1


135° 33 1359 9 1349 45


4 |35° 40


——
4


356 4 1355 4° /355 16


1


6P 3


345 42
346 37
347 32


348 27
349 22
350 17


352 7
353 2
353 57
0 [354 of


355 47


6 |356 42


357 37


536 AN PPLU STRAT ION
A Tasie of Rigut AscEensions.—South Latitude.
Ont a 2 3 A> 5 6


eee exes pa | eee


x% }d.om. |} ds. me | d. m. | dem. | dsm. |] dsm. | di m.


© 1332. 6 1332 28 /332 49 1333 11 1333 33 333 55 1334 18
1 1333 4 1333 25 1333 47 1384 9 1334 31 1334 53 1335 16
2 1334 1 1334 22 1334 44 1335 6 |3385 29/335 51 1336 14
3 1334 58 |335 19 |335 41 [386 3 |336 26 1336 49 [337 12


Weems | cower Vsmnny cmc | oe eeepc tees | SRR et ay Se | SR


4.1335 55 1336 16 1336 39 1337 1 13937 241337 47 |338 10
5 1336.51 |337 13 1337 36 1337 58 338 21 [238 44 (339 8
6 1337 48 [338 1o 1338 33 4338 55 1389 18 (339 41 340 5
7 1338 44 1339 7 1339 3° 1339 52 |340 15 |940-38 [341 2


=


8 1339 40 1340 4 |340 27 [340 49 1841 12:1341 35\/341 59
9 |340 37 |341 © 1341 23 [341 46 342 91342 32 1342 56
10 1341 33 1341 56 |342 19 \342°42 1343 6 1343 29 [343° 53
11 /342 29 [342 52 /343 15 [343 38 1844 2 (344 25 |344 49


peewee | a ee


esace | cate ecreeiney ees [ene Renee | Gee eneinay


12 1343 25 1343 48 1343 11 1344 34 1344 58 /345 21 |345 45
13 |344 20 1344 44 1345 7 |349 39 1845 54 1346 18 (840 42
141345 16 1345 40 1346 3 1346 26. [346 50 1347 14 1347. 38
15 1346 12/346 35 |346 59 1347 22 |347 46 1348 10 345 34


ss


—— |


16 1347 71347 31 |347 55 1348 18 |348 42 |349 6 [349 30
17 1348 3 1348 27 (348 51 |349 14. 1349 38 1350 2 I350 26 If
18 1348 58 |349 22 |349 46 |350 9 |359 33 1350 57 |351 21
19 1349 54 1359 18 1350 42 |351 5 1351 29 1351 53 1352 17


Se


ed ee ed


351 37 1352 « [352 25 1352 491353 13
21/351 44 1352 8 [352 32 /352 56 1353 20 1353 44 [354 8
221352 39 1353 3 (853 27 1353 51 |354 15 1354 39 1355. 3
23 1353 35 1353 59 1354 22 1354 46 1355 10 1355 34 [355 58


ee ee Ey


_ 20 135° 49 1352 13


esd He


24 1354 30 354 53 855 17 1355 41 1356 5 356 29 (356 53
25 1355 25 |355 48 1356 12 1356 36 1357 0 (357 24 1357 48
26 1356 20 1356 43 (357 7 1357 31 1357 55 1353 19 1358 43
27 1357 15 1357 38 |358 | 2 1358 26 [358 50 1359 14 359 38


ete eae | ey Seems | aerated semen | ere ee | mcr Geet Poe | ee


28 1358 10 358 33 1353 57 1359 21 1359 45 [360 9 |360 32
29 1359 5 |359 28 1359 52 |360 16 [360 4o |\g61 4 |361 28
20 }360 0 /360 23 [360 47 1361 11 (361 35 |361 59 1362 23
eS


4 .


ries A tbe eetka oe Rae S
SHEWING THE


DECLINATIONS


OnFe Rye


Tele ee A ees ahi uik- 33S,


+ Be ee te
eae 4


ich Toe


i cepa fh bem},


OF ASTROLOGY: 529


A Tasre of Dectinations.—North Latitude.


H 29 Za | 24 32: | ae Gar] 26 92°] 2g 321 28 32-| 29 32. |30)

23 31 | 24 31 | 25 31°] 26 91 | 27 31 | 28 31] 29 31 {29
1 23 31 | 24 3U | 25 91] 26 31:| 27 31 | 28 34 | 29 31 [28)
23 3O | 24.30 | 25 30 | 26 30 | 27 30 | 28 30 | 29 30 {27


—


23°28 | 24 29: | 25: 28:; 26.28 | 27 28 | 28 28
$] 23: 26: | 24 26 | 2k: 26: | 26 26:| 27 26] 28 26
| 6) a7. 23° | By 23: | 25. 2g: | 26. ag | 27 22} a8 22 | 29 22 |24
| 7] 23 20'| 24 20 | 25 20 | 26 20 | 27 19:| 28 19 | 29 19 |23


8} 23 17 | 24 17 | 2g 17: | 26 16 | 27 16.] 28 16 | 29 16 [22


OP agi gi) 24° 13! | a5: igi} 26 re-}'27 19:1. 28 1a, 29 42/21]
TO} 23' 91 24 O 1,25 Of] 26 g.| 27 8) 28 8) 29 8 |20
i1} 23 4} 24° 4h] 25 yt] 26 4) 27 3) 28 3] 29 BIg


12] 22 59° | 23 59 | 24 591] 25 59 | 26 59} 27 58 |.28 58 [15
13, 22 53 | 23. 53] 24 53'/ 25 53, 26 52 | 27 52] 28 s2 faz)
14) 22 47 | 23 47.| 24. 46'| 25. 46 | 26 46 |.27 45 | 28 45 116)
15] 22 41 | 23.41 | 24 40'| 25. 4Q| 26 40 | 27 39 | 28 39 |15]


eee | ee


16} 22 34 | 23 34 | 24 33 | 25 33 | 26 33
1G} 2B oi || aye ay |) oe 26! | Die aby | 2G. 2g. | 27, am f 28. 240 113
18} 22° 19! ||23 1g: | 24 18: | 25: 98:| 26.17! 27 16 | 28; 16> 12;
Of 2B% rl || yt TOr |) at Ms [jagr rr] ai Bol arp we fae Ge lta


——— a - ; “


poj2e Bii23 O'|\ 24 Bil 25 of 2g co | 26-58) 1/27 57 lio,
21) 21 53 | 23°43 | 23 52) 24 $1 | 25 50 | 26 49 | 27 45°) 9
22] 21-43 | 22: 43'| 23).42)| 24 41 | 25. 40. | 26 39 | 27 38] 8
23) 21 33 | 22) 33'} 23) 32 | 24 31 | 25 go | 26 29 | 27 28: | 7


if ere a!


a ee | ee,


24| 21°23'| 22 23:] 2921°| 24 26 | 25° 19° | 26 18 | 27-17 | 6
28| 20/13) 28/19 | 23°10°| 24: g@ |] a5: 8.) 26 7) a7 6
26) 22 2 | 2%. 6'} 22 59°) 29 58°] a4 571] 25 56 | 26. Se
27) 20:50 | 24 48 | 22°47 | 23°46} 24 45'| 25 44} 26 43


a t


Oo BG


omcerec | he os


eed


28] 20 38'| 22 396 | 22°36 | 23) 341] 24 33°] 25 32.| 26 30°] 219

29} 20..26'| 2% 23 | 22 221] 29 201] 24. 20)| 26° 19:| 26.17) |\1

30| 20-13°| 21‘12 | 22110.| 23° 9:| 24 F125 6 | 26: glo
—° : a 3 tt SE PLS hh LE


he?


-[inok 2:3. 19%] 22 og!) 2% OX} 20 Or]119 gol) 28. Hel}\IG Tes|a0


540 A Ni ISLSL,.UG TT RAAT WON
A Tas Le of DecLINATIONs.—South Latitude.
O I 2 3 4s. ° .


d.’m. | d.m. | dem. | d.om.>?} deiom.i| d.icm. dm. |


eae


eas | Se


— = SS, SS pee oe eee


237.39°| 22° 92°| aT ye") | 20%, 3981) 19° Jae 1118) 303} 1p gap 190
Mp 98° | 22.36 | 2 oT] 20%, 3IS{! MOE 340} 18> sae) TZ GIs Bg
Bei 33!) gee 31°] |oty gts] soy Sis} 1p sac |) 1B gael 19 215198
23° 30°| 22. 30°| 231° 3o°| 20.3021) 29P $901) 3G BO) 17 90: |29


0D | ee ee gee eee


S| ers et | ae


A) 23 28°| 22 28 |) 22 28.) 207 282]. 1g 28} 18 282] 17. 28. |26
s| 23 26 | 22. 26 | ar: 26° || 20° 265} 19: 26°]! 182 162) 177 26 j26
G23! 23°) 22°23! ot5 29") 20: 283 |, 19° 2301) 1 Bi 2a) 17, 294 lay
7| 23 20 | 22 20} 21 20] 20 20} 19 20] 18 20 | 17 20 |23


——


aoe | eos —~


Bh 230 75 | eek Tey |; at || BON ge ls Ie tyst1 TBE Eg 17,19 |22
Qh 230 1g | aBingif eat Wel gor 19s|/ 19F 1ge8l) ABy 1ge |) 177i 1/24


1a) 23. gf ee ge) et ge li20. el ag ee)i1B- eh ag. « 19
12) 22 59 Qt 59 ZO e911. gOS |) 1Qs Ost) Ba yos jag, -O0 | 48
N13] 22 58 | 21 53 | 20 53 19 53:| 18 54 | 17 54 | 10 S417
[14] 22.47 | 21.47 | 20 47 | 19 47] 18 48 | 17.48 | 16 48 [16
H15| 22 41 | 21 41 | 20 41 | 19 41 18. 42 | 17.42 | 16 42 15)


ee


116) 22 34°| 25° 959 (ame gis | 198 gg) 18>. 360 | 1978 gs 116 36. | 14


Ee foes a


117} 22 27 | 21 28 | 20 28) 19 28:| 18:29) 17. 29 |.16 29 113)5


1181 29. 192] 21% g0°%| 20! 203) 19% gan |) 184 aac] Ig ae | 16¢ 2a 182
Hagt.22 4Oo|, 22 1E2] 20 BAL] 2 BRB Lge] 17r gs} 16; 1g¢]14


ae


| etic) 9 | meen SRE ee ee


Soe )P 10 an iB eel 17 5 16 § [10
19 55 | 18 50) 17 57 | 160 47 | 15 58) 9
19 45 | 18 46 | 17 47 | 16 37] 15 48 | 8
19 35 | 18 36.1 17 37 | 16 47 | 15 33] 7


24, 21 23 | 20 24'| 19 25°) 18 26°] 17 97.) 16.28 :
262% 12} 20 14¢) TO 158) 18 168).4ag¢ re). 16218
BO\ 200 evi 20). Bt! Tbe Be) 118): Baltes sth g
24| 20°:50:!.19) 54 | 18) 52°} 1958] 16) 540] 15, 56


a el


eponetnenas peet


|28} 20 38°] 19 399 | 18 40°) 17 41°] 16-42:] 15 44
29, 20 26 | 19 27 | 18 28 | 17.29
820 232/510 14)) 118: 192/17 19

fo) 1 2 3


< =


OOF "ASS eT ROL OvGry. 541
A Tasiez of DecrinaTions.—North Latitude;


° 1 2 3 5
2| d.om.| doom. | dem. |] d.om.]d.om.]d.m./d.om,
o} 20:19'| a4 12)| 22 10°) 23 9 | 24 7] 25 6 | 26 5 \goll
1120 oO} 20 59 | 21 57] 22 561 23 54 | 24 53.1 25 5% 120
al 19 47 | 20 45 | 21 44 | 22 42 | 23 40.| 24 39.| 25 37 |

3| 19 33 | 20 31 | 21 30 | 22 28 | 23 26 | 24 25 | 25 23 I|27
Li 19 19 | 20 17 | 21 16 | 22 14 | 23:12 | 24 11 | 25 Q |26
s| 19 5 | 20 3] 2n 2] 22 0| 22 58] 23 56 | 24 54. [25/1
6) 18 50 | 19 49 | 20 47 | 21 45 | 22 43 | 23 41 ! 24 39 [24/f
4| 18 35 | 19 34 | 20 32; 21 29 | 22 27 | 23 25 | 24 23 [23


—


va


ae


—|— ee ee | (=


8} 18 20 | 19 18 | 20°16: |°21.13)] 22.11.| 23 9 | 24 7 [22

9g} 18 4] 19° 2} 20 O| 20 571 21 55 | 22 53. | 23 Sr j2aip
jro} 17 48 | 18 46 | 19 44 | 20 41 | 21 39 | 22 37 | 23 34.20
11} 17.32 | 1B. 2p | WO. a7 |) ZO 25 | Ad 22) ) 2a 20: ) 23: HF, 119


—~


11} Wee tise |).18d rah} 1s Hor | 20) 98) ||-Ate -g. [22> i3y 1.23, cou 18
13/ 16 58 | 17 55 | 18 53] 19 51 | 20 48 | 21 46 | 22 43 J17))
j14| 16 41 | 17 38 | 18-36] 19 33 | 20 30 | 21 28 | 22°25 |16

Has] 16 24 | 17 21 | 18 18 | 19 13] 20 12 | 21 IO | 22 7 {15


Reeemenee! Sema Seg ee


— ——


16} 16 6) 17 31.18 0} 18 57) 19 54 | 20 52 | 21 49 j14)
17| 15 48 | 16 45 | 17 42 | 18 39 | 19 36 | 20 33 | 22 30 113
r8| 15 29 | 16 26 | 17 29] 18 20] 19 17 | 20 14 | QI 14 j12
ro] 15 11.] 16 8 | 17 4] 18 1] 18 58 | 19 55 | 20 52 \11
20; 14 52 | 16 49 | 16.45 | 17 42 | 18 39 | 19 36 | 20 33 /10/F
21} 14 33 | 15 30 | 16 26 | 17 23: | 18 20 | 19 17 | 20 13] 9
22,14 14 | 15 11 | 16 7117 4] 18 0 | 18 57) 19 53) 8

Ban ah Ge | Fe, Ht || 1S. 47 16 44 | 17 40} 18 37 | 19 33:1 7


ey ge | PF eee


ees Sect | ees Seer ees | eee: SS |S ees | ed sms |


24) 13 34 | 14 31 | 15.27-| 16 42} 17.20 | 18 17 | 19 13.| 6
25/13 14 | 14 11 | 15 7] 16 4) 1% 0] 17 57 19, 52.1 6
26, 12 54 | 13 51 | 14 47 | 15 43 | 16 39 | 17 36 | 18 33) 4
a7| 12 33 | 13 30.|.14 26 | 15 22 | 16 18) 17 15 | 18 11 | Bit


re ee | ere


ES ee


se —


28} 1213: | 13 9 | 14 5°} Ug 4] 15. 574) 16. 54 | 17.50] 2h
29) 11.52 | 12 48 | 13 44 | 14 40] 15 36} 16 33} 17 29 | Hh
gol 11 31°| 12 27 | 13 28 | 1419 | 15 25 | 1011117 7) 0

fo) I 2 3 4 5 6 %


AN


ILLUS TRATION


‘, . rae
A TABLE of DECLINATIONS —-South Latitade,


18 20
18 4
17 48
17 32


i OARS Sy SEED) BR em | mene,


17 4
16 58
16-41
/16 24


daha te Sptaircpeaias eal 3 Suara eet


16/16 6
IT) rg 48
. 1§ 29
ee 11


20) 14 52
et 14, 33
221 14 14
23


we


BR 54
24, 19 34
#6) N30 9
26, 12 54 -
1127/ ¥2 33


SSH | ey eS SSE | sere? S


Holl sa gs
AP30,, F1 _Fa


4O


19 14. | 18 16
a) ROB 8
18 48 | 17 50
ca Cae
18: 24°] 19! 22
me B°|/ 17, B
| 17.52 ) 16 54
| 17 38 | 16-39
1% 22°] 16° 24
17 61 1 8
16 sO | 150 52
16. 34-1 15 36.
16 17 | 15 20
16) oO} 1m @B
1g 43° | 14 46
15 26-| 14° 28
ts "8 14 LI
tee, §@: 1) BYE SS
te 3 1 TS OS
Uti BS | apse
1S gsi | Reg
13° 36 | 12 99
ae es | T2 gO
1%4 Kg J
1g g8 | yr 4a
1218 | 14 Qt
a SS a
rat GP 1G 39
Ph rR | TO go
2 56130 ©]
(18 35 | 9 39
t 3


PSSST ONS Sig eer aE


eS See Ge SSS


17 |


17 4


16 §1


16. 38°


ions sembe co


16 24
16 10


15 56


15 41


15 26.
15e 1%


14 54


14° 98:


14 22


1.
13,48


13 31


rey EA
12 56
12: 98


IZ 20..


i
LI 42


ro 44
16 24


10 wi |
,% 43° |.


9 4
8 43
ale


eh Sgt a ae —


16 18
16): 5
15 §2
15 39


15 26
15 12
14 58
14. 43°


14 28
14 12
13 56:
13 40.


ES


12 17
LL SY
ro
11 29


Il 4
10. 48
10 26


9 48
g 28
9 &
3 44
8 28


amy
7 40


13) 29
13 14:
12 58
12 42,


15 20
ae |
14 54
14 41
inet a7
14 13
13 59
13 44.)


190 23 |


8 SI
8. 31
8 11


7 50 |


neato mae |e


9 a4 |


es
7 Ul


6


sale


OF ASTROLOGY. 54,3


A TABLE of A TABLE of Dectinations.—North Latitude, —North Latitude.


Oj] 11731 rm: Hi a 23} 14 19 | 15 15 | 16 11
1rd Fao 14°12 69 4 14.159 <45.15,46
2 1O%aSMP tt ip ie 44:13 °96.4'14 39%} 15728
3 | 10 26 | 11 a5) 124t9 f 13 444. 4 14.20 } 154.6


4 | 10 5 FRETS reader 13 48 | 14.44
5 9 43 |.10 Neo LUO Tahoe TERA iy 14.022
Dat: OM 10 G7 Pel 2ER 120 Se 184 a. 14 4 °O
7 8458 9 5s 10 cece LE 46 422.4424 13.97
8) 8 36} 9 g2| 10 re 11 1 23
O% . Sars y 9 24 1

16H Zee a 47 ; £: 10 as

11-4. 7528-4. 8 ig F- ger8 4.10 514

TETAS) PLOY 8 55h Os

13} 642} 7 37} 8 32] 9 28

14; 619/ 714) 8 9] 9 5

PSP G64 Get 7471 8 42

16) 5 33] 6 29| 724] 8 19

77

18

a9

20] 358) 4 54} 5 49) 6 44

O17 3°35) 45304 \5 54 + 6220

oo | Le ae 4:37 5 2: 5 157 1

23 * | 438: 7

24. |

25

26 |

27 |

28} o 4B ag 2°98 4. 95331

. | 1 49] Bie .

: = =F é —s


a


beta AC DP LSAT ERY A TaN


A TaBLE of DecrinaTions.—South Latitude. _


Coy"


SAS OA ib ie) aoe 3°23 1.62 27 7.1 82
42)° 540) 4:51) 3551 3.0) 2 4) 1.9
LQ A4E 5 et gig 5.8 92 Poa ae dd OA
tee Pe pends ta re Ray ey codecs Repo ntge de, ere’ ise hy hs ey ewe tt


LR LEe eer menin cee Mae ee Aap at Atv sy werele aia halk 9)
Oe Ae ro BO Sy 2h te tte
6.28 ga Dig O. te) Pile at 1
2 fo)


L838
3 35 | 2 29 E ANH OMhO\). vOurO EAs Tone 167
BYE 200.4) 2 ea One6 4) On80 UP eer bie 20


2 47 1 52 OCT bes Cerys O 53 148). 2 h.3
Bigg Wi. om $28.40 0 183


OMF 7 A SRR OL: O.e ¥, 545)


A 'Tasue of DecLiINnATIONS.—North Latitude.


fe) 1 2 3 | 4 Soto


|


Soho (eaters) Tr SCR) ema se  Wapere GACg5 ty) 43°
OO, 2441! Oy 31 £27 2 9diel  QtG yt FasL Be 0
O48)) OFF | 1 3)) Y $7)' 2.521 3.471. 4.42
TE 2 Oo 1 O 39 13534 2-20 34 24 4 19


1; 305) 10, 415]. 0;45 TAL 2D en] UFO) Fh 5
BehOM hie. Sapr OsnOi. Op 40n) (dete) 296) .'31.9
DREAM aU BGR Os94:), OV22.)  Auigal 2). 82h). 3

eae Inet OxG 7 Tle One set ORE Mr d8l) (hd


RAAT U2eTORL A ASIE | Oe eOy} OA290) Unies.) “aha
93085} 230-4 B44.) 0.49, 0-6) “2.62 4° 15
E09

1


Qugoel) IZiny Teh W2e 4S 1RI'3.) HO. Set SORsS
ANSSE) (eho (angel Ur Qanl lOug ty 0.74


813) 718) 6.22] § 27| 4 31 | 3 35] 2 40


9.21| 8 25| 730] 6341 5 38} 5 42] 8 46
943| 847) 752] 655) 6 of} 5 4] 4 8
DOES NRO Oat hake nou Ole? |, 1526.1 4:90
10 26| 9 31 | 8 36) 740} 643) 5471] 4 54


10 48 | 9 53) 857) 8 1} 7
11-9 | 10, 14)), eis 8) 22)
-E1 31 | 10935 | 9-39 7


546 ANE BrIL ules’? ROA T PON


A TaBLE of DecLINATIONS.—South Latitude.


7 (ROR ine
24. 2.10 2 14 3
48 | 143] 233) 3
12 3


Beg th hie W206 Ai a 02a ee BO tO ral
2551.3 50} 445) § 40} 6 35


12) 64464 plan 6° Q05 "7 igre 28126 9 21
1°). SMD OSS aon 75s) BTSOR  ONaS
TA 934" 64809 (oleh Ordon: (Oma aoe no
15 | 5 56) 6 52) 7 47 | 8.42) 9 37 | 10 33


P64 -'65t9 4) W°rk4 8494 9885.4 To} so%), roUs6
py Orr a. gad: Sig ow tee TO eau) 11 389
£8.) .7" Se. Biol BS een = Omer tOvaGt irae
PQ) Beas Breet ig BO 1OV dd SUT Peo hy Lies s


emcee | mee RTC


Wao Ml) 7 EeTHY Bade Th 19°42 tr 7 Sr Mil oe Mite ae
274. 8 ERGY Deg). lo Ta OM Des Ee eed
220.8260] 9929) 10%S8 Be LPag |) ri2*rO | 1B S14

1} 23] 8 58 | 9 54) 10 50) 15 40) 12 42 | 13 37


——


=


em | ee


Bo ignet y 20Chs a. rir ene Mone EB Cs Oe Be
ess] (9743) 10'g9°] 11°95") 12°80 | 1326) 14-22
S67) LON Mee airser 4 11° c7 i te teo 4 Teta 1 tag
87} 10\36¢) 11°23 | 12°19 | 13°T4| 14*TOY 15%


ees | ee ee


—


28} 10 48 | 11°45} 12 41 | 13 361 14 321] 15 28
N26) 196 82) 33 Peo Ta ea A Ti eee
RK SEXMLORCE nde Yaee cee ILS


OF pAySsT R2O00L 10.:G Y. 547°,


A Tasre of. DecLtinaTions.—North Latitude:


11 3h 4310 » 5 54
LI GRS ABI OCHie TO OU} O ay SUR dk 7 Tats 6 15
IZ-AZ Al AZ 1,10 204; 9 24 1, 8 28.).7 gr}, 6 35
12 33.411 87 4:10 40]. 9 44): 8 48} 7 51 1: 6 55


12 ot he Lic hS Ald cabitqlOgidii GaAs #:- 8 dds 7 AS
ER MA dy IA ogy hi Oty lOw4 4, O a8 4, 338 eek
13 84 |,12.38}.11 41 | 10 44 | 2 48.| 8 51} 7 54
13 54. }.12 58 J.12 °1 | 11 4 | Fry 9 fO 1 8.43
14 pha dl Bigl7 12920 gy 1d 29 |
14 33 4-13.36 |.12 39 |.11 42 |

LO 4.14 62 dr 1B 655 Apt e 68 fi 12 = 2

LAG LE}. 14 FA d\13 7 4 y12-20 oun 33 10-241, 9 28


ee


4015 429 dul 32 |.13 35 {112 98 | 11 41 | 10 43}. 9 46
bet hich held 60 de IP 63412 66 p12 SO pt liga JO. g
166 O dil bi Body UA cdl 8 13 14 P1241 7.4 11 79 110. 22
1Do240 415 BO dnd4 29 118 Be {12 34 11. 36.410. 39


ES ee ee


16.41 }:15 49 dul4 46.413 48 $12 52.411 53 | 10 56 |
169581 IO Dial 5, Sode ldo 5051315 8 4 yl2 dO ptt
WAS dO IZA oS 2OAS4 22 h-13 24.9732 26 pal 29 |
17 32 |.16 34 |.15 36 | 14 33 | 13 40} 12 42) 11 45 |


neem ne ee


ID ABid ol O60: fol Si Scuba kan | 12 CO Alo SBog 12 4
1B Adal Fis Di folOim 8 fol POweld d2 pt13 34,12, 16
18 20 4.17 22 (16 24 | 19 26 4014 28 | 13 29 | 12 31 I}
18 .35 17 87 16 39 |.15 41 | 14.43°}.13 44.) 12 46 |
1B 50.17 52 |.16 54 | 15 56 14 58) 33 59 | 13.3
1Q 9.6 18) Wiel Tino Wel OGlieel deb? tel Aid 3 polZets |:
19 19 | 18 21 1.17 23 |.16 25 | 15 26 | 14 27 | 13 29
19 33 | 18 g§S1.17 36 |.16 58 [15 39 | 14 41] 13 42


—_—-


erent, wertaree | emenidieienesns temreiet eosin Stesesientemcmm,


19 47 | 18 43 WicGOd RTO gle Hohk 62 1.14 54 br IQigs
2Qel.20 - 0 [Oe tA ABR PR A 16 635 15 > 7 lh
Bade, 20.1 3 hig AL et Oe GN aT A 41 5-0 at A |


No. 27. 65 2


548 A NO PLL US 'T RAAT BON


A Fase of Dec tIrnaAaTions.—South Latitude,


© £1491 Pra 27 13 BB P14 GO Pag ato P16 Pay We
If iy 52} 12 48 | 13-44 P 14 Go 71996 16 33 117 BO
ePi2 ie P13 ooh 14 hy Bie 9S a. eG fey “ 5° Ii
2/1232 13 20 7 14 By f 15-21 9'16 we Try a4 418 ee


ee


ees Gees ee | eee:


4} 12 541 13 56} 14 46} 15 42 | 16 39 |'17 g5 {18 yt
S19 WAN A TP Lge P16 ihe rg Beg ee ep tt eee

6 Pag 94 fo14 ge P 1s ee F116 fay 119 ae 18 to ag
7113 54} 14 51} 15 47 | 16 44 | 17 40 | 18 37 | 19 33


eee | ene GEES) Gemety GEESE | GES! mere | peer EE | ee,


S14 Gh Pag ern P46 tay fA1 7 9 S18 i ia 8 Beg ah 9 S59
O7 14 394 15 go F116 26 1417 (23 418 seo l10 cay ep 3
IO f.14 624 '19 49 }'16 45 4 17 42 1°18 99 4°19 3641 '20°33
10 Pag at P16. 584419 4 48 a dae oe8 ro tee too *e


eet eee ee ees |


—)


r2 ¥.1¢ 29 ''16 26 }/17 ‘eg 4713 do


19 17 | 20 14 |’a1 11


13; 15 48} 16 45 | 17 42 | 18 39 | 19 36 | 20 33 | 21 30
14. F'16.06 [17 03858 Hoard eo rg Sa aego 2 Fok 49
15° P16 Sq f a7 ott S458 aR big Gee doo She dai ro foe be


—


Reece aay Ve Gemere eee ES eee —_—


16'Pi16 ga f17 38 4°18 26 Giro Sot Bo Ro t'e1 BB Fioatee
17: +46 58 $17 35 | 18 63 4119 61 4'20 48 T'21 46 Y ‘20 43
13.417 15 P19 Fe 4.19 Wo Flz0 % 8 Alam s Tige.t'2 tg
9 [| 17°32 7 18 ‘29 ia a7 f'20.25°C'2t 23 1 '22 20 }'29,97
207 17 48 | 18 46 | 19 44 } 20 41 ['21 39 | 22 37 | 23 94
Mon $716 PA 19 2 20 96 e087 Tan Ss | 29 595 eget
(oF 1s So '19 FS too 96 Ela. ae P22 te og eo tag fe
23\$'18 B5.1'19 O41 /20. 32 f'2t Bo )'22 O7 29 tae Tog tog


(RE RENEE pee


24. | 18 50} 19 49 | 20 47 | 21 45 | 22 43 | 23 41 | 24 39
26 P19 %.5 $ 29 3 f'2t7 2 Pee ae es feo G MN dade
86.4. 19 tQof 20°29. 421 16 Tag fen Plog ae Tag ‘aN eee
37 4 10'99°0°20 91 |'21 30 }'e2 a8 1°29 26 {24 ioe Nig a


oew eres SSS ens GEE ee


28 419 47 P20 46 t'21..44 |’ 22.42 | 29 Oo) 24) eon eae ag
29°}'20 0420 50 [21 47-4 22M8O |'29 ‘ba Nuon aes §
30 120-19 8'01 ‘Tetie2 16.4 23°0 | 24 Ui com oe 2 A


OF “A'S TR OL OGY. 549


A TaBLe of DeciinaTions.—-North Latitude.


Cf} 20°513>| 19 14)f 18.16 | 17017 7 16.18 | 16 20
I jip 20026-: 19-a7)- 18; 28 | 17, 292f 16 30'} 15. 32

2 420-38 | 19°99 | 18 40 | 17 41°] 16 42 }15 44 | 14°45 |
3. 20) 50} 19 54 | 18 52) 17 53} 16 54) 15 55) 14°57 |


Able Flos Loe 205 218 1ohagPe WeEr42h IFO grR16s 7ik agp 8 |
Gee Alel 3s BOLI 3p 1OGT Sap 18016ek 177i I7L 16518) bh 15219
6-), 21523° 20.24  1gc2a5 | 18: 26e} 17627) 16 28 b 15028 Ff
74.21 33° 20. Qa bk 19:35 181 3656 17°37 | 16 38: P15°38 |
8.) 21 43° (20. 44-):19:45 | 18:46 17°47 | 16 47 15 48 |
9\]2226§3 8 20084 p19) gsi 18) gO: 17° 56 AIP USRSS |
LOrtg W2eo2ke 2lorZae 200 42k 190 sre y8i eee mys 6Le.TGor6. |
Tt Ee 22 V1On: 2191.1 Oe 2001274901 FR 18513


42}. 22029 ee 2T<29  Q00205) 1921 1B :aIsh 17 244716522

12°] 22:27 | 21.28) 20928 |. 19 28:| 18°29 | 17 29 | 16 29
14 | 22 34 | 21 35 | 20 35) 19 35} 18 36} 17 36) 10 36 |
15 | 22 41 | 21.41 | 20.41 |-19 41 [18 42} 17 42 | 16 42 |
16 | 22.47 |} 21 47 (20.47) 19 47.) 18.48 | 17 48 | 16 48 |
17 | 22.53 ) 21 53} 20 53 | 19 53) 18 54} 17 54} 16 54
18 | 22°59 | 21 §9:}20 59! 19 69 | 19 Of 18 Of 17 0
I9sis23¢ 4G8a2r AypeAre 40k 2p 4Ailhipns SHSIBs® 6 IZ SLs


et SS


oe f eee ee cece] =


20.0238 Ors220 Oxc2re goth 20¢ oyc19t10 418 HOE 17 0rO 1
ar | 23-13 |.22 13°} 21:13} 20:19 | 19 14) 18 14°} 17°54
22 4-23 087 is 22, Ob7 Ys 20 27h 20 a7 Ys19 0H7 No r8 “Ez fe 17 oR


23 |. 23.20 | 22 20 | 21 201) 20.20 4 19°20 #18 20/17 20
24 1023 23 4-22 23°} 21.23 20 (23 1°19 23 fe 18 23 4517 123


23 26 | 22 26 | 21 26) 20 261 19 26] 18 26 | 17 26
23 28 | 22 28 | 21 28 j°20 284 19 28 | 18 28 |-17 28
23 3° |. 22 30 } 21 30 | 20 30} 19 30 | 18:30 | 17 30


—_—_— | ee


- -


23 37 422R 131 Yoar ign gezo By pcr19 Bz $518 42 1517 gx
23 QI | 22 31 f21 91 920 gx f8197391 [18 91 1°17 BI
23 32 | 22,32 | 21 32 | 20°32 | 19 32 | 18 42 | 17 32


550 ANYVIDE US TR Bar Hon


A TABLE of DEcuinamronsiceSeuth Latitude.
2 eds aoa en et 2 3 4 pee Ole Pon an


¢ Jodi im. Jed. om,. .b dium od. om. doom. spd. <m: <d. m.


—=


—


OG 2063 >i 212120) Bato! 230 get aah Igo) 255 265 269 4
Lu 201262 21085 M6 2202371 29° Bate, Boul 2c tou ob a4
BRIE 20598 311 2109700 22-96% 23095 Nit 24 ORB Cine suger 26h 30
38) 20 50.) 21 49 | 22:43) 23:47 | 24:-45'| 25 44 1-26 43


ek mer | en


Memes ee EE | ee oe ee eee


ARM QES TO 22> OF 22n59 it B9R68cIt B4cey (25 55 | 26 55
See SLSIQH Sacre azc1Oi 24g sg 256 BO 268 7s oF eo
62 [i 2152301 22°22 | 230210 gaeeoul 25. Foon 261 T8 ees 1g
Fee AI S33) A20B2K" S2081 He Saas ror as L@oSR 26 280 til o4 N28


———


——


—


8.) 21 43 | 22 42°} 23°41 | 24 41 | 26° 40°F 26 39 | 27 38
Q | 21 53 | 22 524123 51 | 24 $1) 25.50 | 26 49 | 27 48
°
1


LON} 225 2] 239 Th 242 OO) 254 O08 25 259 1226558 oar ny

1 | Z2RLOs 23 PLOCT Do tOUr 25 cig Ge 261 18 Sern Cl eRe BT iG

: ee rete

| B24 220290 23 aQ ci 24 (U8 oh 25028 6 26 O87 27 0101 08 “Fe
| ORGO1 22027 123 027 le 24 Veo: 215 ia6or 26625 27 v|e4 28 haa
OF45) 2203440 23°34- Fi 24233 2523308 26792110 27/31: 28 31

| SE541 22.47 |i 23044-4124 AO 25 394226 139 '1027 43828 138
16 22147 23°47 | 24°40) 25°45 4 26°45) 27 45.) 28 44
47) 22.53 |. 2353 [2245831] 25 52126652 ') 27. 52°) 28 ‘gr
OPS 622.089 4) 23.059 1124 059 25 580 26058 027088) 28 ic
IQYI23 2 Fd 245 4Ui2gp 4oe26h FUk27 bp gee2ss. ze 29. 2


245.9 4i250 94°266 8 27% 849289. 8 F029 oy
383 [62443425 23} 26°19 | 27013 4628 12 }°29 ‘12
a2) 28 27 1.24 7 | 125 087 4020 (07 827 164-2876 | 29 46 |
| (29123 20 4124 220 | 25.2026 .20 |°27 “19 |: 28 org || 29 2fg


eae


24.4123 (23 | 24 23 | 125 (23 26 123 27 22 |°28 -22 joan 180 |
ae +123 20 | 24 26}:25 26 .|°26 26 Ic27 a5 | 28 25 29 125
26 1123 28424 28 | 25 28 4-26 28 |:27 28 | 08 28 29 25
27 1123 39 4.24 30 |:26 30 <p 26 30 227 go 428 39 1529 30 fF


Se | ae


———


28 +23 Bt )24 Bt] 25 Qt do26 gi jooy 91 4°28 g1 ‘29 31 |i
29 1 23 B41 1-24 81 1125 314.26 Br f°27 31 4°28 31 J£29 4, |
20 1123 32 1.24 32


| 125 32 1.26 32 |27 32 $128 ga |'29 32


cL A B L E S
SHEWING THE
ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES


OF. oT HE


Pi SEPA cuNwee By Th oS.


No. 28. reba &


“=e ae


Re Aaa


OF Meee ee ln oir Ox Gi Xe 563
Avery MAB Ir EB |


OF
ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES,


To Sixty Decress of LATITUDE.


ion
*
WP oh
)


I
7
d. m.| d m ce d. m.|-d. m.| d. m dina den
Oo. Ho 4ho 5,0 6lo -7/° 80° gio II
o 40 aR a race To] On trp Or £9) OF
ei OE) Oh 13}. 0 ‘16}.0 Ig) ° 2210 25, 0 29) 0
a Sgn ee To. 24) 67H. 9 301.0 34,2 30) ©
7, : 3:0 Avo. 261 & ZO ST Ke Fels 48} 0
; ° 25, 0 3210 g8\.0 .44, 0 51) © 57| 1
e) pee 0 370 44-9 540 SOE Zs
as ps 34,0 42,0 5) 0 59] 0 8} y 16) ©
bast 38, 0 48) E57) t ar 16) 1 26) 1
= 3 as 4 Oy Sane At 1441 25] t 36) I
a4 ae 47,0 58) 1 lol I .22; 1 34 f 46) I
<i oe 3) 8 sur At rf 1 30, t 43, t 56 2
it sab2 cope 23.27 S78. 541% 6} 2
Ps T5) 0 Pe i caer | i 2 a 1] 2 16} 2
Te Oo 16,0 20 ae 37h osteo 4G 26] 2
O ~-B7|.0 Pie s\n ©) ey See Ig].2 36) 2
Pa ba Oo +E) 0 t. San el gon, | She 28) 2 47| 3
O Shincers 8 pagename 7h 371 2 571 3
See I 4412 4i2 25,2 46) 3 8| 3
‘eal Be pine 1 49f2 12) 2 34) 2 56] 3 18) 3
wa 23). I 55) 2 19} 2 4te3 43° 20) 3
>) she 2 | a2 202 534 15) 3, 40-4
ee nae ea ae Cream
“y te ate ce Rs ee ee a
fe) bcs | 4 2 49.3 %73 45,4 14) 4
29) 0 2 24 2° SOL 3 26) 3 56} 4 26) 4.
a Poe 2 333 43 34 4 38 5
i wba 2 403 1213 45,4 17) 4 5°) 5
(x] 5 aad 2) Ams 20,3 54,4 2815 25
2) Brie? Re eee 4,4 395 15) 3
. 3 3 374 wala 51 5° 28) 6
Be x ah Saas OL 4 245-215. 406
spheres pp La eee 14) 5 54/6
>) bg 3 3} 4 4.4 4505 26| 6 8|6
Saws 3384 1314 SOS 3 6-22) 7
ca aos AOE ai es a
icehs 3 47a aats 86 9,6 5717
2 an rats 2 55,4 43,5 30,9 15) 7 6) 7
ys 8 4 a4 s3]5 476 3217 ol
Bear a Ibs 45 55,5 467, 38/8
eats 4 22}5 15) 6 8| 7 t) Faas} 8
5 eal 4 3H 5 26,6 2117 16| 8 329
5 anal 4 405 33 6 34.7 3218. 309
: 4 sus 56 4917 488 48 9
FAERIE Cr gees ten arene ee: a ae


554 | RAT
A NY PLOPguCs rR B10 Oy


a


ASCENS
SCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES
pd o)


d. Mm, d 1 . 4. i
p 46 T 2 : ™m. | a. ane id: a8 digeay 7 | 8 |
47 11 Daa ene eee es dom. | d- m.|d. m
4311 i 9} 3 T3l 4 5 Me i sek) tat 18, 8
{ 7/2 131 3 20 1B) 5: 2H 6 28h -7 ‘be
© ro92 1 Se IED ee 6 42! en Oh
Sah ee 14 2 28 : 35,4 47,5 “5917 11] 8 Pie
ae ae a ag pe be a SNe a7 eae 319
%, 52 bi 20 Bu 3a a Se Tete Or Bh GS) Wb iy | ted 4310
sa] 1 23] 2 ate, 591 5 191 6 40) 8 ie came ee
CAT 3 Sha aid tae ake give Le ape
by 50: -2ql 2 4°18) 5 ‘4g 7 11) 8 dei? li
a pee: Boh 4 ak Rohe als ee da aie
BS c8 tr 26! 3 g| (4.381 6 7 f s8ilo 29/12
< soul 4 ;3 1214 49) 6 26\ 8 44.9 Lgi0 .S4il2
6941 | 3) 265 Oo} 6 aul 8 29 441r Zot
Z Bre toa s 2903 ee AAG eeiuenie
48 2 9 ee} B/| 43 Lo 2, 3
splay Ot Lane eae eaene rst: giz I7il4
6 5g 3x a6) 5 3G 2 3} 9 510 56|r2. 48/1
os ee r 583 56) 5 Beis i 9 2811 24\07° i -
Cy en lg ee 6! 6.2 are 93} Q 53% 54)t 2
Ob AVES eG fe 131 6 198 T*2-| 2Ot2) BF ge S7it6
mca bee Tae el 27/8 37/!0 49% 7\t4. 35/16
Oo ieee ssa ee ae: he Be yet pes vad
2 ¥. ] 68 2. 29) if 33} "if 6 9 29 I 55 3 39 16 IjIg
6912 361 ¢ 57,7 2719 5 8ike aay 2016 AED
Ly 1-70 2 an 2 13 7 51 Io 30 13 3 5 5 17 42)20
° 71 | 2 4515 Bol 8 i7itt * 5]13 ro 53118 39/24
; 72 54 5 AQ) 8 4g It 4 lA gsi 47 Ig 43 22,
fx] 74 3 x | 34 9 52/13 13116 af 5222 12125 #382
76 oe yf O10 22|T4 a1 3 eg 6 23 AI 27 9
a 76 3.4417 2911 I7\I5 A 46,21 3025 21/29
od a0 4 Ij 8 3,12 are’ fe! 3:23 6|27 Io/31
78 4 2018 4313 7\17 ath eee 56.29  38)3
O 59 4 4319 2714 169 ey 16127 sian 8 =
iQ 80 : cae 2115 38.21 24. 1829 38)35 17 4
8 ea 2ci7 17/2 Ai) | 45182 aalze res
Ball a leata he he aden ssae a2
82 i 814 22/21 54129 roloe 32.41 Shes ee ae
a Io|16 31 25 16134 5 38 30.48 24 60 43190
as (rt Bale, 24/29 55141 ee 27\58 5290 ©
3. 31136 | Zz1i99 ©
Si Pee ss mee Ben an
BF 2 yee sae 7° e
36 5190 0
89 |g0 0
go


OF A S°T4RJO0O.L-O G Y, Cans


PRADA ADE ER RY LEE


‘nigga i
| A @ hb A oe IgE


:%
*


Q F


ASCENTIONAL DIFFERENCES, &c.


a


ct Lz I 14 15 16 17 EGoubales 20°
“d. om. dim. Td. A d. m- |.d. m. | d. m. e m,{d. m.|d. an d. m.
geld. 12h eh Eshio tao}, 15),0.8 15), 0; 271.0) 18) 08119) oF 2zl o 13
2 4-0 ) 23{.0 ~ 25) Ov p zB] O | 30) 97 32) O 34) OQ gz oO: 39) 0 42] ©
_ | ig {| 2 > 35pO 38) 0: 142] 0 1 45) 0 48} 0 $2) 0 54) 0°59} F 2) I
4|° 47,° 51 0 BO Ty 7) 0) THe EO ey gal 1 8| x 22105
Z, ghee BSen yi] far 9} 2 Esler, 24) .F 2) 2 ga) ts 38) F  44l
6} = iol! 17| Tay 23 C199) we 997] Wy AH Be gop t 57| ee By
o) gigh Rae te igeh Ine ay) Min 4sy We 53] Sit) A. vo] 2).b 2) 2et 2
3 I 35/1 43} I. 52) 2 O| 2 9) 4 APO 2 128) 28 Bae 40 2
<) git © 46h x SRb 24 14:4) 24/16) a), 26) 2 3°12 43/2 57) 3 +8] 3
co 19 | 2 \ 58) 2. of 2, 20) 2 32] 2 42 Spt Bist SE WB Far 3
url 2 + 20) sPah 2034 47] 2 59) SNES) Sr ay) 32 39713. 5al4
< paibe@) + Beh 2 medhh Zena] Sere) er FO) Pel 4: ae) 34) 58 4 Tey 4 a
gts 2 938) 2 Ame Sis) Suit?) F739) Ss He Stas] Ae A 3e ge
A 14) [02 (473 41% 3 BB) 35034! 31.59) Bool 4 22 4: 39) 4 36] 5 11
te | 2 593 163 3313 5014 7) 4 24) 4s gl 5 Sly 18) 5 3
= 16 | 3-12), 3 9Bok 3.048) 4-5 Ol 4 24) 4. AS) Fic 2) Sil a 5° Aol cg FO
I 17 | 3 2413 44,4 3,4 22) 4 4? 5.2 Baal Fr Aap o 6
oe 1 re] 3 37] 39.658) 4) TB) 4 139] gs 0) 7281 (gay 81) a 25) 6
Oo Fg $3 50.4 121 4 34) iSky oy Bt 544° 6 3) 6 2616 491 7
cz] pod 2. 34 6 20) 40749) Ge 12) 5 36 2 59) 6 241 6 48| 7 12 7
at 14 49, 42 44 S55] 5s 30) 5 Sa EBL OS gsl 2 Top 7 36 8
lal 22 {4 30 4, 55) 5: 21/5 47) G13) 2 397 6) 7 3318 9 8
AG ast Men ee Rey Soc cay ike cA aa Mead Aa Bo
2 26| 5 54) 6 23) 6° 51) 7. 6 I
‘ a : a : BE) Gh REP Ge 4 et ade FZ) ees ty 8 i 9 oe
26 | 5.26} 5 $7) 6 2816 soz 38 9718 35/9. 719. 4olto
27 | 5 41) 6, 13) 6 45] 7 78) 7 51) 5 74) 8 58) 9. 32)'o  OlTo
AQ. 128) 5 56/6529 7, 3/7 3718 HP® 49 2a) 9. s7ito 33/11
is 29} 6 11,6 497 21) 7 57/8 32 2 OF Oi bag! Ou 2FE  celty
3016 247 3) 7 40,8 37/8 54 37410 rojlo 4gitl 28|T2
(2) 3x | 6 4217 2017 5918 3719 169 $5|10 g5ltt 1611 s6lt2 3
32 6 SQ). 7 33 8 18; 8 58 9 38 fo 19i1 rit 4312 25 13
mM 13317 157 56,8 37'9 Toto ao Ait 272 ait 53113
417 34 8 5] 8 $719 4tfto 25 tE IIE sult2 4o13 26/14
oS) 3517 49] 8 34/9 1810  3it0 4g/tt 35\12. 22113 g 13 57]T4
(3) 36|8 78 33,9 39|fo 26[rn 33 cf Th2 50113 3914 29115
37 | 8 25,9 #310 Ito soltr 39\ 3 271% 1014 IoIs 215s ss
a 38] 8 449 34f0 23]t1 “t4lt2 5) 7 57113 45it4 4215. 3616 31
39 | 9 319 Io AO|r1 39\1z 32 € FAA 20105 > 15 16 I1jI9
yo] 9 23]f0 T6IL TO2 5113, © 3% S5it4 gilts 4916. 48117 gy


Sr ea a aan RE a dai
No, 238. 6U |


556 BR OINTD WL LOUsS SERRA Tek O N?


AY RU Bere Dp


OF


ASCENTIONAL DIFFERENCES, &e.


2 ie a 7 13 24 I £6 04 18 19 20
dvnt.| d.'m’.| d. m.4d. ue d. ala. m.}d. ae d. m.|d. m.|d. m.
At |9 44,10 3911 35|12° Z1l1Z3 a8l14 26]15 - 25116 —2a4lr7 25]18 27
42110) gltr: “22 oln2© «SG BlIZ” SBt14” S85 soli7 > —ar8 = 4iIg
43 |t0 27rd 26/12 26113) 2ylt4 BBl1s- 31/16 34lt7 38113 “44|19 50
44 \10 4Qat 512 53/13 s6jt5 O16 siI7 10118 I7|tQ 251/20 35
45 |11 rgr2 16)13 20/14 2815 33/16 4olr7 48/18 58i20 8i2t 21
AO [IL 37,12 (43\03° galr4 58116 717 LOB 7IIg 40]20 5322
47 |12 213 rtlrg = ZollS «—ZOKIG’ 4217 sdlig 8j20 23121 40/2
| 48 [12 28113 39lrg gt|10 “517 Tor8 34l19 51
49 12 55114 girs 24\10 goit7 57]19° 16)
50 113 2H)14 Aolig GRlI7 1718 B7lIg ggj2r 22
gL jt3 S315 1316 3alt7 6\Ig Lo|20° 44j22 1423 39/25 10/26 43
52 \14  24|05 47 T1113 35)20. 3/21 32123 © ala4 °34126 g|27' 46
53 114 57,16 23117 Gdl19 16]2z0 sol2z% 22123-' 5625 ~35lay 11/28
54 (15 3517 T18 32)20 4]2E 38123 85
SS 116 7117 “YOl1g T5205 2122 30/24 10}:
#5\18 22129. H2U 43123 Qalas
br |Ee Bagg 620 Ag|22 3512 22)26' 1228 ~ sigo : 1132 1334
58 118 = 7119 S2iar vat|2R galas azla7 TO2q Isat f20)\44 26°55
Fg 118 52 20 42122, 26) 24 31126 29°28 39130 35132 ~4al4 58137
Gol 19 4o,2T 36i23 gdl25 3527 Bolzq 4731 5834 15|35 37/39
6T \26 32/22 ‘a8


24 37/26 4428 s4iz1 9°33 28135 \53|38 25 41
G% 21 37/23 S425 A4j2z7 5830 36132 38135
63 |22 26124 30126 57)29 18.31 diag. 15176 52,


G4-|23  29\25 F128 15/30 4533 4936 T38 4o4r “46.44 5448
63 24 38/27 7/29 44/32 1035 437 S140 slag To47 3051


of DECLINATION:


66:25 G3|28 3°37, 049° “6143 ach 5250 3954
. “67)\27  ¥5)30 5839 8\42 3o40 lag “s6'¢4 13°59
AD - 1°68" 128 4i5)3: 64r 2345 1349 0&3 52,53 27,04
fx} 69) 30 > 33 30 44, 16-48 20,52 43°57 59,63 ‘47:71
(2) 70132 131.5 et Es lees SR ES Wig
71134 22 38 28 50 6.56 23,62 37\7° “49'jO 0
io 7226 ASi40 7155 33,61 57:79 12190 9
ee 4 7OH3S 2044 3861 13169 4290 6
oO ‘id, we Aq|47 17,69. “Bg. | |
ey 752146 © 3052 31g 0
WOlict Tals fo) i
Be Vopity atl; |
78 66 8Igo © ;
e [79%99° *O |


OP PA $/ BR O.8 OG Yi. 557


‘


ASCENTIONAL DIFFERENCES, &,


i x
CO ON OMAWN


OO CONN Him p Pw ewe OF
WO WAN DAMIMPOwW Nv ARO &


COO CONN DAME REWS WV NH = 0 Of


es
ome}


Z
°
-
x
Z
a
oO
(a2)
A
Ree

1)
ep)
{x}
ea)
im
©
isa)
a


6 ANY Dg Us teat 1 Oe


DEG R EES oF DECLINATION.


OF AST ROL OG Y. 559


ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES, &c.


39
eam, |.
49
37
26
15
4
53
42
32
22,
13
3


AG|II
39 12
32)13
2613
20114
I5t5
11j16

8|17

i. 18

6}I9
6)20
8.21
11|23
16,24
22\25
20 26
40|27
52 28


OW CN ANAW HL ™
on anb BW bb HO
O ON An BWP AO


OC MON AnHAWN HHO


¢


Die C LSIENSA. T.-1 OLN:


D E .G -ReBeErs of


No. 28. ' 6 X


£60 AN one's RA TAO N


A OCT. Ge BOL


OF


ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES, &c.


I 2 : 6 (| 24 38
ap m. ae m, ae, tate. Hie an m. a m,|d. m.
BI 20 10122 gi2z2 58/23 5524 “53l25 53126 55/28 0,29 27|30
B2.j22 - 3122 Ssglz3 “sGlzde*s6 Os “ch/27- “Glas > gi29 “EBZ0°7 2413%
1 33 122 5823 “S624 .o7l25 “59.27 | 3128 & glag P1830 12031 | 44133
34 (23 55/24 56125 59/27 4128 11/29 21|30 3231 48/33 6134.
35 |24 53125 s7l27 3128 «11129 22130 35131 50133 10:34 36)35
36 Ize ‘s3la7. ol28 = -gi29.--2rlg0 35138 52/33 ~12'34 36/36 2/37
37 26 §5/28 —s]29 18130 32.31 50133 12)34 32130 437 26/30
38 |28 “0129 13)30 29/31 45/33 10134 36/30 437 30/39 15/40
39 29 7/30 23/31 44133 634 53130 2/37 3639 15
40 \30 1731 37/33 1134 28/35 59/37 33/39 1340 58 !
41 [31 29132 54134 2235 53137 30139 tolyo 55142 47/44 45/40
42 |32 45134 15/35 4737 23139 5140 5242 4444 42146 4949

: 16.38 59140 46142 3944 3946 4049 215%
4435 2837 7138 5040 3942 33144 3346 4248 5951 27/54
45 136 5633 4040 3042 25144 26146 3648 s45t 2154 4:57
46 138 2940 Ig42 1644 18/46 29148 4851 37|54 56 57
47 |40 742 4'44 8 46 aes 4olst 1153 ~58'50 486
" ft $703 7,46 te 3H5% 353 nie 490° a
9 |4 4 059 53153 40 260 664 068
; H: "(50 4353 30156 34159 $963 4668 3674 49190
SI |47 54150 30153 19°50 24!59 51163 4868 31174 45,90 ©
52 |g Eol53 7/56 13/59 4263 40/68 2slz4 42/90


'


53 |52 5350 59 3103 31/68 I0l74 37.90 :


DEC tel NAT ISO Ne
a


54.155 48:59 16,63 2168 1Li74. 32lI90 0
55 59 663 10168 274 2690 of


Ma?
Pie


of


DEGREES


.


A caetD?” Aguado


«


On F
_ ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES, &c.


46 47 48 49 ||
m. . ‘f


>
>
Oo
a
aS
=
A


5


3
Ou
Onnrin nas OOO.


Al


roe,
o-3
Qa
B


Zz
4
|


WO ON AnNAW NH
p
1S)
WO ON AnfhWNHO
iS)
an
Ww
“I
O ON OPW NHO
© CON ANAWH HO
O OU ONPWH a &
ro
N
WO ON Dibwe Ne &
N
ies)


of “D _E-C-L IN AT EON.
- ~
ON N
eal
Re O10 CONN ANPW NAO
ie) Od Lal
a x 0 wn
N — _—
@) bi NN
w tea
oe woo
to —
2) Ni WN
in w Nw
ie} (2) NI- OD
N — ~~ =
at o WN
+ ~ wn
ON “I Ones
N = _
RX ie) ow
© Mn NN
> oe) nm
, N ~ il eal
De aw Na) asus) c
Ny = ina ;
wal oO oo
N ty er
pod (0) Ln
Legs Nv WN [Sey
°° us 00 -
N N te eet
Wt ae WN OMY OBO NH
- Xe) ne 6)
N N Sas ae ay
ov oy Ow co
I in KN
t MI O® NI
N i ~
NI _ Ny
nal > mn
ae “I NI ¢O
RA TE LIES I I SET LS ICL MG A NTA AIRES DE RI BE aI et 2 A TSE RT AEA PEPE ARTI, EEE SEI IIE EGET


N
™N
i)
nN
Lal
ba |
we
-
~
Ne)
Ww
N
ios)
La
GQ
wo
Wr
Sheds
we
We
Wao [aey
9 ODDAON ©
“I LSP)
b
Ww
és
ice)
_
in
wo
‘Oo
Wn
WwW
ae
bet
WwW
fF
a
Les)
N
e)


ss)
oe
=
co
aN
o
Wi
~~
A
os
aN

ee - OS

. Oat i

lox ;
aN
&
e
oO

GO Ur bot


4

Bek 5
WwW
W
W
a
yp
1)
aS
nN
>
ES
cay)

: SO- \
os
fo
-
Nu
es
oo
Lat
Baa
wa
~
Lal
NI
na
Ww
wn
wal
on
OV
ES
oO
oO
Oo
D
oO
w

OW DOE "0'US cals


ESE ES PERE Ce IN AOE -


EGR
a
Ba


Be
N
Wn
~
Ww
Lond
Ni
-
Ww
uw
S
{@)


562 A N° Geen u's ao ReA TPO N


IO TIE
-——


y Mer necn Pane


© F


ASCENSIONAL DIFFERENCES, ~&e.


f | 355
t m. cd
1 ‘ 17 :
2 34 4
a 3 . 58 4
f 4, 8 5
1 et 5 20) 7
be eas 46 44 «
| 7 Zz {
; © 3 22} It
es m es .
af 34h
feng tt 24) 16
12 A7\16 17
4 < 13 1I|17 19
a Ps os 37119 %
5 4120 a2
G1 lems 16 3.2\22 T5\24
17 2)23 53125
| ms 34)25 34127
i © 19 9} 17\29
3 20 46)28 ° 4\31
Vee os - 26139. 54133
oe 8 AAN3 5
oe 54 45)37
| 34 44 48139
es 265 39 5Q| +4
Oo | 26 38 1O|44:
27 AZ. z 46
biactins ig 53 ‘9
={ 29 12 A4\52
mt 3° 39 bs
| 31 16 48159
32 19.63
na 33 1315 21/68
es) 34 Ane) 14174
35 400 22190
| 25\74 ©
a 42 go
1a


a ae cite Bo oS
SHEWING THE
OBLIQUE ASCENSION of the PLANETS,


For the LATITUDE of LONDON.


No. 28. 6Y


O°F; AS TR OR OG ¥.
Fs A ESTES TE SETA AONE LTR


wa
fon)
as


AY OT ALS LE of its tee te A SCE NS T'O.N S,


a ee


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude,


fe) I 2 3 4
1 Onaga as 1. | 0. ie te. eitl.. |G, tm,


5
Gd: titiva| Gc im


BEE ere Be oe een |
PCE TIT ETE


me es eee


——


BSS HID
B52) 43


O10 © [358 27 1356 55 Ig55 21 1353 47. 952 13

I} © 25 1358 52 1357 19 1355 46 |354 12 352 37 |
21 © 49 1359 17 1357 44 1356 10 |354 36 1953, 2 |351 27
3] 1 15 (359 42 1358 9 1356 35 1355 © 1353 26 |351 51
Al 159] © 7 |358 53 1356 59 [355 25 1353 50 1352 15
5} .2 4] © 31.1358 58 1357 23 1355 49 1354 14 1352 39
6
7


=


eee ee ee ee


2291 © 57 1359 23 1357 49 1356 14 1354 40 1353 4
2 54 | 1 22 1359 48 1358 13 1356 38 1355 4 1353 28
© 12 1358 37 1357 3 1355 27 1353) ST
© 37 1359 3 1357 27 1355 17 1354 14
I 2 1359 27 1357 50 '356 14 1354 37
1 26 1359 52 \358 15-1356 39 1355 1


ee


Pee RD Ge | See GS


© 17 |358 41 1357 4 1355 27
© 41 1359 4 1357 27 1355 50
1 6 1359 3° 1357 51 (356 15
1 32 1359 55 1358 17 1356 39
1 56| © 19 1358 41 1357 2
222) 0 45 1359 6 |357 27


a


2 27 I 11 1359 32 |357 52
3.13] 4 36 1359 56 1358 17
3.33 2 0 O 20 1358 41
4) 5 2 26 © 47 1359 6
I 12 1359 29 |]
I 37 1359 54


O24 ters 42 1-72.21 to 20
GPF lord 2 Jn 2 27 Jor. 43
Cine 435 bs SSF iat! EO


ep Oy BR Se er Ss Ae ae
PIES. $20. (a BBO te (2) Ed
Fd tei $55 | 412] 2 26
Gr oS Wir 23 1 14 39 | 12 $3


*


566. AN AURHUS TRA THON


A TABLE of OBLIQUE, ASCENSIONS,


|
|


| For the Latitude s1 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


v2 e) I 2 2 tian c 6
Pde de mB dim od im Ph mire ad. fy. |, ad
Br EO) HO | SGN) BES See ae OPT tei 4az |: 9) 28
fee | 0 25 BS (PG) Fe eg) BN lOl ee |" C8) wr | 9) 46
ad UR NY 2 i RA 332 be Rekha: a ee) a)
7 Sh Lae| Cxe ee, | ae oe 5 M1 oF, 28 ae fas brs Be) ee 25
gh | FOL tg Me 1 eC AO COL igus era 1 Ol AG. 1911) 8D
cad ae oe he SOC hw NCO, Fe OCB ry. 1° g) go (711) 24
[fates ern Par eam ncrasayrat (asian fo = rita is
1} 36 [E72 SPA Io Pes Far Sta) nS OCBL Re P10) FO [Fa.4) 40
| TERS) HCA) So tO) er |e tm om NCO. We (Lona ee ror Ry
RK eke TO ECA! SBS nG An |" og [Ol se Tia X7 12 39
Be 91 59 [14 33 [e13) 5
10 10} 2% |"11i 68 ["13) Bo
11 , To] 49. (12 33 7° 13).55
11} FF 1191 4g |e14, 21


13) Br [las 35 [\16 57 |
L haa TF Pag fab ,


OFTAS TROL OGY. 567


A A AIR LE: of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg, 32 Min.—North Latitude.


668 A\IN’SE DE. OS T’ RAST RON


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


— me SS = SS SS SS = | on A
Oo CO}]N AnNBPwW N HH OWMON Al Uutwn Fe O s


O'R. ApSi TER OL Go Gt 569


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.— North Latitude.


ay fe) I G. 5 6
ded. mized iid as. i Ge tile t..ante fed. “Mm. td. m


OdsZostote28 21 | 29°29 24 San) 22694420 27-4048 2a
TE GOUG2 CY 20062 278 O25. 8228-94) 2tre7 1g - a
2 | 31 36 | 29 45 | 27 47 | 25 52 | 23 52 | 21 47} 19 38
BBipS2eIOc sore 2oug8N SORI5 Naar sc Nl 2aNZo4 om. 27
AG SIRUAER SIRI 20 29,88" | on 10 26018 WP 2381 20 b58
SU Ber AOae GIN STU. QO. 271; COREA 2604 28l 20° Ba tt gin ag
Ohi 943340). 928 424). 904617 28 49, |) 26° Ac5') 24/904. 22 24
7 | 35 20 | 33 28 | 31 33 | 29 33 | 27 29 | 25 20| 23 7
ON FOUe Tae o40 T5ee Bae S00l) GON LOC 28) Behl 26. 69 a3 63
9} 36 55) 35 2133 7] 3t 6 | 29° 1 | 26 52 | 24 37
10 | 37 44 | 35 5° | 33 55 | 31 54 | 29 50) 27 39 | 25 25
11 | 38 33 | 36 39 | 34 44 | 32 43 | 30 38 | 28 27 | 26 12
12 | 39 23 | 37 8° | 35 34 | 33 32 | 31 28 | 29 16 | 26 50
RGCh 4081 40s 906 21h 4652 451. 94° 290 Zak Tah SoMa Mag: a8
14/) 41) O.| 39°13} 37 14 | 35 15) 33° 7 [30°57 | 28°37
15) 41 59] 40 6| 38 7 | 36 8) 34 © | 31 49 | 29 29
16 | 42 52} 41 ©} 39 1 | 37 21) 34 54 | 32 41 | 30 22
17 | 43 47 | 41 54 | 39 56 | 37 56 | 35 48 | 33 35 | 31 17
18 | 44 42 | 42 48

19 | 45 36 | 43 44
20 | 45 33 | 44 41
21 | 47 31 | 45 38
22 | 48 29 | 46 35
23} 49 28 | 47 35
24 | 50 28 | 48 35

25 | 51 29 | 49 37

26 | 52 31 | 59 40

27 | 53 34| 5! 42
23) 54 37 | 52 46

29 | 55 41 | 53 50

30 | 56 46 | 54 56


wo 0 is MN) BL US DRAPION


, SSR


|


[A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


3° 52} 32 40 | 34 25 | 36 8137 49
34 30 1-33 21 4035509 1-36-51 138 g2
32.19.1434 61 35 52 | 87 35 | 39 16
33. 4-434'5° 1.36 37.| 38 201 40 ©


30 10} 31 58 33 42 | 35 25 | 37° 6
33 48 | 35 36 | 37 21 | 39 5 | 40 46


Go
fore)
oS
aN
HS
O
NS)
Oo


35 20137 8 | 38 541 40 37 | 42 18
30.5.7.|:37: 85° $39 4tjr41 24 43% 5


ee pe eeeare eee :


i 30 + 21.38 cer 11s Seo ae gt


OF ASTROLOGY. | 571


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude.


a. i
Ro
z
oO.
=
Qu
5
Qu.
5
jan
jon
5


CEES oo | Es | PS |


O | 56 46 54 56) 53 2/51 3] 48 59 | 46 48) 44 29
1 | 57 521 56 2 54 9/52 10] 50 7 | 47 56] 45 38
2 | 58 59) 57 10] 55 18 | 53 19 | 51 17 | 49 46 49
3 | 60 6 58 18) 56 261} 54 28 | 52 26] 50 16 | 47 59
4 | 61 14) 59 28) 57 37, 55 39 | 53 38 | St 29 | 49 13
5 | 62 23) 60 37) 58 47 | 56 50] 54 49 | 52 41 | 50 26
6 | 63 33] 61 47) 59 57 | 58 1] 56 3} 53 56] 54 41
7 | 64 43) 62 59] 61 8} 59 14] 57 16| 55 11 | 52 58
8 | 65 54| 64 9g) 62 20] 60 27 | 58 29 | 56 25 | 54 12
9 | 67 6) 65 22) 63 34 | 6r 41 | 59 43 | 57 41 | 55 30
10 | 68 19) 66 37, 64 50 | 62 58 | 61 o| 59 11] 56:50
1r- | 69 33| 67 52! 66 5 | 64 15 | 62 18 | 60 19 | 58:10
12 | 79 47/69 6) 67 19 | 65 33 | 63 37 | 6 37 | 59-31
13 | 72 1) 70 22] 68 38 | 66 50 | 64 56} 62 57 | 60°53
14 | 73 17) 71 38) 69 55 | 68 8 | 66 164 64 17 | 62.14
15 | 74 331 72 54/71 11 | 69 26 | 67 34 | 65 39 | 63 35
16 | 75 59) 74 11] 72 30 | 70 45 |.63 55 | 67 1 | 64°59
- 17-177 775 29) 738 59 | 72 §| 79 17 | 68 25 | 66.24
18 | 78 25| 76 48) 75 10 | 73 26 | 71 40 | 69 46 | 67 49
19 | 79 48' 78 7/76 30 | 74 48 | 73: 2] 71 11 | 69 16
20 | 81 2) 79 28) 77 52 | 76 10 | 74 26 | 72 37'| 70 43
21 | 82 21 80 48) 79 13 | 77 32 | 75 49 | 74 2/72°9
a2 | 63°43) 182" gf 80 36 1.78 65" oe ae 75 28 5 73996
23 | 85 1) 83 30, 81 99 | 80 19 | 78 39 | 76 54 | 75> 3
24 | 86 22, 84 52, 93°30 7°81 “fr 9"8o™ 5) 7S 23] 76.882
25 | 87 42) 86 15} 84 44 | 83 10] 8t 32} 79 50] 78: 2
26 | 89 + 30 38} 86 8 | 84 35 | 82 58 | 81 17 | 79 x30
27 | 90 24| 88 s9| 87 31 | 85 59 | 84 25 | 82 45 | 81:1
28 | 91 47) go 23) 88 55 24 | 85 cr | 84 13 | 82 32
29 | 93 11) gt 46) 90 21 §2 | 87 20 | 85 43 | 84° 4


go | 94 34 93 12] 91 47


3


672 A Nae bk. WisutT RUA) OON


A TABLE. of OBLIQUE, ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—Sowth Latitude.


bers) Ol q 2
d. d. m.| d. m.| d. m.


: 4
de msi yds om.


)

1 57 52) 59 36 61 19
2 | 58 sg| 60 43] 62 25
3 | 60 6] 61 50
4
5


56 46| 58 31| 60 14 | 61 53 | 63 29) 65 4 | 66 35
63 31 | 65 8 | 66 43 | 68 6 | 69 46
61 14] 62 58) 64 39 | 66 15 | 67 51 | 69 22 | 70 52.
62 231 64 7) 65 47 | 67 22 | 68 57 | 7o 28 | 71 57
6 | 63 33] 65 15; 66 54 | 68 30] 79 3] 71 34] 73 2
4 | 64 43) 66 25) 68 3 | 69 38 | 71 12 | 72 42 | 74 10
8 | 65 54| 67 34) 69 12 | 7° 47 | 72 20 | 73 49 | 75 16
9 | 67 6) 68 45) 79 23 | 71 55 | 73 27 | 74 56 | 76 23
10 | 68 19] 69 59 71 35) 73 7 | 74 38 | 76 71/77 33
11 | 69 33] 74 13] 72.48 | 74 18 | 75 49 | 77 17 | 78 43
12 | 70 47172 25,74 9|75 29177 9 | 78 271 79 52
13.172 1 73 39 75 12 | 76 43 | 78 11 | 79 38 | 811
14, | 73 17] 74 §3| 79 26 | 77 57 |. 79 23 | 80 50 | 82 12
1s | 74 33/ 76 7177 39 | 79 9 | 80 36| 82 1 | 832
16 | 75 501 77 231 78 55 | 80 23) 81 45 | 83 14 | 84 36
a903| 7 gh 78-88 80.10 +8438 8a Bh 8a 27 | 5 48
18 8 201 79 56 81.26.14 82 so | 84 18 | 8r 39 1/87" "6
19 EA ae 81 19] 82 42 | 84. 7 | 85 33 | 86 53 | 88 314
20 | 81 2| 82 32) 83 58 | 85 23 | 86 47 88 7 | 89 27
Be 82 21| 83 50] 85 15 86 39 | 88 2] 89 22 | go 4o
o2 | 83 41) 85 9! 86 33 | 87 56 | 89 17 | 90 37 | 91 55
23 | 85 1| 86 28 87 53 |.89 15 Stal Pies 193 20
24 | 86 22° 87 47| 89 11 | 90 32 | 91 51) 93 10] 94 26.
os | 87 42 89 8 90 3t | 91 51 /| 93 10 | 94 20 | 95 41
26 | 89 3) 9° 28} 91 51 | 93 10 | 94 28 | 95 42] 96 57
27 | go 241 91 48) 93.00] 94 29 | 95 49 | 96 59 | 98 13
28 | 91 47] 93 10 94 38. 95 49 | 97 4) 98 18 | 99 31
29 | 93 11 94 32| 95.51 [297 B 98 23.199 0 aang
| 100 54 1102 6


94.34 95:54.97 WN 9? 27 | 99 A2


i


OF ASTROLOGY. 373


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min..—North Latitude.


X O I 2 4 5 6
Geel) UG.) ayy cd. m.i"ds om. (adem. | dim. {°d: m.


oe


© | 94 34) 93 11 | 91 47 | 90 18 | 88 48 | 87 12 | 85 35
1 | 95 581 94 35 | 93 12 | 91 45 | 90 16 | 83 41 | 87 5
2|97 22190 1 | 94 37 | 93 12 | 91 45 | 90 11 | 88 36
3 | 98 451 97 26) 96 3 | 94 39 | 93 12} 91 41 | go 8
4 100 8/98 St | 97 30/96 7 | 94 41) 93 | 91 39
Meelis 16 | 98 56 | 97 34/196 9 | 94 43) 93 11


—- ae A a, Pees afte) SE eee


6 |102 §7|101, 40. |I00 23.| 99 2.| 97 38 | 96 13 | 94 43
7 |K04 29]103 6 |101 49 |100 3r | 99 9 | 97 44 | 96 16
8 |105 46|104 33 |103 17 '102 0 |100 39 | 99 16 | 97 46
9 |107 11/105 59 \104 44 [193 39 |102 8 |100 461 99 21 |
10 [108 36)107 25 |106 10 |104 56 |103 37 |102 16 |100 54
11 [110 g|108 53 \107 38 {106 23 {105 8 j103 47 |102 27 |


me as


12 |111 27/110 19 |109 7 |107 52 |106 37 |105 19 |103 59
13 /112 53/111 46 |110 34 |109 20 j108 6 {106 48 |105 30
14. |114 18)113 12 [112 2 {110 50 |109 36 |108 20 |107 2 |
1s |II5 44/114 37 |113 30 |112 19 |111 5 |109 §1 |108 35 |
16 117 10/116 4 }114 58 |113 48 |112 36 [111 22 j110 7
17 [118 36117 gr j116 25 j115 16 114 6 [112 53 jut 4o_


ee | a ee


| eaters, Coe, es cee seeeencoes |


18 j120 2/118 58 [117 53 /116 46 [115 96 |114 25 1113 13
IQ \121 27/120 25.{119 22 j118 15 (117 7 115 57 |t14 46
20 |122 c4l12t 51 [120 49 \119 44 \118 36 [117 27 |116 16
21 {124 201123 18 122 16 |221 11 120 6 1118 57 1117 49
22 {125 46/124 45 4123 43 |122 40 121 37 |120 29 {119 21
28 4127 12,126 12 124 11/124 8 123 6 |121 59:|120 53°


eo |) a koa


a4 1128 39127 39 |126 39 [125 37 \124 35 |123 29 |122 24 |
25 (130. 51129 6 j128 7 |127 6126 4 |124 59 |123 54 |
26 |131 31130 3I |129 34 |128 34 1127 34 1126 30 |125 26
27 \132 S7ikaT ho |£38) 2 tae.) Purzo|-g i128 © 120° 55
28 1134 23/133 27 |132 29 |131 31 \130 32 |129 29°/128 29
29 |135 501134 53 133 57 |t32 59 1132 9 |190 59 [129 58
30 [137 15/136 19 {135 23 27 '133 29 1132 29 [131 29


574 A NYIAEIL Vis TIRIAAT TON,


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude. |


° Th ge 2 ae 4 ‘3 6
d. jd. m. d..n. (| di.m;: f deims de met de ite tee


ee


© | 94 34 | 95 54] 97 12 | 98 29 | 99 42 |100 54 |j102 6
1 | 95 58 | 97 17 | 98 341 99 49 lor 2 |102 13 [10g 24
21 97 21, 98 39 | 99 §5 |10t. 9g |102 22 |103 32 o4 42 |
3] 98 45 |100 © jlor 17 |102 29%103 42 |104 51 106 1 |
4 \100 «8 {101 24 |102 40 |103 §1 {105 2 |106 11 [107 19
5 |IOL 33 {102 48 |104 2 {105 12 |106 22 |107 31 |r08 37 |


2 ome | ee


ed Gey


7 104 22 [10g 35 |106 47 1107 55 |109 4 |¥10 12 j111 17 |
8 1105 46 |106 59 |108 9g |109 17°|110 25 {111 32 {112 37
Q j107. 11 {108 23 |109 33 |110 40 |111 46 |112 52 113 56
10 {108 30 |109 47 {110 56 |112 3 |113 g |114 13 |t15 16
I1 |110 2 1111 I [112 19 |113 26 |114 Jo |115 34 [116 37


6 l1o2 57 \104 12 |105 23 [106 33 |107 42 |108 51 |109 i


expenme | Gone Cony Soe | wade


12 |T11 27 1112 96°\113 43.|t14 48 \trg §2 116 55 1x7 58
221ti2 53 \tad 2. \225 77 (E16. 1r-|017 19: 118 ag te9 £0
14 {114 18 |115 26 |116 30 |117 34 |118 36 (119 39 |120 40
15 |115 44 |116 50 |117 55 \118. 57 |119 58 |121 .0 |122 ©
16 {117 Io {118 16 |119 18 |120 20 |121 21 |122 22 |123 20
17 |118 36 |119 41 |120 42 |121 44 |122 45 |123 45 {124 42


eer ees


ae


POt26. (OTS E )) Rea 7" 128 ea roe Tread.
19 |121 27 |122 30 |123 31 4124 31 {125 go |r26 28 |127 26
20 |122 54 |123 55 \124 56 |125 Sco |126 54 \127 50 |128 48
21 |124 20 1125 20 |126 21 |127 19 |128 17 |129 13 |130 10
22 |125 46 |126 46 |127 45 |128 43 |129 40 [130 37 |131 ge
| 23 |'27 12 |128 9 |129 9 [130 7 1131 3 |131 59 132 $4


i
!


24 128 39 |129 35 1130 34 |131 31 [1392 26 |133 21 1194 16
25 130 5 |131 2 |132 0 |132 56 1133 49 |434 45 1135 38
26 1131 31 |132 27 [133 26 |134 19 135 13 136 1477 4
27 132 57 |133 54 |134 5° |135 43 136 36 |137 30 [138 33
{| 28 |134 23 |135 18 1136 13 [137 6 |138 © |138 53 |139 45
| 135 50 {136 44 |137 36 |138 30 |139 24 |140 16 j141 8
E30 ISH AS ASB PESO SIE SD. SS: AL ee ae


OF ASTROLOGY. 575


a) a SO Ra a a os


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSION s'


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude.


wikip VEO, Uae
Cod ama eid. amt ie ace


(| ee


Ones S
138 41 [137 46 |135
140 7 |139 12 1138


1 135 54 \134 57 |133 58 |132 58
2 137 22 1136 26 135 281134 29
3 [141 33 1149 39 138 50 |137 54 |136 58 \136 oO

4 4142 59° |142 140 10 |139 23 |138 27 |:37 30

5 [144 25 [143 32 |142 40 ]141 46 |140 51 [139 55 3P 89 | a


ee


|
134 27 [133 29 1192 29 [131 a


eR ee


6 [145 51 144 58
97 1147 17 \146 24
8 1148 43 147 52


omens Penna, | mene


143 13 {142 I9 |141 24 \140 30 |
3. 144 41 [143 46 142 53 |141 58 |
146 9 |145 15 |144 22 |143 27
147 37 [146 44 1145 51 |144 57
149 2 {148 12 1147 18 1146 26


10 15% 34 j150 44
150 29 {149 40 |148 46 147 54


Ir |152 59 152 10


154. 25 |153 36 152 151 55 151 7
153 22 |152 33
157 16 156 28 .\155 38 j154 48 (153 59


—,


eee


[50 14 149 22
151 42 150 52
153 9 |152.18


15 (158 4t |157 53 |157 5 [156 16 1155 27 (154 37 153 47
16 |160 7 |Isg 18 |158 157 42 |1560 54 {156 3 \155 15
17 |161 32 |160 44 |159 159 9 158 20 157 gr |156 43 |
18 |162 58 \162 9g 164 160 35 159 47 158 58 |r58 9
19 |164 23.|163 36 |162 50 {162 2 161 13 \160 25 |159 35
20 [165 48 |165 2+\164 16 |163 29 162 4o [161.52 |161 3 |
21 |167 13 |166 28 |165 41 |164 55 |164 7 1163 19 |162 30 |


166 19 165 33
170 4 |169 18 |168 32 |167 45 |166 58
171 30 |170 43 |£69 57 |169 11 168 24 |167 38 [166 50
172 54.172 7 \I71 22 |170 35 |169 49 |169. 2 [168 I5
174 20 |173 33 |172 47 |172 1 |471 15 |170 28 |169 42
175 45 }174 58 |174 13 fh 27.|172 40 174 54 |171 7
177 10 |176 23 |175 38 |174 52 |174 6 |173 20 |172 33
29 Ego 361177 48 AIA 3 2 18 175 32 1174 45 [173 59
277_43. 976 97 176 31 [175 25


. No. 29. Ste 75


164 45 \163 57
166 12 \165 24


bo
co


576 A Ni PLC S: T- Ro Ay TAO N
Sr rr enema


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


© 1187 15 |138 8 [139 2 |139 55 |140 49 |141 40 [142 32.
138 42 |139 33 |140 26 |141 19 |142 13 |143° 3 [143 54°
140 $-]140 58 |141 52 |142 43 [143 36 |144 26 1145 17 |

141 . 2V 1143 16 |144 8 [144 59 l145 49 |146 40 |


143 53/144 42 |145 32 |146 22 |147 12 [148 5
145 17 |146 7 |146 57 |147 46 |148 36 [149 27


neeccamee: Beae eae


ee | RA, {tem |


146 42 |147 32 |148 21 1149 12 [150 © |150 50
148 7 |148 56 |149.45 |150 35 |151 25 [152 14 |
J149 32 |150 22 {151 9 [151 59 [152 49 [153 38
150 58 |151 47 [152 35 /153 24 [154 13 j155 2
152 23 |153 12 [153 59 |154 49 |155 37 [156 25
153 48 j154 16 |155 24 |156 13 157 1 \157 47


ee


150 30 [157 27 [158 15 [159 2 159 49 |169 35
158 4 |158 52 |159 4o |160 26 j161 13 |161 59
159 28 j160 16 |161 4 |r61 50 j162 3% |163 23 |
160 54 {161 42 {162 28 |163 14 1164 © {164 47 |
162 19 1163 6 |163 52 |164 38 |165 25 |166 12 |


12 {154 .25 : 14/156 2 |156 50 |157 37 158 25 [150 12


163 45 |164 91 |165 16 [166 3 |166 49 [167 35 |
165 10 |165 56 |166 42 {167 27 |168 13 [168 59 |
166 35 |167 22 1168 6 {168 51 |169 38 [170 24 |


21 |167 13 i 2 1168.46 |169 32 [170 17 171 3/171 49


169 25.1170 10-1170 $5 1171 Az |372 27 1173 13
170 50 |17E 35 |172 22 173 6 |173 52 |174 37


(Qeme [esc


172 1§ 1173 © |173 46 (174 31 |175 16 1176 3
173 40 |174 27 |175 12 |175 57 |176 42 |177 28
175 § |175 52/176 37 [177 22 \178 8 [178 54
176 32 |177 17 |178 2 {178 48 179 33 |180 19
177 56 |178 43 |179 26 |180 12 |180 57 |181 43
179 22 |180 - 8 [180 52 |181 97 |181 23 |183 10 |
183 3 1183 49 1184 35 |


180 47 181 32 |182 17


OF ASTROLOGY. 577


et


lA. TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
|


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—wNorth Latitude.


oO


| & 1
) dasel.d eee


2 5
d. m. d. m. d. m.- d. m. d. m. d. m.


NR ee es


180 0 |179 13 178 29 1177-43 |176 57 176 11 1175 2¢ |
181 25 {180 39 |179 52 |179 9 \178 23 |177 37 [176 50 |
182 50 |182 4 \18r 17 {181 34 |179 47 |179 3 \178 17 |
184 15 |183 29 |182 43 |180 58 |181 12 |180 27 (179 41

185 40 [184° §5 \184 8 |183 23 |182 98 |181 52 1181 6 |
187 6 |186 20 |185 33 |184 48 |184 3 1183 18 {182 32 |


eee, Se


oe ee | oe


Bae Suis


6 \188 go |187 45 |187 o 1186 13 [185 29 1184 44.1189 57.
7 1189 56 |189 10 |188 25 187 39 {186 54 1186 g {185 2
8 |191 21 |190 35 |189 50 |189 5 |188 19 [187 39 |186. 47
9 |192 47 |191 59 |191 14 \190 29 |189 43 |188 57 [189 11 |
| 10 j194 12 |193 25 |192 39 |191 54 [191 9Q |190 22 }189 36 |
“11 (195 37 |'94 50 |194 4 [193 19 |192 33 [291 47 jagt a |


SS


Sy ee I OO


12 :|197 2 |196 15 |195 29 |194 44 |193 57 |193 11 |192 25 |
13 |193 28 |197 42 |196 54 |196 8 |195 22 |194 35 |193 49
14 1199 53 \199 6 |198 19 |197 32 \196 46 |196 0 |195 13
1g |201 19 |200 32 |199 44 |198 56 1198 I0 197 23 |196 37
16 |202 44 1201 56 |201 9 |200 20 799 34 |198 47 ‘198 1
| 17 |204 10 |203 22 |202 33 |j2or 45 |200 58 |200 11 |199 25 |


Se ST


see


18 |205 35 \204 46 [203 59 |203 10 202 23 |201 35 |200 49 |
19 |207 1 |206. 12 |205 24 |204 36 203 47 |202 59 \202 13
20 |208 26 |207 37 |206 49 |206 2 |\205 12 |204 23 |203 35
| 21 |209 52 j209 2 |208 13 |207 25 |206 35 |205 47 |204 59
| 22 |211 17 j210 28 j209 38 |208 51 |208 1 |207 11 |206 22 |
23 |212 43 |211 §3 |211 4 |210 15 |\209 25 \208 35 l207 46


* EE S| SS SS | RS NET —


| 24 1214 g '213 18 |212 29 {211 39 |210 49 [210 © |209 lo
Qe 121g 35 1214 43 |213_53 [213 3 |212 14 |211 24 |210 33
26 1216 59 |216 10 |215 19 |214 28 |213 38 j212 48 j211 55 |
a7 |218 27 \217 36 |216 43 |215 52 |215 1 1214 411 [213 20
28 |219 53 |219 2 |218 9 \217 17 |210 24 |215 34 |214 43 |
/ | 29 |221 19 |220 27 \219 34 [218 41 |217 47 \216 57 |216 6 |
30 1222 46 221 52 \220 §9 [220 5 219 11 |218 20 }217 29 |


“
578 AN TLE U STR AT TO N


jA TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
Por the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


4 5 6

d. m.'| d. m. | d. m.
o 183 3 1183 45 [184 35
1 {181 25182 12 |182 67 |183 42 \184 28 1185 15 |186 2
2 1182 50183 37 |184 22 \185 8 |185 54 |186 4o |187 27
3 {184 15/185. 2 1185 47 1186 33 [187 20 [188° 6 [188 59
4 {185 40\186 27 |187 13 |187 59 |188 45 |189 32 |190 19
5


ce) I 2


op 3
d. | d. m.| d. m. | d. m, | d. m


—— oot ene) CIEE |


180 10/180 47 \181 32 182 17


187 6187 53 [188 38 |189 25 j190 11 |190 58 \191 45


== =


6 {188 30189 17 |190 3 /190 49 |191 35 |192 22 [193 10
7 \189 56190 42 |I191 28-192 15 |193 2 |193 48 \194 36
8 j191 22/192 8 |192 54 |193 42 |194 27 |195 14 ]196 3
9 {192 47193 32 |194 19 195 5 1195 53 |196 42 |197 30
10 {194 12194 58 |195 44 |196 32 |197 20 |198 8 |198 57
11 |195 37/196 24 [197 10 |197 58 |198 47 |199 35 \200 25


oto


12 |197 .2|197 52 1198 37 |199 25 |200 13 [201 2 j201 52
“13 1198 281199 16 |200 3 |200 52 |201 40 |202 29 |203 18
14. |199 52/200 42 |201 29 [202 18 |203 6 |209 57 |204 45
15 |201 19/202 7 |202 55 |203 44 |204 33 |205 23 |206 13 |
16 |203 44/203 32 |204 22 |205 12 |206 1 [206 52 |207 42 |
17 |204 10\204 58 |205 47 |206 38 |207 27 [208 18 |209 9Q |


ed


CD Gee ene | Se eee,


18 |205 35/206 24 |207 13 |208 5 |208 53 j209 46 |21098
19 |207 2/207 50 208 40 |209 32 |210 20 [211 14.\212 6
20 |208 26,209 19 210 7 \210 58 \211 48 |212 42 [213 94
21 |209 52/210 42 '211 33 j212 23 213 16 j214 9g j2ts 3
22 |211 17/212 8 212 59 \213 52 \214 45 j215 38 (216 33
23 1212 43)213 yee 214 27 \215 19 [216 14 |o17 7 |218 2
24 ata Qi215 2 215 53 216 47 'j217 42 |218 36 219: go
25 \215 35|216 28 1217 20 |218 14 |219 9 |220 ¢ |\201 2
26 |216 59/217 §4 |218 47 [219 42 |220 37 \221 39 |222 30
27 \218 27/219 21 |220 16 j221 10 |222 G j299 2 |224 oO
28 ee 53/220 48 j22t 43 |222 38 |223 34 \224 g2 l225 32
2g |221 19/222 14 223 9 |224 Oiioes is 226 2 1227 4 @
JO |222 40/223 42 (224 37 [225 35


ee | REE


ee eS


|


OF AS TRO L:0.6 W


579


1A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.— North Latitude.


om. I 2
d..m.} d. m.| d. m.


—


222 456/221 51\220
224 111223 16/222


225 137/224 41/223
227 31226 ° 6/225


59
2
47


ce)


1228 29227 331226 35


229 aseee 58)228 o


| esc pin


231 21230 251239 26


7 age 47,231 51|230 51


8


© 1958. (29


\262 39
“264 1 g


232 15
233,39
235) 4
236 29


234 14233 14
235 40234 40
237 61236 5
238 33/237 ge


239 58/238 55.237 53
241 24/240 19/239 18


t 4


@. inti


ie


3
d. m.
5
30


220
221
222 54
294° 17
225 41
Bap a


228 29
neo: 53
238 1751230 20
232 41 231 43
234. gi 232. 56
235 29 234 30


222
223


226


42735


236 53 235 53
243) 18; 397 15


242 50/241 44240 4I
244161243 10242 5
245° 411244 34243 30
247 | 81245 58244 53


33/247 24
581248 49
24/250 13
49251 37
14}/253 1
255 381254 25


257, 3.255 48


252


239 40 238 39
241 °3:/240 1
242 26 |241 24


243: 49° |242 47


245 11 |\244 8
240 34 |245 33
247 57 240 51
249 20 \248 14.
ASO) FE 4S. 55
5 \250 56


252 18


253) 2


ceed
255 58
258 (361257 20
260° 0/258 43
261 21\260 5
262 149/261 26


257 1


25905 #
261 ‘15


265 26/264 | 6\262 48


254 48 |253 38
256 9 |254 58
257 30 j256 18
258) 51 |257 38
260 11/258 58


261 33 |260 18
7c


j226 39
228 57 /228


257


d.


6
d. m.


mM.


11 |218 20 j217 29
220 36 (219° 44 |218 51
Oo |221
24 iZae 90 j2af 37
224 47 |223 51
Lt |225 15 }224 21


7 }220 25


222 59


225 44
227 6
228 28
229 50
231 11
ia tate
234 53 (233 56
256 0% agg 418
237 38 {236 40
239. 0 1238 > 0
240 21 |239 20
240 43 |240 41 |


—


1
229 23


al


243° 5
244 20 |243 23
245 47 |244 44
247 8 |246' 4°
248 28 1247 (23
249 48 |248 43 |


242% I


9 |250
29 {251
49 |252

9 \253
256 28 |255
257 47 \256


25g - 6 25:7


3
23
4]
59
15
36
54


252
fee)
hl,


“580 AN EDEUSTRA TION


ie)


m I
d d. m. d. m.


222 461223 41
224 11l225 4
225 37226 33
228 I
229 28
jah 54


he ee


d.


226 3

227 31
228 58
230 26 |
231 53


231 21232 21
7 1232 47.233 48
8 234 14235 15
235 4o236. 44.
237 5 6/238:
239 35


2 |
| 10
| 11 1238 332
12 (239 53241 1
241 24/242 29
242 50/243 56
244 16/245 22
245 411246 48
| 17 247 8248 14
248 33/249 41
249 58251 7
251 2Hl2g2: 305
252 49\254 1
254 14/255 27
1255 38/256 54


271259 44
g1j261 9
15|262 34
391263 59
3265 25


26266 49


|


233 21
234 49
236: 17
237 44


240, 38


2 3 4 4
m. | d.m.{d. m,


224 37 225 33 |226 31


227 4
228 29.


229 57


231 26
232 54
234 23
23:5:\ 52
237 20
238 49


239 11 |240 16 |


241 45


242. 7
(243: 35
bo eae |
246 30
247 58
249 26
452) 56
(252 2
253 5°
255 16
256 43
lag8 Ti


259 37
261 4
[262 30
203 57
265 23
266 48


(268, 13


243 14
244 44
246 11
247 44
249 10
259 40
ag2 8
253 37
255 4
250 34


diay eicuna teen |


253 0
259 29
58-
26


260
262
263
205
266
268


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSION S$
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min..—South Latitude.


228 o
229 27
230 57
232 26
233 50


eee


|


. 6
dicm. hed. pk


227 31 1228 21
229 11230. 1
230 31 4231 31
2ZA Od932 - 1
233): 32 12.34 .934
B3o. 144296. 0


235
236
238
439
241
242
244 24
P45 OH


25
23


24
53


250 24
ht GS


|| ena exer Gee


253 23
254 $2
256 23
257 52
259 21
260 51
262 22
263 51
2656 19
266 48
268 165
269 44


127 91 272 48 4074 2s


54
54 241


244 3


236. 31 |237 36
238 1 (239 7
239 31 |240 39
1.1242 41
242 33 |243 44
245 14


251, 40


262 16


+
ee


\266 -49 |268


245 35 |240 47
247 -7 |248 20


a
4


250° 1 O:


i253 11
254 43
256 13
257. 984
ASD 13 4
260 44;


263 47 |265
265 17 |266


268 19 j269
269 49 }271
271 19.4272


‘
\


OF ASTROLOGY.


IA “TABLE of


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude.


|
di. im;


jon
3


hee 33
262 St


265 261264 6262 48
_|266 49'265 28264 9
268 11266 50265 29 [264 I1
269 34.268 11266 so '265 31
270 56,269 31 268 g |266 50
272 18.270 $1,269 29 |268 9g


273 38272 13/270 49 |269 28
274 58273 31/272 $8 |270 45
270 19274 51|273 27 [272 4


pela:
d.


260 18
261 37
262 56
264 14
265 31


265 so 265 34


———


263 9
269 26
292° 43


OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,|


5
m. | d. m,


259 6 |
260 24
261 41


264 18


266
268
269


ize)
6


23


ls


203 1 (2


277 39)276
278 58)277
280 17.278
281 34,280
282 53/281
284 10,282 2
Lis 4 1296 -29F299
286 41/285
287 5$1286


10/274.—45 )273 21
281276 1 (274 37
47/277 18 [275 58
4278 34 |277 8
21279 50 |278 21
27281 § |279 37
E2202 21 [200.24
7 283 34 |282 3


hea
273 13
274 27


270
271
P73


4l |274
57°75
I1 |276
24 (277
37 |279


275
Pze
1278
279
280


21.234. 48


283 17 |281


49 1280


38
53
7


teat a!


33


46 |:


59
LO
21


a ee ee ees


181 33 280 8


289 .11|287 gs j286 oy 284 31 1289 fe)


299 27/253 47/287 Ik
291 41/290 1/283 25
292 53/291 15/289 37
294 5|292 26/290 48
295 16/293 35)291 57
296 27/294. 45 293 6
297 37/295, 54/294 13
298 40/297 1/295 21
299 54|293 10
39, A299, 17
302 6/300 24
“303 14308 29


497535
298 41


291


296 29 |294


299 46 |298 _


285 41 284 11
286 53 |285
288 5 i286
289 13 |287
sd 21 [288


21


30 }289
38 |291
45 1292
51 |293 17
295 58 j294 21
297 3 295 27
298 7 296 31


292
293


282 43 j281 17
283 53. j282 27 |


(285 4 (283 37 _
286 11 |284 44 |


291 44 [290 14 —


|292 46
293 53 |?


1294 50


29.2 2] ;
293 27 |


Pou US. TeR A TIVO N


fo)
d. m.
265 26
266 49
268 11
269 34
| 4 {270 56
5 271 18


I
d. m.


266 49
268 14
269 37
O71) OY
272 21
veh AS Pa)
27 5.--8
276 30
270 FO NLT7 at


6 |273 37
7 |274 58
5 |

9
10
11


278 58 |280 31


280 17
281 34
282 53
284 10
238¢ 27
286 43
iors 287 hes


ae. 289 13
19 |290 27
20 |291 41
2I j292 53
oe ley tae
23 |295 16


| 283 11


284 31
285 49
267 6
288 21
it, 38


29034
292 8
Ay 3 5
ays 33
oad i
as


24 i296 27
25 297 37
26 298 46
27 299 54
28 1301 1
29.\302 8

30303. 14


298 .13
299 23
300 31
301 41
302 50
893 58
395.4


a ee


OBL


2
d. m.


SS ee eee


268 13


269 39
AB EO
272 29
me 54
275 FO


282


284
286
287
288
290
291
292
“93
205
296
eee.
298


10
30
49


5
21


At
55
10


26
40


300
301
302
303
304
305
306 _


|


276 40 |278
276 *3, 1290
279 24 |281
277 39 |279 11 |280 47 |282
8 |283
281 ¢3 |283 30 |285


50 '286 34 |288 20


SSS SSS SS ———————————————————————————


IQUE ASCENSIONS,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


3 4 5 ;
“epuil 08 Oe Be EM eB Nee EG ne Pes PE a be


—


ss


'269
27.5
22
274
275
276


At


271 11 |272 47 |274
8


272 40 |274 17 |275
3 /274 9 1275 47 1277
11275 35 |277 15 |278 59 |
25 |277 1 |278 43 1280 59
50 1278 28 1289 10 |281 <8 |


15 |279 55
At \28t 21
5 (282 46
28 |284 11
$0 [285 34
11 |286 58


281 38
283 6
284 32
285 58
287 23
288 49
290 14 292 11
289 34 |291 35 293 36
COT Sie 5 Ole 0 Se
292 26 |294 21 |296 25
293 44 |295 43 |297 46
295 4 297 3 298 7


283 28
284 57
286 24
287 51
289 17
i ee noe


287° 55
289 15
yee
291 SI
‘293 10
294 27 |296 23
295 45 1297 41
297 1 |299. 0
298 19 |300 17
£99 933° Oe ot
300 46 )302 44


xo
10
21
31
41
50
iy


|


298 23 |300
299 43 {301
39° 59 1303
302 19 304 30
303 35 |305 48
394 49 1307 3


29
50
19


—


303 57 |306 4 |308 19
3°95 11 |307 19 |309 34
306 21 |308 31 \g10 47
307 34 (309 14 [312 1
313
314
ne:


301
3°93
304
3°95
306
3°97
308


go8 43 4310 54
399 53 312 4


A a
ZI


al


reper a


1 (313.11


OF ASTROLOGY, 583


a


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude,


6


up fe) I 2 4 5
d. m.{]d.m | d. m.


3
der [yd tae (det ve. Fd.) mes | dem;


aa


"© [803 14 /Z0% 29 |299 46 |298 7 |296 31 [294 56 |293 25
1 (394 19 1302 34 |300 51 |299 11 }297 35 |295 59 [294 28
2 |305 22 [303 37 |301 55 [300 14 298 37 |297 1 295 29
3 |306 26 |304 40 |302 57 |301 16 |299 39 |298 2 |296 30

4 |307 29 /305 42 /303 $9 302 17 |300 39 [299 2 |297 go
5 1308 31 |306 42 }304 59 [303 18 /301 39 |300 2 298 29 |


ee SS


Eset EE) SES |S, a | el


Sasa See


6 |309 32 1307 45 1306 0 }304 18 |302 39 |301 2 |299


eee. Se


—) ee


q 310 52 }308 45 1306 59 |305 18 |303 38-}302 0 |300 26
8 311 31 |309 44 \307 58 /306 17 )304 36 |302 §9 |301 24
9 |312 29 1310 41 1308 55 |307 11 1305 35 1303 56 |302 21
10 (313 26 |3911 37 1309 51 |308 15 |306 30 1304 §1 |303 17
II [314 22 |312 32 |310 46 |309 6 [307 25 |305 47 [304 11


me


=, oon


12 |315 18 (313 29 |311 42 310 1 }308 20 |306 41 305 6
13 1316 12 314 26 |3912 38 {310 55 |309 15 |307 36 |306 1
14 |317 8 [315 19 |313 32 |311 49 \310 9g |308 go |306 54
15 1318 1 |316 12 1314 27 (312 42 {311 2 |309 22 |307 47
16 |318 54 |317 § 1315 19 |313 35 [311 55 \310 16 308 gs
17 |319 46 |317 58 316 12 |314 26 |g12 47 \g11 7 |399 30


ery eee | eee, a eT


18 |320 37 1318 48 |917 2 (315 18 |313 36 [311*59 |310 22
£9 [338 27 319 39 |317 52 |816 9 |314 27 |312 49 [311 12
20 |322 16 |\320 28 1318 42 3916 59 315 17 (313 39 |312 4
21 1323 5 1321 16 |319 31 |317 47 |316 6 1314 27 312 50
22 1323 52 \322 «5 (320 19 (318 36 1316 55 {315 15 1313 39
23 1324 40 1322 53 |921 6 |319 22 1317 42 1316 2 /314 26
24.1325 26 |323 39 {321 52 1320 10 (318 29 316 48 1315 12
25 1320 12 924 24 \322 39 [320 55 |319 14 1317 36 |315 59
26 1326 56 |325 10 }323 22 |321 40 j320 0 |318 22 |316 45
27 1327 41 (325 54 |324 - 8 |322 25 |320 44 1319 7 |317 29
28 1328 24 |326 38 |324 51 |323 9g 1321 28 |319 50 [318 12
29 |329 8 [327 20 325. 35 1323 52 \322 11 |320 34 1318 57
3° 1329 50 [328 2 326 18 1924 35 |322 54 {321 16 i319 40
§29 [50 ee i Ne eee oe 1S I


No. 29. ve ih ae 9,


—ss


ee pa REE TED eee | en


584 AN ILLUS TRATI oN


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


a te Sa BS oer ee Ye 4 Be ae 36
d. |-d. mi {-d. m. ' d. m. ha ial d. m, | d. m. | d. m.


© 1303 14 |305 14 406 88 308 57 nt 1 (313 12 1316 31
1 |304 19 |306 ro |908 5 |[g10 4 1312 g 1314 20 (316 4o |
2 |305 22 |307 14 \309 10 911 9 313 15 (915 26 1317 47 |
3 |306 26 |308 18 {310 14 312 M4 [S34 20 [316 32 318 52
4 (307 29 |go9 20 B14 17 1313 17 [315 24 [377 35 [329 $7
5 308 81 [310 22 312 19 1314 20 316 27 318 39 32a Of


com | commen,


we) | ees ees | enon ees |e eos


6 |309 32 (911 25 913 21 1315 22 1317 27 1319 40 922 1 |
7 1310 32 1312 2% 1314 22 \376 24 1318 28 1920 41 1923 3 |
8/311 31 (813 25 915 22 817 22 \319 29 [g21 42 [324 4 |
9 [312 29 |314 22 |316 20 [318 21 [820 29 |322 41 [925 2
tO [313 26 |315 19 [9r7 16 [319 18 [921 26 323 37 Ig25 58
11 1914 23 |316 16 |318 12 [320 15 |322 22 [924 39 |326 54
| 12 ‘315 18 |317 12 [319 11 [321 10 [2323 17 325 29 [327 49
} 13 (316 12 |318 6 |920 4 |322 4 1324 12 (326 25 [328 48
| 4 1317 8 [319 © |\g20 59 |322 58 [325 6 327 19 329 38
| 15 1318 1 [319 §4 |321 62 1329 52 |226 © 928 11 1930 91
16 |318 §4 1320 47 |322 46 |324 45 i326 $2 329 2 (991 22

| 17 1819 46 [321 39 )323 32 [325 37 (827 42 [329 52 (332 12


5 eg


—— ——r


| 18 (320 37 [322 30 [324 26 26 28 |328 32 [330 44 (3393 1
| ¥Q (321 27 (909 21 |325 16 927 18 (B29 22 1991 32 1333 48
| 20 (322 16 |324 10 |326 4 |328 6 /330 10 |792 21 334 3%
| 21 323 § (324 58 [326 52 |328 54 1330 59 |333 8 [335 22
| 22 323 52 \325 45 [327 40 329 41 831 45 1333 54 |936 8
ht Bon ee sen 3? Bes 27 eae 22 oe Ste Se 1 be


ae


we ee ay


| 24 |32% 26 4327 48 1309 64 1331 14 1333 35 5 (335 22 1337 36

25 },320 12 328 2 329 58 1331 56 1333 58 1996 6 43398 a8
26 1326 56 1328 48 1930 42 1332 41 1834 42 [336 49 1339 2
| 27 \827 41 |329 32 1331 27 1333 25 1335 25 1337 31 1339 42

28 |328 24 330 15 1932 T1 (334 8/396 7 1398 12 4340 22 |
| 29 [329 8 (330 58 332 54 1334 48 1336 46 [338 52 [341 0
30.1329 5° 1331 39 1333 31 1335 28 1337 26 1339 32 1341 39


OF 7A TRID DL OG ¥." 58s


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—WNorth Latitude.


= ° ge a ak BEC ; 5 6
id, | d.m. a. med. om. a amet) a. md. mi | d. ni.


—


1 |330 32 [328 42 [327 © [325 17 |323 36 321 59 [320 22
2 1931 12 |329 25 327 41 (3925 so 1924 18 1922 40 \921 4
3 13931 52 |330 6 1328 27 \326 41 (325 0 323 22 1321 45
4 |332 32 339 46 |329 2 327 21 1325 42 '324 2 1322 27
5 1333 11 1331 26 |329 42 328 © |326 22 |324 42 (323 (7


o |329 50 [328 2 326 18 |324 shi 54 |321 16 |319 A


6 1333 46 |332 4 |830 22 328 41 327 2 |325 22 |323 47
"7 1334 27 1332 42 1331 1 329 19 1327 40 326 2 [324 25
8.1335 4 1333 2% 1331 39/329 57 (328 19 |326 40 [925 2
9 1335 42 |333 57 |332 15 39° 34 |328 56 \327 18 |325 42
10 |336 18 )334 35 |332 52 |33 11 '329 33 |327 55 |326 20 |
11 1336 52 (335 11 |333 29 1331 48 (330 10 |328 32 (326 57


<==


| 12 1337 29 1335 46 |334 § 1332 26 |330 46 1329 9 |327 34
13 {338 4 |336 20 1334 41 |333 1 (331 23 1329 45 |328 11
14 1338 39 |336 56 |335 16 (333 36 331. 58 |330 21 |328 46
15 (339 14 1337 3° 1335 49 1334 11 1332 34 [33° 56 |329 22
16 1339 47 |388 4 [336 24 |334 46 333 9 [331 32 |329 58
17 342 19 [338 37 |336 58 335 20 333 43 |332 5 [330 32
339 11 1337 31 |335 52 1334 17 1332 39 [331 6
119 134° 24 1339 44 338 5 |336 27 1334 5° 1333 14 [331 47
20 |341 56 340 17 |338 38 1336 59 1335 22 /333 48 1332 14
21 |342 28 |340 40 |339 9.1337 31 [335 55 1334 21 1332 46
22 1342 59 |341 20 1339 41 |338 2 1336 28 |334 52 1333 18
23 1343 27 1341 52 1340 12 |338 35 1337 1 1335 25 1333 50
24 1343 59 342 22 340 44 (339 7 1337 32 1335 57 1334 22
25 1344 31 1342 52 1341 14 1339 38 1338 2 336 27 1334 54
26 1345 «1 1343 22 1341 45 1340 9 1338 32 1336 58 1335 25
| 27 1345 3 (343 52 1342 14 |340 39 1339 4 1337 28 1335 55
28 1346 © |344 22 (342 45 |341 10 1339 34 |337. 59 [336 27
| 29 1346 29 |344 50 |343 16 |341 40 1340 4 1338 30 1936 58
| 30.1346 58 1345 20 1343 45 |342 6 |340 32 1339 0 1337 27


18 (340 52


neces eecen |e ee


586 A. OL Las is TIRE GN


a sete Sinn vena Dig < sean bine RE basa aaainons


la TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
| For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min..—South Latitude.


me 3 4 5
teh id a ihe; | Mee (Tae es ile Geen Gens Al ee, nae


© 1339 50331 39 1333 31 \335 28 337 26 |339 32 |341 39
I 1330 321332 21 |334 12 836 9 [338 6 |340 11 |342 19
2 1331 12)333- 1 1334 52 1336 48 [338 45 |340 49 |342 56
3 |331 52333 4° [335 32 337 27 |339 24 1341 27 /343 32
4
5


332 32334 21 [386 12 [388 5 340 2 342 5 (344 9
1333 111335 © |336 52 338 44 [34° 41 1342 41 [344 45


eee eee


Oe eee


334 27336 18 1338 7 339 57 1341 52 (343 52 |345 54
335. 4336 $3 1338 42 340 32 |342 27 /344 26 [346 27
9 1335 42337 29 /339 18 (34t 7 1343 2 [345 © [347 4
10 339 1813388 5 |389 54 [341 44 1343 37 1345 34 1347 34
IL 1336 52/338 39 340 28 342 19 |344 10 |346 7 [348 5


6 1333 49335 49 1337 29 1339 22 [341 18 | 343 17 1345 21
7
3


ee ee ee


Oe eee


12 1337 291339 12 1341 1 [342 52 1344 42 1346 49 [348 37
| 13 1338 4/339 48 1341 36 1343 26 1345 16 |347 12 |349 10
14/338 39/340 22 [342 10.1343 58 1345 48 1347 42 |349 40
| 15 1339 14/349 57 1342 42 |344 29 1346 21 |348 12 |350 9
16 1339 471341 30 |343 14 1345 2.1346 52 |348 44 |350 41
17 1340 191342 2 1343 47 1345 34 1847 24 1349 15 |351 10


ooo


pee ee | eee een | eee eee | ee Se |: grams Ree


18 1340 521342 34 1343 19 |345 4 1347 54/349 45 |351 39
19 1341 24/343 7 [344 5° |346 35 |348 22/350 15 |352 8
20 1341 56/343 39 |344 21 (346 6 |348 54 1350 45 [352 38
21 (342 28344 16 1345 52 1347 37 [849 25/351 15 [353 5
22 1342 59/344 41 (345 22 1347 8 1349 52/351 42.1353 32
23 1343 27/345 12 |346 52 1348 38 /350 22 |352 11 \354 1


oe


ee ee


CES | Cou, ee | SIR |


24 1343 50345 41 |347 22 349 7 |350 51.1352 39 1354 28
25 1344 31340 12 1347 52 [349 30 [351 24 1353 71354 56
26 1345 41/346 42 1348 22 3350 4 |351 48/353 34 1355 22
27 1345 39/347 11 1348 50 |350 31 1952 15 1354 2 1355’ 48.
28 1346 0/347 39 1349 19 |350 59 1352 42 1354 29 |356 15:
29 |346 291348 7 [349 47 |351 27 1353.10

3 348 35 1350 15 1351 55 1353 37-


7
9


10
II


|


6 1349 45


a,


For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—North Latitude.


d. m.


ge Oek2


351 6
351 32
|354 59


ee Ne ee


Op Re sAGS aR gO UO -G* Ye


I
d.


345 20
345 49


347 14
347 41


te. d. Wm.


ES pee


343 45
344 14
344 43
345 10
345 39
346 7


a eee SE Lee oe


348 8 1946 35


348 37 1347
8 1350 38 1349 4 |347 28°
349 3° 1347 55.)
349 57 1348
350 24 |348 50


eee aS eee ee
\


2,


23


352 25 |350 50 |349 17
352 51 1351 17 1349 43
353 17 |351 42 1350 9
353 43 1352 8 (350 34


354 8 1352 34 /351


a5 34
354 59


357 32
357 56
Seo ge
358. 46
359 11
359 34


No. 29.


I


353 25
853,057
354 17
354 41
BSS CZ
355 32


353


355 57
356 24
356 49
1357 12
357-38


358.48
go 1360 0 1358 27


I
351 28
3 ae


O51 53
Re By
B5 4°43


963° 8 |\354
353 34 (352
353 59 |352


354 25
354 49
355. 14
355 39
356 3
356 28
356 55


3

dst:
342 9
342 39
343 = 7
343 34
344 4
344 31
344 59
345 27


347 42
348 9
348 34


S409
349 20
349 52
350 18
O50 AS
951 10
a5


25


352 50
353 16
353 41


354 6 352 :


354 32
354 $7


7 i


of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,


4
d.


me


34° 33
341 3
341 32
342 1
342 go
342 58


343 25


346 9
346 36

347.2
347 28
347 54
348 20
348 45
349 11
349 37
352 I


1 135° 27


353
21955. 21 135347 1952


Che pees aoe


351
351


ai
e
042


58
23


1352


346 45 /345 13


587


5
d.


m,.


ey


339 © 337
339 29 1337
339 5& 1338
340 27 1338
34° 56 1339
341 24 1339


341 52 )340 18 |
342 19 |340 46 |
342 47 |341
343 13 |341
343 41 (342
344 9 1342


eet = | ee


344 35 |343° 3.
345. 1 \343 29

345924 343 55
345 53 |344 21
346 20 344 47


347 11 345
347 37 1946
849 2 |346
348 27 346
348 53 347


i359 19°


349 19 347


ant


349 44
35° 34 |
350
351
351


588 A N® TUS T REACT T GOON


A TABLE of OBLIQUE ASCENSIONS,
| For the Latitude 51 Deg. 32 Min.—South Latitude.


eae bre


© 1346 58 |348 35 [350 15 1351.55 1353 37 1355 21 1357 7
1 1347 26 1349 4 135° 43 1352 24.1354 § |355 48 1357 34
2 347 54 |349 32 1351 11 [352 5° 1354 32 1356 14 13957 59
3 1348 22 349 59 |351 38 1353 16 1354 58 1356 40 958 24
4 1348 50 |350 26 1352 5 |353 43 1355 25 |357 6 \358 50
5 |349 17.1359 54 1352 32 354 10 1355 51 1357 33 1359 17


ees Se eee


6 349 45 1351 22 1352 59 1354 37 |386 17-1357 58 [389 40
7 1350 12 |351 50 |353 27 1355 3 1359 44 |3958 23 | 0 o
8 \z50 38: 1352 16 195% 52 1355 29 1357. 9 (358) 48) [9 6 31
9
O
1


351 6 1352 42 1354 19 1355 5 1357 34 1359 13 | © 55
351 32 1353 8 1354 45 1356 22 |358 0 [359 40| 1 20
351-59 1353 34 [355 10 [350 47 (358 24 | © 4) 1 44


12 |352 25 1354 © /355 35 1357 13 [958 49 | © 2
13 |352 51 1354 26 356 1 1357 38 [359 15 | © 2 3
14 |353 17 |354 52 [356 27 [358 4 \359 41 | 1 2 §
115 185343 1955) 17 1356 5371858 28)- 6 G5, | ok 4g. page
161354 8 |355 44 |357 19 |358 54 | © go] 2 3 4
~17 1354 34 |356 10 |357 45 [359 19 | © 56) 2 41


18 |354 59 |356 35 358 9 /359 43} 1 19
19 1355 25 1367 0 358 34.1 0 8 | 1 45
20 1355 50 |357 24 |358 58 | © 33] 2 10
21 1356 16 1357 48 359 23 | © 57 | 2 33
22 1356 41 1358 14 1359 48 | 1 23) 257
231357 7 1358 38 | 9 12) 147) 3 22


eet | pe es eee | ne ees CE
:


POR AGy GY -&
- yuw |
NWO Avo © w


#& B® B&G
re) wy OO ws
ee
nN

fo Uy ff
on


24 1357 32 (359 3 | 9.37 | 2 19413 46135 |
peg issy so Sco.b6 | 1 2) 2 Op wim se) 2 a6 ey eee
w20 1958 22 1860.53.) 42.27 | 3. 4k Pgh 16 20 [29 ase
25 958 46} 0 18.) 4 51) 3 Oh ps O16 on Pe ee

28 |359 11 043} 21060) 3 Sou > 24.) 6 58) Boggs
29 1959 94) 28) 244] 4141 § 48) 7 OB r 8 gy

30 (gO 0.755 33 h3. 5]. 4 39 ¥ 0 R SY 7 Az eae


G8 AGS TAR MOD. 0 CY), ; 589
BRE Anes S:


For jinding the Oblique Afcenfions or Defcenfions of the Planets, for any
. Latitude, by the help of Artificial Sines and Tangents.


Fre S I, The planet’s declination is to be fought.
Secondly, The height of the pole wherein the planet is pofited.


Thirdy, With this enter the fines and tangents, and gain the afcen-
fional difference.


Fourthly, The right afcenfion of the planet muft be found, either
as it is with or without latitude.


Fifthly, To this right afcenfion, add or fubtract the afcenfional dif-
ference, according to the declination of the planet, whether it be north
or fouth, and the oblique afcenfion is found.


If the declination of a ftar is north, fubtraét the afcenfional difference
from the right afcenfion, and the remainder will be its oblique afcenfion ;
but, if added together, the fum will be the oblique defcenfion of the ftar.


If the declination of a planet is fouth, add the afcenfional difference
and right afcenfion together, and the fum will be its oblique afcénfion ;
but, if you fubtract, the remainder will be its oblique defcenfion.


Bo Ao Mi ee Ble od


Suppofe it be required to find the oblique afcenfion of
Mars, as in the figure page 197 of this work, under the
elevation of the pole of the eleventh houfe, which is
twenty-three degrees twenty-nine minutes ; proceed thus:
Firft find thedeclination of Mars, which is twenty-two
degrees two minutes north; with this look into a table
of artificial fines and tangents, and fcek the tangent an-
{werable to that degree and minute, which will be - 9.6071 36


Then feek the co-tangent anfwerable to the elevation of
the pole (or latitude), viz. twenty-three degrees twenty-
nine minutes, and it will be


10.362044.


Which co-tangent fubtrac&t from the tangent by adding

10.000000 to the tangent, otherwife fubtraction cannot
be made ; and there remains —— eee 9.245092
| This


590 A NPG, Eu, 'S* bt RA TRITON


This remaining number feek in the column of fines, and it will an-
fwer to ten degrees eight minutes, which is called the afcenfional dif-
ference. .


Then feek the right afcenfion of Mars, in the foregoing
tables of right afcenfions, with one degree feventeen mi- de ink
nutes north latitude, which will be — _ 119 21


The declination of Mars being north, fubtract the af-
cenfional difference from the right afcenfion, and the af-
cenfional difference is come 10 8


The remainder is the oblique afcenfion of Mars requi-
red, Viz. ow 10g 13


Gee


To find the oblique defcenfion of the planets, with latitude, work as
by the following example of the Moon in the aforefaid figure.


Firf, The Moon’s declination is to be fought, which is four degrees
twenty-nine minutes north ‘latitude.


Secondly, With this declination find the tangent anfwer-


able thereto, and it will be oe 8.894366
Thirdly, Find the Moon’s pole, viz. forty-one degrees

thirty-fix minutes, with which, feek the co-tangent an-

{werable, and it will be 10.051664


Which co-tangent fubtracét from the tangent, by adding
10.000000 when fubtraction cannot otherwife be made; oe
there will remain 8.842702


Which number feek for in the column of fines at the top, and it will
be found anfwerable to three degrees fifty-nine minutes, which is called
the afcenfional difference.


The Moon’s latitude being two degrees forty-two minutes north,


Seek the right afcenfion of the Moon with that latitude, d. m.
and it will be — . Seu a
To this add the afcenfional difference, becaufe the de-
- ¢lination is north, — —— a, 59
And the oblique defcenfion required will be op wt 36 52


If


OF ASTROLOGY. 59t


If the declination of the Moon were fouth, the afcenfional difference
muft then have been fubtratted from the right afcenfion, and the re-
mainder would have been the oblique defcenfion.---The fame rules will
apply to the calculating or findingthe oblique defcenfion of all the planets,
in every degree of latitude.


I fhall now fubjoin Tables of Logiftical Logarithms, for the purpofe
of finding the part proportional, either in time or motion, between any
two planets or fignificators ; which will entirely complete this fet of
Aftrological Tables, and render them an eafy and familiar guide to every
ftudent, in afcertaining the directions of all the planets, whether mun-
dane or zodiacal, direct or converfe, that can poflibly occur in the cal-
culation of nativities, or horary queftions.


To make the ufe of them more obvious to the underftanding of every
reader, I fhall fubjoin a variety of examples, fhewing how to afcertain
the daily and hourly motion of any given planet ; and alfo to determine
the precife time when any two fignificators will meet in one and the fame
point of the heavens, or form any other afpect upon the horofcope or.
geniture of any enquirer, in the courfe of practice.


The expedition with which Nativities may be calculated, or Aftrolo-
gical Queries anfwered, by the aid of this fet of tables, not to mention
the expedition with which the governing configurations are found, will
amply reward the reader for any time or trouble beftowed in acquiring
a competent knowledge of them ; as will abundantly appear by the me-
thod in which I fhall bring up the directions of the fubjoining nativity
of my learned friend Mr. Witchell, Mafter of the Portfmouth Royal
Academy. It may alfo be premifed, thet the ftudent, well informed in
all the foregoing rudiments of the fcience ; in the natureand tendency
of the planets, and their various configurations ; will, with pleafing ap-
titude, by the ufe of thefe tables, find himfelf qualified for the calcula-
tion of his own or any. other nativity, precifely in the fame way as will
be laid down in the management of that above-mentioned, which will
prove a competent example for all others.


Thefe tables of Logiftical Logarithms are ofa triple or three-fold ex-
tent; the firft column appertains to motion, the fecond to abfolute num-
bers, and the third to a correct meafure of time, as fpecified at the top
of each table, refpettively.


I have thought it moft confiftent to let the tables precede, and the
explanatory examples follow; for it is impoffible to imprefs the mind


No. 30. 3 with.


$92 AN ILLUSTRATION OF ASTROLOGY.


with a proper idea of the procefs, without often referring to thefe and
the other tables which compofe the fet, as will evidently appear by
what occurs hereafter.


It is not abfolutely neceffary that the reader fhould ftudy the art of con-
ftructing logarithms to underftand the ufe of the following tables, which
are here inferted for the mere purpofe of references, agreeable to the feve-
ral Examples that follow ; it is fufficient for the reader toknow, that ad-
dition of logarithms is the fame thing as multiplication in common arithme-
‘tic, and /ubtraction in logarithms the fame as drvifion ; therefore, in
multiplication by logarithms, add the logarithms of the multiplicand and
multiplier together, and their fum is the logarithm of the product; and
in divifion, fubtract the logarithm of the divifor from the logarithm of
the dividend, and the remainder is the logarithm of the quotient. To ex-
tract the roots of powers by logarithms, divide the logarithm of the num-
ber by the index of the power, and the quotient is the logarithm of the
root fought ; to raife anumber to any power, multiply the logarithmofthe
number by the index of that power, and the product is the logarithm of the
power to which the number was required to be raifed.


TABLES


ii; git 2 aad By 32
O F
LOGISTICAL LOGARITHMS,
For finding the Part proportional both to


TIME and MOTION.


SOF ASTROLOGY.
TICAL LOGARITHMS. .


LaGcrs


Minute.


16990
16930
16871)
16812
16755


16698 1


+ heomti
eR 12 36


a


11725)


) 11707
11689


» 12654
| 11636
ipsa | 11619
12798) 11601


127735} 11684
Sabra 12753 abbey


111549)


awe Aes


11671 abe


10706
106.92
10678)
10663
10649
1063 5


10621


i 10608)


} 1H4
8} 10580


10566
10552


10539


| 10525
q 10912


1, 104.98


1048 4
10471


1 10458


10444


| 10431


| 1382 12341


10418
10404
1agg1


. 10378


596 AN’ DLLUS TRATION


LOGISTICAL LOGARITHMS.
Minute.


20792 12342] 11249) 10378] 9652
20049 13773| 12320} 11233) 10365} 9641
20512 13745] 12300) 11217} 10352) 9630
20378} 15878] 13716} 12279) 11201) 10339] ; 9619
20248 13688; 12259) 11186) 10326} ¢608
20122 13600; 12239) 11170} 10313] 9597


coe pecees | Gem pee |


20000] 15740} 13632) 12218) 11154| 10300
19881) 1695) 13604} 12198] 11138! 10287
19765) 156513} 13576) 12178] 11123) 10274
19652 13549} 12159) 11107| 10261
195421 13522| 12139} 11091] 10248
19435 | 13495} 12119) 11076] 10235
19331| I | 13468) 12099] 11061} 10223
19228 13441| 12080] 11045} 10210
19128 13415} 12061} 11030} 10197
19131 13381) 12010) 11016} 10185
18935 13362| 12022) 10919] 10172
18342 | 13336} 12003] 10984) 10160


—


18751 13310] 11984] 10969) 10147
18661 13284) 1196%| 10954! 10135
18573 13259| 11946] 10939, 10122
18487 (O| 13233] 11927] 10924) 1010
18403 | 13208] 11908) 10909) 10098
18320 13183} 11889) 10894} 10085).


Sa oe


| 18239] 14994) 13158) 11871} 10880! 10073
18159, 14956) 13133] 11852) 10865) 10061
18081] 14918! 13108} 11834) 10850] 10049
18004} 14881] 13083] 11816] 10835| 10036
17929| 14844) 13059] 11797| 10821) 10024):
178551 14808] 13034] 11779] 10806) 10012
17732} 14771] 13010, 11761] 10792 10000}: 97


OF LA S'TIRTOOLUOIG!YI A599
, w “ - . a seer * Dev ee ae . a
—LOGIS TLIGCAL LOG ARI HM).
Minute. 7 | 8. Gt oO lo % 1 | 12 13


420 |} 48 5401) 600 |» 460 | 420 | = 780 |


= eee ey eS |


Time.| h mi |-h. m.|-h. m.|-h. m.|-h. m. bh. mh. m.
{f.| 2-48! 3 P2) 3 36) 4


598%


A N TrLoLourS: T RrA»T,I ON


{tL ones STi CAL LOGA RTT TMS.


~ 6801
}, 6795) .
_ 6789
» 6784


371, 6778)


6772)


24), 6766


6761
6755
6749


| 6749)


6738).


6732 a 9


6726


6721
6715


Bi, 6709 |
7), 6704


sey


8.288
8271
7" 8.270}
8263
8.255


6698

6692
6687
6681),


6676)


LOG
Minute.


|
|


ee | ee ee


OF ASTROLOGY:


TISTICAL LOGARITHMS
14 8415 16 v7 18


840 | g00 | g60 | 1020 | 1080 3.1140 | 1200


h. m.| h. m.| h. m.| h. m.}| h. m.| h. m.} h. m.
6 0


h
6 6 24). 6 \48)7" (22) 7 361-8" ©


5229
5225
$221
5217
5213
5209; 4975} 4753].
5205} 4971}

5201
5197
5193
5189
5185


49
4956
4g SEF


4941
4937
4933
4.930
4926
4922
4918
4915
4911
4907


~——SS S a


609 AN B£LLDUS TRA TI-O°N


TELEOGESTICAL LOGAKITVHM Ss. ,
~~ Minute, 14; fei 15 16 lari7) (pttd, p19 is 20. |r


840, goo 960..


ere PE EE Bee oe eee


OES VA SER O To Gy bor


fJ.WGIS TI e# DLO G ARITHMS. |
- Minate. | a1 22° | 23°) 44 | 25 | 26 27
1260 | 1320 | 1380 | 1440 1509 | 1560 | 1620 |


Time. | hy m.| he m.! h. m. h. m. hem, h. m.) h. m.!
m. f.) 8 2418 48 9 1219  36l10 © 10 24110 48


ene wee
|
|


i
—


o © / 4559 4357, 41641 3979 3802 3032] 3468
1 24°; 4550 4354 4161; 3976! 3799 3626 3465
2 48} 4552) 4351| 4158 3973 3796, 3626) 3463
Sift 42°) 4549; 4347) 4155] 3970 3793; 3623! 3460
4 89) 4546, 4344 qrsel 39671 349; 3621] 3457
5) 2 ©) 4542) 4341 4149, 3964) 3788) 3618 3454,


24 | 4539| 4338) 4145| 3961) 378; 3015) 3452
4535; 4334 4142 3958) 3782! 93619 3449)


6
7 | :
8/3 12] 4592 433%) 4139) 3955) 3779] 3610, 3446
9 36 | 4528) 4328 4136 3952, 3776 3607; 34441
tO; 4 © | 4525) 4325) 4135] 3949] 3773 3604) 34 1
11 24!| A522 4321, 4130; 3946) 3770 3601) 34.38
12 481 4518) 4318 4127] 39431 9768] 9008 3436


73.) 5 12) 4515) 4315, 4124 3o4cl 3565 3596) 3433
14 861 45111 4311] 4190 3937) 3762) 35931 3431
15 |} 6 ©} 4508) 4308] giry 3934 3759) 35901 3428
16 24 | 4505; 4305} 4114) 3931] 3756 3587| 3425
17 48 | 4501) 4302] 4iri} 3928) 390 3585] 3423


—— as | oe pene | pein bane a


18) 7 12 | 4498] 4298! 4108] goas 375°) 3582) 3420


1g 8 | 4494} 4295] 4105 3922) 3747, 3579, 3417
20/8 Of} 4491/ 4292] 4102] 3919 3745) 3576 3415
21 24 | 4488) 4289) 4099! 3917 3742; 3574) 3412
22 48 | 4484, 4285) 4o96| 3914 3739) 3571] 3409
23: | 9 12 | 4481) 4282) 4og2} 3911) 3736 3568) 3407
24 36 | 4477] 4279 4089) 3908) 3733) 3566 3404
23 POO | 4474, 4276) 4086) 3905) 3430 3563, 3401
26 24 | 4471) 4273) 4083]. 9902 3727, 3560) . 3369
27 48 | 4467] 4269/ 4080! 3899, 3725 3557] 3396)
28 11 12 | 4464) 4266 4977} 3896) 3722) 35551 3393
29 35 | 4460, 4263) goo 3893) 3719 3552) 33911


39 12, 0 | 44571 4260 £971" _ 3890} 37161 3549) 3388
SL a a rer ae


A Nee 0 3. tT RA Ser CO UN


O.GLS Tea Ly L OGARTT Hows:
Minute. ; a1 22 23 24 25 26 27


pes.
|


1500 | 1560 | 1620


cee:


| 1260 1320 | 1380 | 1440
|


h. m.| h. m.{ h. m.| hem} h. m.} h. m.} h. m.
Men 1. 108 2418.30 48), Oz t 120 aged © |10 24/10 48]
12-0 4457; 4260) 4071 3890) 3716, 3549) 3388

24 | 4454; 4256, 4008 aoe. 3713} 3546} 338


1312 | 4447; 4250) 4062) 3881] 3708) 35411 » 3380
36 | 4444, 4247) 4959 3878) 3705) 35381 3378
14 © | 4440) 4244 4055) 3875) 37021 3535] 3375
24 | 4437) 4240, 4052/ 3872! 3699) 3533) 3372
48} 4434) 4237! 4049} 3869) 3696) 3530) 3370
15 12 | 4430] 4234) 4046} 3866} 3693! 3527] 3367
36-| 44271 4231] 4043] 3863! 3691| 3525) 3365
16 Oj} 4424) 4228) 4040] 3860, 3688] 3522! 3362
24 | 4420) 4224) 4037| 3857} 3685; 3519) 3359
48 4417 4221] 4034] 3855] 3682) 3516) 3357
1712 44t4 4218) 4031| 3852) 3679) 3514) 3354
36 410) 4245 4028) 3849) 3677) 3511) 3351
45 18 0 | 4407, 4212) 4o25) - 3846/ 3674) 3508) 3349
64 24.[ 4404) 4209) 4022) 3843| 3671) 3506) 3346
48 | 4400 4205) 4o1g| 3840) 3668) 3503) 3344

| 48 19 121} 4397| 4202| 4016, 3837] 3665) 35co} 3341
36 | 4394) 4199) 4013 3834) 3663) 3497) 3338

20 0 | 4390; 4196 4o10, 3831) 3660) 3494; 333

24 | 4387| 4193) 4007) 3828| 3657] 3492) 3333

48 | 4384 4189) 4004) 3825| 3654 3489 3331

53 21 12 | 4380) 4186, oor) 3822) 3651) 3487) 3328
| 36.| 4377, 4183) 3998 3820 3646) 3484 3325

22 0| 4374, 4180) 3995) 3817, 3646) 3481) 3323

24} 4370, 4177) 3991} 3814) 3643] 3479) 3320

48 | 4367| 4174) 3988) 3811) 3640; 3476) 3318

6


© ih ANSFF RAOAL:.O.C iY. 607


<=
—.-


“LOGISTICAL LOGARITHMS..


Minute. | 28° | 29°) * 30 32 | 326 | 33 | 94 4


1680 | 1740. 1800 | 1860 | 1920 | 1980 | 2040


ES I | SET Gee |


eee


Time. | h. m.| h. m. h. m.} h. m.! bh. mm.) bh, m. h. m.
Msi fete) 121. 36226 osf12s.24'02,' 48199 12\13 36


° ©} 3310} 3158 goro; 2868) 2730) 2596, 2467

1 24 | 3307] 3155 3008) 2866 2728) 2sq1| 2465

2 48 | 330s; 3153 3005) 2863) 2725) 2592] 2462

3} 1 1214 3302) 3150; 3000) 2861, 2723) 2590) 2460

4 39 | 3306; 3148) 3002) 28%9} 2721; 2588] 2458)
5} 2 OO} 3297) 3145] 2998) 2856) e719) 2585
6 24] 3294; 3143} 2996 2854) 2716) 2583
rh: 48 | 3292| 3140) 2993| 2852) 2714) 2581
8/3 12] 3289) 3138 2991 2849). 2712| 2579
9 30 | 3287, 3135 2989, 2847, 2710) 2577
10} 4 O/| 3284) 3133, 2986 2845) 27071 2574
11 24 | 3282 3130 2984} 2842 2795) 2572
2703}, 2570


64. AWN YU v's TReAAT 2 ON


—~LOGISTICAL LOGARITHM S.
Minute | 284} 29 | 30 Bt | 32 | 33 | 34


eceeecereereertes Greens | ET | EY |S TS TT


| Ee


1680 | 1740 | 1800 | 1860 | 1930 | 1980


2040
Timet) hom) hyim. biema be m.. h. m, h. m.| betas
m. finn’ 19/t2) 1612) of12° 2412 48.13 12113 368
30 [12 0} 3233] 3083) 29391 2798) 2663| 2531] 2403
ue: 24 | 3231) 3081| 2936) 2796 2660) 2529) 2401
32. | 48 | 3228) 3078) 2934) 2794 2658) 2527) 2399
1 33 13 12 | 3225) 3076) 2931] 2792) 2656, 2525) 2397
34) 36 | 3223) 3073) 2929) 2789 2654) 2522) 2395
35 [140 O.} 3220) 3071| -2927| » 2787, ~2652) 2520) 23903).


Gees GER ee


—=


bee


36 24 | 3218) 3069} 2924| 2785 2649] 2518) 23901]
37 48 | °3915| 3066] 2922, 2782, 2647) 2516). 2389
| 98 |t5 12 | ° 3213) 3064 “2920 2780) 26451 2514) 2387

39 36 | 3210; 3061) 2917) 2778| 2643) 2512] 2384
40 |16 © | 3208) 3059! 2915) 24775; 2640! 2510) 2382
41 24 | 3205| 3056} 2912| 2473} 2638} 2507] 2380


(42 | 484 3203) 3054) 2910) 2771
43 T1712 17! 3200) 48s 2) 0 Bgb8i "D769
44 | 36 | 3198) 3049) 2905] 2766
45 |18 ©} 3195) 3047) 2903) 2764
46 24 3193| 3044) 2901) 2762
447 | 48 | 31901 °3042) 2898) \ 2760


2636} 2505] 2378
* 2634) 2503} 2376
2632) 2501] 2374
2629} 2499! 2372
2627| 2497| 2370
2625) 2494) 2358


A8 |19 12 | 31881 90891 ° 2896) ‘a7s57
49} 36 | 3185) 3037) 2894) 2755
60 '29.2°0 |) 91839) | 7094) “2801/9753

51 24 | 3180) '9032) °'288q) ) 2750
1 52 48 | 3178 (3030) 28847) 2748
$3 japet2 18175) ¢ 'you7|  ta884)! e746


2623| 2492! 2366
2621] 2490) 2364
2618) 2488} 236

2616) 248€| 2359
2614} 2484) 2357
2612| 2482! 2355


Cem


54 | 36] 3173, 3025] 2882] 2744) 2610) 2480) 2353
55 22 oO} 3170, 3022) 2880] 2741] 2607] 2477) 2351
56 24 | 3168) 3020) 28771 2739) 2605] 2475] 2349
57 | 48 | 3165, 3018) 2875) 2737; 2603) 2473] 2347
§8 [23 12 | 3163 3015} 2873) 2735) 2601) 2471) 2345
59} 35] 3160 3013) 2870} 2732) 2599) 2469) 2343
| 60 124 9 3158 30101 2868) 27301 2596] 2467| 2341


Oe a EEE PAYNE Ao A me Oa AE RSE SPS SO EARN ETE SPS RS AB SESE SOR EEE ARS EET SE SS SE ES


OUR) A. 8 TyR#OdLO © Y. 605


GLO GUST cmb roo AR IT TaN Ss
Minute, 35 36 37 38


ed


2100 | 2160 | 2220 | 2280


Time.}| h. m.| h. m.} h. m.} h. m.| bh. m.| bh. m.| h. m.


ms (ie OAS 2A gi aBlimen12its © 361160 116 24.


agate?


o} 2341! 2218 2099] 1984, 1871} 1761) 1654
2339, 2216) 2098) 1982] 1869) 1759} 1652
2337, 2214| 2096 1980) 1867) 1757; 1650
2335) 2212) 2094) 1978] 1865) 1755) 1648


2331, 2208] 2090) 1974] 1862) 1752) 1645


RTE ce | eee nag cee | coat


36} 2333 2210; 2092) 1976) 1863) 1754] 1647

| 24.| 2328) 2206 2088| 1972) 1860] 1750] 1643
| 48 | 2326 2204) 2086 1970, 1858] 1748] 1641
| 3.12 | 2324| 2202) 2084 1968) 1856) 1746) 1640
36:| 2322) 2200! 2082' 1967) 1854; 1745) 1638

10} 4° O | 2320. 2198) 2080, 1965] 1852) 1743]: 1636
II 24 | 2318) 21g6 2078 1963) 1850} 1741) 1634
12 48 | 2316 2194 2076; 1961; 1849] 1739) 1633
Iq |S 82.) 12814) 2192) 2074) <1959) c18e7F 179714 1031
14 36 | 2312) 2190, 2072] (1957) 1845] 1736} 1629
15 |6 O| 2310) 2188! 2070) 1955) 1843) 1734) 1627
16 24 | 2308} 2186] 2068] 1953! 1841) 1732] 1626


17 48 | 2306] 2184) 2066] 1951) 1839) 1730] 1624

18 | 7 12] 2304) 2182) 2064} 1950 1838! 1728) 1622
19 36:| 2302) 2180) 2062) 1948 1836, 1727, 1620
20 | 8 o | 2300) 2178] 2061] 1946 1834) 1725, 1619}
21 24 | 2298] 2176) 2059 1944) 1832) 1723! 1617
22 ‘48 | 2296} 2174) 2057| 1942 1830) 1721] 1615
23 | -QlTe | 82294). 22172) -2055 1940) 1828 3719] 1613


SO ES ere, Sg AN er


24 36 | 2291) 2170) 2053) 1938] 1827 1718] 1612
25 |10 O| 2289} 2169) 2051) 1936] 1825) 1716) 1610
26 24 | 2287) 2167] 2049] 1934] 1823] 1714| 1608
27 48 | 2285) 2165) 2047| 1933} 1821; 1712] 1606
| 28 Jt1 12 | 2283} 21631 2045} 1931! 1819] 1711) 1605
| 29 36 | 2281) 2161) 2043) 1929} 1817; 1709] 1603
go [12 0 | 2279] 22591 2041] 1927) 1816] 1767] 1601


EE SE OE A LT TLS Te TE IA TT I ELT TE ES A


606 A. Ni 1 BY 0S Ga A TL 2OEN;,


Ne 35 36 37 38 39 40 41


eee ag ee Bt | rere | eee ee | en | Ce | ee | ee


2100 | 2160 | 2220 | 2280} 2340 | 2400 | 2460


Semmmeemniemmenditocmen Wat


hettm 4 hem.) he anthem PB h.tan- pth, Saath. a:


2279; 2159| 2041; 1927) 1816} 1707) 1601
2277| 21571 2039] 1925) 181 17051 1599
2275, 2155] 2037} 1923) 1812] 14903) 1598!
113 12 | 2273) 2153) \20px! 1922) 1840] 17e2h 1596
| 2271); 2151) 2033; gig} 1808) 1700) 1594.
2269] 2149) 2032} 1918 1806; 1698] 1592


| 2267] 2147] 2030| -1916| “1805; 1696). 1591

48 |. 2265) 2145, 2028] 1914] 1803] 1694) 1589
2263} 2143) 2026) 1912] 1801) 1693: 1587,

2261} 2141; 2024] 19101 1799} 160913) 1585)

2259! 2139) 2022} 1908) 1797| 16891. 1584

2257| 2137| 2020 1906 1795} 1687, 1582


2253: 2133 2016) -1903) 1792] 1684 1578
2251) 2131) 2014) 1901] ©1790] -1682] 1577
2249| 2129 2012). 1899] 1788] 1680] 1575)
2247, (2127 2010} 1897, 178] 1678) 1573!
2245) 2125) 2009] 1896) 1785, 1677) 1571


2243| 2123) 2007, 1893) 1783) 1675) 1570
2241; 2121) 2005) 1891; 1781) 1673) 1568
2239} 2119} 2003) 1889) 1779 1671) 1566
2237| 2117) 2005; 1888) 1777; 1670) 1565
48 2235) 2115) 1999} 1886) 1775) 1668) 1563


48 2255, 2135}. 2018} 1904) 1794] 1686) 1580


2233] 2113) 1997| 1884) 1774] 1666) 1561


2231} 2111) 1995} 1882) 1772! 1664) 1559
2229) 2109) 1993} 1880) 1770) 1663) 1558)
2227| 2107' 1991) 1878) 1768) 1661) 1556)
2225) 2105; 1989) 1876) 1766, 1659, 1554
2223) 21031 1987) 41875! a765/. 1657) 1552
2220) 2101} 1986} 1873) 1763! 1655) 4551

2218} 2099} 1984) 1871} 1761' 1654) 1549


O.B Ta4s -T [RAO 'L0.G iy. 604


OG UStTiliC-A (Fe LO rGt AiR I-T) EMS.
jj Minute. | 42 | 43 44. | 45) 46 | 47 | 48


—
|


2820 | 2880


ease cere Deerecneen en | ASST | ecm | ater Meee ( eeeneree cee


2520 | 2580 | 2640 | 2700 | 2760


| h., m.| h. m.} hem. h. m. h..am.} h.om.|‘h.- m.
(16 48]17  12]17 ©3618 o |18 2418 4819 1

| ae
1549} 1447) 1347, 1249 1154) 1061, g69,
1547| 1445} 1345) 1248 1152) 1059 968
1546) 1443) 1344] 1246) 1151): 1057; 966
1544, 1442) 1342) 1245, 1149) 1056, 905
1542 1440} 1340] 1243) 1148) 1054) 963
1540} 1438) 1339] 1243) 1146] 1053, 962


1539, 1437) 1337| 1240) 1145) 1051; 960
1537, 1435) 1335| 1238) 1143] 1050 ‘959
1535} 1433) 1334) 1237, 1141; 1048) 957
1534} 1432) 1332) 1235] 1140) 1047) 956
1532] 1430) 1331) 1233) 1138! ro45) 954
1530} 1428] 1329! 1232} 1137) 1044 953


ee ei)


1528 1427| 1327} 1290) 1535) “10g2)  Ogs
1527, 1425) 1326; 1229) °1134) 1041 9 50)


SEE. | eee | ee |


1511j| 1410} 1311| 1214) 1119} 1027) 936
1510) 1408) 1309! 1213) 1118) 1025 935


1508} 1407) 1308) 1211) 1116} 1024 933
1506] 1405) 1306) 1209} 1115} 1022] 932
1504) 1403} 1304; 1208} 1119} 1021 930
1503] 1402) 1303) 1206} 1112] 1019) 929
1501; 1400) 1301] 1206} 1110] 1018] -927|
1499| 1398} 1300) 1203} 1109] 1016 926)
1498} 1397! 1298! 1201! 1107} .1015} 924i]


No. 30. 7K


608 AN TLLUSTRATHEON


LOGISIDULCAL.bOGARETBams.


Minute’) 42) 434 4401 45; 1. 40040 a 7oubaae
2520 | 2580 | 2640 2700 | 2760 | 2820 | 2880
Time.}¢h. am.) heim. heam ch: am... -m.[chismifth. oo,
m. .£./16 4817 12/17 36/18. 0 118) 24|18 4819 «12
gO 12 !o4 1498) 1997] te98! 1202) 1107, 1015 924
| Si 2p\ 14961 19951 1296) 1200) FIe3| 1043] 4 923
qa 43} 1494, 1393{ 1295; 1198) 104} 10121 921
33.13 12) 2499) £392| 1293] 1197; 1202) 1010) 920
134 | 36) 1491; ¥990| 129% 1195; 1101; 1008} 18
35 '14 Oo | 1489 1388) r2go| 1193! 1099] 1007} 917
36 24 | 1487| 1387| 1288) 11rga2| 1098] 1005) 915
OT 48 1486} 1385, 1287); rigol 1096, I004| 914
| 38 |15 22) 2484] 1383) 1285) 118g) 1095) 1002) 9g12
39 36 | r48al 21382| 1283) 1187) 1093; 1001} 911
40 |16 ©} 1481) 1380| 2282! 1186) 10921 999) 909
Ar 24| 1479 1378 1280) 11841 1090] 998] § go8
| 42 48 | 31477) 1377) 41278) 1182) 1088 996 906
143 |17 122) 2476) 1979] Fo7z7 bx8r, FOS 995. 905
144] 39) 1474 1373) £2751 1179) 1085) 993] 903
145 |18 oO} 21472) 1372) 422741 2778 1084) 992) 9o2
| 46 24| 1470) 4370\ -1272} 1176 1082} 990) 900
47 | 48) 1469! 1368| pazol 1174 1081; 989} 899


OF ASTROLOGY. 609°


i HO EISTTOCALIDOG A RUTERMOS Gus
Minute. | 49 | 50 51 52 53 54 55


wee Canes


| 2940 3000 | 360 | 3120 | 3180 | 3240 | 3300


Time. | h. m.| h. m. heehee hh hemi h. m,|
m. f. lig 36120 20 24\20 48j2r 12/21 36)22 Oo


880i = 792} 706] =~ 621 539), 458 | 3°78


879|' 7g0| - 7o4} 620] © 537; 456) = 377)
877! 789) 703} 619) 536] 455) «875
B75) PGS 7) [y o2) 4 617) [i535]: “454i! (Sr
874) 786 700; 616; 533; 452| 373

451 |


éfo oo A Ne SoBe BS TR APT AL OM


|. L-OzGsbSat b € AL) LjIG@G Am te UM oS.
Minute. 49 | 50 51 52 53 54. 65


2940 | 3000


3060 | 3120 | 3180] 3240 | 3300


Time.
m. f.|19

BOI}T 2) WO
31} 9 24
32 48
33 |13 12
34 | 36
35 |14 0
30 | 24
ay 48

| 98 lrg 12
139-1. 0338
4) 40 116 oO
| 41 24
42] 48
1 43 17 12
|| 441 36
|| 45 18 9
1 46 24.
|) 47 | 48
| 48 19 12
49 | 36
59 j20 O
SE} 24
52 48
53 {21 12
54.1| 36
55 [22 4,0
56 | 24
57) 48
58 123 12
59} 36


OF ASTROLOGY. © 611


ee ee eee EEE
fae 0 Gisyia Cea Ty ele OUG A Rok THM S.
Minute . 56 57 58 59
3360 3420 3480 | 3540"
Time, tebceie je net moaned me) h. +m.
‘| m. filet2 Wied Pi22. HAS e283 4 12 123 36
Oo fe) 300 2.23 147 73
1 24. 298 221 14 72
2 48 297 220. 14.5 71
2 1 12 296 . 219 143 69
4 36 294 218 142 68
Bert 7 fo) 293 216 141 67
6 24 292 215 140 66
7 48 291 214 139 64
8 3 12 289 213 13 63
7
9 36 288 211 136 62
LO. waa. OQ 287 210 135 61
II 24 285 209 134 60
12 48 284. 208 1 58
a2
B35 - 28 206 131 $7
14 3 282 et 130 56
B5e seh ~ 280 204 129 55
16 24. “279 202 127 ey
17 48 278 201 126 52
1 7 12 276 200 125 51
19 36 275 199 124 50
20 8 fe) S 274 197 122 49
21 24 273 196 121 =e)
a 48 271 195 120 46
23°41 12 270 194. 119 45
24 36 269 192 ri 44
gou he zO fe) 267 Ig1 116 42
26 24 266 190 115 41
27 48 265 189 114 40
98. | 11 ¥ 12 264 187 112 39
29 36 262 186 111 38


30. | 12 fo) 261 185 110


612


AN ILLUSTRATION


paneer tA» Seah Ea TR BN ARTIST SN ON ET He 8 ea


( L O


GST 6 AL Lo Osa Rae a aS!


56 2 sah BOTT 159
3360 3420 3480 3540


mode Dement hy Smee hy aim.
24 | 22 48 f 23° 12 | 29 96


261 185 110 36
260 184 109 as
258 182 107 34
257 181 106 33
256 180 105 31
255 179 ony 3°
253 177 103 29
252 176 101 28
252 175° 100 27
250 174 99 es
24 172 9 24
24.7 171 9 23
464 170 7o 22
244 169 94 21
243 167 93 a
242 166 91 18
241 go 17
239 a 89 16
23 162 88 15
237 161 x 13
235 160 85 12
234 158 84. Tt
233 157 83 10
232 156 82 8
230 Ios 80

Sips 153 79 6
an 152 78 5
227 151 77 4
28] 150 75 2
224 148 74 I
223 147 poe 0


OF ASTROLOGY. » 629
USE of the foregoing Tables of LOGISTICAL LOGARITHMS.


Xue A aM oe aby yo


Suppofe, in refpett of motion, it be required to find thetrue place of
Venus, thirty-fix minutes before twelve o'clock at noon, on the 11th of
June, 1784. The operation is to be performed in the following manner, -
Refer to page 179 of this work, and take the place of Venus for the
eleventh and tenth days at noon, which will found to be,


On the eleventh day at noon in Gemini - JER
On the tenth day in ditto ~ - = 2 41


Subtract the lefs from the greater, and there re-
mains the diurnal motion a Hie 1. a2


Then, by the rule of proportion, if twenty-four hours give one de-
gree twelve minutes, what will thirty-fix minutes of time give? Apply
_to the tables of logiftical logarithms ; and in the firft column at the top
feek one degrée, and in the firft fide column on the left hand find twelve
minutes ; the logarithm anfwering thereto will be found in the common


angle of meeting, which will be - - ~ _- 16990
In the fame manner feek for thirty-fix minutes 2218
Which fubtract, and there will remain - - 14772


This number muft likewife be fought in the table ; but, asnone is found "
anfwering thereto nearer than 1477, look in the top column, and this
logarithm ftands under 2-min. and even with o in the left-hand column,
which fhews the motion of Venus in thirty-fix minutes of time to be
two minutes; and, if this be fubtracted from the place of Venus that
day at twelve o'clock, the remainder will be the true place of Venus at
thirty-fix minutes before noon, as required, viz. in five degrees five mi-
nutes of Gemini. |


| OP EW RTS Re © a Se ORT A


In refpect of time, let us admit the Moon in twenty-four hours to
move thirteen degrees five minutes, and it be required to know what is
her motion in five hours.twenty minutes ? proceed thus; feck on the top
of the table for thirteen degrees, and five minutes in the firft column on
the left hand, andin the angle of meeting take the logarithm 6614;
then, in the third column on the top of the table, feek five hours twenty


minutes ; but, finding only five hours: twelve minutes, we muft therefore
have


614 ANAL L -W).8' TRE Ae Tih. 0, N


have recourfe to the fecond column on the left hand, and feek 8 under
the character of min. and even therewith, in the angle of meeting, will


be found - a - = 6532
To which * add the above number - 6614.
And the fum will be - - - 13146


For which look into the table, and it will be found to give two degrees
fifty-four minutes, which is the motion of the Moon in five hours twenty
minutes.
|S Us MMs ae gc eh Cae gi

If a part proportional between two Numbers be required, as for in-
ftance, the oblique afcenfion of Jupiter, in feven degrees thirty-fix Mi-
nutes of Pifces, in one degree fouth latitude, under the elevation of the
poleof 51 deg. 32 min. then refer to the table of oblique afcenfion in
page 588; in the firft column on the left hand feek eight degrees, and
under one degree on the head of the table, in the angle of meeting, will


be found - - r - S52 16
Take the oblique afcenfion of feven degrees, viz. - 351 50
And fubtraét the lefs from the greater, and there will ey

_ remain - - - eee NR Me 0° 26


Then feck the logarithm of twenty-fix minutes jn the firft column on
the head of the table, and the logarithm of thirty.fix in the fame man.
ner, which are the minutes belonging to Jupiter, and the logarithm to

.each will be found as follows - . :


3632
Ditto — - = - ‘ = Baie
Thefe are to be added together é - t 5850


The number fought for in the logarithms, and will be found to give
fifteen minutes fixteen feconds, which muft be added to the oblque afcen-


fion of feven degrees of Pifces, viz. - et Te
Part proportional belonging to thirty-fix min. is oO 15 36


Added together gives the true oblique afcenfionof ,
_ Jupiter in feven degrees thirty-fix minutes of


Pifces - - - - 852 «.5°36
Be ke? A NIO® Ree eee ae


To find the time of the conjunétion or afpe& of any of the Planets,
take firft the diurnal motion, and places of the planets on the day the af-


*In all proportional demands, if the firft term be twenty-four or fix


ni ty, you are to add the two given numbers ;
Sut, if it fhould be the fecond term, then you are to fubtract._ er


pect


GER ;A:S UY eRO.11.10' Gy. 615


ect will happen, and, if the planets are both direé& or both retrograde,
i the lefs diurnal motion be fubtracted from the greater; but, if one
be direct and the other retrograde, add their diurnal motions together, and
the aggregate is the diurnal excefs. Then take the places of the planets
from the Ephemeris on the day preceding the afpect, and fubtract the
place of the planet that is fwifteft in motion from the place of that which
is flower, andthe remainder :s the diftance in longitude; this had, the time
thereof will be obtained by the following analogy ; as the diurnal excefs
is to twenty-four hours, fo is the planets to the time of the afpect.


Le an A RY Ly,


To find the quartile of the Moon and Saturn on the twelfth of June,
1784. Proceed thus; Refer to page 179 of this work, and on the twelfth
day at noon the Moon will be found in nineteen degrees feventeen mi-
nutes of Aries, and Saturn in twenty-two degrees fifty minutes of Capri-
corn, retrograde. The diurnal motion of the Moon is thirteen degrees
three minutes, and the motion of Saturn.three minutes. Now, as Saturn
isretrograde, his motion is to be addéd to the Moon’s, and then the di-
urnal excefs makes thirteen degrees twenty-one minutes, with which
enter the table of logarithms ; in the top column feek thirteen degrees,
and in the firft column on the left hand fide feek twenty-one minutes, and
and in the angle of meeting will be found - - 6527

In the fame manner feek the logarithm to the difference

of longitude, viz. three degrees three minutes, which
will be - = - ~ - - 12279


Subtraét the lefs from the greater, and the re-
mainder is - - ~ - m 2 5752


With which number enter the logarithms, and on cafting the eye up-
wards will be found in the third column from the top fix hours, and in
the fecond column on the left hand will be found twenty-two minutes
tweaty four feconds. Thus, itis evident, the Moon came to the fextile
of Saturn on the twelfth day, at fix hours twenty-two minutes and twen-
ty-four feconds, P. M. orafternoon ; andin the fame manner may be
found the conjunttion of any other planet, or afpect.


RULES to be obferved in direCting a NATIVITY.


In order to find the arch of the equator that is interfected between
the fignificator and promittor, which is commonly called the arch of di-


rection, it is neceflary to obfervye,
No. 31. 7M I. Whe-


6160. | ASSO OUsS TEU at nO a


I, Whether the fignificator be on the cufp of the firft or feventh houfe;
and, if fo, fubtraét the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of the fignifica-
tor, with latitude, if any, from the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of
the promittor under the pole of the houfe, and the remainder is the arc
of direétion, which is to be turned into years by the table. .


If. If a fignificator be in the tenth or fourth houfes, fubtraét the
right afcenfion of the fignificator, with latitude, if any, from the right
aicenfion of the promittor, and the remainder will be the arch of direc~
tion, which is to be turned into years by the table.


Ill. If a fignificator be not pofited in the afcendant or mid-heaven, or
in the oppofite houfes, then find the pole of pofition of the fignificator,
and, according whether it be in an oriental or occidental part of the hea-
vens, take the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of the promittor, under
the fame pole, and the remainder is the arch of direction fought, which
turn into years as before.


IV. If it be required to dire the promittor to the fignificator, con-
trary to the fucceffion of * figns, then inftead of fubtracting the oblique
or right afcenfion of the fignificator from the promittor, fubtract the
oblique or right afcenfon of the promittor from the fignificator, and
the remainder is the arch of direction.


V. If the promittor is to be directed contrary to the fucceffion of
figns, and is fituated in the mid-heaven or fourth houfe, fubtraét the
sight afcenfion of the promittor with latitude, from the right afcenfion
of the fignificator, and the remainder is the arch of direction, to be
turned into years, &c. by the table.


VI. If a promittor be oriental or occidental above the earth or under
it, yet not inthe mid-heaven or fourth houfe, feek its pole of pofition,
and thereby gain its true oblique afcenfion or defcenfion with latitude,
and {ubtraét it from the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of the fignifica-
tor under the fame pole, and the remainder is the arch of direction
required.


VII. When any planet is to be direted to the oppofite part of the
heavens, it muft then be directed with oppofite latitude.


VIII. No planet, except the Sun and Moon, can be dire¢ied to either
a fextile trine, or quartile, of its radical place. _


* The Sun and Moon, and Venus and Mercury, can only be dire€ted conyerfely, thatis, contrary to the fuc-
ceffion of figns, they being the only planets capable of the rapt motion.
1X. The


OF ABPRO LOG y. 617


IX. The Sun moves in the zodiac only, and meets all bodies or-afpects
therein, it being his unalterable courfe, that is, without latitude ; but,
when he is diretted to a planet or zodiacal parallel with latitude, it is
then called adireétion in mundo; but, when directed to a planet without
latitude, it is termed a zodiacal direction, and is either direct or converfe,
as the motion of the planet is either with, or contrary to, the fucceffion


of figns.


X. The Moon meets all rays in the circle of Jatitude in which the
conftantly moves, and that is always out of the ecliptic, except when
fhe is in her nodes ; and therefore, when fhe is directed, as a fignificator
with latitude, to a promittor in the zodiac, the latitude of the moon’s
place muft be found. Under this latitude, the declination muft be fought,
which fhews the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion under the pole of the
Moon ; and hence the arch of direttion is correctly found, by fubtraét-
ing the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion of the Moon under her pole, not
forgetting that this oblique afcenfion or defcenfion muift be taken ac-
cording to the latitude of her place at the hour of birth. This is called
a zodiacal direction with latitude ; but, when the Moon is direfted toan
afpe&t without latitude, the place of the zodiac where the afpett falls
is to be taken without latitude, both in right afcenfion and declination ;
and thus find the oblique defcenfion or afcenfion of the point under the
pole of the Moon ; from which fubtraét the oblique afcenfion or defcenfion
of the Moon, taken according to the latitude fhe had at the time of birth,
and the arch of direction is found, which is to be converted into years
as before.


XI. Dire€tions are of two forts, zodiacal and mundane. The Sun and
Moon are capable of being directed both ways ; but the angles of a figure
can only be directed in mundo, they being fubjeét to the accidents and
divifion of no circles but thofe which conftitute the meafure of each
quadrant, and are meafured by the parts of the diurnal and feminodturnal
arches ; therefore they never meet any rays with latitude but bodies and
oppofitions.


XII. The mid-heaven and afcendant are two different * circles, The
mid-heaven meets all rays, and meafures all afpects by the zodiac ; but
the afcendant, by the rapt motion or horary circle ; by which motion
the diurnal circle is alfo meafured, the houfes of heaven divided, and
the mundane afpecis proportionably meafured.


* The zodiacal circle meafures fixty minutes toan hour, but the rapt motion, or horary circle, is fometimes
more or lefs, according to the length of the femidiurnal arch, or planetary hour.
The


618 A: Neh DIB Li USS Tr BAe Tal op ON


The knowledge equating the planet’s places for different meri-
dians being abfolutely neceflary for calculating the nativities of thofe
perfons who were born under the meridian of London, for which la-
titude the Ephemerifes are generally calculated ; I fhall now teach how to
calculate either the mundane or zodiacal directions for any other Jati-
tude, and how a planet in one meridian may be reduced to that of ano-
ther, with the utmoft degree of corre€tnefs and precifion.


For example, fuppofe it were required to know the difference bet ween
the meridians of London and Briftol ; refer to page 179 of this work, and
onthe 11th of June, at twelve o'clock at noon, the Moon is in five
degrees forty-fix minutes of Aries, under the meridian of London;
but, to reduce it to the meridian of Briftal; purfue the following method.
See by the table, Page 208, the roomate of London, and it will


be found =. - 23420
Subtract Hdoney ane A Brittol, hice is - 19 41
And there remains - - ~ = ois


With this difference, three degrees forty-five minutes, look into the table
for turning the degrees of the equator into time, in page'206, then refer
to table the fecond, by which it will be found, that one degree gives four
minutes ; and confequently, three degrees forty- five minutes, the dif-
ference of the two longitudes, muft “give fifteen minutes difference of
time in two meridians ; and, as Briftol is fituate weft from London,
the Moon muit be in five degrees forty-fix minutes of Aries, fifteen
minutes before noon at Briftol, and at noon. viz. at twelve o'clock, ac-
cording to her own motion in an hour, gives for that time, going at the
- rate of thirty-three minutes forty-feven feconds the quarter of an hour,
eight minutes twenty-feven feconds, which, being added to five degrees
forty-fix minutes, make five degrees fifty-four minutes and twenty-feven
{econds of the Moon in Aries, at twelve o’clock at Briftol. And here
note, that, if the place were fituate Eaft from London, then the difference
of time muft have been fubtraéted from the meridian of London, which
would in the fame manner have fhewn the difference of the meridians.


END of the FIRST VOLUME.


Way


vas


Daily Motions
Mean Prefernt Fort’


Planets
Latitude


Declination


20
19-39 S
$7 -15.N

‘


/
youre Ae pee. 9 Wich
| STRONOMER),
5 It the pe mee Portsmouth


Porn OF. Maresh }


é -52, Ne — |
9 47 Sil LL, 28 ts LA |
Og ‘ { rr € O25: y ¢ oO |
| Jl 7/7 28. -* 7 |
| 12-52. NY dea : 0 ||
\| | % Mor . fe ras fi
| 96-42, S| -% Lab? 51 .37 O32 4 - 2 ||
| =D EE EEE
Ames, fcalp Briltol . ;


A -C OMfe LD E:T E
1 - bel Ure Al 1:0 'N
os THE ASTROLOGICAL anp


OGOUT TT’ SCIEN GES


AVING, in the former volume, given at large the rudiments of

the Aftral Science, I fhall now proceed to the real calculation of

nativities, according to the Placidian method as laid down and ex-
emplified in this work. I fhall begin with that, of my learned and very
ingenious friend, Mr. Witchell, Mafter of the Royal Academy at Portf-
mouth, a gentleman well known in the literary world ; as well on account
of his valuable difcoveries in the longitude, as for his very ufeful mathe-
matical publications. .


For the eafe and inftruction of the reader, I thall go through every cal-
culation of this nativity, in the moft pra¢tical and intelligent manner, in
order that it may afford every neceflary example for directing fignificators
to promittors, in all cafes whatfoever, as well as to fhew the probable
effects to be deduced therefrom, in nativities in general.


The fcheme of Mr. Witchel’s nativity, in the annexed plate, was
erected by himfelf; and, from his great veneration for the {cience, he


gave me leave to publifh it, and to make what obfervations I thought ne-
ceffary in the calculation of it. |


On examining the figure, I found it wanted rectification ; and, there-
fore, according to the method pointed out in Vol. I. p. 426, I proceeded
to bring the eftimated time to the true time of birth. It is here to be
obferved, that neither of the luminaries are in the centre- of the angles,
nor fortunes in parallel of angles ; but, as a nocturnal nativity, the Moon’s
fituation with Saturn prefented itfelf moft eligibly for the purpofe of rec-
tification. My bufinefs therefore was to bring them in a right parallel
from the fourth houfe, which is done thus :


Vol. II. No: 31. 7N Firit,


Baio AN ILLUSTRATION


Firft, take the right afcenfion of Saturn, (no latitude) 3257 58
Then the right afcenfion of the Moon, (no latitude) 288 23


S unmnaemmememecd


Subtract, and the difference is the diftance of i
from the Moon | oP aa We


Then feek the femino€turnal arch of Saturn and the Moon, in the table
of the feminofturnal arches for the latitude of London ; and, by entering
the fign Capricorn on the top column with feventeen degrees, on the left
hand fide, in the common angle of meeting, it is declared that the femi-


nocturnal arch of the Moon is ~ - - 8h gm
Which is the fpace of three houfes; but, as the Moon

is not elongated above one houfe, it is to be divided by

three; the third partis ~ - - - ay aif 40°
And is to be turned into degrees of the equator, by

the table in page 206, and it gives : - ae AOL eee


_. The fame procefs may be obferved with refpect to
Saturn. The feminotturnal arch of Saturn is - se MO ea
Divided by three, the third part gives ~ - 2


Turned into equinoctial degrees by the table, gives 36° 5¢
To this third part is to beadded that of the Moon 40 = 2¢


And their arches make vo pa - 76 20


Then fay, by therule of proportion, if feventy-fix degrees twenty mi-
nutes give thirty-feven degrees thirty-five minutes, being the diftance of
Saturn from the Moon, what will forty degrees twenty-five minutes, the
third part of the feminodcturnal arch of the Moon, give?


Anfwer, It gives - - is 10' 959
To which add the Moon’s place in the zodiac 16 56
And they make - Oe See 36 649


Which, by allowing for Capricorn thirty degrees, makes the cufp of
the fourth to be fix degrees forty-nine minutes of Aquaries ; confequently
there will be fix degrees forty-nine minutes of Leo on the tenth houfe,
and twenty-feven degrees thirty-three minutes of Libra afcending. Thus
the figure is brought to a re¢tified time, having the right afcenfion of the
mid-heaven one hundred and twenty-nine degrees fourteen minutes, the
oblique afcenfion of the afcendant two hundred and nineteen degrees
fourteen minutes; and, by adding thirty to each houfe, the oblique af-
cenfion and defcenfion of each of the houfes are obtained.

The


GO. A Bete .0O-L'O-G ¥. 621


The next thing to be obferved in the copper-plate figure is the part
of fortune; which muft alfo be rectified, for it is very incorrealy
placed by Mr. Witchell. Its true pofition, in this nativity, is of the
greateft canfequence, both as to its pole and place ; particularly as it is
Hyleg, and directed for the native’s death ; and, as the part of fortune in
this figure depends wholly on the Moon for declination, right afcenfion,
diftances, &c. and hath its diurnal and nofturnal arches increafed or di-
minifhed as the Moon rifes or fets, it may be truly deemed a /unar Lorafcope;
I fhall therefore give the following rules for its rectification, which
will hold good on every fimilar occafion. Firft, find the oblique afcen-
fion or defcenfion of the Sun, according to his pofition in the figure, under
his own pole, fubtract the oblique defcenfion of the Sun from the oblique
af{cenfion of the afcendant, and the remainder referve ; then obtain the pole
of the Moon, and under the pole obtain her oblique afcenfion or defcen-
fion, with latitude, as before obferved, by the Sun; and, from the oblique
afcenfion of the Moon, fubtratt the diftance of the Sun from the afcendant,
asabove referved, andthe remainder will be the oblique afcenfion or defcen-
fion of the part of fortune ; which may be known by its being a greater
or lefs number of degrees than the mid-heaven ; for, by allowing thirty
degrees for each houfe, it will declare in what houfe the part of fortune
falls; and to know what degree of the Zodiac is anfwerable thereto,
only requires to find the pole of the part of fortune, and, by giving it the
fame latitude and declination as the Moon, it fhews its afcenfional differ-
ence, which muft be added to or fubtratted from the aforefaid oblique
afcenfion as it is found either ina Northern or Southern fign, and the.
right afcenfion is found ; which by looking in the table of right afcen-
fions, allowing its latitude, if any, the degree and minute of the zodiac is
pointed out for the place of the part of fortune; as exemplified in the


following figure.


The pole of the Sun is to be obtained thus:—The Sun is in twelve
degrees feventeen minutes of Aries, and his feminotturnal arch under the


latitude of birth - ss 2 a 4 ape R 5 36
The third part of which is - é m I 52
Which, turned into degrees of the equator, is - 28 0
The pole of the feventh houfe is . x ¥ SI 3k
The pole of the fixth, as may be found by the table in page

202 of this work, is - - _ 2 - 40 48
Subtratted, leaves the diffcrence of the two poles iY: 43


Then


622 AUNYS 14. Liv Oi? Rem ES" Ts ON


Then take the diftance of the Sun from the feventh houfe,
thus: The oblique defcenfion of the feventh houfe is -


39 14
The oblique decenfion of the Sun under the pole of the


feventh is : : - : - - 17 18


Subtract, and the diftance of the Sun from the Southis 21 56


Then, by the rule of proportion, if twenty-eight degrees, the Sun’s
_feminotturnal arch, give ten degrees forty-three minutes, being the dif-
ference between the pole of the feventh and fixth houfes, what will twen-


ty-one degrees fifty-fix minutes give, which is the diftance of the Sun
from the feventh houfe?


The anf{wer is pointed out by the table of logarithms, thus: Seek the
logarithm of the fecond and third number, and add them together; then


fubtract the logarithm of the firftnumber therefrom, and the remainder
is the logarithm of the fum required.


EXAMPLE for the following FIGURE.

Seek the logarithm of the fecond number, which is 10° 43% In the firft
column, at the head of the table, feek ten, andon the fide-column, on
the left hand, enter with forty-three minutes, and in the angle of meet-
ing will be found the logarithm - - - 7481

In the fame manner feek the third number, viz. twenty-one
degrees at the top, and fifty-fix minutes at the fide, and in
the angle of meeting is the logarithm required - - + 4370


Add them together, and they make - - 11851


Then by the fame rule feek the logarithm of the firft num-
ber, 28, which is - - - - 3310


And fubtract it from the fum of the other two - 854r


Seek this remainder in the logarithms, and it will give very near’


eight degrees twenty-three minutes; this being the number fought for,


it is to be fubtracted from the pole of the feventh houfe, thus, the pole
of the feventh : - -


2 ° 5.
The number required is - - is 8 29
Subtraéted, leaves for the pole of the Sun S 43 ae


And under this pole the oblique defcenfion is to be obtained, thus ;
Give the afcenfional difference under the pole of forty-three degrees eight
minutes, and the afcenfional difference is


. + : 4 3

And, as the Sun is in a northern fign, the afcenfional diffe- :
rence is to be added to the right afcenfion. The right

afceniion is - - ee . . I1 18


And


OF ASTROLOGY. 623


And the oblique defcenfion is a - ; 1D i ge
Now, as the afcendant is in a fouthern fign, in order to
‘make fubtraction, the circle muft be added sir 360. Oo


And the fum is ~ Pots - 3
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the
afcendant r - - a ? 219 14


18 653


And the diftance of the Sun from the afcendant is obtained 156 39


Then obtain the oblique afcenfion of the Moon under her pole, by
the following method: Firft, find the feminotturnal arch of the Moon


under the latitude of birth, which is c ’ ae
The Moon not being above the diftance of one houfe from
the fourth, this arch muft be divided by three, i 2°48) AO


And turned into equinoctial degrees, by the table, 40° 257
Then take the right afcenfion of the fourth houfe, 309 14


oe eS


Subtract, and the Moon’s diftance from the fourth is 20 15


Then, by the rule of proportion, if forty degrees twenty-five minutes
give twenty-three degrees twenty-feven minutes, being the pole of the
third houfe, what will twenty degrees fifteen minutes, the diftance of
the Moon from the fourth houfe, give? By the logiftical logarithms it
gives eleven degrees forty-five minutes for the pole of the Moon,
which is correct. :

The afcenfional difference of the Moon under that pole is 6 o

The Moon’s right afcenfion, being in a Southern fign,


mutft be added - = - - - ~ 288 59
And the Moon’s oblique afcenfion remains - 294 59
From which fubtraét the diftance, as before obtained,

of the Sun from the afcendant - - - 156 39
And the remainder is the oblique afcenfion of the part

of fortune - - - - - 138 20
Its true place in the zodiac is obtained thus: take the

right afcenfion of the mid-heaven, which is - 129 14


And fubtract it from the oblique afcenfion of the part
of fortune, and its place is diftant from the medium ceeli G4 19


Then, by the rule of proportion, fay, if thirty degrees, the diftance of
one houfe, give twenty-three degrees twenty-feven minutes, the poleos
the eleventh, what will nine degrees fix minutes, the diftance of the part
of fortune from the tenth houfe, give ? By the logarithms it gives feven

No, gl. 70 degrees


624 A°N MIGLILUA TEA EE DOW


degrees fix minutes for the pole of the part of fortune. Let it be cb-
- ferved, that, if the afcenfional difference is obtained by the Moon’sdecli- .
nation, under the above pole, which is three degrees thirty-five minutes,
add it to the oblique afcenfion of the partof fortune, thus 3 3§

The oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune ~ 138 20

Makes - ae - ide ot ae LAT G5
Which -is the right afcenfion, with latitude, of the part of fortune ;
and, by lookinginto he table of right afcenfions, it afcertains the zodi-
acal degree of the place of the part of fortune, which is in twenty degrees


' forty-three minutes of the fign Leo, in the tenth houfe.


Thus this nativity is re€tified, according to the following fcheme,
and the part of fortune fupputated in its horary circle, by the true doc-
trine of Ptolomy ; and, having equal degrees from the afcendant, con-
ftitutes what is efteemed a lunar horofcope ; in which the part of fortune
is prorogator, or giver of life.


Right afcenfion 129 14


rn et


t
a Ag


4 Mr. G. Wircuett, |
| ASTRONOMER,
Atthe ROYAL ACADEMY,


PORTSMOUTH.


Born the twenty-firft of March,
7h. 52m. P. M. 1728.


es } Re&tified Time.


Latitude 51°. 31%


“Oblique afcenfion 219 14
—¥1 6€ uoyuasjap anbiq—


Right afcenfion 309 14


rage ‘ X

‘OlFT AS TROL(M‘G ¥.” 6.

Ptolomy fays, in his Quadripartite, that the Sun, if he bein an aphetic

place, is to be preferred by day ; if hebe not, the Moon fhall be preferred ;

but, if fhe be not in an aphetic place, that planet fhall be taken that had

three dignities in the place of the Sun at the preceding conjunG@ion of

the Sun and Moon. If no planet hath thofe titles of dozsinion, the horo-

{cope fhall be taken ; but, if it fhould be a full Moon, and no fuch planet
in an aphetic place, then the part of fortune fhall be taken.


‘A SPECULUM or Tue rongédtvc FIGURE.


Planet’s Lati-| Declina- |Antifcions, or Zodiacal) Pole of Right Afcen)Semidiurnal and ‘Semi-
tude. tion. Paiallels: Pofition. with Lat. nocturnal Arch.


re
vem cece | creas Bcc cement


deg. min. j|deg. min. |d, m. d. m. deg. min.deg. min, .h. m. deg. min.
bh 1 6 S20 24 S)29 105 Wo 50 # M11 11/326 2177 LI—107 45


oar erens (eres | eee eee


% © 35 Siig -g9 Ni27 26m & 2 242 234 55) 57 5117 50-117 30


ees


$ 3 12 Ni14 15 N22 20 7 58m v/16 39153 5816 58—104 go


a Smee poe


en | eee
Cee


© 0 Oo] 4 s2Ny2 7 417 43™X/43 8] 11 185 35— 83 45


eee


¢ 0 62 S| 8 47 S}7 30m x22 go 2 V/19 43/337 53,0 49—102 15


eae a On et


Soe


3 3 17 Nij12 52N/3 558 m26 sar ist 21) 22 22\5 107 Tego


=


ca eS —


>» 4.17 S\26 42 S|} 0 9 © [11 H5/288 598 5-121 (15|


adi


—


SORES a. | | ,
® 4.17, 5/26 42N) 9. 9-0 7. 6141 55° o— 0 °o]


t let O11. N. Be The oblique denon
The firft and feventh hou S 5 3 of the Eleventh ig toil hy adda-


ing 30 to the right Aicenfion of


, the Medium Coeli; and in the
The 2d, 8th, 12th, and 6th, 449 48 fame manner is obtained the ob-
lique Afcenfion or Defcenfion of } |

the reft of thé houfes. ‘


————— . acnaneemn eee ec eee


aS SE oy


EE a SS AS


Se oreeael


The rath, 3d, gth, and 5th, 23 27


The above exhibits a fpeculum of fome neceflary calculations at one
view ; but, in order to remove-every embarraflment out of the way of the
young ftudent, I-thall now proceed regularly throughout the whole prac_
tical part of every calculation in this nativity, in fo plain amanner, that
the meaneft capacity may foon become mafter of it. I fhall therefore
proceed to {hew how to gain the pole, or circle of pofition, of the other


‘planets. To


C26 AN ILLUSTRATION


To gain the POLE of SATURN.


Saturn being in twenty-three degrees thirty-eight minutes of Aquaries,
enter with this degree and minute in the tables of feminoC€turnal arches
for the latitude of birth, which is in London, and it gives feven hours
eleven minutes, which being an{werable to the {pace of three houfes, or
ninety degrees of the zodiac, I divide it by three, and one of thefe three
parts will be the diftance from the cufp of the fourth to the cufp of the
fifth houfe; then by the tule of proportion find the diftance of Saturn
from the fourth houfe, as follows: The third part of feven hours eleven
minutes is two hours twenty-three minutes and forty feconds, which
time convert into degrees by the table for that purpofe, in page 206;
by which it is found to give thirty-five degrees fifty-five minutes for the
{pace of one houfe. The pole of the fifth, as may be found by the table
in page 202, is twenty-three degrees twenty-feven minutes.


The right afcenfion of Saturn, with latitude, is —- 320" 23
The right afcenfion of the fourth is - - 309 14
Subtract, and there remains . ~ - ry


The diftance of Saturn from the fourth houfe. Then fay, by the rule
of proportion, if thirty-five degrees fifty-five minutes, the {pace of one
houfe, give, for the pole of the fifth, twenty-three degrees twenty-feven


minutes, what will feventeen degrees feven minutes, being the diftance
of Saturn from the fourth, give?


To find this proportion, make ufe of the logiftical logarithms, as
before, and feek the logarithm belonging to the two laft-mentioned num-
bers, which add together, and then find the logarithm of the firft, and fub-
tract it from them, and the remainder is the proportion required. Thus,
feek in the uppermoft column at the head of the logarithms for twenty-
three, and in the fide column for twenty-feven, and in the angle of meet-
ing is the logarithm = = - - 4080

In the fame manner feek feventeen on the top, and feven
on the fide, and in the angle is - - - ‘ 544.7


Add them together, and they give “ “ = 9527
Then feek the logarithm of thirty-five degrees fifty-five
minutes by the fame rule, and it is _ - = 2229


Which is to be fubtracted from the above . Ps 7298
This


OuF -AtSumeR! 0.1 O:G ‘vy. 627
_ This remainder I feek among the logarithms, and find, by cafting my
eye on the head of the table for degrees, and on the firft column on the


left hand, that it gives eleven degrees eleven minutes, which is the part |
proportional, and confequently the true pole of Saturn,


To take the true POLE of JUPITER.


Jupiter is in twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes of Taurus.———


His femidiurnal arch under the latitude of birth is vi 50m


Divided by three, and multiplied by two, gives ge Fae AO
Turned into degrees of the equator by the table, eee oe
The pole of the feventh, - -. ot pep
The pole of the ninth, = - 23 a4


Subtract one from the other, and the differenceis =< 28 4.


The oblique defcenfion of Jupiter with latitude, - 84° 34
The oblique defcenfion of the feventh * houfe ° 99.) Te


Subtraét, and Jupiter’s diftance from the féeventh is . 45 (gio:


Then by the rule of proportion, if feventy-eight degrees twenty-five »
minutes, being two parts of Jupiter’s femidiurnal arch, give twenty-
eight degrees four minutes, being the difference of the pole of the feventh »
and ninth houfes, what will forty-five degrees nineteen minutes, Jupiter's
diftance, give; viz. Sixteen degrees thirty-fix minutes ;


Which I fubtract from the pole of the feventh, - Bi ot
16 36
And the remainder is the pole of Jupiter, - 34 55.


To find the POLE of MARS.


Mars is in forty-four minutes of Virgo.——-—-The femidiurnal arch
of Mars, under the latitude of the afcendant, is erro ken
Being divided by three, gives for one houfe spit ahs oem ROP


* The oblique defcenfion of the feventh houfe is gained thus : Take the right afcenfion of the
mid-heaven, and fubtra& ninety, being a quarter of the circle, and there remains the oblique de~
fcenfion of the feventh,


No, 31. 7P Turned


+}


(628 A No up hep U S TRAY TORN


Turned into degrees by the table, gives ‘ Cy cee
‘The pole of the eleventh houfe, = - 22 27
The right afcenfion of Mars, with latitude, Seige oC Pe
The right afcenfion of the mid-heaven - 129 14


Subtract one from the other, and the remainder is
-the diftance of Mars from.the mid-heaven, : o4 AA


Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirty-four degrees fifty minutes,
-the.third part of the femidiurnal arch of Mars, give twenty-three de-
grees twenty-feven minutes, the pole of the eleventh, what will twenty-
four degrees forty-four minutes, the ‘diftance of Mars from the tenth,
give? I now enter the table of logarithms, and -find it gives fixteen de-
grees thirty-nine minutes, which is the true pole of Mars required,


The pole of the Sun has been already.obtained, and is forty-three de
grees cight.minutes.


To gain the true POLE of VENUS. Fee


‘Venus is in five degrees twenty-one minutes of Pifces.—


‘The feminocturnal arch of Venusis = - 6h 4zgm
Being divided by three, the third partis  ~ 2 16 20
Turned into-degrees of the equator, RSF Giese
The pole of the fifth houfe, - “ thf Gite
‘The right afcenfion of Venus, with latitude, B70. ae
“‘The.right afcenfion of the fourth, a ROO TA

28 39


Then, by the ruleof proportion, if thirty-four degrees five minutes, the
third part of Venus’ feminocturnal arch, give twenty-three degrees
twenty-feven minutes, the pole of the fifth houfe, what will twenty-
eight degrees thirty-nine minutes, being the diftance of Venus from the
fourth, give?


Anfwer, Nineteen degrees forty-three minutes.


To obtainthe POLE of MERCURY.
Mercury’s place in the zodiac is twenty-five degrees fifteen minutes of
Aries. pie
His


OF Ate rT Roto oY. 62)


His feminocturnal arch for that point is gh oo”
Being divided by three, the third part will be! t Ue gemeee
Turned into degrees of the equator, by Rie table, - Roo 1 ce
The pole of the cufp of the feventh, “ 51 31
The circle of pofition of the fixth houfe, 40.48 —
Subtratt, and the difference of the two poles is * IO. 43
The oblique defcenfion of the feventh, - - Aho ad
The oblique defcenfion of Mercury, under the pole of

birth, ° = - = “ ; 39 4


te ee


Subtract, and the diftance of Mercury from the feventh, o° ‘1d


Then, by the rule of proportion, if twenty-five degrees fifty minutes
give ten degrees forty-three minutes, being the difference of poles, what
will ten minutes give, which is the diftance of is. ie from the
feventh houfe ? .


Anfwer, it gives four minutes, which is to be thus fubtracted from the
pole of the feventh, - - GE fog
Q 4


ecw


And the remainder is the true polé of Mercury, = eae,


The Method of obtaining the POLE of the MOON.


This figure has been already thewn, and was found to be eleven de-
grees forty-five minutes, as was alfo


The Method of obtaining the POLE of the Part of FORTUNE,


. Which was found to be feven degrees fix minutes.


With a view to make this work entirely complete, I have, in page 142,
given the fyftem laid down by Argol and Morinus, for finding the an-
tifcions of the planets; but, as that method is found to be erroneous, I
fhall, according to a former promife, give the Placidian method of taking
them ; which is the true ways and which I recommend to every ftudent
to practife,


The


630 AN SIjLol. vss TRaaaT Pos


The place of Saturn in the zodiac is twenty-three degrees thirty-eight
minutes of Aquaries, and his declination twenty degrees twenty-four mi-
nutes fouth; now, as there is no table immediately for the declination of.
Aquaries in this work, yet as Leo is fituate oppofite Aquaries in the zo-
diac, it only requires to enter into the table of declinations under Leo,
with contrary latitude, that is, north inftead of fouth, and it will be
found to anfwer exactly the fame purpofe; for Saturn’s declination, an-
fwerable to one degree fix minutes north latitude, is twenty degrees
twenty-four minutes. To find the zodiacal parallel anfwerable to that
declination, I examine the firft column of declination in the table, under
o latitude, and feek for twenty degrees twenty-four minutes ; but, not
finding that declination in that column, I trace back into Cancer, where
I find it anfwerable to twenty-nine degrees ten minutes of that planet,
which fhews that Saturn’s parallel falls in twenty-nine degrees ten
minutes of Cancer and Capricorn, and fifty minutes of Sagittary and
Gemini, and thefe points, being equi-diftant from the tropics, are called
the antifcions, in page 142. | :


In the fame manner is found the antifcion or zodiacal parallel of Jupi-
ter, whofe place is twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes of Taurus,
and his declination nineteen degrees thirty-nine minutes, with. thirty-_
five minutes of fouth latitude. But, as there is no table of declination
for Taurus, that of Scorpio, being oppofite, muft be entered under
north latitude, which is equally the fame as having a table of declination
for Taurus, by obferving always to enter with contrary latitude; and
feek in the firft column under o for nineteen degrees thirty-nine mi-
nutes, and it will give twenty-feven degrees twenty-fix minutes of
Seorpio and Taurus for Jupiter’s zodiacal parallel, and alfo two degrees
thirty-four minutes of Leo and Aquaries, as may be found by the
aforenained table of antifcions.


The pofition of Mars in the heavens is in forty-four minutes of Virgo,
and his declination fourteen degrees fifteen minutes, with three degrees
twelve minutes north latitude. I enter the table of declination in Virgo,
under the column 0; but find no fuch declination, therefore I feek in
the table of Leo, in the fame column under o at the top, and find it

“points to twenty-two degrees two minutes of Leo and Aquaries, and
feven degrees fifty-eight minutes of Scorpio and Taurus ; which give
the zodiacal parallel of Mars. |


The mode of finding the Sun’s antifcion or zodiacal parallel is exa@ly
the fame as given by Argol and Morinus; and the reafon is, becaufe the
Sun never varies, but always moves in the fame line throughout all the


3 figns


O°F TACSHSTTRE OL O;G Y. 631


— figns of the zodiac, The antifcions, of the Sun, therefore, fall in
twelve degrees feventeen minutes of Aries and Libra, and feventeen de-
grees forty-three minutes of Virgo and Pifces. ’


The mode of afcertaining the antifcions or zodiacal parallels of Venus
differs from that of the Sun, becaufe Venus has latitude. The place of
Venus in the zodiac is five degrees twenty-one minutes, her declination
is eight degrees forty-feven minutes, and her latitude fifty-two minutes
fouth ; and, as there is no table of declinations for the fign Pifces, I take
the oppofite fign Virgo, as before, and feek for eight degrees forty-feven
minutes in the column with o on the top, and it will be found an{wer-
able to feven degrees thirty minutes of Virgo and Pifces, and twenty-
two degrees thirty minutes of Libra and Aries, thofe places being equi-
diftant from the two tropics.


The antifcion. or zodiacal parallel of Mercury is gained in the fame
manner as the former; his place being in twenty-five degrees fifteen mi-
nutes of Aries, his latitude three degrees feventeen minutes north,’ and
his declination twelve degrees fifty-two minutes in Aries; but, as there
is no table for Aries, it is to be worked by the contrary fign Libra;
but, not finding in the column of no latitude that degree of declination,
I enter the fign Scorpio, and find it anf{werable to three degrees fifty-
five minutes of that fign, and three degrees fifty-five minutes of Taurus,
and twenty-fix degrees five minutes of Leo and Aquaries.


The antifcion or parallel of the Moon cannot in any cafe be directed,
fhe having twenty-fix degrees forty-two minutes of declination, and
the greateft declination of the ecliptic is but twenty-three degrees thirty=
two minutes, and therefore there can be no zodiacal parallel of the
Moon for direction.


Of MUNDANE PARALLELS.


Let it be remembered, that the cufps.of the afcendant, feventh, mid-
heaven, and imum ceeli, are angles in the world, and are defcribed by
the fpheres to cut the globe of this earth in four equal parts or. quarters,
each quarter containing ninety degrees of the equator. A mundane pa-
rallel, therefore, is no other, than when two itars or planets are equally
diftant from any of thefe four angles ; or are brought into that fituation
by the motion of the primum mobile. And, as an exact method of taking
them is abfolutely neceffary to be known, where any degree of accu-


No. 32. ah) racy


638 ANE PUL WS TrReaAryT 1 ON


racy is required, and as they conftitute the moft-confiderable directions
in human life, I fhall give the following examples in this nativity, by
way of initiating the young beginner in a correct mode of taking them.


The MunpaANE PARALLEL of MARS and VENUS.


Diftance of Mars from the mid-heaven, - Py habe 9 te
Semidiurnal arch of Saturn - - 65 58"
Seminocturnal arch of Mercury - 6 49


.  Diftance of Venus from the fourth houfe, by right
afcenfion, ea - * 23° 39

Then, by the rule of proportion, if the femidiurnal arch of Mars, viz.
fix hours fifty-eight minutes, gives for his diftance twenty-four degrees
forty-four minutes, what will fix hours forty-nine minutes, the femi-
nocturnal arch of Venus, give?


Anfwer, twenty-four degrees twelve minutes.


Which is to be fubtraéted from the diftance of Venus from the fourth
houfe thus; the diftance of Mercury from the fourth 28 §=-39


’ The proportional part - aes & Ao Te
Remain for the arch of dire@tion = - 4 _ :
To turn this arch of direGtion into time, add'the Sun’s 5

right afcenfion - Et Obie - rr oa 8
And it is augmented to - - Wee act


Which feek in the tables of right afcenfions, in order to find what
degree and minute of the zodiac an{wers thereto, and, on examination,
it will be feventeen degrees five minutes of Aries. This being found,
refer to the Ephemeris, and examine what length of time the Sun will
take in going from twelve degrees feventeen ‘minutes of Aries, being his
point at birth, to feventeen degrees five minutes of the fame fign, andiit
will be found he is four days and near twenty-onehours; which, by be-
ing computed according to the doctrine of Ptolomy, .by allowing one
day’s motion of the Sun for a year, and ‘two hours motion for a month,
declares the native was four years, ‘ten months, and fifteen days, old,
when Mars came to a parallel of Venus in Mundo.


The


OF ASTROLOGY. 633


The SUN to the Pararrer of JUPITER in MUNDO.


The Sun being in the fixth houfe, and the parallel made from the
feventh, the Sun’s diftance is to be taken from the feventh houfe by
oblique defcenfion, under the pole of the feventh, viz. fifty-one degrees
thirty-one minutes. ;


Diftance of the Sun from the feventh - - 21? 567
Seminodturnal arch of the Sun - so gam

Semidiurnal arch of Jupiter - he 5 EO

Diftance of Jupiter from the feventh - - fier Ae.


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if five hours thirty:
five minutes, being the nocturnal arch of the Sun, give its
diftance, twenty-one degrees fifty-fix minutes, what will
feven hours fifty minutes give?


Anf{wer - - - SP 2g
Which is to be fubtraéted from Jepiter S Sate and the
remainder.is the arch of direction - 19.5 46


Which, by adding the right afeenfion ie the Sun, and turning it into:
time, as in the foregoing example, points out the native to be fiftcen
years, four months, and twenty-one days, old, when the Sun came to
the mundane parallel of Japiter.


The MOON to the Pararrer of VENUS in MUNDO.
~-Diftance of the Moon from the fourth houfe, thet right


afcenfion, - - 20°" ss
‘Seminoéturnal arch:of ithe ;Moon oe 8 5
Seminodcturnal arch of Venus - = 6 49
Diftance of Venus from the fourth mS 28 39


Then, by the rule of proportion, if cai hours five minutes give
twenty degrees fifteen minutes, being the diftance of the Moon from
the fourth houfé, what will fix hours forty-nine minutes, the feminoc-
turnal archiof Venus, give?

Anfwer, feventeen degrees five minutes.

, This.


634 A NYoD E) Ly U) Sr TERA ALT A ON


This proportional part is to be fubtratted from the diftance of Ve-
nus, thus:


Diftance of Venus from the fourth, 28h 39m


Proportional part fubtract - 17 sik


And there remains for the arch of dire@ion 11 34


Which, by being turned into time by the foregoing rules, gives twelve
years, eight months, and about feven days, of the native’s life.


The SUN to the Munpane Paraittet of MAR S%,


Diftance of Mars from the midheaven - DA ran
Semidiurnal arch of Mars ~ - 6 «68
Seminoéturnal arch of the Sun - 5 {35


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-eight minutes give
twenty-four degrees forty-four minutes, what will five hours thirty-
five minutes give? as

\

Anfwer ~ - = - 21 "40


Which muft be fubtracted from the diftance of the Sun from the
fourth houfe thus; the diftance of the Sun from the fourth, by right


afcenfion, is - - 62 4
The proportional part fabtraa ‘- pam. Bie) Sob uf 2
And the remainder is the arch of direttion: - 40. 24


Which, by adjufting according to the former examples, gives forty-
three years of the native’s age.


MERCURY to the Munpanz PARALLEL of PULP LTR:
The diftance of Mercury from the feventh houfe ey oblique defcen-


fion, under the pole of the feventh, is I ai
~ Semino@urnal arch of Mercury ~ 5 SEO
Semidiurnal arch of Jupiter - FEO


* There can be no Mundane Parallels to the Part of Fortune, becaufe the Part of Fortune
emits no rays. 128
‘The


© FP 2 AsssTeRr OL O-G Y 635


The diftance of Jupiter from the feventh, by Bias de-
{cenfion, under the Boeps the feventh, is - + AS Saad g


Then, by the rule of proportion, if five hours ten mi-
nutes give one degree twenty-one minutes, the diftance of
Mercury, what wal feven hours fifty minutes, the feminoc-
turnal arch of Jupiter, give ?


An{wer, - - - - - - CAE!
Which, being fubtracted from PEPER S quan leaves
for the arch of direction = = 43 16


Which, being turned into time by the foregoing rule, gives forty-five


ee ten months, and about twelve days, of the native’s life, when
ercury came to the parallel of Jupiter in mundo.


SATURN to the MunpANE PARALLEL of VENUS.


The diftance of Venus from the fourth houfe is nt: 28 39
The feminoéturnal arch of Venus : baton
The femino¢turnal arch of Saturn - 7 elt


The diftance of Saturn from the fourth houfe - - ER 7


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if fix hours forty-nine minutes,
the feminocturnal arch of Venus, give her diftance from the fourth houfe,
viz. twenty-eight degrees thirty-nine minutes, what will feven hours
eleven minutes give, being the feminocturnal arch of Saturn?


Anfwer, = - - ~ - - - - mois
To which is to be added the diftance of Saturn from the

fourth, becaufe that planet is not paft the cufp, - 12 aa
And the arch of dire@tion will be ~ - - - 47 19


Which, being turned into sane, declares the native to be forty-
nine years and near ten months olds when Saturn comes to the mun-
dane parallel of Venus.


No. 32. 7 ale The


636 Ao Ni IGUSLAUGS HT EREALT FON
The MOON tothe Paratrex of the SUN in Munpo.


The diftance of the Moon from the fourth houfe is - aoe Th
The femino€turnal arch of the Moon = SEs ee
The feminocturnal arch of the Sun + coor

The diftance of the Sun from the fourth houfe, — - 6274


Then, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours five mi-
nutes give twenty degrees fifteen minutes, what will five
. hours thirty-five minutes, the feminocturnal arch of the
Sun, give ? Anfwer, _ - - = os 13 50


Now, as the Moon is paft the cufp of the fourth houfe,
the proportional part muft be fubtracted from the diftance -


ofthe Sun from the fourth,
And there remains for the arch of direétion . a 48 5


Which arch of direction, turned into time, declares, that when the
Mundane Parallel of the Moon and Sun came up, the native was fifty
years, eight months, and about fixteen days, old.


MARS to the PARALLEL of MERCURY in Munpno.


The diftance of Mars from the midheayenis = eee ee
The feminoéturnal arch of Mars - 6 58
The feminotiurnal arch of Mercury = i298) “16
The diftance of Mercury from the fourth houfe Ly 74 Tas


‘Then by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-eight
minutes,.give twenty-four degrees forty-four minutes,
what will five degrees ten minutes give? Anfwer, - 18 22


The part proportional is to be fubtraéted from the dif-
tance of Mercury from the fourth houfe,’


And the remainder is the arch of dire€tion - - 54. 46


Which arch of direction, being turned into time, declares the native
fifty-feven years, five: months, and twenty-fix days, old, when Mars came


in parallel with the planet Mercury,
3 | 3 ? Of


od


Ons S eR Oo lL OG Yo ue 657


Of” MU ND: Anne A SPE CUTS,


Mundane Afpetts are formed by the pofition of the twelve houfes of
heaven, as they are oppofed to, or afpeét, each other. © For inftance, the
cufp of the midheaven beholds the cufp of the feventh houfe and the
cufp of the afcendant with a mundane quartile; and the cufp of the
fourth with an oppofition. The cufp of the ninth houfe beholds the
 cufp of the eleventh with a fextile, and the cufp of the fifth witha trine;
fo the cufp of the twelfth beholds the cufp of the fecond with a {extile,
and the cufp of the fourth with a trine. And thus the Mundane Afpedcts
go round the twelve houfes, and have a meafure peculiar to themfelves,
being diftinét from the meafure ufed for bringing up zodiacal afpedts,
where fixty degrees make a fextile, and an hundred and twenty make a.
trine ; but thefe are meafured by their diftances from a given angle, and
by the femidiurnal and feminotturnal arches ; fo that, to proportionate
or limit a Mundane Afpect, it only requires to bring the ftar or planet
to the cufp of any of the houfes, according to the afpeét it is to be diretted
to; which may be done, by looking into the table of Mundane Afpetts,
in pages c11 aod 512 of this work, where, by entering with the femi-
diurnal or feminocturnal arch of the flar or planet, is {hewn the limited
proportion of their various afpects, as in the following examples.


The Part of FORTUNE to the Munpane QuarTILe of
--M ER CUEREY:


The diftance of Mercury from the feventh houfe, under the pole of the
feventh, is - > Bie 9° pe


The feminofturnal arch of Mercury - - sh yom
The femidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune 8. 5


[The Part of Fortune hath its diurnal and feminoturnal arches in-
creafed or diminifhed in proportion to thofe of the Moon, being wholly
dependent on her for declination, latitude, é&c. fo that, in this Nativity
of Mr. Witchell, it forms a Lunar Horofcope,]

Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if five hours ten minutes, being
the femino€turnal arch of Mercury, give his diftance from the feventh,
viz. three degrees feventeen minutes, what will eight hours five minutes,
the diurnal arch of the Part of Fortune, give? Anfwer, - 5 8

Then take the diitance of the Part of Fortune from the midheaven,

thus:
The


*


638 AN TUL s tT Rar EON
The right afcenfion of the Part of Fortune with the


Moon’s latitude, is = “ ~ aa. 1418 $44"
The right afcenfion of the midheaven Ms - 129) 44
And the diftance of the Part of Fortune from the mid-

heaven - - - - 12; 20
To which add the above proportional part = aL ats
And the fum-total is the arch of direction 2 - he Belek


Then, by adding the right afcenfion of the Sun, and turning the arch.
of direction into time, as by the former examples, it will be evident that .
the Quartile. of the Part of Fortune and Mercury in Mundo came up
when the native was nineteen years, two months, and about twenty-three
days, old.


The QuarTILeE of MARS and JUPITER in Munpo.
The diftance of Mars from the midheaven, by ea afcen-


fion, is 24 44
The diftance of Fapiter: by obligate defeentfion, ‘utider the

pole of the feventh, is =u - 45 39
The femidiurnal arch of Mars - - 6" «8m


The femidiurnal arch of Jupiter - - 7 Oreo)


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-eight
minutes give the diftance of Mars from the midheaven,
what will feven hours fifty minutes give? Anfwer, - 37 a fl


Which muft. be fubtratted from Jupiter’s diftance from
the feventh houfe,


t7 47
Which, turned into time, points out the natiye’s age, when Mars


came to the Mundane Quartile of Jupiter, to be nineteen years, fix
months, and about five days.


And the arch of diretion is 2 % .


The MUNDANE QuaRTILeE of the Part of FORTUNE
and JUPITER.


The diftance of the Part of Fortune from the midheaven 12 30
The -


O3.Fy tA %S TPR (OU (05G" Y. 639


The diftance of Jupiter from the feventh - 45%! 404
The femidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune Clee
The femidiurnal arch of Jupiter - % b450


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours five
minutes give twelve degree'thirty minutes, what will feven
hours fifty minutes give? Anf{wer, - - 2 8


Which isto be fabtragted from Jupiter’s diftance,


~ And the arch Bin eton is a ‘d J 33. 31


Which, turned into es gives thirty-five years, eleven months, and
about three days.


The Mundane QuarTILe of SATURN and JUPITER.


The diftance of Saturn from the fourth houfe - Ly, 7
The diftance of Jupiter from the feventh ~ - AGNES 36
The feminocturnal arch of Saturn - - aa

- The femidiurnal arch of Jupiter - - Forte


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if feven hours eleven
minutes give feventeen degrees feven minutes, what will :
feven hours fifty minutes give? Anfwer, ~~ - = 18 40


This muft be fubtratted from the diftance of Jupiter from
the feventh houfe,


en At Re ert


And the arch of direction is 2 - ~ 260 SG


Which, being turned into time, gives twenty-nine years and two
‘months, when Saturn came to the Quartile of Jupiter in Mundo.


The SUN to the SexTILe of JUPITER in Munpo.


The diftance of Jupiter from the eighth Rone. by oPhang defcenfion,
taken under the pole of the eighth, is 6. 34


No. 32. | 78 The


640 ATOR TLE Sor RA THORN:


The femidiurnal arch of Jupiter = + 4h 1 Boke
‘The feminocturnal arch of the Sun - ueBe


rel


Add thefe arches together,* and they make bes fee’ f


Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirteen hours twenty- -five minutes
give the diftance of Jupiter, viz. fix degrees thirty- four minutes, what
will five hours thirty-five minutes, the arch of the Sun, give?


An{wer, -— A = A EAU
To which add the diftance of the Sun from the fixth, taken

under the pole of the fixth, “ _ - Gtr ug
And the arch of dire€tion is = “ al 9 4


And being turned into time, by adding the right afcenfion of the
' Sun to the arch of direCtion, gives nine years, ten months, and about
twenty-two days, when the Sun came to the Mundane Sextile of


Jupiter.


The Part of FORTUNE to the SexTILE of JUPITER
in Munpo..


The diftance of Jupiter from the eighth is - - 6.5) 34


The femidiurnal arch of Jupiter - 7 50
The femidiurnal arch of the Part of Fomune Bek


Being added, make - ~ - Lge as


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fifteen hours fifty- five minutes
give fix degrees thirty-four minutes, what will eight hours five minutes


give? Anf{wer, - . - - Pe 26)
To which add the diftance of the Part of Fortune from

the tenth houfe - a - - - 12 30
And the arch of direction is - - - isc. “50


Which, being turned into time, gives feventeen year, three months,
and abotit four days.
4% A Sextile being lefs than a Quartile, anda Trine more, it muft always be remembered to


add the two diurnal or nocturnal arches together ; and thus let the complement of both be the firft
number in all proportional demands,
The


OF ASTROLOGY. 64r


The SUN in Tarne of the Parr of FORTUNE in Monpo.


’ The Sun’s diftance from the fixth houfe is - | aes i
* The feminoéturnal arch of the Sun -- NG atom

The femidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune 8 5

Being added, make bee = 13 40


Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirteen hours forty minutes
give fix degrees feven minutes, what will eight hours five minutes give?


Anf{wer, - - hu = a : Re ety

To which add the diftance of the Part of Fortune from
-the midheaven, my TF elii core - - 12 30
_ And the arch of dire&tionis aie - 16 7


Which, being turned into time, gives feventeen years, four months,
and about twenty-three days.


The MOON to the TRINE of MERCURY in Munpo.


The diftance of Mercury from the feventh is - 3.17
Seminoéturnal arch of Mercury a ye. 10
Seminocturnal. arch of the Moon “ 8 37
Being added together, make 1947


‘Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirteen hours forty-feven mi-
nutes. give three degrees feventeen minutes, what will eight hours
thirty-feven minutes give? Anfwer, |. 2.193


To which add the Moon’s diftance from the third houfe,
which is obtained by the oblique afcenfion, under the pole
of the third houfe, - - - 4s 22 21


And it makes the arch of direétion ? 3 24. 24


Which, turned into time, gives twenty-fix years, four months, and
near twenty-two days, from the native’s birth, when the Moon came


toa Trine of Mercury.
The


642 AN \la@ LU. 8-T RAM T-OnN
The MOON to the Munpane SExTILE of VENUS.


The diftance of Venus from the fifth E Go? 249°


Seminoctarnal arch of Venus


ayers 6" 49m
Seminocturnal arch of the Moon 4 Pity
Added together, make a - 1s 26


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fifteen hours twenty-fix minutes
give fix degrees twelve minutes, being the diftance of Venus from the
fifth houfe, what will eight hours thirty-feven minutes, the feminoc-
turnal arch of the Moon, give? Anfwer,


- bier ges
Add the Moon’s diftance from the third 22.5 28
And the arch of dire@tion is ~— = - Br ka oa cy be)


And, turned into time, will point to twenty-feven years, nine months,


and about eight days, of the native’s age, when the Moon came to the
Sextile of Venus.


Pannook FOR TUNE in TRINE “of MERCURY a
Munpo.


defcenfion - -


The diftance of Mercury from the fixth houfe, by oblique
‘ BS) 22 644


Seminoéturnal arch of Mercury


is. Yoo fae
Semidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune bee Mey,
Added together, make » & te 13° 47


Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirteen hours forty-feven mi-
nutes give twenty-two degrees forty-four minutes, what. will eight
hours thirty-feven minutes give? Anfwer, - 13.53


To which add the diftance of the Part of Fortune from
the midheaven, - a


- £2 9e30


And the arch of direction is found san - od shih,


Which, .turned into time, gives twenty-eight years fix months, from


the time of birth, when the Part of Fortune came to the Trine of Mer-
cury.


* The


OFT A STIR OLA GC x: 68
The SUN in Tring of MARS in Munpo.
The diftance of the Sun from the fixth is * y 627!


Seminoéturnal arch of the Sun - 5131635
Semidiurnal arch of Mars ~ af ode Go rig
Being added, make - - be ae)


Then, by the rule of proportion, if twelve hours thirty-three minutes
give fix degrees feven minutes, what will fix hours fifty-eight minutes


give? An{wer, = . as 3 - 9
Add the diftance of Mars from the midheaven 24 44
And the fum is the arch of direction - | a9 44


Which, being turned into time, by adding the right afcenfion of the
Sun tothe arch of dire@tion, it will give, from the time of birth, twenty-
nine years, eleven months, and near feven days, when the Sun came to
the Trine of Mars.


The Part of FOR TUNE in cece of MERCURY


in Munpo.
Diftance of Mercury from the feventh a Cat y
Seminocturnal arch of Mercury - 5-10
Semidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune Sir Br
Added together, make = -- Wy 47


Then, if thirteen hours forty-feven minutes give three degrees feven-
teen minutes, what will eight hours thirty feven minutes give ?


Anfwer, oh - z 1: 98


To which. add the diftance of the Part of Fortune from
the ninth houfe, which is found by taking the Natlae afcen-
fion under the pole of the ninth houfe, 29 64


eet


And the fum of. the sich of direction is tu Spy


Which, turned into time, gives thirty-three years, ten months, and
about fifteen days, of the native’s life.
No, 32. ae The


644 AW? PEL USSTtIR A TIO -N
The Part of FORTUNE in Trine of VENUS in Munpo.


Diftance of Venus from the fifth houfe, i G9 Sag
Seminofturnal arch of Venus - 6% ' 49™
Semidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune TE eh

Tet 26


Then, if fifteen hours twenty-fix minutes give fix degrees twelve mi-
nutes, what will eight hours thirty-feven minutes give ?


Anf{wer, - - - Qva 26
To which add the diftance of the Part of Fortune from

the ninth houfe, taken under the pole of the ninth, by ob.

lique afcenfion, as before - - = 25 Wed


And the fum-total is the arch of direction = —- 33 «20
Which, being turned into time, declares the native was thirty-five


years and nine months old, when the Part of Fortune came to the Trine
of Venus.


The MO OWN to the SexTiLe of SATURN in Munpo.


The diftance of Saturn from the fifth hou


fe, by oblique defcenfion,
- under the pole of the fifth, is - - :


22 eg
Semino¢cturnal arch of the Moon - - 8 37
Seminoécturnal arch of Saturn ~ 2 Fey

15 48


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if fifteen hours forty-eight mi-
nutes give twenty-two degrees twenty feven minutes, what will eight


hours thirty-feven minutes give? Anfwer, - 12 15
Add the Moon’s diftance from the third houfe, 22 02221
And the arch of direction is -. ; 34-36


Which, being turned into time, by adding the right afcenfion of the
Sun to the arch of direction, it fhews that the native was thirty-fix years,
ten months, and twenty-two days, old, when the Moon came to the
Sextile of Saturn in Mundo.


The


OF. TASS TAR GOUL JONG. Y.44 2 645


The MOON to the TRINE of the SU N in Mounpo.


Diftance of the Sun from the feventh - 21 AGE
Seminoéturnal arch of the Sun - Recaro hin
Seminoctturnal arch of the Moon - tee 7,

Being added, make - ; Efe do


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if fourteen hours twelve minutes >
give twenty-one degrees forty-fix minutes, what will eight hours thirty- —
feven minutes give? Anfwer, - ~ D924. 22


Add the Moon’s diftance from the third houfe 22 21


oo


And the arch of direction is a a Be 49


Which, being turned into time, gives thirty-feven years and two °
months of the native’s life, when the Moon came to the Trine of the
Sun in Mundo.


The MOON to the Opposirion of JUPITER in Munpo.


The diftance of Jupiter from the ninth - Veen LO
Semidiurnal arch of Jupiter my amos:
Seminoéturnal arch of the Moon - Gao
Added, make - - EO40 27


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fixteen hours twenty-feven mi-
nutes give thirty-two degrees nineteen minutes, what will eight hours
thirty-feven minutes give? Anf{wer, - - LO) 56


Which mutt be added to the diftance of the Moon from
- the third houfe, Viz. a a


eel


Being added to the Part Proportional, makes - Cagney
for the arch of direction


Which, being turned into time, gives forty-one years and about ten
months of the native’s age, when the Moon came to she Mundane Op-
pofition of Jupiter.

3 The


646 A’ NISL. Us 'TRPAAT ff OFN
‘The Part of FORTUNE in Trine of SATURN


in Munpo.


The diftance of Saturn from the fifth = 4 iy ag rleg oe
Seminocturnal arch of Saturn Pi dgee &
Semidiurnal_ arch of the Part of Profilin soma

Added together, make ~ - Te 4A


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fifteen hours forty-eight minutes
give twenty-two degrees twenty-feven minutes, what will eight hours


thirty-feven minutes gtve? Anf{wer, 5 2. 29
To which add the diftance of the Part of Fortue from the

ninth houfe,. viz. - - ~ - 2A eee.
And the arch of direction is - - 42 23


“Which, being turnedinto time, gives forty-four years, eleven months,
and about fifteen days, yee the Part of Fortune came to the IVsndane
Trine of Saturn, ;


The MOON in Trine of the Part of FOR TUNE in
~ Munpo.


The diftance of the Part of Fortune from the midheaven, by right


afcenfion, is - - ~ Lio eee oe
Semidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune = 8. a7
Seminocturnal arch of the Moon - Se Onan
Added, make ~ - - ee


Then, by the rule of Proportion, if feventeen hours four-
teen minutes give fixty-five degrees thirty-one minutes, being
the diftance of the Moon from the fecond houfe, what will


eight hours thirty-feven minutes give? Anfwer, al 3 20g 45
Which being added to the Part of Fortune, the arch of
direction is ~ - 45 15


Which gives forty-feven years, ten months, and about eighteen days,
of the native’s life. |


The


GO) Fe tA2S oReaR ORL -OUG: Y. 647
The MOON in Trine of MARS in Munpo.


Diftance of the Moon from the fecond houfe - O57 oFe
Seminoéturnal arch of the Moon ss 88 34
Semidiurnal arch of Mars - - 6. -53
Added together, make = Acetate eee


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fifteen hotrs thirty-five minutes
give fixty-five degrees thirty-one minutes, what will fix hours fifty.


eight minutes give? Anf{wer, - - 20.216
Diftance of Mars from the mid-heaven ~ 23 34


Add the diftance of Mars to the eBsOpgtHGnal Batts andthe
arch of direction is found §2 3259


Which, turned into time, gives fifty-five years and about five months
of the native’s life, when this direction came up.


MARS to the Trine of VENUS in Munpo.


Diftance of Venus from the fifth houfe, a Oa ko
Seminoéturnal arch of Venus - - 6 49
Semidiurnal arch of Mars ~ - 2H Poste)

"Added together ~ - - 13 “47


Then, by the rule of proportion, if thirteen hours forty-feven mi-
nutes give fix degrees twelve minutes, what will fix hours fifty-eight
minutes give? Anfwer, - - - SEL,


The diftance of Mars from the ninth houfe, Ey oblique
afcenfion, under the pole of the ninth, is Brera


Then add the proportional part to the diftance of Mars,
and the arch of direction is ~ - ~ DIDS 2


Which, being turned into time, gives fifty-four years, eleven months,
and about fourteen days, of the native’s age, when Mars came to the
Trine of Venus in Mundo.

No, 32. 7 U The


648 AN VIitLch.Ucs T RAAT FQN
The MOON to the QuINTILE of the SUN in Munpo.


The right afcenfion of the Sun, added to the whole circle


of the zodiac, is - - - - SUT bar eae
From which fubtract the quintile, A “f 76
And the remainder is - - - 296 18


Seek for this fum in the table of right afcenfion, and it

will point in the zodiac to twenty-four degrees twenty-three

minutes of Capricorn, the declination of which point is

twenty-one degrees twenty-nine minutes. Then find the

afcenfional difference under the pole of the Moon, whichis 4 39
Add it to the right afcenfion, above given, eh Atalay RAE
And the obliqueafcenfion of thequintileoftheSunwillbe goo 57
From which fabtra& the oblique afcenfion of the Moon,

taken under her own pole, - - s 292 14


(Cees


And the remainder is - tr 8. 43


Then find the femino¢turnal arch of the Moon, according to her
latitude, which is eight hours thirty-feven minutes.


_[The method of taking the Moon’s feminoturnal arch with latitude,
is thus: Find her declination with latitude, and thereby obtain her af-
cenfional difference under the pole of the afcendant, which afcenfional
difference is either to be added to or fubtracted from ninety degrees, ac-
cording whether it be a nocturnal or diurnal arch, or a northern or fouth-
ern fign. |


The feminocturnal arch of the quintile of the Sun is ggm


[The feminoéturnal or femidiurnal arch. of an afpect is thus found:
Find the degree the planet (whichis, the promittor), poffefles in the zodiac,
and add or fubtract what degrees are neceflary for the afped,, and with
that degree in the zodiac find the femidiurnal or femino¢turnal arch under
the latitude of birth; for example, fuppofe the feminoéturnal arch of the
quintile of the Sun be required as above; proceed thus: The place of
the Sun in the Zodiac, which in this example is promittor, is twelve
degrees feventeen minutes. of Aries, from which fubtra& the quintile,
viz. feventy-five degrees, and it points to twenty-feven degrees feventeen
minutes of Capricorn; find the declination without latitude, viz. twenty
degrees forty feven minutes, and then gain its afeenfional différence,
which is twenty-eight degrees thirty-two. minutes; add it to ninety, be-
caufe the afpect is in a fouthern fign, and noéturnal, and it makes

2 eighteen


10. F MAAS FT ROULIO.IG! Y. 649


eighteen degrees thirty-two minutes; which, by the table for turning de-
grees and minutes into time, in page 206, gives feven hours fifty-four
minutes, which is the feminocturnal arch required. In the fame manner
the feminocturnal or diurnal arch may be obtained for any other afpect.]


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven
minutes, being the feminocturnal arch of the Moon, give eight degrees
three minutes, the diftance of-the Sun’s quintile from the Moon, what
will feven hours fifty-four minutes, the nocturnal arch of the quintile,
give ?——For the arch of direction - 4) soos 8 oO


Which is to be turned into time, by the foregoing rule, and it will
fhew the native was eight years, nine months, and about eighteen days,
_ old, when the Moon came to the Quintile of the Sun.


The SUN to the SesquieuaDRATE of MARS in Muypo.


Right afcenfion of Mars with latitude — ‘ rg? 58%
Sefquiquadrate afpect from Mars ~ 2 es


Subtract, and the right afcenfion of the afpettis - 18 58


And, being fought in the tables of right afcenfions, points

_to twenty degrees thirty-three minutes of Aries, the decli-

nation of which is eight degrees three minutes; by this,

gain the afcenfional difference under the pole of the Sun, viz. 7 © 37
Add the difference to the right afcenfion above, and the

oblique defcenfion, of the fefquiquadrate of Mars is - 26) gs


Subtra& the oblique defcenfion of the Sun ~ 1G
And there remains - . - - 10 43.
Semino@urnal arch of the Sun - Range
Seminocturnal arch of the fefquiquadrate of

Mars, according to the above rule - ee 29


Then fay by the rule of proportion, if five hours thirty-five minutes
give ten degrees forty-three minutes, what will five hours twenty-nine
minutes give? Anfwer, - ‘ 4 10 32


Add to it the right afcenfion of the Sun, to turn it into time, and it
will give eleven years, fix.months, and:about fifteen days, of the native’s
life; when the Sun came to the Sefquiquadrate of Mars.

The


6x0 A NYISLOL US T R°ALT EF ON
The Part of FORTUNE to the Sesquiquaprate of MERCURY


in Munpo.
Right afcenfion of Mercury, with latitude, = gg gg”
Sefquiquadrate of Mercury’s afpect, a 136
Being added, make the right afcenfion : . Dey). Be


Which, being fought in thetable of right afcenfions,
points to five degrees thirty-five minutes of Scorpio; the
declination thereof is nine degrees thirty minutes, and the
afcenfional difference under the pole of the Partof Fartuneis 1 Ir


Which afcenfional difference fubtraét from the right
afcenfion, it being ina northern fign, and the oblique af-
cenfion of the fefquiquadrate is sys : 156 11


From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the Part of
Fortune - = - - 138 8


Remains. : : 3 18 3


Semidiurnal arch of the Part of Fortune, be-
ing the fame arch as the Moon, - 8: gy
Semidiurnal arch of the fefquiquadrate of
Mercury . : - 6 40


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty feven mi.
nutes give eighteen degrees three minutes, what will fix hours forty
minutes give? Anfwer, - - 1 eee


Which is the arch of direction; and, being turned into time, will give
fifteen years, three months, and about ten days, of the native’s life, when
this direction begins to operate.


The SUN to-the- Srmiquarfire of VENUS in Munpo.


Right afcenfion of Venus with latitude is. - ng 72. 13
To which add her femiquartile, ~ r Weak
Venus’s firft diftance is ache » 382. 53
From which fubtract. the circle - - 360
And the right afcenfion will be - = Pies Fa


OF "ASTROLOGY. 651


Which: points in the zodiac to twenty-four degrees forty-five mi-
nutes of Aries; the declination is nine degrees thirty-feven minutes,
and the afcenfional difference, taken under the pole of the Sun, is


oF arom
Which, being added to the above right afcenfion, makes the
oblique defcenfion of the femiquartile of Venus __ 92.4
- From which fubtract the oblique defcenfion of theS un, re 2
Seminocturnal arch of the Sun, . Ea a
Seminocturnal arch of the femiquartile of Venus are PG


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if five hours thirty-five minutes
give fixteen degrees nine minates, what will five hours twenty minutes
give for the arch of direction? Anfwer, + cS 15 26


Which being turned into time, by adding the right afcenfion of the
Sun, in order to gain its true place in the zodiac, the diurnal motion of
the Sun will meafure fixteen years, eight months, and about twenty-
four days, of the native’s life, before this femiquartile of Venus in mundo
will begin to operate.


The MOON to the QuinTiLte of MERCURY in Munpo.


Right afcenfion of Mercury, with the-circle, - 382 22
From which fubtraé the quintile U = Yee.
And the right afcenfion of the point is ~ 3 307° 22


Which anfwers to five: degrees of Aquaries,. the declination
of which is nineteen degrees five minutes.


Afcenfional: difference under the pole of ‘the Moon, . alae


Which, being added to the above right afcgnfion, makes the
oblique afcenfion of the quintile of Meats: # ma bree Gdn. 90
From which fubtratt the oblique afcenfion of the Méon, 292 I4


Emenee)


And there remains = - A 19 16
Seminoéturnal arch of the Moon A 8. 37
Seminoéturnal arch of Mercury’s quintile, 7 31


No. 33: 7X Then,


652 AN JU © US 1 ROART T OGN


Then, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven minutes
give nineteen degrees fixteen minutes, what will feven hours thirty-one
minutes give for the arch of direction? An{wer, - 16°. 495


“ Which, turned into time, gives eighteen years and about four months,
when this direction of the Moon in quintile of Mercury comes up.


The MOON to the. SemrquarTiILe of the S UN in Munpo.


Right afcenfion of the Sun with the circle,


~ 371.18
Semiquartile fubtract, = = = 45 Oo
; 326 18
This right afcenfion anfwers to twenty-three degrees fifty-
eight minutes of Aquaries, the declination of which is
thirteen degrees thirty-three minutes. 2
And the afcenfional difference, taken under the pole of the .
Moon, is “ - ROG eal - Qo ES
Which fubtract from the above right afcenfion, and the
oblique defcenfion is = ~ - Te Eee on 8. 20
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon, 292 14
And there remains - - - = Ca ee 3
Seminocturnal arch of the Moon - SP gee


Seminocturnal arch of the femiquartile of the Sun 7


5


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight ‘hours thirty-feven mi-
nutes give thirty-one degrees twelve minutes, what will feven hours
five minutes give for the arch of direction? Anfwer, - 25 39


Which, joined to the Sun’s right afcenfion, meafures the time of the
coming up of this direction to be, thirty-three years, two months, and
about eight days.

The MOON to: the SEMIQUARTILE of MERCURY in Munpo.

Right afcenfion of Mercury, with the circle,


| . 382. 22
Semiquartile fubtract - - 4S cas
And the right afcenfion remains - - B97 uur


This


O Fe A SA TERE OL OGY: 653


This points to five degrees thirty-five minutes of Pifces, the
declination of which is nine degrees thirty minutes.


The afcenfional difference, under the pole of the Moon, is 22 ae!


Subtract the afcenfional difference from the above right


afcenfion, and there remains 2 ef 335 22
From which fubtract the Moon’s oblique afcenfion, 292 14

-— And the arch of difference is a o 43. 8
Sétinocturtial arch of Luna a gs 37™


Seminocturnal arch of Mercury’s femiquartile 6 40


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven mi-
nutes give forty-three degrees eight minutes, what will fix hours forty
minutes give for the arch of direction? Anf{wer, = 33.23


Which arch of direction, being turned into time, fhews that it will be
thirty-five years, nine months, and about fifteen days, of the native’s life,
before it will come up, or have any effect upon the radix of his nativity.


\


The Parr of FORTUNE to the SesquiquapraTe of JUPITER
in Munpo.


Right afcenfion of Jupiter - - = ee st
Sefquiquadrate muft beadded = . - Eieaao
And the right afcenfion of Jupiter’s fefquiquadrate is 192208 5


Which points in the zodiac to thirteen degrees fifty-nine
minutes of Libra, the declination of which is five de-
- degrees thirty-three minutes. ;
The afcenfional difference obtained under the pole of the
part of fortune is md < = is O 42


Being added to the above right afcenfion, makes fat 193 33
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the part of


fortune - = - hee ama
And the arch of difference will be ha! : 55 25
Semidiurnal arch of the part of fortune ! ~ 37


9
Semidiurnal arch of the fefquiquadrate of Jupiter 5 30
Then


654 ANY PHU WS TRATION


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven mi-
‘nutes give fifty-five degrees twenty-five minutes, what will five hours
thirty minutes give ? Anfwer, - ‘ 35° 38


Which is the arch of direction, to be turned into time, by adding it
to the right afcenfion-of the Sun as before, and the refule will give thir-
ty-cightyears, one month, and about eight days, of the native’s life, when —
the part of fortune came to the fefquiquadrate of Jupiter.


The MOON to the QuINTILE of JUPITER in Munpo.


The right afcenfion of Jupiter, with the circle, * AUR G1
The quintile is : = a 75. 450


Subtract, and the right afcenfion of Jupiter's quintile is SEER


Which gives eleven degrees twenty-one minutes of Pifces
in the zodiac.—The declination, of the point is feven
degrees twenty. minutes.


' The afcenfional difference, under the Moon’s pole, is 1 32
Subtract, and the oblique defcenfion of Jupiter’s quintile is 341 19 |
The oblique afcenfion of the Moon fubtraét, —— ~ 292 14
And there remains for the arch of difference - ROues be
Seminoéturnal arch of the Moon Me gh a7”
Seminotturnal arch of Jupiter's quintile eOwngG


Then by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven minutes
give forty-nine degrees five minutes, what will fix hours thirty minutes
give for the arch of direction? An{wer, = Li a5 2


Which arch of direGtion, being turned into time, declares the native


was thirty-nine years, fix months, and about fixteen days, old, when
the Moon came to the quintile of Jupiter. ; 3


The MOON tothe SemiquarTiLe of JUPITER in Munpo, |


The right afcenfion of Jupiter, with the circle, is - 417 et
The femigquartile is - - = is 45. 0
Subtraét the femiquartile, and there remains - 372 5s


Which


OFTASTROLOGY. 64


Which points out thirteen degrees fifty-eight minutes of
Aries in the zodiac.—The declination is five degrees
thirty-one minutes.


The afcenfional difference under the pole of the Moon, is {I 9
Add the afcenfional difference to the above gat eee

and the oblique-defcenfion is found 374 0
From: which fubtraét the: oblique: afdenfiord. of the Moon is 292" $x


And there remains - - ~ 81 46


Seminodturnal arch of the Moon . 8 37
Seminoéturnal arch of the femiquartile of Jupiter 5 30


Then, by the rule of proportion, if eight hours thirty-feven minutes
give eighty- one degrees forty-fix minutes, what will five hours thirty
minutes give for the arch of direction? Anfwer, - 48 a


Which being turned into time as before, declares the native was fifty


years, feven months, and about fourteen days, old, when the Moon came
tothe femiquartile of Jupiter.


The SUN’ to' the Quintiue of SATURN in’ Munpvo.


The right afcenfion‘of Saturn, with latitude, is - 426 23
The quintile is - - . ~ FS) NO
Which add to the right afcenfion - = 401 rl
Subtraét the. circle - - - 360


And the remainder is the right afcenfion of Saturn’s quintile 41 21


Which points’ to thirteen degrees forty minutes of Taurus,
the declination of which is.fixteen degrees, and.


The afcenfional difference under the pole of the Sun is Pew 33
Which add tothe above right afcenfion, and the py ncite:

defcenfion of Jupiter’s quintile is ay
From which fubtract the oblique defeenfion of: the. Sas Ba X52
And there remains ee - ar AY 2 '2


mu, -93¢ » ¥ | Semi-


656 ANE. EY LW St TERS A TWN


Seminocturnal arch of the Sun, a, 5 35
Seminocturnal arch of Jupiter’s quintile, oJ 16


Then, by the rule of proportion, if five hours thirty-five minutes give


forty-one degrees two minutes, what will feven hours fixteen minutes
give? . Anfwer, - - - eA


Which is the arch of direction, and by the meafure of time gives fifty-


fix years and about three days, before the Sun comes to the quintile of
Saturn,


To Direct the ANGLES of the FIGURE.


The angles of the horofocope are directed by the fame rules as all the
other directions in the world are, viz. by the aid of the femidiurnal and
feminocturnal arches ; and, according as the planets have greater or lefs
latitude, fo muft their pofitions be taken; for a ftar is faid to touch the
horizon by direction, or by any other motion, when it begins to leave
the fubterranean hemifphere, and is emerging into ours. And, although
‘the meridian and horizon are only two imaginary circles, yet we are

fure there are two fuch points, which is demonftrated every morning
when the Sun rifes, and equally fo when it fets ; and reafon dictates that
there muft be a half-way between, which we call the meridians Nowa
~ ftar comes fooner or later to thefe angles, in proportion as it has either


north or fouth latitude; and may either be directed by the globes, or
by the method following. |


METHOD of directing the AscenpanT to the various ASPECTS
of the PLANETS.


The ASCENDANT to the SExTILE ofthe MOON.


Right afcenfion of the Moon without titude


- 288 24
From which fubtract the fextile ~ ath fan 60
And there remains « ~ . ? 228 a4:
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant 219 14


And the diftance of the fextile of the Moon fromthe
afcendant will be 2


=


~ ip Qa 210
Then


OF JAS TROL -0 Gy. ~ 657


Then obtain the feminoéturnal arch of the Moon thus; firft find the
declination of the Moon with latitude, and under the pole of the afcen-


dant gain her afcenfional difference, and add to it - 90
Afcenfional difference - - 39. 16
129: 26


This fum being turned into hours-and minutes, by the tablein page
206 of this work, will give eight hours thirty-feven minutes.


The feminoéturnal arch of the afcendant is next to be taken, which
by examining the table of feminoCturnal arches in page so1, it will be
found that twenty-feven degrees thirty-three minutes of Libra will give
fix hours fifty-five minutes.


I take thefe two feminocturnal arches, and fay, if fix hours fifty-five
minutes (being the feminocturnal arch of the afcendant) give nine degrees
ten minutes, the diftance of the Moon’s fextile, what will eight hours
thirty-feven minutes, the feminotturnal arch of the Moon, give?


Anf{wer, - 3 * = Phy ac


Which is to be turned into time, by adding the right afcen-
fion of the Sun - - - BI cts


The right afcenfion of Sol being added, makes - 22 43


Which, being fought in the table of right afcenfions, points to twenty-
four degrees thirty minutes of Aries; to which place the Sun came in
twelve days twelve hours; and by allowing one day of the Sun’s mo-
tion for a year of the native’s life, as before, declares the native to be
twelve years and fix months old, when the afcendant came to the fextile


of the Moon.


The AsceNnDANT to the QUARTILE of SATURN.


Firft feek what latitude Saturn has at the quartile from his place,
which is in twenty-three degrees thirty-cight minutes of Virgo, and it
will be found he has for latitude two degrees eight minutes north.


Secondly, take Saturn’s right afcenfion with that latitude 324 55
From which fubtract the quartile i - go


ec meets ee eed


And there remains * 43 2 234 55
From


658 AN ILLUSTRATION
From which fubtraé& the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant’ 219 14


And there remains for the arch of direction - Te. 41

And by adding the right afcenfion of the Sun, and turning it into
time as before, it will produce feventeen years one month and about fe-
yen days, when the afcendant came to the quartile of Saturn.


The AscenDANT to the Opposition of JUPITER.


The right afcenfionof Jupiter without, latitude ~ 237 43
The declination of Jupiter, with latitude . 19° 99’
The afcenfional difference, with latitude . - - 26 42


Add the afcenfional difference and the oblique afcenfion of
the oppofition of Jupiter - mi - 264, 25
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant 219 14.


And the remainder‘is the arch of direCtion As 1


Which farned into time, by adding the right afcenfionof the Sun, &c.
will produce forty»feven years and about ten months, when the:afcen-
dant came to the oppofition of Jupiter.


The AsceNDANT to the QuarTILE of MARS. -


The quartile of Mars falls in forty-four minutes of Sagittarius, the
latitude which Mars poffefles at that point is fifty-four minutes fouth,


Right afcenfion of Mars with that latitude - I52 29
To which add the quartile = - go

And the fum is Hh) ~ - 242 29°
Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant - 219: 14
And there remains for the arch of dire€tion = 7a PE


Add it to the right afcenfion of the Sun, and turn it into time, by
which it. will: appear. to have been twenty-five, years-and about. three
months when the afcendant,came.teithe, {quare of. Mars,.


The Ascenpanr to the QuaRTILE of VENUS,


Thequartile of Venus falls in five degrees twenty-one minutes of Sa-
gittarius, and the latitude Venus poffeffes at that point is three degrees
forty-feven minutes north.


The


O BTA‘ (TR OLL.O..G iY. 659


Right afcenfion of Venus with that latitude - 398 s'Ko
From which fubtract the ae - go
And the remainder is 245 ~50
From which alfo fubtraa&t the oblique afcenfion of the

afcendant .- - - 219 14
And the remainder is the arch of dire¢tion - 26 36


Which turn into time, by adding the right afcenfion of the Sun, and ’
it will produce twenty-eight years and about feven months, when the
afcendant came to the quartile of Venus.


The AsceNnDANT to the TRINE of the SUN.


Right afcenfion of the Sun with the circle, - B74. 15
From which fubtratt the trine = “ 120

And there remains - - 251 18
Oblique afcenfion of the Acendant - - 219 14


Which fubtraé from the above remainder, and there remains 32 «4
Seminocturnal arch of the Sun — llc: re
Seminocturnal arch of the afcendant O95 5


Then fay, by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-five minutes
give thirty-two degrees four minutes, what will five hours thirty-five
minutes give? Anfwer, for the arch of direCtion, twenty-five degrees
fifty-three minutes, which being turned into time, produces twenty-
feven years and about eleven months when the afcendant came to the
trineof the Sun. |


The AscENDANT to the SexTite of SATURN.


Right afcenfion of Saturn, without latitude - Azer es
From which fubtract the fextile, viz. - 60

And there remains 265. 58
Then fubtract the oblique a (ethos of the afeendant 219 14


Which leaves ~* ~ 46 44
No. 33. | 7 Z,


660 AN OLsLiL U's T REAAT TF ON


‘Obtain the feminoCturnal arch of Saturn according to the latitude the
has at the fextile place, which is - ml a6
Seminocturnal arch of the afcendant ~ 6: 55


Then by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-five minutes give
forty-fix degrees forty-four minutes, what will feven hours fixteen mi-
nutes give? Anfwer, (for the arch of direction) - AO ethers


rant the arch of direction into time, by adding the right afcenfion of


the Sun, and it will produce fifty-one years fix months and feven days,
when the afcendant came to the fextile of Saturn.


The AscENDANT to the Trine of MARS.


Right afcenfion of Mars without latitude woke 152. AO
_ Add the trine -


= IZO0


|


And it makes a ~ ee BIR bag.
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant |


219 14
And there remains - - | Eo
The femidiurnal arch of Mars, according to the latitude he poffeffes at

his trine place, is ~ & > ORT

_ The femino&urnal arch of the afcendant Go Ure


Then, by the rule of proportion, if fix hours fifty-five minutes give


fifty-three degrees thirty-five minutes, what will fix degrees fifty-three
minutes give? Ani{wer - Nip xa


Then, by turning this arch of direftion into time, it allows fifty-five
years eleven months, for the afcendant to come to the trine of Mars.


The MipuEAven, or Mepium Cott, to the Trine of the SUN.


Right afcenfion of the Sun - gt 48


Declination of the Sun is four degrees fifty-two minutes
north


Afcenfional difference under the pole of the fixth


Qi BL VA'S Bak OL OGY. 661


’ The Sun being in a northern fign, add the afcenfional difs
ference to the right afcenfion, and the remainder will be the
oblique defcenfion 12 31
From which fubtrac& the oblique defcenfion of the fixth On tia
And the remainder is the arch of dire€tion - 3.017
Which, being turned into time, declares the site was three years,
feven eamitiie® and twenty days, old, when the midheaven came to the
trine of the Sun.


The MIDHEAVEN to the Conjunction of the PART
: of FORTUNE.


Right afcenfion of the part of Fortune - I4t 44
Right afcenfion of the Midheaven - - 129° 14
Subtraat, and the arch of direétion is t 12 30


Which being turned into time, gives thirteen years, four months, and
about feven days, when the midheaven came to the conjunction of the
part of Fortune.


The MIDHEAVEN to the Oppostrion of SATURN.


Right afcenfion of Saturn’s eppoet point, with contrary


latitude, - - 146 21
Right afcenfion of the Midheaven - 120) 44
Subtraét, and the remainder is the arch of direGtion ry ae


Which, being turned into time, produces nineteen years, eight months,
and about fixteen days, for the completion of this afpect,


The MIDHEAVEN to the Conjunction of COR LEONIS.


The right afcenfion’of Cor Leonis, with twenty-fix minutes north


latitude, is = Tho. 409
The right afcenfion oF the inidhearen - 129 4!
Subtract, and the remainder is the arch of direction _ 18°55


Which,


662 ACN -IsL‘L US .T RoA:T F-O9N


Which, being turned into time, gives twenty years and about feven.
months for the coming up of this direction,


The MIDHEAVEN to the Trine of MERCURY.


Right afcenfion of Mercury, with half latitude, 22 652
Declination of ake with latitude, is twelve degrees
fifty-two minutes.


Afcenfional difference under the pole of the fixth LI e2
And, being ina northern fign, add the afcenfional difference,

and the fame will be the oblique defcenfion of Mercury 34 14
From which fubtract the oblique defcenfion. of the fixth, —

and the oblique defcenfion of the fixth will be ~ Oat
And there remains, for the arch of direction, ns 25- ©


Which turn into time, by the rules foregoing, and it will thew the
native to be twenty-feven years and about one month old when the mid-
heaven came to the trine of Mercury.


MIDHEAVEN to the QuarRTire of JUPITER.
Right afcenfion of Jupiter, with the latitude he pofleffes


at his quartile, viz. fifty-one minutes north, --- 57 4d
Add its quartile ~ ~ g0 oO
And it makes - 147 41
Subtract the right afcenfion of the midheaven ~ 129 14
And the remainder is the Ae of direction - 18 27


Which, being turned into Hine gives twenty years, one month, and
about feven days, for the completion of the afpect.


The MIDHEAVEN to the ConysuncTion of MARS.


Right afcenfion of Mars, with latitude, 153 68
From which fubtract the right afcenfion of the Midheaven 129. 14


And there remains for the arch of direction - 24 44


The


Ol Rw A S ‘Tek Ort O:G Y. 663


Which, turned into time, produces twénty-fix years, nine months, and
about three days, for the operation of this afpect.


The MIDHEAVEWN tto the OrpposiTion of VENUS.


Right afcenfion of the oppofition of Venus, with contrary Ia-


titude ~ - - 157 29
Right afcenfion of the midheaven - 1207-14
Subtra&t, and the remainder is the arch of direction eval i


_ Which, turned into time, will produce thirty years and about fix
months of the native’s life.


The MIDHEAVEN to the ConjuncrTion of the DRAGON’s


TAIL.
Right afcenfion of the Dragon’s Tail, - 162 18
From which ‘fubtract the right afcenfion of the midheaven 129 14
Remains for the arch of direction a ECs


Which, turned into time, according to the former examples, declares
the native was thirty-five years and fix months old when the midheaven
came to the conjunction of the Dragon’s Tail.


The SUN directed to the QuaRTILE of the MOON in the
; ZODIAC, without LATITUDE.


The quartile of the Moon is fix degrees fifty-fix minutes of Aries.
The declination of that point without latitude, is fix degrees forty


minutes. The pole of the Sun, forty-three degrees cight minutes.
Right afcenfion of the quartile of the Moon - is 36
Af{cenfional difference under the pole of the Sun ~ 6 17


No. 33. | | 8 A Oblique


664 AN .€D b US) TRA LON


- Oblique defcenfion of that point, by adding the afcen-
fional difference to the right afcenfion - as


24.
From which fubtract the oblique defcenfion of the Sun, 5 Bf
And the remainder is the arch of direction - ~ iat


Which, being turned into time, declares the native was fix years, fix
months, and about ten days, old, when the Sun came to the quartile of the
Moon, without latitude. F


The SUN directed to the QuARTILE of the MOON in ‘the
ZODIAC, with LATITUDE.


The quartile of the Moon falls in fixteen degres fifty-fix minutes of
Aries,


Look into the Ephemeris, and find what latitude the Moon has at that
point :—and it has three degrees north latitude


The declination of that point with latitude, is nine degrees twenty-
feven minutes.


Right afcenfion of the quartile of the Moon with latitude 14 es
Pole of the Sun, is forty-three degrees eight minutes.


Afcenfional difference under that pole - | 6. 7


Add the.right afcenfion, and the oblique defcenfion of the .
Moon’s quartile, with latitude, is


f = Po 42
Subtract the oblique defcenfion of the Sun is’ 59
And the remainder is the arch of dire€tion 4 4°43


Which, turned into time, gives five years and abouttwo months, when -
the Sun came to the fquare of the Moon with latitude.


The SUN dire&ted to the Sextire of SATURN inthe Zopiac.


Oblique defcenfion of the fextile of Saturn < 30 36
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun - miftib Tho lieotlso


Subtratt


(OL AS TR G-L 0 GY. ~ 655
Subtract the oblique defcenfion of the Sun from the oblique -
defcenfion of the fextile of Saturn, and there remains for the


arch of direction ~ - 14. (37


Which, being converted into time, declares the native was about fix-
teen years old when the fun came to the fextile of Saturn.


The SUN to the Conjunction of MERCURY.


Oblique defcénfion of Mercury with latitude, taken under the pole


of the Sun, mer - fs 34 44
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun =. 4 - Lent eo
- Subtract,’ and the arch of direction is - 18 45


_ Which, turned into time, gives twenty years and about five months
when the Sun came to the conjunction of Mercury.


The SUN to the SEVENTH HOUSE, pirecr Drrecrion.


’ Oblique defcenfion of the feventh houfe - 39 14
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun - - 15 59
Subtract, and the arch of direction is | ui 23°15


Which, turned into time, produces twenty-five years, two months,
and twenty-five days, when the Sun came to the feventh hobfe.


The SUN directed to the Trine of MARS in the Zopiac.


Oblique decenfion of the trine of Mars ° 39 50
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun eo 2 1s. 59
Subtract, and the remainder is the arch of direction 23.61


Which, turned into time, declares the native was twenty-five years,
nine months, and fourteen days, old, when the Sun came to the trine
of Mars.


The


666 AN. UL U8 TER) A Tid, N


The SUN to the Sextrite of VENUS-in the Zoprac..


The oblique defcenfion of the fextile of Venus — : 45 83
The oblique defcenfion of the Sun - - £5. 29
The arch of direction ~ - ~ - 29 54


Which, turned into time, gives thirty-two years, four months, and —
about twelvedays, when the Sun came to the fextile of Venus.


The SUN to the QuinTiLEe of SATURN inthe Zoptac.


The quintile falls in Taurus, eight degrees thirty-five minutes.
The peuats defcenfion of that point under the pole of the


Sun - = son, 8
The oblique ieerane ie the ae - - 15 59
The arch-of direction : os - R42 9


Which, turned into time, produces thirty-fix years and about feven
months when the Sun came to the quintile of Saturna.


The SUN to the Con JUNCTION of VENUS, by converse Motion.


The oblique defcenfion of the Sun, with the circle Cpe at}
The oblique defcenfion of Venus, under the pole of Venus 334 43


Subtract, and the arch of direttion is - - 38 20


Which, turned into time, produces forty-one years and about one
month, when the Sun came to the conjun@ion of Venus, by converfe
motion. .


The SUN directed to the Trine of LUNA in the ZopiAc.


The oblique defcenfion of the trine of eae - 61. 3
The oblique defcenfion the Sun - “ 15 59
The arch of dire€tion - - - - AS” 4


Which,


Dev AKS STPR UOUL, 10.3! ¥: 667


Which, turned into time, produces forty-feven years and about eight
months, wien the Sun came to the trine of the Moon in the zodiac.


The SUN direfted to the Oppostrion of MARS in the Zoviac,
by converse Morton.


Oblique defcenfion of the Sun, with the pate under the pole of


Mars, 372 46
Oblique Gee Gas of Mars at the ‘oppolite point 329 36
Subtract, and the remainder is the arch of direction 43. 10


Which, turned into time, gives forty-five years and about nine months,
when Sol came to the oppofition of Mars by converfe motion.
The SUN directed to the zopriacaL Parattet of VENUS.


The parallel of Venus falls in twenty-two. degrees thirty minutes
of Aries.


Pole of the Sun : “ 43. 8
Declination of Venus ~ - 8 47
Afcenfional difference : - S10
Right afcenfion of the parallel of Venus - 20 48
Add the afcenfional difference to the HAN afcenfion, and the 7a
fum is the oblique decenfion - Pha be
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun - Tose 2


Subtract the oblique defcenfion of the Sun from the oblique
defcenfion of the parallel of Venus, and the arch of direction is 13 15


Which, turned into time, gives fourteen years and about fix months,
when the Sun came to the zodiacal parallel of Venus.
The SUN directed to the zopracat Paratztet of MERCURY.


The parallel of Mercury falls: in three degrees fifty-five minutes of
Taurus.


No. 33. 8 B , Declination


663 A NRL OLS “TF ReAAT EON


Declination of Mercury 6


3 aa 12 52
Pole of the Sun - - Ag, 3
Af{cenfional difference . re 20
Add the right afcenfion to the m(ocmneDeadl diamcnne 31 39
And the oblique defcenfion of Mercury’s pari) 3 is AA ie
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun 15.52

| Subtract, and the remainder is the arch of direction Pou ey


Which, being turned into time, declares the native was thirty years,


fix months, and about twenty days, old, when the Sun. came to the zo-
diacal parallel of Mercury. —


The S UN directed to the zopracAL ParatLteL of MARS.


The zodiacal parallel of Mars falls in-feven degrees fifty-eight minutes
of Taurus.


Pole of the Sun


. ee 43 8
Declination of Mars - - 14 51
A{cenfional difference - 17. 46
Right afcenfion of Mars’s zodiacal parallel - Be. 86
‘Add the afcenfional difference, and the fum is ue oblique

defcenfion, viz. | 49 21
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun - 15) $2


Subtract, and the arch of direction is - 33 29


Which, being turned into time, produces thirty-five years and about
eleventh months, when the Sun came to the zodiacal parallel of Mars.


The SUN direéted to the zopiacat PaRattet of SATURN,


The zodiacal parallel of Saturn falls in nine degrees thirty minutes of
Taurus.


Pole of the Sun


oy | 43 8
Declination of Saturn : * 14 43
_ Afcenfional


OFF ASTROLOGY. 669


Afcenfional difference - . 14 15
Right afcenfion of the zodiacal parallel of Saturn a7 eb
Add the afcenfional difference to the above right afcenfion,

and the oblique defcenfion is - : 51 21
Oblique defcenfion of the Sun - as ‘a alg we)
Subtra@, and the arch of direction is ae 35 29


‘Which, being turned into time, produces thirty-feven years, eleven
months, and about ten days, when the Sun came to the zodiacal parallel
of Saturn. 7


METHOD of directing the Moon to the various ASPECTS in the
‘ZODIAC, with or without Latritupe..


The MOON direfted to the QuaRTILE of MERCURY in the
ZODIAC, with Latitude, '


The quartile of Mercury falls in twenty-five degrees fifteen min utes
of Capricorn, and, by the time the Moon comes to that point in the zo-
diac, Mercury will have three degrees eight minutes north latitude.—
With this latitude Mercury's quartile is to. be taken under the pole of
he Moon, viz.


t |
Pole of the Moon - S 11 4K
Declination of twenty-five degrees fifteen minutes of Capri-

corn, with latitude ne e Bey.
Afcenfional difference under the pole of the Moon | aga
Right afcenfion of the quartile of Mercury, with three de-

grees eight minutes north latitude 296 37
Add the right afcenfion to the afcenfional difference, and the

oblique afcenfion of the quartile of Mercury is - Joo 31:
Right afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude ‘ 288 59
Declination of the Moon, without latitude as 22. 27
‘Afcenfional difference under her own pole ~ 4 56


670 A Nii L 0, U:S: TRAST ION


Add the afcenfional difference to the Moon’s right afcenfion,
and her oblique afcenfion will be - | 2030 gs


Then, to gain the arch of direction, fubtra& the oblique afcenfion of
the Moon from the oblique afcenfion of the quartile of Mercury, thus:


Oblique afcenfion of the quartile of Mercury - 300. 31
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon - ~ 299° 255
Subtract, and the arch of direCtion is - 6 36


Which, being added to the right afcenfion of the Sun, and turned into
time, gives feven years, and near four months, when the Moon came to
the quartile of Mercury, with latitude in the zodiac.


The MOON direéted to the QuinTiLE of the SUN.
The quintile of the Sun falls in twenty-feven degrees of Capricorn.


Declination of that point without latitude (for the Sun never has


any) ne - - 20 "50
Pole of the Moon - - Le
Afcenfional difference of the quintile of the Sun under the

pole of the Moon - : Ay 32
Right afcenfion of the quintile of the Sun ~ 299 4
Add the right afcenfion to the afcenfional difference, andit |

makes the oblique afcenfion - - 303 36
Declination of the Moon, with latitude - 26 42
Afcenfional difference under her own pole - G20
Right afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude - 288 59
Add the afcenfional difference and the right afcenfion toge- —

ther, and the fum will be the oblique afcenfion ‘a 294 59


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the oblique afcen-
fion of the quintile of So], and the remainder will be the arch of direction.


Oblique afcenfion of the quintile of the Sun - 303 « 36
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon - 204 59
Arch of direction - 2 8 37


Which,


O/H uA. S TR OU 0 1G: ¥: 671


Which, turned intotime, produces nine years, five months, and about
four days, when the Moon cameto the quintile of the Sun,


The MOON to the Trine of JUPITER in the Zopiac, with


LATITUDE.


The trine of Jupiter falls in twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes of
Capricorn.


The latitude the Moon has at that point is fou ~ 3 29
Declination of that point aye that latitude 23. 38
Pole of the Moon - = Il 45
Afcenfional difference of the above point a 5 13
Right afcenfion of that point with latitude - 302 54


Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and the
fum will be the oblique afcenfion of the point 308) 9
Then take the oblique afcenfion of the Moon with latitude a 59


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the ob-
lique afcenfion of Jupiter’s trine, and the remainder is the
arch of direftion ‘ - - - 13.590


Which, turned into time, proves the native was Fodetese years, four
months, and about fix days, old, when the Moon came to the trine of |


Jupiter.


The MOON to the Trine of JUPITER in the Zopiac, without


LATITUDE.


Declination of twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes of Capricorn


without latitude - ~ ~ 20; 12
Pole of the Moon ~ * Il 45
Afcenfional difference under the pole 41''23


Right afcenfion of the trine of Jupiter, miiont latitude 302. 6
No. 34+ 8C Oblique


673). A NGETOL OL re oT RE Ar OON


Oblique afcenfion . - 306 29
Declination of the Moon, with latitude " 26 42
Afcenfional difference under her own pole mutt 6 20
Right afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude a 288 59


ee


Add the afcenfional difference and right afcenfion together, _
and the fum will be the oblique afcenfion - 294. §9


Then fubtraét the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the oblique
afcenfion of the trine of Jupiter, and the remainder will be the arch of
direction.


Oblique afcenfion of the trine of Jupiter - 306 29
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon - 2904 59
Arch of direction - ~ <0. -- bs dale fe


Which, turned into time, produces twelve years and about feven
months, when the Moon came to the trine Jupiter.


The MOON to the Sextiztt of the SUN in the Zopiac.


The fextile of the Sun falls in twelve degrees feventeen minutes of
Aquarics.


Declination of that point without latitude - 1 ae
Afcenfional difference ais . $442
Right afcenfion - - 314. 46
Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and the

fum will be the oblique afcenfion of the point - 318 28
The oblique afcenfion of the Moon with latitude 294 59


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of theMoon from the oblique
afcenfion of the fextile of the Sun, and the remainder is the arch
of direction - - - 5 Be 3


Which, being turned into time, produces twenty-five years, five
months, and about four days, when the Moon came to the fextile of the
Sun in the zodiac.


The


OLR TA/STR DIL .D.GLY. 673


The MOON direfted to the ConyuncTion of SATURN, with


LATITUDE.

Pole of the Moon — ms i = 11 4s
Declination of Saturn with latitude i 14 43
Latitude of Saturn is fouth “ ~ I
Afcenfional difference of Saturn és a bre:
Right afcenfion of Saturn with latitude ; 326 21
Add the afcenfional difference and right afcenfion together,

and the fum will be the oblique afcenfion, viz. - 329 29
The oblique afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude, is 294 59
Subtra@, and the remainder is the arch of dire@tion S45.870


Which, turned into time, produces thirty-fix years, eleven months,
and about eighteen days, when the Moon came to the conjunétion of
Saturn, by direct direCction.

The MOON directed to the SexTiLte of MERCURY in the Zoptac, .
| without Latitude. ;


The fextile of Mercury falls in twenty-five degrees fifteen minutes of
Aquaries.


Declination of that point - =.) 5% 53° 0
Pole of the Moon ~ - LPer4gs
Afcenfional difference belonging tothe Sextile of Mercury oP AT
Right afcenfion of the fame point - - 327. 93
Add the afcenfional difference and right afcenfion together,

and the fum will be the oblique afcenfion, viz. 30.20
From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon, .

with latitude - - - 294 59
And the remainder is the arch direftion - ~ - a6 28


Which,


674 AN AUGER LA US T Raver 1 OeN


Which, turned into time, produces thirty-feven years, nine months,
and about twenty days, when the Moon came to the fextile of Mer-
cury in the zodiac.


The MOON direéted to the Sextite of MERCURY in the


ZopiAc; with Latitude.
Pole of the Moon ~ - ~ 11-45


The latitude the Moon has at the fextile of Mercury, is

one degree twenty-five minutes fouth.
Declination of the fextile of uty with latitude 14 30
Afcenfional difference - 3


Right afcenfion of the fextile of Mercury, with latitude 925°" 3


Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and
the oblique afcenfion of Mercury’s fextile place is obtained  - -33r = g


From which fubtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon
with latitude - - = 294 59


The remainder is the arch of direétion “ 36 10


Which, being tained into time, declares the native was thirty-eight


mere and about eight months old, when the Moon came to the fextile of
ercury with latitude.


The MOON directed to the QuarTiLe of JUPITER in the Zo-


DIAC without Latitude.


The quartile of Jupiter falls in twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes
of Aquaries.


Pole of the Moon ¥


| i 11 45
Declination without latitude - Eine
Afcenfional difference - 2 26
Right afcenfion of Jupiter’s quartile, no latitude 290 4

Add


; ™


ey


OF * ASOT OM OiG -Y. 676
Add the afcenfional difference and right afcenfion together,


and the fum will be the’oblique afcenfion 234 27
Declination of the Moon, with latitude e u 26 42
Afcenfional difference of the Moon - mie te 6° ie
Right afcenfion of the Moon, without latitude - 288. 22


Add the afcenfional difference and the right afcenfion to-
gether, and their fum will be the oblique afcenfion 294° 22


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the oblique afcen-
tion of the quartile of Jupiter, and the remainder is the arch of
direction.


Oblique afcenfion of the Siecle of Jupiter - 334 27
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon - “ a 294. 22
Arch of dire€tion os ~ - iz “joe


Which, turned into time, produces forty-two years eight months and
about eight days, when the Moon came to the quartile of Jupiter in the
zodiac, without latitude.


The MOON direfted to the Quartire of JUPITER in the


ZODIAC, with Latitude.


The quartile of Jupiter falls in twenty-nine degrees fifty-five minutes
of Aquaries ; and, by the time the Moon comes to that point in the zo-
‘diac, Jupiter has thirty- five minutes fouth latitude.


Pole of the Mcon - eae
Declination of the quartile of ae with that latitude 2&0
A{centional difference - - re he:
Right afcenfion, with the atiove latitude | = 993 13


Add the afcenfional difference to the Hep afcenfion, and the
fum is the oblique afcenfion me ye 334 46


BANO; 24 8D Declination


676 A NOD -L{L. UCS sf WALT TG N


Declination of the Moon, without latitude - 22, 28
Pole of the Moon - - iti, 6
Afcenfional difference of the Moon - - 4.56
Right afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude. = 288 59


Add the afcenfional difference and right afcenfion together,
and the oblique afcenfion of the Moon is - 20208


Subtra@ the oblique afcenfion of Jupiter from the oblique
. afcenfion of the Moon, and the arch of direction will be - 40 51


Which, turned into time, produces forty-three years five months


and about four days, when the Moon came to the quartile of Jupiter in
the zodiac, with latitude.


The MOON direéted to the OpposiTion of MARS in the Zopiac,
with Latitude.


The oppofition of Mars is in forty-four minutes of Pifces.


The latitude of Mars at that point is three degrees twelve-minutes
fouth. .


Declination of Mars, with that latitude = 14°15
Pole of the Moon - - - rig 45
Afcenfional difference, under that pole - 3 10
Right afcenfion of Mars’s oppofite point, with idtitude erage 5°
Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and the

fum will be the oblique afcenfion, viz. - ~ Ley ais
Declination of the Moon, with latitude git: gb 42
Afcenfional difference ~ 6 i tO
Right afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude - 288. 59


Add the afcenfional difference to the right emir and the
oblique afcenfion of the Moon is - - 294 59


Subtract


OOFL “AS. TR Os, OG. 'Y. 677
Subtra& the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the oblique afcenfion
of Mars, and the remainder is the arch of direction ke 42 9


Which, turned into time, produces forty-four years eight months
and about: ten days, when the Moon came to the Oppofition of Mars,
with latitude.


The MOON directed to ike OppostTion of MARS in the Zopiac,
without Latitude.


Declination of Mars, without latitude A Riviibe
Pole of the Moon u * ‘ 11. 45
Atcenfional difference - s 2 92
Right afcenfion of Mars’s oppotite place, no latitude 332. 49


_—


- Add ihe afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and
the fum will be the oeadne afcenfion - < 335 11


Then take the oblique afcenfion of the Moon, thus :


Pole of the Moon se : Z Ir As
Declination of the Moon, matneut latitude = 22 £98
Afcenfional difference of the Moon ~ | 40 4.56
Right afcenfion of the Moon, no latitude - 288 22)


The afcenfional difference being added to the right afcen-
fion of the Moon, gives the oblique afcenfion of the Moon 2.9.3. .¥8


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the ob-
“lique afcenfion of Mars’s oppolite place, and the remainder is
the arch of direction - - - PAR 05 3


Which, being turned into time, produces forty-four years five months
and about twenty days, when the Moon came to the oppofition of Mars
in the zodiac, without latitude.


The MOON dire&ted to the ZopIAcaL PARALLEL of SATURN:


The zodiacal parallel of Saturn falls in twenty degrees thirty minutes
of Aquaries.
Pole


698 AN ILLUSTRATION


Pole of the Moon “ . 2 Ir 46
Declination of Saturn : * < 14. 43
Afcenfional difference 3 ¢
Right afcenfion of the parallel of Series be 322 s¢


SS Geer


Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and the


fum is the obHQne afcenfion ~ - 26 hs
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon, with latitude ~ 294 59


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the obli-
que afcenfion of Saturn’s parallel, and the remainder is the arch
of direction oP TP is gaits 4


Which, being turned into time, produces thirty-three years four


months and about twenty-five days, when the Moon came to the zodia-
cal parallel of Saturn.


‘The MOON direéted to the ZopIAcAL PARAL IEG. MARS.


The zodiacal parallel of Mars falls in twenty-two degree two minutes
of Aquaries.


Pole of the Moon - ates: ee 11 “a
Declination of Mars = . - = re te as
Afcenfional difference “ Ei
Right afcenfion of the pany of Mars - 324° 28
Add the right afcenfion to the afcenfional difference, and the

oblique afcenfion is = - BRA nea
Oblique afcenfion of the Moon ~ 294 59
Subtract, and the arch of direction is - 32, 28


Which, being turned into time, produces thirty-four years and about
ten months, when the Moon came to the zodiacal parallel of Mars.


2 te S


.*


¥


OF AS'T-ROLOG y,.' 649


“The MOON direéted to the ConyuncTion of VENUS,


Declination of Venus, with latitude . = 8 47
Pole of the: Moon 11 57
Afcenfional difference under the aie of ne Moon ay
Right afcenfion of Venus, with latitude’ © , = 337 53
Add the afcentiondl difference to the right ene ‘and

the fum will be the oblique afcenfion 339 50
‘Oblique afcenfion of the ca with latitude a 294 59


— Subtraét the oblique afcenfion of the Moon from the ob-
lique afcenfion of Venus, and the remainder is the arch. of


direCtion - : ee i 44 51


Which, turned into time, by the rules before given, produces forty=
feven years, five months, and about eight days, when the Moon came to
the conjunction of Venus.:


The MOON direéted to the Zopracat PaRAtixi of JUPITER.


The zodiacal parallel. of Japiter falls in two degrees dee four mi-
nutes of Aquarics.


Pole:ofthe Moon; 4) |... -4 07> OA Il 4s
Declination of Jupiter Mahe nie Fired 19 39
Afcenfional difference ; 2 4 Ig
Bight afcenfion of the pall of Voor - 304 49


Add the afcenfional difference to’ the Fight afcenfion, and the
fum wall be the oblique afcenfion, viz. IGG lo | sgl 4


From which fabtract the oblique afcenfion of the Moon 294 59
And the remainder i is the arch of direction Teg ex 5


No. 34. ' SE Which,


680 A Ne? IINLiUy 8) TeRP A aT TON


Which, being turned into time, produces fifteen years, four months,
and about twenty-fix days, when the Moon came to the zodiacal paral-
lel of Jupiter.


The MOON directed to the ZopiacaLt ParRaLtLEeL of MERCURY.


The zodiacal parallel of Mercury falls in twenty- -fix degrees five
minutes of Aquaries.


Pole of the Moon ~ ) - ~ he 2 Shar
Declination of Mercury -_ = ie? S92
Afcenfional difference hoes 2 43
Right afcenfion of the parallel of Mercury - 328 “21
Add the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and the

fum is the oblique afcenfion - ~ 83m si4
The oblique afcenfion of the Moon - 294 59
Subtract, and the arch of direction is - | DOs «


Which, turned into time, gives thirty-eight years and about feven
months, when the Moon came to the zodiacal parallel of Mercury.


How to dire& the PART of FORTUNE to PROMITTORS.


The PART of FORTUNE directed to the Opposition of


SATURN.
Pole of the part of fortune is - = eee
Declination of Saturn 14 43
Right afcenfion of Saturn’s Spanite prt with Natitude 146 21
Afcenfional difference = 2 2°79


Subtract the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,
and the remainder will be the oblique afcenfion, viz. 144-14


OF ASTROLOG Ye 681


Then find the oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune, thus:


Pole of the part of fortune - - 8 9
Declination the fame as the Moon’s, viz. - 26 42
Right afcenfion - ; 24i. ae
Afcenfional difference A ” Ad


* Subtra& the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,
and the remainder is the oblique afcenfion — ~ 137 40


Subtraé& the oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune from the ob-
lique afcenfion of the oppofition of Saturn, and the remainder is the
arch of direction, thus: 5


Oblique afcenfion of the oppofition of Saturn - 144 14
Oblique afcenfion of-the part of fortune = 54 40
Arch of direGtion - - = ~ 6 Oh


Which, turned into time, by adding to it the right afcenfion of the
Sun, will produce feven years, two months, and about five days, when
the part of fortune came to the oppofition of Saturn,


The PAR-T of FORTUNE direéed to the Conysuncrion
| of COR LEONIS.


The place of Cor Leonts at the time of birth was in twenty-five de-
grees forty minutes of Leo.


Declination of that point = - 7
Pole of the part of fortune ~ = 5.0
Right afcenfion of Cor Leonis - 147 56
Afcenfional difference - - “ ~ Mee:


Subtract the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,
and the remainder is the oblique afcenfion ~. TAO). 32
Oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune : 137° 40


2° Subtract |


. >
-
ll


62 AN ILLUSTRATION


Subtra& the fcnaller oblique afcenfion from the asedecr, and :
the remainder is the arch of dire€tion . is £99


Which, being turned into time, produces niné years, two months,


and about eight days, when the part of fortune came - to the conjunction
of Cor Leonis.


The PART of FORTUNE direGted to the Conjunction of


MARS.
Pole of the part of fortune * = ner |
Declination of Mars with latitude - é 14 15
Right afcenfion of Mars, with latitude aunts 153 58
Afcenfional difference - 7 “


Subtract the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,


and the remainder is the oblique afcenfion _ 1s4 56
Oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune sh er 137 40
Subtract, and the arch of direction is - 14 16


Which, being turned into time, produces fifteen years and about
feven months, when the part of fortune came to the conjunction of
Mars.


The PART of FORTUNE directed to the Quartite of JUPITER
in the Zopiac, viz. twenty-nine Degrees fifty-five Minutes of the
Sign LEO. :


~ Pole of the part of fortune - ‘ Silas = Oe
Declination of the quartile of Jupiter’ | aa ae & Gag
Right afcenfion of the quartile of bias ete hia f§2° 1
Afcenfional difference chil Te 1 39


Subtract


-


Ou AS TR ORD Gry. 683
Subtract the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,


and the remainder is the oblique afcenfion - - 160 22
Oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune - 137 40


‘Subtra@ the oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune from
the oblique afcenfion of the quartile of Jupiter, and the remain-
der is the arch of direction - - - 12 42


Which, turned into time, produces thirteen years, ten months, and
about twenty-eight days, Snel the part of s sepanese came to the quartile
of Jupiter.


The PART of FORTUNE directed to the Opposition of


VENUS.
Pole of the part of fortune - - ~ Supitto
Declination of Venus, with latitude 8 47
Right afcenfion of Venus’s oppofite place, with latitude Te age.
Afcenfional difference = - Ears


Subtraét the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,


and the remainder is the oblique afcenfion - 156 38
Oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune = 137 40
Subtract, and the arch of direétion is - 18 <8


Which, turned into time, produces twenty years, feven months, and
about eight days, when the part of fortune came to the oppofition of
Venus.


No. 34- i 8F | The


684. AN -1R@ 869 T RAT Hon.


The PART of FORTUNE direfted to the Conjunction of the
DRAGON’s TAIL, or MOON’s Sour Nove.


Pole of the part of fortune - - Sig.
Declination of the Dragon’s Tail: ~ - adie
Right afcenfion of the Dragon's Tail : - ~ 162 19
A{cenfional difference - “ 4 oh Og


Subtra&t the afcenfional difference from the right afcenfion,


and the refidue is the oblique afcenfion ~ 161 14,
Oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune = 137 40


Subtract the oblique afcenfion of the part of fortune from the.
obliqué afcenfion of the Dragon’s Tail, and the. remainder is the.
arch of dire€tion, - -_ - 23°. 34


Which, turned into time, produces twenty-five years, fix months,
and about eight days, when the part of fortune came to the conjunction
of the Dragon's Tail.


The PART of FORTUNE direfted as HYLEG to the SUN, which


in this Nativity is ANARETA, or the DirecTion of DEATH.


Pole of the part of fortune = 8.2 of
Declination of the Sun = 4 42
Right afcenfion of the Sun’s oppofite Pepe - 191 18
Afcenfional difference a Oo 4l


oF ASTROLOGY. 685
Add. the afcenfional difference to the right afcenfion, and


the fum is the oblique afcenfion - - 191 59
Oblique afcenfion of the part’ of fortune a 137 40
Subtract, and the arch of direGtion is 54 19
To turn it into time, add the right afcenfion of the Sun 11 18
And it makes - 3 n 65 37


Which points in the zodiac to feven degrees twenty-feven minutes’
of Gemini; and, referring to the Ephemeris, it will be found the Sun
came to this point of the heavens in fifty-fix days twenty hours ;—which,
by allowing a day’s*motion for a year, proves Mr. WITCHELL to have
been fifty-fix years and ten months old when the part of fortune came to
the oppofition of the Sun, at which time he died, viz. the 2gth of Ja-


nuary, 1785.


Now, to-eafe the-learner, and to-aflift the {peculative’ reader, I have
collected the whole of thefe‘directions progreflively'into a table,’ in order -
that they- may~be-referred to-with ‘correctnefs‘and facility, in the follow-
ing obfervations:upon their aftfal effects, both ‘as they ‘affected thé tem-_
poral affairs, and-the- ite od and life;- of the natives


A‘TABLE'


686 AN JLYUSTRAT 10.N


‘A TABLE of DIRECTIONS in the foregoing. Nativity of Mr.
WITCHELL, with the feveral Arches thereof, the Meafure of
Time agreeing to each of them, and the pees and Month when
they began to take effect.


Arcus -Mentur Anno


NOMINA ‘DIRECTION UM.


dae chen. Dire@ionum. Dies Menfis Domini

Le rf vg ¥. M.D, toner 34 pn A
‘Midheaven tothe a of Sol 3 B.S, 720/89 Od.|1731
‘Sol to.the o of Luna 4343 5. 2, o/21 May 1733
\Part of Fortune to the g-of Saturn mo 34 7 2. 5 26 May 17355
Luna to the o. of Mercury 6, .36|.7 4\, 921 July 1735
Luna to the Q. of Sol 8 i 8 gir8/8 Tan’, 1437


aera


—— ee


Part of Fortune to the'é of Cor Leonis| 8 23\.9 2 318 29May 1737


ewes ene


ee a Sa,


\Sol to the * of Jupiter in Mundo 92°F] Gx 10 22|13Feb. 1738
Sol to the Sf{q. of Mars Esto 32 11 6 15/5 Sep. 1739


ena Se ee er ee


oe Peet


Luna to the a of Jupiter, no latitude [11 go12 7 oj21 O€t.|1740


Ss


Lunato the Parallelof VenusinMundoit 3412 8 7\28Nov.j1740


Part of Fortune to the Midheaven 12 30113 ° 4 7/28 July


1741


ea


Part of Fortune to the oof Jupiter 12 42/13 10 28|18Feb


.|1742


eee


Se


Sol to the Parallel of Jupiter in Mundoi13 36/15 | 10 21/11 Apr./1743


2)


Part of Fortune to the Sfq. of Mercury|13 58|15 3 10\goJune/1743


Pee


Luna to the zodiacal Parallel of Jupiterj14 = sj15,_— 4 26)16Aug./1743


Part of Fortuneto the ¢ of Mars 14 16 15 7 0/210. |1743
Sol to the * of Saturn 14 37116 o oj21Mar.|1744


OLFU A § Tomo Pc y. 689)


|4 TABLE of DIRECTIONS in the foregoing Nativity of Mr.
lk WITCHELL, with the feveral Arches thereof, the Meafure of
~ Time agreeing to each of them, and the Year and Month when


they began to take effect.


Aucus Menfur Anno


“NOMENA “DIR: ECTIONUM._ Diseaionum| <8 heh ie Ment) Domini
Sol to the ‘Smq. of Venus Ls 26 16 8 a 14Dec. 1744
lAfcendant to the o of Saturn ee) [t5 41 Be. 28 Apr.lt745
fPartof Fortine to * afluptes tl ands CT ate: re Pale Junea74s


ee


ee eS Cy See


Part of Fortune in aof Solin Mundo |16 97/17) 4 23/13 Aug./1745


ee


aS eee — es |


Cans to the Q. of Mercuryin Mundo|16 4918 4 oja1 July1746


ee


eS OS NE Sy


'\Midheaven to the 8 of Saturn - (7° 4118 8 166 Decj1746
Part of Fortune to the o of 8 Mer- 7 e
cury in Mundo \ 17 38/19 2 23/13 June\1747


es cs tne a | ne


Mars tothe sof Jupiterin Mundo |17 47/19 6 5126 Sep.j1747


ee a ee ee


| Midheaven to the 0 of Jupiter MO. 2geO 1: 7/20 Aprit ao


SS TS TE, | AR ee eg ee


Sol to the 6 of Mercury 18°" 4c\20. 5° OatAug. i748


Cee Nee


liMidheaven tothe sof CorLeonis (18 50/20 7 021 Nov. 1748


peetacaaumey


ee


| Part of Fortune to the § of Venus [18 58/20 7 82gNov }1748


eee


Ne | tn nn ee a amen


|Afcendaie to the * of Luna 22 fagiag O' 0.21 Sep.|i-7 61
[eeeateL the o of Mars 23. 15/25 2. 5126 Mayli7s3
\Solto the g of the Afcendant 23 1505 2 526 Mayli759


pee


ce ee ny ee ee


Part of Fortunetothe g of theS. Nodel23 34/25 6 829 Sep.j1753


——


:
—


ee


[Luna to the * of Sol , ge. 20126 9°65 d42gAug i759
No. 345


688 AUN .4 UG US) oT. RoA’ OF Oven


rere ner
A TABLE of DIRECTIONS in the foregoing Nativity of Mi’


WITCHELL, with the feveral Arches thereof, the Meafure o


Time agreeing to each of them, and the Year and Month whe:
they began to take effect
NOMINA DIRECTIONUM., Dire@ionum| DireGicnuyn, [DIS Mente Rene.
SpE oye ahbicin RE eed a aR eae te Cpa aT 2 NEES "VER i enna NE aera
Sol to. the «a of Mars | 23 51/25 9g 14/4 Jan. 11754
Lunato the a of Mercury in Mundo j24 24/26 4 29/12Aug.j17¢6)
Midheaven to the 6 of Mars 24 44126 9 3124 Dec.|175
Midheaven tothe « of Mercury 25 2 OF el OST ADT kT eS


ee


Luna totheSmq. of Solin Mundo |g5 39/27. 8 8l2gNov.


a 4, fee a


emer cee


Lunatothe * of Venusin Mundo 25 49/27 9 8j29Dec.


RE, OE ER, SE SS RT


eee


Part of Fortune to the a of Mercury)). |
iNtawio HH 26 23/28 6 of21 Sep.
Afcendant in 0 of Venus 26:,. 30,207: 7 oe VOR


on


nae e ee Le StS) ERSe ee SW Boese Eee ae


Jupiter tothe o ofSaturn in Mundo |26 s9i29 2. oj21 May\17657


eee


Sol to the « of Mars in Mundo 27 44/29 11 7\2 8eb.]1758


re ee ce NSE eee ae ee


Midheaven to the Oppofition of Venus|28 15|30 6 0/21 Sep.|1758


ae ee |


Sol to the * of Venus 29 5432 4 122 June|1760


aes Rr sa to the x ey 9233 Be ah Fat


oe


Luna to the Zodiacal Parallel of Saturn|32 3/334 4 ol21 July


ee


Luna to the Zodiacal Parallel of Mars |32 28134 10 oj/21 Jan.


Midheaven to the Dragon’s Tail 33. algs #0 (O27 pene


—— Se


Part of Fortunein 4 of Venusin Mundo}33


20135 9 021 Dec.}1763


oe


ae


—_———


OF SA S TR O+L O G Y! 689


A TABLE of DIRECTIONS in the foregoing Nativity. of. Mr.|
WITCHELL, with the feveral Arches thereof, the Meafure of|
Time agreeing to each of them, and the Year and Month wiles

they began to effect. ia


‘a Arcus Menfur ek bia oe he AG
NOMINA DIRECTIONUM, Direétionum Dire&ionum Dies Menfis| ara


oman
‘ WAS Noga Ms ch De “Saiteget


Luna tothe Smq. of Mercuryin Mundo 33 32135 9 I5\5 Jan. |1764


ee,
|


33 84/35 11 3\24Feb.|17764


ORE ER) IEEE


Part of Fortune in o of Jupiter in
Mundo


Sol to the Q, of Saturn 34 9/36 7. oj21 0.1764)


——._


Luna to the 6 of Saturn 34. 3096 g 188 Jan, 1765


Ree


ee ee Re Ge 8 Se ee ee


Luna tothe * of Saturn, converfe Motion|34 3636 10 22/12Feb. |1765


78


Poet


eee


Luna to the * of Mercury 35. 21137 9g 2o}10 Jan.'1766


See ene


ae


——— te racanemndaemmemenmmemmtendtinmmenmeeseaeel


Partof Fortune Smq.of JupiterinMundoj35 38/38 1 Be Ber 1766


ee


Luna to the Trine of Solin Mundo = [35 43/38 2 0 21 May\1766


eee


ne es | es a ee


es ede Fein es


Luna tothe ZodiacalParallel of Mercurylg6 = -5|38 7-0 21 O€t./1766
jLuna to the * of Mercury ZO GhD.9 Obie Ox, OLZL LON 1766


(ee


es


39. 6 16/6 Oct.l1767


———


eres CA RR pe RIE Seem tem Hee


Luna to the Q. of Jupiter in Mundo = 37


re a cn ED UR ee Sn Re te


Soltothe 4 of Venus, byconverfeMotion}38 2041 1. 0o/21Apr.j1769


a
re ee | ee


~N


ee


Luna to the g of Jupiter in Mundo |39 1741 10. oj2i1Jan. 1770


en ee ee


ee et


ee eet


Lunato the o of Jupiter 40 542 8 829Nov.j1770


wr


eee OF,


es


Parallel of Sol and Mars in Mundo 40 24/43 O° of21Mar.|1771|
|


Lunatothe g of Mars ; 4I 53/44 § 2010 Sep. 1772


—


Part of Fortune in a of Saturn in
Mundo


ee


42 23144 II 155 Mar.}1773


my


" F *


wat +


690 ANY Pls Lev' sir R ART EHO N


1A TABLE of DIRECTIONS in the foregoing Nativity of Mr.
WITCHELL, with the feveral Arches thereof, the Meafure of}
Time agreeing to each of them, and the Year and Month when
they began to take effect.


i
{
| NOMINA DIRECTIONUM.


Menfar Anno
I Dice@ionuni Dire&tionum \Dies Menfis Domini
fied) Ds: Wiewhidl SA iat oe a al
e A RED TPT DS


| Sol to the § of Mars, ie come T0l45 9 o'21 Dec. 1773


Motion


i entenemteradl


ST ec Ree eerie


43 10/45 10 19/2 Feb,|


Mundo


tenes ees


Luna to the ¢ ef Venus 44 51147 + 8j29Aug.


SS


ee ES GS


— :


{|Sol to ere nue Luna | 45 4147 8 o21Nov.li776
| Afcendant to the 6 of Jupiter 45 14/47 20 oj21 Jan.J1776


g ee ee


Luna in o of Part of Fortune in Mundo 45 15/47 10 18/8 Feb.11776


ooo


- es (eo eee | |


Parallel of Saturn and’Venus in Mundo47 19/49 10. 021 Jan |1778


= ee


! fee to the Sma: of Jupiter i in Mundo48 = olsg0._ «7-1 4'4 Nov.}:778


ie eS ANE ae) eee a


Parallel of Sol and Moon in Mundo |48  s\s0 8 16/6 Jan. |1779


/Afcendant to the * of Saturn 49 6\5t 6 7/28 Sep.l1779g


—e


—


||Mars to the 4 of Venus in Mundo 52 21/54 11 14}4 Mar.]1783


comet ee


|Luna to the a of Mars ? §2- 50lg5 5 o21Aug.11783


femeweet e -


21 Feb.}1784 |


ee |


;Afcendant to the aof Mars BI BOE ~ Ean


eee eee


Bee


5ol to the Q. of Saturn in Mundo 53 25/56 0 - 3}


24Mar.14784if


(a


| Part of Fortune to the g of Sol 154. -19}56 10 0/29 Jan.j1785


¥


Parallel of Marsand Mercuryin Mundo|s4 46}57 -¢ 26.


See


re


——


=
* ~*


OFWAS TROL OG Y: 691


The following are the EssENTIAL and ACCIDENTAL DIGNITIES
and DEBILITIES of the PLANETS in this Nativity.


DIGNITIES. DBs By ig hi 3 TD, 1. Ei.8.
SATURN in his own houfe 5 SatTurn—hath no debility
in the fourth 4
direct 4
not combutt 5
oriental 2
{fwift in motion 2
in the terms of Jupiter I
Total dignities in } 23
JuPITER inreception of Venus 5 JurirERintheeighth houfe 4
free from combutftion ue in the terms of Mars I
dire€ét tavar® occidental 2
{wift in motion 2 : whe
fs .—— Total debilities in 2 7
Total number 16
Subtract debilities i


Surplus of dignities in 1% 9


Mars in reception of Venus 5 Mars retrograde 5
in the midheaven 5 occidental 2
_ free from combutftion 5 7
Total number I
Subtract debilities 4
Surplus of dignitiesin ¢ 8


The Sun in exaltation
in triplicity
in the terms of Venus


Subtraét debilities


Surplus of dignities in ©
No. 35." . 8H 7 VENUS


4
3
1
Total number 8
4.
4


ee


692 . AN €L LU S'TR AT TON
DIGNIT =z s. DEBILITIES,

VENUs in exaltation _ 4 VENUS oriental 2

in reception of Jupiter 5

free from combuftion 5 '

in the fourth honfe 4.

direct | 4

{wift in motion 2

in term 2

Total number 26
Subtract debilities 2


Puen ewrey


Surplus of dignities in Rik 24


MERCURY in reception 5 Mercury retrograde 5
occidental 2 under the Sun beams 4

free from combuftion 5 in the fixth houfe 4
_Total number 12 Total number . 13


_ Subtra& dignities 12


Surplus of debilities in x I

Moon in triplicity 3. Moon flow in motion 2

free from combuftion 5 oriental 2

in the third houfe 1 in detriment 5

in thet ‘of Jupi : ra

in the terms‘of Jupiter 1 as tal iui ven ,
Total number Got kO
Subtract debilities 9
Surplus of dignities I


The CLIMACTERICAL YEARS of this Nativity.


The Climatterical Years, as we have before fhewn, are nothing
more than the times or periods in which the Moon makes her quarters,
or re-occupies the place fhe pofflefied at the time of birth, meafured by
her own motion, and applied to the years of the native’s life. To af-
certain the climacterics of this nativity, note the exaét point the Moon
occupied at the time of birth, which is fixteen degrees fifty-fix minutes


of Capricorn. Refer to the Ephemeris calculated for the year in which
‘ the


OA SUTLE OF LIO-G Y; | 693


the native was born, and obferve what length of time the took in coming
to fix degrees fifty-fix minutes of Aries, which completed her firft
quarter. It will be found that fhe was feven days eleven hours and
thirteen minutes in going that fpace; and if we allow for each day’s
motion of the Moon one year, and for every two hours one month, it
will prove that the firft climaterical point or year occurred when the
native was feven years five months and near eleven days old.


To obtain the fecond period, proceed in the fame manner. Obferve
what time the Moon occupied in paffling from fixteen degrees fifty-fix
minutes of Capricora, her place at birth, to its oppofite point in the
zodiac ; which will be found to be fourteen days, eighteen hours, and
forty-eight minutes; fo that the native muft be fourteen years nine
months and twelve days old, when his fecond climacterical year arrived.
The third quarter of the Moon, which produced the third climacteric,
falls in fixteen degrees fifty-fix minutes of Libra; to which point the
moved, from her place at birth, in twenty-one days two hours and thir-
teen minutes ; at which time the native was twenty-one years one month
and three days old.. ‘The fourth climacterical period took place when
the Moon completed her revolution in the zodiac, and came to her ra-
dical place at the hour of birth, viz. in fixteen degrees fifty-fix minutes
of Capricorn; which revolution being formed in twenty-feven days
eight hours and twenty-three minutes, proves the native to have then
been twenty-feven years four months and five days old.


The enfuing clima¢terics are found by adding the quarters progreflively
to the firft revolution. For inftance, if we add the Moon’s firft quarter
to the fourth, it will produce thirty-four years nine months and twenty-
three days, when the fifth climacterical period came up. ‘The fixth alfo,
by annexing the fucceeding quarter, will be found to take place when
the native was forty-two years three months and feventeen days old;
the feventh, when he was forty-eight years five months and eight days
old; and the eighth and laft climacteric of Mr. Witchell’s life, when the
Moon had mea{ured two complete revolutions, and had returned a fecond
time to her radical place in the figure; at which period he was fifty~


four years eight months and ten days old.


Thus the climacterical years are invariably to be found by the motion
of the Moon, which is the only true and rational method ; and is fimilar
to that of critical days in difeafes ; only the timeis in one cafe meafured
by days, and in the other by years. ‘Ihefe climacterical years are


efpecially neceflary to be known and confidered, whenever the Hileg,
| or


694 ANT-D EL W Si TORPAD TON


or giver of life, be direéted to a malefic ftar, which begins to operate
in any fuch period ; for it will then have the fame effect on the life of
the native as the Moon is obferved to produce. upon the difeafe of a fick
perfon, when the paffes. the ill radiations of Saturn, Mars, or the Sun,
upon a crifis or critical day ; for a climadterical year and a critical day,
in decumbitures, proceed from one and the fame caufe, and they have
both a power to deftroy life, when joined with malefic configurations, no -
matter how ftrong and healthy the native might externally appear to be,
even at the moment that they take effe@. But, without the concurrence
of thefe baneful afpects, both critical days and climacterical years are
in themfelves perfectly innocent.


‘Thus far I have calculated and brought up every material configura-
tion and direction of this nativity. My next bufinefs will be to confider
each of them feparately and diftinétly, according to the rules heretofore
laid down; and to thew that no occurrence of Mr. Witchell’s whole
life, either of ficknefs or health, of profperity or adverfity, of pleafure
or pain, ever came to pafs, but at the exprefs times and feafons, and
in the exact order, in which thefe radiations and directions feverally
came up, and that they precifely correfpond in nature and effect with
the configurating planets that produced them. And to which I thall
add, that this gentleman has publicly declared, fince his nativity has
been calculated, there is not an incident of his life that has efcaped
‘me, nor a fingle proof wanting to eftablifh in his mind the certainty
of aftral influence over the temperature and animal nature of man. Hence
then we deduce, from a fource which admits of no contradiction, the na-
tural caufe and production of all thofe aftonifhing viciffitudes and perils
of human life, which continually fall in between the actions and inten-
tions of mankind, and confound the wifeft and beft-concerted {chemes of
earthly fpeculation or fagacity.


For the purpofe of rendering this ftudy as eafy and intelligible as
can be defired, I fhall be particularly copious and minute in defcribing
the quality and effect of each refpective configuration and direétion in
this nativity ; for whoever fhall attain to the ability of comprehending
_and defining the power of the ftars in one nativity, will be qualified to

read and determine the principal events in the geniture of any other perfon
whatfoever, be the events of his life, and the place of his birth, ever
fo extraordinary or remote—provided the figure be correct in point of
time, and properly rectified. I have already given the neceflary rules
for this, and for every other operation in the bufinefs. I fhall now thew
the reader how to apply them, throughout the twelve horofcopical houfes


of the planetary fyftem. |
CO N-


OF TANSHPMREOiLiarG Yi 695


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the FIRST HOUSE.


What this houfe imports, we have fully explained in the former
part of this work ; and, according to the maxims there laid down, we
fhall purfue the enquiry, occafionally adding or repeating {uch rules and
aBhOTs as are indifpenfably neceffary to illuftrate the fubject.


I, Will the Native live to Years of Maturity 2


To determine. this, we muft confider what the configurations are
that early cut the thread of life, and deftroy the bloffoms of our infant
ftate. They areas follow. 1.If the birth be precifely on a new or
full Moon. 2. If the Moon be in conjunction of Saturn or Mars, in
the fixth, eighth, or twelfth, houfes of the figure. 3: If the Moon ‘be
in quartile or oppofition of Saturn or Marsin the fourth houfe. 4. If
the Moon be befieged by the Sun or Mars. ‘5. If an eclipfe impedite
the light of time in the hour of birth. 6. If all the planets be fub-
terranean, and neither the Sun, Moon, nor lord of the afcendant,
effentially fortified. 7. If the two malefics be conjoined in the Afcen-
dant. 8. If an infortune*in the afcendant vitiate the degrees thereof
by quartile or oppofition. g. If the lord of the Afcendant be combutt
of the Sun, and at the fame time cadent. and retrograde. 10. If the
Dragon’s head or tail be in conjun@ion of Saturn or Mars in the fourth.
Thefe configurations, by long and invariable experience, are found to
deftroy life in infancy, except the benefic rays of Jupiter or Venus in-
terpofe, and, by joining inthe afpects, modify and-remit their malignant
effect. But let it always be remembered, that Mars hath greater power
of deftroying life, when pofited in Aries and above the earth, in a
diurnal nativity; and Saturn, when pofited in Capricorn and above the
earth, ina nocturnal nativity.


Thefe being the teftimonies of a fhort life, by comparing them with
the afpects of any genethliacal figure, we may readily determine whe-
ther the child born under it will live to years of maturity. If we exa-
mine this géeniture by the foregoing rules, we fhall not find a fingle tef-
timony of a fhort life’; but, on.the contrary, that the native fhould run
the common race of man—{hould be nourifhed up, under the influence
of more benevolent ftars, even until the Apheta, or giver of life, fhall
come by a regular*ahd unoppofed direction, to a natural union with its
Promittor, which cuts off life, and, by the effects of a natural caufe,
fends us in quiet to the grave.—Let it therefore be remembered, as an
invariable maxim, that, whenever the Apheta is thus unobitructed, the
native will furvive all the perils of its infant ftate.


No. 35. 8] II. The


696 AN’ YIOLivs*TIR°AIT I ON


II. Lhe Temperature and Complexion of the Native.


Thefe are afcertained by mixing the influences of the feveral fignifi-
cators together, and by allotting to each its fpecific quality, in order
to determine which fhall predominate, and affe&t the conftitution of
the native, with the greateft force. For as there are four principal
elements whereof this univerfe is compounded, viz. fire, air, earth, and
water ; fo are these four principal humours in the temperature of man,
which correfpond with them, viz. choler, blood, melancholy, and
phlegm ; and, according as thefe are equally mixed or predominate
conftitutionally in the body, fo fhall the temperature and complexion
of the native be. ‘To difcover how thefe qualities are difpenfed in the
prefent inftance, we muft confider and examine the configurations at
the time of conception, as well as at the birth. By the directions
given with the table, p. 422, we fhall find the conception of this na-
tivity took place on the 16th of June, 7h. gom. P.M. 1727, at which
time the celeftial intelligencers were difpofed as follow :

eee


2 ception


*


Orras TRO L:0 Gy: 699


ception of a'male, as both planets aré’ mafculine, and oriental of the
’ Sun, and neither of the luminaries afflicted of the infortunes; and
therefore the figure declares that the child fhould not fuffer any injury
in the womb, but fhould be’ born fafe at its full time.. But the moft
effential ufe of a conceptional figure after the infant is born, is to com-
pare the temperature of the figns and planets which govern the con-
ception with the nature and quality of thofe that govern the birth, in
order to afcertain the predominant humour, and its»offending quality,
which fhall ever after mark the temperature of the native. In the
prefent cafe we fhall decide our judgment of the temperature of the
embryo by the following teftimonies which refult from the preceding
conceptional figure :


Taurus, which governs the fifth houfe, is cold and dry.
Venus, lady thereof, occidental of the Sun, moift.
Jupiter in the fifth, oriental, hot and moift.
Venus pofited in Leo, hot and dry.
Taurus pofieffed of Jupiter, ae" cold and dry.
Mars in the fifth, oriental, hot and dry.
Gemini, an airy fign, pofleffed of Mars, bot and moift.
The quarter of the year, viz. Summer, hot and dry.
The moon, in her fecond quarter, bot and dry.
And pofited in Libra, an airy fign, hot and moift.
Saturn, Almution of the figure, cold and moift.
And pofited in an airy fign, . 3 hot and moift.
Number of teftimonies for a dof temperature are 8
Teftimonies for the moz? 6
Ditto for the dry 6
Ditto for the co/d 3


So that the predominant humour offending before the birth was the
eholeric complexion ; and fuch a temperature muft naturally incline its
mother, during pregnancy, to be frequently afflicted with complaints
in the ftomach and bowels, fuch as the cholic, heart-burn, naufea, vo-
miting, &c. arifing from predominancy of heat; but, as the moitt
quality is fo.mearly equal, it is apparent that thefe complaints would not
materially hurt either the child or its mother.


We are now to examine the temperature of the fignificators in the
radical figure of birth, in p. 624, which, being compared with and
added to the foregoing, will at once regulate and determine the objects
of our prefent {peculation. The teftimonies are to be colleéted in the
fame manner as above, viz. ' |

% The


698 A NOI U GO. Si ER A TalyeeN

The fign afcending, being airy, od eis Lot and moift.

Venus, lady thereof, and oriental, hot and moift.

Pifces, a watery fign, poflefled by Venus, cold and moift.

Mars, co-fignificator, and occidental, _ dry.

And being pofited in an earthy fign, cold and dry.

Scorpio afcending, cold and moift.

The Moon in her laft quarter, cold and moift.

And pofited in an earthy fign, cold and dry. —

The Moon beholding the Afcendant, cold and moift.
cold and dry.


And in an earthy fign,

The Sun beholding the Moon in quartile,
The Sun in a fiery fign, |
The feafon of the year, viz. Spring,


hot and moift..
hot and dry.
hot and motf.


Venus, Almution of the figure, bot and moift.
In the fign Pifces, cold and moift.
Venus beholding the Afcendant, hot and moi/?.
And in a watery fign, cold and moift.
Mars occidental, beholding the Afcendant, dry.

Mars pofited in an earthy fign, cold and dry. .
Number of teftimonies for a moi? temperature Le
Teftimonies for the cold 10
Ditto for the 4ot 7
Ditto for the dry 4)


Hence it is apparent that the predominant humour offending at birth
is phlegm, engendered of the cold and moift affections of the planets.
If we compare the teftimonies that compofe the temperature at the time
of conception with the above, we fhall find that the humour which
was then weak is now ftrong; and that the humour which was then
ftrong is now weak; fo that, if we confider the formation of the na-_
tive begins with conception, and is completed at the birth, and that the
fuperior temperatures then are the inferior now; andif we allot unto
each of the fignificators their fpecific qualities, and mix them according
to the exatt proportions they give ; we fhall nearly find a mediocrity of
humours in the temperature of this native; but, as the phlegmatic
affection will be found to have the afcendency, the native will of courfe
moft materially feel its a€tion upon his conftitution, by becoming fub-
jet to adepreffion or finking of the {fpirits, and other difagreeable
concomitants, which {hall be tally illuftrated when we come to fpeak
of the fignificators of ficknefs. But, before we difmifs the prefent
fubje&t, it will be neceffary to premife, that if cold and moifture

* prevail


OF ASTROLOGY. 699


prevail in a geniture, the native will be phlegmatic ; if cold and. drinefs
have the fuperiority, he will acquire a referved habit, and be oppreffed
with melancholy ; if heat and moifture predominate, he will prove of
a fanguine temperature, and of an even courteous difpofition ; if heat
and drinefs, he will be choleric, and of furly temper; but, where the
qualities of the configurating ftars are nearly equal, the: native will be
ftrongly affected by their temperatures refpectively, when under a direc-
tion of their own nature and quality.


The temperature being determined, we may with great eafe afcertain
the complexion by the rules heretofore laid down. Libra and Scorpio
being the figns afcending, give a fanguine complexion ; but, in this na-
tivity, not very fair nor clear, becaufe oppofed by the oppofite effect of
Mars, Venus, and the Moon, and becaufe phlegm was the fuperabun-
daht quality in the temperature at ‘birth ; the mixture of thefe feveral
fignificators produce a fallow complexion, grey eyes, light fandy hair,
with due conformity in the other members; to which defcription this
native {trictly corre{ponded in every particular.


The foregoing judgement will hold good in all cafes where fimilar
configurations are found. Let it be remembered, that only four diftin@
colours or complexions are produced, viz. black, white, red, and yel-
low ; all others proceed from a mixture of thefe, and are afcertained by
affigning to each fignificator its own proper colour; then collec the
whole into one fum, and, according to the quality, number, and force,
of the feveral teftimonies, judicioufly incorporated with each other, will
the complexion be accurately found. Regard muft however be had in
all cafes to the climate where the native is born; becaufe, in fuch parts
of the earth where the figns and fignificators have from their aftronomi-
cal pofitions greater force and energy, they will more vifibly affect, and
more fenfibly demonftrate their influence upon, the perfons born under
them. This, I believe, has been fufficiently demonftrated in the intro-


duttory part of his work.
Il. Form and Stature of the Body.


To judge of the form and ftature of the body, we muft note the fign
that occupiés the afcendant, the lord thereof, and the planets pofited
therein, or in conjunction with the lord of the afcendant, Thefe va~
rious fignificators are to be regarded in proportion to their digaitics,
and as they are fituated with re{pe@ to north or fouth latitude; or with
the luminaries ; nor are the fixed ftars to be nogintige in this fpeculation,


No. 35. for
‘


» He


a


700 AN .@sL tL OS TRA & IGO5n


for in many cafes they operate much, particularly thofe of the firft mag-
nitude. This being premifed, and the rules heretofore laid down being
had in memory, we {hall demonftrate their certainty, by applying them to
our judgment in this figure.


Upon the afcendant we find the latter part of the degrees of Libra,
and about two thirds thereof occupied by Scorpio; thefe figns give a
ftature fomewhat above the middling. But we muft add to thefe the
teftimony of the configurations: that Venus is pofited in the watery
fign Pifces; that Mars and the Moon are occidental of the Sun, each
beholding the afcendant ; and, that the Moon participates with the na-
ture of Capricorn, her place in the figure. Thefe are arguments of a
mean ftature, and of a mediocrity in the component parts, uniform,
and duly proportioned. Libra and Scorpio declare an exact fymmetry
of features, oval face, and elegant countenance ; -but Saturn, who pro-
duces the direct contrary effects, having his exaltation in Libra, and
beholding the afcendant with a ftrong afpett, greatly mars the beauty
and comelinefs derived from thofe figns; yet-we are not to fuppofe that
the delicacy and {weetnefs contributed by the firft fignificators fhall be
converted into a dark lowering vifage, faturnine ; but that the quality
of Saturn, in proportion to his ftrength of afpect, fhall be incorporated |
with the oppofite qualities, leaving the impreffion firft given by Libra,
but abating its beauty and comelinefs, and leaving the face moderately
fair, and the features not altogether unpleafing. This exactly defcribes
the perfon of the native; of a middle ftature, oval lively features, the
ftamp of the figns; dark eye-brows, the mark of Saturn ; with a fpright-
linefs, refulting from Mercury conjoined with the other fignificators. We
may remark further, that in genitures where the Sun has no afpe& with
the afcendant, the native acquires the habit of bending forward in his gait;
and, as he gradually advances in years, becomes round and ftooping
in the fhoulders. This has been remarkably verified in the prefent
nativity.


In drawing judgement from the foregoing premifes, let it be well
confidered, that, if two planets have equal dominion in the horofcope,
preference muft be given to him that beholds the afcendant moft par-
tially ; but, if their configurations with the afcendant fhould be equally
dignified, regard the planet that is lord of the houfe, in preference to
that which has only his exaltation therein. Remember likewife, in
the further progrefs of this enquiry, that, when the planets are fituated
in airy or fiery figns, they give large ftatures; but, when in earthy
or watery, they progace much fhorter and {maller. When they have

great


OtFTA 8 TT RO LO G VY. 708


great north latitude, they denote large corpulent bodies ; but, when they
have great fouth latitude, they inducea {pare, thin, and low, ftature ;
and, according to the immortal Ptolomy, thofenatives whofe fignificators
have fouth latitude are more active and laborious, whilft thofe whofe
ruling planets have great north latitude are ufually of a heavy, flothful,
fupine, inactive, difpofition.


IV. Temper, Quality, and mental Endowments, of the Native.


This is one of the moft effential fpeculations of the whole Science,
fince, in a general way, the fuccefs of all our worldly purfuits and ac-
quifitions in a great meafure depends upon our mental endowments.
And here the reader would do well to refrefh his memory with what
we have already premifed on this fubject, in p. 438, &c. where it is
laid down, as an eftablifhed maxim, that our enquiry in this particular
is chiefly to be governed by the Moon and Mercury, and by the other
fignificators only as they fhall be configurated with thefe planets, or
with the Sun, or with the angles of the figure; of which the afcendant,


or eaftern angle, hath the greateft power. Therefore, if feveral planets


are found in the afcendant, they will all act in a certain degree upon
the bent and motions of the mind, and will become fignificators in
proportion to their refpective pofitions and dignities. Their influence
upon the fenfitive faculties of theanimal foul will be apportioned to their
ftrength of afpect, and will operate by the fame rotation in which thofe
 afpects come up. Thetime when they fhall refpeGively begin to ope-
rate, together with their duration, is known only by direction, as we
fhall prefently fhew; and their effect will be found to vary, as the
irradiations are transferred from one planet to another. For inftance,
when the Moon is directed to the terms or afpect of the moft potent
planet in the afcendant, then the native almoft wholly participates in
the temperature and quality of that planet, and, while it operates, will
vifibly manifeft them to the world in his actions. And thus, when the
Moon varies her term or afpeét, and applies to thofe of another planet,
then will the native’s inclination vary, and aflume the qualities and con-
ditions of {uch other planet.


By the fame force of fympathy we find, that, when the Moon comes
tothe terms or afpect of Venus, the native is gay and cheerful ; when
to the terms or afpect of Jupiter, fober, induftrious, and difcreet ; to
the terms or afpeét of Saturn, grave, melancholy, and referved; to the
radiations of the Sun, proud, and inclined to vanity and oftentation ;
to the terms or afpect of Mercury, ftudious, laborious, and inquifitive,


or elfe participates in fuch other affections as may be produced by fome
other


WS


462 AN IBHUS TRA T ICON

other platiet joined in body or afpect with Mercury; and, when the
Moon comés to her own terms, or in afpect with her radical place in the
figure, (provided it be in the afcendant,) it will induce a wavering, un~
fettled, and mutable, difpofition in the native.


When there are no planets to be found in thé afcendant, note what
configurations are made with the Moon and Mercury ; for whatever
planet is joinéd with them will become fignificator, and will act upon
the mental endowments of the native. But, if no planet be in the
afcendant, nor configurated as above, then the lord of the afcendant
fhall be the fignificator, provided his. difpofitor beholds him in fome
bodily afpect ; if not, we muft have recourfe to the planet that moft par-
tially pekelas the Moon or Mercury; but, if no fuch be found in the
figure, then the planet which hath the moft effential dignities in the figns
Mg fen or the Moon fhall laftly be taken as the fignificator from
whence this judgment fhall be drawn. 3


According to thefe rules I examine the preceding genitute. I find
there are no planéts in the afcendant, nor in configuration with the »
Moon and Mercury ; and therefore I take Venus as the fignificator of
the native’s temper and mental difpofition, becaufe fhe is lady of the
afcendant, and is beheld by Jupiter her difpofitor. Mars alfo, being
conjoined with Venus in ruling the afcendant, and in afpect with his
difpofitor, will in a fecondary degree affect the native. The pofition
of Venus near the tail of the Swan, and thus configurated, influences
the native toa purfuit after knowledge; and, being in the fifth houfe,
the houfe of pleafure, declares that he will take much delight therein.
This fignificator being likéwife near the Dragon’s head, which partici-
pates of the nature of Jupiter, implies a mild, juft, and peaceable,
difpofition. Being pofited in the houfe of her exaltation, proves his
demeanour will gain him general efteem ; but, being ina moveable fign,
fhews him changeable in the objett of his purfuits. On the other
Rand, Mars will abate much of the mildnefs and evennefs of his tem-=
per indicated by Venus, particularly when under a dire¢tion of Mars,
at which times he will be unufually peevifli, fretful, and paffionate—
a circumftance which this native confeffes has been frequently verified,
when neither himfelf, nor any part of his family, could account for his
auiterity and change of temper; but, whoever infpects his géniture by
the rules of this Science, will find it was occafioned by the oppofition
of Mars with Venus. It is no lefs curiows to remark, that, while that
falefic planet fours the temper, he ftrengthens ‘and expands the defire
of knowledge, endows the native with an enterprifing {pirit, ftirs him

2 ee uD


GH TAASSTIRCOCLIO! GY: 703


up to life and action, and induces an emulation for honour and promo-
tion. A ftrong inftance this, of the contrary effects of the afpects ;
for, while the firft impreffion of an even and complacent dif{pofition is
deranged by the force of a partile oppofition, the other laudable qua-
lities are enlarged by the congenial influence of atrine afpett of the
fame planet with its difpofitor, zz the exaltation of Mercury! Thefe
teftimonies are much ftrengthened by the fefquiquadrate afpect of Mars
with the Moon, in the terms of Jupiter; and, as the Moon is pofited
in the dignities of Saturn, it fhews that the native will be attached to
the Arts and Sciences, and inherit a truly honeft difpofition.


ures far we have confidered the configurations which form the
temper, and give the firft bias to the mind, in the earlieft ftate of in-
fancy: but what fhall be the refult, as they gradually ripen into
maturity, to what {peculations they will be directed, and to what
extent of perfection the native may arrive in mental acquirements and
ability, .is determined by other confiderations. The intelle¢tual fa-
culties in ALL genitures are under the aftral influence of Mercury
and the Moon; Mercury governs the rational and animal fpirit in the
brain, but the vegetive ftrength of the brain is folely under the power
and dominion of the Moon; therefore, whenever we infpect a nativity,
and find thefe fignificators well affected to each other in terms and
afpect, we may fafely conclude that there is a proportionable harmony
and modulation in the rational intellect, and in the other members
which contribute to a fertile genius, and to ftrong natural parts. But
when thefe fignificators are ill affected, and in quartile or oppofition to
each other, it is altogether as fure a prefage of a dull capacity, and a nar-
row contracted mind; particularly if Mercury be combuft, flow in mo-
tion, cadenty or peregrime, or afflicted of the infortunes, more efpeci-
ally of Mars. And thus, the more Mercury is afflicted or impeded
in his own proper nature, the more weak ind fhallow we always find
the mental endowments of the native. In thofe genitures where Mer-


-cury is occidental, and in no afpect with the Moon, or with any bene-


fic planet, it produces a deep, cunning, artful, clofe, diffembling, per-
fon, with a ftrong fhare of penetration and fagacity, but with a mind
difpofed to exereife it only in mean and felfith purfuits, without regard
to integrity or reputation. If this planet be found in the combuft way,
i, e. in that {pace of the heavens extending from feventeen degrees of
Libra to feventeen, degrees of Scorpio, and at the fame time flow in mo-
tion, it declares a trifling fuperficial character, perpetually engaged in
unworthy objects, ftunning us with impertinent remarks, with unlefs
niceties, or with unapt difquifitions.


No. 35. 8 L . ) Let


—-


&


04. AN DE US T RBAAT HON


Let us apply this réafoning in our confiderations of the prefent ge-
niture; in which we find Mercury and the Moon, the grand patrons
of mental. ability, are favourably fituated with refpect to each other.
Here is a remarkable reception between Mercury and Mars, the joint
rulers of the afcending fign; Mercury poffeffes the dignities of Mars,
and Mars the exaltation of Mercury. Thus the fignificator of the tem-
per and fathion of the mind, and the patron of fenfe, are mutually
conjoined in the fame influence; and befpeak not only a difpofition to
fearch after literary acquirements, but prefage a fit capacity to receive,
and an underftanding capable of digefting, them. The Moon likewife
fends her fefquiquadrate ray to Mars, from the dignities of Saturn, and
in the terms of Jupiter, which declares the favourite purfuit of the
native {hall be after {cientific knowledge ; and, as the pofition of Mars
is fo highly elevated, it is evident that his endeavours fhall not only
prove fuccefsful, but fhall be manifefted in an eminent degree. We
have alfo a perfect fextile afpett of Mercury and Saturn ; which adds a
ftrong retentive memory to a folidity of mind, whereby the early pur-
fuits of the native are impelled forward, and ripened into maturity,
under the united fan@ion of reputation and profit. Thus the fignifi-
cators of the temper, quality, and mental endowments, of this native,
when drawn into one focus, teftify, according to the approved rules of
this Science, an acute penetrating wit, an enlarged underftanding, a
retentive memory, and a ftrong predilection for f{cientific knowledge,
with a folidity of mind and a confiftency of manners well adapted to
give vigour and fuccefs to fuch purfuits. That thefe gifts were feveral-
ly and refpectively verified in the perfonal qualifications, purfuits, and
preferments, of the native, the united teftimony of all his friends and
relatives will not only prove, but the fa¢ts will hereafter be more mi-
nutely eftablifhed, when the refult of each afpect comes to be exami-<
ned and explained, under the various dire@tions by which thefe events
were refpectively brought to pafs.


Hence it will be feen, that Mercury, in this judgment, and in all
cafes where relation is had to the faculties of the animal foul, is to be
moft attentively confidered, and his influence and operation regarded,
in -proportion as they are configurated or mixed with the rays of other
planets. The importance of this enquiry, in the inveftigation of every
geniture, induces me to repeat to the reader, the neceflity of bearing in
mind the obfervations I have written on this fubjett, from p. 438 to
446; to which it is now incumbent upon me to add the following
general remarks. 1. That in all cafes where Mercury occupies an
angle of the figure, but particularly the afcendant, and at the fame.

/ time


va


O PTA. SATIRE OO: G YW 705


time is pofited in one of his own houfes, in any of the twelve figns
except Pifces and Scorpio, take for granted the native will inherit a
good underftanding, with a capacity adapted for almoft any employment.
But if this happens. in an airy fign, and the planet fwift in motion, it
denotes perpetual wavering, and great inftability of mind. 2. Mercury
in conjunétion of the Moon, in any and in every fign, denotes inge-
nuity of mind. The fame effect, though in a fmaller degree, is given
by the fextile or triangular rays; but, in this cafe, the fextile is
always to be preferred to the trine. 3. If there be found a conjunction
of Mercury with Venus, or Jupiter, or the Dragon’s head, in Gemini,
Libra, Aquaries, or Virgo, it beftows an excellent genius, and a mind
qualified for invention and improvement. 4. If Mercury in Aries’ be in
reception with Mars, the native will be fubtle, deep, and fagacious.
sg. The Moon in conjunction with the Dragon’s head or tail denotes
alert and active fpirits, with a promptitude for fcience; particularly
when encreafing in light, and near the full. 6. Mercury in reception
of the Moon, and the planets in any figns, gives an afpiring genius,
and an active volatile difpofition. 7. When Mercury is below the
horifon, in fuitable figns, he inclines the native-to {cientific knowledge.
Ifinanairy fign well fortified, it gives freedom of {peech, with ftrong
oratorical abilities. 8. If Mercury be in conjunction with Saturn,
and Saturn well dignified, the native acquires a grave and a fober habit, ©
accompanied with a profound judgment, and folid underftanding. 9. If
in conjunction with Jupiter, unafflicted by any malefic ray, Mercury ©
beftows an excellent capacity, fet off with an eafy elegant addrefs, and
inclines the native to generofity and integrity. 10. Mercury and
Mars united by conjunction, in good places of the figure, free from
affliction, and, well fortified, gives a moft confident and undaunted f{pirit
in writing or fpeaking; furnifhes fterling wit, and beftows a prolific
invention. 11. With the Sun, Mercury gives the native an afpiring
mind ; and, well dignified, promifes fucceis in the moft ambitious pur-
fuits, though they are likely to be difhonoured by intemperate pride
and arrogance. 12. Mercury and Venus united, and ftrengthened. by
concurrent teftimonies, beftow an admirable conception in literary pur-
fuits, with the mind formed for invention and ftudy. 13. Mercury in
any fituation of the figure, well fortified, and in good aipect with the
re{pective fignificators, forms a good and perfect underitanding ; but
the different gradations of fenfe, and of the reafoning faculty, are pro-
duced according to the dignity and quality of the fignificators with
which he may be configurated ; always obferving, that in proportion to
the ftrength and energy of thofe feveral fignificators, and of their pofi-
tions in refpect to the angles of the figure, will the mental powers of


the native be formed.
' Much


706 A Ni POLiw.siTORAA T I OLN


Much has been contended, by the advocates for and againft this {pe-
culation, on the fcore of education. For my own part, I.cannot but
be furprifed, that any argument or controverfy fhould have been fo long
fupported, upon inferences fo palpable and obvious. Thofe who con-
tend, that education fets thefe aftral influences at defiance, and pro-
duces the wife man or the fool, in proportion to the.extent of his aca-
demic acquirements and difcipline, might as well attempt to perfuade
us, that the barren deferts of Arabia, by labour and cultivation, would
foon vie with the fertile banks of the Nile, and become a land
“« flowing with milk and honey.” Earthly fabftances, as well animate
as inanimate, receive the ftamp ‘of their ‘natural quality in the hour of
formation. This quality will. remain, as long as thefe fubftances en-
dure, in every cafe, except where the laws of nature incline them to
mutation or change. All the inventions of man are far fhort of totally
removing thefe firft qualities ; and therefore all, that can be fairly de-
duced from arguments in fupport of the effects of education, is briefly
this, that it aftonifhingly enlarges a good matural underftanding, and
puts.a fuperficial glofs over the deformities of a naturally bad one, but,
fo far from giving vigour to a weak mind, it too often leads to the op-
pefite extremes, for want of ability to digeft, and intellect. to comprehend,
the inftruction it receives.


Hence we frequently fee inventions of the moft ingenious and com-
plicated extent {pring from individuals who appear.as, ignorant as,
they areuntaught ; yet, when we come ‘to examine their ‘internal endow-
ments, we exprefs our admiration that: fo much ingenuity and fterling
fenfe fhould be -concealed under theruft of what is.termed a fate of
nature. But let the reader regard with due attention the obfervations I
have laid down ; let him, within the circle of his own acquaintance,
if he can obtain a {peculum of their nativities, obferve the nature of thefe
configurations, and I will venture to affirm, at the hazard of my life,
that he will be able to trace the true quality and extent of each man’s
mental capacity, from the caufes which give them being.


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the SECOND HOUSE,


The principal judgment drawn from this part of the genethliacal
figure, is that which regards worldly riches and preferment; or rather,


whether the native fhall be buoyed up upon the wings of profperity, or


plunged by adverfe ftars into the depths of adverfity. This fpecu-
lation has been juftly confidered one of the moft important of the fcience; -
but on all-hands it muft be admitted the firft amongft the enquiries of

thofe,


Oi TAS/T RIO OG Yi. 707


thofe, who with to know the outline of their future fate. For this
reafon, I fhall be as copious as poffible in blending theoretical with
practical examples in the elucidation of this enquiry, with the humble
hope of enabling every attentive reader to derive that information from
his own labours which delicacy or expence. might preclude him from
obtaining in the cuftomary way.


On examining this figure, I find Mars and Jupiter are the prime
fignificators of wealth and profperity, becaufe they have dominion over
the fecond houfe; and the Moon, and the Part of Fortune, are co-fig-
nificators of the native’s fubftance. Finding there are no planets pofited
in the fecond houfe, I examine what configurations are formed with
the foregoing fignificators, and what afpects irradiate the fecond houfe.
Mars hath dominion in the tenth, the houfe of honour and preferment,
and is in reception of Mercury, within the terms of that planet; an
argument that the native fhall profper under fuch purfuits as are pe-
culiarly within the dominion of Mercury, viz. offices of public truft,
literature, or fcience. This deduction is alfo corroborated, by the united
teftimony of the part of fortune in the tenth, with thofe royal fixe
ftars Hydra and Cor Leonis; and Mercury’s trine afpett falling in
the fame degree, proves that an advantageous and reputable emolument
fhould flow through this channel. This judgment has been confirmed
in various inftances; but in none fo confpicuoufly as in his appoint-
ment to the mafterfhip of the royal academy in his Majefty’s Dock-
yard at Portfmouth, which appointment refulted—not from the good
offices of ‘friends at court,” —but folely from the progrefs and improve-
ments he had made in the mathematies,


Thefe. propitious configurations are neverthelefs impeded by fome
Jatent malefic rays. which hang upon his horofcope. The part of for-
tune, otherwife fo happily found, is affli@ed by the moft baneful af-
pect of Saturn, namely, his oppofition; at the fame time that he be-

olds the fecond hovfe with a quartile ray. This in no fhape leffens
the mental faculties, nor impedes the fuceefs promifed under the bril-
liant endowments of Mercury; but it fhews, that, however fuccefsful
the native might be with refpe@ to pecuniary advantages, yet that his
income fhould pafs from him in an improvident manner, and the pro-
duction of his labours never accumulate to an amount equal to his
merit. This is further illuftrated and confirmed by the oppofition of
Venus and Mars, ‘the fignificators of his perfon and poffeffions. I alfo
find the Moon is. near the quartile ray of the Sun,. a bad afpect, and
- afreth teftimony that the native will not accumulate or lay up much

F E


No. 35. ’ 8M 0


708 AN PLUS TRAIT TOON


of the goods of fortune. This, however, is in fome meafure abated,
by the intervention of the Sun, which beholds the fecond houfe with
a favourable trine; and the configuration of Mars with the Moon is
a further declaration in his favour. Jupiter, we find, hath dignities
in the fecond houfe ; but being in the eighth, in the face of Saturn, with
latitude in Gemini in his detriment, plainly indicates, that at certain
periods of his life, when under the influence of evil directions, the native
fhould experience divers difficulties and embarraffments in money con-
cerns. But when we draw into one view the number of planets that
dignify his birth, and are effentially fortified ; when we confider the ex-
cellent reception of Mercury and Mars; the Sun in exaltation, fend-
ing a trine to the fecond ; the part of fortune in conjunction with emi-
nent fixed ftars, exalted in the midheaven ; we fhall find them fo many
circumftances to prove, that, notwithftanding the oppofition of malefic
rays, the native will be upheld through all the difficulties and viciffi-
tudes of money matters, and eventually acquire a competent and liberal
income, fuch as fhould afford all the real comforts of human life, and,
with ftri€t ceconomy, provide a handfome patrimony for his defcendants,
But the aftral inclination of this native is not favourable to penurious
or mercenary praiices. The bent of his mind is influenced by too
much liberality and generofity of principle, either to withhold his purfe,
or withdraw the comforts of humanity, where friendfhip or charity
demanded them. .Thofe who knew him cannot but juftify the truth of
the obfervation; and he has. very often acknowledged to me, upon
my remarks on his nativity, the ftraits he has experienced, by improvi-
dently parting with his money, and fupplying the emergencies of friends ;
as is deducible from the face of his geniture, by contemplating the feven
erratics and their accidental pofitions. :


For the further information of the reader, it will be proper to re-
mark, that, in giving judgment upon this queftion, we are not confined
to the pofition of benefic ftars ; for it frequently happens that Saturn
and Mars give advantage and profperity to the native, when lords of the
fecond houfe, and well configurated with the luminaries, and the other
fignificators. So likewife eminent fixed ftars in good places of the figure,
well qualified, and conjoined with benefic rays, give increafe of pro-
fperity and riches. But if the two malefic planets, Saturn and Mars,
occupy angles in the figure, and the benefics are pofited in fuccedent
houfes, it fhews the native will experience adverfity in the early part of |
~ his life, but profperity in the end. The Part of. Fortune conjoined
with the Dragon’s head hath nearly the fame effet as with Jupiter,
and predicts an increafe of wealth. Saturn dignified in the eighth

houfe,


O4F-A.S Tah.O, L.0.G. ¥: 704


houfe, in adiurnal nativity, in afpect with Jupiter or Venus, declares
encreafe of fubftance by the death of relatives or friends. The fame
event will take place, in genitures where the lord of the eighth houfe,
in his effential. dignities, is placed in the tenth; and again, where the
difpofitor of the tenth is well configurated with the lord of the afcen-
dant. When Jupiter or Venus are fo pofited at birth, as to behold the
cufp of the fecond houfe with a good afpect, it is a certain prefage of
durable fubflance ; whereas the Sun, or Mars, pofited in the fecond
houfe and ill dignified, fcatter the native’s wealth, induce to pro-
digality, and eventually make him poor, So the Moon in conjunttion
of Saturn, in bad places of the figure, and beheld by no benefic ray,.
will reduce even.the fan of aking to a flate of infolvency! The lord of
the fecond hovfe combuft, and the part of fortune in anaretic places,
forefhews confifcation of property, bankruptcy, and ruin, When the
part of fortune is confederated with violent fixed flars, in evil places
of the figure, it prefages lofs of fubitance, and great poverty. To de-
termine the mode by which thefe events fhall happen, or how fub-
ftance or profperity will be acquired, we are to regard the nature and
quality of the houfes over which the fignificators have dominion. Thus,
if the lord of the eleventh houfe give virtue and influence to the fignifi-
cators of fubftance by propitious rays, we are to conclude, that the na-
tive will receive an increafe of wealth through the medium of relations
-or friends. But, if the lord of the feventh be thus irradiated, his fub-
ftance will be increafed by marriage, partnerfhip, or fome joint concern.
And thus judgment is drawn in all cafes from the nature of the houfes
which the feveral fignificators govern or irradiate.


To obtain a proper idea, not only which way riches and profperity
are likely to come, but to decide alfo whether they fhall be obtained by
lawful or difhonourable means, we muit note whether the benefic pla-
nets are fignificators ; and, if they are not afflicted by the malignant rays
of Saturn or Mars, nor in conjunction with any violent fixed ftar, it
fhews the native will acquire eminent profperity by fair and honourable
means. But, if a malevolent ftar be fignificator, and the benefic planets
in no afpect with him, and either retrograde or combuft, it induces the
oppofite effect. If a benefic planet. be fignificator, and placed in the
dignities of either of the malefics, it fhews wealth will be obtained both
ways. To know whether riches, when obtained, will be durable or
not, we muft confider whether the fignificators are fo pofited in the
heavens as to be unimpeded by the intercourfe of the maiefics; for
then profperity fhall continue during life. But, if the benefics are fig-
nificators, and fituated in bad places of the figure, and the infortunes

2 occupy


‘


410 AN ILLUSTRATION


occupy the good, fo as to obfcure or overcome the energy of the bene-
fic rays, it fhews a continual flux and reflux of wealth; fo that what is
obtained under one dire&tion fhall be loft under a bad one. But the
time when thefe things fhall feverally come to pafs can only be known
by equating the directions of each afpect, which is the only true and ra-

tional way of difcovering when they fhall begin to operate.


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the THIRD HOUSE.


The third houfe difcovers, by the afpeéts with which it is configue
rated, whether we fhall be advantaged or injured by the confanguinity
of brethren, or by inland journeys and fojournments ; which we have
fully explained in p. 164, &c. The fignificators of brethren or fifters
are taken from five degrees preceding the cufp of the third houfe to
within five degrees of the cufp of. the fourth houfe. And the lord of
the third houfe, or the planets accidentally pofited therein, fhall be the
fignificators. We are then particularly to remark the pofition of Mars,
which is the general fignificator of brethren,—-or the Moon, which re-
prefents fifters. If Mars or the Moon be found in fruitful figns, or
in good afpect with the fruitful planets, whith are Jupiter, Venus, or
the Dragon's head, it is an argument that the native fhall have brothers,
if the configurations are made with Mars ; or fifters, when made with
the Moon; and the number fhall be according to the irradiations and
force of the afpeéts. If a good and benevolent configuration is formed
between the lord of the afcendant and the lord of the third houfe, i¢
implies mutual good offices, harmony, and concord between brothers
and fifters ; but, if bad afpedcts are found, then wice ver/a, malice, hatred,
envy, and ill will, exift among them, When Jupiter, Venus, or the
Dragon's head, are pofited in the third houfe, the-native will derive ad~
vantage from travel, or by change of habitation ; and will be aided by
the good fellowthip of his own family,


To determine thefe queftions in the prefent nativity, I obferve that
Capricorn hag the principal rule in the third houfe; which being a fen
not very prolific, but rather inclined to barrennefs, I conclude there
are {mall expectations of brethren. The Moon's pofition in the third
houfe declares. there will bea fifter, or perhaps two; which is further
demonttrated by the fextile ray of Venus; but, being at the fame time
under the malignant inftuences of Mars, it fhews that what might be
produced by the fuitful influences fhall be cut off by premature death;
and indeed, the Moon being in an evil afpeét with the Sun, and ap- —
proaching to a quartile with Mercury, is no argument of durable life to

fitters,


OF ASTROLOGY. git


fitters. As to brothers, we have not a fingle teftimony to produce
them. Mars, the natural fignificator of brethren, is pofited in a barren
fign, and in no good afpect with any planet, except in reception of Mer-
cury, which operates not in favour of fruitfulnefs, becaufe he alfo is po-
fited in a barren fign. Thefe are argum entsto prove the native was the
only fon, or at leaft the only one that fhoul dcome to maturity, or engage
in the viciffitudes or concerns of this life.


With regard to the inland journeys of this native, his fojournments, :
or change of refidence, they are declared to produce an encreafe of profit
and fubftance. The Moon’s pofition, unafflitted, in the third; and Ve-
nus in fextile, having hgr.exaltation in the fifth, denotes many journeys
that fhould produce pleafure or profit, and fometimes both, in an eminent
degree; as is further evinced by the planet Venus being in. reception
of Jupiter, the fupreme lord of the fecond, the houfe of profperity
and fubftance, as well as lord of the fifth, the houfe of pleafure and de- |
light. And as the third houfe is unafflitted by any malefic ray, or by
the pofition of the infortunes, or any evil configuration therein, it res
mains evident, beyond contradiction, that he fhould receive no injury
by means of brothers or fitters, nor any difadvantage from travel or change
of refidence.—This has alfo been remarkably verified in the perfon of
of the native, who hath uniformly changed his fituation and refidence
for greater profit and preferment. .


CONSIDERATIONS arifing from the FOURTH HOUSE.


From this houfe we obtain judgement of the native’s hereditary ac-
quifitions ; the fubftance he fhall derive from his father; his houtfes,
lands, hereditaments, &c. in which we are particularly to obferve, 1,
the fituation of the lord of the fourth houfe; 2. the pofition of the Sun
in a diurnal, and of Saturn in a nocturnal, nativity; and, 3. what planet
or planets are configurated in this houfe. If the major part of thefe fig-
nificators are found ftrong and well dignified, under benefic influences,
it is an argument of much good from the father; but, if otherwife,
contrary effects will be produced. So the lord of the afcendant, or the
Moon, in fextile or trine with the Sun by day, or with Saturn by
night, forefhews unity and concord between the native and his father ;
and, if the afpeét be made with reception, it will continue unto death,
and Jead to an inheritance of the father’s fubftance, ‘The famé effee is
produced by the lord of the afcendant and the lord of the fourth houfe
in mutual reception ; and again, if the lord of the afcendant be in good
No. 36. bon BIN alpect


712 A-N 2G DY Utes T Rati T 1G N


afpeét with the lord of the fourth ; or the Moon apply by benefic rays
to the lord of the fourth; thefe are {trong arguments of concord be-
tween the native and his father, and of advantage by inheritance. But,
if contrary afpects govern this houfe, the native and his father will be
at enmity with each other; and the more ferious and afflicting will this
enmity be, and the more injurious to the native’s inheritance, in pro-
portion as the fignificators fhall be in adverfe pofitions, ill configurated,
void of reception, or afflicted in the angles, ‘This rule invariably holds
good in all genitures. |


On the cufp of the fourth houfe of this nativity we find almoft feven
degrees of the fign Aquaries, and Saturn in dignities pofited therein, in
fextile with Mercury. ‘Thefe are teftimonies of longevity in the father,
as well as of ftrong mental endowments, and of refpectability among
mankind. We find Saturn difpofes of the Moon; and Mars, who is
lord of the afcendant, cafting a fe{quiquadrate to the Moon, in reception
of Mercury, declares the native fhould be regulated by a {trong filial
affection for his father, and that in a more eminent degree than the fa-
ther forthe fon. ‘This is confirmed by Saturn, fignificator of the father,
being the fuperior planet, in a mafculine fign, and the fignificators of the
native being inferior, and in feminine figns.


As to the father’s riches, they muft be deduced from the afpects of
the benefics to the fourth houfe, and the pofition of the part of fortune,
and the planets in the fifth houfe, which is the father’s houfe of fub-
ftance.. Now Jupiter being in quartile of Saturn and in no afpect
with either of the luminaries, are arguments that the father fhould not
encreafe his fubftance ; and, as the part of fortune is in oppofition to
Saturn, it declares he fhould meet with many loffes. And, although
Saturn is cligibly pofited in the fourth, and might thereby promife an
inheritance of landed property at the death of his father; yet, as the part
of fortune is in oppofition with Saturn, in the terms of Jupiter, and
Jupiter configurated with violent fixed flars, it is clearly demonftrated,
that, through the eafe and freedom of the father’s difpofition, accom-
panied with fome heavy lofies, he fhould at his death leave but a {mall
patrimony for the fon,. which fhould happen at a very advanced time
of life ; as is predi€ted by the pofition of Saturn in the father’s afcendant,
which invariably gives old age, particularly when pofited in his own


‘dignities. Thefe circumftances precifely happened both to the father
and the fon.


CON-


OF AS?r ReO-L)O GY. 713


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the FIFTH HOUSE...


The fpeculations upon this houfe afford the moft fatisfactory informa--
' tion concerning the native’s iffue—whether he fhall have children; to--
gether: with their conditions, qualities, and fex. Alfo, whether the

native fhall derive any fuccefs from fpeculative riflk of property, fuch

as buying and felling in the funds ; adventuring in the lottery, or con-

figning goods to the uncertainties of an unknown foreign market.—

Thefe feveral.enquiries ate definable from the figure of every geniture,..
and are fought out from the configurations in, or relating to, the fifth.
houfe;. and, as they are not of the leaft importance among the various

occurrences: incident to human life, I fhall lay down fome feleé rules.
for the more particular information of fuch of my readers as with to re--
duce the theory thereof into practice.


To know whether the native fhall have iffue or not, particular regard!
_ muft be had to the configurations in the firft, fifth,.and tenth, houfes ;;
- and.alfo.to the afpeéts formed by the lords of thofe houfes ; as alfo the:
eleventh. houfe.and its Jord, becaufe it is the. fifth from the feventh.
If thefe fignificators are in fruitful figns,.then it is certain the native -
will have iffue; but, if they are in barren figns, the contrary effect will:
be. produced. .


But, .as it feldom happens that the planets are wholly pofited in thefe.
oppofite extremes, I fhall ftate the effect of thofe configurations which
are cafually formed, amd which lead ‘to a full explanation of all the o-
thers. If the.Sun, Saturn, or Mars, rule the afcendant; fifth, .tenth,..,
or eleventh, houfes, without fome fruitful afpect of the benefics, they,
deny children. So Saturn in the fifth, or the Sun in quartile to Japi--
ter, will be found to. work the fame barren effect. If the Sun be con--
figurated with Saturn and Mercury in the eleventh or fifth, in afpect
with the Moon, it fhews the native-will fcarcely have children ; or, if ¢
he. fhould, they will die fuddenly, in their infant. ftate... The fame -
planets conjoined in the midheaven, and in quartile or oppofition of |
the Moon, produce the fame... Venus pofited in the firft or, feventh -
houfes, in conjunction or oppofition of Saturn, or in communicative -
dignities, i. ¢. he in-her. term, and fhe in his; or if Saturn be in ‘Taurus, ,
and Venus in Capricorn ; it.argues barrennefs in a male’ geniture, and .
abortion in that of a female; or that. what is produced {hall die ere it.
has feen the light. In like manner Saturn, if pofited in the afcendant, .
will produce barrennefs, or deftroy the offspring, So Mars in oppo--

fitiona


714 AN: OLYL WS--T (REA-T I 'O N

fition of Jupiter or Venus deftroys the hope of iffue in the native ; and
Jupiter in oppofition to Saturn deftroys whatever is produced under it,
more efpecially if Jupiter happens to be lord of the fifth. But the moft
decifive teftimony of barrenne({s, is when the lord of the fifth and the lord
of the afcendant are combuft and retrograde, unaided by benefic rays, and
the Moon in detriment. |


If, on the contrary, the Moon and Mercury are pofited in the fifth.
thoufe, and their difpofitors unafflicted, it is an argument that the na-
tive fhall have iffue. So likewife if Mercury be occidental, and in good
afpect to Jupiter or Venus, it produces children ; but if oriental, and
afflicted by Saturn, it denotes barrennefs. The Moon configurated with
Venus or the Dragon’s head in the fifth houfe, and a prolific fign on
the cufp thereof, is a certain proof of many children, and good. And
again, Jupiter in trine afpect of the Moon, in moift figns ; or the Moon,
with Jupiter or Venus in an angle, or in good afpect with the angles,
declares the fame; and that they will be born to preferment. When
thefe fignificators fall wholly in mafculine figns, the iffue fhall be all
males; but when they fall wholly in feminine figns, the offspring fhall
be all females. Again, if the major part of thefe fignificators fall in maf-
culine figns, and the refidue in feminine, the native fhall have moft boys;
but, if the majority be in feminine figns, and the reft in mafculine, then
will he have moftly girls.


_ The number of children the native fhall have is determined by col-
le€ting the number of teftimonies by which they are produced ; for the
more fruitful planets that are found in the fifth or eleventh houfes, and
in fruitful figns, give the more children ; whereas, the fewer the planets
are that we find pofited in thofe houfes and figns, the fewer children will
be produced ; and this is a never-failing criterion whereby to judge. Let
it alfo be remembered, that fruitful planets in bicorporal figns produce
‘double, and in fruitful figns treble, the number.


‘The readieft and moft accurate way of determining the native’s iffue
is to collec all the teftimonies of fruitfulnefs and fterility that appear
on ‘the face of the geniture into one table, as in the foregoing judge-
ment on the temperature and conftitution; and, according to the majority
of fignificators, let the enquiry be decided. If the fignificators and figns
of fterility exceed in number and energy the fignificators of fecundity,
the native cannot have iffue. If thefe teftimonies happen to be equal,
then regard muft be had to a good revolution and direttion meeting to-
- gether; and, if fuch fhould occur, without any malefic influence, it yes
fafely


OF ASTROLOGY. 71s


fafely be pronounced that the native will have one child. If thefe rales
are duly attended to, the reader will find no difficulty in obtaining fatif-
factory information upon this important enquiry, in hisown or in any
genethliacal figure that is laid before him.


According to the rules I have recommended, I. fhall inveftigate the
queftion in this nativity, reducing the particular quality of each. figni-
ficator into a-table, and deducing from thence the effects they refpec- _

tively give. Upon the afcendant there aretwo figns, both of which muft
be taken, as well as all the other afpects.


Libraafcending, in itfelf is indifferent.
Venus, lady of that fign, in Pifces fruitful.
Scorpio afcending fruitful.
Mars, lord of that fign, in Virgo barren.
Pifces on the cufp of the fifth Sruitful.
Jupiter, lord of that fign, in Taurus - indifferent.
Jupiter, by fextile afpec to the fifth Sruitful,
Leo, on the cufp of the tenth barren.
The Sun, lord of that fign, in Aries indifferent.
The Moon, in Capricorn indifferent.
The Moon, by dexter x with min the afcendant Sruitful,
The Moon, by finifter * with Pifces in the fifth Sruitf{ul,.
Virgo on the cufp of the eleventh barren.
Mercury, lord of that figa, in Aries indifferent.
The Dragon’s head in the fifth gives THREE

teftimonies fruitful,


Number of teftimonies for fruitfulnefs
Number of ditto for barrennefs


alwrwo


| Surplus in favour of fruitfulnefs


And therefore, as the indifferent figns operate neither way, I conclude
from the above majority of fix fruitful fignifieators, that the native fhall
have fix children. The next thing is, to determine their fex, or how
many fhall be males or females. To do this, it only requires to
afcertain the quality of the figns and planets with which the Moon is
configurated, whether mafculine or feminine ; and from thence judg-
ment is drawn. For example: Fhe Moon, in this geniture, is the firft
planet that collects mafculine rays, and is therefore to be firft taken.
She is pofited in a feminine fign, and beholds the feminine fign Scorpio, »
which are two arguments in favour of a female child; but, oppofed to

No. 36. 38 O thefe,


%


ae: "ANTE G O84 Rea oy


thefe, we find a much more powerful influence in favour of the mafcu-
line. ‘The Moon in fefquiquadrate afpeé&t with Mars, in quartile of
the Sun, and within orbs of a quartile configuration with Mercury,
who in this figure is conftituted a mafculine planet, by being in a maf-
culine fign, in fextile of Saturn, and in reception of Mars, which are
both mafculine planets ; and the Moon’s north node falling in the fifth
houfe, and being difpofed of by Saturn; are fo many infallible teftimo-
_nies of the mafculine conformation, that I pronounce the firft iffue with
which this native fhall be bleffed will be a fon.—And fo it happened.


To demonftrate the fex of the fecond child, I re-confider the figure.
I-find the Moon is the principal fignificator of the fecond child alfo, be«
caufe fhe fends a finifter fextile to the fifth houfe, as well as a dexter fex-
tile: to the firft. Adopting therefore the fame node as before, I deduce
two arguments only in favour of a female; but in favour of a male [
again find a confiderable majority; the Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, and the
Moon’s north node in the fifth, being all trong teftimonies that the
fecond child fhall be a male. And fo it proved.


We next confult the figure, and fele&t the principal fignificator of the


third child. This I find to be Jupiter, becaufe he is not only lord of ©


the fifth houfe, but becaufe he likewife beholds the fifth with a fextile,


and the eleventh with atrine, afpect. I am therefore to confider, as in_


the foregoing cafes, how this fignificator is configurated as to mafculine
and feminine influences. ‘The fign upon the cufp of the fifth houfe is
feminine ; Jupiter lord of the fifth, in Taurus, is alfo feminine; Venus,
who is. the difpofitor of Jupiter, is a feminine planet, and pofited like-
wife in a feminine fign ; the Moon beholds the fifth houfe with a fextile
afpect, and is a feminine planet ina feminine fign. ‘Thefe are all ar-
guments in favour of the female conformation ; whilft we find only two
in favour of the mafculine, namely, Jupiter, a maiculine planet, and the
Dragon’s head, or fortunate node of the Moon; fo that, the majority of
teftimonies being fo much in favour of a female child, I hefitated not to
affirm, that of fuch fex fhould be the next offspring ; which was abfo.
lutely the cafe.


The other three children are defined from the Moon’s fortunate node,
or Dragon’s head, which, falling in a fruitful fgn, invariably denotes
three children; and, as its configurations:are made with mafculine or
feminine planets, fo fhall be their fex. Ih the prefent cafe the Dra-
gon’s head falls not only ina fruitful but in a feminine fign ; Jupiter,
its difpofitor, though a mafculine planet, is in a feminine fign, and

piniee therefore
:


j


Pte


iOnr AS T BOL .O.GrY. 417


; 4 " Ke :
_ therefore impregnates that quality ; the Moon, a feminine planet, be-
holds the Dragon’s head from a feminine fign ; all which prove the fe-
minine. nature fhall form the quality ; and hence it is certain that the
three laft children of this native fhall be all girls. And fo it really


proved.


This account may appear miraculous to thofe unacquainted with
planetary influence; but their action is certain, and their energy invari-
ably the fame. | Thus the grand Projector of the univerfe continually’
produces, by perpetual revolutions of the celeftial bodies, the fame
caufes and effects, giving life and motion to all animated nature, and
vegetative nourifhment to the inanimate ; and, as the inanimate are fome-
times found imperfectly wrought, or mixed, or blended with their op-
pofite qualities, or of a doubtful genus ; fo we find the animate are fub-
ject to the fame mixtures and affections, according as the planets fhall be
configurated under which they are formed. And hence we _ conttantly
find, that, in the generation of the human fpecies, if the mafculine influ-
ence hath greatly the majority, the perfons produced under it will be pro-
portionably ftrong, mufcular, raw-boned, and mafculine ; but, when it
hath barely the fuperiority of the female influence, the native is effemi-
nate, weak, flender, and diminutive. So likewife females, where the fe-..
male conformation hath greatly the afcendency, are moft delicately and
charmingly formed, with all the grace and foftnefs of the fex, and with
due fymmetry and proportion ; but, where it hath but barely the pre-
dominancy over the mafculine, it fails not to produce large, coarfe,
raw-boned, mafculine, women. © And, as we have before fully explained,
if the mafculine and femininé configurations are found equally ftrong at
the time of birth, if the action of the one quality fhall in no wife ob-
tain predominancy over that of the other, but the degrees of power and
dignity ftand equally balanced, and neither the mafculine nor feminine
influence preponderate, then fhall the jpunz agpoden, OF the hermaphrodite,


be produced.


From the fifth houfe we are alfo enabled to form a tolerably correct
judgment, whether the children born to the native fhall, ina general
way, be’ fortunate or unfortunate in their journey through life; but, as
thefe children are all living, and grown up to maturity, delicacy requires
that I fhould be filent on that head. I would at.the fame time recom-
mend to every perfon, before he decides pofitively upon the events pre-
dicted by the fifth houfe, fo far as they relate to the general characters
and purfuits of children promifed to the native in any genethliacal figure,
to confult the radix of each child’s birth, and compare it with thole of
the parents, by which means the artift can never err. .

°
A


ad


418 ANTILLUSTRAT ICON


“By the fifth houfe we are likewife enabled to judge of the probable:
event of every fpecies of adventure, whether by lottery, dealings in. the)


funds, purchafe or fale of life-annuities, or of any tranfaction where a
certain-or definable rifk is to be fuftained: for thefe fpeculations, how-


ever varied or multifarious, are governed by the fame motions of the ©
mind, and fpring from the fame effect in our radical geniture. In the


prefent figure, we find the north or fortunate node of the Moon pofited
in the fifth houfe, which is a ftrong argument of fuccefs in fuch enter-
“prizes 5 and this fuccefs is ftrengthened by the Moon's fextile afpect
therewith. But we dare not, in any cafe, decide by one fpecies of evi-


dence, without confulting what may be offered on the contrary fide.


~ We therefore find, that, oppofed to the foregoing propitious teftimonies,
there are feveral that produce a very oppofite effect. Jupiter, who is
lord of the fifth, and fignificator of the native’s adventure, being pofited
in the eighth houfe, deftroys much of the luck promifed by the forego-
ing afpect ; and, as Mars is in direct oppofition to Venus, and the part


of fortune afflicted by Saturn ; at the fame time that the Moon’s un--


fortunate node or Dragon’s tail falls in the eleventh, the houfe where
the final end of all things is determined ; we may fafely conclude, that,
though the native might occafionally derive advantage by fuch {pecula-
tions, yet he would eventually be injured by them.


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the SIXTH HOUSE.


From the fixth houfe we deduce thofe infirmities or conftitutional dif-
orders of the body, with which the native, from the particular quality
of the ruling planets at birth, fhall from time to time be afflicted, as
the feveral directions fhall happen to come up... This houfe likewife has
relation to the good and evil occurrences that refult from our immediate
fervants or demeftics ; and likewife from our cattle.


But the moft effential information the inquifitive reader can with to
acquire, is that which regards the health or ficknefs of the native, and
which, fince the days of Adam, is the promifcuous lot of all God’s
children, Infirmity both of body and mind were unqueftionably oc-
cafioned by the fall, which hurled, as it were, the whole fyftem of na-
ture into oppofite extremes, and gave that jarring inequality to the ele-
ments which lays the foundation of every radical diforder. For,
as thefe elements are more or lefs predominant in conception, and as
they are diverfely changed and modified by the forms and properties
of the planetary influence at the time of birth, fo will the incidental
occurrences of health and ficknefs be, according to their {pecific quality
and temperature; and this is definable from the temperament and com-

s + plexion


t-
%, r


7


mon Aes Tomo O GY. 419
plexion of the native ; for, as his temperature is, fo fhall be his ficknefs
or his health ; for’ ficknefs is no other than an inequality of fome pre~
dominant humour offending at the time of birth ; and, of whatever
element fuch' predominant humour is compounded, of fuch nature and
quality will be the’ difeafe.’ “Hetice’ then the propriety of every phyfi-
cian’s confulting the radical caufe of difeafes from the geniture of the
patient, wherever it canbe obtained’; for, by uniting uranical and phy-
{ical precepts together, there cannot be a doubt but life may, oftentimes
be preferved; where it is fatally deftroyed through ignorance or miftake
in the radical caufe of the complaint. Indeed the eminent progrefs,
and unbounded. fuccefs,. of the learned. and ingenious Dr. Salmon in
the fcience of phyfic, he confeffes.to have derived from aftrological
knowledge in decumbitures, by which means he feldom or ever lofta
patient, bit where nature was totally exhaufted, and the {prings of life
fairly at an end. A very proper example this, for modern practitioners
to follow; fince. not only fortune and fame,, but the general good of
mankind, would flow from it.


In the hope that many of my readers will be defirous ot acquiring
the moft extenfive information in this part of the fcience, I fhall here
ftate the various configurations from whence the caufes of ficknefs and
_ health may be deduced; as well thofe which were felected by Dr. Sal-
mon.in the courfe of his practice, as thofe which I have added by my
own experience. ‘The fubject is interefting, and deferves attention.


If, in the figure of birth, the lord of the fixth houfe be in good afpect
with the lord of the afcendant, itis a {trong argument that the native
will be healthy. So when the-Moon is well dignified, and in good
configuration with the lord of the fixth houfe, or beholds the cufp of
the fixth with a fextile or trine, itis another proof of the native’s health.
When benefic ftars are in the fixth houfe, in good configuration with
the luminaries, or with the lord of the afcendant, it further demonftrates
a healthy conftitution. Ifthe lord of the fixth, the cufp. of the, fixth,
or the Moon, be unafflicted by bad afpects of Saturn or Mars, or by fixed
Stars of their nature, or by the Dragon’s tail; and neither the lord of
the fixth nor the Moon be combuft or peregrine, the native will moft
probably live in perfect health all his days. —


“But, on the contrary, if moft or all, the fignificators,in.a.genefis be
found weak and ‘unfortunate, or afflicted by the malignant planets in
body or afpe ; or if moft of the fignificators pofited in the twelfth,
eighth, or fixth, houfes; or the infortunes in the feventh. are.in no good


No. 36. EE RE RE afpect


:


Sa)


720 A NPL BAL) Vast TERFA IT alt


afpect of Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun, or Moon ; the native’s body will
be very infirm, and become a perfect repofitum of difeafes. And ac-
cording to the nature of the figns in which thofe planets are pofited,
7. e. according to the triplicity, fo will the native be continually afflicted
with fuch infirmities as proceed from the predominant quality of that
trigon; for, if the fignificators be in watery figns, -he will be afflicted
with phlegm; if in earthy, he will be opprefled with melancholy ; if
in fiery, with cholic, heat, and feverifh affections ; but, if in airy figns
he will labour under moft or all of thofe complaints which arife from
too great an abundance of blood. — 3 4, . oF


Whenever we find in a nativity the lord of the afcendant applying to
the lord of the fixth, it declares the native will. be inattentive to_ his.
own health, and often fuffer thereby. ‘The Sun in the fixth, feyenth,
eighth, or twelfth, houfes, is an argument of fhort life, of many and
bitter affiGions, and of much ficknefs; particularly if in bad afpect
with the Moon; but, if thefe luminaries be in conjunction of each other,
it prefages defect of underftanding, and ‘affli@ions of the head and
brain, which the phyfician can neither difcover nor cure. If the Moon
be affliged by the quartile or oppofition of Saturn, or the Dragon’s tail,


in the firft or fecond houfes of the figure, it declares the whole life will


be infirm; and, if fixed Stars of the quality of Saturn. be joined with
either of luminaries, the native will be always lean and puny, and the
food he takes will afford but little nourifhment; fo likewile he that hath


Mars elevated above Saturn in his birth will be of a weak and fickly ha-—


bit of body.


If Mars be in the fixth houfe, it gives fudden cafual difeafes, which
return upon the flighteft occafion; if in the twelfth, he afflicts the
body with extreme weaknefs, and forebodes cafual misfortunes. So, if
an infortune be matutine, it fhews fudden difeafes or falls; if vefper-
tine, a fickly habit or durable complaints. But, fince bodily infirmi-
. ties cannot be deduced intirely from the bare pofition of any one planet
when others of an oppofite nature and quality are fo fituated as to. coun-


terbalance its influence, fo the foregoing obfervations can only hold good.


in fuch nativities where they ftand implicitly as above defcribed, with-
out any other planet in configuration, and totally unimpeded by the in-
fluence of other rays; for, when thefe occur, the complaint arifes from
a compound caufe, and every feparate quality mutt be confidered, and
compared with the fundamental fignificators of the temperature and ae
ftitution of the native in his radical figure of birth, which, being duly
afcertained, and proved by dire€tion, will feldom fail to point oe Res
precife nature and tendency of the difeafe, atop ,


c


~The


4


oD


OF ASTROLOGY. 72.1


The four triplicities, from whence the four complexions or tempe-
ratures arife, and the figns which compofe them, muft be fully con-
_ templated in this enquiry. If the native be found to exceed in his:
temperature or complexion with the choleric humour, and Saturn
happens to be the afflicting planet, and pofited in Aries, being the houfe
of Mars, and the exaltation of the Sun, he then declares the native fhall
at times be troubled with melancholy vapours, and impofthumes in the
head, with colds, watchings, ftoppage in the ftomach and bowels, diftilla-
tions of rheum, and pains in the arms and fhoulders. If Jupiter be the
afflicting planet in Aries, he denotes fome affliction in the head, or
quinfey in the throat, or tumorous-fwelling, with fainting or {woon--
ing. If Mars in Aries be the afflicting fignificator, he gives extreme:
pain in the head, arifing from a hot caufe; or elfe want of fleep, or hot
rheums in the eyes, or gripingsin the bowels. If the Sun be the affli@-.
ing! planet, and pofited in Aries, he then gives the megrim, reftleffnefs,,
fore eyes, with pain or fwellings in the thighs and hips. If Venus be the:
afflicting planet, and in Aries, fhe produces heavinefs and dulnefs in the
head, proceeding of cold; and difpofes to lethargy, and to complaints.
of the kidneys and reins.’ If Mercury be the affliding planet in Aries,.
he caufes the vertigo, or lightnefs of the head, with all the various dif.
orders of the womb. If the Moon be the affliGing planet in Aries, fhe.
gives defluxions of rheum from the head, falling ficknefs, convulfions,.
dimnefs of fight by cold, fleepinefs, with pains or lamenefs in the knees..
‘Thefe feveral complaints are peculiar to the fituation of each of the
feven planets in the fign Aries; for, in each different fign, they vary
their effect upon the conftitution, by participating in the nature and qua-
lity of each of the figns refpectively. It will therefore be neceflary to
trace their influence through each of the four triplicities, before their ac-
tion can be precifely determined in every geniture.


Saturn in Leo, being the afflicting planet, gives violent affliction of
the nerves, confumption, or wafting of the liver, debility in the reins,
and weaknefs' in the back. If Jupiter be the afflicting fignificator in:
Leo, sit difpofes to feverifh complaints, pleurify, pains in the. in-
teftines, gripings, and wind cholic; and the {ciatica, or hip-gout,.
‘When Mars is the afflicting planet in Leo, choler abounds, with a vio-
lent fever, pains of the ftomach, or kidneys. If the Sun be the afflict-
ing planet in Leo, it gives the putrid or {potted fever, {tone and gravel,
fainting fits, excruciating pains in the head, almoft to madnefs. If
Venus afflict the native in Leo, it induces the violent fever of love ;
gives obftructions at ftomach, with pain or {welling in the legs. If
Mercury afflict in Leo, he gives fadnefs of heart, tremblings, pains nh

. tne


»
»


422 A N .IsL,-L y-S «eT ReAnT J ® N


the back, with lamenefs in the arms, and.pains.in the extremities. If
the Moon afflict the patient in Leo, fhe gives ficknefs at ftomach, in
éreafes the king’s evil, and all diforders of the. throat.


“In Sagittarius, if Saturn be the afflicting planet, he produces weakne{s
of the extremities, confumptions, pains. in the legs.and feet, and the
gout. If Jupiter be the fignificator of affliction in Sagittarius, he pro»:
duces putrefaction of blood, fevers. proceeding from choler; pains and)
fwellings in the knees, and tumours in.the head and neck. If Mars)
affliG in Sagittarius, he gives the fciatica, or pains. in the hips or thighs,
drinefs of the mouth, with extreme heat. and forenefs.of the throat,
If Sol affli@t in Sagittarius, it caufes choleric humours in the thighs or:
hips, the fiftula, fainting fits, and ficknefs,atheart.. If Venus be the
affii€ting planet in Sagittarius, fhe produces the {ciatica, corruption of
blood, furfeits, and ficknefs of ftomach.. If Mercury afflict in Sagitta-
rius, we fuffer pains in the back and reins, pains in the kidneys, coughs
and ftoppage of urine. If the Moon be the afflicting planet in Sa-
gittarius, fhe induces weaknefs or lamenefs in the thighs, pains in the
bowels, and the wind cholic. Thefe are the various complaints which
the planets give in the fiery triplicity, which is under the denomination
of choler, and is compofed of the three foregoing figns. I thall now:
ftate the afflictions which arife from the pofition of the feven planets in


the earthy triplicity, which confifts of the three figns Taurus, Virgo, .—
and Capricorn, | '


If Saturn be the afflicting planet in the fign Taurus, he gives the
king’s evil, or malignant fore throat, quartan ague, obf{trudtions of the
ftomach, the fcurvy, and melancholy affections. If Jupiter be the
afflicting planet in ‘laurus, it produces the quinfey, or {welling of. the
throat, rheumatic gout in the*hands and arms, wind in the blood, ob-
ftructions in the bowels, with pains and: gripings. If Mars be the
afflicting planet in ‘faurus, he occafions tumours of the neck.and throat
weaknefs and pains in the back, the ftone in the reins, or.aconfum <
tion, If the Sun afflict in ‘Taurus, it endangers the quinfey or fore
throat, and gives pain and {welling in the knees. If Venus be the af.
flicting planet in Taurus, fhe produces a catarrh, or fome malignant hu-
_mour in the throat, pains in the head, colds, and defect in the fecrets

If Mercury afflict in Taurus, he caufes diftillations in the throat ar
wheefings in the ftomach, the fciatica, or lamenefs and numbnefs in the
feet. If the Moon be the afflicting planet.in.Taurus,. the occafions:
{welling and forenefs of the throat, canker in the mouth, pains in the
legs, and gout in the feet.


2 If


OF ASTROLOGY, or


If Saturn be the afflicting planet in the fign Virgo, he occafions vio-
Yent obftructions in the bowels, which frequently end in mortification,
and terminate life ; he likewife produces laflitude and weaknefs in the
thighs, ftoppage of urine, and the ftone. df Jupiter be the afflicting
planet, and polited in the fign Virgo, he occafions putrefied and cor-
rupted blood, cold and dry liver, obftructions of the lungs, confump-
tion, ie dabinet in the back, pain and feeblenefs in the joints ; and, in
women, fits of the mother. If Mars be the afflicting. planet in» Virgo, he
often occafions the bloody flux, or a confirmed dyfentery ; alfo obfttuc-
tions in the circulation: of the animal fluids, and itdiedars in the legs,
if the Sun be the afflicting planet’ in Virgo, he gives the bloody flux,
or choleric obftructions in the ftomach and throat, or fome {welling
tumours therein. If Venus afflict in Virgo, fhe produces worms, wind-
cholic, flux, pains at the heart, or illnefs proceeding from cold taken in
the feet. If Mercury afflict in Virgo, -he gives the bilious cholic, fhort-
nefs of breath, obftrudtions at the ftomach, pains in the head, and -dif-
orders of the brain. If the Moon be the afflicting planet, and fituated
in Virgo, fhe gives all kinds of ob{tructions in the bowels, lownefs of
fpirits, deep melancholy, fudden tremors, fainting fits, and weaknefs i in
the extremities.


If Saturn be the afflicting planet in the fign Capricorn, he gives the
gout in the knees, legs, and feet’; alfo pain in the head, and obftructy
the circulation. If Jupiter be the ‘afflicting planet in Capricorn, he
produces melancholy blood, and running pains, or fome obftruction: or
ftoppage in the throat. If Mars be the afflicting planet in Capricorn,
he gives violent pains in the knees, with lamenefs, and alfo in the hands
and arms, with hot {wellings,' and violent tumours.. If the Sun be the
afflicting planet in Capricorn, he gives fwellings in the knees, whitlows,
diftemper in the bowels, . with mortification, and fever. If Venus
afflict in Capricorn, fhe produces fcrophula in the knees and thighs,
tumours or fwellings in the tefticles, debility in the reins, and coldnefs
at ftomach. If Mercury be the afflicting planet in Capricorn, he gives
the gout in the feet and knees, occafions ftoppage of urine, palpitation
of the heart, and violent heart-burn. If the Moon affli¢t in Capricorn,
fhe gives the gout or whitlow in the knees, pains in the back and reins,
ftone and grayel, weaknefs of the kindeys, and the whites in women.
‘Thefe difeafes are all under the malefic configuration of the feven planets
in the earthy triplicity. I fhall next ftate thofe ufually produced in theairy,
which triplicity is compofed of t he threes next figns in order, viz.
Gemini, Libra, and Aquaries. '


No. 36. ts 8 Q_ a If


724 AN DLL US TR A Talo N


If Saturn be the affiGing planet, and pofited inthe fign Gemini, he
gives pains in the arms and fhoulders, pleurifies, obftructions in the
bowels, melancholy, and iblack jaundice. If Jupiter be the afflicting

lanet in Gemini, then blood will. abound, and occafion pleurifies, and
diforders of the liver and reins. If Mars be the afflicting planet in
Gemini, he often occafions breakings out, biles and blotches, pains in
the arms, heat of blood, putrefaciion, the ftranguary, and other com-
plaints in the fecrets. Ifthe Sun afflict in Gemini, the native will be
fubje@& to {corbutic complaints, corruption of blood, and peftilential
fevers, with weaknefs or lamenefs in the legs... If Venus be the afflict-.
ing planet in'Gemini, fhe corrupts the blood, and brings on a dropfy ;
fhe alfo. produces the king’s evil, and fome diftillations of rheum from
the head, afflicting the extreme parts. If Mercury afflict in Gemini, it
produces windy blood, weaknefs in the arms, pains in thehead, and the
rheumatic gout.. If the Moon affi@ in Gemini, fhe brings the gout
in the hands and elbows, alfo in the legs and feet. ‘Chefe complaints
are all peculiar to Libra. | ;


If Saturn be the afflicting planet in Libra, it argues a confumption of
the body, weaknefs in the back, ftranguary, corruption of blood, the
{ciatica, and gouty .or rheumatic pains. If Jupiter be the affli@ing
planet in Libra, it occafions the dropfy, tumours in the groin, the piles,
fiftula, inflammations in the legs, fevers, and furfeits. If Mars be the
afflicting planet in Libra, he gives the ftone and gravel, violent pains in
the kidneys and bladder, fevers, and pains inthe feet. If the Sun be the
afflicting planet in Libra, .he produces choler, painsin the back, fharp-
nefs of urine, univerfal corruption and inflammation of the blood, with
Jaffitude in the arms, fhoulders, and extremities. If Venus afflict in
Libra, fhe gives. a weaknefs in the reins, debility of the animal func-
tions, diabetes, pains in the bowels and,head, with the bilious cholic.
-If Mercury afflict in Libra, he gives pain in the mufcular fyftem, oc-
cafions ftoppage of urine, faintings and palpitation of the heart, ob-
ftructions inthe throat, decay of the lungs, or phlegmatic fwellings in the
breaft.. If the Moon be-the afflicting .planet in Libra, the debilitates the
reins, gives pains in the back and bowels, ;produces adiabetes, or brings
on the whites in-ewomen, ‘Thefe are the feveral complaints engendered
under Libra.


If Saturn ‘be the affiGting planet, and: pofited in Aquaries, he gives
pains.in-the head from:metancholy vapours, fwellings or gatherings in
the throat, pains and cramps in the limbs and joints, pains in the ears,
and deafnefs. If Jupiter be the afflicting planet in Aquaries, he pro-
duces running pains all over the body, particularly in the hands, . arms,

legs,


Oe AS RROD OG ¥i & ne.


legs, amd fect.. If Mars be the afflicting planet in Aquaries, he begets
putrefaction and inflammation of the blood, {welling in the legs, obftruc-
tions in’ the ftomach,-pleurify,-or intermittent fever.’ If the Sun be
the afflicting. planet,’and in. Aquaries, it occafions lamenefs and: foul
irruptions in the legs, difficulty in making water, and wafting of the
reins and kidneys. If Venus be the afflicting planet in Aquaries, fhe
caufeth: gouty: or rheumatic humours in the knees and feet, and fome-
times in the ftomach ; but, if the blood be in a putrefied ftate, the will
caufe the dropfy. If Mercury be the afflicting ‘planet: in» Aquaries, ‘he
gives fluxes, and wind in the bowels, running pains in the extremities,
and fwellings in the feet and legs. If the Moon be the afflicting. planet
in Aquaries, fhe produces dropfy in the legs, fits of the mother, | dia-
betes, weaknefs in the ftamina, univerfal laffitude, runnings of the reins,
andimpotency. Thefeare engendered of the planets, when malevolently
configurated in the airy triplicity. We fhall next confider the watery,
which is formed of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifces.


If Saturn in Cancer be the affli@ing planet, it occafions obftructions
of the ftomach, tertian agues, fcurvies, coughs, and colds, phthifics,
and ulcerations of the lungs, cancers and ulcers in ‘the breatt, pains
and weakneffes in the back, afthmas, and confumptions.» If Jupiter be
the afflicting planet in Cancer, he caufes furfeits, dropfy, bad appetite,
obftructions in the bladder, weaknefs, and debility in the ventricle. If
Mars be the afflicting planet in cancer, he breeds a pleurify, or occa
fions the gathering of fharp acrid humours in the ftomach, whence arife
the moft violent bilious complaints. If the Sun be-theaffli@ing planet in
Cancer, it produces hoarfenefs, and feverith affections, inducing to the
fmall-pox or meafles. If Venus be the afflicting planet in Cancer, the
caufeth bad digeftion, lofs of appetite, furfeit with vomiting, an univerfa]
corruption of blood, and pains in the back and bowels. df*Mercury is
the afflicting planet, and in Cancer, he declares a cold -ftomach, grips
ings of wind, diftillations of cold rheum, or forne cough, with lame-
nefs in the legs. If the Moon be the afflicting planet in Cancer, the
produces watery ccmplaints of the ftomach, {mall-pox, dropfy, »timpa-
nies, falling ficknefs, and convulfions. ‘Thefe are the feveral afflictions
incident to the feven planets, when promittors under Cancer.


If Saturn “be the planet afflicting in the fign Scorpio, he gives the
piles, fiftula, and tumours in the groin, gout in the legs and feet, ob-
ftruction of the nerves, giddinefs, and pally. ‘If Jupiter be .the aff lict-
ing planet’ in Scorpio, he gives the feurvy or dropfy, indigeftion, ob-
ftructions in the'bladder, ftranguary, weaknefs, palpitation of the heart.


726 AN ILLUSTRATION


the fciatica, and-piles. If Mars be the affli@ing planet in Scorpio, ‘he
gives violent fevers, {mall pox, fcurvy, dropfy, {welling in-the privities,
violent pain in the head, rheum :in’ the eyes, the .megtim, and in a
womana fuper-abundance of -the menftrual -flux. If the Sunrbe the
afflicting planet in Scorpio, it occafions .violent irruptions of putrid
matter from different parts of the body in large boils or ‘blotches ;
otherwife it brings. on-obftructions in the ftomach and bowels, fup-
preffion of urine, or the bilious cholic. If Venus be the afflicting planet
an Scorpio, fhe produces the dropfy, -fcurvy, king’s evil, pains of the
kidneys, running of the reins, debility, and impotency. If Mercury
be the afflicting planet in Scorpio, he produces quartan agues, proceed-
ing of heat and moifture ; pains inthe bowels, flux or dyfentery, with
pains in the arms and fhoulders. If the Moon be-the afflicting planet
in Scorpio, fhe deftroys the generative faculty, vitiates and impoverifhes
the femen, and finally induces an unceafing gleet; fhe likewife brings
on a dropfical or confumptive habit, which generally terminates in
death. Such are the difeafes engendered under Scorpio. We fhall laftly
confider thofe produced under Pifces. |


If Saturn: be the affliGting planet in the fign Pifces, he will occafion
the gout in the hands or feet, defluxions of vifcous humours, confump-
tions, or dropfy. If Jupiter be the afflicting planet in Pifces, he im-
poverifheth the blood, brings on a dropfy, caufeth abundance of phlegm
in the ftomach, produces {wellings in the face, and pains in the head.
If Mars be the afflicting planet in Pifces, he gives lamenefs in the
feet, ftops the free circulation of the blood and juices, vitiates the
liver, which comes away with frequent fpitting and retching, and
ultimately brings on a fever. If the Sun_ be the afflicting planet in
Pifces, he deftroys procreation, brings on all the diforders incident
to barrennefs, with obftructions in the ftomach and bowels, ftranguary,
and extreme pain in the back and reins. If Venus be the afflicting
planet in Pifces, fhe produces acold watery ftomach, white {wellings
in the knees or legs, flux in the bowels, which terminates in a dyfentery.
If Mercury be the afflicting planet in Pifces, it occafions weaknefs and
Jaffitude in the bowels and reins, with running pains or {wellings in
the knees, legs, or feet. If the Moon be the afflicting planet in Pif.
ces, fhe produces the dropfy, impofthumes of the head, watery fwellings
in the thighs and legs, univerfal laflitude, or a phlegmatic conftitution
of the whole body.


Thus have we defined the f{pecific difeafes produced under each of the
twelve figns, according to the nature of their triplicity, in which anyor
either of the feven planets are the promittors or fignificators of the malady.

3 Bat,


Ould AS ThE OC XY A. 727


/


Bat, as it does not always happen that the afcendant, or the part of fortune,
is the giver of life, anda fingle planet at the fame time promittor, in
which cafes alone the foregoing rules can invariably be admitted, it
will be neceflary to demonftrate the other influences, with which the
regular enjoyment of health is impeded by ficknefs and*difeafe, It is
the mare neceflary to be copious in this fpeculation, fince we cannot,
without .a perfect knowledge of all the configurations that induce fick-
nefs, either afcertain the afflictions to which the native fhall be
fubje€t during his life, or difcover, with amy degree of accuracy or
fatisfaction,, the temporary and curable diforders, from that laft and
final malady, which baffles the fyftem of phyfical aid, and difunites the
immaterial foul frem the corruptible body. In all difeafes, the Moon
is more particularly to be regarded, fince her action upon the body is
moft fenfibly felt, and her contiguous pofition brings her more fre-
quently into contact with malignant rays. I fhall therefore demonftrate
the various configurations, under which fhe tends to deftroy the native’s
health of life, if afflitied by the malefic rays of Saturn or Mars, in-his
-figure.of birth. ,


If the Moon in Aries be afflifted by the conjunction, quartile, or
oppofition, of Saturn, the native will be remarkably fubject to coughs
and colds, impoftumes in the head, weaknefs in the eyes, diftillations
of rheum in the breaft, fwellings in the throat, loathings in the fto-
mach, with irregular and profufe perfpiration. But if the affliction be
by the conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of Mars, it caufes diforders
‘of the brain, violent fevers, reftle{inefs, inflammations of the liver, and
phrenzy. If in Leo the Moon be afflifted by the evil rays of Saturn,
it produces a violent fever, putrefaction of the blood, heat and drinefs
in the ftomach, with laffitude, and debility. But, if the difeafe comes
by the affliction of Mars, ftagnation of the blood, lofs of appetite,
phrenzy, the putrid or fpotted fever, will be the confequence. If
the Moon be thus configurated with Saturn in Sagittarius, it produces
a defluxion of*thin, fharp, and fubtle, humours, gives pain in the limbs
‘and joints, with heat and {welling in the extremities, refulting from
the adverfe effects of heat andcold. But, if the affliction comes by Mars,
it will produce violent ficknefs at ftomach, intermittent fever, pains in
the reins and loins, inward and outward piles, and the fiftula. Thefe
difeafes are produced by the maletic afpects of Saturn and Mars with
the Moon, in the fiery triplicity.


If the Moon be afflicted in Taurus, by the quartile, oppofition, or
conjunction, of Saturn, it indicates flow fevers, proceeding from burnt


No. 36. 8R choler ;


728 A NUE SE US TRA aT Sv


choler; and obftrutions of the arteries, with inflammation of the whole
body, and exulceration of the lungs.. But, if the diforder proceeds from.
the quartile, eppofition, or conjunction, of Mars, it will rife from a
fuper-abundance of foul blood, inducing various obf{truGtions of the body,
inflammationg of the neck and throat, pains in the head and limbs, with
watchfulnefs, and convulfive fpafms. If in Virgo the Moon be thus
afflicted of Saturn, it occafions crudities and indigeftions of the {tomach,
tough phlegm, obftructions of the bowels and inteftines, head-ach,
pleurify, and heat of urine. But, if the affliction be by Mars, it de-
notes an exulceration of the inteftines, bloody flux, putrid fever,
loathing, retching, and violent ficknefs of the ftomach. If in Capri-
corn the Moon be afflicted by Saturn, it fhews fubtle, cold, and thin,
diftillations, pains and obftructions in. the neck and breaft, inflamma-
tions of the lungs, with difficulty of breathing. But, if the Moon in
Capricorn be affliéted by Mars, it prefages illnefs arifing from bad digef-
tion, or from fome choleric or acrid humour in the ftomach. It may
likewife produce a fever of the nerves, ulcerations of the throat, and
fluxes of the f{tomach and belly. Thefe are the afflictions peculiar to the
Moon in the earthy triplicity, when impeded by the malefic rays of
Saturn and Mars. :


In the airy triplicity, if the Moon in Gemini be afflicted by the con-
junction, quartile, or oppofition, of Saturn, it inclines the native to a
confumption, to diforders of the fpleen, wearinefs, watchings, with
flow fevers, pains all over the body, particularly in the joints and ar-
teries. But if the affliGion be by the malefic configurations of Mars in
Gemini, it produces violent fevers, dangerous obftructions of the blood
and juices, irregular pulfe, with ficknefs and loathing. If in Libra the
Moon be afflicted by Saturn, it gives difeafes of the breaft and ftomach,
pain in the head, want of appetite, loathing of food, nocturnal fevers,
hoarfenefs, coughs, and diltillations of foul humours. But, if the evil ir-
radiations are from Mars in Libra, it occafions a {uper-abundance of blood,
inclines to putrid fevers, breakings out, or inflammations of the whole
body. If the Moon in Aquaries be afflicted by Saturn, it occafions
Janguor, depreflion of f{pirits, nervous affections, watchfulnefs, and an
univerfal relaxation of the nervous fyftem. If the affliction come by the
coil afpects of Mars in Aquaries, it portends difeafes which arife from
hot and fharp humours engendered in the ftomach and bowels, and
‘eventually produces agues, intermittent fevers, exulceration of the


liver, and fometimes mortification of the bowels. Thefe are efpecially
under the airy triplicity.


_In the watery triplicity, the Moon afflicted in Cancer, by the quar.
tile, oppofition, or conjunction, of Saturn, indicates diforders refulting
' from


@.FeriA § WZ RGOLL 1.0 .G7Y.- 4729.


from: violent colds, to which the native will be remarkably fubje@; it
will likewife occafion diftillations from the breaft and lungs, moift ca-
tarrhs, althma, hoarfenefs, and obftructions of the bowels. But, if the
afflictions arife from the malignant configurations of Mars, it gives fan-
guine complaints, hard tough phlegm in the ftomach, pains in the head,
retching, ficknefs of the ftomach, and putrid fever. If the Moon in
Scorpio be afflicted by Saturn, it forefhews ulcerations in the legs and
thighs, fiftula, the piles in ano, with painful furpreflion of urine by
{tone or gravel. But, if the affliction be of Mars in Scorpio, it fhews -
violent pains in the head, with ulcerations or impoftumes ; as it likewife
gives the hemorrhoids, meafles, {mall-pox, {potted fever, thruth, chick-
en-pox, boils, and all bodily irruptions. If the Moon in Pifces be af-
fli€ted by Saturn, it produces diftillations of cold rheum, flow fevers,
pains of the back and loins, mortification of the bowels, and {peedy
death. But, if the evil come by the affliction of Mars in Pifces, it fhews
an abundance of grofs humours, violent irruptions in different parts of
the body, fudden fevers, epilepfy, ftagnation of the blood, fainting fits,
and apoplexy.


Thus I have ftated, in as brief a manner as poflible, the various dif-
eafes produced by the Moon in each of the twelve figns, when impreg-
nated with the malefic afpects of Saturn or Mars ; and here let it-be
underftood, that nearly the fame effects are produced by the quartile,
oppofition, or conjunction, of Mercury with the Moon, as by the fore-
going configurations with Saturn, and the fame by the malefic irradia-
tions of the Sun with the Moon, as refult from the evil influences of
Mars. I fhall now point out the particular diforders occafioned by
the coil afpect of: Saturn and Mars with the Sun.


If the Sun-be afflicted by the quartile or oppofition of Saturn in fiery
figns, he produces the megrim, .laflitude of the body, quartan agues, -
and confumptions. In earthy figns, cholics, cancerous tumours, rheu-
matifm, and gout in all parts of the body. In airy figns, madnefs, phren-
zy-fevers, {plenetic melancholy, and violent nervous fpafms. In watery.
figns, agues of al] forts, fcurvy, leprofy, king’s evil, and gout.


If the Sun be afflitted by the quartile or oppofition of Jupiter in fiery
figns, it-produces fevers, pains in the breaft, and ulcers of the liver
and lungs. In earthy figns, the phthyfic, catarrhs, colds, coughs, hoarfe-
nefs, black jaundice, and inveterate cholic. In airy figns, corruption
of blood, inflammation of the lungs, fcurvy, and debility in the reins.
In watery figns, {mall-pox, meafles, ficknefs of the ftomach, and inter- -
mittent fevers.


3 If


430 ANIULE US TRAA RaW


If the Sun be afflied by the quartile or oppofition of Mars in fiery
figns, it denotes putridity of. blood, violent fevers, fainting fits, and
epilepfy. In earthy figns, the yellow jaundice, quinfeys, and choleric
tumours in the throat, ague and fever. In airy figns, furfeits, inflamma-
tions of the blood,. ftone and gravel, weaknefs of the back and reins,
debility, and impotency. In watery figns, the dropfy, feurvy, .pleurify,
obftructions of the:lungs, diabetes, and {tone in the bladder. »


The Sun, directed to his‘own quartile in any nativity, gives fainting
fits, tremors, and palpitation of the heart’; whattoever be his fignifica-
tion in the radix, he will, phyfically confidered, be the author of flow
fevers, and always incline the native to difeafe. But, if he be afflicted by
the quartile or oppofition of Venus in fiery figns, it will produce pains
in the back, bowels, and reins, fluxes of the belly, tending to’a con-
firmed dyfentery. If in earthy figns, phlegmatic tumours, and cold
defluxions of the breaft and lungs, In airy figns, putrefaction of blood,
running of the reins, pains in the fcrotum, and incurable frigidity. In
watery figns, obftructions of the ftomach, fmall-pox, meafles, dropfy,
rheumatifm, and gout,


If the Sun be afflicted by Mercury, in fiery figns, he gives the phrenzy,
iliac: paflion, and impofthumes in the head. In earthy figns, melan-
choly, king’s evil, fciatica, leprofy, and:gout. In airy figns, pains of the ©
head and ftomach, bilious cholic, {tranguary, and gravel in the reins.
In watery figns, quotidian and tertian agues, flow fevers, defluxions of
the brain, fainting fits, and dropfy. But, if the Sun be afflicted by the
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the Moon in fiery figns, it occa-
fions the falling ficknefs, convulfions, vertigo, and violent head-ach.
If in earthy figns, the bloody flux, hemorrhoids, fiftula, and gravel in
the kidneys. If in watery figns, the dropfy, epilepfy, fits of the mo-
ther, obftructions in the bladder, debility in the reins, and crude femen.
If in airy figns, corruption of blood, violent cholic, pains, of the {tomach
and bowels, {curvy, leprofy, and tumours in the feet or legs.


Difeafes produced by the Part of Fortune, when Hileg or Giver of Life, and
. afflicted by the Anareta, or Kiling Planet.


If the part of fortune be in quartile or oppofition of Satufn, it
brings fevers, afthmas, and confumptions. If in quartile or oppofition
of Jupiter, putrefaction of blood, furfeits, fcurvy, and leprofy. If in quar-
tile or oppofition of Mars, it gives violent fevers, ulcers, and fore legs.
If in quartile or oppofition of the Sun, dead palfy, ftagnation of blood,
and epilepfy. If in quartile or oppofition of Venus, obftruétions of the

ie bowels,


SFTASHTrR OUAG Ys. 731


bowels and weaknefs of the reins. If in quartile or oppofition of Mer-
cary, diforders of the brain, head-achs,: and {pafms. If in quartile. or
oppofition of the Moon, : the native will be afflicted with the falling fick-
nefs, dropfy, or, diabetes... And here let it be particularly renders Hare;

that whatever part of the body the part of fortune governs, it will fuffer
more fenfibly andacutely than any other part, in proportion to the na-~
ture and quality of the direQion under which it operates. If the direc:

tion falls in a‘fign of the fame nature with the promittor, the difeafe is
more. remifs ; but on, the contrary,. the more extreme.


Di jah priced by the Afvendant when: Hike, or Giver of Life, and seins
fucied by the Anareta, or de dete 2 Planet.


If the afcendant be afliéted by the quartile or oppofition of Saturn, in
fiery. figns, .it-occafions, diftillations of melancholy humours ; but, if’ in
earthy “figns,, confumptions, agues, obitructions of the. terms, afthma,
and whooping. cough. If in airy figns, furfeits, ficknefs of ftomach, and
bilious cholic. Ifa watery figns, the feurvy, gravel and dtone, leprofy,
and gout. Ifthe af{cendant be afflicted, by the quartile,or oppofition of
Jupiter, i in fiery figns, it brings putrid fevers, pleurifies, and inflammations,
in thofe.parts of, the body reprefented by that fign in which the direc
tion falls, . If in,earthy figns, it produces melancholy, diforders of the
{pleen, and cholic. , If in airy figns, univerfal corruption of |the blood,
{mall- *POwe meailes, | and feuryy. If in eater y figns, luapodivigned of the


oppeation eA: 4.) or in “Rery figs it coreupts, pa blood, induces yio-=
lent phrenetic fevers, and fea to madnefs. Ifin earthy figns, the cho-
lic, rheumatifmm, and gout.,..Jfin airy figngs inflammationsjof the blood,
ftone and. gravel, and, oweaknefs, in the, reins.; If in, watery figns, the
f{mall-pox, meatfles, and dropfy. - df, the afcendant, be affliQed) by the quars
tile or; oppofition of. the.Sun, in fiery fiens, ait gives continual fevers,
violent. head-achs,, and. weaknefs of fight. olf.in earthy! figns, {chirrous
tumours in the, neck, obftructions.. in the jhowels, .ending, in mortificas
tion. ' If i ip, airy: figns,. the thruth, chicken; apex» flow fevers, weaknefs
in the.xeins, and) pains in.the back, If in watery, figns, the'king’s evil,
leprofy, and feurvy. df the. afcendant, be afflicted by the;quartile or op-
pofition, of Venus, .in fiery. figns, it giwes jafthimatic coughs, and hot de-
fluxions of rheum, . If i in earthy figns,. obftructions of the blood, and
hard, painful {wellings: Ifin airy digns,: diforders of ;the. womb, gleets,
and simpoetency,... [fan watery, figns, the,dropfy, ‘diabetes, or dy fentery.
If the, afcendant, be aitlicted, by, the quartile, or eppalition of |Mercusy,
in, fiery-figns, -it-produces catarrhs, confumptions, wvertigoes, and: phren~
ZYo»eghf in earthy figns, melancholy, fevers in the head, and quotidian
No. 37. 8 L agues,


232 AW PDL U SITEREAAT TO N


agues. If-in airy figns, the rheumatic gout, -difeafes of the back and
reins, and obftructions of the bowels. If:in watery figns, fits of the
mother, whooping cough, and*ftone in the bladder. If the afcendant be
afflicted by the. quartile or oppofition of the Moon, in fiery figns, fhe
brings the vertigo, megrim, falling ficknefs, and apoplexy. If in
earthy figns, catarrhs, -palfy, putrefied blood, and obftruCtions of the
terms. If in airy figns, furfeits, ficknefs-of ftomach, fmall-pox, and
meafles. If.in watery figns, fcurvy, dropfy, and difeafes in the womb
and bladder. And:thus, whenever-the afcendant is afflicted by the male-
fic rays of any promittor, the offending humour will abound according
to the.nature of that fign or triplicity wherein the afpects fall; if in fiery
figns, choler; in earthy, melancholy; in.airy, putrefaction of blood; in
<watery,.corruption of the whole animal juices, _


‘Saturn‘in conjun¢tion, quartile, or oppofition, of Jupiter, pofited with -
the lord of the afcendant, or in the fixth houfe, induces diforders in the
blood, melancholy, and gives pains and coldnefs inthe extremities. In
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, with Mars, he gives the yellow
jaundice, quartan agues, the ftone, gravel, gout, and rheumatifm. ‘In
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the Sun, he gives nervous affec-
tions, deep melancholy, confumptions, and fainting fits. In conjunc~
tion, quartile, or oppofition, of Venus, he gives the green ficknefs, fevers,
and quotidian agues. In conjunétion, quartile, or oppofition, of Mer-
cury, he gives ‘melancholy madnefs, waiting of the brain, and confump-
tions. Inconjunction, quartile, or oppofition,- of the Moon, he gives
the epilepfy, convulfions, and hytteric fits.


If Jupiter*be-in-conjunétion, quartile, or oppofition, of Mars, he brings
putrid fevers, furfeits, inflammation of .the lungs, and putrefaction
of blood. If he be in conjunction or evil afpe@t with the Sun, he
gives the pleurify, meafles, fmall-pox, and malignant fevers. In con-
junction, quartile, or oppofition, of Venus, he gives putrid fevers, mor-
tification in the bowels, and univerfal corruption and ftagnation of the
blood and juices. In conjunétion, quartile, or oppofition, of Mercury,
he gives defluxions of the breaft and lungs, fluxes, and immoderate head-
achs. In conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the Moon, he gives
_the pleurify, bilious cholic, ficknefs of ftomach, and fore throat. If
Mars be in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of the Sun, it gives a
violent burning fever, the tertian ague, carbuncles, and foul tumours.
If Mars be in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of Venus, it produces
king’s evil, fcurvy, diforders of the back, reins, and womb. If in con-
junction, quartile, or oppofition, of Mercury, it induces madnefs, ii

evers,


GET AL SATE RE OTL OG Yi 733


fevers, and watchfulnefs. If in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, of
the Moon, it gives the dead palfy, epilepfy, or convulfion fits. If the
Sun be in conjunction or evil afpect with Venus, it produces fevers,
meafles, {mall pox, and other cutaneous diforders. If the Sun be in
conjundtion or evil afpec&t with Mercury, it brings melancholy, con-
fumptions, and weaknefs of the nervous fyftem. © If in conjunction,
quartile, or oppofition, of the Moon, it gives rheums, defluxions of the
lungs, lamenefs, agues, and putrefaction of blood, Venus in conjunc~
tion or evil afpect of Mercury, when they are fignificators of the difeafe,
give lamenefs, fcurvy, or iliac paffion. In conjunction, quartile, or op-
pofition, of the Moon, fhe induces the palfy, numbnefs of the extremi-
ties, cramps, and rheumatifm. Mercury in conjunction, quartile, or
oppofition, of the Moon, generally produces the falling ficknefs, and va-
rious difternpers of the brain.


To judge accurately of the natural force of a difeafe, great regard
muft be had to the figns wherein the fignificators of the difeafe are
pofited, both as to their nature and quality; for earthy figns denote
colder difeafes than airy, and fiery figns hotter and drier difeafes than
watery. And hence diforders might with eafe be fought:out, by duly
confidering the nature of the figns, the dignity of the configurating
planets, and the quality of the houfes in which they are pofited.. In this
ipeculation it.muft be always remembered, that the houfes of heaven
which denote difeafes, are the fixth, twelfth, eighth, and feventh; and
particular regard muft be had to the lords of thofe houfes, as well as. to
the planets pofited therein, in acute difeafes; and to the Sun and lord of
the afcendant in chronic. But the fixth houfe, and its lord with
the planets pofited therein, beft defcribe the difeafe, particularly when
they afflict either of the luminaries, or the lord of the afcendant. The
configurations of the Moon are in a particular manner to be noticed ;
for, in the conftitution of difeafes, fhe tranflates the nature of one planet
to that of another.; the which, if well examined, with the ftate and
quality of that planet whofe virtue fhe tranflates, cannot fail to difcover
to us the true caufe of the ficknefs or difeafe with which the native is
afflicted. For, according to the fign the Moon is in, to the nature of
that planet to which fhe applies, and to the fign that planet is in, fo the
difeafe fhall correfpond in nature and quality to that planet, whether
it be afortune or an infortune, mafculine or feminine, nocturnal or di-
urna], hot or cold, dry or moift ; and the fame fhall be reprefented of the
temperature, part of the body, and difeafe, he induces; and whether he
be angular, fuccedent, or cadent; whatever part of the body he governs


3 by


734 A Ny BlolL:W)SsPTReAaT 1 ON


by the houfe he is in, whether he be dire or retrograde, fwift or flow,
oriental or occidental, combuft or free, precifely fo fhall the ftrength
and duration of the malady be. And in this enquiry it will become
us to diftinguifth whether the affliction be effential or accidental... The
parts of the body effentially afflicted are governed by the fign upon
the afcendant, the cufp of the fixth houfe, and the Moon; thofe acci-.
dentally afflicted are governed by the lord of the afcendant, the lord of
the fixth, and the Moon; and by the figns in which they are pofited,
both according to fimple and compound fignification. The difference
between the effential and accidental affliction is this : the one de-
monitrates where the root of the difeafe lodges, and where the chief
and real affliction is feated ; whilft the other thews the fympathetic
affliction of the component parts, which, though in fact really well,
yet fuffer an acute and fenfible pain, by reafon of the extremity of the
diftemper which effentially or radically affi€ts fome other part. For ex-
ample, when one burns his-hand, that is the member or part effentially
vitiated ; but, by reafon of the extremity of the pain, the whole arm be-~
comes inflamed: thus the difeafe accidentally affeis the ‘whole arm,
but it is effentially feated only in the burned hand: ‘The fame reafoning
holds good in all cafes generally ; but particularly we fay, that Saturn
in the beginning of Cancer produces pain inthe left fide, as though pierced
with an awl]; in Leo he afflias the heart and back ;-in Virgo, theheadand .
bowels; in Scorpio, the hips and reins, ‘and caufeth difficulty in mak-
ing water. So Mars, lord of the fixth, with Aries or Scorpio on the
afcendant, afflicts thehead; though this pofition frequently gives pain in‘all
parts of the human body, and produces an univerfal breaking out, in
biles, blotches, ulcers, itch, {mall-pox, meafles, or the like. ‘But, if
Mars,in this cafe be pofited in «Leo, he produces pains in the ‘back’;
in Virgo, inflammations of the lungs ; in Libra, pains in the back and
reins ; but, ifshe be lord of the fixth in Scorpio, he gives diforders of
the womb and bladder. }


If the lord of tbedixth houfe be afflicted in adiurnal fign, the difeafe will
appear in. the ;fore-part of theibody, as, inthe face, breatt, or belly; but,’
if be be afflicted in a nocturnal fign, the feat of the difeafe will be either
in the back or internal parts of the body; and this will hold good, whether
the fignificator be above or under the earth. If the lord: of the ‘fixth
houfe be afflicted above the:earth, and in a diurnal fign, the ficknefs falls
in the right-fide; but, ifthe be under theiearth, and inva noéturnal ign,’
it falls in the left fide. Mafculine planets alfo affi@ the right fide of
the body, and feminine the left, according to the. {pecific:parts ‘of the
body which they refpectively govern ; but always remember, that a


male-


OF T AASAT IR #OULMO.! GL -Y% 738


malefic flar in the afcendant, or in oppofition to it, in what fign foever it
be pofited, always afflicis the head. ‘The {pecific humours and virtues
inftilled re{pettively by the planets, abftractedly confidered, muft like-
wife be regarded, in proportion to the flrength of their rays, when fig-
nificators of difeafe. ‘Thus Satarn of himfelf produces thick, grofs,
melancholy, and fuperfluous, phlegm ; and rules the receptive virtue
which refts in-the body and fpleen.;.and hath this natural energy doubly
augmented, when pofited in Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn. Jupiter’s
natural influence is heat, blood, and wind ; therefore his virtue is cre-
icent, growing and quickening ; and is feated in the liver. He governs
the digeitive faculty in man, and hath his power much augmented
when pofited in Gemini, Libra, or Aquaries.. The humour produced
by Mars is hot, fharp, and choleric; he therefore induces anger, and
governs the attractive quality in man, having his power much increafed
when in Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius. The Sun ingenders yellow choler,
hot and dry ; he governs the vital faculty, and is the beginning of life
and motion... His action is upon the heart ; and with Mars he rules the
attractive quality, having his power greatly augmented in Aries, Leo,
and Sagittarius. .Venus produces.thin phlegm, cold and moift, governs
and excites the libidinous appetite, and with’ Mars and the Sun pre-
~ fides over the attractive quality, having ‘her greateft energy in Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius. © Mercury engenders thin melancholy, hot and
dry, hath the virtue imaginative and cogitative, and difpofes the: animal
virtue refting in’ the. brain.’ The Moon ‘produces grofs, raw, crude,
phlegm, prefides over the natural virtue refting in the liver, and governs
the expulfive faculty, having her greateft power and influence in Cancer,
Scorpio, or Pifces. Ro


From thefe obfervations we are led to deduce, that, whenithe planets
in their effential dignities are pofited at the ‘fame time in ‘any of the
above figns, the operation of the planet fo effentially dignified will fo
far exceed the influence of all the other ftars, as to render its. tempera-
ment and quality too powerful’in the .conftitution of the native, and to
produce fuch diforders as are the natural confequence. For example,
if Jupiter be thus dignified in Gemini, the digeftive faculty will be
{trong ; or, if Saturn be in Cancer, the native will have the flux, and
therefore folid food and aftringent liquors would: be naturally’ recom-
mended. ‘The fame doctrine holds in every other complaint which
muft be produced by the fuper-abundance of fome one of the four qua-
lities ;| and, when the effential caufeiof complaint is once found,.a remedy
may be’ eafily adminiftered..- The following table: conveys at one view,
according to the pofition of the ‘afHicting' planet, what part of the body
is aggrieved, M1 Det sen OW ged

No. 37. | | (o8sr THE


336 A NDOLOL 1UCS ST IRGAAT 2.0 N


To point out the ufe of the above table, let us fuppofe a native to fall
fick when his fignificator is in Aries, and fuppofe ‘his fignificator to be
Jupiter ; look in the top column -for Jupiter, and in the firft column
on the left hand for Aries, and in the common angle of mecting you
will find Leo and. Taurus, which thew he is afflided at the heart, and hath,
fome evil fenfation in his throat, &c.-for every planet in his own houfe
rules the head ; in the fecond fign from his own houfe, the neck and
throat ; in the third, the arms and fhoulders ; and foon, as ftated in every
common almana¢c., Having thus gone through the moft material ob-
fervations neceflary to-form -a right underftanding of ficknefs in any na-
tivity, I fhall now proceed to examine the» fixth houfe, or houfe
of ficknefs, in this geniture. The fixth houfe, we find, is govern-
ed by the Sun, Mars, and Mercury... Mars inthis figure-is. lord of the
afcendant, as well as lord of} the faxth. houfe, and therefore induces in
the native a perfect indifference as to the care of his owa health... Mars,
being pofited in an earthy-fign, inclines him to choler; while the Sun
in the fxth, and Mercury in fextile of Saturn, ina fixed fign, produce
chronic difeafes, eventually inclining to palfy ; together with depref-
fion of fpirits, and habitual melancholy... This is farther declared by
the oppofition of Saturn: to the Part-of Fortune, who in this figure is
Hileg, or giver of life. If therefore we examine, by the foregoing
rules, what part.of the:native’s body fhall-be moft fenfibly afflicted by
this accidental pofition of the planets, we fhall find him remarkably fub-.
je&t to’ pains in the head from melancholy, ftrumas in the throat, ach-

ing


OF ASTROLOGY. 437


_ img pains in the joints, defects in the ears, with tremors and palpita-
tions of the heart. ‘The fignificators being wholly in the fiery, earthy,
and airy, triplicities, denote likewife that the native fhall be very fubject
to fevers ; but, to difcover when thefe feveral maladies fhall befal him,
we muft direct the feveral fignificators to their promittors, which we
fhall prefently demonftrate in the directions, and thereby prove how ex-
aétly the feveral diforders with which Mr. Witchell was, during life,
afflicted, correfponded: with the fignificators in his nativity.


The fixth houfe alfo bears relation to fervants, and points out how we
may be affected by them. Their fignificators are the planets pofited in the
fixth, with the lord thereof, and the Moon. In this figure'we find the
Sun and Mercury are in the fixth houfe ; and, as the Sun is lord of the
tenth, the houfe of honour and preferment, and in the fign of his exal-
tation, it denotes that the native fhould have very ‘profitable fervants ;
and, finding Mercury in reception of Mars, it indicates that thofe placed:
in a fubordinate capacity under him fhould be diligent, active, and’
vigilant in his fervice. In fhort, I find no injury likely to arife to him
by means of domeftics, except it be from females, and that no way
material, fince it arifes only from the quartile of the Moon to the fixth
houfe,. ina feminine fign. The circumftances of the natives’s life fully


confirmed this opinion.
CONSIDERATIONS arifing from the SEVENTH! HOUSE.


From this houfe we derive aftral information concerning the native’s
intercourfe with women, whether he fhall marry, or lead a life of celi-
bacy ; whether he fhall indulge in'the delectable enjoyments of the fof-
ter fex, or whether the cold and frigid conformation of his nature fhall,


give him an averfion to' women.


To determine the marriages of men; we muft confult their principal
fignificators, which are Venus and the Moon,.the feventh houfe, the
lord thereof, and the’ planets pofited therein... But, to determine the
marriages of women, we muft particularly regard the Sun and Mars, the
feventh houfe, and the planet or planets pofited therein, To afcer-
tain whether the native will marry or not, requires a minute infpection
of the nativity; for, if Saturn be more elevated than Venus or the Moon,
than Mars or the Sun, or ftronger in dignity than all of them, the
native will have a natural averfion to a married ftate, particularly if no
‘ benefic planet: colleéts’ his rays, and conduces thereby to a more com-,


municative and active fpirit ; for Saturn,. being the author of habitual
: 3 foli-


38 ANY BLOL.US TR AT EQN


folitarinefs; and, when fo pofited, the producer of cold, crude, and frigid,
humour, takes. away that inftinctive affection of the mind, and that
generous warmth, of the paffions, which nature ordained to {tir up
and ftimulate the fenfitive faculty to the production of its like, When
Saturn or Mars are found in afpe& with Venus or the Moon, and in no.
good configuration either with the Sun, Jupiter, or Mercury, and are
at the fame time weak or peregrine, it) argues that the native fhall lead
a gay and lafcivious life, indulging too freely in the ufe of women,, be-
fore he will engage in matrimony. If thefe fignificators are in barren
figns, or in cadent houfes, and dignified in Leo or ‘Taurus, or the Moon
in Scorpio, in quartile or oppofition of Saturn ; or if the Moon be in
conjunction of the Sun in Capricorn, , Aquaries,. or Libra, and in op-~
pofition to Saturn, the perfon, born under fuch configurations will never
marry. And again, the oppofition or quartile of Venus and. Saturn -
with the Moon, in a barren fign, or in a cadent houfe, argues much
againft a married:life. » But where we find the Moon and Venus in male
nativities,/ or the Sun,and Mars in thofe of women, are pofited in fruit-
ful figns, and the ,lord of the feyenth houfe fortunate, or.a benevolent
planet in that houfe, or the fignificators of marriage fituated in good
parts of the figure, or a reception between the lord of the feventh and
firft houfes, ora goodafpett between any of the principal fignificators,
we may then fafely declare the native will not marry, but is well qua-
lified to render that ftate truly blifsful and happy.


But, to know whether matrimony will be contracted with eafe, 7. ¢.
without much trouble, anxiety, or difappointment, obferve whether
Saturn and Mars behold each other by an oppofition out of the firft or
feventh houfes, or whether Venus be pofited in Leo or Scorpio, in evil
afpect with Mars, or whether Mars tranfits the cufp of the feventh houfein
Capricorn, Virgo, or Taurus; for in any of thefe cafes the native will find
great difficulty and embarrafimentsin purfuing the object of his affetion;
and, whenever matrimony takes place, it will be ona fudden. If, on
the contrary, we find the fignificators of marriage well beheld by bene-
fic ftars, {trong and in good afpect to Saturn and Mars, and: the lord of
the feventh applying to the lord of the afcendant, matrimony will be ob-
tained with eafe. ‘Che number of wives or hufbands the native fhall
have is declared by the application. of the Moon in men’s. nativities,
and by the application of the Sun in thofe of women, either in body or
afpect ; for, if the Moon or Sun be joined with, or apply to, but one planet,
it denotes but one wife or hufband ; except thofe fignificators chance
to be pofited in watery figns, and then the number is doubled. « Pto-
lomy likewife faith, that, if the Moon be ina fign of one form, and


3 apply


otpT A STR OLOGY: 739


apply. to one planet, it declares one wife; but if in a bicorporeal fign,
applying to many planets, many wives. But, if none of thefe configu-
rations are found, examine how many planets are direct, and free from
combuftion, except fuch as are in their effential dignities, and conftituted
between the mid-heaven and the planet Venus, if Venus be fituated iff
the infant oriental quarter, and fo many wives or hufbands fhall the
native have. But, 1f in the figure of birth no fuch are found, ‘then ob-
ferve how many planets behold the lord of the feventh houfe with
partile afpedt, whether they be retrograde or combuft, and from thence
determine the number of wives. ‘Thefe obfervations, according to the
long-eftablifhed evidence of caufes and effects, will in all cafes enable us
to determine this important incident of life, where no oppofite teftimo-
niés are found in the figure of birth to contradi@t them. . We fhall now
apply thefe matrimonial configurations in the elucidation of that fubjectin
the prefent nativity. “The Moon and Venus are Mr. Witchell’s fignifica-
tors of marriage. ‘The Moon is not in a barren fign, nor-afflicted by any
malefic ftar,*nor is fhe pofited in the fixth, ninth, twelfth, or eighth,
houfes of the figure. Again, fhe is not combuft of the Sun, nor under any
other evil influence. It therefore teftifies a natural inclination in the
native of entering intoa marriage ftate. This judgment is confiderably
augmented by the Jord of the feventh, viz. Mars, being in an exact fef-
quiquadrate of the Moon; and Venus being at the fame time in a fruit-
ful fign, in reception of Jupiter, produces a ftrong teftimony of radical
heat, amorous defires in the native, to {timulate him to the contra; |
but Venus being in oppofition to Mars declares he fhould fuffer great
perplexity and difappointments in his matrimonial engagement, before it |


fhould abfolutely take place.


The time when his marriage fhould be compleated, is determined by
the motion of the fignificators ; and that motion, or fpecial time, is
afcertained, by directing the Moon, or Venus, to a-fextile, trine, or
conjunction, of the feventh or firft houfes ; or by directing the mid-
heaven tothe conjunction, fextile, or trine, of Venus, or the Moon; or
by directing the Sun to the fextile, quartile, or trine, of the Moon and
Venus ; or by directing the Moon to the fextile, quartile, trine, or op-
pofition, of the Sun or Mars; but in this cafe it maft be particularly ob-
ferved, that if marriage is brought up by a quartile or oppofition of the
Sun or Mars, according to which the Moon {hall be directed, they mutt
be in the terms either of Jupiter or Venus, or the direttion will be .
of no force. Any of the above afpeéts thus diteéted, or the Sun,
Moon, mid-heaven, or lord of the afcendant, directed to the fextile
or trine of the lord of the feventh houfe, will bring ap the time of

No. 37- ‘ . 8 U mar-


74 AN 23D (Geu; S$ Tun aw TiO. N


marriage, as the cafe and configurations in the genethliacal figure fhall
happen to be, ‘The directions that gave marriage to this native, were
the Moon to the fextile of the afcendant, andtrine of the feventh houfe,
followed by Mars to the midheaven, the Sun to the feventh, and the
Moon to the fextile of the Sun, all which were reafonably fufficient to
ftir up ‘the native’s mind to the completion of the marriage-contrad,
and which accordingly took place, in that exact order and point of time
defcribed by the aforefaid dire€tions, as will be hereafter more fully
proved and explained.


As to the number of wives, if we examine the Moon by the rules
already given, we fhall find the native will have but one. The Moon,
in this nativity, applies but to one planet, while fhe is in the fign Ca-
pricorn, and that planet is Mercury, who is.in reception of Mars, lord
‘of the feventh houfe, and therefore muft have pre-eminence in the de-
{cription of the wife, who was a perfon of a tallifh ftature, fair complex-
jon, light brown hair, fharp, witty, and ingenious, and of a fanguine
choleric difpofition, precifely as the fignificators imply.


The reafon Jupiter is not admitted in teftimony of a fecond wife, is
‘becaufe, according to his latitude, he is out of Taurus, and is verging
into the fign Gemini; and therefore the Moon cannot be faid to apply
‘to him while fhe is pofited in the fign Capricorn ; a diftinétion that ~
-every artift muft carefully make, or his-labours will be often vain, and
his judgment founded in error. Modern practitioners have in general
‘paid little or no attention to the latitude of the ftars, a thing of the
‘utmoft importance, and hence the fuppofed uncertainty and difgrace that
‘have been brought upon this department of the fcience of Aftronomy.
As to the agreement of the native and his wife, 1 thall only take notice,
that Marsiin oppofition of Venus muft create occafional animofity ; but,”
on what account, I fhall leave the attentive reader to difcover by the
rules and aphorifins I have already laid down for the illuftration of this
fubject.


We will now examine, according to the pofition of thefe afpets,
‘whether the native, or his wife, -fhall live the longeft. Wefind, firft,
that the Moon is much better fortified than Mercury, the planet to which
fhe applies; and which is therefore the fignificator of the wife. Se-
-condly, Venus is afflicted by an oppofition of Mars. Thirdly, Saturn,
a malefic planet, is in the fourth houfe,; which three-fold cord ties the
wife of the native down, according to natural caufes, to certain death
before her hufband.; and proves, by the never-ceafing laws of .motion,

$% the


O°vFrT A'S T RO: D-0:G.Y. F41


ithe certain and inevitable effect of celeftial bodies over the terreftial; and
_ that all the operations of nature are regularly produced by caufes and
effects.


Public enemies ‘being alfo difcovered by the configurations in the’
feventh houfe, I -thall proceed to note them. Venus in this cafe, is to
be confidered the principal fignificator becaufe fhe claims almoft the en-
tire rule of the feventh and twelfth houfes ; and therefore declares, as the
falls in a feminine fign, and being herfelf a feminine planet, that women
in general hall be the moft dangerous enemies of this native; at Jeatt,
fuch as fhall eventually do him the greateft injury. ‘To.confirm this it
may be noted, that Venus is well dignified in Pifces, a -watery fign,
which declares a female fhall be his avowed enemy; but Mars being in
reception of Mercury, and in afpect with the Moon, denotes that he will
_ eventually get the better of this, and every other oppofition, to his fuc-
cefsand preterment through life; though he does not appear likely to be
troubled with many powerful.or dangerous opponents. :


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the EIGHTH HOUSE,


The eighth houfe has fignification of death, and of preferments, and
advantages by death, as:hath been fully explained in page 165. But let
it be remembered, that this houfe is not to be direéted for death, with-
out it.contains the anareta or killing ftar, any more than the fixth or
twelfth houfes.; death arifing from other .caufes than merely the pofition
or tranfiting cf the cufps of houfes, as we have abundantly fhewn in
page 465. But this houfe, being under the dominion of the malefic
planets, participates moftly of the quality of death, and hath therefore
been affigned to this particular enquiry, which, indeed, is of the lat
importance.


The firft thing-taught in our fchools, and the primary faét impreffed
upon our minds, the moment we attain the maturity of reafon, is the
inevitable deftiny of our nature, that we muft once die, aitheme that few
men love to hear, or to dwell upon, although it.is the exprefs term of
their exiftence. How,abfurd it is then, that we thould inceflantly labour
to put off all thoughts of fuch an event, until the very moment it
approaches, and petrifies us with its hafty fummons! How cowardly,
how pufillanimous, that heart, which.dares not aneet a fentence with calm-
nefs and fortitude, which no power can remit, nor:no entreaties pro
long, even for amoment! It is, d.think, much to be lamented, that
thofe pious perfons, who formed the liturgy of the Chriftian i

i en


742 AND Ga tog Te a THw N


fion into the morning and evening fervice, did not incorporate fo much
of that moft admirable Epiftle of Paul to the Corinthians \as relates
to death and immortality ; that kings might daily here the true extent of
their dominion—that princes might know the termination of. their
fplendour—that men in affluence might oftener recolleét the level of the
grave—that their perfecuted and opprefied fellow- mortals might be oftener
confoled under the certain termination of their fufferings, and of the
joyful certainty of finking into that repofe from whence they never
thall awake—but to a better world. Happy, indeed, are thofe, who
can indulge in fuch fervent hopes, and whofe heroic fouls can trace the
dreary manfions of the dead, with no other emotions’ than the grandeur
of the fubject and the folemnity of the event muftinaturally furnith to
the moft obdurate mind! ‘To fuch alone I dedicate my remarks upon
_ thofe certain caufes of death, which, being ingrafted in-our nature‘in
the moments of formation, have a regular:and progreflive motiom in’ the
fyftem of the univerfe, not-vague, nor,undefined, but limited, certain,
definable, and inevitable, as all the other laws of nature are. Y


The fhortnefs or duration of life thet upon the diftance of the
hileg, or giver of life, from the evil rays of the anareta, or killing pla-
act, whichis afcertained by dire direction, or by tiiechabtion of the


primum mobile, whereby the hileg is carried to the: cufp»of the feventh


- houfe, and then by adding or fabtracting the teftimonies given by benefic
or malefic ftars, with the complexion of the.anareta, the length of time
will be obtained, according to the faid motion, as we thall more particu-
larly define in bringing up the Chega 93 io 4g a


The hileg, or giver of life, in this vnitoi is'the part of fortune ;
and the anareta, or deftroying planet, is the Sun. Now, ’when the part
of fortune by direct direction’ comes to the oppofition of the Sun, the
native will be deprived of radical moifture, and mutt expire; becaufe
the Sun, by obtaining that pofition, overcomes the'influence of all the
other planets, and hath’ power to cut off hfe. ~The quality: of death is
firft to be taken from the nature of the malevolent planet; fecondly;
from the nature of the fign'the planet is in; thirdly, from the quality’
of the houfe; and, fourthly, from the pofition of the two ) luminaries ; ;'
all of which [have heretofore eg el bid it


“The Sun confidered: as the anareta’ or. deftroying ppb not being:
ofited ina violent fign, nor configurated with a:violent fixed) ftar, nor
with the lord of the afcendant, in no afpect with the Moon, nor with
the lord of | gi eighth houfe, convinces: me he thall not diea violent


e death.


”


*


OIF ASITTR OLQi.G Yi 743


death.  Befides, Jupiter, a benefic ftar, being fituated in the eighth
houfe, acts as a guard upon the native’s life, to preferve him from acci-
cidental and premature death. But, todetermine by what kind of means
the native fhall be taken from this world, we muft firft confider the
pofition of Venus, lady of the eighth, and Mercury, lord:.alfo of the
fame houfe ; fecondly, the lord of the afcendant ; thirdly, the fituation
of the anareta or killing planet ; and fourthly, the planet pofited in the
eighth houfe, together with their effential and accidental production of
difeafes, fince we find no violent means fhal] attain the fuperior effect in
this nativity. Venus and Mercury are co-fignificators of the eighth
houfe, and the difeafe Venus in ber nature gives, is thick, cold, tough,
phlegm, andwatery, caufing indigeftion, with quotidian phlegmatic fe-
vers. ‘The difeafes, incident to the influence of Mercury in Aries, are
yellow’ choler and fubtie melancholy, with deprefiion of fpirits, per-
turbation of mind, and defect or’ lofs of fpeech. Now, as-Mars is lord
of the afcendant, in oppofition to Venus, and in reception with Mercury,
it appears highly probable thefe: difeafes will have much predominancy
in the native’s death: But they will be in fome degree varied by other
rays. The Sun in Aries will have a moft fenfible effect; and the
Moon being afflicted by the Sun, under a powerful afpect with Mars,
lord of the afcendant, and at the fame time difpofed of by Saturn, lord
of the fourth, gives a certain prefage of convulfions, apoplexy, or dead
palfy. Jupiter being in the eighth houfe, and ruling the digeftive
faculty, gives difeafes of the blood, and will contribute not a little
to the fatal tendency of the aforefaid influences, which really brought
on, fome years after this nativity had been calculated, that fudden ftroke
of the palfy, which carried this worthy native to the manfions of reft
and peace.


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the NINTH HOUSE.


From this houfe we give judgment on the effects of journeys; of the
integrity, morality, or religious temper, of the native ; and of the pro-
able import of extraordinary and ominous dreams.


“The fignificators of travelling are to be taken, firft, from the ninth
‘thoufe and its lord ; fecondly, from the planet or planets pofited in the
ninth houfe; and thirdly, from the relative fituations of the Moon,
Mars, and Mercury. ‘To determine, on: the infpection of a nativity,
whether the native will travel or not, obferve whether the Moon, Mars,
or Mercury, be in conjunction or reception with each other; or in
conjunction or reception with the lord of the firft or ninth houfes; or

NO. aie ka 8X pofited


s


s
74h ANY DIOL WU SiTOR &2 TIIGO N

- pofited in the ninth, third, or firft, houfes ; or have effential dignities
therein; for, in each of thefe cafes refpectively, the native’s mind. will
be too reftlefs and unfettled to continue long at atime im one: place or
fituation. So likewife the lord of the firft pofited in the ninth, or th
lord of thé ninth configurated in the firft, prefage the fame. |


When the Sun is pofited in the proper houfe of the Moon, irradiated
by Mercury or Mars, or in reception with either of them by effential
dignities; or if the Sun be conjoined by any afpe&t to Mercury, Mars,
or the Moon, it denotes a removal of the native from one fituation: to
another, as the cafe may be. So likewife many planets in a moveable
fign; Mercury in the houfe of the Moon; or the Moon in the houfe
of Mercury, induce the fame confequences ; and planets accidentally
pofited, efpecially the Moon, are obvious implicators of travelling.
But the quarter of the world to which the native fhall be impelled, is
afcertained by comparing the latitude and longitude of thofe parts of
the heavens where the fignificators of travelling fall, with the latitude
or place of the native’s birth ; uniformly obferving this ftanding maxim, ©
that, if thefe fignificators fall in the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, firft, fe-
cond, or third, houfes, the native fhall travel toward the eaft; but, if
they are found in the fourth, fifth, fixth, feventh, eighth, or ninth,
houfes, then he fhall travel weftward; and that quarter of the world
will, in a general way, prove moft conducive to the native’s good for- —
tune, where Jupiter, Venus, the Dragon’s. Head, or Part of Fortune,
are pofited, provided they are dignified in good houfes of the figure, and
not vitiated by malefic rays. .

Thefe confiderations being annexed to thofe rules laid down in: page
461, will enable us to draw all neceflary conclufions concerning the
material or effective journeys of the native. In this nativity we find
Mercury, a very principal fignificator of travelling, pofited in Aries, and
in reception of Mars, in the tenth houfe. This declares the native
fhould be impelled weftward, ftrongly urged by {cientific acquirements,
which is the true and radical implication of this planet’s nature and
influence. And, as Mercury is elevated in the fixth houfe, in conjunc-
tion of the Sun in his exaltation, it is anirrefiftible argument that the
native fhould be raifed by the events of this journey to an advantageous
poft, under the aufpices of princely authority, as the exalted afpect of
the Sun clearly demonftrates. . And again, Mercury being lord of the
eleventb houfe, and having his exaltation in Virgo, declares that this
journey fhall be taken through the medium of friends, who. were {cien-
tific men ; and, as Venus is lady of the afcendant, fituated in the watery
. fign


“e


OF As SsTiRe Ounraia Yv sz 745°


fign Pifees, and near the fortunate node. of the Moon, it is. thereby:
farther declared, that this journey fhall be made, inithat-angle which is
welt from Londons the place of the native’s birth: and that it fhalh be
terminated by fome great body of water, in the vicinity of which: the
native fhall find a durable refidence.. This was, in every inftance, moft
remarkably yerifiedi|in the native’s: appointment: to a {cieatific ‘office: in
his Majefty’s Dock Yard, at Portfmouth, upon the-recommendation of:
fome of the Fellows of the Royal Society ; in confequence of which,

this important journey was taken, and all ihe Hahocene te! events were
pies gg A to AK SVE ctsi Gay FRA 4:


We have néxt to eofifides the teri iby ot rdintous bent? of the’ nae
tive’s mind; which is ufually afcertained by the following configurations,
Jupiter, Venus, or the: Dragon’s Head, placed! in the ninth or third
houfes, or configurated with Spica Virgo, are'certain prefages of a moral
and religious perfon?’|’The “Moon, : Mercury; and Part of Fortune, in
fimilar pofitions, denote*the fame ;. but) the/Sunveffentially dignified in
the ninth houfe thews.a very {trong natural propenfity : to moral and re-
ligious practices ; and,’ if the tiative happens to be bred a clergyman, he
becomes a moft admirable Abe Sst ant hath every agg of confider-
ble peetersithas in the church. .


AW Keitcver’ it: hiappeak nat no Dib bee: are foudld in the iach houfe of
the figure, we muft have particular regard to the aftral pofition of Jupi-
ter; for, if he be in his own houfe, or in reception with Venus or Mer-
cury, or ‘with the Sunvor Moon, or in conjunction, fextile, or trine,
with Venus, In/angular places, they declare the native to bein principle
a ftri@ly ‘moral: and confcientious man, poffeffed of more *f{terling inte-
grity than thofe who make large profeflions..| But Saturn, Mars,’or the.
Dragon’s Tail, pofited in the ninth ‘houfe, and in’ moveable figns, with
Jupiter peregrine, cadent, or in bad afpeét with Saturn or Mars, prefage
great mutability in religious perfuafion, which generally terminates ‘in
atheifm. » Saturn polited i in acommon fign, ill dignified, and retrograde,
befpeaks: an hypocrite ;:and Mars ‘thus configurated forefhews a'mind
pliable to any sastngseee’ that will-beft ferve the purpofes of avarice and
ambition,


If we. may prefume to {peak of the native’s moral and religious cha-
ratter according to the: true implication of the fignificators in /his ge-
nethliacal figure of birth, -we cannot hefitate to affirm, that ‘the Moon,
being lady of the ninth houfe, andin ther. own dignities, declares the
native fhall be conftant tothat faith in which he was brought up and

‘educated,


«
7A: A NY DIDLIW SST IRGAAT 1 O N


educated,: though an admirer of every other perfuafion that’ pays a rigid
attention’ to the* principles and tenets. by which itis governed; © And,
there being:a’ moft remarkable reception between ‘Mercury and Jupiter
in their triplicity, Mercury ‘being in the triplicity’of Japiter, and Japi-
ter by his latitudean that of Mercury, will ineline the native not only
to be.a man of: ftrict integrity.and honour himfelf, but alfo tovencourage
and reward itin others. «2: | YY airot Ni


(Let it not be fuppofed, from the foregoing obfervations, that I would
wifh to infer that the ftars have power to make a man a faint ora’ devil;
or in any fhape to govern or direct his judgment or his will. This is
net whatik contend for ;,:but thus:;much I am free to affert, that they
clearly point out our natural inclinations, whether-good or evil ;,and it
will generally be found that. thofe inclindtions,carry fo {trong a bias over
our reafon and’ ‘moral intelledt,,.thaty injqiinety-nine inftanees:out of-a
hundred, the ‘natural influence .or/ inclination imprefied, by: eachi/ man’s
fignificator will be- found to. prevail., . And -yet this is no defect in our
moral preception:; ,for,,each man having the. ability to .diftinguith be-
tween right and. wrong, ifshe -chufes to do-wrong, in oppofition to that
which he knows, to be his, duty, it isan open violation of his own fenfe
and reafon, and a willing facrifice of the duties of-morality-and religion,
Hence the excellence of that celebrated remark on ancient philofophers,
“© That wife men-rule their ftars; and none but wicked: men,or-foolsiare —
ruled by them.” sit 03. bist | ni


The laft confideration of this houfe is, that which refpects our dreams.
Of this. I fall at prefent fay but little, meaniog, in its proper place, to
give fuch an explication of that aftonifhing motion of the. foul as hath
yet never made-its appearance before an, enlightened “and impartial
public.. And this, I thall alfo take upon me to prove, is another means
by which the all-gracious Deity has mercifully condefcended to. afford
his creature, under a. variety of circumftances, certain tokens or pre-
fages of what is about to happen, either .to:himfelf, to, his relations, or
friends. But, as it will in many cafes be neceflary to inform: perfons
who have had fome ominous or extraordinary dream the natural, import
deducible from the fignificators of his nativity, as well as the period of
time when its object fhall be accomplifhed, I fhall give the following
rules to effect it. As foon as the perfon awakes, let him as near-as pof-
fible note the hour of the day or night in which it happened... Then find
what planet ruled that hour, whether it be Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, or
any other; and, when the Moon comes to conjunction, fextile, ‘or trine,
of that planet, the dream, if it hath a good fignification, will be-


é 3 « gina


OUF TAASST TREO LIOiG Y. ANT


gin to thew its effects ; but, if it hath an evil tendency, it will begin to
operate when the Moon comes to the conjunction, quartile, or oppo-
fition, of the lord of the hour. “And here let it be remembered, that a
dream hath not always the full completion on the firft configuration of
the Moon with the lord of the hour; but oftentimes remains unfinifhed
"until the Moon comes in contaét with another afpeét of the fame nature
and fignification, |


In this nativity the Moon and Venus are the principal fignificators of
dreams; the one being lady of ‘the ninth houfe, and the other behold-
ing that. houfe with a trine afpe&; and they are ftrong arguments that
the native fhould frequently have important communications through
the medium of dreams. .


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the TENTH HOUSE.


The tenth houfe hath fignification of honour, preferment, trade,. pro-
feffion, or of any regular and accuftomed means by which men live,
and are refpected. In treating of which, it will be neceffary to obferve
the following rules, in addition to thofe laid down in page 448.


‘If the Sun or Moon, in the figure of birth, fhall happen to be pofited
in the very degree of the exaltation, and at the fame time free from
the evil afpecis of the infortunes, it is a powerful indication of the moit
flattering acquifitions to the native, in proportion to his capacity and
degree of birth. When the light of time tranfits the cufp of the mid-
heaven, and is furrounded by benefic planets in the hour of birth, ‘and
no malefic rays of the infortunes intervene, the native fhall arrive to
fome important poft of power and authority under government; or toa
public employment of dignity and*honour, under fome chartered body,
or princely power, in proportion to the condition of his birth. If the
Sun or Moon are pofited in angles, though unaided by-other configu-
rations, yet the native fhall live in much refpett and efteem all his
days. -In thofe figures of birth where neither of the luminaries are found
pofited in angles, nor in any of their effential dignities, nor in mafcu-
line figns, nor configurated with the propitious rays of Jupiter or
Venus, be affured the condition of the native will be poor and abject
all his days, no matter what might be his hereditary profpects at his
‘hour of birth. ‘But if the planets that-yhave dominion in the places of
the Sun and Moon, or in'the degrees afcending, fhall be orientally fixed,
and well dignified, the native fhall raife himfelf to a high condition,
efpecially if by a concatenation of fortuitous events, thofe planets are
afpeted by either of the benefics. |

No. 37. 8Y Jupiter


¢
748 A Ni. DIN LLUDS ST TReAAT £0 N


_ Jupiter pofited in the tenth houfe, in a diurnal-nativity, gives a pretty
accurate teftmony that the native fhall be employed in fome advantage=
ous public poft ; but, if either Saturn or Mars be in quartile or oppofi-
tion with that pofition of Jupiter, the native will certainly be driven
from his preferment, with lofs of reputation. But he who hath the
good fortune to be born ju(t at noon, When the Sun enters the meridian
at his place of birth, eflentially dignified, and oppofed by no vicious
ray, will, in fpite of all the gloomy profpects that may attend his in-
fancy, certainly arrive to great fortune and preferment, and increafe in
honour and reputation all his days. If the lord of the tenth apply to
the lord of the afeendant, in oriental ftations, and in their exaltation,
fuch a native fhall be profperous, and well beloved. And again, he
that hath the Moon pofited in Taurus, upon the cufp of the afcendant ;
the Sun being at the fame time in Leo, will arrive to great honour.
The Moon in the firft houfe, oppofed to the Sua in the feventh, and
in quartile of Jupiter in the fourth, gives wealth and authority by the
perquifites of magiftracy, embaflies, &c. but, if the Moon be in the
afcendant, and the Sun in partile conjunction with Venus, wealth and
honour will come by ecclefiaftical preferments..


The fixed ftars, likewife, in this fpeculation, have, by accidental
configuration, a moft important influence. If the Moon be with Cor
Leonis, and Jupiter elevated in the tenth houfe, in trine of Mars,
and in effential dignity, the Sun being at the fame time in conjundtion
with the Dragon’s head, it will produce thofe rapid and unexpected turns
of good fortune and preferment, that equally furprife the native and
aftonifh mankind. ‘To confirm the certainty of this obfervation, I could
only with the genitures of Sir Roger Curtis, Sir Francis Sykes, Sir
Thomas Rumbold, Mr. Mackreth, anda hundred others in fimilar
circumftances, to be infpeéted, and I will forfeit my head if the radical
eaufe is not found equally the fame in them all.


According to this hypothefis, thofe perfons fhall likewife prove for-
tunate and illuftrious, ia whofe nativities the Moon is in good afpe@
‘with many planets, united with a princely ftar; and he that hath ia
other refpects but an unpromifing geniture, as to riches and honour, yet,
if he hath the Moon configurated with any eminent fixed ftar of the firft
magnitude, he fhall, at fome part or other of his life, be unexpectedly
promoted to fome poft of authority and advantage, though he may per-
haps be difhonourably fuperfeded, and caft down to his former obf{curity.
Again, Caput Medufe in the midheaven, with the Sun, Jupiter, or the
Moon, gives power to the native over his enemies; and the Pleiades or


_ Hyades
%


# nae -


*


O WT A: SITE RE GLO! GY. -m49


Hiyades in the fame pofition, or rifing upon the afcendant with the
Sun or Moon, fhews that the native, in any military employment, accord-
ing to his poft and dignity, fhall prevail over his enemy. But if Spica
Virginis isin the above configuration, it then more aptly applies to
ecclefiaftiacal preferments.


Oculus Taurus, and Cor Scorpio, with either the Sun or Moon in
the afcendant, or in the midheaven, (hews that the native, whofe geni-
ture is thus conftituted, will gain riches by means of violence. And,
if he hath Sirius Procyon united with them, and configurated with the
luminaries in the afcendant or midheaven, the native fhall arife by fimi-
lar means to kingly authority and preferment. But the obftacles he
will have to encounter, can only be furmounted by an unfeeling {pirit of
rapine and violence. Infpect the geniture of a late oriental governor !


Saturnine fixed ftars of the firft magnitude in conjunction of the Sun
involve the native in a fucceffion of troubles, by repeated affliction ;
but, if the Sun be configurated with Fomahaut in forty minutes of Pifces,
or with Rigal in thirteen degrees fifty-fix minutes of Gemini, the na-
tive will acquire an illuftrious character and fortune. Regulus, Arctu-
rus, the right fhoulder of Orion, or the left of the Waggoner, configurated
with the Sun, Jupiter, or the Moon, in the tenth heute of the figure,
give alfo ample fortune and reputation. Thus the fixed ftars, when in

angles, contribute admirable eflicacy to any geniture; but, if the benefic
planets do not at the fame time contribute their ABbence jointly with
them, they are of but little import ; and, if malefic planets are joined
with them, they then induce much mifchief ; for, if the Hyades, Hercu-.
les, Cor Scorpio, or Lynx Auftralis, are pofited in an angle, and configu-
rated with Saturn or Mars, in a quartile or oppofite afpect, thofe fixed.
{tars fo fituated imprefs the native with fuch defires and endeavours in the
attainment of places and pofts of honour or emolument, as, by the mal-
influence of the malefics, and in thofe kind of expences and difappoint-
ments to the native, not only chagrin and torment his mind, but
often prove his inevitable ruin.


When the Sun, in Libra or Aquaries, is configurated either with good
or evil planets, and near fome eminent fixed ftar, it will happen, that,
when the Sun comes-to the ill direétion of the malefic influence, and
meets with a bad revolution, at the fame time the native fhall be fud-
denly plunged into fome unexpected and lafting misfortune; but, if the
direction only prove bad, and the revolution good, though he be caft
down during the continuance of the malefic direttion, yet he thall rife


again


750 AN PIL USsTtrR & TION


again upon the going off of its ¢ffe&, and bereinftated in his former
occupation or employment. of pom pbucenie b .


Upon enquiry, I found this native was mechanically brought up to
the. profeffion of a watchmaker and goldfmith; but, if we attentively
confider the import of the proper fignificators of his preferment and
profeffion, we. fhall_ find that..nature had fitted him for a more refined
and elevated line of life. The cardinal, and equinoctial fign Libra is
upon the cufp of his afcendant; the Sun pofited in the cardinal fign
Aries; the Moon in the tropical fign Capricorn ; Mercury and Mars,
the two principal fignificators of his profeffion, in reception of each
other; Mars alfo in the exaltation of Mercury, and pofited in the tenth
houfe, the houfe of honour and preferment; the part of fortune alfo in
the tenth, configurated with the two royal fixed ftars, Hydra and Cor
Leonis, are fo many unequivocal arguments, not only that the native
fhould abandon every handycraft employment, in purfuit of the more
elevated and fublime ftudy of the liberal arts and {ciences, but that he
fhould eventually obtain honour, promotion, and emolument, by. the
purfuit. Mars, belides being the principal fignificator of his: profeffion,
is alfolord of the afcendant, and therefore proves that the avocation of
the native fhould be fuch as he would make choice of himielf, and that
it would be in the line of {cience, as is moft aptly declared by the poti-
tion of Mars in the dignities of Mercury; whilft the Sun being in the -
houfe of his exaltation, and lord of the tenth, declares honour and pre-
‘ferment fhould refult from’it, with durations of fuccefs; and the more
fo, becaufe the Sun fends a trine afpett to the tenth houfe, as well as
Mercury, which proves his profperity and advancement to.arife from his
own intrinfic merit.


All this was in a moft remarkable manner verified by the-wonderful
facceffes and purfuits of the native, oppofition to every obftacle, dif-
ficulty, and opprefiion, thrown in his way, by attempts to force upon him
an employment incompatible with his genius. His many curious and
valuable pieces, written at an early age, and publifhed among other
mathematical difquifitions, his memorable improvements and difco-
veries in the longitude, for which his fovereign promoted hia to the
honourable poft of Aftronomical Mafter of his Royal Academy in Portf-
mouth, which he filled with univerfal reputation, fhew us, that in thefe
cafes, the influence of the ftars are not to be refifted, nor the bright
rays of genius chained to arbitrary limits. In my. opinion, thefe are
-genitures that afford a moft brilliant {cope to aftrological enquiry; be-
caufe we are not only enabled to define this extraordinary impulfe of the

Tit mind,
a


; ; ; .
' -_
> a x


O Fy A. Si TREO LO. G '¥; 75h


mind, which impelled this native forward in purfuit of fame ; but we
are likewife enabled to trace this inflin¢tive faculty ftill farther than the
conftitution of his own figure of birth, and to difcover fomething of
it in that of his parents, which I fhall here explain. The fourth houfe
reprefents the father; and Saturn being configu: ted in that houfe, in
effential dignitics, in an airy and {cientific fign, proves the father to have
ioherited a fcientific turn. But the tenth houfe bears fignification- of the
native’s mother, whofe fpirit of generofity and elevation of foul are moft
remarkably exprefied by the two royal fixed ftars configurated in her af-
cendant in conjunction with the part of fortune, the giver of life to the
native; and we may obferve, that, as Mars is lord of the native’s afcen-
dant, and falls in his mother’s afcendant, he fhould, according to natural
efficient caufes, inherit the vital principles and difpofition of his mother.
Hence too we define the caufe why children fometimes more {trongly re-
femble the father, and fometimes the mother ; an effe& which folely de-
_- pends upon which of their fignificators is the ftrongeft and beft dignified
in the act of generation. ais j


Upon the whole, we may remark, that few events can more Alluftri-
oufly difplay the obvioufneis of planetary information, or more vilibly de-
monttrate the goodnefs of God in mercifully affording his creatures this
aftonifhing mode of communication, than the foregoing radical proofs of
this native’s natural force of genius; who, at twelve years of age, was of
fufficient capacity to fend a moft elaborate piece for infertion in the Gen-
tleman’s Diary ; and, at the early age of twenty-one, was admitted a
member of the mathematical fociety in London! A proof this, that af-
tral influence fhould be the firft confideration to direé&t us in forming the
tender minds of youth to fuch purfuits and avocations as are beft calcula-
ted to place them in the high road to excellence and perfection. And for
which purpofe, I cannot recommend a more ftriking example than what
is afforded in this effential part of the nativity of my good and worthy
friend Mr. Witchell.


CONSIDERATIONS tefulting from the ELEVENTH HOUSE.


The eleventh houfe is that part of the vifible heavens from which
we draw judgement concerning frieads and friendfhip ; hope, confi-
dence, and truft; I fhall therefore, in addition to what I have com-
municated in page 459, offer the following remarks. When Jupiter
or Venus fhall be found in the eleventh, fifth, tenth, feventh, firft, or
ninth, houfes of the figure, it is a fure prefage of many friends; but,
if Saturn or Mars are peregrine inangles, or pofited in the twelfth houfe,
it denotes many enemies. Whoever is born with Cancer afcending

No, 38. 8 Z on


-. “.


* 4


552 ACNE PEs US “PP RE AE TOW


on the eafttern fineter of the heavens, fuch native will enjoy a very: {malt
fhare of friends ; and nearly the fame will be the lot of thofe in whofe
nativities the lord of the eleventh houfe and the lord of the afeendant are
found feparating from a propitious configuration.


If it be in any cafe required to know whether mutual good offices of
friendfhip fhall long exift between any two particular perfons, or be-
tween lovers or fweethearts before marriage, or between hufhand and
wife after, the only certain mode of obtaining this information is by
comparing the two nativities of either of the two perfons together, and,
according to their import, judge. For, if the afcendant in the figures
of both parties have the fame fign afcending, or the fame planets in the
firtt houfe, or beholding each other by the fame afpect, mutual friend-
fhip, love, and confidence, will long exift ; for, as affinity of manners
and likenefs are the effence of affection, fo affection, in this fpeculation,
muft be the author of agreement, of fincerity, and of friendfhip. Tode-
monftrate this, let us confider the influence and condition, of the lord of
the afcendant, under its four different configurations: viz. firft, when
in both nativities he is doa fide the fame planet ; fecondly, when he is
received of the other nativity by houfe or exaltation ; thirdly, when he
is in conjunction with the lord of the afcendant of the other nativity ;
and, fourthly, when he is in fextile or trine of the Jord of the other na-
tivity. For, in all cafes where there is not a concurrence of one or other
of thefe teftimonies, the friendfhip or attachment of thofe two particular
-perfons will not be found of long continuance. ~


When, in the nativities of any two given perfons, the one hath Venus
in the pofition where the other hath the Moon, or the Sun, the part
of fortune, or the lord of the afcendant, it is a fubftantial proof that
there will be firm and lafting friendfhip between them; but, whenever it
is found, in any two nativities, that the fign upon the afcendant of the
one occupies the cufp of the twelfth, eighth, or fixth, houfes of the
"other, there cannot poffibly be any durable attachment or friendfhip be-
tween the parties. It hath been determined, by repeated obfervation,
that thofe perfons regard each other with the pureft friendfhip where
the lord of the afcendant in one nativity applies to the lord of the afcen-
dant in the other, or where the benevolent planets are found in reception
of each other. By the fame parity of reafoning, they hate moft invete-
rately where the fame number of malignant planets occupy the afcendant
of each other’s nativity ; or where the lord of the afcendant in one nati-
vity, being of a contrary or adverfe nature with the lord of the afcendant
of the other nativity, are thereby configurated under a conftitution of eter-


nal enmity.
. The


OD) FAS “FOR. MOULTON Gs Ye: 753


» The concord or enmity of the planets is a moft obvious {peculation,

ecomprifed in their own natural quality and action; viz. Saturn hath fym-

pathy with Jupiter, Mercury, and the Moon; but a ftrong antipathy to

the Sun, Mars, and Venus. Jupiter hath affinity with Saturn, the Sun,

Venus, Mercury, and the Moon; and is only difcordant with the planet
Mars. Mars hath pacific tendency only to Venus, and that by means

of her fuperior property in allaying his intemperate heat ; for otherwife

they are contrary in nature, Mars. being hot and dry, and Venus cold

and moift. ’Fhe Sun hath friendfhip only to Jupicer and Venus; and

is inimical to Saturn, Mars, Mercury, andthe Moon. Venus is coms

placently beheld by Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Mercury, and.the Moon ;

but rigid Saturn is her mortal enemy. Mercury hath friendthip to Sa-

turn, Jupiter, and Venus; but the Sun, the Moon, and Mars, are his ene-

mies. ‘The Moon pacifically behold Saturn, Jupiter; and Venus; but
hath enmity to Mars, the Sun, and Mercury. ‘ihe Dragon’s Head hath

fympathy with Jupiter and Venus ; but antipathy to Saturn, Mars, the
Sun, Mercury, and the Moon. The Dragon’s ‘Tail hath Saturn and

Mars in friendfhip ; but Jupiter, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, andthe Moon, .
are enemies: the Part of Fortune is in this cafe conftituted precifely the

fame as the Moon. ;


By thefe rules it will be obvious, that,. where we find, in two nativi-
~ ties, the Sun and Moon, or Mercury and the Moon, or the Sun and Mer-
cury, configurated in each other's places, there will exift fome degree of
refpect and good-will between the natives ; but, if Saturn, Jupiter, Venus,
or Mars, are thus found, there will be fome difléntion, mixed with a
defire of friendfhip. If Jupiter or Saturn are found in reception of each
other’s place in the different nativities, their friendfhip will exift merely
for the purpofes of emolument or avarice; but, if Mars and Venus are in
each other’s place, the attachment of the parties will be formed for illicit
and difhonourable practices.


When in the nativities of any two perfons, we find the Sun or Mars in
oppofition to Mercury or the Moon, the parties will delight to injure
and opprefs each other; but, where Saturn or Mars are in oppofition, the
enmity will. be perpetual. Where the malefic ftars agree, the parties
will agree in the purfuit of wickednefs, though unfaithful to each other.
The Sun in the place of any friendly planet, declares unity between the
parties for integrity ; Jupiter, for utility ; Venus, for pleafure ; and the
Moon, according to the conftruction of her nature.


The


754 AN ILLUSTRATION


The quality and nature of friends are determined by the planet that
is principal fignificator. For inftance, if Saturn is pofited in the ele- -
-venth or firft houfes, and in no dignities, he is the fignificator, and de-
notes falfe and faithlefs friends ; but, if well dignified, he declares con--
{tant and honourable friends, according to the particular. circumftances of
his own nature and quality; as dotheach of the planets refpectively,
according to which rule I examine the prefent~nativity. I find the fign
occupying the eleventh houfe is Virgo, the exaltation of Mercury ; and,
as there are no planets therein, we muft particularly regard the pofition
of Mercury, who is lord of the eleventh houfe, from whence this judg
ment is deduced. I obferve Mercury isin reception of Mars; and Mars
being lord of the native’s afcendant is a demonftrable proof that he fKould
have many and great friends; fuch as were of a fcientific turn themfelves,
and well qualified to forward the views of the mative ; who would admire .
his afpiring genius, and take him by the hand. | This was completely ve-
rified, as the native hath often told me, even in the early part of his life,
when his literary productions introduced him to the knowledgeand friend-
thip of the celebrated Mr. Charles Brent, Mr. Francifco Forrecefy, Doc-
tor Bevis, Mr. Thomas Simpfon, and many other Fellows of the Royal
Society. And, as it was with his friends, fo we might fay of the native’s
hopes, ‘confidence, and truft ; for he was generally very fortunate in his


expectations, and fucceeded well in whatever he ardently {trove after, or
anxioufly defired. .


CONSIDERATIONS refulting from the TWELFTH HOUSE.


From this houfe we obtain cognizance of our malignant private ene-
mies, and of the calamitous misfortunes of adverfity and imprifonment. -
Whether this houfe be properly under the government of malefic influence
or not, is of little importance to the objects of our prefent enquiry ; fuf-
fice it fay, that it anfwers every purpofe for detetting thofe forked or
doubled-tongued malefics in fociety, who by every difcordant means
wound and blaft the reputation of their neighbours. And I am forry
to add, that, within my obfervation at leaft, there are very few indeed,
even among the more liberal and humane, that with a friendly hand
and compaflionate heart are forward to caft the mantle of charity over
the frailties of their fellow-mortals ; or that, like the good Samaritan,
will pour the balmy oil into the bleeding wounds of thofe who are
made the victims of relentlefs and unfeeling flander, which fkulks be-


3 hind


Orr SPrRERGOTL, OF G YE a pe,


hind. the curtain, and ftabs us in the dark. . Metals are never fo bright as
when completely polithed ; nor enemies never fo dangerous as when
concealed. It is therefore not the leaft important among our aftral en-
quiries, to inform ourfelves well of the quality and ftrength of our private
enemies; and, to make this enquiry obvious to all my readers, Ihave, in
pige 459, given ample rules detect and to elude their malice. I
fhall now apply them in my obfervations on the prefent nativity. On
the cufp of the twelfth houfe, we find the fien Libra, which is the day-
houfe of Venus, and wholly under her government, in the houfe of her
exaltation ; and, as fhe is in direct oppolition to the lord of the afcen-
dant, and is alfo lady of the feventh houtfe; the obvioufly declares that
fome woman fhould become an implacable enemy to. the native ; and that
this woman fhould not be of the mean or vulgar fort, is Hen tated by
Venus being in her effential dignities. But, as neither of the lumi-
' naries are affected, nor the lord of the afcendant vitiated by malefic rays,
it is impoflible the malignity of this woman’s refentment fhould ever
materially affect the well-being of the native. Befides, there are two
royal fixed ftars pofited in the twelfth houfe, viz. Arcturus, and. Spica
Virginis, which not only furnifh an argument that this female opponent
fhould do him little injury, but that no private enemies fhould ever be
able to accomplith his ruin, or opprefs him by imprifonment. And, as.
the luminaries are free from the affliGtion both of Saturn and Mars, and
as no malignant planet occupies the afcendant, twelfth, or fixth houfe of —
the figure, I am free to declare my opinion, that the native never will be
expofed even to the danger of imprifonment, either by civil or criminal
procefs, which might arife either from the hand Bi iat ices or arongh
his own indifcretion.


Having thus completely inveftigated the various afpects of this nati-
vity ; according to the genuine import they bear in each of the twelve
horofcopical places or houfes of the heavens, I fhall now proceed to bring
thofe afpecis refpectively into view, in the precife order in which they
came up by direction, and in which they affected the mundane actions,
‘purfuits, and eventually the life, of the native; from whence it will ap-
pear, that the nativity of any man, when corredily and judicioufly cal~
culated, will in a manner difplay a compendium of the principal inci-
dents. of the native’s life, from his birth to his diffolution; taking into
view 3s-well the things paft as thofe which are tocome. ‘To make
this the more intelligible to thofe who mean to ftudy the fcience, as well
as to the bulk of my readers, I fhall confider the directions of this nati-
vity exactly in the order they occur, from the time of Mr, Witchell’s

No. 38. 9A birth ©


S


«


BOOS REIT DEY LL” Uy SEE RAMOS N


birth to the day of his death. And, that thofe afpects may all be feen
and confidered at one view, I have colleéted them into a fpeculum, in
the annexed plate, of which the following is an explanation.


The top column of the table, from left to right, difplays in regular
fucceffion the twelve. figns of the zodiac, beginning with Aries, and
ending with Pifces; under which are refpectively placed thirty degrees
of the zodiac for each fign, making in the whole three hundred and
fixty degrees.. The firft column on the left, contains degrees and mi-
nutes, as far as completes one fign ; and, wherever minutes are joined to
degrees, it fhews there is an afpe& in the nativity that falls in that de-
gree and minute of the correfponding fign under which the planet
ftands. For example, under the letters D. M. at the.top of the firft
column, ftand 0 44; and, under the fign Virgo, in the common angle of ©
meeting, is found the planet Mars, which fhews that Mars, in this
Mativity, is pofited in forty-four minutes of the fign Virgo; and
gives us at one view every configuration made by that planet throughout
the zodiac; for at thirty degrees from his given place he forms a femi-
fextile, at fixty degrees from the fame point he forms a fextile, at
feventy-two degrees he forms a quintile, at ninety degrees a quartile,
at one hundred and twenty degrees a trine, at one hundred and thirty-five
degrees a fequiquadrate, and at one hundred and eighty degrees an
oppofition; whereby every afpect is at once fought out, as well thofe -
of the other planets as of Mars. The Yerms and Faces of the planets
are alfo denoted throughout the zodiac by the initials T’and F; the
ufe of which is to point out to the reader an eafy and concife method of


. facilitating zodiacal directions ; particularly to the Sun, as the ecliptic
“line is the only orb in which he moves, and wherein he meets with all


the afpects of the erratic ftars, with their terms, faces, exaltations, &c.
I fhall now take thefe afpects from the fpeculum, in the order they
ftand in the Table, p. 686, as well mundane as zodiacal, and explain
their refpective fignificators by fhewing their power and effect upon the
life and aétions of the native, and how far his body and mind were in-
fluenced and impreffed by them,


The firft direction in this nativity is M. C. a ©, the medium celi,
or midheaven, to the trine afpect of the Sun; or, in other words, the
Sun to the cufp of the fixth houfe. ‘This was a direction to the native’s
mother, productive of a journey; for, as the tenth houfe of the native’s ,
figure is his mother’s tenth, and the fixth her ninth, it is apparent,
that when the Sun, who is lord of the tenth houfe, approached the cufp


3 | of


—_ | =


_
bo
i
NS
’
—_
-I


[el | le
Ec aan:


a
¢
4
4
.


tl
Dl nan} -p


fella]


Pica ela taley deel ietatel il
ee ee Pe


| 30 |'60 | 90 [1201150 | 180 [210] 240/270 [300/330 |


ay


CREA SFRO-1, OC Yeee ¢ 77


of the fixth, a journey fhould be determined on, and put in execution.
And as Mars, the native’s fignificator, is pofited in his mother’s tenth
houfe, and the Sun, who reprefents the mother, being lord of the tenth,
and by accidental pofition in the houte of Mars, fhews it that this direc-
tion fhould carry the native along journey with his mother, which real-
ly happened in the month of October 1731, when the native was but
three years and feven months old; and conftitutes the firft material oc-
currence of his life, after his entry into this world, under the impreffion
of his fignificators. it muft however be noted, that the effect of this
direction falls moft effentially upon the parent ; and that it acted only in
an accidental or fecondary degree upon the perfon of the native, who was
in this cafe wholly under the influence of his mother.


© od. ‘The Sun to the quartile of the Moon by dire&t motion.
This afpect, being formed from the third and fixth honfes, and the
Moon being afflicted in the houfe of Saturn, threatens the native, in
his early days, with a dangerous fit of ficknefs. ‘The diforder implied
may be of a bilious kind, accompanied with retchings and fever ; fore
watery defluxions of the eyes, irruption of humours, meafles, or fmall-
pox. This direétion came up, and was at its higheft influence, when
the native was five years and two months old, at which time I have been
confidently affured, that he was attacked by the meafles in avery violent


and dangerous manner.


® ¢@ hb. The Part of Fortune to the oppofition of Saturn. This is
another afpect productive of ficknefs. ‘The Part of Fortune, in this
nativity, is giver of life, and, being in oppofition to Saturn, in-a fiery
fizn, and Saturn in an airy, denotes an affliction engendered of thofe
two qualities, which fhould befal the native whenever the direction of
this afpect began to operate, which, as we have already worked up and
proved, took place when the native was feven years and about two
months old; at which time he was attacked with the {mall-pox, and
was a long time before he recovered his health and ftrength, as is
obvioufly implied by the flow and ponderous quality of the planet Sa-


turn. ;


> o 8. ‘The Moon to the quartile of Mercury. ‘The Moon, in
this geniture, being lady of the ninth, and Mercury lord of the eighth
and eleventh houfes, the quartile afpect formed between them under |
thefe circumftances denotes a journey to the native, which fhould bring


him back from the place where his mother had fojourned in the country,
to


738 A°NG Tale LUU-s TAR SAST PE Ban


to London, the place of his nativity. The force of the dire@iion which
brought up this afpe@, took place in feven years from the rectified time
of birth, when the {quare was completely formed by the two planets ;
and it is a well-known fa@ in Mr. Witchell’s family, that at feven years
of age he was brought back to town, to be prefented to fome gentlemen,
who, out of refpeét to the parents, had profeffed their readinefs to patro-
_nize the child.


>Q. 0 @6.C.L. The Mcon to the quartile of the Sun, and
Part of Fortune to the conjunction of Cor Leonis. Thefe benignant
afpects-came up by good directions to fupport the influence of the pre-
ceding ; and gave the native a confiderable {hare of favour in the eyes
of thofe gentlemen the moment he was prefented to them ; and befpeak
at the fame time a {weet and placid appearance in the youth, with a
gravity and fedatenefs in his manners that could not but acquire efteem
and commendation from every. obferver, but more efpecially, from his
friends.


© * u% in M. The Sun to the fextile of Jupiter in Mundo. This
direction follows up the former two, and participates of the fame be-
nign influence; for, inafmuch as Jupiter is lord of the fecond, the Sun
is lord of the tenth, by their joint concurrence they not only prefage the
general approbation of his friends and teachers, but are a happy fymbol
of that early defire of learning and improvement, which was-for fome
time a fubject of aftonifhment to them all, and laid the foundation-ftone-
of prof{perity to the native. ry :

© Sfq. ¢. The Sun to the fefquiquadrate of Mars. This direction
is implicative of a ftrong natural defire for the ftudy of fcience; and
lays a good foundation for honour refulting from knowledge; and a
very apt direction it is for that purpofe, fince the Sun is lord of the
tenth, the houfe of honour and preferment, and Mars lord of the firft
and fixth, who difpofes of the Sun and Mercury. The afpect, by fall-
ing in the terms * of Mercury, quickens the fancy, and enlarges the


* Whenever judgment is drawn from a direction, particular regard muft be had to the terms in
which the afpects of the planets fall ; otherwife our conclufions will be erroneous, and oftentimes
abfurd. For, if malefic direCtions are wrought from the evil'configurations of Saturn or Mars,
and thofe direétions fall in the terms of Jupiter or Venus, in good places of the figure, the -

“evil declared by fuch directions, will operate with much lefs force, and the .effeét be {carcely. dif-
cerned. For this reafon, all oppofing qualities, whether in good or evil directions, muft be duly
confidered, and their effect allowed, before we make our judgment final. For, if there be a good
direction from the benefic rays of Jupiter or Venus, yet, if they fall in the terms of Saturn or
Mars, the good promifed will be greatly abated; and in fuch proportion as reafon and good fenfe™
will invariably dictate. Pe hb


native’s


OF AS TRIOILIO'G ¥. 769


frative’s defire of learning. ‘This and the three former direétions came
up progreflively, and operated upon the mental powers of the native by
regular gradation, until he was near twelve years of age, before the effect
of the laft direction wholly fubfided.


>AUu—»yP.¢M. The Moon to the trine of Jupiter. This is..a
good direction. The Moon is conftituted lady of the ninth houfe, the
houfe of fcience; and Jupiter is lord of the fecond and fifth, co-operating
in the force of mental endowments. Under thisdiretion the native made
his firft effay in fcientific literature, having compiled a fimall piece, for
the Gentleman’s Magazine, which was highly approved. With this
direction he had another operating, namely, the Moon to the parallel of
Venus in mundo ; which, being of the fame quality, gave force and ener- .
gy to the influence of the preceding.


@® M.C. Part of Fortune to the medium-cceeli. This is a very re-
markable and equally potent direction, operating upon the mental facul- -
ties; and it came up when the native was about thirteen years and four
months old, as may be feen by the calculation p. 661, where thefe direc-
tions are worked up and equated by the folar motion. Under the influ-
ence of this direction, the native, at that early period of his life, com-
piled a moft ingenious mathematical difquifition, which was printed in
the Gentleman’s Diary, and received univerfal approbation.


@a %. Part of Fortune to the quartile of Jupiter. This diretion
portends evil to the native’s ftate of health, and has a malefic tendency,
Jupiter, though in nature the moft benignant planet, in this cafe pro-
duces an evil effect, by the conftitution of the afpe& he forms. He is

ofited, according to his latitude in Gemini, in the eighth houfe, among
fixed ftars of the quality of Mars, in quartile with the Part of Fortune,
which in this nativity is Hyleg, and ftrongly appertains to the native’s
health and life ; and therefore, according’ to the radical effect of Jupiter
in this pofition, which caufeth heat and putrefaction of the blood, I
concluded that this direction muft have brought with it a violent fever,
becaufe the quartile afpect is productive of the greateft evil, and becaufe
this dire€tion falls in the terms and face of Mars, who is the author of
choler, and uniformly productive of putrefaction of the animal juices ;
though here are no teftimonies to fhew that its violence fhould be fuch as
to endanger life. This direction came up in fourteen years from the
time of birth ; and] have been affured that Mr. Witchell, at the age of
fourteen, fuffered feverely from a fever which held him a confiderable
time, as the force of this direction obvioufly demonitrates.

No. 38. 9 B oP,


760 AN’ UU L'U'S'T REA TT O N
© P.uM. The Sun tothe parallel of Jupiterin Mundo. As this


parallel is made to the feventh houfe, it muft relate to fome contract on
the part of the native; and, as the Sun is lord of the tenth, the houfe of
trade and profeflion, I concluded this afpect governed fome contract in
bufinefs. Upon enquiry, I found the native was bound apprentice to a
watchmaker and goldfmith ; which is aptly enough defcribed by a con-
junction of the Sun and Mercary in Aries. This direction, as we bave
before proved, came up in fifteen years and twenty-one days ; at that pre-
cife age the native and his mafter, as he hath fince informed me, execu-
ted the indenture, and he became apprentice to a watchmaker.


@Sfq.3—»)Z.P.u—@ 6 8. Thefe remarkable afpects immediate-
ly fucceeded, and. produced, as their directions feverally brought them
into effedt, thofe unpleafant circumftances which are invariably felt in
all fimilar cafes. - The Part of Fortune to the fefquiquadrate afpect of
Mercury isa direction that took off the thoughts and the attention of the
native from all mechanical employment, and fixed them upon mathema-
tical contemplation. The Moon toa Zodiacal parallel of Jupiter ftrength-
ens and enlarges this ftudious and contemplative faculty, expands the
underftanding, and allures the mind toa purfuit of thofe acquirements
which render manual employments infupportable. ‘The Part of Fortune
to the conjunétion of Mars could not fail, when the directioncame up, to .
produce violent contentions between the native and his mafter, in confe-
quence of his total neglect of the bufinefs, and of his inattention to the
-orders and inftructions given him therein. Upon enquiry, I found my
judgment in no refpect erroneous ; for, although the mafter was on the one
hand continually remonftrating and complaining of neglect and inatten-
tion, the apprentice, on the other, was totally indifferent as to the ill con-
fequences threatened, and {till addicted himfelf to the ufe of books, to
the folving and propounding mathematical queftions, and to the publica-
tion of anonymous pieces in the magazines.


© * hk. This is unqueftionably a good dire@ion. The Sun is lord
of the tenth, the houfe of profeffional honour ; and Saturn is Jord of the
fourth, the houfe of hereditary acquifitions ; fo that the fextile afpe,
formed betwixt them, leads me to conceive, that the native, while un-
der the influence of this direction, formed a refpetable and advantage=
ous connexion with fome elderly perfons, who approved his ftudious turn,
and admired the gravity of his manner, notwithftanding its unfitnefs
for a life of mechanical labour, and the anger and uneafinefs it oc-
cafioned in the breaft of his mafter. Yet, in {pite of all this, I had no
difficulty in declaring, that, when this direction came to operate with

. its


OF ASTROLOGY. 761


its fulleft force, the native would be patronized and encouraged by fome
perfons of eminence, who were friends to his father, or allied to his fa-
mily, This I have heard repeatedly acknowledged by the native himfelf,
who was at that period ftrongly patronized by his uncle. —


‘oSmq.¢—Af.a ». The Sun to the femiquartile of Venus, and
the Afcendant to the quartile of Saturn. Thefe afpects are of a baneful
quality, and exprefs much uneafinefs, anger, ‘and affliction, in the family
with whom the native refided.—AlJ quartiles are mifchievous, when di-
rected to particular perfons. ‘The firft of thefe joint afpects relates to
the native and his miftrefs, on whofe account he fhould ftand in immi-
nent danger of difgrace and ruin, by means of an occurrence, which,
though of a moft deftructive tendency, yet is too common to perfons
of ftrong paffions of both fexes, I fhall not, however, enter into a
detail of the matter ; itis fuficient for me to remark, that, as the afpect
only forms a femiquartile, its effet, when brought up by direction,
which was in the native’s feventeenth year, would be the lefs mifchiev-
ous to the parties, and the difgrace be the fooner blown over. The
fecond of thefe joint afpects acted, as it were, inconcert, and relates to the
native and his mafter, and, being a perfet quartile of the greater infor-
tune, hath fatality annexed to it. In fhort, it argues violent anger be-
tween the parties ; but, when the direction is perfect, which happened
quickly after the above, it deprived the mafter of life, and left the ap-
prentice and his miftrefs at large.


@*uM.—@aoM. Thefe afpeéts are both in Mundo. They
import a ftruggle between the native and his father, concerning the pur-
fuit of his bufinefs. Whilft the native, on the one hand, was fedulous
to become a ftudent, the father was decifive on the other, to put what is
termed ‘‘ a good trade in his belly.” Thefe directions came up in fe-
venteen years and four months, at which exact age the native was turned
over to another matter of the fame profeffion.


2 Q.3M. ‘The Moon to the quintile of Mercury in mundo. This
is another direction which applies to the intellectual faculty, and
ftrengthens the brain. It denotes an enlargement of the under{tanding,
and a fruition of rational ideas in {cientific difquifitions. Under this
direction the native turns his back upon all fubordinate fpeculations, is


deaf to the calls of bufinefs, and to the remonftrances of his mafter, and
applies


=


ibn AN ILLUSTRATION


applies himfelf, in {pite of every obftacle, torigid contemplation and ftudy,
The effect of this direction was at its utmoft height when the native —
was cighteen years and four months old ; about which time, as he has
fince told me, he was fo intent upon {tudy, as to frame a contrivance to
blind up the crevices of the doors and windows, that no part of the fa~
mily might have a fufpicion of his pafling the greateft part of the night
in reading and contemplating the different branches of fcience. |


M.C.8 ». The medium-celi to the oppofition of Saturn. This
isa no lefs remarkable than fatal direction, again appertaining to the
‘native and his maftere It fhews an animofity between them, fo far as it
relates to the bufinefs ; but it prefages the death of the mafter, and once
more fets the apprentice at liberty ; as though fate had really ftriven with
him to ebtain a different purfuit. But here, as I have been confidently
informed, the parent again interpofed his fovereign authority, and, in
{pite of every argument, and of every importunity, fo prejudiced was he
in favour of theemoluments of trade, and fo fixed in his mind upon that
which he had before fingled out for his. fon, that he. loft. no time in
choofing him out.a new fituation. Here we perceive, in its {trongeft
colours, the abfurdity as well as the evil confequence of forcing upon
the hands of youth avocations which their nature lothes, and which are
foreign both to their ability and their inclination. Let us here fora ~
moment paufe, and, look which way we will, we {hall find ample tef-
timonies of the truth of this miftaken zeal for the. provifion of our chil-
dren. Azeal which has, more than all other, caufes put together, fur-
nifhed the world with a race of dunglers in almoft every profeffion ; for
the mind, like the temperature of the body, cannot be forced, but will
be governed by its own immediate laws ; a circumftanc, which, if duly
attended to, and regulated by the quality of the fignificators at birth,
would not only prove much more highly advantageous to children, but
infinitely more beneficial to mafters of every craft and occupation.


@o0%—éo%2x. Thefe afpects are both made in the world; and
their directions are of courfe mundane. They are both quartiles of a
pernicious tendency, and even threaten the life of the native. Under
the influence of the firft, he is put, forely againft his will, to a new maf-
ter, with whom he fhews but little difpofition to attend to bufinefs.
Under the fecond, which acts in contact with, or rather follows up, the
evil nature of the firft, his life is endangered by fome violent accident
of fire, ‘This is moft aptly denoted by the pofition of Mercury in a

3


fiery


0 Fo A ST RO LiO'G Y. 763


fiery fign, with the violent planet Mars, his fignificator, and the Part of
Fortune, which in this nativity is giver of life, all in quartile afpect ;
‘but, whether this danger fhould occur to the native by his falling into
the fire, or by the burning the houfe he lived in, or by what particu-
lar misfortune, was impoflible to determine ; but it was evident to my
underftanding that his danger would come by means of fire. After con-
fidering and reconfidering thefe configurations, I enquired of the native,
whether he had not, fome time between nineteen and twenty years of age,
had- the misfortune to fet his bed-curtains on fire, or his room; for, as I
knew he had often accuftomed himfelf to-read in bed, I had a ftrong
fufpicion that he had fallen afleep, and that the curtains had taken fire,
and expofed him to the danger of being burnt in bed. But this he ab-
folutely denied, and contended much for his carefulnefs and precaution
on thofe occafions. Had he by any accident fallen into the fire ? or had
the candle caught his clothes ? No; he never had met with fuch an ac-
cident in his life. I perfifted moft confidently that fome fuch accident
muft have befallen him, and at that particular time, whereby he was ex-
pofed to great bodily hurt, if not to the danger of Jofing his life; and
I requefted him to refle& upon the matter, and to tell me ingenuoufly the
fact. At laft, he fatisfied my doubts, by relating-the following circum-
ftance :


He had not been many days with his new mafter, before he was left
in the fhop with no: other companion than a young lad, who had been
put apprentice to the fame perfon a year or two before. At the fame
time that the mafter’s abfence furnifhed Mr. Witchell with an oppor-
tunity of taking a book from his pocket to read; which was invariably
the cafe upon all fuch occafions, it afforded the other lad fit time to go
to play. A foldier’s mufquet ftood in one corner of the fhop, moft aptly
denoted by the quartile pofition of Mars, which the boy took up, and
began to perform the manual exercife with. When he came to that
part, ‘* Make ready—prefent—fire,” he levelled the piece clofe to the
body of his fellow-apprentice Witchell, who fat with the utmoft
calmnefs and compofure, reading his book; a circumftance evidently
implied by the pofition of Mercury. The boy drew the trigger, the
gun f{napped, and he recovered his arms. Pleafed of courfe with any
employment rather than with his bufinefs, he proceeded with the ma-
nual a fecond time. When he prefented the piece again, it was ele-
vated fomewhat above Mr. Witchell’s head; he drew the trigger, tlie
gun went off, and carried away a large piece of the window: leaving
both of them, as Providence would have it, totally unhurt. With this


‘No, 38. gC I was


v4 - ANY Eo Lole Ube Tee A Tal ON


I was quite fatisfied ; it relieved me from my doubts; and, upon equate
ing the direction, I told him this muft have happened on or very near
the 26th of September, 1747; for, though the other afpett came up
fooner, yet its influence was held on by the quick fucceflion and fimilar
quality of the co-operating or fecondary afpect, which was not ripe in
its malefic tendency until the day Mars began to feparate from his
auxiliaries, which was on the day above-mentioned, at which time the
native was near twenty years of age. After endeavouring to recollec all
the circumftances of the faéty he acknowledged I was ftrictly right in
point of time, as wellasin my judgment of the danger he had been expo~
fed to by means of fire.


The aftrological reafon of this narrow but happy efcape is thus de-
fined from the native’s horofcopical figure of birth; In the eighth
houfe, which is the houfe of death, we find the benevolent planet. Ju-
piter, which is an irrefragable argument that the native fhould not die a
violent, but a natural, death. Now, had Saturn or Mars been there, the
evil had certainly touched his life. Another decifive teftimony for the
prefervation of the native’s life is, that the direction operating comes
trom a benefic planet ; and, though the direction be of an evil quality,
yet, as it is not governed by the anareta, nor by any crofs direction either
from Saturn, Mars, or the Sun, to the Part of Fortune, it is impoflible, -
according to the radical import of the fignificators, that life fhould be
deftroyed, although expofed in this remarkable manner to the moft
unequivocal inftrument of death. '

I have dwelt the longer upon thefe two dire@ions, becaufe I confider
them as the moft remarkable in the whole figure; and I am fure their
effect is equally extraordinary ; befides, it tends to fhew, that, in geni-
tures where the fignificators clearly demonftrate a long life and natural
death, and where no. crofs malefic configuration ftrongly irradiates the
aphetic place, however the native, in his journey through life, may be
_expofed to the moft imminent perils and dangers, yet, if benefic fignifica-
tors, as in the prefent nativity, have the afcendency in point of dignity
and conftitution of place, he fhall fafely overcome them all, and enjoy
life until that period of time arrives, when exhaufted nature can no lon-
ger exercife her proper functions, and diffolution becomes the neceffary
confequence.


Ido not here mean to enter into any arguments againft that abfurd
ftile of reafoning, which, refting all its force upon {upppofed propofitions,
will


OF 'AS'TIR(O}L'O-G Yi 765


will contend, that, if the mufket had been pointed the fecond time at the
body of the native, he muft have been killed, let the ftars have been
pofited how they might. But what man would be hardy enough ferioufly
to avow this? or, if he did, it could avail nothing, fince facts and fuppo-
fitions would be ftill at variance. The piece was not levelled the fecond
time at the native; and why it was not, who'can define? It is enough
for me to fhew, that, by the native’s figure of birth, he was not to re-
ceive any fatal injury; I will now thank the man, who by any other;
or equally reafonable, hypothefis, will point out to me-why the piece was
not levelled at the native the fecond time? or, if it had, let him prove
that the piece muft of neceflity have gone off, and that the confequent
wound muft have been mortal. When this is done, I fhall be ready to
give it an anfwer. | .

M.C. ou. This afpect imports no good; it is a quartile between
Jupiter and the midheaven ; and, as Jupiter is lord of the fecond and fifth
houfes, it declares lofs of fubftance to the native, by the interference’of
fome religious or clerical perfon, who fhould prove his enemy.’ This :
came up by direction in twenty years and five weeks from the time of
birth ; at which period of the native’s life, as he hath frequently affured
me, he was prevented from receiving a fum of money from a relation who
had afiually promifed to give it him, but for the perfuafions of the cu+
rate of the parifh, who, having taken fome offence at the native, fet every
engine at work to injure him in the opinion of his friends. This afpect
is likewife baneful to all contraéts or purchafes under it.


o 6 ¥—M.C. 4 Cor Leo.— @ 8 ¢. ‘The Sun to the conjunétion of
Mercury, the midheaven to the conjunction of Cor Leonis, and the Part
of Fortune to the oppofition of Venus. ‘Thefe directions were all opera-
ting at nearly the fame time. Under the firft, he was very ftudioufly
inclined, and influenced to the regular purfuit of the mathematics. Un-
der the fecond, he was introduced to the acquaintance of feveral refpectable
characters, eminent in the line of {cience, and who fhould feel a predilection
in favour of the native. And this really laid the foundation for his being
introduced into the mathematical fociety, "The third direction operated
with the laft, and fhews, that, while he was engaged in forming fuch
connections as fhould introduce him into public life, he fhould fall
pretty much in the way of the ladies, and that a large and perplexing
female acquaintance. would be the refult, which is indicated by the
oppofition of Venus to the Part of Fortune.


: Thefe


766 ANT DU LIV STIR eAAT FON


Thefe two laft directions have their force continued, in 4 more or lefs
fenfible degree; until the influence of fome other direction begins to
take place ; and this, we find by looking in the Table of Directions, p.
687, admits a fpace of almoft three years. And here let it be remembered,
that the fulfilment of any matter or thing. promifed by a direction is
completely formed when its afpect is in all refpeéts perfect, and the
irradiations of each contributing ftar fully complete; though, according
to the latitude of that principal fignificator by which the direction is
brought up, the fubject of the matter or thing fo to be brought about
may, by certain gradations of influence, be fome time in preparation, ere
the abfolute event is really brought to pafs. For, in the cafe of mar-
riage, there is ufually fome time fpent in courtfhip and dalliance, before
the parties repair to the hymeneal altar. But, when this is performed,
or about to be performed, the exact working up of the direction fully de-
monftrates. So it is in all other cafes where a matter is declared to be
brought to pafs by the force of a direction ; except where a direction of
a contrary quality, and fuperior ftrength, falls in its way, and overturns
its tendency and influence; on all which occafions the thing originally
predicted is fet afide, and a contrary effect takes place; as we frequently
obferve in perfons betrothed, who, even at the church-door, or before
the altar, change their fentiments, and put the marriage afide. But, if
no fuch crofs dire€tions interpofe, and a length of time occurs between —
them, then the original afpect holds its own proper force and quality to
the full extent, and whatever it denotes is ina general way fully com-
pleted, with all its confequences and contingent effects.


Afc.* D. Under this direction, the influence wrought by the laft is
brought to perfect maturity. A connexion with one of the ladies, which
. had for fome time been formed, is now brought to its crifis; and, when
this afpect was complete in all its rays, the parties were married. ‘The
perfonal defcription which this afpect gives of the wife, is of a middle
ftature, pale dark complexion, brown hair, comely, and agreeable; in
mental endowments difcreet and ingenious, rather petulant, and worldly-
minded, and therefore fufficiently faving and frugal.


Afe.o ¢é—o© gAfc. Thefe are both directions of an evil defignation.
They import no finall fhare of vexation and difagreement between the
native and his wife, through the means of detraction, and the whifpers of
falfe female friends, connected with the native’s wife, who fow the feeds
of jealoufy, and lay the foundation of enmity and difcord, betwixt them.
The attention of the native is thus for a time taken off from objects of
preferment and advantage; his affairs go backward in the world, and he

3 f{uffers


O FP a's ROME ore rv: 767


fuffers a two-fold anxiety of mind, accompanied with a depreflion of
fpirits, conftitutional by the temperature of his fignificators at birth, but
greatly enlarged by the force of this latter direction.


»>*O—@ 68. Thefe afpects are found jointly operating, after
the influence of the preceding are fpent, though of an oppofite action and
quality. Under the firft, the native affumes his former purfuit of literary
acquifitions, and endeavours to enlarge his connexions, with men of let-
ters and character. He fucceeds much to his wifhes, being, at the
time this direGtion came up, which was in twenty-five. years and nearly
a half from his birth, introduced to fevera] gentlemen of the firft literary
talents’and refpeCtability, who promifed him their. patronage and friend+
fhip. But, in the height of thefe flattering profpects, the fecond direc-
tion, viz. the Part of Fortune to a conjunction. of ‘the Dragon’s Tail,
fubjects the native to a violent fore throat and fever, occafioned, by cold
taken in purfuing the objects of the other dire€tion. This affliction was
very fevere, and feized the native, as he hath fince affured me, when he
was twenty-five years anda half old, and confined him to his bed for
near a fortnight.


© A $.~ This direGtion imports much good to the native, from thofe
who are his fuperiors. Under its influeuce he will extend his literary
connexions ¢ and will derive honour and ‘eftimation from the extent of
his own abilities, in the opinion of thofe who are difpofed to ferve him.
‘Lhis direction likewife, from the prolific fituation of the fignificators in
the figure of birth, imports conception to the native’s wife, which, I have
no {cruple to afirm, took place under its influence.


> Ay. This is a very flattering direction, and prefages much good
to the native. Under its force he will apply very clofe to {cientific, ex-
ercifes, and enlarge the number of his friends. It was under this di-
rection he was introduced to the acquaintance of Dr. Bevis, who was
afterwards very much his friend, and rendered him feveral eminent fer-
vices. This gentleman was a great encourager of fcientific {peculations,
and was fo perfectly mafter of aftrology, as to have calculated feveral
national events, which’ feverally came to pafs with the moft remarkable
exactnefs.


M.C: 6 8. This direction implies good to the native, becaufe
Mars is lord of the afcendant ; otherwife it would have operated to his
difadvantage. He was warmly engaged in aftronomical enquiries, when

No. 38. 9 D : this


768 ANG IRD L US TR BAT her N


this direction operated, which likewife introduced him to a further ac-
quaintance with gentlemen eminently diftinguifhed in that line. It
was at this time that he became intimately acquinted-with Mr. Charles
Brent, Aftrologer to George II. under whofe royal authority and di-
rection be calculated the nativity of our prefent illuftrious monarch,
King George the Third ; a copy of which nativity he prefented to Mr,
Witchell, who afterwards gave it to me, and which I have now fydereal -
ly projected in the annexed plate.


M, Cua 28, Under this dire@tion the native hath a fon born. (It hath
likewife a ftrong intellectual operation upon the native himfelf, who is
impelled to a critical inveftigation of the then ftate of the feveral depart-
ments of fcience, and imports great honour and pecuniary advantage from
his labours therein, and accelerates his defires for attempting to improve
them. I have hada great deal of converfation with Mr. Witchell on the
fubject of this direction, which I confidered fomewhat remarkable ; and
he affures me that it was about the time when this direction came up,
namely, when he had completed his twenty-feventh year, that the firft
thought of corre€ting and improving the longitude prefented itfelf to
his mind, and which was ever after infeparable from it, until he had fully
accomplithed that moft invaluable difcovery.


»>Smq- oM.—o « ¢ M. The Moon to the femiquartile of the
Sun in Mundo, and the Moon to the fextile of Venus in Mundo. Here
are two generally good diretions operating together, which promife the
native health of body and felicity of mind. ‘The affairs of his family
will profper under them, and all matters relating to fubftance and ad-
vantage will fucceed well. He takes feveral little journeys, which fhall
prove profitable and pleafant, and hath the pleafure of receiving fome un-
equivocal marks ofthe fincerity and confidence of his friends. And the
native frankly acknowledged to me, that no part of. his life was fo free
from the intrufions of care and perplexity as the {pace of time occupied
by thefe two afpects, which carry him from the twenty- seventh to, the
twenty-eighth year his age.


@.43M—Afc.o ¢. The firftof thefe joint direCions, hath the
defignation of much good to the native ; for, while it prompts him to a
Jaudable purfuit in the improvements of {fcience, it will enlarge the
circle of his friends, and promote his reputation with the world. But,
as the brighteft day, is not without its clouds, fo this direction is united
with one not guite fo aufpicious. The quartile of Venus to the afcen-

dant


O FT al siToR OL OG Y. “69


dant is produttive of family broils and diffentions. Jealoufies are re-
newed under this direction; and the native perhaps will find, that
dealings with the fair fex are not altogether fo profitable to him; on
the contrary, he will experience, about this time, the ftrongeft exertions
of a quondam favourite female to work his deftruction, which, however,
fhe will not be able to effe&. Under this direction the native’s wite
conceives a fecond time witha male child.


uo hM. Jupiter tothe quartile of Saturn in Mundo. This di-
rection continues the baneful effects of the former, transferring’ the
malignity of his female enemy to thofe of his male, whereby a variety
of unpleafant occurrences follow, and many mean and ungenerous ad-
vantages are attempted to be taken of him. This is followed by a con-
fequent lofs of fubftance, which appears ultimately the means of ter=-
minating the evil machinations enforced againft him. Were the parti-
culars of this feries of vexation and perplexity to be unfolded, with the
eaufe which gave them being, it might tend to ftrengthen the reputa-
tion of planetary prefcience; but the beft of people are not without
their weak fide, and God forbid I fhould take pleafure in expofing the
foibles of any man, much lefs of one who may be ranked among the
number of the moft deferving, and to whom I am under many obliga--
tions. Suffice it to fay, that the party of the offended female made head |
againft him, until he confented to pay a handfome douceur, which, as
he himfelf informed me, put an end to hoftilities, and reftored the olive--
branch of peace. tay


o 448M. This direction promifes advantage tothe native ; the Sun
being lord of the tenth, and Mars of the afcendant. This denotes prof-
‘perity and refpect, and fome advantage by the fidelity and ability of
good fervants. It likewife gives the native feveral mathematical fcholars,
who become ftudents under him,


M. C. 8 ¢. Under the mal-influence of this direétion, the native
feels the vindictive fhafts of private enemies, and again encounters fome
family broils and difingenuous reflections, which likewife originate
from a female caufe, and for a time difturb the internal tranquillity of his
- mind.


© * ¢. This direction reftores peace and harmony to his family,
gives him another pupil in the ftudy of the mathematics, and all things
go on fmoothly, and much to the native’s fatisfaction and advantage.
He


770 A Ne bli U) SiT-ReA TIO N


He receives pleafure.in the purfuits of feveral amufements, and is on
terms of perfect amity with his.wife and her friends. Under this direc-
tion likewife Mrs..Witchell becomes pregnant with a daughter, and has
the profpe¢t.o .a fafe and healthful time, ,

@ x 3M. . ‘This diretion operates upon the mental faculties, and
-promifes much good to the native. Under its influence he writes the
Mathematical Magazine, and acquires unbounded reputation in the lite-
rary world. ‘He alfo obtains an increafe of pupils to his mathematical
fchool, and meets with encouragement and fuccefs in all his under-
.takings.


> Z.,.P.b. ‘The Moon to the zodiacal-paralel of Saturn. This di- -
rection imports no pleafing occurrence to the native ; under its operation
his father falls ick, and his family is opprefled with vexation and for-
row, arifing from thofe evils which chequer life, and render the mott
perfect, {tate of human blifs mutable and precarious. The native himfelf
will be much afflicted with melancholy by this direction...


>» Z. P. é. The Moon to the zodiacal parallel of Mars. ‘This gave
Mrs. Witchell another daughter, and demonftrates a. bad and fickly la-
bour, attended with a dangerous fever to the native, as is declared by
the conititution of this parallel with Mars; for parallels are either good
or bad, according to the nature and quality of the planets by which they
are refpectively brought up. ‘This judgment is likewife confirmed by
.the pofition of the Dragon’s Tail in the tenth. ; .


@4¢M. This configuration, being in Mundo, denotes encreafe
of fubftance to the native, either, by Jegacy or by hereditary right
to the effects of fome deceafed perfon, which happened when this direc-
tion was completely wrought. It likewife indicates profperity to the na-


tive, by means of profeffional application and perfeverance in the ob-
jects before him.


»Smq.3M.—@o 4. Thefe are direCtions which induce a fort of
chequered life to the native ; for, having an oppofite quality and influence
to each other, whatever the one impels the other counteracts, and
renders all attempts and all endeavours, while thefe dire€tions are ope-
rating, totally abortive. The native will take fome fhort journeys under
the conftitution of thefe afpeéts, in the hope of obtaining. preferment ;
but his labours will prove fruitlefs, and his prefent hopes terminate in

3 difappointment.


OF GA, S Renee LO. GY. 771


difapointment.. Juft fo, as the native himfelf affured me, was the
greater part of his thirty-fixth year diftinguifhed, at which period
thefe directions yielded their influence ; and many times, when he had
reafon to expect the full completion of his wifhes, fome untoward Cir-
cumftanée or other conftantly intervened, to fet his hopes afide.


©Q.b—> 6b. Thefe directions are fraught with no good, but
threaten great anxiety of mind and depreffion of {pirits to the native,
refulting from fome fecret enemies, who make a point of oppofing his
career, and who vilify and traduce him to fome perfons of diftin@ion
and power. He will likewife fuffer fome affliction in his eyes, and


dizzinefs of the head, with melancholy and BSFRI AON of mind, whilft


the fecond direciion is under its operation.


> * bh. ‘the Moon to the fextile of Saturn, by converfe motion.
Under this dire€tion the native bas another daughter born; but its in-
fluence upon his temporal affairs is but little “better than the former;
fince this afpect comes up very quickly after them, and participates of
their quality and temperature. The. native. recovers completely from
his indifpofition; but the -viciffitudes of fortune, and the vexations of |
his mind, continue with little abatement, until the effects of this di-
rection are wholly taken off by the fucceffion of another.


> * 8. This is avery promifing direction, replete with happinefs
and good fortune to the native. The powers of fenfe, of difcernment,
and invention, are here ftrongly combined, and the refult leads to
profperity and fame. The native’s difcoveries in the longitude are here
moft aptly depicted; and I have no doubt, but under the force of this


- direction they were rendered complete. The friendly rays of the Moon


and Mercury, in elevated places of the horofcope, are uniformly pro-


_ duttive of the moft acute intelletual endowments; but relate, in a


more peculiar manner, to an extenfive knowledge i in ier: and to an
unbounded comprehenfion of the power and extent of figures. This
direction came up in thirty-eight years and eight mounths from the hour
of birth, at which period the’ native made his laft and final improve~
ments in the longitude, for which his Majefty rewarded him with a
liberal annuity during the refidue of his life. Let it be remembered
that this afpect falls in twenty-five degrees fifteen minutes of Adquaries ;
and that the nature of thefe planets being fo exaCtly conftituted with
the quality of the fign, clearly demonftrates that the improvement and
difcovery, brought up by this direction, fhould, in a particular manner,
No. 39. gE relate


772 AN WB OH US TR AA ION


relate to the fea; a circumftance deferving the attention of every curious
eader.


® Smq. 2% M. Part’ of Fortune to the femiquartile of Jupiter in
mundo. Under this direslion the native fuffers a flight indifpofition.
The internal: peace of his family will likewife be difturbed, from a fe=."
male. caufe; which, however, will fhortly fubfide. He will likewife
experience fome fhort perplexity in money-matters, which perhaps may
make him more cautious of fupplying the neceffities of others, before he
provides for his own.


»> A OM.. This afpe@ brings frefh honour and reputation to the na-
tive ; for under its influence he will experience the united recommenda-
tions and good offices of his friends. ‘Ihe dire¢tion comes up in, May
1766, and holds on to the middle of O&ober following, as may be feen in
the Table of Directions belonging to this nativity, p. 689; in which
{pace Mr. Witchell has affured me he experienced the moit remarkable
inftances of civility and friendfhip.from feveral members of the Royal
Society, and from ether gentlemen of diftinguifhed merit.


>Z. P. y. / This direction participates much of the benevolent na-
ture of the preceding, and promifes additional profperity to the native in
a moft eminent degree, It prepares and fortifies his mind for frefh
ftudies, and influences. a laborious application to books, and to experi=
mental philofophy.. Under this direction we perceive the foundation of
a journey, which will probably be taken in confequence of fome advan-
tageous occurrence,

D * 8%. This and. the foregoing direétion have in many refpects
a joint influence, as they follow in fo quick a fucceflion, and partici-
pate of the fame benignant quality. ‘This afpect completes the good
fortune begun by the former ».* %, under which he received a reward
for his difcoveries.. The prefent benignant configuration, conftituted
with other rays, brings him a frefh inftance of the approbation of his
Royal Sovereign, who appoints him, uader this direction, to the Maf-
terfhip of the Royal Academy at Portfmouth. This direction comes —
up in November 1766, and operates until the month of October EVO.
at which time another direction fucceeds. Mr. Witchell took poffeffion
of his new-appointed office the 26th of March, 1767, when this direction
was in its utmoft force. And we might here trace the completi on of that
| 1 journey,


Of As TR OL OG Y. | 773


journey, predicted under the laft dire&tion, which now conveys the native
and his family to a new refidence, in a different part of the kingdom.
And, if. we contemplate the quality and pofition of the correfponding
fignificators, with the affinity of Mercury and Venus, and the fign they
are pofited in, near the fortunate nodeof the Moon, we fhall find that
they exactly defcribe the fituation to which the native’s family fhould
remove, and that their refidence fhould be permanent and prof{perous.


> Smq. 3 M. ‘This is likewife a profperous direction, and ftill
continues the good effects of the former three. The native derives ad~-
vantage and pleafure from an acquifition of new friends and acquaintance,
addicis himfelf to literary purfuits, and is more ftudious than fora con-
fiderable time before. Under this direction, as I fince learn, he pub-


lifhed his Mathematical Queries.


© 6 ¢. The Sun to the conjunaion of Venus, by converfe motion.
Although this afpect 1s fraught with fome good, and gives the native
an addition to his family by the birth of a daughter, yet the effect of
its direction will bring to pafs' fome unpleafant occurrences, particularly
relating to the female part of his family, which is obvious in this con-
figuration, by Venus being conftituted lady of the eighth ‘and twelfth.


houfes.


»>s uM. This gives the native fome fruitlefs’ journeys to feveral.
eminent perfons, from which he returns with’no greatfhare of cons
tent. He will lofe money by fome fpeculative® adventure; vand, what-
ever {cheme he fets on foot under this direction, either for emolument.
or fame, will prove abortive, and eventually tend to his difadvantage and
prejudice. About this time, I find Mr. Witchell Joft'a large fum by


adventuring in the lottery.


> ox. ‘This configuration 1s made in the zodiac,. and participates
of the fame unfriendly quality with the laft. ‘The Moon is lady of the
ninth, and Jupiter lord of the fifth and fecond, whereby this direction
will bring up lofs of fubftance to the native, by means of the non-ability
of fome quondam friend, or clerical perfon, to-fulfil his engagements in
money-concerns, It likewife argues the exertions of fome private enemy,
to blaft the native’s character and reputation, with regard to his friends
and family. ‘Lhis occurrence, the native told me, he had too much

reafon to recollect, with heart-felt regret.
oP. ¢ Mz


f


774 AN 292 #@ US Ff ATi) N
o P. @ M. The Sun to the parallel of Mars in Mundo. “This di-


reGtion promifes to’advance the native’s profefiional chara¢ier ; Mars be-'
ing the fignificator of his profeffion, exalted by a parallel from the Sun.
Tranquillity and fuccefs accompany this direction, and under its influ-
ence the native will have a fon go out to fea. “Vhofe in fubordinate fta-
tions to the’ native will-afford him fatisfaction, and his fervants and do-
meftics will be found orderly and faithful. All things now go fmooth-
ly on, and his own withes and defires are in almoft every fhape complete-
ly gratified.


> 8 ¢. Under this direction the native fuffers fome uneafinefs re-
lative to his fon’s voyage. He will likewife experience fome lofs by a ~
’ fpéculative adventure, which never can fucceed under this afpect. An
unpleafant difagreement appears very likely to happen in ‘his family ;
and whatever friendfhip or connexion he forms under this configuration
will prove faithlefs and vexatious. |


@a} M. This configuration gives folidity and ftability to the
mind, confolidates the ideas, and influences an unufyal ferioufnefs of
‘imagination, which, conlidering the phlegmatic temperature of the
native; will moft likely afflict him witb lownefs of {pirits, nervous af-
fictions, and ‘habitual melancholy... Under this direction, however,
the native’s mind will be engaged in a defire of purchafing fome houfe
or land, which will occupy moft of the time this direction continues
in force; and, whatever purchafe he makes under it, will be advantage-
ous and fatisfaGtory to himfelf and his family. _ ‘


© g é. The Sun to the oppofition of Mars, by converfe motion.
This is a malevolent direction, and imports no good to the native, thro’
the means of fome fubordinate perfon, fervant, or domeftic, but which
the native will dete&t and defeat. He will fuffera few weeks’ illnefs,
under a flow nervous fever, which goes off with the termination of this
difcordant afpect, and is fucceeded by an indifferently good ftate of
health, and celerity of {pirits; which is demonftrated by the direction |
arifing from the parallel of Mercury and Jupiter, which comes up im-
mediately upon if, abating the evil, and removing the intemperate qua-
lity, by milder rays. ;


>» 6 @. This configuration is extenfively good, and gives the na-
tive profperity and fuccefs in all things which relate either to the ninth,
fifth, or eighth, houfes. Under tnis direction he takes a pleafant and
; , profitable


ta


OF, ASTRO O © Y. 775


profitable journey, as the fatisfa€tion of feeing all his defires profper,
and has peace, harmony, and content, in bis own family, and good fel-
lowfhip with his affociates and neighbours.


© A». This is a very excellent and profperous direction, in-
fluencing a Variety of favourable occurrences to the native, both in the
line of his profeffion and in the general approbation and regard of his
fuperiors and friends. The trine afpect of the two luminaries, in emi-
nent places of the horofcope, is im all cafes to be regarded as a fymbol
of great good, and of an advantageous and honourable intercourfe, ac-
cording to the birth and ftation of the native, with. fome high and ele-
vated perfons of rank and fortune. Had the native not been previoufly
appointed to the ftation -he now filled, he would, under this direction,
in all human probability, have obtained fome fimilar preferment, from
the fimilarity of the afpects; but, as it was, the good effect of ‘this di-
rection was fenfibly wrought upon him, fince it introduced him to feve-
ral noble perfonages, who'at this time placed their fons ander his care
and tuition, for the purpofes of obtaining a nautical education.


4 @Afc. Jupiter to an oppofition of the afcendant. This direction
‘impairs the native’s health, alters the ftate-of his blood, and induces a
bilious complaint in the bowels. He will moft likely fuffer by fome
difputation or difagreement with an acquaintatance, and perhaps experi-


‘ence a vety unpleafant embarraffment on the occafion, with lofs of
fubftance.


> 4@M. The Moon to the trine of the Part of Fortune in mundo.
This configuration always forebodes increafe of fortune, fuccefsful en-
terprize, benefit in fpeculation, and profperity in bufinefs. Under this
“direction the native experienced ’a great fhare of eftimation from his fupe-
tiors, and felt the emoluments arifing from it.


mP.¢M. This direction imports death to fome female in the na-
tive’s family ; and, as Venus is conftituted lady of the feventh houfe,
with clofe ‘affinity to the native in his radical figure, it is moft probable
he will lofe his wife; it is apparent, however, that this configuration
will produce him much anxiety and perturbation of mind, with depref-
‘fion of fpirits and deep melancholy.—Upon enquiry, I found that Mrs.
Witchell really died under this direction,


> Smq.%M.—oM. P. ». ‘The Moon to the femiquartile of Jupi-
ter in Mundo; and the Sun to the mundane parallel of the Moon.
No. 39. gF Thefe


776 A N.YICLGL.U0S MIR2AAT 1 O N


Thefe are: both::propitious directions, » and iprefageeia lcontinuance® of
much good: to:the natives Heowill profpersinoall undertakings inthe:
way of hissprofeffion, >» wilh receive -frefh’ marks of) the approbation: and
attention of his friends, and will rife in the: eftimation of fome high
and noble patron; whereby his -fpirits will: beexhilarated and his: me-
lancholy sremoved.  : Thefe pleafing circumftances: alternately occured
during the:time thefe directions contributed their influence, which lafted
inca more ‘or Jefs) powerful degree, from the beginning of November,
1778; to, the: month>of September, 1779, when their effects: totally
fubfided. :


Afc. * %: ‘This direction is armed: with the moft ferious affliction
to! the ‘native of “any thing that hath yet gone before it,’ It is the
harbinger of fome fudden difeafe that'threatens life. And, if’ we con-°
fider the radical import of this afpect, taken collectively with the irra-
diations of the other planets, and. their re{pective -pofitions and par-
ticular places in the figure, as they ftand influenced and impregnated:
with the ambient quality of ‘the ‘figns, we can have no reafon' to hefitate.
in‘our judgment, that this: affliGion: will’ falbas it ‘were inftantaneoufly,”
and that. it will ‘come by ‘fome defect in the animal’ circulation, or in
the functions of the brain, whereby fenfation will be defttoyed,| me-
mory obliterated, or bodily motion ‘withheld ;-but the moft' probable
effet of the three arifes from! the fuperior ‘dignity,of Saturn, who
governs this afpect; and, as he rules the’ retentive faculty of man,
it. becomes pretty ‘evident’ that this ‘diforder ‘fhould-be a fit of» the
_palfy, falling upon the brain, whereby the “native ‘fhould ‘fuffer -a-
privation of fenfe and motion, particularly deftructive to the ideas
of the mind, and to the force of memory. Under this “direftion
Mr. Witchell really had the misfortune to fall down in an’ apo-—
pleétic fit, which held him’ for fome time ina -ftate. of perfed '
infenfibility, deprived of fight and motion, and of every vifible ap-
pearance of life. When circulation was reftored, and pulfation re-
turned, the native became fenfible to pain, and re-poffeffed all the
funétions of the body ; but his memory continued for fome time wholly
arrefted, and was ever after greatly impaired : his whole frame felt the
fhock, and his conftitution ‘was vifibly ftruggling with it, during the
full time of this direction. Our'recovery, indeed, fromall complaints :-
influenced by Saturn is ufually flow; but particularly fo, when they are
oceafioned almoft entirely by ‘his own malignant influence, unabated by
milder rays. 7 |


“@a3M.


UW © F TAAS STROLL: O.CIY. |! 771


ie arg Meo ThisodireQionids ofca/more grateful quality, giving the
native cheerfulnefs; and: removing infome meafure hisihabitual) melan-
choly..: This: direction naturally inclines the fancy: to’ women,: and ins
cites amorous defires;: and I have no doubt but thesnative, even under
an. impaired. conftitution;: anda confirmed ‘nervous habit, was more
than ordinarily: awakened: to thefe defires. during the operation of this
afpect. « Iti was,)meverthelefs, too indelicate) a queftion for. me to put,
however my curiofity: might have been-excited bythe viftblecdefignation
of the) planets, or-however anxious I. might have been tovjuftify the di«
rections of a nativity which were intended for public {crutiny.


d 4 @M... This-diretion participates extremely .of ‘the quality ‘of
the foregoing, aod. they. operate in many inftances with a,joint influs:
ence, being both from afpects made in the world, -and coming up.
nearly together. |-The native, hathocertainly flrong predilections:in fas.
vourof fome particular female ;, and, if his conftitution was not-fome-.
what impaired, and his mind pretty much-engrofled by other concerns, I
have no kind-of. doubt, but-he would, have married again while-this di-)
rection- eperated ;.,but,;: though /it, gives a) radical import of fuch am,
event, yet when we, come, to, confider it maturely.with the quality of
other planets, .whofe horofcopical .places,at the, birth give them acon.
ceg@g. in the completion of {uch an.event, we fhallifind fome few argu-..
ments wanting to give it a complete turn in favour of a-fecond matrimo-=
nial engagement, But that the native, had {trong prepofleflions that way,
I have not the leaft, doubt, and with a lady: who perhaps isnow. living,»
and might confirm the truth of my, remark. it nogn )


Afes-é «, This, direction is naturally good, inclining the native:to
fortitude and perfeverance, and gives animation to:the {pirits, .and vigour
to the mind.-: He -will, however, be,fomewhat abfolute, and arbitrary
under -it, particularly, in his,own family, and with his-more immediate
domeftics and, dependents.» With refpett to, bedily’ infirmity, he will
feel an affliction of choler, and.a feverifh tendency, induced by the qua-
lity of Mars, .who has borne rule in the;three laft dire@tions ; and, by
thus encreafing the energy of his influence upon the fpirits, will leave
them fubjeét to a flow.nervous fever, deftructive to the radical moifture
of nature, and to the free circulation.of the: blood and. juices.

; } 2 FW j G WOM VIIBUIU @. oD y

©Q.bM.; This, direftion, isthe vforerunner, ofa; worfe. . It.is not
a configuration that deftroys life; but it is one that. unhinges the ner-,
vous fyftem, and reduces the native to a painful ftate of hypochondriacal

PAA | melancholy,


778 AN ITLLUSTRA‘TION

melancholy. It is a remarkable circumftance, that Saturn and the Sun
fhould from the laft ‘afpe@ in this nativity, which precedes that of
death ; and that of the Sun, ‘being axarera, ‘no fooner feparates from Sa-
turn, the moft malevolent ‘planet, than he applies to and receives the
Part of Fortune, which is dy/eg. Neither is it lefs curious to remark
the gradual fatality which is here brought on and announced to the na-
tive. Mars, the lefler infortune, occupies the chief influence of the three
directions which operate prior to this; and he no fooner retires, than he
is fuceeeded by the greater infortune, Saturn, who gives place to the
Sun, the anareta. And thus, operating bya gradual yet fenfible influ-
ence, from a lefs to a fuperior ftate of infirmity, brings on that inevita-


ble and final deftiny, which gives every good and virtuous individual ‘* a
place amongft the gods.” .


6 9 ©. In this direction, therefore, we fee the two principal fig-
nificators of life and death, which were conftituted in the radical figure
of birth, form that fatal configuration, which, in all countries, and
in all nativities, is uniformly the fame. The one, at the moment we
enter into this world, is conftituted hyleg, ‘that is, giver or protetor
of life, becaufe we were formed and nourifhed in the womb under the
influence and temperature of that particular planet, and becaufe it
guards us in every peril of our earthly pilgrimage.. The other is in the
fame early period conftituted amareta, -or deftroyer of life, becaufe it is
tempered by its horofcopical pofition, with qualities diametrically Op-
pofite tothe hyleg; and becaufe, whenever it’can form an evil confi-
guration with the hyleg, it will deprive it of all its power and efficacy,
and overcome its preferving faculty, by a fuperabundant energy of op-
pofing matter, which nothing lefs than a fupernatural caufe can either
alter or prevent. And therefore, when that certain caufe, that vege-
tative faculty, which fupports nature and fuftains life, is thus over-
whelmed by a redundancy or fuperiority of matter or influence, incom-
patible with, and contrary to, itfelf, its exiftence becomes annihilated,
and the native dies. Thus it is in the prefent cafe. ‘The Sun, in this
nativity, being conftituted of a dire& oppofite quality to'the Part of
Fortune, will, whenever they form an oppofition or quartile afpea,


abforb its power, and deftroy its influence; in which cafe, . whatever
be the thing that was nourithed or brought into being under it, it will be
deftroyed likewife. ;


If we regard, with a critical eye, the prefent figure of birth, we
fhall find every proof of thofe oppofing qualities in thefe two fignifica~


tors,


OF. A SyTeR @ LQ 6 ¥s 779


tors, that conftitute the Ay/eg and anareta; but the number of days,
weeks, months, or years, which thefe two fignificators will occupy
before they meet or form this difcordant afpe@, can only be known. by
equating the arch of direction which brings them; intocontact.. This
I have done in p..68%, where it appears, that thefe two fignificators
were fifty- fix years and ten months in coming to this pofition in the
heavens, from their ref{pective places or politions at the. time.of the na-
tive’s birth ; and it is a fact too well eftablifhed to admit cither. doubt. or
refutation, that the native died with a ftroke of the palfy,:, which this
afpcct deferibes, on the ggth of January, 1785, at which. time he was
exactly fifty-fix years and ten months old !


Thus it is apparent, that, however unaccountable or undefinable thefe
planetary irradiations might appear, they certainly are what the Su-
preme Author of all things originally intended them to be, the natural
and efficient caufes of thofe ftrange and eompLiShE mixtures and af-
fe€tions in men, which have. confounded the {peculations of the. wifett
philofophers. And I am. perfuaded that no man, unlefs it be thofe
who are wilfully obftinate, can hefitate in forming. his opinion of the
truth of thefe premiles 3 particularly after obferving. that, no remarkable
incident of this native’s life ever happened, but under the uniform influ-
ence, and as it were by the confent, of one or other of thefe direétions,
the defining of which conftitutes the only true, and rational mode of
predicting by, or of calculating, nativities.


But, eRe difmifs this fubject, and in order; to render every cake
of the fcience as plain as poffible, it will be proper,.in this. place, to
explain what is meant by Revolutions and Tranfits...A revolution isa
returning or revolving back of any one of the celeftial bodies tothe
fame place or point in the heavens from whence it firft.receded ; for fo
the word radically imports. But, in our application of it to explain or
illuftrate any particular circumftance ina nativity, it ufually refers only
to the return of the Sun to his radical place in the zodiac, that is, to
the fame degree and minute of the fign wherein he was pofited in the
hour of birth. For the truth is, that. revolutions 4nd tranfits more
properly appertain to the fate of empires than to the circumftances of
a nativity. It has, however, been found, by eftablifhed obfervation
and long practice, that the revolutions, not only of the Sun, but of all
the other principal fignificators in a nativity, to their radical places in
the horofcope, excite a very powerful additional influence in the afpects
and directions then operating, whether of a good or evil nature; but

Nos 39. gG more


~N


780 A N.YIQV. UG TF RAAT AON


more particularly when the planet, fo falling into its radical point,
participates ftrongly-of the. fame quality. and teaperature-as the confi-
guration or direction then in force... And hence it is-utual for every
judicious proficient in this art, when he is: calculating and bringing up


the directions of a nativity, to: erect revolutional figures through the ~
whole period of the native’s life, in otder to obtain the moft fatisfactory_


information in the probable or poffible means, whereby any important
direction, whether good or bad, might be increafed or diminifhed in
its natural quality and, import, by the falling: in of the revolution of
any other fignificator, or of any particular planet tranfiting the place,
under the influence of which the cuftomary effect of the direction may
be varied.


The ufual way of erecting a revolutional figure is by adding five
hours and forty-eight minutes to the exact time of the, native’s birth
for every year’s revolution; and, when the aggregate exceeds twenty-
four hours, the twenty-four are to be caft away. For example, I would
fet a revolutional figure of Mr. Witchell’s»birth.- Now the the time of
the day on which he was born was feven hours. fifty-two minutes in
the afternoon. The figure of birth, it muft be obferved, ftands for the
firft year; confequently the firft revolutional figure to be fet for the na-


tive exhibits the pofitions of the luminaries and planets for the fecond.


year of his age ; and the feventh alfo anfwers from the feventh to the
eighth ; and therefore, if we add five hours forty-eight minutes for every
year, cafting away the aggregate of twenty-four hotrs as often as they oc-
cur, wefhal] uniformly obtain the precife fituations and pofitions of the
planets for the year required.


ly. 52 a Be es
‘Thus, feven times five hours forty-eight minutes is 40 36
From which f{ubtratt — os 24,6
And there'remains 1038 as 16° 36

To which add the hours from noon on the day of the-na-
. tave’s birth, viz. — — a 7 62
And the fum will be — -—— 24 28


From this fum the twenty-four hours are again to be caft'away, and
the Table of Houfes is to be entered with twenty-eight minutes, under
the title of Yzme from Noon, in the fame manner as’ before directed for


erecting the horofcope ; and the heavenly bodies will be’ found*to difs.


play themfelves in the following manner :
Bs Having


@ FAVS TROL 10.G1Y; 281


Revolutional Figure.


BEGINNING
March 22..28m. P. M. 17355


AND ENDING


March 21. 6h. 16m. P. M.


Having delineated the figure, we are to. examine how. it agrees’ with»
the radix, or original figure, of birth, and whether -it.be in. fextile, ,
trine, or oppofition, to it ; and alfo what planets make their. return to
their own: radical places, or to the radical places of others ; and alfo.
whether the luminaries be well-beheld by the’benefics, or afflicted by
the rays of noxious planets, or by the fixth, eighth, or twelfth, houfes.
of the radical figure of birth ;or whether Saturn or Mars afflict the
places of the Sun, Moon, or afcendant of the radix, or whether there,
occur any eclipfe either upon or near the radical places of the three,
Hylegiacals ;. for, according as thefe circumftances are found, fo will the
affairs of the native be either: injured or advantaged, and. his health
either impaired or eftablifhed, as the cafe fhall happen to.be. For, if:
unbenign occurrences in the revolution fall in with qualities and rays
of the fame difcordant nature in the radix, evil and affliction will be.


predicted, in proportion to the ftrength and qualities of the fignifica-.
tors 3.


"82 ANSE LY LIU. S pT ERT AON ©


tors; and, on the contrary, if grateful and benign influences thus con-
cur, and mutually ard and unite in benevolent tem ptratures, then great
and lafting good, according to the different natures of the planetary
caufes and effects, will. undoubtedly take place. But, to make this
fomewhat more familiar to the reader’s underftanding, I fhall give a few
general rules, whereby judgement may be determined in other cafes.


Whenever the hyleg, or giver of life, whether it be the Sun, Moon,
Part of Fortune, or Afcendant, tn the radix or genethliacal figure of
birth, is found to behold its place in the revolutional figure, by form-
in a fextile or trine afpect with each other, it is confidered a vifible
argument that the native fhall, during that yeat, enjoy health of body,
and that his affairs will in a general way go well; but, if this afpect be
made by a quartile or oppofition, the contrary ‘effects are denoted. So
if the Moon, in both the radix and revolutional figure, be free from the
malignant rays of the infortunes, and not combuft, it is likewife an
argument of an healthful and profperous year, more -efpecially 1f fhe be
configurated with benefice ftars. “But, if the Moon be combuft, or af-
flicted with the malefic rays of Saturn or Mars, it will prove an unlacky
and fickly year. a


If, in the revolutional figure, an eclipfe or comet fhould fall upon
the afcendant, it threatens a year of. great trouble and anxiety to the
native. But, if the eclipfe in.the revolutional figure, whether of the
Sun or Moon, fhould fall exaftly in the fame degree as the hyleg, or
giver of life, in the radical figure,of birth, and any violent configuration
of the malefics fhould begin to operate at the fame time, it will, in
all probability, affect the native’s life, by encreafing the malignancy of
the afpect, and heightening the violence of the means, whatever it may
be, by which life is threatened. So, if an eclipfe of the Sun fhould
in like manner fall im the fame degree and minute of the Dragon’s
Head, it alfo endangers life; but, if it only falls near the fame point,
it then threatens danger or difeafe in that year, but not fuch as fhould
touch life. ?


If in the revolution the Part of Fortune.falls in the fame degree as
in the radix, it is implicative of the fame effects, and will tend to fa-
cilitate them in a more eminent and obvious manner ; and, if it happens
that this pofition falls ina good afpect with its difpofitor, it will greatly
tend to encreafe the native’s wealth or fubftance during that year; but,
if.the afpett be made with malefic rays, and the horofcopical Be
Oo


Pa


OF A, So TeRy Ola Oy GY. 983


of the Part of Fortune in abject places, it-portends a direct contrary
effect. It is, however, always to be remembered, that any planet
ftrong and effentially dignified in a revolution, and at the fame time in
good afpect with the Part of Fortune, or with the lord of the fecond
houfe, or with Jupiter, Venus, or the Moon in reception, uniformly
prefages good fortune to the native during that year.


If the Sun be in the firft houfe, mid-heaven, or eleventh houfe of
the evolutional figure, in good afpect with Jupiter or Venus in the
radix, and free from the unbenign radiations of the infortunes, it de-
notes an increafe of honour and reputation, of refpett and efteem,
during that year, although no direction whatever fhould be then ope-
rating to increafe its influence. So Jupiter, well configurated in the
afcendant, or in Pifces, Cancer, or Sagittarius, indicates the fame, ac-
cording to the quality and occupation of the native; but he denotes
honour and efteem in a much more eminent degree when pofited in the
‘ medium. ¢cli. Or, if the revolutional afcendant be the place of the
Dragon’s Head in the'radix, and irradiated by Jupiter, it likewife pro-
motes honour, and encreafes worldly efteem ; and fo, vice verfa, if the
afcendant of the radical figure of birth be the place of the Dragon’s
Head in the revolution, it denotes the fame.


If in the revolutional figure the luminaries are conjoined in the fe-
venth or fourth houfe, it prefages death either to the father or mother
of the native; more efpecially if their places in the radical figure be
likewife infortunated by malignant rays. If Saturn be found to afflict
the Sun by quartile or oppofition, or by conjunttion in one of the an-
gular houfes, it is an argument that the father fhall make his exit, but,
if the Moon be thus afflicted by Saturn, with relative pofitions in the
two horofcopes, it prefages death to the mother; for in thefe. cafes the
Sun is natural fignificator of the father, and the Moon of the mother;
and, when thus configurated in a revolutional figure, they forebode
death to happen within the year. |


Whenever the lord of the fifth is pofited in the afcendant, or the lord
of the afcendant in the fifth houfe of therevolutional figure, and ia a
fruitful fign, with due affinity to the radix, it is a moft propitious con-=
figuration to give the native iffue, if married; but, if fingle, it will bea
very dangerous year to the native, by intercourfes with the other fex.—
If the native be a male, he will moft probably have an illegitimate off-
{pring to provide for; but, if a female and a virgin, fhe will rarely

No. 39. 9H efcape


&


: ,
484 AN Pa UU Ss TY RATS ON


efcape ruin, ‘and will probably become the unproteéted mother of an
unfortunate orphan. This afpect is therefore to be regarded with the
utmoft attention, and refifted with becoming fortitude and refolution by


both fexes.


If the lord of the fifth be pofited in the twelfth, (it being the eighth
from the fifth,) in fimilar afpeét to the radix, it threatens death.to the
native’s children. So likewife if Saturn or Mars, or the Dragon’s Tail,
be pofited in the fifth houfe of the revolutional figure, in evil afpect
with the,radix, it, forebodes death to the native’s iffue in the courfe of
that year, Or if Saturn or Mars afflict the fifth houfe or its lord by
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, it implies the fame. :


Whenever the lord of the afcendant, in the revolutional figure, is po-
fited in the feventh houfe, and comes by direction to the radical place of
Venus in the figure of birth ; or if the lord of the feventh, an the revo-
lution, is brought by direction to the afcendant of the radix, they afford
ample proofs that the native will marry in the courfe of that year. Or
if Jupiter, Venus, the Moon, or Part of Fortune, be thus irradiated, it
denotes a propenfity in the native to contract matrimony, although cir-
cumftances might occur to prevent it.


~ Whenever Saturn is pofited in the feventh houfe of the radix, and
found alfo in the feventh houfe of the revolution, it threatens death to
the native’s wife before the expiration of that year. Mars and the Dra-
gon’s ‘Tail thus configurated, imports little lefs. Mercury, if afflicted
by the malevolents, and in the feventh houfe, declares: much danger to
the native ; but, if configurated with Venus, under the fame malignant
rays, it threatens mifchief both to the native and his wife.


Mars, Mercury, and Venus, being the proper fignificators of. pro- »
feffion, if they are afflicted in the revolutional figure, with direct affinity
to the fame places in the radix, prefage great forrow and embarraf{ment
to the native in his line of bufinefs during that year., .But.a comet
or eclipfe falling upon the mid-heaven ‘of ‘the ‘radix .and revolution, -
irradiated by the good afpects of cither the Sun.or Mars, will,produce
avery profperous year to the native, and will bring him honour and
preferment. EWE


Thus far we have confidered the general tendency and import. of the
feveral, fignificators in a revolutional figure, as they are conneCted with
2 or


OPP AS TORO TE GC! Y, 785


or behold the radical figure of birth. There is now another effect to
be confideréd, which the erratic ftars produce by their refpetive motions
round the Sun, which are called tranfits, that is, a returning to or
re-afluming either-their own place, or the place of-any. other planet in
the revolutional figure, fo as exactly to corvefpond with their radical
places in the figure of birth. Thefe tranfits, when of a remarkable or
eminent nature, always produce an effect or influence of their own,
peculiar to the nature and quality of that particular ftar by which fuch
tranfits aremade ; but whenever they fall in places of the figure, or in
configuration with other planets, where a direCtion is coming up, or
any diftinct afpect then operating, they never fail to co-operate with,
and give additional force and efficacy to, fuch afpects or direCtions,
whether good or evil, as the cafe and quality of the feveral fignificators
fhall happen to be. And for this reafon it is highly proper, whenever
the fpeculum of a natwity is projected, and the various directions
brought up, to examine what tranfits are likely to occur in the courfe
of the native’s life that may poflibly vary the effet’ of any particular
direction ; and, confequently, of the incidents or events predicted there-
by, a8 likely to happen tothe native. For this reafon I have annexed a
few general obfervations, calculated to direct the reader’s judgment un-


der this {peculation.


When Saturn returns to or'tranfits his own radical place in the revo-
lutional figure, well dignified, he indicates profperity to the native; and,
if he be lord of the afcendant either in the radical or revolutional horo-
fcope, he will tender that profperity fill more excellent and-confpicu-
ous. If Saturn tranfits the radical place of Jupiter, propitioufly confi-

urated, it denotes ‘increafe of fortune by the favour of eminent men ;.
if ‘he tranfits the place of Mars, it gives advantages from friends or bre-
thren ; and, if thefe tranfits are made with evil configurations, the con-


trary evils will be produced.


“When Saturn tranfits the place of the Sun, it is implicative of fome
ftrong or violent contention with magiftrates, or with men in power, in
the courfe of that year; and, if accompanied with afpeéts of difeafe,
will produce bodily ficknefs and’ infirmity. If Saturn tranfits the place
of Venus, it demonftrates infelicity froma female eaufe ; if the place
of Mercury, it implies advantages from ftudy; if the place. of the
Moon, it declares afflittion both of the body and mind; if the place
of the Dragon’s Head, it tends to promote the native’s good fortune ;


but, 1f Saturn tranfits the place of the Dragon’s Tail,..it has a moft
dangerous


786 A Nigel U6 TOR AGT 1b O5N


dangerous and malignant tendency. If the place of the Part of For-


- tune be tranfited by Saturn, with benevolent rays, it denotes encreafe


of fubftance and eftate ; but, if by evil rays, the contrary effect: will be
produced.


' Precifely the fame is the refult of all the other fignificators tranfit-
ing their own or other planets’ places in the radical or revolutional
horofcopes ; with only this invariable diftinétion, that the effects vary
according to the nature, quality, and temperature, of each refpective
planet, and to the radiations and afpects formed with them, or to the
dire@iions then operating ; for revolutions or tranfits of a benevolent
and friendly nature, falling in with good directions then operating,
will vifibly increafe their propitious quality, and greatly benefit the
native ;.whilft, on the other hand, revolutions or tranfits of an evil de-
fignation, falling in with noxious and malignant directions, will en-


creafe the evil, or deftroy life. But good revolutions or tranfits falling in


with bad directions mollify their malignancy; whilft evil ones, oppofed
to good directions, lefien the good fortune then operating, and deprive
the native of the full completion of thofe golden advantages which per-
haps appeared almoft within his grafp. Ts

To difcover the precife time when any event*or direction fhall take
place in a revolutional figure, we direct the five hylegiacals, as in the
radix ; always obferving, as it is for the year enfuing, to direct the tem-
porary progrefs of the zodiac for five hours forty-eight minutes. For
inftance, {uppofe the cufp of the medium cceli hath one degree of Gemini,
that point 1s to be directed to every afpect that falls between that one de-
gree and twenty-four degrees of Leo ; and alfo, if the afcendant hath at
the fame time eight degrees of Virgo, it muft be directed to all promit-
tors between that point and nine degrees of Scorpio, becaufe that point
will be upon the cufp of the afcendant for the enfuing year, and Leo
will occupy the mid-heaven. In like manner the Sun, Moon, and
Part of Fortune, muft be directed unto their promittors, always femem-
bering, that the diftance of a planet from the afcendant is found by ob-
lique afcenfion, and from the mid-heaven by right afcenfion. But, when
one planet is directed to another for the purpofe of afcertaining tranfits,
their diftances from each other are found, by oblique afcenfion or defcen-
fion, under the pole of that planet which is taken for fignificator ; and
the diftance which is thus given by degrees muft be converted into time,
2 with the given denomination of degrees into the following

able


£


———


OFA S RRO OG Y¥.


5 : y
4 : Se eed i]


A REVOLUTIONAL TABLE.


| NA Table for Degrees. A Table for Minutes.


{|Deg.) Days. | b. m. | m. Days. | h. m. | m. |Days.
iis 4. 4 56 I Ot MATT D. Bt 2,
Hi 2 8 Gast ates: O 3 -22)1 32 2
3} 12 | 14 48.) 3 AD eines ge 2
PN a le oa ine 20 coeliac a Geis 6-44 }934 ) 2
ETL Gee O 40 5 fe) G62 iiegs 2
EO ARs 696.18 on teres (6/1e36 2
Pi 29. P1042 se Ze OWN ELE Ay, 1907 %
Fu B31 Gh Sas Ue ih 1899.92 5 x38 2
Ql 297 120 Baan iS Oe RES SQL 39 4
LOU. 42 1 20 | 10 ° 16.50 | 40 ae
Taf 46,0} cOonG. 5 ta OG ARTO esl s4t 2.
12] 20 “de hly he Wok? OW [e7osnL42 2%
19 4°54 EG: MEG Se Oy? (S2R SHA 943 zh
oe a) 21 4 | 14 Oo, | 23,33 | 44 3
B5 63 oI in a NS SEA Be 2724. 5045 1 B
16}. 67 6, 56. | 16 I 2.55 | 46 | 2
PA, Phy hE RS AF [ot es ASO MeaZy lec 3
18] 75. [16 48. ] 18 17 dp Gay iiias 3
19 | sfQin| SE 4b 29.ps Te] Fis 49 fe 3
20 4 2.40. |) 20 I 9 39 | 5° 3
22.) 92 | 12.32] 21 Tibet 20 nog tT 5
24 | 100 22 24. ||| 22 iI 13 1 1152 a
26 | 109 |. 8 16 || 23 1} (14 42 53 2
28 | 114 £8\¢ Bo], 24, I 16 23° 54 3
30.<| 126 439.00) 2 5 Dik Pi Sha Wass 3
4o}168 |. 5 20) 26]. 1 | 19.45 || 56 2
$0.4 210 6yA0:| 3377 tie BO 587 3
60 | 252 [48:0] 28 Tie} 123.2 FW 1§9 4
49-4 294, [NOLO 29] 92). @ 48 || 59 4
80 | 336 |} 10.40. || go ) 2 28 || 60 4


~ 788 AN sD us TRATION


comemelieton a AB AE
Collecting allthe Days of the Year, and ferving fuccetlively to find the
~ Month and Day of any Accident.


OPS) 2) Ss) 2 CE) ee] eee) aig
aaa eee ee ous | ee
He eis oe ae NS ee a | aes
3 eh | ee
I Vo} 32 Go }*.Qif e221) 182)482) 213). 2441274) 305) B35
2429) 334.61 Op ogtiA2etae 2ln8 2214) 246127 5)-206) B30
31 3) 34] 62 | 93] 123] 154) 184! 215) -246] 276) 3071 337
4.4244-°35-1 63 |" gal ted a5 $ic18 cl 216). 24715277 3e8) 398
51} 5 |.36) 64 |' 95 125) 156 186) 217| 248) 278) 309, 339
6) 6 | 37 | 65 | 96; 126) 157) 187] 218) 249 279) 310 340}
7 | 7 | 38 | 66 | 97) 127, 158] 188) 219) 250 280 314] 34r
8 1° 8.) 39°) 67 | g8)128)°159) 189] 220) 2g1| 1281) 312 Baal.
91} 9] 40) 68} gg}.129| 160}. 190) 221] 252) 282) 313} 343))
10 |.10 | 41 | 69 | 106] 130] 161 191|. 222) 2¢3) 283) 3141 344ih
11 | 11 | 42 | 7o | 1or}4a3H 162]. 192) 223) 254) 284) 315) 345]]
12°| 12 | 43] 71 | 102-1321} 163) 199) 224] 255, 285] 316, 346)
13 | 13 | 44 | 72 | 103] 193) 164| 194] 225| 256) 286) 317, 347
14 134) 45 | 73] 104} 134] 165) 195] 226) 2¢7| 287} 318 348
15 | 15 | 46} 74 | tos! 175] 166} 196] 227] 258)-288) 319) 349)I
16 | 10 | 47 | 75 ' 106) 136] 167,:197] 228} 259] 289, 320) 350


17 | 17 | 48 | 76 | 109} 197} 168] 192] 229) 260] 290}: 321! 351
18 | 13.) 49 | 77 | 108] 133] 169] 199] 230] 261|.291] 322) 352
i9 | 19 | 50 | 78 | 109] 139} 170} 200) 231) 262! 292).323 353
20 | 20 | 51 | 79°} 110] 140] 171] 201} 232) 263] 293) 324° 354)
21420} §2 | 80.) 111] 141) 172) 202] 233.264) 294) 325) -3 551)
22 722. $3.4 81 | 112) 142/172) 1209) 294) 2661-204) 226-056
23 | 23 | 54 | ©2 | 113) 143) 174] 204] 235) 266) 290) 327 357
24 | 24 1 $5 | °3 | 114) 144) 175] 205) 235] 267] 297) 328 358),
25 | 25 | 59 | 84) 115] 145} 176] 2061 297 268 298} 329) 359}
,26 | 26} 57 | 85 | 1141 146) 177] 207) 238] 269] 299] 330} 360
27 | 27 | 58 | 86 |.117| 144] 178) 208] 239, 270) 300] 334] 361
23 | 25 | 59 | 87 | 118 148) 179] 209] 240 271) 301! 332] 362
29 | 29° 88 | 119} 149] 180] 210) 241] 272} 302] 333] 363
30 | 30 89 | 120] 150] 181) 211] 242) 273) 308 334] 364


I '- Whether ~


O Fi iA S TR GOL 70 4G: Y. fatgeau


Whether the directions be radical or revolutional, the table in the
foregoing page will ferve equally for both, by changing the names-of
the months to any other, according to the given day of the month of
any nativity, making the day of birth the firft day of the year; and
always remembering, that when it happens to be leap-year, one day mutt .
be added to February, and there will then be three hundred and fixty-fix


days in that year.


I have now completed every remark and every inftruétion that is or
can be neceflary for the perfect calculation of nativities; and I am
bold to fay, that whoever will beftow fufficient time and application to
the rules I have laid down, and that will attend properly to the colla-
teral circumftances, will find no difficulty in obtaining a foreknowledge
of all material events relating to himfelf, or to any other perfon, whole
real nativity is laid before him. I have, in the management of the
foregoing nativity of Mr. Witchell, been particularly plain and copious,
that no underftanding might go uninformed, as well of the fimplicity .
and verity of the art, as of its moral tendency to promote the good of
mankind, and the certainty with much human events might be foughe
out through its means. © - . >


Every thing I have ftated with refpect to Mr. Witchell’s nativity. is
incontrovertible fact. That gentleman, when in perfect health, and.
in full vigour of mind, reforted to me for no other purpofe than to
hold difputations upon the rudiments of the f{cience, and to inform
himfelf as to its hypothefis and. probability in the fcale of reafon and
{cience.. The more he enquired, the more convinced he was of pla-~
netary influence and effet. He proceeded from theory to practice. He
amufed himielf with a variety of difquifitions upon the different branches
of the art, and had the pleafure to find, that, in all cafes where truth
and perfpicuity were the bafis of his enquiries, there were no in- |
ftances of doubt or deception.in the predictions refulting from them. ~
Well grounded in all the common departments of aftronomy, he obtained
an extenfive theoretical knowledge of this part of it with the greater
facility; and, to reduce it to regular practice, he began with calcu-
lating his own nativity. In comparing the afpects with the particular
incidents of his life, he was foon convinced they were infeparable from
each other; and hence it was that he committed the revifion and com-
pletion of it to my care, with a firm and manly folicitation to have the
anaretical direction brought up and afcertained, as well as thofe of fmaller. —


magnitude and importance. This was a tafk I performed with the
Sk greater,


790 A Ne? On Ars fe RA TION


greater fatisfa€tion, becaufe it was to undergo the fcrutiny of the moft
perfect. mathematician of age; and becaufe his conviction and ap-
probation of it would ftamp new reputation upon a fcience, which, _
having few or no real advocates, has been long borne down by popular
prejudice and obftinate declamation. Having performed every part of
the calculation with an exactitude that highly pleafed him, he made
ufe of it as a friendly monitor of the good and evil that awaited the re-
fidue of his days; and, when he approached towards the ftated time of.
his diffolution, he would mention it without the fmalleft emotion, and
confidered the knowledge of it as one of the greateft bleflings of his
life, which not only drew his attention to his Maker, and fixed his
thoughts upon celeftial defires, but raifed his mind above the contem-
plation ‘of earthly ‘enjoyments, and gave ferenity and calmnefs to his
~ converfation and deportment. It was on one of thefe occafions, that
he requefted me to print his. nativity in my work, which I began
‘to publifh fome little time before; obferving that the evidence of fo _
recent and refpectable a proof of aftrological predi@ion might tend to
bring mankind to reafon, and admonifh them no longer to abandon this
fublime and interefting branch of knowledge.


And now, what need can there be of further argument in fupport of


fo felf-evident a doctrine? or what advantage could it poflibly be to -


me, or to any difinterefted man, to préach up the advantages of a fci-
ence which hath no exifténce in reafon or in truth? The facts here”
laid down are unqueftionable ; and fuch, I think, as no reafonable man
will attempt to refute. If farther proofs are required, I fhall at
all times be ready to furnifh them, or to explain any matter or thing
herein-before laid down that might be deemed unintelligible, or that
is not thoroughly underftood; at the fame timé that, if any ob{ftinate
unbeliever, or any other defcription of men, can offer a fair and candid
argument. in oppofition to aftral influence, I fhall be ready to hear them
with refpect and attention. Wretched indeed fhould I be, if, after
every precaution to guard myfelf againit-the encroachments of enthu-
fiafm, I fhould fall a vittim to its phrenzy, or be deemed a madman
or a fool: at the ‘fame time let me not fhut my eyes againft demon-
ftrable facts, merely becaufe the bulk of mankind chufe to difcounte-
nance them, or determine to become wilfully blind. I-have examined,
and am convinced ; and I truft I have fufficiently éftablithed the’ reality
of this fcience; and have abundantly fhewn that the ambient matter,
collefed by the rays of the celeftial bodies, and communicated by a
fympathy of action’ to all fublunary things, is the caufe of all thofe

: | unde-


aa


OFTASTROEL OG ¥ 291


undefcribable occurrences in human nature, which, for want of a more
clear comprehenfion of the wonderful works of creation, are frequently
attributed to caufes, which call in queftion the benign attributes of the
Deity, and difgrace the underftanding of the meaneft of his creatures
upon earth.


It hath been contended by fome,*in oppofition to that part of aftro-
logical doftrine, which’ determines the bodily form and mental difpo-
fition of the native from the feveral fignificators in his own and in
his parent’s genethliacal figures, that this likenefs or fimilitude’in body
and temper is ftamped by the energy or idea of the parents in the act of
copulation. Although Iam willing to admit this obfervation in part,
yet I contend that the. primary caufe, which furnithes that energy or
motion in the parents, is derived from their refpective fignificators in
the heavens; and that they imprefs ¢heir particular quality in propor-
tion as they happen to be in dignity and power at that precife time. If
the fignificators of the mother are ¢hen fuperior in force and dignity,
the mother’s features and difpofition will be moft vifible; if the fa- ,
ther’s geniture be the ftrongeft, the father’s temper and fimilitude will


‘be moft predominant in the offspring then begotten; but, if both their


fignificators are equally ftrong, the child then equally participates in


the likenefs and difpofition of both his parents. Let it neverthelefs be


remembered, that, however ftrong the fignificators of both or either of
the parents might be, yet thofe proper to the fcetus or conceptional
matter invariably take the lead, and flamp that peculiar form and tem-
perature upon the native, which in a great meafure fupplant the firit
impreffions given by thofe of the parent, and form a perfon and mind
eflentially differing from both, though with fome veftiges of hereditary
fimilitude. And hence the reafon why fons and daughters more or lefs
depart from the ftature, feature, complexion, and temper, of their
parents; and why no two human beings, in the whole compafs of ge-
neration were ever yet formed precifely alike! Vf, therefore, the man
lives, who can fairly and completely refute this argument, he fhall
have my thanks and my applaufe. And I will add further, in the em.


’ phatic words of an unrivalled author, that “ my heart is already with


“‘him. I am willing to be converted. I admire his morality, and
«* would gladly fubfcribe to the articles of his faith. Grateful, as I am,_
‘*to the good Being whofe bounty has imparted to me this reafoning
«* intellect, I hold myfelf proportionably indebted to him, from whofe
‘‘enlightened underftanding another ray of knowledge communicates


‘¢to mine. But neither fhould I think the moit exalted faculties of


‘No. 40. gk f the


792 AN 2L b US TeoR & T1-6 N


‘‘the human mind a gift worthy of the divinity, nor any affiftance, in
‘‘ the improvement of them, a fubject of gratitude to my fellow creatures,
‘‘if I were not fatisfied, that really to inform the underftanding corrects
‘*and enlarges the heart.” eee


OBSERVATIONS on the NATIVITY of the Rev. GEORGE
WHITFIELD, M. A. aati


I fhall now, agreeable to the plan I have before laid down, introduce,
by way of example, a number of remarkable genitures, in order to fhew
that the afpects of the planets, and the influence of dire¢tions, are uni-
formly and invariably the fame in all cafes, and corre€tly diftinguith thofe
extraordinary a€tions in every native’s life, for which he afterwards be-

comes celebrated and famous.


The well-known life and chara€ter of the Rev. Mr. Whitfield, and ..
his remarkable prowrefs in the line he adopted, render him no unfit
-fabject for our prefent purpofe.. He was born on the 16th of Decem-
ber, 1714, as in the annexed plate of his geniture. At a very early
period of his life, he loft his father, and was left unprovided for in the »
world. When he arrived at the age of ten-years, his mother again con-
tracted matrimony, which turned out very unhappy; which is demon-
{trated by the mid-heaven coming at this time to a contra-antifcion of
the Moon; and, as both are fignificators of the mother, they prefage
much trouble and anxiety as well to her as tothe native. At fourteen
he was taken from fchool, and affifted his mother in the bufinefs of a
public houfe; at which time the mid-heaven came to a quartile of the
Sun, which always brings difgrace and trouble. His mother quitting
the inn, it was taken by, his brother ; and, his fifter-in-law and himfelf
not agreeing, they frequently fell out, and he would fometimes not
fpeak to her for three weeks together. This fullen auftere temper is
produced in the radix of his birth by the quartile of the Sun and
Mars; and to complete the obftinate perfeverance of his mind, the
Moon is in conjunction of Saturn, which invariably produces fuch a
temperature. : ge ee :


In fifteen years and twelve days from his birth, the Moon came to
the trine of Venus, who is the fignificatrix of joy and pleafure. Itisa
remarkable good diredtion, by falling in the eleventh houfe, which de-
notes friends; and, as Venus is in the third, it relates to kindred fons

ort


)ol/GEORGE WHITEFIELD, MA Val


A. Sh Seave
1___ 56 North
i ARO ee, 3 pee TAS «|
1. O Wort
2___ 44 Worth
4.) 31 South


|| Born 1/6. December
| 16H 57m. P.M.
171A. Pa |
Tatitude 51-59}
|| Died 29" SeptisH.PM.
1770. at Newbury near


KM Bostore, wn._New Lnglan. \


Ares, feain, Briflol.


NPLI.


meda =


a
t
Ff Anane


 /,


OF ASTROLOGY. 793


fhort journeys. Under this direction it was refolved to fit the native for
the univerfity; but he went on fome vifits of pleafure before he con-
figned himfelf to the difcipline of a preparatory {chool. At the age of
feventeen years and one hundred and eighty-eight days, the Moon came
to a bodily afpe€t with Mars. This direction hath an evil fignification,
becaufe thefe two planets are by nature inimical to each other, as we have
already fufficiently fhewn; and it would have had a {till more malignant
influence, had not Venus at the fame time caft her trine afpett to Mars.
Under this direction he contracted an intimate acquaintance with feveral
debauched young gentlemen, who led him into a variety of fcrapes, and
into the wicked company of proftituted females.


At about eighteen years of age he was received into the univerfity ; for
which there came up a moft fignificant direftion of the afcendant to the
trine of Jupiter, which hath reference to preferment under the nobility,
clergy, religious focieties, and fuch like. Under this direction he was
chofen fervitor to feveral gentlemen of the univerfity, whereby he con-
ducted his pecuniary affairs fo well, that he did not ftand his friends in
twenty-four pounds in three years. At the period of eighteen years two
hundred and fifty-fix days, the Sun came ro the trine of Saturn; under
-which direétion the native abandons the eftablithed doftrines of the
church, and takes up the religious tenets of Methodifm, to the atter
aftonifhment and concern of all his relations and friends. At nineteen
years two hundred and forty-four days, the Sun again came to the trine
of Saturn; under which direction. the native more vigouroufly purtued
his religious principles, and became intimately acquainted with the
Rev. John Wefley, by whofe friendly advice and exemplary conduct he
ufed frequently to fay, ‘‘he had been delivered from the fnares of
Satan.”


At nineteen years one hundred and twenty-fix days from the time of
birth, the mid-heayen came to the oppofition of Jupiter. At this
time many infelicities arife by means of clerical men. The native’s
mind is tormented and oppreffed, and he is loaded with calumny and
contempt. He incurs the difpleafure of the heads of his college; his
relations alfo confpire againft him, and his mind becomes a prey to per-
¢urbation and defpair. This laid the foundation of a violent fit of fick-
nefs, which lafted him upwards of feven weeks, whilft this dire@ion
operated with its utmoft force; his life was fuppofed to be in danger,
and his enemies rejoiced in his affli@ion. At twenty years and two days,
the Moon came to the fextile of Mercury, under which favourable

direction


794 . AN, TRL US TRA FAO N


direftion he was reftored to health, and recovered his wonted refolu-
tion and {pirits.


At twenty years and two hundred and eighty-fix days from his birth,
the mid-heaven came to the trine of Venus, which produced him the
fincere regard of many perfons, with health and content, and profperity
in worldly affairs. Under this direction the native journeyed to Glou-
cefter, and foon afterwards to Briftol; in the courfe of which he ex-
perienced many offices of friendthip from thofe whom he had confidered his
enemies. Lady Selwyn, of Gloucefter, recommended him to the pa-
tronage of the Bifhop, who immediately fent for him, and offered to or-
dain him whenever he defired; and at the fame time prefented him with
five guineas. And the next direction coming up at twenty years three
hundred and fixty days from the time of birth, namely, on the 12th of
December, 1735, greatly encreafed the good fortune promifed by the for-
mer; for, under the influence of this direction, Sir John Phillips agreed
to allow him thirty pounds a year.


At twenty-one years and eighty-feven days, 14th March, 1736, the
afcendant came to the fextile of Venus. While this direction was ope-
rating, it gave the native a pleafant and agreeable time, full of profpe-
rity and content, with reputation and fuccefs in his vocation; fo that in
May following he was ordained. What renders this direction more re-
markably propitious is, that it falls in a good part of the horofcope,


and that Venus is no way afflicted. In Auguft following he returned to
London.


When he was twenty-one years three hundred and forty days old, 2. e.
on the 22d of November, 1736, the Moon came by direction to Spica
Virginis, a fixed ftar of the firft magnitude. Fixed ftars of a benevo-
lent quality, in fuch conjunctions, ufually denote fudden honour and
preferment, and frequently bring men into higher repute than any fingle
erratic influence; but, when mixed with planets of their own nature
and quality, they give durable reputation and profperity, as was
the cafe in the prefent inftance. At twenty-two years and twenty -
four days from the birth, namely, on the ioth of January, 1737, ‘the
Sun came to the trine of the Moon from the tenth houfe, the houfe of
profeffional honour; and, as the Moon is fignificatrix of the mixed mul-
titude, or common people, it declares that the native fhould experience
an uncommon fhare of honour and refpett from the middle clafs of peo-
ple, which every one knows was really the cafe. This afpec likewife

1 implies


© FAN SHTUREOL Lio! GY. 295


implies fome diftant journey ; and we find that Mr. Whitfield now firft
formed his determination of going to America. Under this direétion
the native acquired great popular applaufe, as he hath declared himéfelf ;
and at this time he preached in the parifh-churches. On the 30th of
October following, the afcendant came to the fextile of Venus, which
promifes fuccefs; and, by reafon that fo many benevolent directions
follow fo clofely after-one another at this juncture, his fuccefs became
more rapid and confpicuous. On the 10th of December the afcendant
came to the fextile of Mars; and on the 28th of the fame month the
native embarked for Georgia. This direction brings him into the fo-
ciety of military men, with whom harmony and attachment is moft
amply denoted by the fextile afpect.. It likewife gives the native fuit-
able magnanimity, fortitude, and courage.


The next direction is of a very dangerous and evil import, namely,
the medium cceli to the body of Mars, which, genethliacally confidered,
fuddenly expofes a native to the mifchance either of life or fortune ; it
ftirs up the wrath of powerful men againft him, and excites his mind
to popular tumults and commotions. This was in an extraordinary man-
ner exemplified in the perfon of Mr. Whitfield; for under this direction
he returned to England, landed at Brifto], and behaved with great ar-
rogance to the Chancellor of that Diocefe; and afterwards infulted and
rebuked the Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and contemned his authority,
with that of all the other dignitaries of the church. He was now
prohibited from performing divine fervice in any of the proteftant
churches ; in confequence of which he commenced feld preacher, in the
neighbourhood of King{wood, near Briftol. In February, 1739, the af-
cendant came to the conjunction of Mercury, at which time he was feized
with a violent fever, and continued very ill upwards of fix weeks.


At twenty-four years and feventy-eight days from the native’s birth,
March 5, the mid-heaven came to the body of Mercury, ruler of the
tenth houfe ; fo that, notwithftanding the oppofition and cenfure he met
with, yet. he was remarkably fuccefsful, and received great encourage-
ment from the populace, as this direction obvioufly denotes. Under its
operation he preached openly in Iflington church-yard, then at Moor-
fields, afterwards at Kennington Common, and at feveral other places
in the open fields round London. ‘The novelty of his dottrine and de-
portment excited public curiofity, and the populace flocked to hear him
from all quarters. He collected large fums of money daily, in the
form of a fubfcription for building the Orphan Houfe in Georgia; for

No. 40. gL which


“go AN) DID LI UW) SAT IRI MT FON

which purpofe the truftees: had granted him five hundred acres of land
for ever. ‘This direCtion likewife inclines the native to travel, and under *
its influence he embarked for Georgia in Auguft, but returned to England
again in-Mareh, v74d. Latloastq Sil Sean

From the thirty-fecond. to the thirty-fixth year of the native’s age,.
there happen four remarkably good directions, viz. ‘the Part of Fortune
to the conjunétion of the Moon, the Sun tothe fextile of Jupiter, the
Sun tothe conjunttion of Venus, and the Sun to the trine of Mars.
Under thefefeveral direCtions he confiderably encreafed his fubftance, grew
daily intohigher repute amongft his difciples, and publifhed feveral tracts
that met with univerfal approbation. Ele likewife under this-influence
married the widow of an apothecary.in Wales, with a fmall landed
eftate. On the 27th of June, 1751, the Sun came to the trine of Mars;
under which direction he collected large faums of money, and completed.
his tabernacle in Moorfields. :

At the age of forty-two years and fixty-eight days, March 4, 17%7,.
the afcendant came to the quartile of the Moon, an evil direction, pre-
faging much mifchief. The native was now publicly molefted and
abufed by the populace. He was driven from the chapel in Long Acre
with indignant violence; and in feveral of thefe popular tumults he
natrowly efcaped with hislife. He embarked for Ireland under: the
evil influence of this direttion, where he in vain attempted to gain pto-
felytes to his doctrine. The populace were ina fhort time irritated againft
him ; and after feveral fruitlefs efforts to fwbdue the paffions and fpirits
of his auditors, and after patiently enduring a copious fhare of. infalt
and abufe, accompanied with fome fevere chattifenyent, ‘he re-landed in
England, and came back to purfue his fortunein London.


At the age of forty-two years two -hundred and fifty-feven days, the
mid-heaven came to the fextile of the Sun, which is an afpect denoting
much good. Under this direttiom he found himfelf well received by
the populace; he refumed his former places of public declamation,
and went round the country, preaching in the open fields, or public
ftrects, as beft fuited his purpofe. His colleétions upon thefe occafions
were generally pretty liberal, particularly in places where his doétrine
and manner were novel, and he gained over many difciples. He returned |
to town, and under this benevolent dire¢tion he built his chapel in Tot-
tenham-Court Road.


At


~~ P™ j
OFTA STIR OUGaG yY¥ : 7197


At forty-five years: one hundred and eighteen days from the time of
_birth,, viz, April.a7,.:1760, the Moon eame tothe quartile of Venus.
This direction fallsin the twelfth houfe, and is the forerunner of anguifh
and afflition.; At, this time Foate’s comedy of the Minor made’ its ap-
pearance, which fo ftigmatized the native’s character, ‘that he never'got
the better of it.. He devoted himfelf to: the tafk of ipreaching it down,
and: perfevered. for a long while in this fruitlefs attempt; bur the infult
and fatire of the populace; was fo great, that he was under the neceflity of
withdrawing himfelf from the performance of divine fervice even‘ in his
own. chapels.; At this time likewife' many of his) principal followers de-
ferted him, particularly a diftinguifhed lady, from'whom he had received
very great fupport... Phis direction is immediately followed up by the
Part of Fortune to the/oppofttion of Jupiter, a banefal afpec&, which
came up the 20th of May, 1760, and alfo declares lofs of reputation and
faobftance to the native... Under this direttion feveral others of his moft
opulent.difciples abandoned him, and the pecuniary emoluments of his
chapels were. greatly decreafed. | | | |


In September, 1764, the Part of Fortune came by direftion to the
bodily afpect of Mars, which hath fignification of many - violent con-
tentions between the native and his adherents about the loaves and
fithes; with lofs of property and refpect-in confequence. The next
afpeG came up the sth of December following, that is, in forty-nine
years three hundred and fifty-thtee days from thetime of birth, when:
the mid-heaven, which reprefents the native’s honour and reputation,
comes to the quartile. of. Venus in the twelfth houfe. This is a ma-
lignant direction, calculated to blaft the native’s general character, and.
to produce fome fudden evil from a female: quarter. - Thefe fucceffive
direclions, being fraught with difappointments and infurmountable per-
plexities to the native, prepared his mind to feek an-afylum in the more
grateful climes of America.


At fifty years one hundred and eighteen days from the time of birth;.
the afcendant came to the conjunction of the Sun, and is then brought
to a quartile afpect with Jupiter, in an equally malignant radiation of
the Moon. The union of thefe afpects is extremely fingular, as is the
manner in which the Hyleg and Amareta are here brought together, by
the united force of three co-operating malevolent direétions, al! of
which came up. in September, 1770, and deprived this celebrated cha-
raCter of life, on the 18th day of that month, at Newbury, near Bofton,
in America, : )

As


al


ake


798 ANY 2 ELA Ui se Three 1 Oy


As to the natural temper and difpofition of Mr, Whitfield, it was
none of the beft, as: might be collected from his:own words: ‘I can
“truly confefs,” faith he, ‘*that I was brutifh from my mother’s
‘*womb ; and fo brutifh, as to hate inftruction. I can date fome early
<©adts of uncleannefs, with flagrant proofs of an impudent temper, a
“‘ lying and filthy talking tongue, addicted to ftealing, frequently taking
‘*money out of my mother’s pocket before fhe got up in the morning;
«‘ likewife {pending money that I received in the houfe, it being a pub-
‘lic houfe; joining others in roguith tricks, but was generally dete¢ted.”
This account agrees precifely with the temperature and bent of mind,
denoted by the feveral fignificators in his nativity ; and is more mani-
feftly declared by the fign Scorpio upon his afcendant, and the evil po- ©
fitions of Saturn and the Moon with refpect to Mercury, which governs
his difpofition. But as the meaning and radical import of all thefe fig-
nificators, together with their various afpects and relative pofitions, have
been fo amply defcribed, it would be unpardonable tautology to repeat
them. I therefore mean this felection of remarkable nativities as fo
many ftriking examples, whereby to exercife the underftanding and ~
judgment of my readers, in obtaining a perfect knowledge of the
aftral {cience.


OBSERVATIONS on the NATIVITY of the Rev. JOHN HEN-
DERSON, A. B. of Pembroke College, Oxrorp.


THIS nativity exhibits a collection of the moft remarkable configu-
rations I ever faw comprifed in one horofcope, during «the whole courfe
of my practice; and it is really curious to remark their oppofite defig-
nations, as they refpectively occur upon the face of the genethliacal fi-
gure of birth, illuftrated in the annexed plate.


According to the rectification of parallels, this native was born when
the Sun was at its higheft meridian altitude; at which time one degree
fifteen minutes and twenty-four feconds of the princely fign Leo af-
cended the eaftern finiter of the heavens, and affords the moft exalted
teftimony of anoble and generous difpofition. The fenfitive powers’
and underftanding of the native, are reprefented by Mercury and the
Moon. Mercury, who rules: the active and ‘rational part of the brain,
is pofited in the ninth, the houfe of religion and fcience; in the dig-
nities of Jupiter, in conjunction of Mars, and within orbs of the
benefic planet Venus. This fharpens the wit, and furnifhes the

1 imagination


es


Meron


romeda


‘Planets Latitude & Deelinat 0
- 4 7 cee a
P 055 South South 1610\ | Toun H..p..8.%, BA. 6 0 SPday 2 oO


q 3 1 18 Aorth South 16 45} | } i] 4% 0 £4 Lit O |
}o-1 8 Y | fASimbrohe College 4 we

I aulh South 7 347\\ y- ORS og Oo 0 47 4 DA

be 5 | poe) PATE te C i i ‘2 |

a oF if \; North 247 (O XFORD.. me O 59 14 16 (0) i

@ QP 125 wouth South 6 5} eet te te 1 8 Oo. jf

& 2 0 South South 9 27 1 Born Ze March at Meridian\|| & 1. ae |

q k ' « it ! 4 H) |

; | D344 South North 19 37 | — 1757 — I D U Sl7ay, 4 0 i
SR im Lat. 52-30 J 2) pele ye


Ames, 22 Prriltol


*


ire


©


GB A St Ten Or. OG. y. 799
imagination withlinexhauftible powers of reafoning; and if we add to
the foregoing teftimonies, that Mars ‘is configurated in his own tripli-
city, and Venus in her exaltation, we thall difcover the endowments of
a mind apt for invention, with an impetuofity of natural ideas, fcarcely .
to be equalled; which is ftill more confirmed by the ftrength and good
afpeét caft by Mercury to the Moon, who rules the moifture of the brain,
and thereby fructifies and ftrengthens the retentive faculty. This pofi-
tion of the fignificators likewife gives the native a ftrong tafte for {cien-
tific: knowledge, impels him to ‘the confideration of abftrufe and occult
reafoning, and to the inveftigation of myftic divinity.


Tt is however’ tiuch ‘to be lamented, that, in the midft of all thefe
propitious configurations, Mercury happens to be in his detriment ; for
thereby it is declared, that thefe fplendid endowments will profit the
native little or nothing. And, as five of the fignificators are pofited in
watery figns, it is too obvious a proof that.he will, be regardlefs of repu-
tation ‘and preferment, but will give himfelf up to the pleafures of
conviviality,’ and facrifice too frequently at the fhrine of Bacchus. This
failing is fo ftrongly marked, that furrounding fpectators, whilft they
admire the'brilliancy of his‘wit,'and the acutenefs of his underftanding,
will ‘be equally furprifed' that he fhould not apply them to an ufeful and
advantageous purfuit. | 3 eth we fe |


Nature‘has fo endowed his ratiortal intellect, that he is alike qualified
for law, phyfic, or divinity; three avocations that perhaps few or
nonébefides himfelf can claim equal pretentions to.. Thefe extraordi-
nary ‘qualities’ are thus-defined from the horofcopical fignificators: Ve-
nus in the ninth houfe, in trine to Jupiter lord of the ninth, infpires
him with a confcientious mind, formed for divinity ; Mars in conjunc-
tion with Mercury, gives him a depth of judgment and an acutenefs of
reafoning fitted for the law; and, as Venus is in conjunction with Mars
and the Moon, at the fame time that Jupiter beholds Mars and Mercury
with a trine afpect, and Mars being lord of the tenth houfe, with the
Sun exalted therein, thefe are fo many decifive arguments to fhew, that, had
the native been profeflionally bred to the law, he would not only have
acquired an immenfe fortune, but would have encreafed likewife in re-
putation and character. That he would have made an excellent phyfi-
cian, is every way obvious. Jupiter, lord of the fixth, the houfe of
pharmacy and phyfic, is in Scorpio, a phyfical fign, and is dignified in
the fifth, the houfe of profperity and pleafure; and being in partile
trine of Venus, and in trine alfo with his difpofiter, as well as in re-

No. 40. 9M ception,


Tere) AN. 1. LG, byt, Se Te Rem T FE O-N


ception, at the fame time that he is forming a fextile afpett with Saturn,
Jord of the feventh, thefe are evident demonftrations of a perfon; born with
the heavenly art of healing; and who, like the good Samaritan,. not
only poffeffes the ability, but the difpofition likewife, of affording relief
to his wounded or afflicted fellow creatures, si chug leups od
This native is not only born with an extraordinary talent for. either
of the foregoing profeffions, but hath, in.a.moft eminent , degree, the
gift of acquiring univerfal knowledge; poffeffing from naturea-ftrong
retentive faculty, a quick and. lively perception, and a fruitful genius;
apt for every kind of ftudy, and formed for invention. In ftature he
is but fhort, as is defcribed by the Sun in Aries; brown, hair, grey eyes,
full round features, and of a mild and placid difpofition ; though given
to be fatyrical upon the ladies, as is demonftrated by Mars being incon-
junction with Venus and Mercury inhis detriment. aleaak


swede ond £ apol agit visiew

That the native might obtain preferment in. the church, is abundantly
evident, from the pofitions of, fo many planets in his ninth houfe,;,and
therefore an excellent profeflion for him to: follow, provided he would -
fum up refolution to fet afide the diffipating rays of Mercury,, Jonly
fubmit this as a friendly hint to the native. himfelf,, who’ being. alive,
and poffeffing the ability of analizing his own geniture, and. of fore.
feeing the different events that are likely to refult from the diredtions,
it is my duty to leave the confequences thereof. as. a proper, monitor to
his future conduct, meaning to difplay the figure of his birth,as an
example only to my readers, of the extraordinary circumftance, of ‘many:
illuftrious afpects being deprived of perfect efficacy. by. one difcordant
configuration. ie EE » ai shuod dat ee ata


A


OBSER-


OF ASTROLOGY. AP


OBSERVATIONS on the NATIVITY of Mr. JAMES GILBERT.


‘ :


148. 16


ob. a 21.8. 19° «go S.
(wmlorine: 22 ba. sitll ga ON,
@nilesz ¢zotriN. 14 1 N.
Kl jozira agli tagvuiNy
Lb? co2uy ake 1988 Bos a2 N.
BES eon 5. 1.10 -.N.
; [deo gal io AN. ag) agulN.


This is the nativity of a perfon well known in the county of Kent;
aman who has a ftrong natural propenfity to acquire knowledge, as is
proved by the Moon’s pofition in the ninth houfe, the houte of fcience
in fextile to Mercury, in her own dignities. The fign Scorpio a{cend

in


*


Soa, AN,I,L.LUS$ TR A,T L,0,N


ing in the eaft, and Mars and Leo in trine of Venus in Aries, declare
him, to-be of a well-formed body, and of a middling ftature, of an open
generous ‘difpofition, ‘and fair and juft in all his dealings, which is parti-
cularly defcribed by Jupiter being in his own dignities, and ina goed
afpect with.the Sun. —— Sewanee


With regard to..the native’s fubftance, if we confider his birth, we
(hall find it has encreafed in a true proportion with what is’ promifed
by the fignificators in*his genethHacal horofcope. <The Part of For-
tune is /well fituated, in the fecond houfe ;’the Moon is likewife pofited
in her own houfe, encreafing in light and ‘motion; Jupiter, who is
lord of the fecond, the houfe of fubftance;.and difpofitor of 'the Part
of Fortune, is conjoined with the Moon’s fortunate node; , and hav-
ing dignities*in the fifth:and fixth “houfes, prenotes that the native
fhould derive xadvantages from fuch things as particularly. relate to
thofe houfes; which are fully explained“in page 165, &c. but, as thefe
fignificatorssare all of them either in fiery or watery figns,dt is’apparent
that fuch occupations,as are more immediately under-the government
and controul of thofe figns would,be found moft profitable for the na-
tive to follow. ie es

We might eafily perceive that this native is not of a clofe and fordid
difpofition, owing principally to the remarkable ‘configurations, of the
Moon, in quartile of Venus, “in fextile with Mercury, and within orbs
of an oppofition of Saturn. The force of thefe predominant qualities,
while under’the “particular dire@tion of .each re{pective afpect, will in-
cline the native tobe profufe, and carelefs-about money=matters ;- will
expofe him°to the impofition of the ‘crafty and defigning, and eventu-
ally to the lofs of; property; and the diminution ofvhis'fubftance, unlefs
a great degree of fpirit and refolution be exerted, to modify and correct
this good-natured, but fatal, propenfity. A hint to the wife is ufually
fufficient ; and as this.native is {till living, and extenfively:furrounded
with friends, I would. by no means wifh to. hurthis feelings, or draw
down upon, myfelf the:refentment of thofe, who-might have it in con-
templation to take advantage of the|native’s generofity.


But to returns. The: third houfe is the houfe of journeys; and here -
we find the malevolent planet Saturn retrograde. This is a {ure argument,
that change of refidence,. and journeys in general, fhould prove unfuc-
-cefsful and injurious to,the native, .either in .the pocket, or by bodil
affliction, or. both, and fhould therefore:be avoided as; miuch as: poflible,

; »» ohitxstithe


OFT ASTTRGBALOG XY 803


The fourth houfe bears defignation of the principal fcope and end of
the native’s life. In this angle we find the fixed fign Aquaries; and,
as Saturn is pofited in that fign, it is an argument that fome houfes or
land fhould devolve to the native by hereditary fucceflion; but Saturn,
being retrograde, fhews that this patrimony fhall not be poffeffed until
the native is far advanced in years, or in the latter ftage of his life.
The fifth houfe denotes advantages to be obtained, or lofies to be fuf-
fered, by any {pecies of adventure; and, as the Moon’s fortunate node falls
in this houfe, it is apparent that the native fhould in a general way be
fortunate upon every fuch occafion, as cards, dice, hazard, dealing in
the lottery, or fending goods upon the chance of a market to any of our
fettlements or connexions abroad. I have no doubt but this pofition of
the dragon’s’ head, conjoined with the benevolent planet Jupiter, who
is lord of the fecond houfe, the houfe of fubftance, and bears rule like-
wife over the fifth, which relates to adventure, would prove extremely
favourable to the native, were he to try his fortune in the lottery; more
efpecially if he would be careful to choofe his ticket under a favoutable
and correfponding revolution or direétion, many ef which are to be
found in his nativity.


With regard to ficknefs or difeafe, and the accidents which aré likely
to be moft fatal to the native, we fhall, if we regard the fixth houfe,
and the planets bearing configuration therewith, eafily difcover of what
kind and quality they fhall be. If we carefully confult the figure, we
fhall find that choler is the moft predominant humour in the native’s
conftitution; and that ‘the effects of fire and air fhall be moft offenfive
and injurious to him; and for thefe very fubftantial reafons; nainely,
becaufe we find a fiery fign occupies the cufp of the fixth houfe, with
Jupiter, who governs the fiery triplicity, and he is pofited therein.
Jupiter likewife beholds the Sun with @ friendly ray, and thereby
ftrengthens his quality, becaufe the Sun bears rule over the fatné tripli-
city, and is pofited in an airy figh in the eighth houfe. We find alfo
an airy fign upon the cufp of the twelfth houfe; and Mars, the lord
of this native’s afcendant, hath his feverifh quality much encreafed,
by being pofited in a fiery fign; and as this malefic beholds Venus
with a trine afpect in the fixth, at the fame time that fhe is lady of the
twelfth, and in quartile to the Moon, it rendérs that otherwife benefic
planet inimical to the native’s conftitution, Thefe teftimonies all
conf{pére’ to thew; thatthe native fhould be’ more than ordinarily fubject
to hot and: feverifh complaints, and to accidents from violent falls
and bruifes.


Nox 40. gN According


¢
804 AN ILLUSTRATION


According to thefe pofitions of the planets, and to the direttions
wherewith their afpects are feverally brought up, will the infirmities
and misfortunes of this native be refpectively found. At about eigh-
teen years of age, namely, when Venus perfected her mundane parallel
with the Sun and Mercury, he was afflicted with a long and violent in-
termittent fever. At twenty-four years of age, he had another violent
fever, which produced the meafles. This was brought on by the bale-
ful configuration of Saturn in oppofition of Mars, lord of the afcendant,
and was fo powerful and violent, owing to Saturn being in his own houfe,
and coming at the fame time to a mundane parallel of Mars, that no per-
fon whatever expected his life; nor could he have furvived fo fevere an
attack, had the hylegiacal and anaretical ftars been united in the configu-
ration, to the want of which we can alone attribute the prefervation and
continuance of the native’s life. |


At the age of thirty-four years and three months, the native is again
attacked with a violent fcorching fever, which nearly abforbed all the
humours of his body, and annihilated the blood and animal juices.
This was produced by a joint and moft remarkable oppofition of the
Sun and Jupiter to the afcendant ; whereby Jupiter partakes of the con-
fuming heat and violence of the Sun, being in fextile afpe& with him,
in the fiery fign Aries, in the fixth houfe; at the fame time that the Sun,
being in the airy fign Gemini, in the eighth, is moft apt to corrupt the
blood, and to promote putrefaction. This fever continued with aftonith-
ing violence, until the Moon’s crifis fuperfeded the force of the direction,
and abated, by its nutritive and moiftening quality, the confuming heat
of the preceding configuration.


At the age of forty years and one hundred twenty-feven days, the —
Sun comes to a mundane quartile of the ponderous malefic planet Sa-
turn, which from natural defignation portends little lefs than inevitable
deftruction, from fome fudden bruife or violent concuffion of the cir-
cum-ambient matter. Had this afpect been formed of Mars inftead of
Jupiter, I fhould have predicted danger of death from the fudden and
all-devouring ftroke of lightning; but the quality of Saturn defcribes
it to be the effect of fome violent blow, or fall from an eminence. And
the fact has really turned out, that the native moft improvidently, at
this age, got up intoa tree, from whence he fell to the ground, and
broke feveral of his bones, and lay for a confiderable time without the
leaft profpect or hopes of recovery; but, as this malevolent afpect was
not made to the hyleg, it was impoffible it fhould deftroy life, no

matter


OR A SoTineo Lf O''G Y. 805


matter how much the human frame was injured and deranged by the vio-
lence of the fall.


From the feventh houfe we colleét information concerning wedlock and
marriage, and its probable confequences. This houfe therefore repre-
fents the native’s wife, who is defcribed by Mercury in Taurus as a
lively but head-ftrong woman; ingenious, quick, and penetrating, but
pofitive, and felf-willed. This marriage was brought up by the mundane
fextile of the Sun and Moon, and may be ranked amongit the mediocrity
of the happy ones.


The eighth houfe fhews us what might be expected from the wife’s fub-.
ftance, either from dowry or from legacy; and likewife what portion
of happinefs and content may probably be found'in company therewith.
As to the firft of thefe, we may obferve that the Sun, in fo impeded a
pofition, rather deftroys the fortune of a wife than adds to it; and,.
as to the fecond, there does not appear, either from earthly connex~-
ions, or from heavenly configurations, any reafon to form extenfive.
expectations. The beft way in all thefe cafes is, wifely to learn to be.
content with our lot.


The ninth houfe relates to profeffional fcience, to fea-voyages, and
the like. And, as the Moon is pofited therein, it fhews the native, in
his early days, fhould have a ftrong inclination to go to fea, and to tra-.
vel into foreign: parts; but Saturn being in oppofition to the Moon, and.
a {uperior planet, over-rules this difpofition ; and fhews, by his pofition,.
that, ifthe native had gone to fea, he would have fuffered an uncommon.
fhare of perils and dangers, by ftormy weather, public enemies, and
fhipwreck. As to fcience, we have already feen the native’s inclination.
and propenfity towards it ; and, confidering his fituation, and the difficul-
ties he had to encounter, he has made great proficiency therein, although:
Saturn has often proved detrimental to him even in this purfuit, not-.
withftanding the vigour of his mind, and the zeal of enthufiafm; for
Saturn, by cafting an oppofite malignant ray to the Moon, who rules the
moifture of the brain, proportionably dulls the underftanding, and caufes
the native to labour hard for every grain of knowledge he has the good.
fortune to obtain.


The tenth houfe is the houfe of trade, honour,. and profeflion.
In this portion of the horofcope we find Mars, lord of the afcendant, .
beheld by the trine afpect of Venus; but, as Venus is in her detriment,

it


4


806 AN 2. hYiLsG Si rReAAT F @N


itis apparent fhe cannot afford that eminent profperity and unimpeded
fuccefs the otherwife might do. It is however pretty obvious that the na-
tive’s advancement in life is net to be ranked amongft the moft inconfi-
derable; and that his fuccefs, in the department of phyfic and chemiftry,
fhould neither be difreputable nor unprofitable. Mars pofited in the
mid-heaven, out of all his effential dignities, generally declares the native
to be violently paffionate and rafh; but here we find his hafty temperature
cooled by the mild trine of Venus, which meliorates the native’s difpofi-
tion, and induces him to be more gentle and kind.


In the eleventh houfe we-find the unfortunate node of the Moon, com-
monly called the Dragon’s Tail, which implies hypocritical enemies and
perfidious friends. Of thefe 1 make no: doubt but the native has had
ample experience; and therefore, from what has already come to pafs, I
would admonifh him of the future ; being convinced, from this pofition
of his geniture, that no part of his life will be exempted from the at-
tacks of thofe affailants. This pofition of the malefic node likewife de-
clares, that the native fhall fuffer great difappointments in his pecuniary
hopes and expectations.


The twelfth houfe relates to public enemies, imprifonment, and great
cattle. Venus being lady thereof, pofited in the fixth, in oppofition, de-
clares the native fhall be unfuccefsful in any dealings in cattle; at the
fame time it difcovers his profeffed enemies to be in too abject a fituation
to do him much injury. As to imprifonment, there does not appear to
be the leaft apprehenfions of ; but that the native will live in profperity
during the remainder of his days, and yield up the ghoft upon the bed
of liberty, full of years, and amidft the good offices of his friends, I am


bold to affirm, from the confideration of thofe celeftial intelligencers that
have-never yet deceived me, |


CONSIDE-


OF ASTROLOGY.


80%


CONSIDERATIONS on the NATIVITY of Mr. THOMAS
CHATTERTON.


BOR N


Thomas Chatierton,


h 20th November, 6h. P. M. }


3


1D


LATITUDE.


Own O000


3752


58
1
26
fo)


8


fe)
3


N. | #
S.

N.
S.
S.
oe


This gentleman was a native of Briftol, much celebrated for his lite-
rary productions, and for the originality of his ideas, which rofe early


in the horizon of his life, and fet as prematurely u


No. 40.


pon its hemifphere,
without


808 A NY PLOLJUCS FR AsT WOON


without even allowing him to attain its meridian altitude. In fhort,
this is a very remarkable, at the fame time that it is a moft unfortunate, ~
geniture. Upon the afcendant we find the fign Gemini, and Mercury
lord thereof, which lays the foundation of a fharp wit, and an acute un-
derftanding. But then Mercury, his principal fignificator, is pofited in
the fixth houfe, in his detriment, and in combuftion of the Sun; an in-
fallible argument of a wretched life and a fatal end.


This judgmenit is corroborated and confirmed in a moft extraordinary
manner, by the coalition of the Sun, Saturn, Venus, Mercury, and
the Part of Fortune, in the fixth houfe, which prefages every {pecies
of misfortune that can arife from poverty, and from the chicanery of
proftituted women ; the immediate effect of the baleful rays of Saturn
and Venus. ‘This* fatal conjunétion, to.which Mars is a proaching
with accumulated malevolence, hath defignation of a fhonfand tiftreffine
occurrences,,which occafionally torment, and alternatelys.pervade, the
natives mind. be


We likewife ‘find the: Moon pofited in the twelfth” houfe; receding
from a fextile with Jupiter, and forming an oppofition. with the Sun;
that is, depatting from the early good and prolific temperature, to en-
creafe the virulence of the other malefic rays.* ‘The Moon is lady of the
fecond honfe, and therefore'in a more particular manner governs his fub-
ftance; and,. by being in the twelfth houfe, the houfe of imprifonment
and affli€tion, denotes a frequent want_of prefent cafh, and the dangers
to which the’native would be often yexpofed on that account; which
would have been dreadful indeed,’ and perhaps fecured the native for a
length of-time within the iron gates of a prifon, had not the more be-
nevolent planet Jupiter been in his exaltation in the fecond houfe, which
fortunate configuration leflens the foregoing baneful influences, and is
the means of producing timely, and unexpected relief, in pecuniary
matters, to the native, when nothing but the moft abje@t and barren
profpects ftood before him; and but for which fortunate occurrence, he
had certainly experienced the moft abje&t penury and want. And here
it is temarkable, that whatever bleffing, or whatever abundance, fhould
be thrown in his way by, the genial influence of Jupiter, is either
abufed, or improvidently fquandered away, under the oppofition of the


Sun and Moon; and, by the Moon’s conjunétion with her unfortunate
node, we are more.clearly convinced that the native will experience very
embarrafled, circumflances.


reryryve
; :


lOgU Viste ig 4 DAE ,Stil ; ins


‘The


OO, Bass SuTe RO. LOG. ¥. 80g


The Part of Fortune unluckily falls in conjunftion with Saturn and
Venus ; and as Saturn is pofited in a fign out of all his dignities, and is
the lord alfo of the eighth houfe, his influence is implicative of certain
ruin by means of wicked and debauched women, defcribed by Venus,
conjoined to the worft rays of Saturn, This conftruction is abundantly
confirmed by the conftitution of the hylegiacal and anaretical places of
the figure, and the difpofition of the fignificators by which they are
refpectively irradiated. The afcendant, in this horofcope, muft be ©
confidered as hyleg, or giver of life, fince neither the Sun, Moon, or
Part of Fortune, is fo pofited in the geniture, as to entitle either of
them to the pre-eminence ; and it is the peculiar quality of the afcen-
dant, occupied by Gemini, and governed by Mercury, to ftamp upon
the native fo early and fo extraordinary a turn for literary purfuits; which
are too well eftablifhed to need any other proof, than that they were com-
municated to the intelleCtual faculty, by this conftruction of the hyleg,
and circum-ambient matter, at the time of birth.


‘' Weare here likewife to remark, that Saturn is the anareta, or de-
ftroyer of life, and is pofited in the moft noxious pofition that could
have happened, and where he ufually prenotes the fatal commiflion of
fuicide, without fo much as one friendly ray to oppofe his influence, or
to render the fhocking attempt partial, or lefs deitructive than a caufe
that will certainly touch life. On.the contrary, here is a concatenation
of ‘evil rays, which in a remarkable manner contribute to a premature
death. “The Sun and Moon are in oppofition to houfes that are under the
influence of the worft caufes of death; and as Venus is in conjunction
with Saturn, who rules thefe evils, and draws them as it were within the
focus of her own orb, it is evident that his death would come by his own
hand, under the preflure of defpair, heightened by meagre want, through
the perfidy of fome abandoned female.


If we enquire minutely into the life of this unfortunate man, we
fhall find every action and prediction of the flars, which were the im-
preffors at his birth, fully and completely verified. He"was born of no
very diftinguifhed parents, and received but a {mall fhare. of claffical
education; yet his productions, at a very early period, were fuch as
excited the admiration of the firft {cholars of his day, and proved him
to inherit great natural ability and genius; infomuch that Mr. Wharton,
in his additions to his Hiftory of’ Poetry, vol. 2, hath taken occafion to
obferve,- That Mr. Chatterton had given a fingular inftance of prematu-
rity of abilities, and that he had acquired a ftore of general information far

LOL CRT ee ae ee has exceeding


810 AON Sof ee S *T PRs ON


exceeding his years; that he poffiffed a comprebenfion of mind, and athivity
of underftanding, which predominated over bis fituations in life and bis op-
portunities of inftruétion. But notwithftanding he was thus gifted, and
pofleffed fo eminent a fhare of fterling fenfe, yet he combined with it
all the vices and irregularities of youth, and his profligacy was at leaft as
confpicuous as his abilities.


Finding himfelf encompafled with private enemies, furrounded with
the evils of poverty, and deftitute of every means of fubfiftance, he quit-
ted Briftol, to try his fortune in the metropolis. Having fixed himfelf
in private lodgings, he fought for bread through the medium of his li-
terary talent, which falling fhort of his expettations, as well as of his
merit, he moft unfortunately fell into the hands of the lower order of
proftitutes, by whom he was duped, difeafed, and finally deferted! In
this deplorable fituation he continued a few months, occafionally
drudging for the bookfellers, who neither having the generofity to re-
ward him as he deferved, nor fpirit to advance upon the credit of his
future produétions, he at length, opprefled with poverty and difeafe,
and overcome by defpair, put an end to his exiftence, in the month of
Auguft, 1770, by a dofe of poifon, which he prepared with his own


hand.


If we confider the quality of the dire@ion which produced his death,
we {hall find the manner of it moft aptly defcribed in his figure of birth.
Saturn thus configurated with Venus, in that particular part of the
heavens, and under fuch noxious irradiations, hath at all times, as well
by Ptolomy as by every other refpectable profeffor of this fcience, been
found to occafion death by poifon; and fo many concurrent teftimonies
in the houfe of ficknefs and difeafe bear the ftricteft affinity thereto;
and this fatal dire¢tion is much ftrengthened by coming up with the
revolution of Saturn.


Mr. Chatterton, notwithftanding his foibles, and his want of a more
{cholaftic education, was neverthelefs a benevolent man, and a good
fcholar. He certainly laboured hard, and combated many obftacles in
his literary attainments; hut his fuccefs was great, and had he been
born to great profperity, and under the influence of milder ftars, he
had been an ornament to the age in which he lived, and an honour to his
country. I have many reafons to believe, that his knowledge of the
uranical part of Aftronomy had enabled him to forefee, by his own
geniture, the evils he had to combat, and the fatal termination of a

; life,


Ort Ae RRS Loe ve | Bie


life, which his own folly had rendered infupportable ; but which an
oppofite condué, and a more manly refolution, might confefledly have re~
medied and prevented. This ferves to fhew, that there certainly is a fate
in nature, which nothing but the rational means made ufe of by He- .
zekiah, 2 Kings, chap. xx. can alleviate or prevent, namely, unfeigned
prayer, anda determined f{pirit to abandon the allurements of vice, and
to walk perfect in the ways of God and Truth; which verifies the an-
cient proverb, That wife men rule the flars; and none but the giddy and
the thoughtlefs are ruled by them.


That Mr. Chatterton’s acquaintance with this fcience, and his ap-
probation of it, may not be difputed by thofe critics who are unwilling
to admit it has ever had the fanétion of men of fenfe or learning in the
prefent age, I fhall conclude my remarks on his nativity, by fubjoining
fome excellent verfes he wrote upon the occafion, after he had made
progrefs enough in the ftudy, to be convinced of its importance and
utility.

THE Sun revolving on its axis turns,
And with creative fire intenfely’burns ;
Impell’d the forcive air, our earth fupreme
Rolls with the planets round the folar gleam :
Firft, Mercury completes his tranfient year,
Glowing, refulgent, with reflected glare;
Bright Venus occupies a wider way,
The early harbinger of night and day ;

More diftant {till our Globe terraqueous turns,
Nor chills intenfe, nor fiercely Heated burns ;
Around her rolls the Lunar Orb of light, ,
Trailing her filver glories in the night :

On the earth’s orbit fee the various figns,
Mark where the Sun, our year completing, fhines.
Firft the bright Ram his languid ray improves ;
Next glaring wat’ry thro’ the Bull he moves :
No. 41. gP The


812


AN ILLUSTRATION


The am’rous Twins admit his genial ray ;

Now burning thro’ the Crab he takes his way ;

The Lion, flaming, bears the folar power ;

The Virgin faints beneath the fultry fhower.
Now the juft Balance weighs his equal force;

The flimy Serpent fwelters in his courfe ;

The fabled Archer clouds his languid face ;

The Goat, with tempetts, urges on his race;

Now in the Water his faint beams appear,

And the cold Fifhes end the circling year.

Beyond our globe the fanguine Mars difplays

A ftrong refletion of primeval rays ;

Next belted Jupiter far diftant gleams,

Scarcely enlight’ned with the folar beams ;

With four unfix’d receptacles of light,

He tow’rs majeftic thro’ the fpacious height :

But farther yet the tardy Saturn lags,

And five attendant luminaries drags ;

Invefting with a double ring his pace,


He circles through immenfity of {pace.


Thefe are thy wond’rous works, Firft Source of Good !
Now more admir’'d IN BEING UNDERSTOOD.


Bristol, Dee 23.


CONSIDE-


OF PA S*TRPOVL:0;G Y: 813
CONSIDERATIONS on the Nativity of JOHN COLLONS.


65 18.


aS A i ON A A


Joun Cottons,


5, 07,R.-N


24th June, 1oh. 3m. A. M,


Latitude. Declination.
g / f

Bie? 2h Fl 4a ns

(2b O..4 36 EN 24 A055
is o 654 N 8 316° °N
o oOo oO 29, 90 .N
Le) oe aes bg” 74 IN
¥ 4 fe) 18° 30° N

Do ed a AB 9 eo 20 1S


I am induced to give the foregoing horofcope a place in my work, as

a remarkable example of the influence of the ftars upon a malefactor,

whofe crimes expofed him to the forfeiture of his liberty and life, by
the iron hand of the law. Dass
his


814 AN! PMu'u’s TIREAAT TON


This unfortunate man refided in Briftol. He contracted an intimacy
with a female, and lived with her in the clofeft habits of the fexes,
until they had feveral children. At length difagreements arofe, in
confequence of his refufing to marry her, and a violent quarrel feparated
them. The woman immediately attached herfelf to another man, to
whom fhe was fhortly after married, totally forfaking her former con-
nexion. The native, enraged at this circumftance, took frequent op-
portunities of way-laying and remonftrating with her; of claiming a
prior right to.her perfon, and of infifting on having familiarity and
contact with her whenever he pleafed; but fhe rejected him with con-
tempt, and threatened profecution whenever he attempted to force her.


Hurt at this repulfe, and exafperated at the indifference with which
he was treated, he took an opportunity of watching the hufband from
his bed, who, being a labouring man, went early to his work ; upon
which the native made his way into the houfe, went up ftairs, and
found the wife in bed. Demanding familiarity with her, he was refufed,
with fevere reflections on the method he had taken to get into her bed-
chamber. He then drew his knife, and, with a degree of inhuman
barbarity better conceived than exprefled, he threw himfelf upon the
bed, and cut her throat from ear to ear.


The alarm was foon given, and the cry of innocent blood became
general. The culprit was feized, examined, and committed to New-
gate for trial. He there affected to fhew marks of infanity, and, for fome
confiderable time before the affizes, -was generally believed to have per-
petrated the bloody act in a paroxy{m of madnefs, which was now be-
~come vifible in all his words and actions. His friends availed them-
felves of this circumftance to palliate his guilt, and took every ftep to
improve the advantage againft the day of trial, when it was generally
believed that he would be acquitted. Different. parties, however, had
taken up the matter on different grounds ; and it was at laft agreed, by
fome gentlemen of refpectability in Briftol, that I fhould be requefted
to infpect his nativity, and to give my judgment whether he would be
found guilty, or acquitted. I readily accompanied the gentlemen to
Newgate, and obtained the eftimate time of the prifoner’s birth, which
I retified by the method heretofore laid down, and found the fignifi-
cators of his nativity difpofed asin the foregoing horofcopical figure, -
which I thus explained.

Mercury being lord of the afcendant, irradiated by a°malefic quar-
tile afpect of the planet Mars, and afflitted by an oppofition with Ju-


piter,


OIF? AS TROL Otc ¥. Sys


piter, declares that the native fhall be involved in an abyfs of troubles
and afflictions, even to the hazard of his life. As to temper and pro-
penfity of the will, he is rafh, violent, and arbitrary; unftable in his
purfuits, and ufually difappointed in his expectations. This is denoted
by the oppofition of Jupiter to Mercury; but the quartile of Mercury
with Mars, particularly when Mercury is conftituted principal fignifi-
cator, hath implication of high crimes and mifdemeanours, and utually
produces violent contention, aflaflination, murder, rapine, robbery, and
bloodfhed, as we have more particularly delineated, in p. 229, 230.


Upon a further infpection of the figure, we find a baneful quartile
afpett of Mars and Jupiter, with a mifchievous oppofition of Saturn
and Mars. To the firft of thefe we are to attribute the diffolute man-
ners of the native, fince it influenced the mind to thofe immoral habits,
which eventually lead to perfidioufnefs and treachery, whilft the fecond
configuration not only confirms thefe vices, but fhews that they will be
the means of his death. Here is unqueftionably a favourable trine
of the Sun and Saturn; but no great good can refult from it, becaufe
the Sun is lord of the twelfth houfe, pofited in the tenth, out of all his.
effential dignities ; at the fame time that Saturn is lord of the fixth, lo-
cated therein, and both the fignificators are under the dominion of the
evil genii, Vitiating the mind and affeciions of the native, and tending
toan ignominious and premature end.


At the time the unhappy native was prompted to commit this bar-
barous act, the Moon came‘to an oppofition of Mars by direct direction,
while fhe occupied ‘the cufp of the feventh houfe, which reprefents the.
unfortunate woman; and the quartile of Jupiter lord of the fourth,,
with Mercury lord of the afcendant, hath defignation of the native,. and:
points out the fatal connection betwixt them.


Having confidered fo much of the horofcope,. it was my next care to
afcertain the hylegiacaliand anaretical ftars, and the particular influx.
flowing from them. The Sun I find to be giver of life, pofited in the
tenth houfe,. the houfe of juftice ;, Mercury,. tord of the afcendant, be-
ing in Gemini, anairy fign, and, the Moon. likewife in: an airy fign,
fhew the manner of the native’s death, that he would die fufpended in
the air, while the oppofition of four planets in the radix, and the mun-
dane quartile of the Sun and Mars, from the tenth, the houfe of juf-—
tice, fhew the quality of it, namely, that it fhould be in. due courfe of.
law, ‘by the hands of the common harigman, and not by fuicide.


No. 41. ; gQ.’ The


—-Bc6 AVS. GUSE sh §3T ROA TaN


The fignificators of juftice likewife, confidered judicially from their
refpective pofitions in relation to each other, give no: profpect whatever
of favour from the judge, nor of any effectual interpofition after convic- -
tion ; fothat 1 made no {cruple toaffirm, That, notwithftanding the
hopes that had been formed of faving the native’s life by pleading his
infanity, and the number of perfons who appeared anxious to ferve him,
yet all their endeavours would prove abortive, fince he would certainly
be found guilty, and fuffer the fentence of the law in confequence.


It would be needlefs here to relate, how much this prediction was
ridiculed by all degrees of people in Briftol; or with what contempt
my opinion was treated by moft of the poor man’s friends. And it was
with fome difficulty I could pafs without infult. I was determined,
however, to place my judgment in amore ftriking point of view. The
aflizes were not fixed, nor could any perfon undertake to fay when they
would be, much lefs afcertain the day of the native’s trial. I therefore
“brought up the dire¢tion of death, with great nicety and precifion, and
found he would be plunged into eternity, when the Sun came to the
anaretical point in the midheaven, and met the noxious beams of the
Moon and Mars in oppofition, which, thus conftituted, is ever produc-
tive of a violent death. Thofe, who will take the pains to equate this
direction, will find the content of its arch to be twenty-feven degrees
thirty-four minutes, which, turned into time, and reckoned from the
hour of birth, will be found to come up onthe eighth day of April,
1786, and gives the {pace of life twenty-fix years, nine months, and
fome odd days, which exactly anfwered to the native’s age. I then
publicly declared, notwithftanding the popular clamour was fo much
againft me; that the prifoner would fuffer on the above day ; and as the
affizes were not fixed, noone could charge me with having drawn my
conclufions from the probable event of the day of trial.


When the folemn hour arrived, every one appeared anxioufly intereft-
ed in the event ; and the utmoft exertions were ufed to fave the unfor-
tunated prifoner from the fate impending over him—but in vain! After
a long and indulgent trial, the jury pronounced him guilty, and he fuf-
fered the law, as thoufands can teftify, on the very day I had preditted.


And here let me juft remark, that this geniture not only points out,
by the conftitution of the Moon and Mercury in airy figns, that the
native would be hanged ; but Mars being in quartile to the Sun, who
is giver of life, and upon his afcendant, defcribes the circumftance of
his diflection, as may be feen by the rules already laid down in the for-


mer part of this work.
CONSIDE-


OF ASTROLOGY.


817


CONSIDERATIONS on the NATIVITY of Mrs. KEIZA LAM-


PARD, who died in Child-bed.


Mrs, Keiza Lampard,


BOR N


qth Oober, oh. 19m. Ay M.


Latitude. Declination.
Q 7 Q é

». 2 9 N 12°,°39,.8
a | 3 S§ 18 2 §
[#; 1 15 N At 34
@ oOo ° OQ.) eg tS
i?) 9 40 |S *. 6; .25N
‘eS aaee oS 16 i 9s
(», 2- 56 S§ 10 «57 N


This


818 ANY ®OLIWSITIREAA TU ON


This geniture befpeaks a female of a fharp wit, and lively difpofition.
Mars. is lard ,of the afcendant, pofited in Virgo, the exaltation of Mer-
cury, butin no afpeét with any planet in the heavens, confequently the
fafhion and temperature of. the native will. be formed principally of Mars ;
who, as we have feen before, produces, when in Virgo, a middling fta-
ture, inclining to brevity, hot and fiery temper, rafh and invincible in
all difputes,.and.ungovernably. violent.in hafty quarrels, yet foon ap-
peafed by good-nature and fubmiffion, which at-all-times-induce her to
be tractable and induftrious, and“for the moft part fober and frugal.
Her features ate defcribed to be thin and pale, occafionedby the Moon’s
conjunétion with, Venus y_yet of a pleafing ahd agreeable vifage, owing

to the influx of the: Benue of Venus, whois the author of beauty. But,
_ by reafon that Venudis in her fall, the fymmetty of features will be

proportionably deranged}and, as Saturns- the author of deformity, be-
holds both the Moonand: Venus witha fextile ray, it becomes evident
that thé native could only be moderately | handfome. The mixture of
thefe fignificators give her brown hair, and great volubility of {peech, from
which great inconveniencies anife, and, fometimes loffes and injuries, as
is particularly denoted by the reception of Mercury and Mars, and the
conjunction of Saturn with Mercury i in the prsitehs the’ houfe of pri-
vate enemies.


at b

This nativity might be® clafled amoneft thofe of a mean and obfcure
defignation, fince wefind.no one planet through the whole horofcope
effentially fortifieds, except “Mercury and Mars, and that is only by re-
ception, which, from the conftitution of their places, declares good by
evil means, with a difpofition to low and vulgar purfuits. And here
it may not be improper to remark, that, whenever we find the planets,
in any nativity, out-of all. their effential dignities, we might fafely con-
clude, that their effets will in: no fhape be-remarkable or extraordinary,
and that the native will lead generally a mean and obicure life.


That this perfon.fhould live to years of maturity, is abundantly evi-
dent from the conftitution of her horofcope ;. as ‘well as that fhe would
enter into the marriage ftate.. Venus and Mercury, in this figure, give
teftimony to the hufband, who is defcribed by Jupiter,‘ on twenty de-
grees of the afcendant, under the government of Saturn ; fo that it
was very improbable, if not impoflible, that the native would marry
young, becaufe Saturn is above the earth, conjoined with the fignifica-
tor of her hufband, and declares the would not enter into that ftate at
leaft under thirty years. In fact, there is but one direétion within that
period, that could poffibly have brought it to pafs; atid that came up

when


OFF TALS IT SREOUL!01G Y, 81g.


when fhe was only about twelve years old, fo that its effect paffed off in
her minority, without producing any fenfible operation. ‘The direction
which perfected her marriage came up when fhe was thirty-one years
three months and eleven daysold, namely, on the fifth of February, 1785,
when Venus came to the trine of Jupiter; as appears by the following
calculation : ight |


The right afcenfion of the 4 of 4, . s 191° 423°
The right afcenfion of ¢ , with latitude, = - 100. 43
Arch of direction, ~ - - P 30 59


Which, added to the right afcenfion of the Sun, and turned into
time, as before pointed out, produces exactly thirty-one years, three.
months, and eleven days. |


Upon a further inveftigation of the horofcope, we tha@ find that Mars
is not only lord of the afcendant, but hath fole dominion over the fifth
and twelfth houfes, which prefage thofe kind or fpecies of evils to the
native as are ufually produced in thofe particular pofitions of the hea-
vens. The twelfth houfe being the houfe of affliction, and Mercury
and Mars in reception therein, it declares the native fhall prove in many
refpects her own enemy ; and, as Mercury is in conjunction with Saturn,
who likewife communicates an influx of malefic rays to Venus and the
Moon, whereby they participate of his quality and nature, in the fign
Scorpio, which rules the fecret parts, it evidently demonftrates great
and imminent danger to the native by child-bearing. And the Sun
being in the eleventh houfe, oppofed to the fifth, which is the houfe
of children, and being likewife the avareta, or deftroyer of life, it evi-
dently proves the native’s death fhall arife from child-birth; and fo it
really happened ; for foon after her delivery of the fifth child, in the
thirty-ninth year of her age, fhe was fuddenly feized, and died ina few
hours after, on the 13th of Auguft, 1787.


The dire€tion under which fhe died, is the Moon, which is apheta,
or giver of life, to the conjunction of the Sun in the eleventh houfe ;
at which exact time Venus came to the fame anaretical point, and Mars,
lord of the afcendant, to the twelfth houfe, where the malefic rays of
Saturn and Mercury contribute their baneful influence, all which con-
fidered together, denote, in the moft remarkable and decifive manner, a
child-bed death to the native.


No, 41. - | 9R 3 Many


820 A NO RLOLIOS IR CAAT POON


Many other confiderations might be adduced from this geniture ;
but, as the only proof we wilh to eftablith is to thew, according to na-
tural caufes and effects, the certainty with which the time and manner
of death might be afcertained by the force and influx of the ambient
and elementary matter, prefcribed by the laws and motions of the hea-
venly bodies, it would be deviating from our plan, and prove deroga~
tory to the good fenfe of the reader, to dwell longer upon fubordinate
{peculations.


It may not however, be unentertaining to the curious reader, were
he to compare the configurations formed by the planets in this horo-
{cope, and the particular influx of their refpective beams, with thofe
general rules and obfervations ‘heretofore laid down, for’ the purpofe of
afcertaining the quality of death. The wonderful harmony, order,.
and precifion, with which the heavenly bedies operate upon this
fublunary worlds the uniformity with which the fame caufes are found
to produce the fame effects; and the certainty with which the time and
manner of human diffolution is fought out by them, will at once infpire
the mind with the moft elevated ideas of the omnipotence of God, and
lead the foul to thofe divine Shiney dal which are founded in hu-
mility,” gratitude, and love !


CONSIDER-


OF ASTROLOGYY. S21


CONSIDERATIONS on the NATIVITY of the HONOURABLE
| BARON EMANUEL SWEDENBORG.


‘Baron EMANUEL |
i SWEDENBORG, |}
BOW OR ON


‘goth January, sh. 3cm. A. M. §


The fingularity of the charafter and doftrine of this illuftrious native
would be a fufficient reafon for my offering a {ketch of his geniture to.
the inquifitive reader, had I no other motives for taking notice of him
in this place. But, as the literary purfuits of Baron'Swedenborg have
been principally directed to an explication of the doctrine of fpirits, and
the ftate of departed fouls, which we fhall-have occafion to advert to
in the magical part of this work, I conceive it highly proper to {peak
of his endowments by nature, agreeable to that doctrine of fecret and
occult influence received by the terreftrial from the fpiritual world,
which he has with fo much’ ability and acutenefs endeavoured to prove.
And, when I reflect that he was our co-temporary, and his perfon and
manners well known to many refpectable perfonages now living in this

coun-


822 AN ILLUSTRATION


country; that -he is the lateft writer upon the nature and exiftente of
immaterial beings, and has. thrown much new light upon the fubjed ;
it cannot be unentertaining, nor unimportant, to illuftrate, by his na-
tivity, the extraordinary endowments of his mind,


But, before I {peak of the conftitution and quality of his geniture, it
will not be amifs to introduce the reader to.a nearer acquaintance with
this celebrated author, which I fhall do by quoting his own account of
himfelf; as given ina letter to a friend, publithed in his*works.


Baron Swedenborg’s Anfwer to a Letter from'a Friend, printed in his Pre-
face to the World of Spirits.


I TAKE pleafure in the friendfhip you exprefs for me in your letter,
and return you thanks for the fame; but, as to the praifes therein, I
confider them as belonging to the truths contained in my writings, and
fo refer them to the Lord our Saviour as:‘his due, who is in himfelf the
Fountain of all Truth. It is the concluding part of your letter that
chiefly engages my attention, where you fay as follows: ‘* As after your -
‘* departure from England difputes may arife on the fubje@t of your
writings, and fo give occafion to defend their author againft fuch falfe
reports and afperfions, as they who are no friends to truth may invent
to the prejudice of his charaGter, may it not be of ufe, in order to
refute any calumnies of that kind, that you leave behind you fome
fhort account of yourfelf, as concerning, for example, your degrees
in the univerfity, the offices-you have borne, your family and con-
<* nections, the honours which I am told have been conferred upon you,
and fuch other particulars as may ferve to the vindication of your
character, if attacked ; that fo any ill-grounded prejudices may be
obviated or removed ? For, where the honour and intereft of truth are
concerned, it certainly behoves us to employ all lawful means in its
“* defence and fupport.” After reflecting on the foregoing paffage, I
was induced to comply with your friendly advice, by briefly communi-
cating the following circumftances of my life.


€é


ee


I was born at Stockholm, in the year of our Lord 1689, Jan. 29,
My father’s name Jefper Swedberg, who was Bifhop of Weftro-
gothia, and of celebrated character jn his time. He was alfo a Member
of the Society for the propagation of the Gofpel, formed on the model
of that in England, and appointed prefident of the Swedith churches in
Pennfylvania and London by King Charles XII. In the year 1710 I be-
gan my travels, firft into England, and afterwards into Holland, France,

be ans | and


OF ASTROLOGY. 823


and Germany, and returned home in 1714. Inthe year 1716, and af-
terwards, I frequently converfed with Charles XII. King of Sweden,
who was pleafed to beftow on me a large fhare of his favour, and in that’
year appointed me to the office of Affeflor in the Metallic College, in
which office I continued from that time till the year 1747, when I
quitted the office, but ftill retain the falary annexed to it as an appoint-
ment for life. The reafon of my withdrawing from the bufinefs of
that employment was, that I might be more at liberty to apply myfelf
to that new funétion to which the Lord had called me. About this
time a place of higher dignity in the ftate was offered me, which | de-
clined to accept, left it fhould provea fnareto me. In 1719, I was
ennobled by Queen Ulrica Eleonora, and named Swedenborg; from
which time I have taken my feat with the Nobles of the Equeftrian
Order, in the Triennial Affemblies of the States. I ama Fellow, by
invitation, of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Stockholm, but have
never defired to be of any other community, as I belong to the Society
of Angels, in which things fpiritual and heavenly are the only fubjects
of difcourfe and entertainment ; whereas in our litetary focieties the at-
tention is wholly taken up with things relating to the body and this
world. In the year 17341 publithed the Regnum Minerale, at Leipfic,
in three volumes, folio; and in 1738 I took a journey into Italy, and
ftaid a year at Venice and Rome.


With refpeét to my family connections; I had four fifters; one of
them was married to Erick Benzelius, afterwards promoted to the Arch-
bifhopric of Upfal; and thus I became related to the two fucceeding
_Archbifhops of that fee, both named Benzelius, and younger brothets
of the former. Another of my fifters was married to Lars Benzelitierna,
who was promoted to a provincial government, but thefe are both dead ;
however, two bifhops, who are related to me, are ftill living ; one of
them is named Filenius, Bifhop of Oftrogothia, who now officiates as
Prefident of the Ecclefiaftical Order in the General Affembly at Stock-
holm, in the room of the Archbifhop, who is infirm ; he married the
daughter of my fifter; the other, who is named Benzelftierna, Bifhop
of Weftermannia and Dalecarlia, is the fon of my fecond fifter; not to
mention others of my family who are dignified. I converfe freely, and
am in friendfhip, with all the bifhops of my country, which are ten in
number, and alfo with the fixteen fenators, and the reft of the gran-
dees, who loveand honour me, as knowing that I am in fellowfhip with
angels. The king and queen themfelves, as alfo the three princes
thei« fons, fhew me all kind countenance ; and I was once invited to eat
with the king and queen at their table, (an honour granted only to the

No. 41. 9S peers


824 AN PPL eh. jUsS TRBART ON


peers of the realm,) and likewife fince with the hereditary prince. All
in my own country with for my return home; fo far am I from the
leaft danger of perfecution there, as you feem to apprehend, and are alfo


fo kindly folicitous to provide againft; and, fhould any thing of that
kind befal me elfewhere, it will give me no concern.


Whatever of worldly honour.and advantage may appear to be in the
things before-mentioned, I hold them as matters of low eftimation,
when compared to the honour of that facred office to which the Lord him-
felf hath called me, who was gracioufly pleafed to manifeft himfelf to
me, his unworthy fervant, in a perfonal appearance in the year 1743; to
open in mea fight of the fpiritual world, and to enable me to converfe
with fpirits and angels ; and this privilege has been continued to me
to this day. From that time I began to print and publifh various un-
known arcana, that have been either feen by me, or revealed to me,
concerning heaven and hell; the ftate of men after death; the true
worfhip of God; the fpiritual fenfe of the Scriptures; and many
other important truths tending to falvation and true wifdom: and that
mankind might receive benefit from thefe cammunications, was the
only motive which has induced me at different times to leave my home
to vifit other countries.- As to this world’s wealth, I have
and more I neither feek nor wifh for.


fufficient,

Your Jetter has drawn the mention of thefe things from me, in aie.
as you fay, they may be a means to prevent-or remove any falfe judg-
ment or wrong prejudices with regard to my perfonal circumftances.—~
Farewel ; and I heartily with you profperity both in things fpiritual


and temporal, of which I make no doubt, if fo be you go on to pray to
our Lord, and to fet him always before you. i


London, 1769. . EMAN. SWEDENBORG.


Upon the horofcope of this eminent perfon there are four planets
effentially dignified, viz. Saturn, lord of the afcendant ; the Moon, lady
of the feventh.; Mercury, lord of the fifth and eighth ; and Mars, lord
of the third andtenth ; with Jupiter on the afcendant. Thefeare in-
fallible teftimonies not only of an high and exalted mind and character,
but are proofs of a devout and examplary life. Venus and the Sun ap-
pear to give but little of their qualities in the temperature and confti-
tution of the native; firft, becaufe the Sun is fixed in his detriment
upon the cufp of the afcendant ; and, fecondly, becafue Venus is pofited
out of all her fortitudesand dignities; and hence we find no trait in


the


OIF AS TRO L.O°;G Y. 825


the life and ations of the native, which defcribes his having formed
any connection with the fofter fex, or been at any time ftimulated with
thofe unconquerable defires for connubial enjoyments, which thofe only
who have Venus ftrongly dignified in their genitures are qualified to
explain.


Upon the afcendant we find fixteen degrees of the tropical fign Ca-
pricorn, with Jupiter’s benign afpecét located therein. This denotes
rofy health, and uninterrupted profperity to the native. It is the em-
blem of dignity, an infallible argument of efteem, and a ground of
lafting reputation to the end of his days. And we need no further evi-
dence than the foregoing well-authenticated narrative of his own life,
to convince us of the full completion of all that thefe fortunate beams
had promifed.


We muft. not, however, forget to remark, that as Jupiter hath his
fallin Capricorn, fo it denotes likewife that the native fhall feel. fome
occafional indignities from the oppofition of perfons difcordant to his
own opinions and do¢trine, who, in the very midft of the honour and
favour he is receiving from eminent and royal perfonages, will infult
him with perfonal reflections and poignant-fatire. This, I have no
doubt, was a thoufand times verified, in almoft every ftage of his life,
by thofe who confidered Baron Swedenborg fuperior to themfelves,
either in favour or abilities, or who fuppofed him touched with infa-
nity, among which cla{fs there are more to be numbered in this ifland
than in any other part of the globe.


The active planet Mercury we find likewife in the afcendant, ap-
proaching his own triplicity in the fign Aquaries. The influx of this
planet’s beams, and the effect of their predominant mixture with the
qualities of the other planets, in forming the intelletual part of man,
has been already fufficiently explained. In the prefent cafe, it is evident,
that this pofition of Mercury gives to the native an acute and penetrat-
ing genius, a tharp and ready wit, with a mind apt for the fciences.
And, when we add to thefe confiderations, that Saturn is lord of the af-
cendant, in his exaltation, and beholding the afcendant with triangular
beams, at the fame time that the Sun, the prince over the planetary
fyftem, beholds Saturn with a trine alfo,, we fhall not be furprifed to
find this native poflefled of a moft comprehenfive and elaborate under-
ftanding, fraught with the ftrongeft and fublimeft ideas. Indeed I am
ready to confefs, that out of all the long catalogue of nativities I have
hitherto infpecied, I never found the planet Saturn fo properly confi-

gurated


$26 AN ILLUSTRATION


gurated to give an enlarged mind, nor the other fignificators at the fame -
time fo happily correfpondent therewith, asin the geniture now under
confideration. How far this ability has been eftablifhed and confirmed
in the perfon of the native, let his attempts to pry into the depths of
Eternal Nature, and to folve the vifions of the Deity, determine for him.


But as there can be. no eminent portion of good in this world fince
the fall, without fome intermixture of evil; fo in this nativity, notwith-
ftanding its eminent defignation, and the high and important benefits
promifed by it in the fcale of human acquirements, {till we fhall find a
certain portion of malefic influence, of imperfection and misfortune,
whereby the feeds of difcontent and death are nourifhed up, until they
become prodominant over all the powers and funttions of our nature. Of
this tendency is the baneful oppofition of Saturn and Mars; an afpect
which operated with uncommon ftrength and duration, both upon the
mental and bodily funttions of the native, giving him the moft extra-
ordinary enthufiaftic flights of imagination, and expofing him to the
cenfure of the learned, as well as of the illiterate, who charged him
with exorcifmand madnefs. But let me here embrace the opportunity of
‘affuring thofe who have taken up this idea, that there are not the
imalleft traces of infanity to be found in any part of this geniture. The
native is perfectly found, and fingularly competent, in his underftand-
ing; but, like the man who purfues the longitude, or the philofopher’s
ftone, beyond the beaten track of other adventurers, and is elated in
proportion to the new lights he receives, or the hopes he forms of fur-
pafling every other competitor, precifely by the fame ratio: will the
world meafure his wits, and decide upon the competency of his under-
ftanding and the foundnefs of his brain.


We have before feen, that the native’s mind was by no means formed
for fociety ; for the beginning of all our defires for community with
ethers muft be naturally founded in our love of intercourfe with the
female fex. The native never knew a predilection of the kind, but felt
himfelf happieft in the uninterrupted contemplation of his own ideas ;
and to fuch a pitch has he indulged himfelf in this particular, that he
has remained fhut up in his private chamber for two, three, and four,
days together, without admitting any perfon to make his bed, or even
to rap at his door. This ancommon difpofition can only be accounted
for by the pofition of Saturn, fo remarkably elevated, at the fame time
that both the luminaries are under the earth, which gives a ftrong and
invariable propenfity to the native to lead a fingle folitary life.

To


OFFASTROLO GY. 827


To this grave and folitary turn we are to attribute his early acquain-
tance and familiarity with fpirits, He has been often heard, in houfes .
where he lodged during his abode in London, for whole nights toge-
ther, in converfation with thefe miflionary beings, who become vifible
to thofe only that have refolution to devote the whole of their time and
attention to a community with them. How far Baron Swedenborg has
benefited fociety and himfelf, by the intercourfe he has had with them,
let his feveral publications, now in univerfal fale, determine for him.
The queftion is too delicaté and abftrufe even for an a/frologer to decide
upon. ; and itis a morfel which even the critics nibble at with unufual
precaution, left they fhould be found dzting at a file.


It has been a fubject of difpute, whether the fpirits, with which
Swedenborg had familiarity, were good or evil, For my own part, I
have no difficulty in deciding, from the conftitution of the planets in
his geniture, that he had community with both ; which I believe to
have been the cafe with every perfon fince the days of Adam, who has
had familiary with fpirits. Indeed Swedenborg himfelf tells us, that
a certain fpecies of the infernal {pirits would at times intrude themfelves
upon him; but that he was always preferved, by the goodnefs of the
Lord, from thefe infidious deceivers of men ; whofe malice and enmity
towards us is fo great, that, were it not for the watchful care and pro-
tection afforded us by the clemency of God through the medium of the
good genii, or lower order of the angelic hoft, it would be utterly im-
poflible for man to deliver himfelf from the power of hell and the
craft of the devil. ButI fhall defer entering upon an elucidation of
this fubject, until I come to treat of Spirits, in the magical part of this
work, where Baron Swedenborg’s intercourfe with them will be come
pletely inveftigated.


I fhall next confider the fignificators of the temper and difpofition of
this native, to fhew how far his general deportment correfponded with
them. As we find Jupiter, Mercury, and the Sun in his afcendant,
‘and the Moon at the fame time beholding that important angle with
triangular rays, it is evident the temper and difpofition of the man muft
be formed from a due mixture of their influxive qualities, each of
which would prove vifibly predominant, as they alternately came to act
through the medium of their refpective direftions. Exactly fo we find
the native agitated and imprefled. At one time his exterior would be
uncommonly pious and devout, exhorting all men, who ‘came within
the reach of his voice, to humility, charity, and repentance. At ano-
ther time he would totally feclude himfelf from all company, fhut

No. 42. 9T himfelf


828 AN ILLUSTRATION


himfelf up for whole days together, and obferve fo folemn and profound a
filence, as not even to give an anfwer when fpoken to. Yet at other
times he would enter into converfation with the utmoft vivacity and
{prightlinefs, and continue for a long time together in this communi-
cative humour; but always in a ftile and manner remarkably elevated
and majettic,


The reafon of all this is abundantly obvious from the face of his
horofcope. ‘The fuperior planets: being pofited in his afcendant, in
their full dignities, and confequently in their greateft influence and
energy, ated upon the temperature both of his mind and body, as they
refpectively came up by dire€tion, with uncommon force and power,
whence the affections of his mind, his words, his ations, and every
motion of his frame, were wound up to’an uncommon degree, and
diftinguifhed themfelves accordingly.


It will be readily feen, by any perfons acquainted with his difpofition
and character, that the fame general turn of temper and condu@ was
uniformly fupported throughout the whole of his life, which might
fairly be ranked amongft thofe of remarkable longevity. And it may
be feen, by any perfon who will take the pains to equate the direCtions
of thofe fuperior afpects, that they operated by alternate fucceffion with
equal force and influence, until the direction of death extirpated the
co-incidence of their beams.


The natural caufe of diffolution in the temperament and conftitation
of Baron Swedenborg, was, as may be feen by the geniture, a decay of
vital heat, oceafioned by a redundancy of cold rheum, accompanied with
the bloody flux. The dire€tion under which he died, was the Sun to
a partile conjunction with the body of the Moon, taken under the pole
of the Sun. The pole of the Sun is fifty-one degrees; the latitude of
the Moon is one degree one minute north ; then, by taking the oblique
afcenfion of the Sun, and the oblique afcenfion of the Moon, the arch of
dire€tion will be fixed at eighty degrees feventeen minutes.


If we equate this arch or track of the aphetical and anaretical ftars,
by the rules heretofore laid down, we fhall find it gives the {pace of life
_ to be eighty-fix years and near two months, at which time the native


emerged from this world into a world of {pirits, namely, on the igth
day of March, 1772.


CONSIDE-


?


ae


Te we SE SG
Ct
\
oy & y


a
, . Ss


— 2
te


2S


~~


| Ahimule }
t DTWIN,
LB Orn 22"Mark
2H 26 MPM
: 763.


VO


PO PDD BAFIDPDA DI DD OZ as


Born


po
7700,
/


| ATWEN |


: 19 ft Sune! 4
ie :


| CL 40M PM i


Fol \
0 0
Y .
\ J -% \
4.» /
e y
@.5
viet
2 ;
oP!
pe
af.
a 0
19
$
rs
r,


OL LeL ee eek Rh dk ee hed headdhee hee eee


2


Born
1g & Sure/


P Aab ere
; an


GP A% Toso L0G YA. 829


CONSIDERATIONS on the NATIVITIES of FOUR- TWINS,
whofe Genitures are difplayed in the annexed Plate,


Thefe four Twins were the produce of two births. The firft birth
confifted of a male and a female, who were brought into the world
nearly together ; from which circumftance the reader would naturally
infer, that the influx of the ftars muft have been the fame on both of
them ; and, confequently, that the duration of life, with its incidents
and events, were infeparable from each other. This not being the
cafe, however, I fhall proceed to account for it, upon the true princi-
ples and grounds of this fcience. And firft of


The FEMALE TWIN,


This child was born precifely at the time fpecified in the plate. Leo
afcends the oriental horifon, and confequently the Sun is lord of the
afcendant ; but being in the eighth houfe, the houfe of death, is an
infallible argument of a fhort life. The Moon, being in an aphetical
place, is the giver of life; but fhews the deftruction of it, by forming
a quartile afpect with the Sun in the houfe of death. No ftronger evi-
dence of an immediate death can well be adduced ; for, fince the Sun
is author of vital heat, and the Moon of radical moifture, and both of
them at once deprived, by malefic rays and cadent pofitions, from af-
fording a fit and due proportion of thofe nourifhing qualities, it is im--
poffible that life fhould be longer fuftained than during the time this
unfortunate afpect was forming.


It might be contended, that the pofition of the benevolent planet Ju-
piter in the medium ceeli, or tenth houfe, is highly favourable to the
prefervation of the child.. But, when it is confidered that this planet.
bas noafpect with the luminaries, that its beams are only reflected into
itfelf, and that all communications with the afcendant and fignificators
of life and death are cut off, we fhall find that this eligible pofition of
the benign Jupiter is in the prefent cafe totally without the power of
communicating the leaft aid to the funttions of life, or of mitigating
or leffening the malevolent effects of the anaretical influence.


A further proof of this child’s diffolution arifes from the Moon’s
pofition in the terms of Mars, at the fame time that his fiery intempe-
rate beams are conjoined with the worft irradiations of the cold planet
Saturn, and thereby act. upon the conftitution with violent oppofite ex-

tremes,


820 ANaheL £038 FRATTON


tremes. We find alfo that both the Sun and Saturn are difpofed of by
Mars; to whofe fuperior influence Mercury bends, who, with the Moon,
nourifhes and protects the brain. Hence it is obvious that the child
fhould die in its’ infant ftate, partly from the want of natural ftamina
and ftrength, and partly from the effects ofa cold fucceeded by a fever ;
and that this cold fhould be of the moift kind appears from the trian-
gular rays of Mercury and the Moon in the watery fign Pifces. The
child only lived until the quartile afpect of the Sun and Moon was
completely formed, when the weaknefs and debility of its body and
lungs gave way tothe convulfive agitations of the whooping cough, fuc-
ceeded by cold chills and fever, the immediate effects of the configura-
tion of Saturn and Mars; fo that nothing lefs than a fupernatural caufe,
which we juftly calla miracle, could poffibly have faved this child’s
life. J fhall next confider the little offspring which accompanied it,
and this was


A MALE TW...


This child came into the world-only about two hours after the former,
and yet it is not fubje& to the fame fate. ‘The Moon is prorogator in
this nativity, as well as in the other; but with this remarkable diffe-
rence, that both the luminaries are going from afpects of affliction, in-
ftead of approaching tothem. ‘The Sun is entering into the feventh
houfe, promifing vital heat and ftrength, while the Moon, juft fepa-
rated from a noxious quartile, gives teftimony to it, by affording due
proportion of health and nourifhment, being located in her own houfe
in the fign Cancer. So that, confidering the newly-acquired {trength of
the Moon, and the pofition of the Sun in a fign of his own exaltation,
emerging from quadrangular beams of affliction, weare afforded the moft
fatisfactory evidence of a found and perfect conftitution in the tempera-
ture of this native, with fufficient teftimonies to enfure health and
longevity.


The varied pofitions of the other fignificators afford us additional rea-
fons, of avery ftrong and decifive nature, why this Twin fhould live
to years of maturity, while its little companion fhould {carcely be per-
mitted to fee the light of this world. The conceptional arrangement
defcribes the fuperior ftrength of this child in the womb, and declares
it to have drawn to itfelf a confiderable part of that nourifhment which
fhould have fallen to the fhare of its fifter.


As therefore the pofition of the luminaries in the other birth declared
a fhort life, fo in this they afford equal teftimonies of longevity ; and
confe=


Or TAS © ROU Ja'G' y. 831


confequently the caufe of death will be fought from different fpeculation ;
for, though the Moon be giver of life, the caufe of death will be diffe-
rent. In this nativity Saturn is the anaretical planet, and the native
will in all probability be carried into the other world by the dropfy.
He will live until the Moon’s body forms a mundane quartile afped
with Saturn and Mars ; at which time, according to natural caufes, his
thread of life will be cut in twain—when his body will return back to
the earth, and be re-incorporated with the elements, while his etherial
or effential part mixes with that tormented or bleffed clafs of {pirits
to which the complexion of his conduct here fhall recommend him
hereafter. The youth is living, and I hope will draw a friendly ad-
monition from thefe premifes. alee


Of TWINS born immmediately together.


The genitures of thefe Twins are difplayed in the lower part of the
fame plate. The one was born on. the 19th of June, 8h. 4om. P. M.
or afternoon, and the other at‘only 8h. 42m. of the fame day. The
difference of time is therefore only two minutes ; which admits of fo
little variation in the pofitions of the planets, and in the coincidence of
their beams, either in refpect to the angles of the figure, or to the tem-
perature of the ambient matter, that each Twin mutt of necefflity fhare
the fame fate, in all the important confiderations attending the iffues
of life and death.


To eftablifh this fa€t, we need only contemplate the horofcope, and
compare it with the circumftances of the genitures we have juft dif
miffed, whereby it will be feen, that the difference of two hours has
moft effentially varied the impreffions of the fignificators at the time of
birth in the former horofcope ; while, in the prefent cafe, no fuch,
diftinctioncan be found ; and confequently, the effects of the elementary
matter being the fame, and the beams of the ftars falling in the fame
dire€tion, and with equal force, cannot afflict one infant without the
other feeling the fame affection ; not inftantaneoufly, but in a {pace of
time precifely equal ae in which the planetary fyftem moves in two
minutes. ‘This I have\ obferved in a variety of inftances ; and it is to
this very remarkable circumftance that the common notion of mankind
relative to Twins, that, when one ts taken ill and expires, the other will foon
follow, has obtained fo much confidence in every part of the uni-
verfe ; though we have feen, in the foregoing geniture, that this hap-
pens only where Twins are born immediately together, and not where
any confiderable time intervenes between their birth, unlefs the contti-

No. 42. 9U tution


832 AN’; Balch Ure sF Ray Poon


tution of the ftars fhould be fo configurated. as to continue the: fame
benefic or malefic influence during the whole of that fpace of times
which rarely happens, owing to the difference of velocity in each re-.
fpective planet, and the accidental circumftances of their becoming re-
trograde or ftationary. |


To determine the fate of thefe Twins, we have only to confider the
pofitions of the luminaries with the afpects of the erratic ftars, and it.
will be evident that their exiftence can be but of very fhort duration,
and is determined by the motion of the primum mobile; for, when Mars
came to the oppofite point of the Moon, which in thefe genitures is
giver of life, it is.apparent they would die. This was. exactly verified ;
Mars came to the firft anaretical point in two hours, and to the fecond
in two hours and an half; and the children accordingly died within
half an hour of each other, and within two hours and an half of the
time of their birth.


But, to fhew that life could not be prolonged in either of thefe infants,
we will take a further view of their genitures. The Moon, we find,
is in her detriment, difpofed of by the malignant planet Saturn, within
the rays of an oppofition of Jupiter and Mercury, who become fubfer-
vient thereby to the affliction of that ponderous malefic. The Sun is
going down under the affliction of Mars, difpofed of by Mercury, in.
houfes cadent and naturally evil ; whereby every thing born under their
influence is deprived of vital heat and nourifhment. The Moon’s
pofition, likewife, in the phafis of Mars and terms of Mercury, much
ftrengthens this judgement ;. befides, Mars is dignified in his own .terms,
while the Sun is received in the terms of Mars, as well as of Jupiter;
fo that four planets out of feven are in the dignities of his malefic influ-
ence, and partake of his temperature. Thefe are all teftimonies of a
fhort life, and, falling fo immediately together, render the {pace of life
of a ftill lefs duration.


But, had it been poffible for thefe Twins.to have out-lived the ele-
mentary influx of thefe deftructive configurations, ftill they would have
died fhortly after they had paffed their infancy, under the anaretical
affliction of the Sun direéted to the oppofitional rays of the Moon, who,
being giver of life, would have had her vegetive {trength and virtue


totally abforbed by him, whereby vital heat and animal pulfation muft
have totally fubfided.


And.


OF ASTROLOGY. 839


And here we deduce a caufe moft obvious to the fenfes, and ftri€tly.
conformable to the laws of nature, why the anaretical influence is fome-
times baffled by the fuperior ftrength of the native’s conftitution, affifted.
by the rays of aphetic ftars, whereby the difeafe or accident is bafHed,.
though death were pronounced inevitable, both by phyficians and.
friends ; fo that, when the anaretic influence is thus overcome, the pa-.
tient acquires immediate ftrength and fpirits, eats and fleeps, and reco-
vers his health and vigour in fo furprifing a manner, that the phy fician
is cried up to the fkies, as the fine? man in the world, at the very moment.
when he himfelf is as much at a lofs to account for the caufe as. the:
moft ignorant of his panegyritts.


Thus it happens in many genitures, and requires the aid of reafon
and philofophical acquirements to decide pofitively on the effetts of
configurations which involve fo much doubt, and appear equally unde-
cifive in point of life or death, though obvious and certain as to the
violence of the difeafe or accident whereby the native fhall be afflicted.


The fureft way of forming our judgment in thefe cafes, is to direct
the afpetts of the {tars which bear principal rule in the hylegiacal and
anaretical places of the horofcope, far beyond the wra of fuch undecifive
malignant influx, at leaft till another death-like configuration is formed
by them ; and, if this appears the moft {trong and-powerful in favour of
the killing rays of the anareta, it will generally be found that abfolute
death will not happen to the native until the fecond congrefs of thefe
important fignificators is completed in the heavens, notwithftanding the
danger threatened by them in their firfttconfi uration may make it next to-
a miracle that the native efcapes with his lif


OF


894 AN b.D DU sR A. Taw. N


Veer AN Tl COC Sopdet Wank.


The following figure exhibits the geniture of a Child born with fix fingers
on each hand, and fix toes on each foot, and thofe double-jointed.


| Thomas Bellisford, |
BORN


8th May, 4h. 55m. in Morn. 3
3 1778.


Lat. 52.


Latitude of the Planets.


b North 2 34

( North i 1
[és North O 19
i North re) 30
1g North 1 10
ey South 3 55


This


OF ASTRO LO & ¥-. 8365


This nativity.is of a very rare kind, affording an eminent example of
the effecb of prolific configurations, where only one foetus is produced
under the nutritive qualities nature had intended for two. The pofition
of the luminaries here, in figns fruitful and obeying, with nearly all the
planets under the earth, give the moft demonftrable proofs of large and
high ftature, that can well be adduced; but the additional fingers and
toes refult from the fecundity of four-footed figns, occupying the angles
of the figure, at the fame time that the luminaries are fuperior to all the
other planets, whofe regulating influence in this nativity is totally |
withheld.


The Sun being in the twelfth houfe, and in degrees encreafing for-~
tune, fhews that the native fhall thrive in the world by the rarity of his
parts ; and fo it has in fome meafure already happened, and will in a
much more eminent manner hereafter, as this youth encreafes in bulk
and ftature. He has now been fhewn as a natural curiofity for fome
years, and a great deal of money has been accumulated by that means.


We have, in the introductory part, already fhewn the radical caufe of
this fuper-abundance of nature in its formulary operation ; and in this
figure thofe rules are conrpletely verified. For neither the fuperior nor
inferior planets having dignities in the afcendant or medium coeli, nor —
afpect therewith, and the principal light of time being in the twelfth houfe,
with the Moon in the mid-heaven, and in the figns Gemini, Sagittarius,
or Pifces, in azimene degrees, isa demonftrable proof that what is then
born fhall exceed the common line of nature, and be either monftroufly
misfhapen, orabove the common bulk of mankind. In the prefent cafe
we find both has happened, as well in the excefs of members as in
the mafcular proportion and altitude.


According to the fame mixture and quality of the formative matter,
we find fimilar conceptions take place, whenever Saturn afflicts the Moon
in an angle poffeffed by beaft-like or double-bodied figns, with the Sun’s
fuperior beams increafed by figns of long afcenfion, and carried to the
fame point by fextile or triangular rays. Under fuch a fynod of plane-
tary fignificators, gigantic ftature, or inconceivable corpulency, 1s fure
to take place. IndeedI have been confidently informed, by a gentleman
who had for many years made Aftrology his amufement, that this was
nearly the pofition of the heavens, in the genethliacal figure of the much-
celebrated Mr. Bright, fo famed for his corpulency and ftature.

No. 42. Near gxX Again,


836 AN ILLUSTRATION


Again, whenever the afcendant, Sun, or Moon, at the time of con-
ception, is afflitted in the ob{cure parts of the figure by Saturn, and in ~
figns double-bodied, beaft-like, and prolific, excefs of parts and Mature
will be produced, either general, as to the whole body, or elfe in thofe
particular parts only which are under the government of the figns re-
fpeftively occupying the afcendant and midheaven. But, to afcertain
thefe circumftances with due precifion, we muft ere€t the conceptional
figure of every nativity, to difcover the tendency and influence of the
formative virtue in the earlieft ftate of the embryo.


It may alfo be remarked, that monftrofityin brutes originates from
the fame caufe; and, as they aredeprived of the functions of reafon, it
is plain the planetary influx acts with greater force upon them ; and more:
frequently produces this furprifing effect.


The


OF ASTROLOGY. 834


The GENITURE


of


a’ D WA’ RF.


Latitude of the Planets.

North,
South,
North.
North.
South.
South,


h re) 40
| 2 1 43
ue re) 33
|? I 59
‘8 2, 11
» 4 50


In this nativity Capricorn, a fign of brevity, afcends the horofcope,
and Saturn, being lord thereof, by his cold and dry nature, oppofes the
nutritive power of the Moon, which, being inan abject place under the
earth, can afford no nourifhment. This effect is produced through the
medium of Mercury, who, being in conjunction with Saturn, difpofes
of the Moon, and participates in the qualities both of Capricorn and


Saturn,


$28 AN ILLUSTRATION


Saturn. Mercury, at beft gives but a fmall flature; but, configurated:
with thefe rays, he contributes all his influence to check the growth and
nourifhment of whatever.is conceived under; it.


It is here likewife a moft remarkable circumftance, that Mars, from
a fign of brevity, beholds the Sun by a fextile ray, pofited alfo ina fign
of brevity, fo that the figns occupying the principal angles in this ge-
niture are precifely of an oppofite quality and influence with thofe in
the laft figure, and confequently have a tendency and effect diametrically
oppofite thereto. And fo indeed we find it; for this native, inftead of
exceeding the common fize and ftature of man, will never grow to the
height of four feet, nor poffefs limbs nor parts larger than the common
run of boys of feven years old.


An additional teftimony in favour of this opinion is the quartile af-
pect of Jupiter and the Sun from brevious figns, which ufually demon-
ftrate the conception of a Dwarf. But indeed it is an univerfal maxim
in this {cience, that whoever hath an earthy fign afcending the horifon
of his nativity, with two or three planets pofited therein, will certainly
be but of low ftature,’ particularly if: Saturn be located amongft them ;
for a cold and dry temperature, excluded, from the heat and moifture
of the two luminaries, is contrary to the natural growth of any thing,
as we may {ee by the ftate of vegetation in the autumnal equinox.


OF ASTROLOGY. 839
of 2 SHORT LIFE, o EMBRYO not nourifhed.


fee “| * >
O° -A Son'of Jj. S. 9,70
BORN
28th July, sh. agm. in the morn.


Bes
1783. yf


& > Lat. 51° 32” ap
Si. ve A ih
. e
of vA K
“ % oy v
% S Pes | Pa
g s php
Ps Re at
Se


he V nd


Latitude of the Planets.


bh 2 North.
YY ° 34 South.
é 4. 20 South;
¢ ° 15 North.
¥ I 49 South.
2) 4 15 . North,


In this figure we find both the Sun and Moon, the two great lumi-
naries, one the author of vital heat and motion, the other of radical
nourifhment and moifture, both pofited in conjun¢tion in the twelfth
houfe, which is the manfion of the evs/ demon, and fhews the immedi-
ate termination of whatever is generated under it. Befides this, we find
Jupiter, lord of the houfe of death, in oppofition with the Moon ;
~ No. 42. 9Y and


840 AN ILLUSTRATION


and Mars, who beholds the Sun with triangular beams, hath the vivi-
fying quality obtained thereby totally deftroyed by the pernicious quartile
configurations with Saturn, lord of the fixth houfe.


Thefe qualities and temperatures of the planets demonftrably thew,
that the embryo. in its original formation was void of ftamina, and that
the nourifhment, during its continuance in its mother’s womb, was
fcarcely fufficient to fuftain life. It is evidently born without any
particular accident or indifpofition ; and yet it is as plain that it cannot
long furvive the day of its birth ; and the reafon 1s, becaufe the digeftive
and expulfive faculties, the motion of the lungs, and the vibration.of
the heart, have not fufficient ftrength or ftamina to perform their re-
fpective fun@ions, and the moment the ftomach comes to be furcharged
with food beyond its digeftive power, the infant will be feized with
fpafms, and die almoft inftantaneoufly, nearly in the fame manner as
though it were fuffocated.


I caft this nativity foon after the child was born, and prepared the
mind of its mother to meet its lofs with refignation and fubmiffion to
the will of God and nature. The {pace of life will be feen, by taking
the diftance of the Moon from that precife point in the heavens which
forms an oppofition with Jupiter, lord of the houfe of death. This
gives, by the folar motion, about four days ; and the child died ex-
actly in the way I had defcribed, on the firft of Auguft following, which
is four days from its birth. |


Another


OF ASTROLOGY. 841


Another EMBRYO. not nourifhed.


A Male Child,


B (Orn N


Froth March, 4m. before eight
o’clock in the morning, 1786.


Lat. 51°. 32°


Latitude of the Planets.


h O°”! 41 South:
4 1 6 South.
é ae 6 North.
Lg et 26 South.
3 2 fo) South.
> 2 25 North.


This geniture is of much the fame quality of the former, but the
pofition of the horofcope at the time of birth is much more remarkable, .
having fo many planets in the twelfth houfe. This is in all cafes an’
unfortunate omen, but particularly in the prefent, where no one friendly.
ray can be found to oppofe their influence. On the contrary, we find
Mars in the fecond houfe, afflicting thefe ftars with a quartile irradia-

t10N».


842 AN ILLUSTRATION


tion, having dignities at the fame time in the twelfth ; which is a
powerful argument not only of certain death, but rather of an imme-
diate and violent nature. Jupiter being lord of the eighth houfe, is in
fextile with Mars, and both of them are lords of the twelfth. Venus,
lady of the afcendant, is befieged by Mercury, lord of the fixth, and
the Sun, the only light of time, and the Moon, lady of the fourth,
afford neither nourifhment aor affiftance, whereby conception could be
ftrengthened, or the functions of life fufficiently formed. |


In the conceptional figure of this infant, both the luminaries are -
afflicted in angles, by the noxious rays of the malefics, whereby ftami-
nais denied, and proper nourifhment entirely prevented from reaching
the vital parts of the body. This may be feen, by comparing the
figure with thofe rules heretofore laid down in the former part of this
work; from whence the attentive reader will be fufficiently enabled to
perceive, that the duration of this child after its birth could not ex-
ceed more than four days ; at which time it was feized with convulfions
at the breaft, and died in the greateft agonies.


Many other nativities might be adduced, of this and the like kind,
to fhew the obvious power and agency of the fuperior world, in form-
ing earthly Man, who is an epitome of the whole fyftem, and ‘* wonder-
fully and fearfully made,” partaking of all its efflence and parts, and
comprifing the fair image of the Deity. But furely, after the faéts that
have been eftablifhed, and the examples we have given, in almoft every
{tate and contingency of human nature, it can anfwer no good purpofe
to multiply thefe inftances of aftral influence and prediction, particu-
larly to minds that are wilfully deaf to reafon and argument, and who
ob{tinately fhut out the light of heaven, left it fhould irradiate their
underftanding, and convince them they are but men of Jow and hum-
ble conceptions, in no fhape qualified to determine the pathlefs ways of
God, or to meafure the extent of his omnipotence, ~


CONSIDERATIONS on a@ QUESTION of MARRIAGE, deduced
from the NATIVITIES of ¢he contracting PARTIES, and confirmed
by an horofcopical Figure of the Heavens, at the precife Time of celebrating
the Nuptials.


Much has been faid on the fubject of Matrimony ; and it muft be
confefled, that the importance of the contract, and the great end of our -
exiftence ‘being involved in it, as well as the fublunary happinefs or
mifery of the geeateft part of God’s children upon earth, renders it a


fubjec


OTA SITING uUdc y: 843


fubject of the firft magnitude, in which the hands and hearts of both
fexes, of all ages and degrees, are with one confent united. I therefore
confider myfelf in fome refpects bound to ftate the prefent queftion, as an
example whereby to render this enquiry facile and eafy to fuch of my
readers as chufe to employ their leifure hours)in this {peculation.


The circumitances of this marriage came under my own immediate
cognizance and obfervation ; and they are fuch as, I truft, will operate
as a caution to every fingle perfon, not to enter into that holy ftate from
mere motives of advantage or convenience, when love is confeffedly
wanting on the fide of either of the parties. But cautions now-a-days
are out of date; and the admonition of friendfhip is regarded only
as the fubtil declamation of hypocrify, or the bufy officioufnefs of a
marplot,


The lady, who is the fubject of the prefent queftion, came to obtain
my opinion and advice how far the prefent marriage would prove advan-
tageous and happy;. confefling, at the fame time, that fhe had no. great
regard for the old gentleman. I ftopped her, as is always my cuftom,
from entering into particulars, and defired her only to furnifh me with
the exact time of her own nativity, and to procure me, if poflible, that
of the party to whom fhe was engaged. This was complied with, and
I drew my judgment accordingly. rier |


Upon comparing the radical conftitution of the two genitures,. I could
not find a fingle configuration in the one that bore the leaft harmony or
fimilitude with the other. - The benefic ftars in the angles of one figure
were oppofed by the malefics in the angles of the other. The mafeuline
temperature was ftrongeft in the female horofcope, with the Moon and
Mercury in good afpect in the fifth houfe; while, in the man’s geniture,
the effeminacy of female influence was but too apparent, with the mor-
tifying teftimony of Saturn, lord of the afcendant, in oppofition to Mars,
the lord of the fifth, and the Moon afflicted in a cadent houfe.


The places of marriage in both figures were occupied with the lefler
infortunes, but not difcordant; neither were they harmonized by a fin-
gle ray of benefic influence. I therefore faw the probability of marriage
taking place betwixt them, at the fame time that the warm paflions. of
the woman rendered it impoflible for her to be happy in the arms of a
cold, frigid, aged, barren, and almoft impotent, hufband. I clearly {aw ava-
rice had a fhare in her compofition, and that the hope of advantage fup-
plied the place of connubial affeGtion. Vhis I detected, and condemned as

No. 43. 9 Z highly


Seas AME DL UW siTeR AT TO N


highly reprehenfible, and at the fame time candidly pointed out the na-~
tural infirmities of the man fhe propofed to call hufband, which, added

to his fuperiority of years, made it impoflible for her to enjoy the natural

felicities of a married life, or that they could long live and cohabit to-

gether. My advice was therefore to drop all thoughts whatever of fuch

a connexion, and a refolution was apparently formed for that purpofe ;

but the contrary perfuafions of friends, added to the fordid temptations

of lucre, in a fhort time got the better of my advice, and on the goth of
November then next following this couple were married.


Determined to be confirmed in my judgment of this curious match,
I took down the exatt time the ceremony was performed, which was at
forty minutes paft nine in the morning, when the heavenly inteiligencers
difplayed themfelves as in the annexed plate, and the fignificators corref-


ponded with their re{pective genitures, in a manner aitonifhingly cor. ~


rect, and fo as to prove, to the fatisfaCtion of every reafonable mind, that
the impulfive or inftin¢live faculty within us is ftirred up and excited by
the medium or influxive agency of the celeftial bodies.


The afcendant of this matrimonial figure is given for the bridegrmoo,
andthe feventh houfe for the bride. Saturn we find is ftill lord of the
afcendant, located in his own houfe, and moft aptly defcribes “the per-
fon of the bridegroom, viz. a tall lean. and flender perfon, advanced in
years, with long vifage, dark ‘hair, meagre complexion, and peevith
difpofition; whilft his imbecility is mofl corre@tly denoted by the pofi-
tion of Venus, difpofed of by the frigid planet Saturn in Capricorn,


The Moon in Cancer, in the feventh houfe, -reprefents the bride ; and
defcribes her to be of amiddie ftature, round full face, brown hair, and
well proportioned ; and, as the Moon is approaching toa trine afpect
with Mars, it fhews her to be,a woman of {trong paffions and fpirit ;
hot, fiery, and impatient, though good-natured and courteous.


Let it here be premifed, that, in all marriages where the two fig-
nificators which reprefent the brideand bridegroom are not in good.
afpect with each other, it is impoflible the parties can live in harmony
with each other; neither do they come together by the impulfe of pure
love, but for fome other motive, which may generally be known by —
examining what houfe the lord of the afcendant or feventh houfe applies
to, and the nature of the planets by which they are then occupied ; for,’
if the lord of the eighth apply to the lord of the afcendant, or if there
be no reception of the luminaries in their nativities, they are carried to

the


y


Beayanun Brovonsel.


Married


OF TAASATIREOULI ONG Y. hes. ee


the hymeneal altar, not by the force of love, but by motives of avarice.
Sometimes indeed we ‘find love to be on one fide, and intereft only on-
the other. This is when the lord of the afcendant is a fuperior planet,
and the lord of the feventh an inferior one of a contrary nature, and yet
applying to the lord of the afcendant. Again, we find marriages take
place where there is no love at all, as is the cafe in the above figure,
where Saturn, a fuperior and ponderous planet, fignificator of the man,
is pofited in his own houfe; and the Moon, a light and inferior one,
and fignificatrix of the woman, likewife in her own houfe, but both of
them in oppofite figns, is a demonftrable proof of avarice on one fide,


but of love on neither.


Upon the whole, mutual convenience may be traced out as the pri-
mary incentive in both thefe parties. The man was rich and old; the
girl young—but not rich. So Mars, being lord of the tenth houfe, and
pofited therein, collects the rays both of Saturn and the Moon ; and,
being fo much higher elevated, imprefles with a ftronger influx this dif-
pofition upon their inclinations, and proves to us that their hagds were
joined, but not their hearts. ;


- Jupiter, in all cafes where he is free from malignant beams, hath de-
fignation of perfect honefty. In this figure we find him juft entering |
into ‘his own houfe, in platic trine to the Moon, and in fextile with Ve-
nus. But, although he thus favourably irradiates thefe two prolific pla-
nets, fo as to impel a joint inclination to have the marriage ceremony
performed, yet, by being in quartile afpect to the Sun and Mercury in the
eleventh houfe, which is the’ bride’s fifth, and comfequently her houfe
of children, pleafure, and delight, it plainly demonftrates, that, though
fhe fhould have no offspring by her hufband, fhe would take care to ac-
quire it by other means.


The Sun and Mercury have dignities in the feventh houfe, and confe-.
quently have ftrong fympathy with the bride ; but, being pofited in the
eleventh, they become fignificators of enemies of the bridegroom. The
Sun having his triplicity in the twelfth, and being within five degrees
of the cufp, united at the fame time with Mercury, fhews that their
influence will be of the like nature and tendency ; and, as both of them
are in the bride’s fifth, which according to the rotation of the {phere
is her houfe of pleafure and fecundity, they give defignation of two per-
fons, with whom fhe would have familiarity and criminal contact ;
which is further illuftrated by their being in exact quintile to the Moon,
her immediate fignificator ; which, being in no afpect whatever with

ike Saturn,


846 ANY DLOLIWSeTIRGART TON


Saturn, the fignificator of her hufband, fhews that they will feparate, and -
abandon each other, without any bodily union whatever,


The extraordinary circumftances of the cafe induced me to give my
opinion of the marriage very freely, in the company I was in, the fame day
it was, if I may fo termed, confummated. Much mirth, of courfe, re-
fulted from my obfervations; but very few believed the circumftances I
mentioned would fo fuddenly come to pafs; particularly that a feparation
would prove the confequence of a fingle night’s embrace: and that. both.
parties, would difunite with fo much indifference.


The facts quickly followed the prediction. The new-married pair
were put to bed—qwhere. love and joy fhould take their fll: but fuch was
the fingularity of the cafe, that the bride rofe up with the Sun, and, hav-
ing been refufed that participation of fortune her friends had blazoned.
out, and finding no other allurement to fupply that défect, fhe immedi-


rc c:ately deferted her hufband, who never took the pains to retrieve her; and


the has fince attached herfelf to. two other perfons, by both of whom fhe
has had children. : |


Whoever contemplates the horofcope given in the annexed plate, will
eafily account of this otherwife extraordinary narration. They wilk
likewife perceive that we have given a lively contraft of a bad marriage,
_ by an emblematical reprefentation of a good one, where heart and hand,.

and innocence and love, draw down the foftering hand of heaven, with
fruitfulnefs and joy. Intereft and ambition ought furely never to guide
the laws of+love. The {weet intercourfe of the fexes, and the ecitatic
bending of foul and body in the bonds of matrimony, becomes a crime,
when not directed by that heavenly flame. It is the attic fire of all-.
powerful love, which alone teaches us to be happy here, and leads ‘to.
wnmortal happinefs hereafter ; for,

|


Well-chofen love on earth can neven die,
But with our nobler part afcends the fky..


TRAITS


e


‘
=


ere iat Pew 8
‘ erg ES .


hn “x


5 eer
take Sy


AD LV? 12,


Born qrex Ee.
2 duivy. geo”


357 Ante Get sll ve


re 3 set
OP SEXTUS Sh
Deer 29H yo


322 15 21.
<7 ‘Argoe


i : Aldelaran S$
TE Ss
/ S


OF TAASSTIREOLIQIG YI 847


TRAITS of Illuftrious and Extraordinary CHARACTERS,
deduced from their genethliacal Figures of Birth.


ALEXANDER the GREAT.——Born in Lat. 42°.


The perfon of — this illuftrious monarch is moft aptly defcribed by the
refpective fignificators of his geniture, in the annexed plate. We find
the lord of the afcendant, and the two luminaries, are in Cancer,
Virgo, and Taurus, all which are figns of brevity, and.denote a low
cor mean ftature ; and, as Saturn, lord of the afcendant, is-pofited in a

itted degree of Taurus, it fhews that he was wry-necked, conftantly
holding his head on one fide. He was likewife hafty and cholerie ; which
is defcribed by the Moon in conjunction with Mars, a configuration that.
gave him at the fame time an uncommon fhare of courage, an intrepid
fpirit, and an unconquerable mind. Experience hath taught, that
Venus adorns and enriches that part of the body which is governed by
the fign in which fhe happens to be pofited at the hour of birth. In
this nativity, Venus is in nineteen degrees forty minutes of Leo, which
reprefents the back and heart ; and in conjunction of Jupiter. Thefe
circumftances prove the native to have been. endowed with a large, bene-
volent, and courageous, heart, allof which, in the courfe of his life and
actions, were ina thoufand inftances exemplified. Nor are thefe ex-
cellent endowments prefigured only by the benefic irradiations of Jupiter
and Venus; they are further illuftrated and ftrengthened by the north
node of the Moon falling in the afcendant, while Saturn, the difpofitor
thereof, is in trine to the Moon and Mars, and the Sun, ipethe; exalta-
tion of Jupiter, in trine of them all. |


The time of this monarch’s inauguration and inveftiture of the king-
dom is prefigured by the trine of the midheaven with Venus; at the fame
time that Venus is within orbs of a conjunction with Jupiter, who is
lord of the tenth and eleventh houfes, which have defignation of the
crown, kingdom, and people. The direCtion of thefe afpects came up
in about twenty-one years from the native’s birth, at which time his
coronation took place; when he, in every fenfe of the word, began to
reign in the hearts of his people.


In this nativity, the Moon is certainly Hyleg, and is therefore to be
directed for death. The Sun, Mars, and Mercury, are co-figni-
ficators of death; and hence it is that the learned Gadbury attributed
his death to poifon, which misfortune befel him when the Moon came
to the quartile of Mercury in the eighth houfe. This prediction of the

No, 43.. 10 A native
M09


e


co


848 A Ni DLOLIUOS FTIR IAAT F ON


native being poifoned, is unqueftionably confirmed by what is recorded
of Olympias his mother ; who having, fix years after his death, difco-
vered the fact, caufed many fufpected perfons,to be.put, to death, as ac~-
ceflarics in the murder.


NERO. .CASAR.——Born in Lats, 51°.


This native is ufually denominated Bloody Nero; and indeed, if we
but caft our eye upon the horofcope of his birth, we fhall find ample de~
monftrations of a cruel and vindictive difpofition. Mars is oppofed to
Jupiter and Venus in the twelfth houfe, an afpect'of noxious and dire-
ful tendency. Jupiter, we find, is lord of the tenth, and confequently
fignificator of the native’s mother. Mercury is lord of the afcendant, in
exact quartile of the Moon, which is an obvious proof that the native
fhould cruelly treat and abufe his mother ; and, as Mercury is at the
fame time in fextile of Mars, it.is a probable argument that he would
become 2 murderer. The quartile of the Sun and Saturn, is.a confi-
guration productive of every vicious inclination, and of every atrocious
crime. Under the influence of this malignant direction, which held
for a confiderable length of time, he not only became hated by the peo-
ple under his government, but exercifed thofe. bloody and unparalleled
cruelties that darken and difgrace the annals of his reign. .


In the black catalogue of his offences it is recorded, that he not only
murdered his mother, but firft committed inceft upon her. He poifoned
his own brother ; killed his fifter in Jaw ; and deftroyed his wife Poppea,
by kicking her to death when pregnant. He. wantonly fet fire to
Rome, and exultingly made an entertainment in fight ‘of the flames,
while the city was burning ; and, being afterwards proclaimed by the
Roman Senate an enemy to the ftate, he, the monent he heard it, be-
came his own executioner, and deftroyed himfelf in the thirty-fecond
year of his age ; the directions for which are the Moon to the conjunc-
tion of Mars, and Jupiter to the oppolition of the Sun, who, in this na-
tivity, was Hyleg, or giver of life. Thus the configurations precifely
defcribe the quality of the man, and the directions thew the manner of
his death, all which minutely came to pafs.


POPE


OFTASITIR OU OG ¥: 849
POPE SEXTUS V.——Born in Lat. 43°.


Latitude of the Planets.


. eb North Latitude @ 50
2. Seuth Latitude Oo 21
8 North ; Latitude Qi g
? South Latitude a a
3 North Latitude a 89

Oy South Latitude 4 - 46


“This nativity’ difplays a’ brilliant’ affemblage of benignant confi-
gurations, calculated to promote the moft exalted’ honour and felicity.
To prefigure the native’s future greatnefs, here is a moft- remarkable
conjunction of the Sun and Jupiter in the afcendant ; and, to prove that
this fplendor fhall arife from ecclefiaftical preferment, we perceive the
lord of ‘the’ ninth houfe in conjunction with the lord of the tenth,
alfo in the afcendant. That an extenfive flow of wealth and riches fhall
accompany this preferment, is evident from the pofition of the lord of
the afcendant in the fecond houfe,: {trong in dignity, and in trine afpect
of the Moon, which isin conjunction withthe Part of Fortune, Thefe
are univerfally allowed to be the ftrongeft arguments of future profpe-
‘rity and grandeur to, the native that can. poffibly arife from any irradi-
ations of the ftars. whatever; and the refult proved the certainty of the
fact. At the age of fixty-four he was elected. Pope ; at which time the
medium ceeli came to the body of the Sun, as may be feen by equating
the direction ; and is‘ moft apt configuration for producing princely
honout:and. fovereignty.. The Sun, in this nativity, is Apheta, andthe
Moon-is-Anareta; fo that, when the Sun and Moon came into contact
by anaretical rays, this illuftrious native departed this life, which hap-
pened on: the 24th of Auguft,. 1590, at which time the Sun came tothe
perfect quartile of the Moon, in fixty-nine years from the day of birth,
which was the exact age of the native.


PHILIP Il. KING of SPAIN.——Bornin Lat. 42°,


_ When. this native was twenty-five years old, (which was in the year
1630,) he was in imminent danger of being burnt to death, but was
miraculoufly preferved. The directions at that time operating, were the
afcendant to the body of Saturn, and the Sun to the oppofition of the
midheaven ; and confequently to a conjunction with the fourth houfe,
which hath defignation of the houfe in which he dwelt. The Sun and
Saturn being in fiery figns prefage his danger to arife by means of fire ;

and


Bso AN ILLUSTRATION


and the oppofing irradiations of the benefic .ftars defcribe the manner
in which he was preferved.


In the year 1633, a confpiracy was formed againft the prince, and he
was in ‘the utmoft danger of being flabbed. This is declared by the
direQion of Mars to an oppofition with the afcendant by direct direction,
and prevented by the fuperior force of the benefic rays.


In 1649, when the native was nearly forty-four years old, he was
attacked by a fharp and violent fever, and his life was defpaired of. This
indifpofition came by the configuration of the Moon, which is the
apheta, or giverof life, directed to the quartile of Mars: but fatality
was prevented by the nourithing beams of Jupiter directed at the fame
time to-the afcendant. | .


In'the year 1656, a war broke out betwixt this prince and Oliver
Cromwell, then Lord High Protector of England; an event which is
mott aptly foretold by the body of the Sun coming to the Bull’s Eye, a
violent fixed ftar; at the fame time that the Part of Fortune comes by
dire€tion to an oppofition of the Sun in violent figns.


In the year 1659, King Philip made peace with France, and married
his daughter to the French King. ‘Thefe events are prefigured in his
geniture, exemplified in the foregoing plate, by the afcendant coming
by difection to the fextile of Mercury, lord of the feventh houfe; and the
Moon'to a perfect fextile of the Sun.


In 1661, the afcendant came to the body of Jupiter; :and was fuc-
ceeded bya revolutional fextile of the Moon to-her own radical place
im the geniture; at the fame time that Venus forms a mundane trine
with the midheaven. Thefe ‘directions promife much ‘happinefs, ho-
_ nour, and reputation, to the native, and point’ out the happieft and moft
iluftrious part of his reign. .


The Moon in this nativity being Giver of Life, and the Sun Anareta,
forefhews the time and manner of his death. Let the direction of their
oppofite beams be equated by the rules already given, and-‘it will be
found that the perfection of the afpect in the anaretical place of the ho-
rofcope agrees precifely with the hour in which this illuftrious prince
yielded up the ghott. ; |


HENRY


OG A Sa THREO L G'G ¥, 5) gay
HENRY VI. KING of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. ¢1° 92'.


This prince fucceeded to the crown of his anceftors when he was
but two months old, and was crowned King. of England on the 6th of
November, 1429; the midheaven being then directed to a trine afpett
of the Moon. At ten years of age he was crowned King of France in
the city of Paris, under the influence of the afcendant directed to the
body of the Moon, which configuration participates of the fame nature
and quality with the former, and they both moft aptly denote thefe illuf-
trious events, when applied to the perfons of princes of the blood, or
to heirs apparent to the throne.


At twenty-four years of age, the afcendant is irradiated by the fextile
rays of Jupiter ; under which direCtion he marries with the celebrated
lady Margaret, daughter to the Duke of Anjou, a _ princefs of mafculine
refolution and courage, which is reprefented by the fiery planet Mars,
located in the feventh houfe, in his exaltation. This violent and in-
trepid fpirit of Margaret was quite oppofite to that of her confort, who
imbibed from nature a difpofition remarkably mild and meek, as is ob-
vioufly prefaged by the paffive qualities of the feveral fignificators in his
geniture, difplayed in the foregoing plate,


In his thirty-ninth year, this native was taken captive by the Earl’ of -
March, and, by confent of the people, ftripped of his royalties, and
fent’ prifoner to the tower. This untoward event is prefaged by the
Moon’s quartile application, firft to the midheaven, and then to a malefic
quartile of Mars, both which directions came up precifely at the time
thefe circumftances took place. After he had been twelve years a clofe
prifoner, namely, on the 21ft of May, 1642, being then fifty years of
age, he was inhumanly murdered by the hand of Richard, the bloody
Duke of Gloucefter. Mars then came to the quartile of the Moon,
which, in this nativity, was Giver of Life,


If we confider the relative pofitions of the planets in this geniture,
we fhall not wonder that this prince was unfortunate in war, and un-
fuccefsful in all his enterprizes. The Moon in oppofition to Mars,
ftrengthened by angular places, and Mars, fignificator of public ene-
mies, fo powerfully located in his own houfe, at the fame time that he
is conftituted the governing planet of the geniture, is an irrefragible
argument that Fate and the Stars were combined again{ft this unfortu-
nate prince. The caufe and manner of his captivity are clearly pointed
out by Venus, lady of the afcendant, in quartile with Saturn ; and by

No. 43+ 10 B | Jupiter,


F


a3


852 AN 2 EU Ses Ree ore Ny


Jupiter, lord of the twelfth houfe, the houfe of imprifonment, in.
quartile with the afcendant ; whereby is fhewn the fuperiority and
fuccefs of his enemies over him. The Moon’s oppofition to Mars,
from fixed figns, and near the Pleiades, denotes the violent and untimely
death which this native fuffered ; but who inherited fo mild and paffive
a temper, that, when ftruck by a common ruftic, he gently replied,
«« Forfooth you wrong yourfelf more than you do me, by ftriking the
Lord’s anointed !”


HENRY VIII. KING of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. 5° 34°.


The lofty fpirit and arbitrary will of this prince are demontftrably
proved by the pofition of the luminaries in cardinal figns, as difplayed
inthe annexed plate. His temperature and inclinations are afcertained
by the configurations of Mercury in trine of the Moon, and in fextile
to Venus ; at the fame time that he beholds the afcendant with a fextile
ray, and forms concordant familiarities with the other fignificators.
This not only befpeaks a winning and complacent deportment, but
manifefts a luxuriancy in the gifts of nature, not commonly beftowed
upon the mafculine conformation. Here are however {trong marks of
obftinate refentment, and obdurate revenge, even again{t offending fe-


_males; whom it was not in his nature to forgive, when once ferioufly


-


incenfed againft them, as the houfes and figns teftify, wherein Venus
and Mercury are Iccated.


The aftrological caufe of this native’s defire after many women is
deduced from the fextile irradiations of Venus and the Moon with Mer-
cury, the Moon being at the fame time dignified in the feventh houfe,
And the reafon of his continual difagreements and contentions with them,
is becaufe Jupiter, lord of the feventh, is in quartile with ‘Mars and
the afcendant, which ftir up the choleric humour, unallayed by lafci-
vioufnefs and luft. The feverity of his treatment to them, is depicted


by the luminaries being in quartile to each other; the Moon in the


weft angle, in the houfe of Mars, while Venus, the fignificatrix of his
concubines, is in conjunction with the Dragon’s Tail.


The circumftance of this potentate changing his religion, and en-
couraging the reformation of Luther and Calvin, is moft admirably
defcribed by the quadrate afpect of Jupiterand Mars, with the Dragon’s
Vail in his ninth houfe. I thal] not go into a detail of this remarkable
event, nor confider it aftrally in all its parts; my purpofe here being
only to mark out the extraordinary incidents of thefe great mens’ lives,

and


0)
ca Qo.


a>

ja Bo TH, ies of *
Si Pt Sep.4. 211.20
1533 %,


Jat Roberts .rculp,


~e * i ‘ *
AE ee ree a
Se ee ae


OvF Ats TRO UL oJG! y. 85%


and to fhew the directions under which they happened, that the young
ftudent, or inquifitive reader, might apply them as examples, and profit
by the refult.


This Prince reigned over Great Britain thirty-nine years, and died on
the 28th of January, 1547, in the fifty-fixth year of his age. In this
geniture the Sun is Hyleg, or Giver of Life, which, being diretted to
the Anareta, will be found to correfpond exattly to the time of his
diffolution.


“ EDWARD VI. KING of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. 51° 32°.


North Latitude


Rh Ir 50
Fy North Latitude fF * 90
9 North Latitude omy §
2) South Latitude ZL ohh oy


It is remarkable of this native that he was extracted’ by manual ope-
ration from his mother’s womb, and his life preferved. At ten years:
of age he fucceeded to the crown of Great Britain, namely, onthe 28th
of January, 1547; at which time the afcendant of his nativity came
by direftion to the conjunctive afpect of the planet Venus, lady of the’
* tenth houfe or medium-cceli, whichis the houfe of dignity, honour, and
fupreme power. pes


This prince reigned only fix years and five months, and- expired when
he was little more than fixteen years old. The afcendant, in this ge-
niture, muft be taken for Hyleg, or Giver of Life, becaufe neither the
Sun, Moon, nor Part of Fortune, are in aphetical places. Saturn is
the Anareta, or Deftroyer of Life; and confequently, when Saturn came.
by direction to the afcendant, the native expired.


_ To prove this to be a fatal dire&tion, we find there were operating.at-
the fame time, the Sun to the quartile of Mars and the Moon to the

oppofition of the fame malefic planet ;. fo that both the luminaries were

afflicted, when Saturn traverfed the afcendant, and gave frefh.vigour to.
the hand of death. Hence it. is apparent, that this native was not de-

figned by nature either for a long or an happy life.


MARY,.


J


854 A Nyioboh Uses TR ANT § @N


MARY, QUEEN of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. 51° 34°


In this geniture we find Saturn lord of the afcendant, out of all his
own dignities, but in thedignities of Jupiter, and in a fiery fign. Ju-
piter we find is the difpofitor of Saturn ; but is pofited in a fiery fign;
likewife. Thefe are infallible arguments of an oppreflive and rigorous
government. The Moon, being in oppofition to Jupiter from angles,
hath defignation of grievous diffentions about religion. The quartile
configurations of the Sun with Mars, and Mars with Mercury, in the
dignities of Jupiter, in bicorporal figns, near Aldebaron, fhew the dif-
honourable and bloody reign of this. princefs, and the perfecution of
her fubjecis in matters of confcience and religion. Venus, being lady
of the third houfe, reprefents. her filter; and, being pofited in the
twelfth, moft aptly declares her fifter’s imprifonment; and the more
fo, as Saturn is not only lord of the afcendant, but lord likewife of the
twelfth, the houfe of imprifonment and affliction.


When the afcendant came to the fextile of the Sun, fhe fucceeded to
the crown of Great Britain, namely, in the year 1553, being then near
thirty-feven years of age. Inthe year 1554, fhe was fuddenly married
to Philip King of Spain, under the direction of the Sun to the trine
of Venus. .


This native died in the forty-fecond year of her age, after fhe had
‘reigned about five years anda half. The time and manner of her death
are pointed out by the Sun, which is Giver of Life, directed to the
quartile of the Moon, in quartile to Saturn, lord of the afcendant ;
and on the day fhe died the Moon came to the oppofition of Mars,
Thefe directions are all of a violent nature, and whoever equates them
by the Sun’s motion will find them correfpond exattly to.the time and
manner of her death.


ELIZABETH, QUEEN of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. 51° ga!


Upon the afcendant we find the regal fign Sagittarius, with Jupiter, |
its lord, located therein; which declarés the native to inherit a moft
‘mafculine and intrepid {pirit, a poignant wit, and undaunted refolu-


tion; qualities which are greatly heightened by the degree afcending
‘being in-the dignities of the planet Mars. -


In .


Gm As SATERE OT LTO: GY, age


In the twenty-firft year of her age, fhe was oppreffed and imprifoned,
and fuffered every fpecies of perfecution that could refult from the
vindictive jealoufy and refentment of her enemies, During thefe trou-
bles, the had operating a moft malefic direction of Saturn to the quartile
of the Sun, in the ninth houfe, which exactly defcribes the caufe for
which fhe was perfecuted, namely, her hereditary right to the-erown,
and her attachment to the proteftant religion.


When this #luftrious princefs attained her twenty-fifth year, fhe
triumphed over her domettic enemies, and was crowned Queen of
England. At this time the afcendant was directed to a trine alpect of
the Sun, whois the patron of honour and fovereignty.


In the fixty-ninth year of her age, this celebrated princefs made her
exit, under the mortal direction of the afcendant to the quartile afpect
of the Sun; leaving pofterity to record the bleflings of her reign, in
which were laid the folid foundations of the proteftant eftablifhment.


Should the young ftudent take the pains to fet a revolutional figure
for the year of the native’s death, he will find there was a conjunttion:
of the two infortunes in the oppofite place of the Moon in her radical
nativity; and the figure itfelf nearly in quartile to that of her birth.
The lord of the afcendant was in the eighth, and the Sun was falling
in the fixth houfe ; and on the day of her death, viz. the 24th of March,
1602, the Sun and Mars were both in the place of the direction, and
the Moon in quartile of them both, as if nature herfelf fympathifed
with her fubjects in the lofs their fovereign.


The EARL of ESSEX.—Born in Lat. 52°.


North Latitude
North Latitude
North Latitude
North. Latitude
North Latitude


vet po
be oe
0-0-0 0-0


It was not until the twenty-cighth year of his age that any thing
remarkable occurred to diftinguifh the charaéter of this celebrated no-
bleman. About that time he had a very eminent and powerful direCtion
operating, of both the luminaries to a fextile configuration of Jupiter,
under which he became powerful and elevated at court, and acquired
the efteem and confidence of the queen, in a moft unlimited degree, as
the feveral fignificators very aptly teftify.

10 C


No. 43. At


866 “AWN DUL WSuTERBANT BON


At thirty-two years of age he was deputed, as the principal in com-
miffion, to feize the Spanifh fleet; and foon after he was created eark
marfhal by the queen. This latter honour begat him abundance of
enemies, and created great jealoufies and fufpicions among the nobles,
and particularly among thole who were invefted with the feveral dig-
nities-and offices of ftate. At this time the native had the luminaries
direéted to the fextile of Venus; and, to thew the envy and malevolence
of his enemies, he had the midheaven diretied to the oppofition of the


Sun. pels


In the thirty-third year of his age this native was appointed to Ire-
land, viz. on the 27th of March, 1599. The Dragon’s Tail was then
on the afcendant ; and, the day he fet off, the Sun and Saturn were in
oppolition from the tenth and fourth houfes; and, what was worfe, the
medium-ceeli came by direction to an oppofitiow with the Moon. It
is hence evident that he would not profper; and the event proved the
fact; for, on the 28th of September following, he returned to the
Cout of London, the Sun being then in the place of Saturn at the
time of his fetting out.


On the ed of Oober, 4399, he was committed to the Tower; and
in June following he was i{ufpended from all his employments and
offices in the ftate. On the igth of February, 1600, he was arraigned
tried, and condemned, and on the 25th of the fame month, being Ath-
Wednefday, at eight o’clock in the morning, he was beheaded ; at which
time the midheaven came to a malefic oppotition with Mars.


The arguments of a violent or premature death, in this nativity,
are many. The two luminaries in conjunction with Mars, in afpect
with a violent fixed ftar; the Sun and Moon, and lord of the eighth
houfe, in violent figns, and Mars in Sagittarius afflicting the luminaries,
are {o many arguments, in any geniture, of an ignominious and untimely
end; and, in the nativities of perfons of quality and diftin¢tion, they are
always confidered as emblems of the lofs of life, honour, and reputation.


_. At the moment of this unfortunate nobleman’s. death, the radical
place of the Dragon’s Tail afcended ; the Sun and Mars were in oppofi-
tion to the afcendant of the revolutional figure, and Saturn was in exaét
oppofition to the Dragon’s Tail, all which circumftances declare his
life to have been taken away by violence and treachery, to fatiate private
refentment, and to appeafe the clamours of thofe who were too power-
ful to be oppofed, and too fanguinary to rife in the political hemifphere
but at the price of blood of thofe by whom they were eclipfed. Z;
%} JAMES


e


pet

#,
ra

f

;

rh


ty
Gs
Be
%
9
“NV


‘i


\


ae \
© \
a Re ee
OA aE Be
eae ee
y AS a4
jee / 8.3
Ss & P27.
Paes


OF ASTROLOG We a, .s-


JAMES I. KING of ENGLAND,——Born ia Lat. 56°.


This geniture is remarkable for giving a great number of teftimonics:
to the honour, dignity, and pre-eminence, of the native..- The Sun:
being in exact fextile to the afcendant from the tenth houfe ; the Moon
in partile fextile of Jupiter ; Jupiter in conjunétion with “the Part of
Fortune in the fecond houfe ; Venus, lady of the tenth located therein,
having familiarity with many eminent fixed ftars, in trine to the fecond.
houfe ; the two luminaries in perfect reception of each other ; and the
lord of the afcendant in the tenth houfe in conjunttion with the Sun,.
and in fextile to the afcendant, are teftimonies of dignity, honour, mag-
nificence, and fupreme power, rarely to be found in one and the fame:
geniture; but which were in the moft remarkable manner verified i in
the perfon of this illuftrious prince.


But notwithitanding thefe extraordinary arguments of fpendour and.
fovereignty, deduced from the influx of the ftars, yet we fhall on the:
other hand find, that this.celebrated monarch was not without his fhare
of anxiety and trouble; as the annals of the Britifh page abundantly
prove. In the aftral {cience thefe perplexities are prefaged by the fami-
liarity of Venus with the Dragon’s Tail, in perfect quartile of Saturn
and Mars; which fufficiently accounts for every evil that befel him.
Added to which, we muft not forget to remark the difcordant rays of
the Sun and Mercury, in quartile to Jupiter, . lord of the feventh houfe, .
and in cardinal figns, whereby the enmities and aia ae again{t. hiay.
are moft accurately forefeen.


The coronation of this prince took place in London, when he was:
thirty-feven years of age ; at which time the Sun came to the zodiacal
parallel of Venus, lady éf the tenth houfe, which hath defignation of.
fame, honour, magnificence, and preferment.


The memorable powder plot (memorable only ‘for its diabolical ma-
lignity) happened, under the moft noxious quartile afpe& of the /e/fer
malefic tendency of which mifchievous dire@tion was removed by the
infortune Mars, in the thirty-ninth year of the native’s’ age; the
fuperior rays of the benevolent Jupiter.


* In this nativity the Sun is Hyleg ; and: we’ find Mars; Venus, and
Saturn, all of them operating in the anaretical place of the geniture,


- Hence it is obvious, mary when the Sun came to the conjunction “of Mars, .
jointly


658 AW- db oO Ss TRA THICO N


jointly with the quartile of Venus and conjunction of Saturn, the na-
tive would fuffer a violent death ; which really took place, when thefe
direGions came up, in the fixtieth year of his age. The conititution
of Venus with the Dragon’s Tail, irradiated both by Saturn and Mars,
in the anaretic place, fhews the native’s death to have been occafioned
cby poifon ; for the immortal Ptolomy faith, that, whenever Venus is
joined with the malefics, in familiarity with the Dragon’s Tail, ia di-
‘rections to the hylegiacal or anaretical parts of the horofcope, it portends
death by poifon—and fo it really happened in the pretent inftance.


CHARLES I. KING of ENGLAND.—Born in Lat. 56°.


This unfortunate monarch was crowned king of this empire in the
twenty-fifth year of his age ; and was foon after married to the daughter
of Henry IV. of France. The medium-cceli was then directed to the
triangular cays of the Moon, in the houfe of dignity.


In the twenty ninth year of his geniture he had the medium-ceeli
directed to the oppofition of the Sun, under which influence he diffolved -
his parliament. The Scotch enthufiaftic phrenzy took place in his
thirty-eighth year, under the direction of Saturn toa conjunction of
the Moon. In 1641, being the forty-firft year of his age, he fummoned
a new parliament, in which the famous contention about the militia
took place. It likewife fermented religious jealoufies, and laid the
foundation of ferious machinations again{ft the king’s life; all which
misfortunes are prefigured by, and happened under, the influence of the —
afcendant directed to the quartile of Venus, lady of the tenth houfe;
and of the medium-ceeli directed to the quartile rays of Jupiter.


It was in the forty-fixth year of his geniture, that this monarch
placed his life in the hands of the Scotch army, expecting from them
that fafety and protection they had proffered to give. But, when they
had effected their bargain with the parliament, they bafely furrendered
him up, in violation of all the ties of honour, humanity, and benevolence.
This tranfaction took place under the malevolent influence of Saturn
tranfiting the midheaven, a configuration in the world known to. be
the forerunner of ingratitude, treachery, and deceit.


In his forty-cighth year, this unhappy monarch was beheaded, in
the front of hisown palace, Whitehall. . This memorable event was ef-
fected under the direction of the Part of Fortune to the quartile of the

Moon,


OF ASTROLOGY. . 859.


Moon, and the zodiacal. parallel of Saturn to the mundane parallel of
Mars ; and might ferve as an ufeful monitor to fucceeding princes, not.
to trifle with the remonftrances of a free people ; nor to hold in defiance
that genuine flame of heaven-born patrioti{m, which, when once feri-
oufly kindled through an empire, carries all before it, and breaks down
every barrier of protection, even to the facred perfon of the Lord’s
anointed.


OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord High Protector of ENGLAND.
Born in Lat. 52°. 19/. |


Inthe nativity of this enterprifing and extraordinary character, we
find fix planets effentially fortified, and four of them in friendly trine
to each other, with the luminaries and Jupiter in fextile. Thefe confi-
gurations prefage the moft important aequifitions to the perfon of the
native ; at the fame time that they illuftrate the intrepidity and valour
of his fpirit, with the capacioufnefs and fagacity of his mind, The
profeflors of this art both ancient and modern agree, that, where
only three planets are found effentially dignified in a nativity, it is an
earneft of fingular profperity and good fortune to the native ; but, where
fix teftimonies of the fame nature occur, it is an evident proof that the
perfon born under their influence will. eclipfe all. his cotemporaries _in
his advancement to glory and fame. How far this was verified. in ‘the
perfon of Oliver Cromwell, when the humble fituation of himfelf and
his anceftors is confidered, I fhall leave to the decifion of the candid and .
intelligent reader..


In the year 1640, this native was elevated to a feat in the Britifh par-
liament. This was his firft ftep to public fame and honour, and hap-
pened under the occourfe of the medium-ceeli to the Dragon’s Head; |
feconded by a favourable revolution, in which Jupiter occupied the
cufp of the tenth houfe.


In the year 1642, Cromwell. was appointed. to the command of a re-
giment of horfe ; and he raifed one troop at his own expence. The
Moon was then directed to the Scorpion’s Heart, an eminently martial
and jovial fixed ftar. In 1643, he was elected Lieutenant General to
the Earl of Manchefter, under the. direCtion of the Moon to the trine
afpect of Mars.


The memorable difpute between Cromwell and the Earl of Man-
chefter took place in the year 1644, with uncommon acrimony on.
No, 44. 10 D both


860 AN VYRRU STRATTON

both fides. ‘The Earl conceiving himfelf the better man, and fup-
pofing his intereft in parliament to be much fuperior, he preferred
divérs informations againft his Lieutenant General, but to little or no
effe&t. The native quickly exculpated himfelf, and triumphed over
his accufer. During the whole of this year, Saturn occupied the
afcendant of his revolutional figure ; and in his radix, or figure of birth,
the afcendant was at the fame time direC¢ted to the term of Mars.


In i645, the native was appointed Lieutenant General under Sir
Thomas Fairfax; and now his fame began to fpread abroad. The
Moon was then directed to. the fextile afpett of Saturn, lord of the
medium-cceli ; and under this direétion he eventually took the lead of
Fairfax himfelf. | iB.


In the year 1648, he remonftrates with the parliament, and contends
with the levellers, by which he fell into difgrace. Under the influx
of the fame. directions, he formed the plan of bringing his fovereign’s
head to the block. Thefe malignant beams proceeded from the quar-
tile afpect of the Sun and Saturn, accompanied by the Part of - Fortune
to the oppofition of Venus. '


In 1649, Cromwell attended the army in the expedition againft Ire-
land. He fucceeded in the undertaking, but was feverely indifpofed
with a flux. and fever. This all happened under the fucculent ‘beams
of the Moon, diretted to the parallel of Jupiter in the zodiac. The
years 1650, and 1651, were employed in fubduing the oppofition
in Scotland. Wherever the native turned hisarms, he came off vic-
torious, This was the Sun directed to his own fextile, and the fortu-
nate irradiations of the principal fignificators in the revolutional figures
of thofe two years, to their radical places in the geniture, whereby all
‘things appertaining to the native profpered well, and terminated generally
to his.own particular intereft and advantage.


The memorable zra of his afluming the power of Lord Proteor of
England, was 1653, when he boldly poffeffed himfelf of the avenues
leading to the Houfe of Commons, and put an end to the fittings of
parliament. Eying the Speaker’s mace, he ordered his attendants to
take away ‘* that zdolatrous bauble; ” though he afterwards thought it
no vanity to have three fuch borne before him. ‘Thefe events took
place when the Sun came to the. bodily afpett of Jupiter, and to the
fextile of. the Moon, at the fame time that the Part of Fortune received


the


OFTASMTTR OU AG % S61


the fextile beams of Venus; fo that both the benefic planets concurred
in the fuccefs of this daring enterprize*.


In the year 1654, Cromwell effected an honourable peace with France,
through the medium of Cardinal Mazarin; and he concluded a treaty
of alliance with the King of Sweden, through the indefatigable perfe-
verance of Mr. Whitlock. This gentleman was rewarded for his merit,
by being dignified with a title, and appointed ambaffador to the Swe-
dith court. TThefe incidents occurred under the influx of the Part of
Fortune directed to the trine of Mars.


The craft and fubtlety of the native was never «more confpicuous, than
when he convened a new parliament, for the purpofe of getting himf{elf
confirmed in the fovereignty of the empire, under the affumed title of
Lord High Protector... This took place in the year 1656, when the
Part of Fortune came to the fextile rays of the infidious planet Saturn,
lord of the tenth houfe, joined with a favourable revolution ; whereby is
moft aptly prefaged, the attainment of advantage and preferment, under
the hypocritical mafk of piety and religion. To fucha pitch of adulation
were fomevof his creatures arifen, that they not only confirmed him in
the title of Lord High Protector, but entreated him to aflume the name
and dignity of King. This, however, he had the fagacity to refufe;
deeming it fafer to poflefs the power, without the pomp, of Majefty.


In the year 1657, when thus invefted with the fupreme jurifdiction of
the kingdom, he fends fix thoufand men upon an expedition into Flan-
ders, under the command of Sir John Reynolds. This valiant knight had
likewife confulted Mr. Lilly before his. embarkation, and he fhortly
afterwards reduced and took poffeflion of Dunkirk, as that proficient in
the aftral {cience had previoufly affured him would be the cafe. The Sun
was then forming a perfect fextile of the planet Mercury in cardinal figns,
applying to Mars. °


In the year 1658, on the third of September, 3h. 15m. P. M., this
phenomenon amongft mankind departed this life, in the natural way,
without affaflination—which is perhaps the greatefl wonder of the age


* Itis a circumftance worthy of remark, that, before Cromwell put this daring fcheme into execution, he fent
for the celebrated Mr. Lilly, (who at that time of day was fingularly eminent for his knowledge in this {cience,)
and confulted him upon the occafion. Mr. Lilly only requefted, to be put in pofleffion of the hour of his nativity,
and he would foon inform him of the probability of the event. This was complied with; the direétions above
fpecified were equated and confidered, and the confequences exaétly foretold.. Cromwell is therefore fuppofed


to have entered with more confidence inte the Houfe of Commons, and tohave conducted his exterior with grea-
ter courage and dignity.


3 in


862 AN YLLUSTRATION


* in which he lived ; and can only be attributed to the feare—not to the
~ Jove—of thofe who had accefs to him, In the dire€tions which prow.
duced his death, the Sun is the Apheta, or giver of life, and Saturn the
Anareta, or deftroying planet ; and the incidence of their beams met by
quartile rays, precifely at the time this illuftrious native gave up the
ghoft, as any one might perceive, by equating the arch of direction.


Thus terminated the life and actions of a man, who perhaps never
had his equal—whofe refcources were within himfelf ; and whofe pro-
grefs through life was marked with ftrong portions of. temerity and hy-
pocrify—of perfeverance and good fortune. He attempted nothing
but what he accomplifhed ; and furmounted difficulties, which would
have plunged half the univerfe into ruin and defpair.


CHARLES II. KING of ENGLAND.
Born in Lat. 51%. 392".


It muft be pretty obvious to the reader, that the utmoft of my defign,
in giving thefe nativities, is merely to fhew the principal incidents of
each native’s life, and diftincétly to point ‘out the configurations or oc-
eurfions of the planets, under which they happened; that, by com-
paring to one with the other, in every age, occupation, or diftinGion,
of human life; we might be convinced, by the uniformity of facts, and
the evidence of our own fenfes, that the one is, in a limited degree,
fubfervient to the other ; and that the motion of the heavenly bodies, _
variegated and qualified by a coincidence of their beams, is. the real
medium by which the affairs of this world are influenced and directed ;,
and whereby the attentive reader, from obfervation alone, might be
enabled to predict the principal occurrences of any man’s life; from a.
bare infpection of his nativity.


According tothis fpeculation, we find the Moon in-earthy figns, ap-
. plying to the terms of Mars, near the place of the Pleiades, at the time:
this prince-was nine years old. The natural inference to be drawn from:
this afpect is, a broken limb, a violent bruife, or fome accidental afflic-
tion ; accordingly we find the native, when this direction came up, had.
the misfortune to break his arm: :


Again, at ten years of age, he was afflicted with the jaundice, and’
fuffered greatly bya fever. Thefe are the difeafes of Mars ; and the |
Sun, being Giver of Life, and paffing the terms of Mars.to a configura-
; tion.


OIF TAS TREO LOG ¥. 863


tion with violent fixed ftars of the fame nature, evidently produced’
them. The violence and duration of thefe diforders, are pointed out
by the oppofition of Mars to the Sun’s radical place in the geniture, in
quartile to the afcendant, with the Sun and Saturn conjoined in the
fixth houfe.


The afcendant. came to an oppofition of Jupiter when this prince
was afflicted with the meafles, which happened when he was about
twelve years old. .Soon after this he left London with his royal father,
and was plunged intoa labyrinth of forrowsand diftrefles. Thefe are
pointed outin a moft aftonifhingly correct and uniform manner, by a
chain of malefic configurations in his revolutional figure of that year.
The moft remarkable afpects are, a quartile of the Sun and Jupiter; a
conjunttion of Saturn and Mars ; a quartile of the Sun and Saturn; a
quartileof Saturn and Mercury ; a quartile of Mars and Mercury ; a
quartile of Saturnand Venus ; and a quartile of Mars and Venus; allin
progreflive order, accompanied with feveral unpropitious and moft alarm-
ing tranfits.


In the year 1646, this prince left his native country, and went for
fafety to France, where he fell fick with a {earlet fever, and his life was
defpaired of. At that time the Sun, Giver of Life, was diretted to the
terms of Mars, and to the ftars of Hercules, and Saturn paffed the
Moon’s place in the radical figure of birth. But Jupiter tranfiting the
Moon and Venus, and to the afcendant, not only gave him a mott
friendly and cordial reception at the court of France; but. prevented
the fatality threatened by the evil rays of Mars and Saturn.


In the twentieth year of his age, he was crowned King of Scotland.
This was under theinflux of the mid-heaven to the trine of Jupiter.
In his twenty-firft year, namely, in the year 1651, he entered England
with a confiderable army ; but was quickly attacked and defeated by
Oliver Cromwell, then Lord Protector of England. At this time the
afcendant came to the quartile afpect of the Sun ; Saturn tranfited the
eleventh houfe; and Jupiter formed a quartile with the afcendant in
his own radical place in the figure of birth, .


It is very remarkable, that on the precife day the battle of Worce(ter
was fought, which ended fo difgracefully to the native, the Sun came
in quartile with his radical place in the geniture ; Jupiter formed a
quartile with the afcendant; Mars was in oppofition to the Moon and
mid-heaven, and the Moon in quartile both of Mars and Venus. Under

No. 44. 10 E fuch


864 AN PEL Uw SiToR ALT £0 N


fuch inaufpicious ftars, what lefs could be expected than an inglorious
defeat, and a cowardly defalcation on the part of his troops ?


In the year 1607, the King of Spain aflifted the native with money
to the amount of one hundred thoufand pounds, The direftion then
operating exa€tly points out the circumftance, which was the Sun to
the trine of Jupiter. In the year 1685, the native died. The direction
which produced his. death, was Saturn, the Anareta, tothe oppofition
of the Sun, the Giver of Life.


If we compare the geniture of this illuftrions prince with that of
the king his father, we fhall find the afcendant of that nativity to be
the place of Mars in this. Secondly, the Dragon’s Tail, in the geniture
of this native, is upon the place of the Sun in the other. | Thirdly,
the Sun in the geniture of the father, isin oppofition to himfelf in the
geniture of the fon. Fourthly, the Sun in this nativity is in» quartile
to the place of Jupiter in the other; arguments, which ferve abun-
dantly to thew, that the father and the fon fhould both be involved in
one and the fame unfortunate quarrel ; that the father fhould fall a
widtim to its rancour, whilft the fon fhould rife fuperior to the enemies
of them both, and be reinftated in the hereditary rights of the crown,,
and in the hearts of his people ; which, I believe, was. at laft pretty
nearly the cafe. | |


JAMES Il. KING of ENGLAND.
Born in Lat. 51°. 32°.


The firft accident we meet with in this geniture, befel the native in
his infancy, when he was only a year anda half old, which was an im-
pofthume in his head, and continued, after it broke, for five years,
before a perfect cure could be formed. ‘This happened under the di-
rection of the Moon to the quartile afpect of the Sun ; which, being in
fixed figns, declares the obftinacy and continuance of the diforder,


In the year 1646, the native was afHlicted with a fevere ague, which
reduced him in a manner fingularly rapid and alarming. The caufe of
this illnefs I find in a revolutional horofcope of that year, where a
malefic oppofition of the Sun and Saturn, in quartile to the Moon’s
radical place, produces aguith affections, accompanied with a violent
fever. The ponderofity of Saturn declares the tranfit thould be accom-
panied with dangerous fymptoms. Again, the afcendant came to the

3 body


OF! ASTROLOGY 865°


body of Mars in the year 1650, and the Moon toa quartile with the
Part of Fortune, which influx likewife produced a violent fever, and a
remarkable laffitude of the whole human frame.. The native was then in
his feventeenth year. |


In 1653, this prince headed a wing of the army in Flanders, and re-
ceived adangerous wound, It-was in its nature not mortal; but, being
accompanied with a violent fever, the dangerous fymptoms were en-
creafed, and the native’s life in confequence defpaired of. This was
produced by the beams of the Sun, whem lord of the afcendant, directed
to the hoftile rays of a perfect quartile of Mars. Another fever was
produced by the Moon directed to the body of Mars, and the Sun to
the body of Saturn, which attacked the native in the year 1667, when
no perfon expected he would have furvived. Thefe configurations ferve.
to thew, that, from the radical conftitution of the feveral fignificators
in the figure of birth, the native was more liable:to fevers than to any
other complaint. From the fame fource of information we likewife
difcover, that this prince was fubject to weak.eyes and imperfect fight.
This is declared by. the quartile pofition of the two luminaries to each
other; the one being placed near nebulous ftars, and the other in fami--
liar congrefs with ftars of a violent nature.. ;


Anno Domini 1688, this prince fuceeeded to the crown of Great:
Britain. This is predicted by the planet Jupiter, to a favourable con-
junction of Mars, in the meédium-ceeii, or tenth houfe, the houfe of
honour, glory, and preferment. But here the influx of Mars, who is
the lefier infortune, moft aptly points out to us, that, though he is
brought by the primum mobile to a coincidence with the benefic beams
of the princely ftar Jupiter, and bears teftimony to his coronation, yet
the confequences would favour very much of the evils wherein this ma-
lefic planet is obferved to delight.


So many crofs and unpropitious directions as we find in. this nativity
are at firft fight fufficient to convince us, that the unhappy native would
drink deep of the bitter cup of difappointment and affliction. To juf-
tify the remark, requires only to advert to the private and public anec-
dotes of this prince, who, though he lived to the age of fixty-feven
years, enjoyed but a very moderate fhare of health, and ftill lefs of
happinefs. |


A


GEORGE;


866 AN SIL Vis T RA A Ls00N


GEORGE, DUKE of ALBEMARLE.—Born in Lat. s1®,


North ‘Latitude


‘b © 17.
uy ‘North Latitude T+ 50
é South ‘Latitude ‘Oo AQ
e South Latitude °o 59
rf South Latitude I 20
D South Latitude 4 53


This -nativity is worthy the minuteft attention of every reader, for
‘the fingularity of its noble and illuftrious configurations ; and whereby


-a good and profperous geniture might be readily diftinguifhed from
-thofe of an unfortunate and adverfe defignation.


The firft dire€tion material for us to examine in the above geniture,
is the afcendant to the quartile rays of Saturn, pofited in Aries, the
greateft dignities of Mars. Under this malefic influx, the native was
taken with the fmall pox, and very narrowly efcaped with his. life,
which we-fee.protected by the fuperior ftrength of the benevolent Ju-


piter in the afcendant, and the vivifying rays of the Sun unafflitted in
the tenth houfe.


‘In the twenty-firft year of his age, he was appointed to an arduous
-employment in the Low Countries ; in the execution of which he en-
ereafed in reputation, honour, and fame. The Moon was then di-
rected to the eminent ftar Oculus Tauri ; which hath the moft natu-
ral defignation of this fortunate occurrence. In ‘his thirty-firft year, he
was made a Captain inthe Horfe Guards. He had then in his nativity
‘the afcendant directed to the trine afpect of Venus, in the fign Taurus,
her chief dignity and exaltation, whereby thefe two eminent promo-~
tions are found to correfpond, and to be the refult of each other. When
the native was thirty-two years old, he was honoured with the com-
mand of a regiment. » To denote this preferment, he had the mid-
heaven directed to the fextile afpect of Mars ; and this in Capricorn,


his exaltation ; a very great argument of fuccefs in martial honours and
atchievements. Aur


At thirty-five years of age, this native was unfortunately worfted in
an engagement, and taken prifoner. The Sun was then directed to
a conjunction of Saturn ; and the Moon had nearly formed a quartile
afpect with Mars. The firft direction fell in the twelfth houfe; and
Saturn, the promittor, was then Jord of the twelfth. .


But


ie ae ees


og a eis


4 * : 7
55:44 Nae


ae,
Ory
es Resieneane
“a Sime y.035


1606.


2 CorLeonis |
RE 25-25 |


\ate Ds Duke of BU 5 J, ;
a q.* WAnotog yt Zak |
xan 59? Ge A
10a! = SN,
~~ %
* Sle wm 3
ie ws ‘
Priel, ae a


Ort As PRO L.O'G ¥. 86%


But in the fifty-fecond year of his age, namely, in May, 1660, he
reftored Charles the Second to his crown and dignity, after he had
been twelve years in exile ; and re-eftablifhed peace and tranquillity to
the three kingdoms, England, Ireland, and Scotland. He had then
the Moon directed to the fextile rays of Jupiter; and Jupiter being
lord of the tenth houfe of his nativity, made that attion more eminent
and honourable. This was not a little augmented, by the Part of For-
tune being alfo directed to the trine of Jupiter ; and, to thew the oppo-
fition and ftruggles he fhould meet with in the accomplifhment of that
glorious undertaking, he had the afcendant directed to the contra-_
antifcion of Mercury, lord of the feventh houfe, and the fignificator of
open enemies.


That this native was born for great and illuftrious undertakings, ad-
mits of no doubt, We find the Sun pofited in the tenth houfe; ina
noble fiery fign, and in trine afpect of the Moon, ina fign of the fame
triplicity. Jupiter is likewife pofited in the aYfcendant, in trine of
Venus and Mercury in the eleventh. Mars, being alfo upon the
afcendant, gives him intrepidity and. courage ; and in fextile of the
planet Saturn, added deliberation to his enterprizes, and formed him
not only for the foldier, but for the ftate{man and patriot. He hath
the Moon likewife in the very degree of the Sun’s exaltation, upon the
afcendant of England, in the fign Aries, which difpofed him to fuch
great and glorious enterprizes, for the love and loyalty he bore to his
king and country, |


JAMES, DUKE of HAMILTON.—Born in Lat. 56°.


North Latitude 1
North Latitude I
South Latitude 2
South Latitude 3
South Latitude 4
South Latitude I


vm Ww D> P st
Oo0o000Q 0


This is a glorious nativity; there being no lefs than. five planets
moft eminently dignified with the luminaries above the earth, in adimi-
rable reception of each other. The light of time is located in the houfe
or angle of dignity ; and the lord of the afcendant is in his own effen-
tial dignities, in the medium-ceeli, all which are fo many arguments of
martial fame and glorious atchievements, productive of immortal ho.
nour and renown. But, though this native’s life was for the moft part

No: 44. ro F thus


868 ANOUL E.U. 5 @ RA TH O:N


thus eminently diftinguifhed, yet his end was tragical and unfortunate,
for. he died by the hands of his enemies, in the forty-fecond year of his
age, having at that time the afcendant directed to the quartile of the
malefic planet Saturn, in the beginning of the fign Libra, and Saturn
radically pofited in the fourth houfe. Andon the day he was routed
by Cromwell in Lancafhire, namely, on the 17th of Auguft, 1648,
Mars, in his revolution, was in the quartile place of the Moon, and
Saturn ftationary, to retrogradation, in the place of Mercury, lord of
his afcendant ; the Moon being then in oppofition, and the Sun in the
very oppofite place of Jupiter; all which malicious tranfits in his revo-
lutional figure were eminent tokens of difcomfiture and defeat inthat
ill-advifed engagement; and this the rather, becaufe the mid-heaven
was thus dire¢ted to the oppofition of Saturn.


In 1643, January the 3d, he was fent prifoner from Oxford to Pen-
dennis Caftle in Cornwall, where he continued until the year 1646.
Saturn was then in quartile to the Sun, and Mars in oppofition to the
lord of his afcendant, and a very bad revolution he had for that year.
But, towards the end of the year 1642, King Charles entertained him
very honourably at court, and advanced him to confiderable honours
and employments. He had then operating the mid-heaven to the trine
afpect of Jupiter.


On the day he.was beheaded, being March the oth, 1648, the
Moon was in conjunction of Saturn ; whofe quartile was promittor in
the direction of his death, and the Sun was upon the very degree of the
eighth houfe of his nativity, nearly in oppofition with Jupiter, and the
fiery planet Mars had juit paffled the horofcope of his birth. Hence we
derive the following arguments of a violent death : namely, Saturn Op-
pofing the Sun from angular houfes ; the Dragon’s Tail on the cufp of
the eighth houfe ; Mars on the eufp of the fourth, in oppofition to the
tenth, and the Moon by her latitude in the eighth houfe.


The EARL of STRAFFORD.—Born in Lat. 51°. 32% viz. London.


This native was a perfon fo fingularly accomplifhed, that King
Charles, after bemoaning his unfortunate end, and reflecting upon
himfelf for’ confenting to his death, wrote as follows: §«* I looked
** upon my Lord of Strafford as a gentleman, whofe abilities might
“« make a prince rather afraid, than afhamed, to employ him in the
‘* greatelt affairs of flate ; for thefe were’ prone to create in him great


**confi-


OPE A Si TERT OF BOG Y,) ' 869


«¢ confidence of undertakings, and this was like enough to betray him
to great errors and many enemies; whereof he could not but con-
** tract good ftore, while moving in fo high a fphere, and with fo
vigorous a luftre, he muft, like the Sun, raife many envious exha-
lations, which, condenfed by a popular odium, were capable to catt
“* a cloud upon the brighteft merit and integrity.”


To denote the eminent accomplifhments of this noble perfonage, for
the purpofes of government and good policy, he hath Virgo afcending ;
a fign which uniformly reprefents a native admirably ingenious and pru-
dent. Mercury, lord of the afcendant, isin Taurus, with the Sun, the
fovereign light of time, cafting a trine afpect to the afcendant. °Mer-
cury is at the fame time lord of the tenth houfe, and of the afcendant
likewife, which is a certain prefage of honour and dignity to the native,
by the natural excellencies and endowments of his mind. It is never-
thelefs to be confidered, that Mercury is combuft of the Sun, and the
Moon and Mars are inexact quartile to him ; configurations, which not
only eclipfed the reputation of his great abilities, but argue that his rela-
tions and friends, as well as his enemies, fhould envy him the honour
and preferments thofe great abilities procured him.


Mars, with the Sun and'Moon, govern the eleventh, twelfth, and
third, houfes of the horofcope ; and Saturn being locally and virtually
in the eleventh houfe, in oppofition of Jupiter, fhews the falfhood
and perfidiou{nefs of his friends, and the violence and malice of his ene-
mies ; and, to add to thefe difcordant configurations, the cufp of the
mid-heaven is-the exact antifcion of Saturn, and the contra-antifcion of


Jupiter.


When this nobleman was near forty years of age, he was contftituted
and appointed Lord Deputy .of Ireland. He had then operating in his
nativity, the Moon to the fextile rays of the Sun, and the mid-heaven
to the antifcion of Venus by. direction. At forty years-old, viz. No-
vember 12, 1640, he was impeached for high treafon. Mars was that
day in oppofition to the. afcendant, and in quartile of Mercury, lord of
the medium-ceeli, and of the afcendant.,. On the 1gth of November he
applied for bail, but was refufed. The Moon was then in oppofition to
Mercury, and the Sun in oppofition tothe tenth houfe. On the 23d
of the fame month he» was ‘committed to the Tower. ‘The Moon was
then in oppofition bothto Mars and to her own radical place in’ the
genitures 1 0 ou) : Is be


On


870 A Ny bln Ly Uy Si BERRA AT a ON
On the 28th of January, 1641, be was fir impeached in the Houfe


of Commons. The Moon was at this time in oppofition to Saturn's
place, and Mars poffeffed the Sun’s place in the radix. On the goth of
January, he was impeached in the Honfe of Lords, Mars ftill occu-
pied the Sun’s place, and the Moon continued in conjunction with the
Sun in the fixth houfe.


On the rsth of April, 1641, this native was declared guilty of the
treafonable prattices with which he had been charged. ‘The Moon was
then in oppofition to the Sun, near his radical place ; Saturn was in
oppofition to the afcendant ; the Sun was in quartile of the place of
» Mars, and Mars upon the place of Venus, in the tenth houfe. On the
aoth of May the King figned the warrant for his execution. Mercury
was then ftationary, and Saturn in oppofition to the afcendant ; and the
Moon was in quartile of Mars and Venus. On the tenth day of the
fame month this native was beheaded, in the forty-eighth year of his
age. The Moon was then in exact oppofition to the Sun, and Saturn
in oppofition to the afcendant. But to fhew a more eminent defigna-
tion of thefe affliGtions, and eventually the lofs of his life by them, he
had the mid-heaven directed to the conjunction of Saturn, and to the
oppofition of Jupiter. The Moon was likewife ten digits eclipfed in
the very beginning of the revolutional figure of that year, and Saturn
and Mars were both afflicting the afcendant.of the geniture. Thus fell
this great and diftinguifhed character, who was excelled by few in the
bright ornaments of wifdom and underftanding.


GEORGE VILLERS, DUKE of BUCKINGHAM
Born in Lat. 53°.


South Latitude
South Latitude
North Latitude
North Latitude
North Latitude
North Latitude 4


wie Hap st.
NY = O = H
OO Oe 6


This native was a remarkable favourite of King Charles the Firft ;
and indeed, to a perfon verfed in the aitral fcience, there can be no
wonder, fince there is fuch an aftonifhing fympathy in their nativities ;
for the figns are not only pofited the fame upon the cufps of the celeftial
houfes, but Jupiter's place in the one nativity is the place of the Sun

3 in


O'FIASITRODOGY. 87


in the other; and the Moon’s place is precifely the famein both. Such
an harmony and fimilar coincidence of matter in the temperature and
endowments of 'thefe two natives, could not but produce that remark-
able concurrence of judgment, and familiarity of fentiment, which
was uniformly difcovered in the actions and manners of thefe eminent
perfons, ;


This illuftrious native was not without his fhare of private enemies,
who ufed every means to alienate the king’s good opinion and favour
towards him. But vain was the attempt; for, where the heavens form
an unity of fentiment, it is beyond the fubtlety of human invention. to
diffolve it.


In the year 1627, on the 27th of July, this native being then near
thirty-five years old, embarked for the Ifle of Rhee. - The fuccefs of this
undertaking by no means an{wered the expectations that had been formed
of it; and which was before hand but too evident; for, on the very day he
fet fail, Mars was in exact quartile to his afcendant at birth, and to the
Sun’s place alfo; the Moon was in quartile to the place of Mars and Ve-
nus, and to the Sun, and in oppofition of Jupiter ; all which unfortunate
pefitions previoufly declared the expedition to be as unfuccefsful as it
eventually proved. |


In the year 1628, on the 23d of Auguft, this native, being near thirty-
fix years old, was bafely aflaflinated and ftabbed at the Crown Inn, in
Portfmouth, by a ruffan of the name of Felton. The Moon. was
that day in quartile of the afcendant at birth, and the fun in the radical
place of Mars; and in the revolutional figure for that year, the Moon
was in exact quartile 6f Mars and Jupiter. And, befides this congrefs of
malefic tranfits, which in themfelves were alone fufficient to deftroy life,
there was a fatal direction operating at the fame time, of the afcendant
to the body of Mars. The grand argument of a violent death in. this
nativity, is the conjunction of the Sun and Mars, in the quartile to the lord
of the eighth houfe, who is in conjunction of that violent fixed ftar, the
Heart of the Scorpion.


No. 44. 10 G WILLIAM


872 ANILLUSTRATION


WILLIAM LAUD, ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY.
Born in Lat. 52°.


hb North Latitude 1 59
4 South Latitude 1 44
$ North Latitude Ole
4 South Latitude Oo 10
3 South Latitude © 10
D South Latitude 4 50


Libra afcends the eaftern horifon of this nativity, which is a fign of
jufticeand mercy. Mercury, the true patron of fcience and learning, is in
conjunction of Spica Virginis, in the afcendant; and Jupiter is in the
ninth houfe, with Oculus Tauris in trine to Mercury, and the Moon and
Venus are in friendly trine with the cufp of the angle of honour and dig-
nity, and enjoy the fame benign configuration with each other, and that
from good places of the figure. To fhew that the native would be learned
and pious, thereare feveral ftars of the nature of Jupiter and Mars culmi-
nating, which in many genitures have been found to raife the native even
from the loweft degree in the church to the higheft honours and prefer-
ments of ecclefiaftical jurifdiction and authority.


Another argument of the epifcopal dignity of this divine, is deduced
from the circumftance of cardinal figns poffeffing the principal angles of
the figure: for, as the greateft actions of the world depend on the car-

-dinal points of the heavens, viz. Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn,
fo the moft eminent perfons, fuch as rife to honour and preferment highly
fuperior to their birth and expectancies, have thofg cardinal points upon
all the angles of their nativities. Thus it was in the geniture of Cicero,
whofe parentage, if authors may becredited, was fo obfcure as {carcely
to be known; yet was he elevated to fuch a pitch of honour, as to be
called ‘* the father of his country.” And thus it was with Oliver Crom-
well; and may be feen inthe genitures of a thoufand others, who have
rifen highly fuperior to all their cotemporaries, by having thefe cardinal
figns thus fortunately pofited on the angles of their figures of birth, with
other concording teftimonies of dignity and honour.


If we carefully examine the conftitution of this figure, we fhall find
the caufe of this native’s imprifonment, misfortunes, and violent death, ©
to be very naturally pointed out, The lord of the twelfth houfe pofited
in the afcendant, gives many malicious private enemies, and denotes

2 im pri-


@ F 4A Suey Re Oo; L3 0: GY. 873


imprifonment, founded on the principles of falfe teftimony, of trea-
chery and deceit. Befides this, the fiery planet Mars is upon the cufp
of the twelfth houfe, in oppofition to the Moon, and in quartile to her
own difpofitor; and that he fhould die a violent and premature death,
is obvious from the pofition of Mars in oppofition to the Moon, and the
lady of the afcendant pofited in a violent fign, in conjunction of Sa-
turn, lord of the fourth houfe,


The mid-heaven directed to the body of Mars was the occafion of
this native’s imprifonment; and, according to Mr. Gadbury, from
whom mott of thefe nativities are taken, Saturn directed to the conjunc.
tion of the afcendant was the caufe of his death. But, according to the
true Placidian method, the Sun mutt be directed for death, becaufe he is
Hyleg, and Mars is undoubtedly the Anareta. For a proof of this, let
the revolutional figure for the year of the native’s death be examined,
where we fhall find Mars in conjunction with the Sun, and Saturn Jo-
cated in the fixth houfe, in the fign Aries, the houfe of Mars ; fo that
the two infortunes contributed to the untimely death of this celebrated
divine, who for learning and abilities was equalled by few, and excelled
by none.


CORN Ee bik U8i) tA GRE P PsA,


The nativity of Cornelius Agrippa, as handed to us from the ancients,
is difplayed in the annexed plate. But, as this geniture has been confi-
dered, by all the profeffors of the aftral {cience, not authentic; which
indeed appears but too obvious from the difcordancy of its parts, and
from the impoffibility of its admitting the teft of rectification ; I decline
giving any remarks of my own upon it; and fhall leave it, as he was an
uncommon character, to the contemplation of thofe, who may hereafter
rife to greater perfection in aftrological enquiries. ;


MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO.—Born under the Latitude of Rome.


We have no right, if we credit Cardenand Lyndbolt, to queftion the
time of this celebrated native’s birth. The figure exactly correfponds
withthe defcription of his perfon given us by Plutarch, which is that
of a lean, weak, and fickly, temperature and conftitution ; which is aptly
enough declared by the Moon in Capricorn, in the fixth houfe, fhe
being lady of the afcendant, and Saturn her-difpofitor in quartile of the
Sun, and Mercury approaching the afcendant from fixed figus. Now,
concerning his manners and gift of fpeech, Carden defcribes him to

have


84 AN PIPL s*Tintaha fF OLN


have poffeffed a loud and clear articulation, but that it was harfh, and
the lefs captivating, on account of the deficiencies of his perfon and
manner, which wanted grace and comelinefs. This feems well pre-
noted by the conjunction of Venus with Mercury in the afcendant, af-
flicted by the prefence of the Dragon’s Tail, accompanied with Saturn’s
quartile, combuft of the Sun.


The honour and reputation which this native acquired is reprefented,
in a very ftriking manner, by the effential dignities of the Sun, in trine -
afpect with Mercury, Venus, and Mars, in the angle of dignity and {o-.
vereignty ; the Sun likewife having his exaltation therein. Jupiter,
who is lord of the ninth, is in conjunction alfo of Saturn in the fifth
houfe, and thence emitting his benign rays to the afcendant, which is
an additional argument of very important acquifitions in the fcale of
honour and preferment.


Plutarch-tells us, that Cicero’s nurfe was admonifhed by a vifion to
beftow the utmoft care and attention upon the child then at her breatt;
for that he fhould become the moft diftinguifhed character amongft all
the Romans; and yet he was but the fon of a bond-woman, and of
mean extract. This prediction, however, whether imaginary or real,
was literally fulfilled; for he was twice made Conful of Rome, and, for
the timely difcovery and prevention of Catiline’s confpiracy, he was
furnamed by Cato, ‘‘ the father of bis country.” He died by aflaffination
in the fixty-fourth year of his age, having fuffered the chief misfortunes
of his life in his grand climacterical year. |


It is written of him, that,. when he was fent into exile, he was fore-
warned of his death, by an uncommon flight of crows, which came and
fettled upon the maft and yards of the fhip in which he was failing ;
that, when he came on fhore, the fame flight of birds followed him to
the houfein which he was accommodated, and even forced their way.
through the chamber windows where he lay, clofe to his bed fide. He
was foon after betrayed by his own fervant, a youth he had bred up,
into the hands of Herrenius and Popilius Lena, who bafely mur-
dered him.


NICHOLAS


ey 5


i
yi
>


OF ASTROLOGY... 87s


NICHOLAS CULPEPER, Student in Phyfic and Aftrology.
: Born in Lat. 51°. 32- |


hy South Latitude 2 @
2 North Latitude 0 30
é North Latitude oO. $7
2 North Latitude Oo 26
% South Latitude £30
> North Latitude 5.0


The fign afcending we find to be Capricorn, a fign of brevity ; and
‘Saturn, lord of the afcendant in Taurus, another fign of brevity; and
‘the Moon located in the fixth houfe, decreafing in light, -are all argu-
‘ments of a middle ftature, fomewhat {pare and lean ; a complexion dark
and {warthy ; brown hair, long vifage, quick eyes, active nimble body,
alert, and full of agility ; which is defcribed by the Moon’s pofition in
the houfe of Mercury, in fextile of Mars, with Saturn, and the other
planets ia the houfe of Venus, and having fouth latitude,


As to the manners, temperature, and conftitution, of this native, he
‘was melancholy and choleric,.occafioned by an carthy fign occupying
his afcendant, and Saturn’s pofition being in an earthy fign alfo. The
Moon with martial fixed ftars, of the fame nature in the afcendant, is a
further teftimony of a choleric habit; but the greateit proof of a fuper-
abundance of choler in the nativé’s conftitution, is the Sun’s reception
‘with Mars from. violent figns, which declares that choler fhould over -
- power the melancholy humour, and become predominant. As to. his
_underftanding, and mental acquirements, Mercury, the patron of inge-
nuity, &c. is the moft:potent planet in the. horofcope; and, being po-
fited in Scorpio, the houfe of Mars, and.fo near the invigorating beams
of Venus, is an evident demonftration that the native fhould be of an
excellent wit,.of a fharp acute fancy, admirable conception, and of an
_adtive brilliant underftanding. .


_ . He wasa very eloquent and good orator, and {poke both fluently and
freely, but with much feverity,and fatire, as the quartile of Mars and
Mercury very aptly denotes. In his writings, he had a ludicrous turn,
fo infeparable from him, that, in things of the mojt ferious and impor-
tant nature, he would introduce fubjects of levity and humour, which

-I. prefume> was calculated more> to pleafe himfelf than his readers,
though perhaps it was intended to do both. To this fingular turn he

_is indebted to the joint influx of Mars, Mercury, and Venus.

No. 4. 10H me. As


876 ANGLO ST RA TID ON


As to matters of eftate, he had the fixed fign Aquaries on the cufp of
the fecond houfe, and the Moon and Jupiter cafting their friendly rays
to the fame point, with the fortunate node of the Moon in the houfe of
Jap’ all which are teftimonies of a competent fortune. Yet, op-
pofed to this, we find the lord of the fecond houfe retrograde, upon
the cufp of the fourth, im quartile to the fecond, and Venus his difpo-
fitrix combuft, in quartile of Mars, ‘and in quartile to the fecond alfo ;
which are plain demonitrations of the lofs of fubftance, and of the de-
cay of his paternal patrimony. And‘hence we find, that Mars afflicting
Mercury, with the Part of Fortune in an obfcure part of the heavens,
and the Sun Jord. thereof in oppofition to Saturn, influenced him ‘to
‘iquander away his eftate, both carelefsly and improvidently, even to the
‘fhocking extremity of reftraint or imprifonment. This gave occafion
to that jocular faying of his brethren of the faculty, that poor Culpeper
was forely afflicted with a ‘* Confumption of the purfe.”


However feverely this refleCtion might be confidered, its application
was but too juft. At the univerfity, he was as free with his purfe as
with his pen, and cared not how little was left for himfelf, fo that he
could effect the happinefs or welfare of others. And really, if he had
not had the Dragon’s Head in the'fecond houfe of his geniture, he would
have. been perpetually poor; ‘for the arguments of poverty in his radix
are fo uncommonly ftrong, through the propenfity of his will, that, had
he been born to the moft ample eftate, ‘he would in a ‘fhort time have .
iquandesed it away, and become pennylefs.


As to the native’s kindred and fhort journeys, Mars is the principal
fignificator thereof; and his pofition inthe eighth is the moft unfortu-
nate place in the whole heavens. He is likewife in quartile of four
planets, viz. the Sun, Venus, Saturn, and Mercury; which is a fur-
ther proof of great unhappinefs ‘to the native from family difputes ; and
promifes no great fuccefs in his fhort and inland journeys. Again,
we find Aries upon the cufp of the third houfe, and Mars pofited in a
fteril ign, which fhews a deficiency of brothers and fifters, or ‘no har-
‘mony with them, in cafe of any. It were needlefs to repeat the many
misfortunes this native fuftained on account-of his relations ; or to re-
count the perils and dangers he encountered upon fome of his journeys,
it being fufficient to confirm the verity of this art, by affirming that he
never gained any advantage by either.


With regard to his parents, we find Saturn, the ‘general fignificator
ef fathers, and Venus, the reprefentative of mothers, are/in oppofition ;


and


¢


OFC AS TROL O G Yr os - 877


and Mars, lord of the tenth houfe, in quartile to them both, from fixed —
figns, which clearly fhews that the parents of this native woald die be-
fore he was of age ; but, had.they lived till he had come to years of ma~ -
turity, I do not fee how he would have been bettered’ by them, fince
their fignificators are every way found fquaring and oppofing his. By
the account: he gives himfelf of his parents, they died while he was
young, and.his mother’s relations cheated him out of a good part of his
eftate, i ‘


As to the fignificators of wife and children, we have the Moon, lady
of the feventh houfe, in a double-bodied fign, which feems to prefage
two wives; but Venus, a general fignificatrix of wives, being combutt
of the Sun, and in an evil afpect of the infortunes, oppofes this influ-
ence fo powerfully, that, did fhe not cafta prolific beam to the afcen-
‘dant, and another to the feventh houfe, the native would fcarcely have
ever married at all. Under.thefe circumftances we deduce an argument:
for one wife only, which happened in courfe.


Venus governing the fifth houfe in Scorpio, a fruitful fign, irradi-
ating both the afcendant and feventh, promifes the native many chil-
dren. But Caput Medufa being upon the cufp of the fifth, and Venus
combuft, in oppofition to Saturn, and in quartile of Mars, in the houfe
of death, declares very few, if any of them, fhould live. It afterwards
turned out, thatthe native had but one wife, and by her he had feven
children, and they all died young, except a daughter, who lived to years |
of maturity. .


The native’s public and private enemies are fignified by the Moon
and Jupiter; but principally by Jupiter himfelf, becaufe he hath great
dignities.in the twelfth and feyenth honfes. Mars has alfo a fhare in
the defignation of his enemies, becaufe he is in trine of Jupiter, and in
fextile of the Moon, and beholds the Jord of the afcendant with a quar-
tile ray. Now it is well known that Mars reprefents phyficians, apo-
thecaries, &c. and Jupiter divines ; and thofe two defcriptions of men
were really found to be the greateft enemies of the native, both public
and private: the faculty hated him for fimplifying the art of medicine ;
and the church defpifed him for his ‘fuperior knowledge in the aftral
fcience. Yet neither of them durft venture to difpute with him upon the
fimplicity of the one or the reality of the other, notwithftanding he
gave feveral public challenges to both the colleges, to enter the lifts
with them, | :

We


878 AM. 2D UU STRAT ON


We thall now take notice of the reprefentatives of ‘his ‘friends; and
sere’I am forry to fay, we have but few teftimonies in their favour. Mars,
lord of the eleventh houfe, being in quartile to four planets, denotes the
native’s friends, or at leaft fuch as pretend to be fo, are hypocritical and
deceitful; and of fuch covetous difpofitions, that he would feldom be
bettered -by them. It is well known the native has often declared, that
the had a few who called themfelves his friends, but that he was more
prejudiced than ferved by them; for that, when he moft ftood in need of


their afliftance, and promifed himfelf the advantages of it, they generally
deceived him.


“With regard to honour and preferments, Origanus tells us, that the
Sun in the tenth houfe is a certain prefage of honour and preferment;
and that Venus, when pofited in the tenth, is a general fignificatrix of
honour by the means of women ; and alfo, that the Moon in fextile of
Mars, and the Sun in reception with him, when he is lord of the tenth
houfe, are evident proofs of future honour, fame, and renown. And
indeed, had not Saturn, who is lord ofthe afcendant, been in oppofition
of the Sun, the general fignificator ef honour, and in quartile of Mars,
the native would:certainly have obtained a far higher degree of eminence
dn life than he really did; but, although he was an enemy to his own pre-
ferment, yet, in the latter part of his life, he encreafed very much in
fame, honour, and reputation; and, if we enquire by what means, we
fhall find the fextile of the Moon and Mars, lord of the tenth, and Ve-
nus, lady of the ninth, locally pofited-in the tenth, and cafting a fextile
afpect to the afcendant, in joint familiarity with Mercury, lord of the
fixth, the ftrongeft planet in the figure; we fhall not therefore be fur-
prifed to fee the native arriving at a very elevated degree of fame, honour,
and. reputation, on account of his ingenuity, ability, and knowledge in
_ the arts and fciences. - This, however, is not likely to be obtained with-
out much difficulty and oppofition, as appears by the quartile afpect of
Mars to Mercury. It is, 1 believe, very well known, that the native
grew into public efteem, by means only of his great abilities, and fupe-
rior underftanding, particularly in phyfic and furgery, aad of the {ciences
in general. ; | j


The caufe and manner of his death, according to the aftrologers of his
time, are pointed out as follow. The fiery planet Mars, pofited in
the eighth houfe, in quartile to Saturn, lord of the afcendant, feems to
portend a violent death; but the Sun being on the cufp of the mid-
heaven, near the body of Venus, and in reception of Mars, with the
Moon in the fixth houfe, abates much of the fury of Mars, and makes


3 it


OF AST ROLOG Y. $79


#t fomewhat probable. the native may die of a. confymption, or by decay
of natural ftrength and ftamina. However this may be, he-died on
Monday the tenth of January, 1654, when the Moon was in quartile te
the radical place of Mars, and the Sun in quartile to his own and to Sa-
turn’s place in his nativity 5 Saturn and Jupiter at the fame time behold-
ing each other with an oppofition.. From this pofition of the fignifica-
tors, it has been thought by fome, that he was malicioufly potfoned ;
and indeed, by the above configurations, it is not unlikely but fome of
the Efculapian tribe had a hand in his death.


The accidents or events by which this nativity is rectified are thefe.
At eighteen years old, he went to the univerfity: the Sun was then
directed to the body-of Mercury, and the afcendant to the fextile of the
fame promittor. At.twenty-fourth years old, he particularly applied him-
felf to the ftudy of phylic: the Moon was then directed to the trine
of Mercury, her difpofitor, in the radical figure of birth. At the age
ef} twenty-feven years, he went into the army, and was wounded. by a
mufket fhot in the fore part of his body, of which he never recovered
to the .day of his death: at. the time of this accident, the afcendant
came to the quartile ef the Sun, and foon afterwards to the quartile of
Saturn, which prolonged and continued the malady. In the thirty-
-eighth year of his age, he died: the afcendant then came to the oppo-
fition of Mars with latitude. Upon examining and comparing the revo-
Jutional figure with the radical horofcope, we find the ftri@teft agreement
betwixt them: Saturn pafies the radical place of Mars, and re-occupies
the afcendant; the Sun and Jupiter behold each other with a quar-
tile ray ; and Jupiter comes in oppofition to the place of Mars, and in
quartile to his own radical place likewife; which evil revolutions, agrees
ing with malefic directions, neceflarily prefigure approaching death.


WILLIAM LILLY, Student in Aftrology.—Born in Lat. 52%. 38°.
; North Latitude


3 I 44
ue North Latitude 1i3'g6
é North Latitude 1. hey

? South Latitude O 40
x - South Latitude 247
D North Latitude 3.539


I fhall enly give the horofcopical figure, andthe latitude of the pla-
nets in this nativity, becaufe the native has given two different times of
No. 45. 10 I has


880 AN ILLUSTRATION

his own birth, which might be feen in his Ephemeris, printed in the
year 1645, and in another wosk of his, entituled, The Chriftian Aftro-
logy. And, therefore, as I am an enemy to every fpecies of double
dealing, I fhall content myfelf with pointing out the fraud, and leave |


others to make their remarks upon a nativity, which, having no certainty
for its bafis, can afford no amufement to intelligent minds. |


JOHN HEADON, Chemift and Aftrologer.—Born in Lat. 51°, 90°.


I North Latitude ea N
U4 South Latitude O4>7TR
t South Latitude Oo 19
g North Latitude oO 38
8 North Latitude 1 3
») North Latitude CACHES Re


‘We have here the geniture of a perfon of an uncommon defire’ for
fearching into the occult myfteries, and for obtaining a knowledge of all
the curious arts.. This propenfity is very aptly defcribed by the great
ftrength of Mercury, lord of the afcendant, in his.exaltation, in fextile to:
Jupiter, and in trine afpect of the Sun, whereby the mental endowments.
of the native far excelled the common lot, of mankind.


' He wrote many curious books, which are now very fearce and valua-
ble. His Temple of Wifdom, Holy Guide, Harmony of the World,,
Rofie-Cracian Phyfic, and feveral’ other myftic pieces equally curious,
being far above the common fcope of claflical learning, were equally
admired, envied, and abufed,-as beft fuited the purpofe of each dif-
ferent reviewer. © This is aptly defcribed by ‘the quartile of the Sun and
Mars, the Sun at the fame time beholding the afcendant with the fame
afpeét, and Saturn. beholding Jupiter with a quartile -from cardinal
figns. Mars pofated in the afcendant, in quartile with the Sun, very
aptly denotes imprifonment, refulting from the frowns and ill-humour
of great perfons, ot men-in- power. This difgrace really happened. to.


the native, in the troublefome times of King Charles, .who. detefted him
for the truths he told.


I fhall omit entering into any. particulars upon his nativity, becaufe


be has publifhed it himfelf in the compleateft manner in his Harmony
of the World, ta which. I beg leave to refer the curious reader. © ~~


JOHN


OFLASTROLOG ¥ * 881
JOHN GADBURY, Stutent in Aftrology.—Born in Lat. hee Sy


bh South Latitude 2 29
4x South Latitude OQ’ 47
-) South Uatitude rina
'§ North Latitude Oo 50
¥v South Latitude 3, 8
D North Latitude = 90


Mr. Partridge having taken. great pains in the calculation of this nati-
tivity, and worked up its feveral directions according to the Placidian
method, it were needlefs for me to go over the fame ground, or to repeat
_ any thing more in this place, than a few of the principal accidents where-

by the horofcope. of his birth is rectified, or proved to be radically true.


ae eighteen years and ten months old, the Sun came to the parallel
of Saturn in his nativity, by the rapt, motion. -At this time the native
was afflicted with a furfeit, accompanied with a violent intermittent fever.


‘In the year 1651, when the native was twenty-three. years and three
months old, he was married. This happened under the direction of the
Moon to the fextile of the Sun in mundo, by direct direction.


When the native was fifty-one years and eight months old, he was
imprifoned.’ The direCtion that brougt jt this up was the midheaven to
the body of Saturn.


At the age of fifty-nine years and ten Letoeitie) the native was married
the fecond time. The direction. producing this Pye contract. was
the midheaven to the triangilar rays of Venus.


_ When the native fixty-two years and eight months old, he was inal als
ed in great trouble, and fuffered confinement. This was brought to pafs
under the influence of the Sun directed. tothe parallel of ‘Saturn. in the
zodiac, by oblique afcenfion,


At the end-of feventy-feven years.and thee months from the day of his
birth, viz. March 24, 1704, the native departed this life. The direc-
tion. which foretels his death, is Mars to the parallel of Saturn, by the
sapt motion, whereby the aphetical and anareticali beams, falling into one
focus, abforbed. the vital Fide and Aeparated the effence from the mate-
oe body.


: VINCENT
tr


ara
[-


2 “AN cI@LUSTRATION


VINCENT WING, Student in Aftrology.—Bern in Lat. 52°, qos.
® “<= South Latitu&


“1 = 84
2 South Latitude bap RES RY 6
$ North Latitude 2 46
¢ © North'Tatitude ~~ -o 20 ;
¥ South Latitude 1o32h
Dd Nort’ Latitude Oo 46


Yn this nativity Libra afcesds the horefcope, and Spica Virginis, an
eminent fixed ftar, is pofited in the afcendant.. Venus, lady thereof, is
in Pifces, in trine of the Moon in Cancer, in the ninth houfe, in an emi-

“ment reception of Jupiter, Mercury, the patron of arts and {ctences, is
in the fign Aries, in reception of Mars; and there are in the fcheme no
lefs than four planets eflentially dignified, viz. the Sun, Jupiter, Venus,
‘gad the Moon; two of them in their exaltation, and two in their own
houfes. “Thefe are teftimonies of an admirable fignification and tendency,
which not only procute credit and fame, but conftitute the natural and
proper fupport thereof, viz. a generous mind, with a-competent eftate.
To render this the more eminent and durable, the Sun cafts an amicable
afpeét to the Part of Fortune; as doth the Moon and Venus to the cufp
of the fecond houfes "0s 7 a


_ All the angles of the figure are poffeffed by cardinal figns ; and in that
refpect he had honour and fuccefs in his profeffion as an aftronomer ; and
was efteemed by the great, and regarded by all, as the wonder of his time,
and the prodigy of the age in which he lived, for the eminent and famous
things he did in the icience of Aftrology.


This native began to write for public information and utility when he
was but twenty-two years old. He had then the Sun directed to the f{ex-
tile rays of Venus, lady of the afcendant, in Taurus, her own dignities;
which is an eminent argument.of the happy and deferved efteem his writ-
ings met with in the world. Pe 38


_ Many fpeculations and interefting conclufions might be’ drawn from
this figure; but, as my defign herein is only to give the rudiments whereby
to inittate the young ftudent into the art of bringing up directions, I thall
enly take notice of the manner of his death.


~The Sun is without difpute the giver of life, and Mars and )Satern
are the deftroyers, The Sun is therefore to be dire€ted to the quartile
3 _ of

e


pe


5


ee


2H g


25S
Qi Feb.2h


Op


Deer A BoP RO EO Gee.” 883


of Mars in mundo, and to the conjunction of Saturn in the zodiac, and,


immediately after fuch conjun@ion was formed, heightened by the
beams of Aldebaran, it was natural to fuppofe the native would expire
under the oppreflion of a confumptive or hectic habit of body; which
really put a period to his exiftence on the goth of September, 1668.


HENRY COOLEY, Mathematician and Aftrologer.
Born in Lat. 51°. 42.


b I 28
Ya ro) 22
$ eee
2 i 13
§ 2 ‘e)
> I 59


- When this native was between nine and ten years of age, he had the
fmall pox; at which time the Moon was diretted to the Virgin’s Spike,
upon the cufp of the eighth houfe. This direction is found by obligue


’


defcenfion, under the Moon’s pole, viz. 50°. 4°.


In the middle of Auguft, 1644, aged ten years and ten months, the
native was afflicted with a violent {potted fever: and fore throat. This
was produced by the afcendant to the oppofition of Mars. At fourteen
years of age he had atertian ague. This was the afcendant to the quar-
tile of Saturn.


When fourteen years and fix months old, the native entered into the
army. This inclination is pointed out by the Sun to the quartile of
Mars in Scorpio. At feventeen years old, he had a dangerous fall from
a horfe, and was likewife in danger of being drowned. This is defcribed
by the conjunction of the Moon and Mercury in the eighth houfe. In
September, 1652, the native was fettled in a regular line of bufinefs;
and then the trine afpect of Mars came to the. mid-heaven, In April,
1654, the native went a journey to London, and was taken ill witha
fever and furfeit. This was produced by the conjuntion of the Sun
and Moon in the eighth houfe.


On the firft of May, in the year 1656, the native entered into the
holy ftate of matrimony. This was occafioned by the force of the
afcendant, directed to the oppofition of Venus; which thews likewife
that the marriage fhould not be very harmonious nor happy, nor of long

No. 45. 10 K | dura~


&


884 A Nok RUS TORCA Talo N


¢


duration with refpeG to the life of the bride. .This marriage, how-
ever, produced one child, which was born in June, 1657, under: the
afcendant directed to the quartile of Jupiter ina fruitful fign.


On the 24th of April, 1660, the native was married the fecond time,
under the influence of the afcendant to the Dragon’s Head; which, be-
-ing a good benevolent direGtion, produced a: good wife and a happy
marriage. On the third of September, 1661, the native had a fon by
this lady, born under the afcendant direéted to the trine of Saturn in Sa-
gittarius and Aries, which are both mafculine figns. |


In the year 1663, the native publifhed his Clavis Elmata, under the
direction of the Sun in the fextileof Mercury. In May, 1672, he hada
fhort but violent fever, which feemed to threaten life. This was pro-
duced by the afcendant to the oppofition of the Sun. Upon his reco-
very, he greatly enlarged and improved his Clavis Elmata; at which
time the Moon came by direction to the mid-heaven. In the -year 1673,
the native firft wrote and publifhed his fo much celebrated Almanack.
The mid-heaven was then in trine of the Moon.


Thefe are the accidents given by Mr. Coley himfelf, for the purpofe
of rectifying and difplaying his nativity.; and are therefore to be relied
on. Had this eminent profeffor of aftrology underftood the power of
mundane afpects and parallels, he would have avoided many abfurdities
which appear in his works, and given lefs occafion for cavil and exulta-
tion tothe enemies of the {cience. ase


Upon the whole, this nativity promifes much on the {core of ingenuity
and invention, and has many teftimonies of confequent reputation and emi-
nence. Firft, Mercury is direct, and {wift of courfe, and in reception
with the fortunate planet Venus, which argues a clear underftanding and
an upright judgment, and is the forerunner of refpect and efteem. Se-
condly, Mercury is in conjunction of Spica Virginis, an eminent and
benign fixed ftar, which adds both to his mental and worldly acquirements.
Thirdly, we find Mercury applying toa fextile configuration with Mars,.
in familiarity with another eminent fixed ftar. This endows the native
with a lively imagination, and an excellent invention. Fourthly, Mer-
cury’s triangular rays caft to the afcendant multiplies all thefe arguments,
and ftrengthens his title to public eftimation and regard.


But here are other arguments in favour of worldly honour and efteem.
Firft, becaufe the lord of the afcendant is upon the very cufp of the mid=


2 heaven,


OT A STEROL OG Yeon 7: 8B


heaven, which fcarcely ever fails to produce public fame and reputation ;
and, being in afpect with an eminent fixed ftar, fhews that the native will
never live in ob{curity or difefteem. Secondly, Jupiter, lord of the mid-
heaven, isin his exaltation, in trine of the Sun, which is a moft illuf-
trious configuration. | Befides, the Sun being in reception of Mars proves
that the native fhall be in high efteem with the public. Yet Saturn’s
malefic pofition inthe mid-heaven muft needs reduce the happy effects of
the foregoing indulgent ftars, and give fome caufe of vexation and difap-
pointment. Saturn being lord of the twelfth, the houfe of private ene-
mies and imprifonment, and being pofited in the tenth, denotes many
{trong and powerful enemies, and fhews fome reftraint of liberty, with
temporary lofs of honour and reputation ; yet it neverthelefs demonftrates
that honour fhall eventually court him ; and the malignity of his enemies
be totally bafHled. |


The pofition of Mars in the feventh houfe, in oppofition to the afcend-
ant, renders the native obnoxious to a particular defcription of men;
which is alfo confirmed by the Sun’s platic quartile to the afcendant, and
the Moon’s pofition in the feventh houfe, in. platic quartile to the mid-
heaven and, to Saturn. But, fince Mars and the Sun both befriend the
native in a far more powerful degree than they afflict him, it is apparent


that all confequent difputations will in the end turn out to the native’s
honour and advantage.


It is here worthy of remark, that this pofition of Mars in the feventh
houfe is to be found in the nativities of three eminent profeffors of the
aftral fcience, who were all cotemporaries in the laft age, namely, John
Gadbury, William Lilly, and this native, Henry Coley; all of whom
had {trong oppofitions to encounter with their enemies; but they lived
to triumph over them, and to fee their extirpation from the land of the
living.


&


JOHN PARTRIDGE, Profeffor of Aftrology.—Born in Lat, 518392"
h South Latitude


Bi2d
u South Latitude Divs
3 South Latitude Oo 36
z South Latitude 1 28
1B South Latitude Brie
|D North Latitude 2 18


This native rofe, from a very humble fphere in life, to be phyfician
to his majefty James the Second, King of England. In the figure we
find


>


886 AN ILLUSTRATION


find Mars in his exaltation, and in reception of Saturn, with the Moon
in oppofition to one, and in quartile tothe other. This configuration
gave the native a very acute and fatirical turn of mind. The ftrokes of
his pen, when directed againft his enemies, were poignant and fevere;
and, even when drawn in behalf of his friends, he could not help expofing
their inadvertencies, and attacking their weak fide.


In the grand endowments of folid fenfe and underftanding, this native
was in no refpect deficient; as is apparent by the fituation of Mercury
with the Sun, in the fcientific fign Aquaries; both which fignificators
being in the trine of the Moon, and in fextile of their difpofitor Sa-
turn, afford the higheft proofs of a mind enriched with every brilliant
endowment.


That the native fhonld be rich and fortunate, and arrive to the pinna-
cle of honour and preferment in human life, is apparent, from the pofition
of the two fortunate planets, which behold cach other in a fextile confi-
guration, whilft the Moon, lady of the eleventh houfe, the lord of the
medium-cceli, and the vital Sun, behold each other in a benefic trine.
But this nativity, having, been already moft compleatly invettigated,
renders it waneceflary for me to {peak of its directions,


GEORGE PARKER, Profeffor of Aftrology.—Born in Lat. 52°. N.


h ~ North Latitude ~ 1 25
UL South Latitude 1
$ North Latitude . 1
g South Latitude © 1
8 South Latitude I

Sirest eet South Latitude ebiy |
Right afcenfion of @ is - = - 228


Upon the afcendant of this nativity, we find the fign Leo, impedited
by the evil and malignant planet Saturn, which exactly defcribes the
Native’s perfon. Mercury and Jupiter being in oppofition to each other,
yet both in their own dignitics, is a remarkable proof that the native’s
wit and judgment fhould be vitiated; but the Moon fending a trine _
afpect to Jupiter, anda fextile to Mercury, corretts this evil influence, .
and affifts the native greatly. Yet, as fhe is difpofed of by Mars in the
twelfth houfe, it declares his enemies would be very powerful, and but
too fuccefsful againft him. Hts public enemies are defcribed by Saturn
and Mars; and ‘the Moon perfonates his wife, and fuch as-he once -

| efteemed
<


OFT A ROER OL O-G Y; 884


efteemed his friends, After fuffering a deal of trouble and affli€tion, itis
apparent he will overcome all, fince the Sun, the lord of the afcendant,
is located in the afcendant, and is the ftrongeft planet in the heavens,
difpofing both of Mars and Saturn.


Between twenty-three and twenty-four years of age, the native entered
into the ftate of wedlock. This was effected by the planet Venus, di-
rected to the fextile of the afcendant. When he was thirty-nine years
and three months old, he was taken into cuftody and accufed with form-
ing a dangerous plot, but was cleared of this charge, under the afpect of —
the Sun diretted to the oppofition of Jupiter. The native wrote many
{mall tracts, and was cotemporary with Henry Coley and John Partridge,
by whom he was mortally hated, and who threw out many. wicked
invectives againft him. He died in the year 1742, aged ecighty-cight
years. ;


JAMES USHER, Bifhop of Armagh in Ireland. —Born in Lat. 53°. .


h South Latitude o 21
au North Latitude Wee
ie North Latitude 1 45
g North Latitude ft pe og |
re] South Latitude 0 3
‘p> South Latitude <6


>


Upon this horofcope we have Gemini afcending the eaftern angle, with
Mercury, its lord, in conjunction of Saturn, lord of the ternith and ninth
houfes, who is pofited in the tenth, and cafts a friendly trine to the af-
cendant, and to the planets Venus and Mars. Thefe are eminent argu-
ments of ingenuity and learning ; and fhews the native will inherit a more
than ordinary capacity and underftanding, becaufe all the fignificators,
which govern the mental faculties, are in aereal figns.


Boetius, {peaking of this native, faith of him, that he excelled, with
a moft fingular judgment, in the oriental languages, and in all abftrufe
and occult knowledge. Dr. Prideaux alfo ftiles him a rich magazine of
folid learning, poffeffed of all the curious fpeculations of antiquity.


In this nativity we find fix of the planets elevated above the earth, and
Mercury, lord of the afcendant, in the moft exalted part of the heavens,
in conjunction with the Moon’s fortunate node, and the fun-beams

No. 45. io L 3 occu<


¥


888 A NY DU we st WR ae Tho N


occupying the cufp of the’hinth houfe ; which, aftrologically confider=


ed, portends the going out of his glory and fame into every part of the
earth. i”


In the year 1600, and in the twentieth of his age, he was created a
Matter of Arts, a thing at that time of day not very common in either of
the Univerfities ; it was therefore a greater demonftration of his piety and
abilities, and of the refpedt paid him by the learned. He had then ope=
rating the Sun directed to the fextile of Venus, and to the mid-heaven alfo.
In the year 1612, aged thirty-two, he was promoted to the dignity of a
-Doétor in Divinity ; at which time he had the mid-heaven directed to the
fextile of the Moon. In the year 1624, and in the forty-fourth year of
his age, he was created Archbifhop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ire-
land; though he was not put in poffeflion thereof till two years after.
He had now the Sun direcied to the fextile rays of Jupiter, upon the —
cufp of the eleventh houfe, in the higheft dignities; and therefore moft
admirably fignificant of thefe honourable preferments.


Soon after this native was created archbifhop, he was afflicted with a
violent fit of ficknefs, which continued for nine months. . The afcendant
was then directed to the oppofition of the Sun, and the Sun to the quartile
of Mars, which diredtion, falling in Cancer and Pifces, denotes it to be
of the putrid kind, and of long continuance. In the year 1640, bein
Mixty years of age, he came to England, under the impulfive force of the
-, mid-heaven directed to the quartile of the Moon, and the Part of Fortune
to the fextile of Mars. He was requefted in the year 1647, by the
benchers of Lincoln’s Inn, to engage con{ftantly to preach before them,
and they would allow him a confiderable maintenance ; it being then the -
time of the Bifhops’ perfecution, At this time he had the Moon direct-
ed to the fextile of Jupiter, and the afcendant to the trine of Venus.


In. the year 1655, on the twenty-firft day of March, this learned and
pious churchman, after he had been feventy-five years a pilgrim on the
earth, and fifty-five years a preacher or the gofpel, died at Ryegate in
Surrey. The directions operating were, the afcendant to the oppofition -
ef Saturn, lord of the eighth houfe of the nativity, and the Part of For-
tune to the oppofition of Mercury. 7


NASC-


ia ih >
oe te
ad


Fan


oti \


44


= \
|
|
|
Hc Niso-ppass™ of /
X20 x es
ct 27, or as 30 ae
é /
Say, ee \
a
pa ea Me
‘
\
b
rh Hi
|
; |
e : = se ie. / E
ae a oe i.10 ay ¥ a
om Ona


—<—<———
——>.


7)


i


i


\ \ z 3} T. Suop HAS


oe * % Px f i iy ;
peg | 7


rn


Nae


\ pf? Pitta MELA
X Born Fe


ni:
xe OS»


“M- Se
X46. 7K. gm? j : d


1497-


7em Origa


OFTASITIR. O UOC YitcA + “ees
NASC-ERASMUS, of Rotterdam, in Holland,
Elevation of the Pole 54°.


In this nativity we find Mercury and Venus pofited in the afcendant ;


_. @ proof of volubility and freedom of f{peech; and being alfo in an airy


fign, beheld by a benefic trine of Jupiter from the ninth houfe, de-
clares the native to be a perfon of ftrong natural parts, and rich mental
endowments.


The learned Cardan has fhewn, that the reafon why this native aban -
‘doned\his own country, and undertook fo many complex journeys, was
becaufé the luminaries were in the dignities of Mars, with the lord of
_ the ninth in the afcendant, in the conjunction of the lady thereof, in a
moveable fign.’ The fame ingenious author further obferves, that while
the mid-heaven was under the direction of the fextile rays of Venus, the
native enjoyed times of happinefs and reft. This was moft completely
felt about the thirty-fourth year of his age, but its continuance was fhort.
His fifty-fixth year proved a moft dangerous and unfuccefsful one to him,
_ for he then laboured under the baneful oppotition of the Moon to Jupiter,
ftimulated by the quartile irradiation of Mars. He died in the feventieth
year of his age.


MA RPI NOU U THE R,


The nativity of this celebrated divine is remarkable for having fo many
planets located in the ninth houfe, Saturn and Mercury*are in conjunc-
tion, in the fign Scorpio, which afford a ftriking prefage of the zeal and
perfeverance of his-mind; whilft the five planets in the ninth houfe de-
clare his fuccefs in religious controverfy. There is no need of pointing
out the feveral directions; they are already confidered by the ingenious
Mr. Gadbury ; and it will be no improper exercile for fuch of my readers,
who have an inclination to become further acquainted with this fcience,
to collect the feveral configurations and directions from the horofcope in
the annexed plate, and to equate and bring them up, according to the
rules heretofore laid down.


The direftions of all thefe nativities, which are felected from Mr.
Gadbury, by: way of example, are fo eminent and remarkable, and the
characters ‘of the different natives fo well known, that they comprife a


moft excellent fet of EXERCISES for any perfon defirous of learning the


er aitral {cience.


BISHOP


mt


to ANY OPE DU ST RAT TOON


BISHOP HALL.—Born under the elevation of the Pole of 99°.


h North Latitude 2° 22
z) South Latitude oO 39
F South Latitude I 40
g South Latitude 3 .19-
% South’ Latitude 1 I
> North Latitude Or 8


The nativity of this eminent divine was found after his death in his
pocket-book, written by his own hand; and, having been f{poken of by
many profeflors of the {cience, can receive but little new light from my
pen. : |


This native was committed to the Tower, with eleven other bifhops,
when in the fixty-feventh year of his age. He had then operating the


Dragon’s Tail to the mid-heaven; and the continuance of his imprifone _


ment is moft aptly denoted by the teftimony of the lord of the afcendant
in the twelfth houfe, which is the only light of time above the earth,
His death happenéd in the eighty-fecond year of his age, under the ana
retic influence of a quartile of the Sun and Moon. |


PHILIP MELANCTHON.—Born in Lat. 49%. 5°.


The horofcope vifibly declares this native to be of fhort ftature, and of
a hot and dry temperature ; but the teitimonies of his excellent endow-
ments are many and various. .Venus in conjunction of Saturn, Mars in
conjunction of Jupiter; the Moon in the exaltation of Mercury; Mer-
cury in the {cientific fign Aquaries; and Saturn and Venus in trine of
Jupiter and Mars, are eminent arguments of the native’s illuftrious
qualifications. |


Hiftory abundantly furnifhes us with inftances of the native’s aftonifh-


ing prowefs in the occult and refined arts, and in the dottrine of philofo- —


phy and divinity. He was a friend to every department of ufeful litera-
ture ; and took great pains to purge aftrology of its grofs and miftaken parts,
by tranflating the books of Ptolomy out of the original Greek, into pure
Latin ; in his preface to which he has moft learnedly and ably defended
the {cience from the lath of its ignorant and uncandid oppofers.


:


GEORGE


o
r
7 *
we 4
« ¢ »
J (fe 4
E7- ss
¢Q + ie a ae = '


y
. 2 29, 12
\ I 5 27,16 bs be
ss


4 Gas,41che  y 2,
oy £413, 27 a ee


(\ “%, Ne Aldebaran


P= 3


Sec~< CC —<— ee


y


a gems:


ae


~


- oe
¥ -
a


OF ASTROLOG ¥. B91


GEORGE Ill. KING or GREAT BRITAIN.


Were I to enter minutely into a calculation of this nativity, the event
might be prejudical to many, and draw upon me the contempt of fome
and the refentment of others. Therefore, fince it is my with to give
offence to no party, nor.to ftir up the embers of ftrife and diffention
amongft the different orders of fociety, I fhall content myfelf with
making only a few remarks, whereby the inquifitive reader may be led
to a contemplation -of thofe celeftial influences, which ftimulate and
govern the actions and purfuits of men, and form the bafis of all fublu-
hary events.


Upon the oriental horifon of this illuftrious geniture, we find the
noble and princely fign Leo afcending, with Caput Algol and the -
benefic Jupiter moft glorioufly elevated in the medium-cceli, the houfe
of kingly honour, eminence, and unbounded fovercignty ; which are
true emblems of that univerfal joy, of that glory, honour, and renown, |
wherewith his majefty moft defervedly afcended the Britifh throne. As
to the fignificators of temperature and difpofition, no geniture in the
world ever produced more evident proofs of that reCtitude of principle,
of that benevolence of heart and mind, of that regard to juftice, mercy,
and truth, which aflimilates the human nature to the divine image of


the Deity, and forms the interior of a patriot king. That the refult has


uniformly kept pace with this defignation, I am {ure no good man, nor
any loyal fubject, will deny. :


The moft remarkable circumftance in this geniture is the congrefs for-
med in theeleventh boufe ; which’ it is my with that every {cientific
reader would pay particular regard to; and I have no doubt but they
will readily make out, by the rules heretofore given, a pretty correct
prefage of all the principal public occurrences that have happened during _
the prefent reign.


Whoever turns to page 166 of this work, will find it laid down as a


_- fundamental principle in the rules of this fcience, that, by the conftitu-


tion of the eleventh houfe, that is, of the configuration formed therein,
we deduce all enquiries concerning friends and triendfhip, hope, truit,
expectation, or defire ; alfo whatever relates to the fidelity or perfidiouf-
ne{s of friends; or to the counfellers, advifers, affociates, favourites,
flatterers, or fervants, of kings, princes, or men in power. The co-figni- .
ficators of which are the Sun and Aquaries,

‘No. 46, if » 10M : . I would


$92 AN PRLEUSTRATION,


I would now wifh the planets in the eleventh houfe to be well confi-


dered, their tendency and defignation afcertained,and compared with the _


 sevolutional figures of the royal, horofcope, in thofe years when any re-
markable national event came to pafs. The refult would not fail to
enlighten the underftandings of moft men, and would lead the mind to
an unalienable love and attachment to the perfon and family of our moft
gracious Sovereign. all af
For example; let the radical horofcope, the revolutional figure for. the
thirty-eighth year of his majefty’s life, and the {cheme of the American
wera of independence, be projected by the fide of each other; let the
cardinal houfes be well confidered, with the manner in which they afpect
-or irradiate each other ; and give the refpective fignificators, as their pofi-
~ tions are found to vary, their true and genuine implication, according
to the known and eftablifhed rules of the {cience ; and 1 am bold to fay,
that no one will be at a lofs to account for thofe unhappy events, which
have {eldom been attributed to the right caufe. 3 ioe


‘The NATIVITY of our Blefled LORD and SAVIOUR
JESUS CURIS T.


Upon this nativity I fhall not venture to give any opinion of my. own.
It was calculated above a century ago, by that learned and ingenious au-
thor, Dr. John Butler, chaplain to his Grace James, Duke of Ormond,
and Rector of Litchborough, in the county and diocéfe of Litchfield.
He publifhed it in an 8vo volume, with a very learned and ingenious in-
troduction, fupported by a fet of Chronological Tables, calculated to
place the day and hour of our Saviour’s birth at.a certainty beyond dif-
pute ; and, as that book has been many years out of print, and is now
become very fcarce and valuable, ] have thought proper to copy that
_ part of it, which contains the immediate calculation of this nativity, in
-* the do€tor’s own words, without adding or diminifhing from the text,

or prefuming to introduce any remarks of my own. ~ es 5
' The geniture or figure of birth, difplayed in the annexed plate, was
alfo projected by this learned author, which I have carefully caufed to
be engraved from a corrected copy in the doftor’s own hand-writing ;
and I flatter myfelf that the reputation this tract hath acquired in every
part of Europe, added to the re{pectability and eminence of its author,
will not fail to render it highly acceptable to the reader. The following .
extract commences with page 256 of the doétor’s book. of


v


iy


*
ol OA ed a a rd i ae I et ee


care * ,
fe es aes ee OE OS OE OS HG OT a SE OT ee Er a PEE 7q
»
4
4
‘A
4
‘
‘|


ity 5)


Se
M46


ght)


a2 oh 4 Ay . 4
“ 6 ay .
Fete a at att teal le tall ae te ee eee ed
J : x
~— Tubian Yean4gs
is °
.


yf NX
— 25.0f December
a


of
At~ Midn1


US CHRIST


Be Re
>. / Nativi
SES
ved,
ie


atlthieLT th Of


’
ee


2%


a


'


~ was conftituted a prieft of the order of the four and twenty. At lix


ET ABP OR OLE OG MY. "893


Of the punétual Hour of the Day, and Minute of that Hour, whereon


Jefus Chrift wasdorn. Proved by the unerring Canons of Affrology.


» North Latitude o 46 Ob. Afc. Afcen. 181 41
% South Latitude o 42 Ob. Defc. o S71 He
4  NorthLatitude 1 17 Ob. Defe. > 21s

-'8 NorthLatitude o 41 Ob? Defc. » "2 312 59
'¢ South Latitude 1. 1° Ob. Afe, =%& 189 40
‘gy South Latitude 2 2 ObsAie. 37 @.)294 9
R.aM. H. - OI 41

‘Ria o Sida Gk


That we may fee at length how fitly the nativity of Jefus Chrift fuits
with all paffages of his life, as alfo with his qualities and complexion, we
muft firft examine how the accidents of his life do lead us, as the ftar did
the wife men, to the place, and to the moment of time when he was


born. That Jefus was born at Bethlehem in Judea is paft difpute. Here


the longitude is commonly reputed different from the meridian of London
in England (for which place our tables are framed) two hours and forty-
fix minutes: and by fo much time, it feems, it is twelve of the clock at
midnight with them fooner than it is with us. Here alfo, as is vulgarly
efteemed, the pole is elevated at the neareft guefs fome thirty-one degrees


of north latitude and fifty minutes. Now the time, as it is efteemed vul-:


garly, whereon Chrift was born under this elevation, was the night
before Saturday the twenty-fifth of December, in the forty-fifth Julian
year ending, at what time the cycle of the Sun was nine, and of the
Moon was one, and, the year being biffextile, the dominical letters
were DC.


-~ Now, that out of this night we may procure the certain moment where


in the bleffed birth happened, we muft firft afcertain the accidents of his
life. And thefe are as follows: Firft, his birth happened in an honour-
able hour; for on that very night both angels and men came in to adore
him. Secondly, in the fame year, and about forty days after he was born,
perfecution followed, and he was forced, young as he was, to fly for his
life into Egypt. Thirdly, his return out of Egypt happened at almoit


or about two years of age.


At twelve years of age, and fome hundred days over, he had great
honour and praife, by difputation with the dottors in the temple at
Jerufalem. At about twenty-five years of age, according to Suida, he


days


894 A Nghe, Dav Ss “ER ACT Taw |


days over twenty-nine complete years, he was baptized, and entered into
his miniftry; and at the fame time was forty days tempted of the devil ;
and at the end of thofe was very contemptuoufly caft out of Nazareth by
the rude rabble there. Yet, notwithftanding, he was very well received °
at Capernaum; and at Jerufalem he drove the buyers and fellers out of the
temple. And laftly, after three years and three months fpent in his mi-
niftry, at thirty-two years of age and one hundred and one days over, he
wascrucificduponmount Calvary, between two thieves, and died upon the
crofs. But,although he lived unto that time, yet it was about fix months
fooner, at what time the Jews confpired againft him to kill him at the
feaft of tabernacles; and about two months before the time he was con-
demned by the Sanhedrim, and a proclamation was iffued out to take
him. Now may we find a time, according to the experienced rules of
art, to fuit fitly with all thefe accidents, and fuch a time as bhall aptly
defcribe him to be the man thatin Holy Writ he is fet forth to be. Then
fay I, It is a certain argument that both the day, hour, and minute, of
Chrift’s birth are demonftratively determined. And {o will all acknow-
ledge, who know what Aftrology is.


The DIRECTIONS of this NATIVITY, whereby the genethliacal
Scheme of Birth is verified,


‘ob. ‘af.


A aac SR
» to Algol’s Head 3% 17 vOnaeanOu.944
M.H. to 3 0 92:11. 0 30.0 186 |
© too D 292 O79323.0' 235 Aahes
© to 8 with Lat. soe 2 fe) eo re) ae The flight into Egypt.
To 8 without Lat. 272 :A2 >) OP 57-96 8
eM Fe to28 5.2 vat OSC Bi 1 B96 Baz

AfcsfOoG 3850. 1103320) 0 40N 8132 69 p
id. to Ter. 2s.4. 0 Sane Jie 12s. 2 as {Th return.
xy to Flying Vult. w 518 0 0 0 oO oOo

To Ter. 3 192 433593 3° 39
i A b 19 I 108

: 8 S4 ara 4
en Gioia sane 30 45 430 4 206 >Heencreafedin wifdom
> {ro A y 87 207 a5. Qa ake 2
h tO.A g 0:0. OD aNo 4
M.H.tos ¢ 97 133s. 52S SBA Y ily di
Afe. to 9 & 188 5 624 6 180 idly alone
M.H. to o 2 99 22.7) 40°97 331 y i


I | | Ate.


OFT ASHER OL Oo G’y.


ob. af.

Afe. to % 190 I
» to & AQ AT
u%to4 2 100 13
¢ to * » 324 57
to A 4 306 15
eft 4 without Lat. ° oO
Afc. to 4 % Lat. 193 58


Afc. to a % withoutL.194 1


IXth to a » Lat. 73 46
@® to A fh Qio%s 4
‘> to contra-an. @ 48 37
© to contra-an. % 289 5
IXth to 6 b 77 43
¢ to * Oo 329 22
Afc. to a 2 200 24
@ to 6 2g 315 56
IXth to a ¢, 83 48
yp too ¢- 54 23
y% to 8 Dd 212 35
> to Rig. 56 10
¢ toa bh 340 24
4 to # © 217 16
® to o Dd, 99°45
4% to * 8, 218 19
M.H.to o »! 120 8


IXth to Caftor’s-Head at o o
- } to the Goat aOtiod
M.#H.to Hyder. Heart 122 37
Afet0 2D | 212 50
Afc. to g,.», with Lat. 2139 2


’


No. 46.


28


28


fe)
31
31
3h
31


1o N


9


31


21 9 296f


d.


166. Healthful.
1g2 Slanders.
243 A pleafant time.


$F


119
138; The difputation with
169 the doctors.


Gain by old folks.
His mother ill.

His father ill.
Scorned at for his piety
Favour of great men.
A very pleafant time.


£36 Honoured for his piety.


291 |Scorned and hated for —
2 the fame.
Elected into the order
of the four and twenty.
299 Morehatredforreligion
Refpeét from great men
for his religion.
Great affronts from all
forts. of people for
his piety and religion.


ie Jan. he was baptiz-


221


150


ed,and begantopreach,
and was fuccefsful in
gathering difciples.
He was by means of

{this affronted and cait
out at Nazareth.


37
&cx His miniftrys
240 ,
227 \He was crucified.


Now,


896 OA NE OR Bea Uh So Te ke oT Ol UN:


~ Now, as Chrift had a real body made of a woman, fo was it no {mall
argument of the reality of his body, in that it fubmitted unto the im-
preflions of the ftars, as do thofe of other men. For, although the im-
meafurable power of the fpirit upon him was able to fway, and did fway,
all impreflions and inclinations of nature, fo as to fubject them abfolutely
to be obedient in all things unto the commands of his holy will, yet
were not only the complexion of his body, but alfo the qualities of
his mind ‘and affections, much of them preffed and wrought by the
power of the heavens. Only excepted, that, whereas he was born with-
out fin, neither evil planets, nor evil afpects of any planet, could have
that advantage to work upon his manners and difpofition, fo as to incline
them with fuch command as they do’by others. But, as for the acci-
dents of his life, in refpect of what befel him, as for matter of love or
‘hatred, ficknefs and health, life and death, the ftars had as free and full
liberty and power over him and his body as upon any the leaft of us.
For, though he was able, by fpecial authority of his own, to force the
utmoft power of ftars, or heaven, yet herein Jay his humility,. and his
charity in that humility, in that he-voluntarily fubmitted his body to be
ordered according to the courfe of nature: whereas, would he himfelf,
he might have made it lord over all that nature could-do: And, though
he raifed the bodies of others from death unto: life, in defpite of nature, -


yet would he fuffer his own body quietly to be ordered even as. nature
would herfelf. a


Thefe things confidered, next come we to meafure the time between
the accidents of life and time of birth. It is obferved, and a continued
experience has verified it according to obfervation, that, (unlefs fome
f{pecial interruption intervene, either by a tranfit, or fome revolution ut-
terly crofling,) from the fignificator in a nativity unto the promittor of
the thing fignified, there are ordinarily fo many times one year and five
days and eight hours as there are degrees either of afcenfion or defcen-
fion between the one and the other. The moft remarkable accident of
Chrift’s life, that we can work by, was his death, and the manner of ir,
at the end of thirty-two years and an hundred and one days after birth.
To bring this about, the Moon claims nothing as a fignificator. The
Sun feems to proffer fomething, as if his direction to the quartile of the
Moon fhould proclaim fome fuch matter. But then the Sun, being
neither giver of life, nor years, in this nocturnal geniture, could hardly
have fuffered fo fatally by that quartile, that death fhould follow upon
it. And befides, upon examination it appears, that that dire€tion came
up fome years too foon: for thirty-two, in what pofition foever placed
uader ground. And now therefore, if neither Sun nor Moon van

; aciors.


OF 7 Ay Sy PEReO7 Ls O:.G -¥: 897


actors in fuffering that direful fate, then it follows, that certainly it was
that point of the {cheme which is called the afcendant. And, if fo, then

it was either the direction of the afcendant tothe quartile of the Sun,

(and thusit was -a ten-o’clock birth, and Virgo afcended,) or it was the

oppofition of Mars a quarter of an hour after the fame, Virgo afcending,
Or it was the oppofition ef the Moon, and then was it a midnight

birth, and Libra afcended ; or it was to the oppofition of Saturn, and
then was it a birth at almoft half an hour paft eight in the morning, and
Scorpio afcended. But, of all thefe, none will {uit with a defcription of

the perfon, and the other accidents of his life, but that of the afcendant

to the conjunction of the Moon. The Moon at midnight of the fore-

mentioned day, we find in the fign Aries, and in twenty-eight degrees
and one minute thereof, upon the cufp of that which is called the eighth.
houfe of heaven, or the houfe of death; and. there is fhe-nearly im con-
junction with a ftar called Algol’s Head, which is one of the moft ma-
lignant ftars.in the whole heavens, and difpofed of by the planet Mars,
who is the lord of the native’s profefled enemies, and alfo of death. The
Moon of herfelf is naturally a giver of life; but, as fhe fits upon the houfe

of death, and difpofed of as the is, fhe fignifiesa murderer: and, as: for
the perfons fhe fhould work it by, they are the common people and rude

rabble, and efpecially women, whom fhe naturally reprefents; and the

chief magiftrate of the place, whom alfo fhe reprefents by accident, by

virtue of that dominion, which fhe claims in the tenth houfe, or houfe of
‘honour and dignity; and fome ecclefiaftical perfon or perfons by acci-
dent alfo, as fhe hath dominion in the ninth houfe; and laftly foldiers, .

as fhe is difpofed of by Mars, who naturally fignifies men of war. Now,
all thefe fignifications fo fitly meeting in the Moon, and fhe fo aptly re-

prefenting a murderer, how readily {tands the to ferve our purpofe? To

proceed therefore, we find the oblique defcenfion of her in that degree

and minute to be two hundred and twelve degrees and fifty minutes :
but, if we confider her latitude, the oblique defcenfion will prove two.

hundred and thirteen degrees and two minutes. Next, as for the time

when the afcendant fell under this direful direction, we muft allow fome

time for the ftrength of conftitution, which this fcheme,. pofited after

‘this manner, feems to afford the native to wreftle with the ftrokes of
death. For Jupiter, a benevolent planet, lord of the fixth, and in the

afcendant,, together with his antifcions in the fixth, and a fextile of the

Sun lighting there alfo, befpeaks an healthful body, and of a very ftrong

-conftitution, and luftily able to ftruggle with its deftinies, before death
fhall get the maftery. Wherefore we muft not lay the afcendant. under

the oppofition of the Moon juft upon the very day of death, but fome

weeks before it. And, fecing we have an oppofition, firft. without lati- —

2 tude,


898 AN! £47 0'U/S TURE TF ON


. tude, and then withit ; we therefore lay the introdudtion to this fatal
murder firft, under the oppofition with latitude, and that was at the end
of the feaft of tabernacles, at what time the Jews firft took up {tones
to ftone him; but he efcaped away and hid himtelf; and this was fome-
what before the very day of his nativity, at the end of thirty-two years
of age, on the 17th of October. Now, between the oppofition without
and the oppofition with latitude are feventy-four days, and, during this
time, Jefus was ftruggling with crofs fates, and preached privately in
Judea, and not openly, for fear of the Jews: only, at the feaft of de-
dication, he appeared in vindication of the blind man, unto whom he
had given fight. But at that feaft again, took they up ftones to kill
him, and they fought to take him, but he efcaped, and went: away be-
yond Jordan: and this was about the twenty-fifth of December, at.
thirty-two years of age : and yet he lived three months ftill after that,
but then it was as a wounded perfon, all the while debating with death :
for the Jews condemned him to die abfolutely, and laid wait to take him,
and he could not walk openly among them any more, but went away
beyond Jordan unto Ephraim on the borders of the wildernefs. To —
meafure therefore from the 17th of Odtober, or the morrow after the
featt of tabernacles, in the thirty-fecond year of Chrift almoft ended,
unto the day of his nativity, there are thirty-one years and two hundred
' and ninety-feven days; which, turned into degrees after the rate of one
year five days and eight hours’ to a degree, (as was before mentioned,)
do make thirty-one degrees and twenty-one minutes; and thefe again
fubtracted from the oblique afvenfion of the Moon’s oppofition in Libra,
twenty-one degrees one minute, which is two hundred and thirteen’ de-
' preestwo minutes, do make the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant to be
an hundred and erghty-one degrees forty-one minutes; and that oblique
afcenfion, under the elevation of thirty-one degrees and fifty minutes,
places the afcendant of this nativity in the fign Libra, one degree twenty-
fix minutes ; and from the oblique afcenfion of the afcendant, one hundred
and eighty-one degrees forty-nine minutes, fubtracting ninety degrees, the
right afcenfion of the mid-heaven muft be ninety-one degrees and forty-
one minutes ; and the right afcenfion placeth the mid-heaven itfelf in
the fign Cancer, in one degree thirty-three minutes: and now again
fubtract we the right afcenfion of the Sun, which is two hundred and
feventy-two degrees eleven minutes, from the right afcenfion of the
mid-heaven, which is ninety-one- degrees forty-one minutes; or, be-
caufe that cannot be, from four-hundred and fifty-one degrees forty-one
minutes, which ‘isthe addition of the whole circle of heaven. to the
right afcenfion of the mid-heaven ; and the remainder is one hundred
and feventy-nine degrees thirty minutes of the equator, which, turned
‘ | ; into


O7F; Ay SE TERE OF LL O.-G YIA A 899)


into the hours.and minutes of the day, do befpeak the equal time of
Chrift’s birth to have happened at eleven hours and fifty-eight minutes
in the afternoon, to which add one minute and thirty-eight feconds for:
. equation, and the apparent time was eleven hours, fifty-nine minutes,
and thirty-eight feconds, which comes within a fmall matter of midnight.


The time of birth being thus propofed, I calculate all the planets’
places for this time, and direat them to their promittors, together with’
the afcendant, mid-heaven, and the ninth houfe, in pidon to {uit all
other accidents according to this time, that by fo doing, it may appear,
according to the moft experienced rules of Aftrology, we have laid the
time right. And, this being done, it appears firft, that the angels adored
him; but this act had nothing of the ftars in it. Then, that the fhep- »
herds came and publifhed his glory all over the city, and in thirteen days
after came the wife men from the eaft to worfhip him; all thefe were
nothing elfe but the fruit of famous tranfits at the time of birth: the
Virgin’s Spike and Arcturus (two great and noble ftars) were newly gone
by, and, being within orbs, drew after them a goodly grace of honour
and glory; Jupiter, who accidentally reprefented fhepherds, as he was
lord of the fixth houfe, and naturally fignified religious perfons, or royal _
priefts, being inthe afcendant, and near upon the cufp, was much about
rifing, when the fhepherds entered, and drew the prieftly kings out of
the eaft to vifit him; the Sun, alfoa fignificator of honour, wasin con.
junction of Venus, who had dignity in the ninth, and with the Flying |
Vulture, a royal ftar, and the famous Fomahaut, by latitude, was
within. his beams, with thefe tranfits accompanying thefe honourable
directions. Firft, the mid-heaven was nearly coming up to the oppofi-
tion of the Sun, and the afcendant was haftening after to the quartile of
the fame, and the Moon alfo was nearly in trine me the Sun and Mercury.
But that which came neareft to the purpofe, was the Moon to the con-
junction of Algol’s Head, at the end of twelve days and odd hours, at the
very point of time as the wife men came. Now this Algol’s Head
is a ftar of Saturn and Mercury, and, though it be a mifchievous ftar, yet
it fignifies preferment, though it be with a vengeance at the heels of it.
And fo it was here. For, the wife men being gone, Herod, by means
of their coming, plotted Chrift’s murder, and forced lim to. flight.
The mid-heaven alfo to the oppofition, and the afcendant to the
quartile, of the Sun, aéted much fuch another part as Algol’ s Head did,
giving honour of kings, though not without a mifchief init. But the
Moon in trine of the Sun and Mercury, argued an aptnefs of the native
to be honoured both of kings and priefts, and of all men in authority. |

No. 46. 19 O And


~ gae AN ELLUSTRATION


And, although thefe direftions came not up until above four years after,
yet, by means of good tranfits, the virtue. of them diftilled fo long
before. :


After thefe things followed the flight into Egypt within the firft year.
And this needed no more anger than from what directions gave the pre-
ceding honour, as the Moon to Algol’s Head, at thirteen days of age;
for here Herod plotted his murder; and the mid-heaven to the oppofi-
tion of the Sun.at an hundred and eighty-five days end; and the afcen-
dant to the quartile of the Sun at two hundred and'two days end; ‘and
to Mercury at three hundred and fifty-two days end; for all this while
was our Lord and bleffed Saviour a itranger in a ftrange land, and an
exile who durft not thew his head, neither durft his parents be known,
who, or what, or where, he was. The Sun to Mercury as lord of the
twelfth houfe, fignifies a mifchief by means of private enemies; and yet,
as: Mercury was alfo lord of the ninth, it helped out of that mifchief, by
means of along journey: with thefe alfo accompanied the Part of For-
tune toa quartile of the Moon at two hundred and ninety-three days end ;
and the mid-heaven to the oppofition of Mercury at one year’s end and
one hundred feventy-two days: and laftly, the afcendant to the quar.
tile of Mercury at one year’s end and two-hundred and fifty-nine days,
(for fo long continued our Saviour’s exile in Egypt.) But when the

Moon entered into terms of Venus in Taurus © 0, at two years of age
ye eighty-five days, he returned home with his: parents. At’ much
about the fame time. came Mercury alfo to the Flying Vulture, and:
Jupiter to the North Balance with latitude: and at: three years and
thirty-five days came Jupiter into his own terms: and at four years and
one hundred and eight days, he came to a trine of Saturn: and a little
after, at four years and two hundred and fix days, the Moon gained the:
trine of the Sun: and in the next year, at five years of age and two hun-
dred and eighteen days, fhe attained to the trine of Mercury : and Saturn
about the fame time came toa trine of Venus. . Now during thefe times.
Jefus greatly increafed in wifdom’; and, befides that, the grace of God
was mightily upon him. Thefe things aptly furthered his great parts
by nature. But at five years and three hundred and forty-eight days,.-
the mid-heaven occurred to the quartile of Mars: and at fix years and.
one hundred and eighty days, the afcendant was encountered with an.
oppolition of the fame. And during thefe times Jefus wanted’ not his:
fhare of worldly crofles: he feems to have been laden with’ quarrelfome
affronts, and likely-enough it is that his parents fuffered in the fame way;
if they efcaped ficknefs, and loffes in eftateand honour. Moreover, our:

; ee Saviour


Gre AS TeReo.L OG Y. gor


Saviour feems to have tafted fome fharp diftempers of hody himfelf, or
elfe very great wrongs from his enemies. But ftorms laft not for ever:
the afcéendant came to Jupiter, at eight years and one hundred and fixty-
fix days, and gave him a very halcion time; and he then lived in much
love of neighbours and kindred. At ten years and one hundred and fifty-
two days, he feems to have encountered fome more misfortunes, or elfe
his mother bore them for him, by means of the Moon falling into the
pit called the Dragon’s Tail. But within three months after, Jupiter
coming to the trine of Venus gave him great content, whether it was by
means of fome long journey, or by reafon of the pleafure of his ftudies,
or both: however, it was a pleafant time, and the world feemed to wel-
come him with fome of her favours.


Batt at the end: of twelve years and fome three months over, he began
to be taken notice of publicly for his great wifdom and parts. Venus
was lady of his afcendant, and alfo principal fignificatrix of his, mind.
And, at twelve years of age and fifty-two days over, fhe came, by direc-
tion, to a fextile of the Moon’s difpofitrefs of his honour and advance-
“ment; whichis as muchas to fay, fhe introduced him into a lucky vein
of Being well accepted for his inward worth, and excellency of mind,
ationoit men of power and authority. And the virtue of this good direc-
tion wrought to purpofe at the paflover after, at the latter’end ioe March,
about fome forty-one days after the dire@tion happened. But, from this
time forward there is na queftion but he was every year more and more
noted and admired, as he came yearly up to the feaft at Jerufalem ; for at
twelve years and one hundred and nineteen days, which was but a month
after the pafiover, the Part of Fortune came to-a trine of Jupiter with
latitude, and about feventy- four days after to’ the fame trine without
latitude; and at one hundred and fixty-nine days over twelve years
came up the afcendant to a trine of Saturn out of the ninth houfe, with
latitude, and eighteen days after that to the fame trine without latitude ;
and thefe are directions to credit a man, amongft ancient and ferious
people, to purpofe. But that which hit nearett upon the very week,
was the direction of the ninth houfe unto the trine of Jupiter with
latitude, which happened at the end of twelve years and one hundred
and one days, at the beginning of April, prefently after the paflover
week; and the fame houfe came to the fame trine without latitude about
forty days after. But, however, the directions preceding and fucceeding-
all concurred to heap up the glory of his difputation amongft the doétors.
Alfo thefe kind of dire¢tions: made him dextrous at his calling too, in
building houfes, and following. his bufinefs ferioufly, and with great


induftry. After this, at over fixteen, came the Part of Fortune to a
trine


902 AN ee te. US aoe eG) va


trine.of Saturn, and that was good, but had relation chiefly to his trade,
as if he had gained by it in dealing with elderly people. But, half a
year after, the Moon to the contra-antifcion of Venus ‘was ill either to
himfelf or his mother, or both. And at over feventeen, the Sun fell
under the contra-antifcions of Saturn, and that feems to have been
grievous to his reputed father. At fixteen years and ninety-eight days,
the ninth houfe came up tothe body of Saturn, and then no doubt but
he was fufficiently unhappy in his grave councils, and met with more
derifion than attention. And they, who formerly had applauded his wif-
dom, would be apt enough now to betray their own weaknefs, in chan-
ging their ftory. Yet Venus coming to the fextile of the Sun a little
after, in the fame year, would not only allay much of that difpa-
ragement, but alfo would be raifing friends amongft the more prudent
fort of powerful perfons, to reprove and bridle the licentious lips of en-
vious and upbraiding tongues. At eighteen years and three hundred and |
fixty-one days the afcendant happened upon the trine of Venus, and -
that was an healthful and a pleafant time, cleaving off the reproaches of
Saturn and envious people. At twenty-two entering, the Part of For-
tune fell into the lap of Venus in the fifth houfe, and rendered a time
religioufly pleafant. And at twenty-two years and one hundred and
thirty-fix days, the ninth houfe got out of the clutches of envious Saturn,
and encountered a trine of Venus, in the fign Gemini. And this un-
_doubtedly gave him to fee favory fruits of his good counfels and grave
admonition, to his great contentment. But towards the year ending,
the Moon coming to the quartile of Venus interrupted the pleafant pro-
grefs of his affairs. And, in the twenty-third year well entered, he met
with great oppofition, as well from men in power as the rabble rout,
greatly gainfaying his facred converfation, and this by means of Jupiter
falling under the Moon’s ‘oppofition, both without and with latitude.
At twenty-four years of age, and two hundred and twenty-one days,
came the Moon to the Foot of Orion, called Rigel; at what time might
poflibly happen the preferment into the order of the twenty-four, fpoken
of by Suidas, of which he never made either profit, ufe, or advantage,
unlels it were by accident. At twenty-feven years and two hundred and
ninety-nine days, Venus, lady of the afcendant and of the ninth honfe, |
fell upon the quartile of Saturn; and this adminiftered unto him much .
ef trouble in his mind,’ and of difturbances in his religions courfes, and
perhaps he met with fome wrong in his journey to the feaft of taberna-
cles, which happened about that time. At twenty-eight years of age
complete, Jupiter attained unto the fextile of the Sun, and that admi-
niftered unto him much favour and refpeCt from perfons of quality.
But, the Sun being at the very bottom of heaven, it feems as if all his


greateft


Oi AG TROLO GY. 903


greateft friends favoured him, like Nicodemus, more by night than by


day. At one hundred and fifty-days over twenty-eight years of age, the
Sun was encountered with the quartile of the Moon. - And at this time,
John the Baptift entering into his miniftry, Jefus feems greatly to have
been affronted by people of all forts. Itis very likely too, that old Jofeph,
his reputed father, yielded unto nature about this time ; for the Sun fig-
‘nifies parents. And whether it was when Saturn came to the oppofition
of the Sun, or now that the Sun came to the quartile of the Moon, we
cannot certainly determine; but much about this time it feems he left
this world for a better.


But now the time draws on, wherein Jefus began to thew himfelf the
Chrift ; at this time he was baptized of John in Jordan. His kingdom
was not of this world, neither was his miniftry of men, or by man’s
authority, but by a divine commiffion ; and by figns and wonders it was
confirmed to be fo. We cannot therefore expect influence from heaven
for thofe things which come from beyond heaven; nor muft we expect


fo)
a commiffion from the itars for thofe miracles he a@ted as it were in


defiance ofthem. And, as for what applaufe followed by virtue of thofe |


miracles, we muft look for the reafon of it from the Maker of all things,
rather than from any created being, though never fo much exceeding
all other’ creatures. Yet, for fuch natural paflages as amongft his mi-
racles did accrue, we cannot debar nature from executing her office ftill.
And firft, we find him thruft out contemptuoufly and rudely at Nazareth,
with great {corn unto his facred fun@ion; infomuch that he rentawsd
his houfehold upon it unto Capernaum. And in this great affront his
mother alfo feemed not alittle concerned, who removed her houfehold with
him, from where fhe feems to have Hees bred and born, unto a ftrange
place. Now at this time the mid-heaven, the fignificator of Chriit’s
honour and his mother’s perfon, came to quartile of the Moon, which
very fitly fuits with all that happened. The direction came up on the
fixth of November, before the twenty-eighth year was quite run out.
But the malice of it lafted not only unto this affront, which was acted in
March of the twenty-ninth year entered, but alfo unto the paflover
following, whereat it encountered him with much fnarling of the Jews
againft him, notwithftanding all his great miracles. And worfe would
it have proved, but that Jupiter, the natural fignificator of his divine
function, came to a trine of Mercury, lord of the ninth. This happened
at twenty-five days. over twenty-nine years of age,. much about the
time of his entrance into his miniftry. And, though we cannot fay
it purchafed him that honour, yet we can fafely fay’ “that it prompted
his human mind to comply with his divine commiflion, and facilitated
No. 46. 10 P , his


@,


go4 ASN iTable L v0: 5, TORS A STE OUN


his reception, wherever he came, witha kind of luck whereby this di-
reCtion ferved him; for God Almighty makes ufe of natural inftruments
to ferve divine ends. About this time alfo came the ningh houfe to the
mercurial ftar called Caftor’s Head ; and the Moon encountered the She-
Goat, a ftar of Mercury and Mars, at_thirty-one years and two hundred
and forty days. Thefe are {tars furthering ingenuity, though not with-
out troubles, and fuch our Saviour wanted not for all the time of his
miniftration, until finally his afcendant came to the oppofition of the
Moon, firft without latitude, at the end of thirty-one years and two
_ hundred and twenty-two days, about the beginning of Auguft ; at which
time his neighbours of Capernaum began to deride his miniftry, and the
pharifees,-complying with the Herodians, made him fly the country;
and, laftly, the afcendant to the oppofition of the Moon, with latitude,
the afcendant being in this figure Hyleg, -and the Moon, which is Ana-
reta, being on the eighth houfe, deprived him of life, as God had ap-
pointed it from the beginning.


Thus we find the time propofed moft fitly agreeing with all paflages of
his life, as well as with his.death. But yet, to make fure work, we
ufed to compare the fituation of a fcheme alfo with the complexion and
qualities of the native, before we determine that the time is right. And
now to do as much by this; Firft, it is apparent, by the known rules of
art, that. Jefus was born, as it were purpofely, and-that fo as may be
_difcerned by the fcheme of his nativity, to die a violent death. For
here we have the Moon, the common fignificatrix of life, fitting upon
the very brink of death, upon the cufp of the eighth houfe: then we find
her in conjunction with the very worft of malignant ftars, Algol’s
Head. . The Dragon’s Tail alfo is in the eighth, in lefs than ten’ de-
grees of her: but as bad or worfe than all this is Mars.in oppofition
_unbto, Jupiter in the afcendant, and in quartile with Mercury, and the
Sun in the fourth. It is true indeed, that, as he came into the world
without fin, fo was he above the power of any influence of heaven to be
able to hurt him: and, had he not voluntarily fubmitted unto the infir-
mities of nature, they had never in the leaft reached him. ~ And, though
the fignificator of his enemies was ftronger and better armed than fuch
ftars were which ftood for his own perfon, yet was his armour of inno-
cency eafily able to have overturned all, would he have uled his mighty
power to that purpofe: but fuch was his love, that he was willing to
Jay down his life; and therefore he put himfelf under the power of
nature, in order to Jofe his life.. And hence, by means of this fubmif- -
fion, Mars, in the houfe of enmity, and lord thereof, being ftronger than
Venus, lady of the houfe of lite, or Jupiter, her affociate, placed “in

that


that houfe, rendered his enemies too ftrong for him, and backed them with
bitter choler, fpite, and malice, againfthim. The Sun being in quar-
tile to Jupiter and the afcendant inclined the magiftrates averfe both to
his perfon anu’doctrine. Mercury alfo in the fame quartile inclined the
churchmen with the fame averfenefs to oppofe him. Mars in oppofition ©
exafperated the men of war. And, laftly, the Moon ftirred up the vul-
gar people to cry him down. And all this might have been as aptly fore-
{een by his nativity when he entered the world, as it is now known by


his life paft it.


But,. to purfue the refidue of his perfon, as well as his condition, we
find, that Libra, a cardinal fign, of temper fanguine, hot, and moitt,
afcends;,and Jupiter is in the afcendant, near the point of rifing, at birth,
in a fign of his own nature; and Venus, lady of the afcendant, in Aqua-
ries, a fanguine fign too, do all befpeak him to have been a perfon of'a very
level temper, and of a fanguine complexion. Venus, in trine to the
afcendant in the houfe of Saturn, endued him with a fober chearfulnefs
in his converfation: and Saturn, being in a fanguine fign too, in trine
of Jupiter in the afcendant, from the ninth, or houfe of ingenuity and
religion, and in dignities of Mercury, with.a reception from him in the
higheft. degree by houfe, infufes melancholy ipto his temper, to mingle
with his mirth, and feeds him with a mighty ftrength of judgment and
deep policy: alfo he diftils gravity and {erioufnefs into all his actions: and
thus Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, are moft excellently united in him
with the beft.of afpects.. To thefe we may add the Moon, with almoft
a moiety of her orbs in her exaltation, and there in trine of the Sun and
“Mercury. The Moon is the great miftrefs of life and nature, and the
trines to the Moon do gratify the native, even as ftrongly as if they fell
into the afcendant. Hence therefore is he armed from the Sun with a.
majeftic and a royal prefence, and princely prudence, and from Mercury
with as great a {tock of ready wit and ingenuity ; and the rather, for that
he is in Cazimi with the Sun, and in fo {trong reception with Saturn. To- ‘
gether with all thefe we find Spica Virginis, a ftar of the fweeteft influ--
ence of all the fixed ftars in heaven, fitting near upon the cufp afcend-
ing, and there admirably qualifying for oratory, and that. efpecially in
divinity. Arcturus is there too, a princely ftar, that adminifters courage
and a noble refolution. Laftly, the fign of juftice afcends ; and Jupiter,
the planet of religion, joins with it, to increafe devotion; and Sa-
turn and Venus are both in figns humane and temperate. And, al-
though our Saviour was not as common people are, yet had nature,
wonderfully fet him out,


But-


906 AM V2 £0 8S TRA TION


*


But yet there are exceptions. For the Moon is.il] placed on the eighth,
in an unlucky houfe, and joined with a peevith and crabbed ftar, which
mut needs infect her to be fo too. Mars is alfo fet as if he ftood on pur-
pofe to deftroy a nativity, fo oppofite to Jupiter and the afcendant ; and,
being ftrong withal, he feems to threaten all good qualities with an over-
turn, infufing nothing but choler, fury, and malice, into the native’s
head; and, difpofing of the Moon, he makes her fo too. The Sun alfo
looks upon the cufp afcending with an evil quadrature, and fuch as ufu-
ally renders a native much more proud and ambitious than either wife or
good-natured ; and Mercury, complying with the Sun in the fame afpect,
endeavours to incline this facred perfon unto theft and lies. But what
now? Was Jefus thus? or rather does not Aftrology belic him? No,
neither.. For, had thefe evil afpects courted an ordinary nature unto
evil manners naturally, yet would they not have forced him, but he
might have overcome all by gracious habits. But much more than this
muft we note in our ever bleffed Lord Jefus Chrift. © For, he being’ born.
without fin in his nature, the heavens wrought upon him in a different
manner of influence from what they do by us. For, feeing that the divine
nature withheld fo as no fin could enter him, the worft of afpetts (for
matter of qualification). became the beft unto him. For, by how much
an oppofition or a quartile is a ftronger afpect than a fextile or a trine,
may they be withheld from doing harm, they muft needs afpect with the
greateit force of their virtues. And thus the oppofition of Mars, falling
into his head, inftead of fury and choler, adminiitered the greater courage
in him; and the quartile of the Sun, inftead of pride and ambition, gave
him the greater majefty and wifdom ; and the quartile of Mercury, inftead
of lies, gave him the more prodigious wit; and the Moon with Algol’s
Head, inftead of peevifh, made him the more foberly wife. But we mutt
remember, that, though Chrift could not fin, yet die he could. And
thus therefore oppofitions and trines, and evil ftars, were as evil to him,
in as high a degree, as unto the meanett of us; for in all things, faving fin,
was he as we are.


Next proceed we to his body, only fo as to compare that too with our
fcheme. For, though we have no proof either of his ftature or his
colour, yet may we be bold to fay (by rules of art) that, Libra afcend-
ing, he was fomewhat inclined to be tall and fair: but this was the lefs,
few degrees of that fign afcending, and they in terms of Saturn: elfe
is there nothing to except, unlefs the Moon, with Algol’s Head, may
be thought fomewhat to abate from both. Jupiter in the afcendant
gives an handfome brown feature, hinders not tallnefs, but befpeaks

1 - fome-


wae a. as 7"


@ Pai A SaTHREOPLsO;G, Y. 907


fomewhat of corpulency; fave that the trine of Venus from Aquaries, and
of Saturn out of Gemini, forbid it. Jupiter gives a grey eye, and fo
fays Venus ; and none can hinder. Venus would gladly beautify the
face, by virtue of her intereft,in Libra, and fomething fhe does to
render it rather fair than brown. And Saturn from Gemini can hinder
but very little: he would pacify, but Jupiter and Venus are refolved
to keep up the complexion. Jupiter adminifters brown hair, and Venus
renders flaxen: but Saturn would have it black ; whence, between both,
Jupiter carries it. Venus gives a pleafant {miling look, and Jupiter
denies it: not only Saturn attempts it, but prevails no fasther than to
render it foberly ferious withal. The Sun-and Mercury, with their trines
fo near the cufp, would fain deform; but Mercury in the Sun has not
power todarken, ‘The Sun would only caft fwarth ; but Jupiter in the
afcendant on one fide, and the Virgin’s Spike upon it on the other fide,
utterly defeat him. Mars in oppofition would fain fcarify, but Jupiter
fo near defies him alfo. Laftly, the Moon between Aries and Taurus
contraries but little from the ret ; efpecially for that fhe has fo few rays
falling into her bofom. The: mon fle’ does in oppofition is only, by .
means of her place in the eighth, and being with. Algol’s Head fo near,
-to wrinkle the brows, and furrow or dent the cheeks, but fhe wants
ftrength. Jupiter would have a full face, and Venus around; and fo
it is concluded between them, faving that Saturn and the Moon ‘together
prevail fo faras to render it oval.


‘Laftly, as for his other fortunes. Firft, we find his afcendant and
fixth well fitted with a very.ftrong conftitution for health. The oppo-
fition of Mars and a ‘quartile of ‘the Sun and Mercury prevail to harm
more by unlucky outward accidents than by inward diftempers. - His
houfe of wealth is diretly oppofed by the Moon, lady of the mid-
heaven, and is not defended with any good afpect. His mid-heaven is
alfo very low, the lady of it is fufficiently afflicted ; and, being incum-
bered with a croud of evil afpects, had no help of either of the fortunes.
No, the Sun in the very bottom of heaven befpeaks that this native’s
kingdom is not of this world. Only the Moon upon the houfe of
death, after void of courfe, is in trine of the Sun, which fhews to pro-
mife his kingdom by death, or after it. His ninth houfe has the help
of both the fortunes. But Saturn bodily dwells there, and hatcheth a
world of croffes, both in his funétions and long journeys. His houfe
of enmity is very ftrong, with the lord ‘thereof therein, and at home in
his own houfe, and threatens malice enough. The eighth houfe is
even malignant too; and fois the lord of the twelfth, faving his trine
to the Moon, But ‘this-lord is under the Sun, weakens his force,

No. 47. 10Q. | and


F 4 ‘ | - & Rte


908? A NS® PLL UO) STi RG ANT: 2O°N

and difcovers-all his private fpleen. His fifth houfe, or houfe of chil~
dren, has a rich jewel in it; and the lord thereof looks pleafingly upon
the afcendant, which argues he had a body fufficiently fruitful for iffve.
The lady of the afcendant alfoin the houfe of children, in trine to the
lord of that houfe, and both in good afpett unto the houfe of marriage
and the lord thereof, do all agree, that it was no hindrance in nature
which rendered our Saviour wifelefs or childlefs. No, it was his great:
gravity, or rather his infinite piety, which, for the Kingdom of Heaven’s
fake, led him to defpife nature’s treafures. And hence came it-to pafe,


that the church was his only f{poufe; and by her hath he a numberlefs: -


offspring” of holy: faints unto his children! The! lord of the fixth
is in the afcendant, and the great fortune ; whence were his fervants’
true and faithful : only” one Judas (when thatfixth houk came by di-
rection to the quartile of Mercury, in the entrance of the houfe of en-
mity) fatally :betrayed him; and the reft, more out of fear than for
falfehood, forfook him and fled. The lord of the ninth is very low, and
in quartile of Jupiter and Mars, and in conjunction of the twelfth lord;
which rendered his: friends men of low condition, and befriending him
more by night than by day; as being terrified by’ mighty enemies, and
not encouraged by any otitward promifes from himielf. The lord of
the third is in the houfe of enmity, and thence rendered moft of ‘his
neighbours: bitter and envious, eipecially during the times of ill direc-
tions operating. Only Jupiter, having dignities in that houfe, made
other of his neighbours and kindred as much his friends. Laftly, the
Sun upon the cufpof the fourth feems fitly fo comply with that fove-
reignty whichattended upon his death, and appeared by his refurrection -
and afcenfion into heaven. When Adam entered, the’ Sun was juft
upon fetting. When Jefus Chrift was incarnated, he was’ juft upon
rifing. But at his birth he was at loweft.’ For it was not the Sun of
the Firmament, but the Sun- of Righteoufnefs, who arofe with healing
in his wings.

Such was the Fastin of our Saviour, anid his progrefs through this
earthly world ; and fuch were the qualities of his. humane thitich even
as the ftars defcribe them ; and fuch were the complexion of his hu-
mane body, juftas the Heagkiis do befpeak. And, though we never faw
his perfon, or any true portraiture of the fame, yet know we, by the
fcheme of his nativity, that he was a man fomewhat tall of ftature, of
an oval face, of a ruddy complexion, between fair and brown, of a
grey eye, yet fharp and piercing, of a bright brown hair, of an high
‘Yorebead, of much beard, of a pleafant look, fmiling, yet foberly {e-
rious, and of a body well compofed, and indifferently fet, between

flender


OP TA SLR O 110 6 M's 909


flender and corpulent. And all this know we by the canons of Aftro-
logy. And that thofe canons are true, it is no fmall evidence, in that
all the known paflages of his life fo punctually comply with them.
And, be thefe canons true, (as we know. by multitude of experience that
they are certainly fo,) han it appears by thefe canons, that at midnight
of December the twenty-fifth day, was 1668* years compleat, fnce his
birth. And every birth-day of this our ever blefied Lord and Saviour
Jefus Chrift falls on the twenty-fifth day of December. His life points
out the very moment’of time whereon he came into the light. . And the
{cheme of the heavens to that moment is a true picture of his life; and
fuch as no moment can fhew again, in any hundred years time, before
or after.


To thefe may be added, the frame of the heavens at his death, fo fitly
fuiting with the time of the great bufinefs in hand, and defcribing what
was done. And firft we note, that on the over-night of the paffover
feait, at what tirhe our Saviour was apprehended, the fign of the fourth
houfe in the nativity (which always carries with it the charatter of death,
or the end. of every matter) was then afcending; and the Sun, wich
was therein at birth, was then in the bloody eat of Mars in the radix,
“which was at that point of time’the fourth houfe, or the bottom of hea-
ven, fhewing all the glory of his prefent hi ife to be lying in the duft, and
his end of days haftening apace to overtake him. The malignant Saturn
was upon the houfe of pleafure,- envioufly eclipfing all his. mirth:
Jupiter, who was radically a great affiftant in the afcendant, was the lord
of the afcendant, and fignificator of life at this time, but.was locally in
the houfe of ec eibe and "asvelp: in conjunction of Mars, lord of enmity
in the nativity, and now lord of his end, who was greatly afflicting him
in the radical place of Saturn. ‘The fignificator of Judas in this fcene was
Mercury in his detriment and fall in Pifces, who, as he ftands in the
third, with the nee of the mid-heaven in conjunGtion, and difpofes
of his mafter in the fixth, afflicts him with a malignant quartile; and
laftly, the Moon,’ which was radically in the eighth, or houfe of
death, was now lady of death, and, being advanced unto the top of
heaven, feemeth to ftand there trampling on the head of the Sun da
the fourth, as it were in his grave, with her wortt of rays, and they
too not a little poifoned with the neannefs of the Dragon’s Tail. Such
was the {tate of heaven at his apprehenfion by Judas and his company at
twelve o'clock at night, on the evening preceding Friday the third of
April.


* The year in which this author wrote, and calculated our oue s nativity. Let it be re-
membered, that the alteration of the ftile has nothing to do with this COE Rg


2 ; As


Bs |


+


910 PIN ALY WSR: Quer 10


As the Sun approached the afcendant, Jefus was led before Pontiis
Pilate, the Moon in the feventh malicioufly oppofing; for fo the judges
at his firft apprehenfion became now his accufers, and, poflefling oe
natural fign of Chrift himfelf, which afcended at birth, and which wa
the fign of jultice, as the /abourers in the vineyard, under pretence of re-
ligion, caft they him out of his own: and Mercury and Venus, one
fignifying the traitor, and the other the magiftrate into whofe hands he
was betrayed, were then in the twelfth, acing the part of private ene-
mies. But, as the Sun drew into the eleventh, or houfe of hopes and
friends, and there infected by the envious place of Mars in the radix,
Pilate alfo, his fome-while friend, yielding at laft to the oppofition of the °
Moon, or the rabble, and turning enemy, condemned him to be crucified.


And, by that time the Sun in the radical chair of Mars came into the
boufe of honour, the Sun of righteoufnefs was lifted up upon the crofs,
as if he was hafting towards heaven, and that in order to draw all men
after him. And here the Moon, fignifying the rabble, oppofes him
with bitter railings. Saturn upon the eleventh, and lord of enmity,
complies with them to deftroy his hopes ; and Jupiter, lord of the ninth,
fignifying the priefts, and Mars the foldiers, being both in the twelfth,
are private enemies. But finally, as they continue railing and reviling,
lo! at the very point of high noon, an univerfal darknefs overwhelmed
all, and the Sun himfelf-bluthed to behold what curfed things were act-
ing. The Sun was now where Mars wasat birth, as it were difpofed of
by his mortal enemies. Jupiter, which afcended at birth, was in the
hands of Saturn, in his very feat of the radix, as it were in the dungeon
of bitter.reftraint, and Mars, the natural enemy, was afflicling him
there. ‘The Moon, which was radically lady of the mid-heaven, and
placed upon the houfe of death, was now at length fettled and feated
together with the Dragon’s Tail upon the afcendant, or the feat of life,
as who would fay, the utmoft period thereof is now expiring, and, even
as the darknefs fell, the Moon upon this place of life was juft underground
with it.


Laftly, at three in the afternoon, the darknefs vanifhed, and the light
returned ; and then was the Sun falling into the houfe of death, {till being
in oppofition of the Moon. Saturn was in the ninth, enjoying the eccle-
fiaftical, and Mars in the tenth, ufurping the civil, authority. But, as.
Chrift died, all his mifery died with him: and that death brought light
into the world, and ufhered our ever bleffed-Saviour in that glorious light
into his eternal glory. And finally, the Moon arofe at fun-fetting ; but
it was eclipfed, fignifying the fall of all fuch as thought to rife upon
their fovereign’s ruins. And the frame of all thefe things ye may behold
as follows, in the annexed {chemes :


But


ws


No. 473»


= sniffer te ERR NE A EE DE ING ERNE NCPR IES NOI OG SNTOIE AIS BEANE AER Mer ra BB :
i S CH EM E oof ‘the H E.AV ENS: :


f At the coming of the}
Darknefs at h, o.


4 PPREHENSION.


Venus appeared 3h, 12m.


before noon :


ta


In the year of Chrift 33 current.


@ wt OWS TUE ESSE Ee Ewe TE


Ke


At the APPREHENSION and Crucirixion of CHRIST.
‘ To face page-g10..


ZELLER


_ be


AE eaSGTR a ee ar alee le


me


uk pea ee


Le Dean Lad Pein


gh aie
star a po ye ene rea De


aye


© FTA. S°TURROIL:.0'@ Y. gua


But, becaufe the life and death of St. John the Baptift was fo nearly
related to the life and death of our ever bleffed Saviour, and the day of
his nativity appears alfo with much fhew of certainty, I have therefore
taken the pains to calculate a {cheme of his nativity alfo, as follows:


NACL LVL DN rohiecl aw BOWL Neithey Bo ALP-TIS I.


iB te


-


2t June 24. Years Julian


Hk aout »
2h
“\ AN
49 5
» bus
oe 4k
; Y i)
Ps; (ri
Ss <
Oran, © )|
Nl
PWS x PQ PQA VA i


South Latitude g
South Latitude oO
North Latitude 5 ike os Bs
South Latitude 3
North Latitude I
South Latitude Bord


Here the Dragon’s Head and Antares, with latitude upon the afcend-
ant, give a very bold man; the Moon, with Regulus in trine of Mars,
confirms the fame. ieee .

The fign Scorpio, with the contra-antifcion of Saturn in the afcendant,
give one of a furly and auftere difpofition; Saturn in oppofition of Mars


confirms the fame.
No. 47. 10 R The .


%


‘12 A NX PWLIWOsor Rama T 1 ON


The antifcion of Satarn on the ninth, with the Moon upon the afcen-
dant, with the Dragon’s Head, as aifo the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, in
fextile of Jupiter, inclines unto honefty, gravity, and good mannets. |


Mercury in reception with Jupiter, and in trine to the afcendant ; alfo
the Moon in trine of Mars, and in reception with the Sun, and the Sun
in the fextile of Jupiter, give a fuffcient wit, and a found judg-
ment,


_ Nothing promifes worldly wealth ; but, contrarily, Jupiter in the mid-
heaven, in fextile of the Sun and Venus, promifeth honour enough.


But Antares, a violent fixed ftar, upon the afcendant, with latitude,
and that within a degree, befpeaks a violent death. And Saturn in oppo-
fition of Mars, from angles, (the one being lord of the afcendant, and
the other of the fourth,) peremptorily threatens it... And it came to pafs,
is it feems to be ufhered in by thefe direCtions, as follows.


Firft, he entered into his miniftry at'the age of twenty-nine years, and
fome little odds; and was immediately buoyed up with wonderful ap-
plaufe. At this time were operating, theafcendant in trine of the Moon
with latitude firft, and.then without. ‘The mid-heaven to the Virgin’s
Spike, with latitude firft, and then without. Alfo the mid-heaven to
Arcturus, without latitade.. Alfo the Moon to the fextile of Mercury,
andthe Sun to Regulus. But the afcendant came to the conjunction of
Mars, without latitude, at the fame time.


Secondly, at thirty years of age and upwards, he wasimprifoned. At
which time were operating, the Moon to the quartile of Mars, and the
Sun to Hydra’s Head. The afcendant to the conjunction of Mars, with
latitude, and the mid-heaven to the quartile of the Sun, were coming
up. But


Thirdly, he was beheaded: at! which time came the afcendant to a
conjunction with Mars, with latitude, at about thirty-one years of age,
and two hundred and fixty days, or thereabouts ; and the mid-heaven
to the quartile of the Sun was near in action about the very fame time.


Laftly, we find how this death was brought about by a fhe private


enemy ; and fuch a one we find Venus, lady of the twelfth, with the
Sun, lord of the mid-heaven, in the eighth. | a


On


OF jA‘S TROL. O'G ¥. gts
On 08s? Pom Net Po! N's:


What is meant by Elections, is nothing more than projecting a {cheme
of the heavens, to find the feveral pofitions and configurations of the pla-
nets on any given day whereon we propofe to begin any bufinefs of im-
portance, to take a long or interefting journey, to make. overtures of
marriage, or to purfue any object of our happinefs or advantage; for the
purpofe of chufing what is vulgarly called a lucky time to begin, that is,
when the influx of the principal fignificators is fuch, as fhall correfpond
with the defires of our mind, and with the bufinefs, whatever it may be,
we with to take in hand.


AaeL pushsely declined taking notice of this fpeculation in the Firft Part,

that I might not be laughed at; which I muft own the abfurdity and
folly of thofe, who on every ludicrous and trivial occafion have reforted
with religious folemnity to this cuftom, have given but too much occa-
fion to infpire; yet I will now take leave to hope, that enough has been
faid to fhew, that in our more important concerns, and in the real and
heart-felt perturbations of our minds, upon the commencement of any
arduous and extenfive undertaking,-it may be as well to choofe thofe fea-
fons when the beft and moft favourable influences of the heavens concur,
as when they put forth the moft noxious and difcordant irradiations. To
a thinking mind, there cannot be a moment’s hefitation, fince no man in
his fenfes would prefer a ftormy tempeftuous day to ride out for pleafure,
to thofe diftinguifhed by calmnefs and ferenity; nor would he choofe an
intenfe frofty morning for the pleafures of a cold bath, which is luxu-
riant only in a milder feafon; and yet all thefe differences in the weather
are produced by the varied pofitions and changes of the planets, by an
influx and effect upon the ambient matter, which we, can no more fee,
than we can the influx produced by the fame bodies upon the bent of our
minds, or which determines this certain order of times, fo fitly appropri-
ated to all human concerns, that the {criptures pioufly recommend a due
obfervation of them, and which, the pfalmift declares, are beautiful in
their feafons !


Thofe, therefore, who with to confult the heavens, previous to any
important undertaking, fhould project the horofcope for that precife
time when they feel their inclinations moft completely bent upon en-
gaging in the bufinefs. This will thew them the particular influence of
every fignificator then operating; and, being compared with the geneth-
liacal figure of birth, and with thofe dire¢tions in the nativity, which
are to operate both for our good and evil, will, upon a fair and true

2 | com-


914 A NYAeEOL U0 Sct oR PAST. TROON


comparifon, quickly inform us whether the bufinefs in contemplation
will generally or eventually turn out to our advantage, or not. But, for
the more particular difcovery of what relates to the good or ill fuccefs of
the bufinefs itfelf, with all its confequences and collateral incidents, a
figure muft be projected of the exaét time when that bufinefs is begun,
and the face of the heavens then operating, moft particularly and minute-
ly confidered. The figns, the fignificators, the angles of the figure, and
the good and evil places-of the horofcope, are to be allowed their natu-
ral and accuitomed implication, exaCtly the fame as in all the rules here-
tofore laid down ; and, if the two figures thus projected form an harmony
and concurrence with the figure of birth, and fall in with the good di.
reCtions arid revolutions thereof, the undertaking will undoubtedly be
profperous, and the bafine(s fuccefsful. But, if thefe figures are difcordant
in themfelves, and oppofe the benevolent fignificators in the geniture,
it will, if purfued, prove dangerous or deftructive to the native, and will
forward the evil events prenoted by the direttions of the geniture.


A mediocrity in the pofitions and influences of the fignificators, and
of the angular houfes of the eleCtional figures compared with the geni-
ture, will, as in all other cafes, produce a medium between the two
- extremes, and fhew that the event of the matter in hand fhall neither
greatly ferve, nor materially injure, the party then about to engage in it.


END of the SECOND PART.


's


yet i
my US Tee eA CT 1-0 N


Chi hs Tiss Gib N.CE


OF


mooi OLOGY.


Poa TE thet) BT RP.


CONTAINING THE


METEOROLOGICAL PART of URANOLOGY;
WITH CERTAIN
RULES for prejudging the Revolutions of every Part of the habitable WORLD.
GENERAL EFFECTS OF |

Great Conjun¢tions, Eclipfes, Comets, Blazing Stars,

. And other Exrraorpinary PHENOMENA:

WTA tHE
ART of CaLtcuLaTIne ECLIPSES, TIDES, and WEATHER,


For any Number of Years to come.


THE WHOLE


Iluftrated by a FIGURE of the SUN’s Ingrefs into the Sign ARIES ,
ALN DBL A


Revolutional Ficure of the Commencement of the AMERICAN EMPIRE.


By EBENEZER SIBLY, Asrro. Putzo.


RINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCXCIL


AN. We
Tig he es Rea D Ob IN


Of the CELESTIAL SCIENCE. of


r


Ags le RO @..G. ¥.


Si PARE the EFT RD:


HE meteorological part of Aftrology is that which enables us, by

a certain well-known influence of the planets, feconded. by obferva-

tion and experience, to afcertain the caufes of the different qualities of
the air, the generation of meteors, thunder,. lightning,. and all the vari-.


ous phenomena of the heavens ; whence the predictions of the weather,
of the temperature and quality of the four feafons of the year, and of the


profpect of a healthy and plentiful time,,or of plague,. peftilence, and
famine, are neceflarily deduced.


This part of the {cience likewife comprehends the dodtrine of eclipfes,
comets, blazing ftars, and the great conjunétions.of the fuperior bodies;
whence the revolution of empires, the fate of kingdoms, the renovation:
of cuftoms, and the civil and political fluciuation of all.the provinces,.


ftates, principalities, and commonwealths, upon the furface of-the globe,:


are fought.out and predicted. We fhall therefore arrange thefe {pecula-
tions under their refpective heads, and confider them diftingtly in the
order they ftand.


OF METEORS ia GENERALE.


" Meteors are divided into two forts or claffes: the one rifing from va-
pours and exhalations, called imperfectly-mixed bodies, becaufe they
are eafily reduced into their firft nature, or proper element, as into hail,
{now, or water; and the others are termed perfectly-mixed, as thunder-
bolts, and fuch-like petrified fubftances; becaufe they cannot fo foon be
converted into the firft element from whence they were derived. The

material


«Be


.


180 ANAL, U SCRA Oa


material caufes of all meteors are hot and moift vapours, or hot and dry


-exhalations from water andearth; the efficient caufeis from the fixed and


wandering ftars, by virtue of whofe beams a light rarefied fubftance is ex-
trated from grofs and heavy bodies, as vapours from water, and exhala-
tions ffomearth. Their qualities are heat and moifture, which produce
diverfities of effects, efpecially in thofe which are lef{s perfe@tly mixed, and
of a light and convertible nature.


Vapours confift of the four elements ; but the fubftance is-water; as
the fteam of a boiling pot, which hangs like dew upon the lid or cover.
Exhalations are commonly like fmoke, of a hot and dry quality, as is
perceived in a fummer’s day to offufcate the air, or make at feem dufky
with the afcending of thin fumes; and after this ufually comes thunder,
which fhews from whence thefe exhalations were extracted ; for out of


fire and air only no meteor can generate, as wanting matter; the fire


of itfelf being an element fo fubtile that it cannot be purified ; whereas
all exhalations and vapours muft be refined, and confequently extracted
from fome grofler body. For the air, if much rarefied, will turn to fire,
as is feen in the violent motion of wheels, and in fuch things as are fet on
fire by rarefa@ion, where the matter is dry and-combuftible. When the
air becomes grofs, it turns to water; as appears from our breath in the
winter feafon, or from the inclofed air in vaults, or other hollow places,
which will quickly be condenfed by oppofition of the outward air; or


coldnefs of the place, efpecially againit rainy weather.


But the element of air is divided into three feveral regions, or parts, va-
rioufly qualified, in which are generated many imperfect and mixed bodies ;
and thefe divifions are nominated the upper, middle, and lower, regions of


the air. The firft and uppermoft is clofe adjoining to the element of fire,


and hath a circular motion from eaft to weft, carried about by the primum
mobile. ‘This region of air is perpetually hot and dry, and, by reafon of
its violent motion and proximity to the fire, will not admit the genera-
tion of clouds, becaufe of the heat, and remotenefs of the earth from
whence they are extracted. ‘To this place are lifted up exhalations, by
nature hot and dry, which eafily afcend to that height, by reafon of their
heat and levity. Thefe imperfect bodies, by the heat of the Sun, and
influence of the ftars, are conceived to be exhaled from the earth, or out
of lakes, rivers, feas, and other watery places; and this meteor, as it


afcends, leaves the grofler parts in the loweft and middle regions; and,


as it rarefies, it elevates itfelf unto the upper region, like a fubtile and


thin fume.


' 'Thefe


“OF ASTROLOGY. 919


Thefe exhalations, having penetrated the middle region, and attained
unto the height of the elements, are circumvolved with a flimy matter,
oily, and apt to be inflamed. ‘Thus having aflumed a body, it is vio-~
lently carried about with the air, until with the motion and vicinity of
the fire it is inflamed ; and then, nourifhed with more exhalations conti- |
nually drawn unto it, it burns.and converts itfelf into divers forms, ac~
cording to the difpofition of the matter then generated.


‘But others appear to fall, and flide through the air ; the lighteft part
being confumed, or drawn away by fome other means, or the levity of it
being unable to fupport the groffer part, lets it defcend obliquely through
the air ; and, thus enlightened, is termed a falling ftar.. Some conceive
that this meteor afcends not fo high, being of a grofs body, (yet hot and
ftriving toafcend,) but is repulfed by the coldnefs of themiddle region, or
the moiftnefs of the clouds; and fo, by reafon of its own weight, and
by the oppofition of the element, it is thrown down again. The fubftance
of it is like a jelly, tranf{parent, lucid, and apt to be illuminated.


Fiery meteors are ufually moved, by the region they are in, from eaft
to weft, according to the raptile motion of the fpheres ; though Seneca
affirms that he perceived one which moved parallel to the horizon, from
the north by the weft into the fouth, and fo by the eaft into the north
again. |‘This is by, no means improbable, .fince many lucid meteors move
with the air, and are impelled by the matter which nourifhes them ; as
may be!feen by fire in ftubble. Another kind of meteors are feen to
remove ‘fuddenly from one place to another, cafting forth fparks like
fire, andare by. fome termed goats; whilft others again appear fixed and
immovable, both in refpect, to latitude and longitude. . Thefe are ge-
nerated in any:part of the heavens, and at all times of the year; but
rarely, in cold countries,, at any other time than autumn ; for then the
heat is fufficient to raife up the matter, and the temperature of the air is
apt to fuffer the éxhalations to draw to it a flimy matter, which cannot
exift in the {pring time, the heat not being then fufficient to elevate
them. And in fummer, the exhalations are not fo grofs, becaufe the
Sun’s heat diffipates thofe-vapours, and rarefies ;the air ; and, if it could
be drawn together, the’middle region is fo cold, that it cannot afcend to
the upper; and the winter quarter is: fo cold and moift, and oppugnant


to fuch exhalations, that it is quite unapt for the, generation of meteors
of this kind. — ;


The middle part or region of the: air is generally conceived to be
vehemently cold and moift, by, antiperiftafis; and its effect allo proves
No, 47. ; 10 T the


920 A Ni DUYLLU SAVrReAAT YL @ N


the fame. And this we fee in all things that are oppugnant, inclofed,
and comprehended by their contraries ; for being of greater force
doth caufe the contrary, which is inclofed, and not being able to
break forth, and at the fame time repulfed by its oppofite quality,
contracts, and, as it were, fortifies itfelf. This is feen by experience
in all living and fenfitive creatures ; their inward parts being much hotter
in winter thanin fummer : and their ftomachs apter and more able to di-
geft their food. Thecaufe is, that the heat is then repulfive to the in-
ward parts, by the oppofitionand coldnefs of the outwardair. Befides, the
fire, and allcombuftible things, will burn more violently in winter than in
fummer; and, the colder the weather is, the more it, will {corch. |The
reafon in all thefeis the fame; fince the fire’is found to grow more vio-
lent, by how much the more it is oppofed by the contrary quality of the
fubdued cold. The cafe is the fame in the middle region of theair; for
the upper part is made hot by the violent motion of it, and by its prox-
imity to the element of fire ; and the lower region'is made hot by reflec-
tion of the Sun-beams ; whence the cold included between them! becomes
the more violent in proportion as the lower region is inflamed by the
Sun’s reflection, and by that means is colder in the heat of fammer than |
in winter. . |


Thefe divifions or portions of the air have no determined [pace ; nor hath
the water in refpeét of quality ; for, by the motion of the celeftial bodies,
both cold and moifture being drawn together, the element of water will
increafe, by which the air muft of neceflity diminifh. So, by the con-
junction of heat and moifture, the fphere of water will be ‘diminithed, and
the air as much increafed. By this means the air more abounds in fum-
mer than in winter, and the water more in winter ‘than’ in fummer ; and
thus the middle region of the air isoccafionally: contracted and dilated, and
is confequently greater at one time than another.) >} it 3

: seve Oi 34 i

By the heat of the Sun-beams, and influence’ of the ftars, meteors are
elevated to the middle region of the air. Thofe which by nature dre tem-
perately hot and moift are extracted from wet and waterith places ; yet
they retain: as much heat as is fufficient to elevate them ‘unto the: height
of the middle region, where,’ by reafon of the coldnefs of that place, they
are condenfed, and there generate feveral: kinds-of imperfectly-mixed
bodies. The clouds, thus incorporated, are with the cold turned
into fnow, and congealed many times before it engenders water. To
prove this affertion, we may obferve that fnow, if compacted or bea-
ten together, is not fo foon diffolved into’ water, ‘as ice will be, by
the Sun, or any other means ; which argues, that, had this fubftance

1 been


are thereby generated,


OF AS -TR OL .OiG ¥, g2t


been water firft, it would have been fooner reduced. Thefe vapours,
or thick exhalations, drawn up into the middle region of the air, are
often digefted and turned into water, and from thence diftilled down like
mifts, or in very {mall drops; for the greateft rain is fuppofed not to fall
far through the air, but out of the inferior part of the lower region.


It is generally conceived, that the rain which falls from the middle
region defcends in little orbs, whereby to preferve itfelf, and to refift
the violence of the air through which it paffes ; and it becomes {mall,
by reafon of the diftance and time it occupies in falling. For hail de-
monftrates both the bignefs and rotundity of the drops, which from
humid exhalations, drawn up into the middle region, are there converts
ed into water; and, immediately as the drops diftil down, they are con-
tracted into ice by the coldnefs of the air, in that part which ‘is called
hail, derived from the High Dutch Hage//, or from the Hebrew Ege//;
which fignifies congealed drops.


In the winter feafon it is feldom obferved to hail, becaufe the cold in
the middle region is more remifs than in warm weather ; and in fummer-
time it is feldom obferved in any very hot day, becaufe the heat of. the
lower region will not permit it to pafs, without diffolving it before it
reaches the earth. Butin the {pring, and in autumn, we frequently fee,
and are fubject to, hail-ftorms; the heat being then fufficient to elevate
the matter, and yet not fo violent as to diflolve it in its fall. Sometimes,
however, it happens that very large hail- {tones are precipitated at Mid-
fummer, or in the very hottett feafons; and thefe hail-ftones are then
the greater, if the elevated matter be fufficient, by how much the more
its nature is oppofed by the lower region, made hot by the reflection of
the Sun; forin allitimes of the year, and in all countries, there are more
and greater ftorms of hail obferved to fall in the day than in the night.


There is unqueftionably a fiery nature included in hail-ftones, very dif-
ferent from the heat of that fubtile vapour which occafions it to afcend
the middle region ; for by the force of contraries it is evidently congeal~
ed, ‘as may be illuftrated by the fimple quality of falt, which, being hot


‘and dry, is made of water whofe natural temperatures are directly oppo-


fite ; being’cold’ and moift in open weather, or by the fire-fide, or in the
funimer feafon.’ Take a handful of falt and mix fomefnow with it; ftir
theny together till they incorporate; and they will immediately contract
themfelves into ice; which’is done by antiperiftafis, or repulfion on every
part’;' fo, the middle region of ‘the air being cold, thefe frigid meteors


The


o


022 AN ILLUS TRATION


The lower region of the air receives all the former qualities by neceflity,
according to the feveral feafons of the year; and, by the means already
mentioned, there are exhaled from the earth moift and crude vapours ;
the grofler parts being earthy, and containing but little heat; they are un-
able to afcend to the middle region; yet by the help of that heat, and >
the attractive virtue of the celeftial orbs, they are raifed above the earth, |
and there oftentimes congeal before they can be diffolved into water.
Thefe are called frofts, whereof there be many ‘kinds, according to the
matter exhaled, and the temperature of the feafon. At fome times of the
year, the ground in the mornings will be hoary, like the head of thyme, ©
and the grafs crifped with the froft ; at other times rime-frofts, or con-
gealed mits, hang pendant on the branches of trees ; or elfe black or wind
frofts, which are not fo wholefome; for they confift of grofs and:earthy
vapours, exhaled out of more undigefted humours, and are not fo ealily
difcovered by the fight .as by the fenfe of feeling. — |


~ There are other vapours exhaled, which are called mifts, derived from.
the mixture of air and water:.. Of thefe there are feveral forts; fome are
thin and, fterile, and have not moifture fufficient to beget: water, nor
is the heatin.them fufficiently, prevalent to elevate the grofs humours, and
caufe them to afcend ; but they hang upon the earth until the Sun rifes;


then he ufually.chafes them away, and, being diflipated, 1t becomes a
fine day. of ‘


Befides the above, there are grofs :mifts or fogs, which are more
earthy than the former, .compoted.of crude and: undigefted vapours,
drawn from corrupted places, out..of fens and. wet marfhy grounds.
“Thefe are very unwholefome, and unpleafant to the {mell, in proportion
either to the noxious {lagnate waters from whence they were extracted,


.or to the putridity of the air, occafioned by along continuance of calm
smoift.weather.


There is another exhalation called dew, -which is.a liquid vapour,
extracted from water.or earth. This hath an affinity to froft, as rain
-hath to fnow.; and are alike in. the material caufe; the efficient caufe
being attributed to the flars, and .to the.coldnefs of the air. . The
.dews are conceived to .be very earthy and ponderous; for they. do
not afcend high, but are converted into.a watery fubftance, almoft
-as foon as extracted, being obferved much more upon low and,,wet
grounds, than upon high and dry hills; and thicker upon the hum-
ble fhrub, than upon trees of an high and exalted nature, like; the
lofty cedar. whe syed


~The


. >


OF ASTFROLOG Y¥Y: : 923


The ufual time of thefe dews is in the evening; the heat of the Sun,
declining, being then unable to fupport the meteors which he raifed in
the day ; and, on his deferting the hemifphere, thofe that were more ele-
~wated mutt likewife fall. .The hotter the day, the greater are the exhaé
lations; and the nights are then ufually colder, to convert-them into
water. All dews are obferved to be greater at the Moon’s increafing ;
but greateft of all at the fall. -The feafon of the year is to’ be confidered,
and the weather ; for, the hotter the day is, the colder will be'the night,
by reafon of the fhadow which the terreftrial globe then makes ;'as is exer
plified by the fhades of trees, or of any other interpofed body, which are
colder in fummer-time than in winter, in refpect of the air in general.
For in fhadowed places, in the heat of fummer, the air, asin oppofition
to the heat, is found to contraét itfelf into a grofier body ; from whence
it appears that the whole element of air is by: nature cold.


There is a dew that flies in the air like fmall untwifted filk ; which,
falling upon’ the ground, or on plants, converts itfelf into a form like
fpiders’ webs.- The matter they confift of is an earthy and flimy vapour
or exhalation, fomething dry ; and they are found equally in fpring, fum-
mer, and autumn ; but in thefe northern countries they are moft frequent
when the Sun is near Libra, the days being then’ temperately warm,> the
earth not exceeding dry, nor yet overcharged with moitture.


There is alfo another fort of dew, called honey-dew, which confifts of
earthly exhalations mixed with waterifh vapours ; and many fuppofe them
to be exhalations from plants and flowers; and this more evidently appears
from fugar-canes, and divers kinds of Indian reeds, which have, in the
morning, dews hanging upon them, in tafte refembling honey ; and argue,
by their fweetnefs, that they are extracted from the plants. Thefe honey-
dews afford plenty to the ftores of the induftrious bee; nor have their
purveyors much labour or trouble to procure their loading ; but, though
thefe honey dews are good for bees, they are deftructive to many kinds
of animals, as fheep, goats, deer, and the like; and are in general inju-
rious to all fruits and blooming flowers; efpecially to hops, grapes, and
corn; and often blaft them in their prime. It was for the purpofe of
diverting thefe evil effects, that Numa, one of the Roman kings, {u-
perftitioufly inftituted the feafts called Rubigalia and Floralia, in the year
from the building of Rome 516; which feafts were obferved on the 28th
of April to the 3d calend of May. This feftival the Catholic Church
hath fince converted into Afcenfion Week, calling it Rogation, from
the .circumftance of imploring a blefling upon the fruits of the
earth.


No. 48. 10 U The


924. AN? cTE LU S FR A TUCO N


The next effect to be confidered is rain. Rain-water is found mich
more infipid at one time than at another; and is very often impregnated
with a brackith tafte, yet comfortable to vegetation ; and, by reafon of
the warmth, it nourifhes more abundantly, and is more natural for that ~~
purpofe, than {pring-water, or what is drawn out of wells, which is cold, '
and too earthy ; whereas the other participates of the air, which is hot
and moift; but, by reafon of this co-mixture of the elements, it is apt
to form divers animalcule, efpecially in calm times; which, like the
air, wanting motion, may corrupt; and fo, confequently, generates
many things, according to the undigefted matter exhaled from the earth.


The loweft meteor in the air fomewhat refembles a burning candle;
and is by fome called Ignis Fatuus.. This is a hot and moift vapour,
which, ftriving to afcend, is repulfed by the cold, and, forced by anti-
periftafis, moves clofe to the earth, and is carried along by the vapours
that feed it, always keeping in low moift places. The, lucid rays are of
an exceeding pale colour, and very unwholefome to meet with, by rea-
fon of the noxious vapours it attracts, which nourifhes the palid flame.
It is frequently feen to afcend with a very rapid motion; but it as fud-


denly falls, the moment it is repelled by the cold atmofphere; from
whence its name is derived. |


There are likewife vapours, hot and moift, co-mixed with exhalations
that are hot and dry, involved thus within one another, and form what is
termed electrical matter. They afcend, by virtue of their heat, into the
middle region of the air, where the exhalations, by antiperiftafis, grow
inflamed, and ftrive to break forth from the cloud in which they are in-
volved. The upper part of the cloud, where the heat would pafs, by
oppofition grows more ftrong ; and the exhalation, grown over hot by
being thus conftrained, breaks forth with violence from the weakett place,
againft the air that is in the loweft part ; and, by reafon of the cold above
it, the heat and fubtilnefs of the exhalation, with its own violence in
breaking forth, glances down upon the earth, without doing any injury,
if unrefifted ; as a confuming fword, without hurting the {cabbard. This
is the natural generation of thunder and lightning ; which Dr. Franklin,


Dr. Prieftly, and other ingenious men, have largely treated of in their
electrical difquifitions.


The clap of thunder is firft, but the lightning fooneft appears ; becaufe
our fenfe of feeing is much quicker than that of hearing; as may |
be exemplified by a thoufand common experiments; particularly by the
difcharge of a gun, orf cannon, where we fee the fire before we hear


I | the


‘OFTCAS ER OGG E ¥! 928


the report. With the conjunéion of thefe compound vapours and
exhalations, ftones are generated in the air, as other minerals are in the
earth, but more fiery by nature ; and thefe are what are vulgarly called
thunder-bolts; which, in their form, are perfect cones, like the flame
of fire which generates the mout of the terrene exhalations ; they pervade
the’ earth in proportion to the projectile force of their velocity: The pre-
fervatives againft thunder and lightning are many. All hard things will
preferve what is foft and liquid ; as iron laid upon veflels will keep the
liquor from fouring, by the former alleged reafons, befides this, it is
naturally refifted by a cover made of feal’s {kin, which preferves any crea-
ture by which it is covered. The like doth the laurel-tree ; for which
reafon many of the Roman Emperors, in times of thunder and light-
ning, were accuftomed:to wear a garment made of laurel-boughs. The
pale lightning is moft unwholefome; but the red apteft to burn; the -
beft and moft affured prefervative againft which is the protection of
heaven. ; |


But let it be noted, that there may be thunder without lightning, and |
lightning without thunder ; for, when thefe hot and dry exhalations are
inflamed, and the cloud weak in which they are involved, the incenfed .
exhalation breaks forth without violence, not being reftrained ; and.
the coldnefs of the middle region ftrikes the flafhes downward, but not
always to the edrth, though its glittering and reflecting upon the
watery clouds makes it appear clofe by; the fame as when the Sun .
beams, or any other fudden light, falling upon the water, will reverbe-
* rate the luftre, and dazzle the eye; particularly if the water be moved
with any wind. Thefe corrufcations are common in hot countries, and ;
in the heat of fummer.


Thunder without lightning alfo happens when the hot and dry exha-
lations break violently through the clouds in which they are circum-
volved, but not inflamed ; yet making a roaring noife in the burft of the
cloud which reftrained it. We alfo frequently fee little bladders filled
with wind give a crack or report at the fudden and violent breaking of
them. Sometimes thunder happens, and yet no lightning. will appear,
by reciprocal winds ; the clouds violently breaking themfelves in meet-
iug with one another ; and this may often happen, by the infurrection
of feveral mutinous exhalations difturbing the air with feveral commo-
‘tions. Thefe ufually happen after much calm weather; and are very
wholefome to purify and purge the air, left with too much quietnefs it .
fhould corrupt.


Rain-


926 AN SBLERERERBATEON


_ Rainbows are generated in waterifh clouds,. which -are ready to be
diffolved into rain. Thefe are obferved to be always dire€tly oppofite
the Sun or Moon; as, if the Sun, be in.the fouth,. the rainbow will be
in the north; ;and, when:the Sun isin the eaf{t, the rainbow will be in
the weit; and thus in every part of the globe... The lower or nearer the
the Sun is to the horifon,, the larger will the rainbow appear ; though
it never can exceed a femicircle, and is the: lefs.in. proportion te
the light of the Sun above, in any {phere; which is the reafon at noon-
day we fo feldom {ee any rainbow, particularly when the Sun is in the
fummer folftice, or near. the tropic of ,Cancer;, except. in fuch places as
are far northward, or towards the antardtic pole, where, for fome weeks,
‘there is continual day.


The Sun in winter, near Capricorn, may caufe a rainbow at noon-da:
in our climate; for they are formed by the light rays of the Sun falling
upon vapours and waterifh exhalations oppofite to him, and but little
elevated above the earth ; and, by reafon of the great diftance or remote-
nefs of the Sun, the illuminated beams deferibe his form after an, ob-
{cure and imperfe@ manner, portraiting on an.arch of a circle, adorned
ufually with the colours red, green, and purple, inclining to a bluifh
colour, The.diftinétion of thefe proceeds from the radius. of the Sun,
reflecting upon the vapours; and.thofe colours are light in it, which are
meareft to the Sun, and thofe which are moft remote, always tend more to
obfcurity ; for a demonftration, both of the colours and form of the
rainbow, it only requires to caft water in a circular manner againft the
Sun when it fhines, and the whole is produced artificially.


Some think the red colour only is made by the Sun’s rays, and fup-
pofe the fecond colour is produced by reflection, and the third by the
jecond.; and that all are contained within one condenfed hollow cloud,
co-mixed with airy and watery exhalations, For, if more rainbows than
one appear at a time, it is certain that they are produced by refleCtion of
oneanother; but the colours in the fecond will be weaker than thofe in
the firft; and the third rainbow will be more palid than the fecond, if
there happen to be three, which is very feldom: then-the colours in
the firft will be counterchanged in the fecond, and the third again like
the firft. The arches in the clouds or rainbow ufually continue longer
than the circles about the Sun, becaufe the diftance in thefe are fo great,
that his beams cannot fo foon diffipate the exhalations which caufed them. —
Rainbows in the night-time are exceeding rare, becaufe they are made by
the Moon, whofe beams are too weak to caufe fuch reflettions upon any
cloud at fo great a diftance ; but, though they are rare, they fometimes
happen.

They


OF FA SOL Wicr yh A. ge


The durora Borealis, or northern light, is an extraordinary meteor, or
luminous appearance, fhewing itfelf in the night-time in the northern
part of the heavens. It is ufually of a reddifh colour, inclining to yellow,
and fends out frequent corrufcations of pale light, which feem to rife
from the horifon in a pyramidal undulating form, and fhoot, with great
velocity, up to the zenith. :


The Aurora Borealis appears mo&% commonly in form of an arch ; chiefly
in the fpring and autumn; after a dry year, The arch is partly brighr,
partly dark; but generally tranfparent. And the matter of which it con-
filts is alfo found to+have no-effect on the rays of light which pafs through
it. Dr. Hamilton obferves, that he could plainly. difcern the fmallet
{peck in the Pleiades through the denfity of thofe clouds which formed
part of the 4urora Borealis in 1763, without the leaft diminution of its


tplendor, or increafe of twinkling.


‘This kind of meteor never appears near the equator, and was fo rare in
England, that none are recorded in our annals fince that remarkable one,
November 14, 1574, till the furprifing 4urora Borealis, March 6, 1716;
which appeared for three nights fucceflively, and put the whole kingdom
into the utmoft confternation, terrifying brutes as well as men. Indeed
the horfes were fo frightened, that no fences could keep them in the in-
clofures ; it was impoflible to travel in the evenings, and the road-waggons,
and all other carriages, were obliged to lie by immediately that the Sun


was down. Inthe years 1707 and 1708, five {mall ones were obferved in”


little more than eighteen months; but they have no comparifon with
the above. Hence it fhould feem, that the air, or earth, or both, are
not at all times difpofed to produce this phenomenon, for, though it is
poflible it may happen in the day-time, in bright moon-fhine, or in cloudy
weather, and fo pafs unobferved; yet that it fhould appear fo frequent at
fome times, and fo feldom at others, cannot well this way be accounted
for. That in March, 1716, was vifible to the weft of Ireland, and the
confines of Ruffia, and to the eaft of Poland ; extending at leaft near thirty
degrees of longitude, and from about the fiftieth degree in latitude, over
almoft all the north of Europe; and in all places at the fame time it exhi-
bited the like wonderous appearances.


Many attempts have been made to affign the caufe of this phenomenon.
Dr. Halley imagines the watery vapours, or eflluvia, rarefied exceedingly
by fubterraneous fire, and tinged with fuphureous ftreams, which many
naturalifts have fuppofed to be the caufe of earthquakes, may alfo be the
caufe of this appearance: or that it is produced by a kind of {ubtile mat-

No. 48. ta bO hme ter,


928 ANC epS.0S a ReACT LON.


ter, freely pervading the pores of the earth, and which, entering into it
nearer the fouthern pole, paffes out again, with fome force, into the ether
at the fame diftance from the northern; the obliquity of its direction be-
ing proportioned to its diftance from the pole. This fubtile matter, by
becoming fome way or other more denfe, or having its velocity increafed,.
may be capable of producing a {mall degree of light, after the manner
of effluvia, from the electric bodies, which, by a ftrong and quick fric-
tion, emit light in the dark :: to which fort of light this feems to have a
great affinity. | adage


"Fhe celebrated M. de Mairan, in an exprefs treatife on the urora Bo-
redlis, publifhed in 1731, afftgns its caufe to the zodiacal light, which,
according to him, is no other than the Sun’s.atmofphere: this light hap-
pening, on fome occafions, to meet the upper parts of our air, on the fide
of the limits where univerfal gravity begins to act more forcibly towards.
the carth than towards the Sun, falls into our atmofphere, to a greater
er lefs depth, as its {pecific gravity is greater or lefs, compared with the
air through which it paffes. Mr. Fuller thinks the caufe of the durora
Boreas not owing to the zodiacal ight, as M. de Mairan fuppofes ; but
to particles of our atmofphere, driven beyond its limits by the impulfe
of the light of the Sun. On this fuppofition, he endeavours to account:
for the phenomena obferved concerning this light. He fuppofes the
zodiacal light,, and the tails of comets, to be owing to a fimilar caufe.
This hight fometimes appears remarkably red, as it happened December.
‘. 1737, Of which there are a variety of accounts. from different parts of

TULOPes.


Ever fince the identity of lightning, and of the eleGtric matter, has:
been afcertained, philofophers have'been naturally led to {eek the expli-
cation of aerial meteors in the principles of electricity ; and they feem to:
have ho doubt but moft of them, and efpecially the urora Borealis, are
formed of elecirical matter. Befides the more obvious and known. ap-
pearances which conftitutearefemblance between this.meteorand theeleric:
matter whereby lightning 1s produced, it has been obferved, that the Au-.
rora occafions a very fenfible fluctuation in the magnetic needle; and
that, when it has extended lower than ‘ufual into. the atmofphere,.
the flafhes have been attended with various founds of rumbling and:
hiffing, taken notice of both by Sig. Beccaria and M. Meffier. Mr...
Canton, foon after he had obtained eleCtricity from the clouds, offered a
conjecture, that the urora Borealis is occafioned by the dafhing of elec-
tric fire from pofitive towards negative clouds at a great diftance, through:
the upper part of the atmofphere where the refiftance is leaft... And he:

! fap=


mee PASTENEVOrLuGi@. Yosh 6 oe gae


fuppofes, that the Aurora, which happens at the time when the mag-

netic needle is difturbed by the heat of the earth, is the electricity of tae
heated air above it; and this appears chiefly in the northern regions, as
the alteration in the heat of the air in thofe parts will be the greateft ; nor
is this hypothefis improbable, when it is confidered, that clouds fur-
charged with elettrical matter are the caufe of thunder and lightning ;
that it has been extracted from the air at the time of an Aurora ‘Bor eekng
that the inhabitants of the northern countries obferve it to be remarkably
ftrong when a fudden thaw fucceeds very fevere cold weather; and that
the tourmalin is known to emit and abforb the electric fluid only by the
increafe or diminution of its heat.


Pofitive and negative eleGricity f in the air, with a proper quantity of
moifture to ferve as a conductor, is fuppofed to account for this and -
other meteors, fometimes feen in a ferene fky. Mr. Canton has fince
contrived toexhibit this meteor by means of the Torricellian vacuam, in
a glafs tube about three feet long, and fealed hermetically. When one
end of the tube is held in the hand, and the other applied to: the conduc. -
tor, the whole tube will be Mami sated from end to end; and will con-
tinue luminous, without interruption, for a confiderable aun! after it has. -
been removed from the conductor. If, after this, it be drawn through
the hand either way, the light will be uncommonly intenfe, aad without :
the leaft interruption, from one hand to the other, even. to its. whole -
‘length. And, though a great part of the eleftricity is difcharged by this
Operation, it will fill flath at intervals, when held only at one extremity, -
and kept quite ftill; but, if it be grafped by the other hand at the fame
time in a different place, ftrong flafhes of light will hardly ever. fail to.
dart from one end to the other, and thefe will continue: twenty -four
hours, and longer, without any frefh excitation.:. An arched double
barometer, of a confiderable height, is an improvement of this con.

-trivance, for exhibiting the appearance of an Aurora Borealis by means
of the electric fire.. Signor Beccaria, .who has purfued his obferva-
tions om ‘atmofpherical electricity farther than any of his-aflociates in
theie enquiries, conjectures that. there is a conftant and regular circula-
tion of the electric fluid from north to fouth ; and he frie’ that the
Aurora Borealis may be this electric matter performing its circulation in
fuch a ftate of the atmofphere-as renders it vifible,-or approaching nearer
the earth than ufual... Dr. Franklin. fuppofes,. that the electrical fire dif-
charged into‘ the polar regions. from many leagues of vaporifed air rs dfed
from the ocean between. the tropics, accounts for the Aurora Borealis ;
and that it appears firft, where it is firft in motion, i.e. in the moit. -
northern part, and the Tce ve proceeds fouthward, though th3- nts
really moves. northward, :

Ai ea


_ 930 AN LbLLiUSiv RATION


-- Ail'this,: however, appears to be little ‘more: ‘than the conjectural
-fpeculation. of modern philofophers. The ancients, it is plain, never
faw. this phenomenon ; ner -did it ever occur in their days, fince no
mention whatever is: made of ‘it in their writings, nor is-any notice
taken of it in the records of the moderns: until the year 1574, which
is the firft-time, I believe, the 2lurora Borealis ever made its appearance
in the world; and, being anew phenomenon in nature, muft undoubtedly
have been produced by fome great conjunction, or by the violent heat
of fome invifible comet, or by a variation in the frame and fyftem of the
world, or of the heavenly bodies, which at that particular era mutt have
taken place, and which ftill continues, at times, to produce ‘the fame
luminous and fiery appearance.


‘Blazing’ ftars are fiery luminous appearances, generated in the upper
-region of the air, and formed into a body, whence they take an oblique
direction. with aftonifhing velocity, and defcend to the earth. The light
they convey will fometimes exceed that of the Moon, as was the cafe a
_ few years fince, with.a very remarkable one, which pafied from north to
fouth, very near the furface of the earth, and was fuppofed.to fall into the
fea. Their appearance is at once beautiful and tremendous.


Signor Beccaria, in one of his philofophical papers, makes mention of

a very remarkable one, which appeared about an hour after fun-fet, and

directed its courfe immediately towards the fpot where he and fome friends

were walking. ‘It grew apparently larger and larger as it approached, and

went off very near them; when it left their faces, hands, and clothes,

with the earth, and all the neighbaquring objects, fuddenly illuminated
with a diffufed and lambent light, but without any noife.


Blazing ftars are likewife underftood by fome to mean comets, on ac-
count of their tails, or the extended train of light or fire which is obferved
to iffue from them. But, as the doctrine of comets is an immenfe {pecu=
lation, I fhall treat of them under a diftin¢t and feparate head.


Of CoO Nees


A Comet is now certainly defined to be a heavenly body, in the pla-
netary region, appearing fuddenly, and again difappearing; and, during
the time of its appearance, moving in a proper though very eccentric
orbit, like a planet. As to their nature, the unfrequency of their ap-~
pearing, together with the feeming irregularities of their phenomeay

| ave


Orr AS BROL OG: 931


have left philofophers much in the dark. ‘Thofe who lived before Arif
totle accounted for them by fuppofing the heavenly fpaces full of an
infinite number of ftars ; and many of them too remote, or too fmall, to
have ever come under the notice of aftronomers : thefe invifible ftars they
farther fuppofed to move by their own proper motion every way ; finith-
ing their courfes in very unequal times. Anda comet, according to them,
was a vaft heap or aflemblage of thefe little ftars, meeting together, by
reafon of the inequality of their motions, and uniting into a vifible mafs ;
which muft again difappear, as thofe {tars feparated, and each proceeded
in its courfe. But, how thofe ftars fhould thus meet, coalef{ce, and form
a body, which in all pofitions of the Sun fhould refemble a tail, and again
feparate, is totally inexplicable. This opinion Ariftotle overturned, by
fubftituting another in its ftead: he infifted that comets were only a kind
of tranfient fires, or meteors, confifting of exhalations raifed to the up-
per region of the air, and there fet on fire, far below the Moon’s courfe.
But neither is this hypothefis more juft than the other : for, on this prin-
ciple, the light of the comet, being independent of the Sun, would be
difperfed every way alike, without any appearance of a train, or tail,
which is contrary to the phenomena. Moreover, they are obferved at the
fame time in places on the earth very remote from each other. Befides,
the medern aftronomers who have meafured the diftance between the ~
comets and the.earth, find that the comets have no fenfible diurnal paral-
Jax ; which could not be, were they not much more remote than the
Moon, whofe parallax is fenfible: and yet, as they have a fenfible an-
nual parallax, they are not fo remote as the fixed ftars. Tycho Brahe
was the firft among the moderns, who, after diligently obferving the
comet of 1577, and finding that it had no fenfible diurnal parallax,
afligned it its true place in the planetary regions.


Hevelius, from a great number of obfervations, propofes it as his opi-
nion, that the comets, like the folar maculz, or fpots, are formed and
condenfed out of the grofler exhalations of his body. In which notion
he agrees nearly with Kepler, who maintains, that comets are generated
in the ether in vaft numbers, like fifhes in the ocean; though they do
not all become. vifible, either becaufe of their finallnefs, or becaufe they
lie a long time. under the horifon.


But Sir Ifaac Newton has fhewn the fallacy of this hypothefis, by
proving that the comet of 1680, in its paffage through the neighbour-
hood of the Sun, weuld have been diffipated, had it confifted of exhala-
tions of the Sun and planets; for the heat of the Sun, it is allowed,
is as the denfity of his rays, 1. e. reciprocally as the fquares of the

No. 48. wife yy - diftances:


632 AN QeLvus TRA TON


diftances of places from the Sun: Wherefore, fince the diftance of that
comet in its perihelion, December the 8th, was obferved 'to be to the'dif-
tance of the earth from the Sun nearly as6 to ro00; ‘the Sun’s heat in
the comet, at that time, ‘was to his heat with us at Midfummer, as
1000000 to 36, or 28000 to 1. And again, finding ‘by experiment that
the‘heat of ‘boiling water is little more than three times the heat of our
dry earth, when “expofed to the Midfummer’s Sun; and affuming the
heat of ted hot iron to be about three or four times ‘as great as that of
boiling water; he thence concludes, that the heat of the dried earth, or
body of the comet in its perihelion, muft be near 2000 times as great as
that of red-hot iron.


Such an tmmenfe heat once acquired in its perihelion, the comet muft
bea long time in cooling again. The fame author computes, that a
globe of red-hot iron, of the dimenfions of our earth, would fearce be
cool in so000 years. If then the comet be Tuppofed to cool 100 times
-as' fait as red- hot i iron, yet, fince its heat was 2000 times greater, fup-
pofing it of the Bienes of the earth, it would not be cool 1 in a million of
years.


James Bernouilli, in his Syftema Cometarum, fuppofes fome primary -
planet revolving round the Sun in the fpace of four ‘years and ‘one hun-
dred and fifty-feven days, and at the diftance from “his” body of 2583
femidiameters of the magnus orbis; this planet, he concludes, either
from its vaft diftance or fmallnefs, to be invifible to us: but, however,
to have, at various diftances from him, feveral f{atellites ‘moving round
him, and fometimes defcending as low as the orbit of Saturn; and that
thefe becoming vifible to us, when in their perigeum, dre what we call
comets.


Des Cartes advances another opinion: he conjectures, ‘that comets are
only ftars, formerly fixed, like the reft, in the heavens ; but which, be-
coming by degrees covered with macule, or {pots, and at length wholly
robbed of their light, cannot keep their place, but ate tatried off by the
vortices of the circumjacent ftars ; and, in proportion to’ their magnitude
and folidity, moved in fuch manner as to be brought nearer the orb of Sa=
turn; and thus, coming within reach of the Sun’s light, rendered vifible.


But the vanity of all thefe hypothefes abundantly appears from the
phenomena of-comets; the chief of which are as follow : 1ft, Thofe
comets, which move according to the order of the figns, do all, a little
before they difappear, either advance flower than ufual, or elfe go retro=»

I grade,


err Ose AS © ROFL 0-"G «¥. 933
grade, if the earth be between them and the Sun: and more {wiftly, if
the earth be fituate ina contrary part. Onthe other hand, thofe which

roceed contrary to the order of the figns, proceed more fwiftly than
ufual, if the earth be between them and the Sun; and more flowly, or
go retrograde, when the earth is in a contrary part. 2d, So long as
their velocity is increafed, they move, nearly, in great circles; but to-
wards the end. of their courfe, they deviate from thofe circles ; and as
often as the earth proceeds one way, they go the contrary way. 3d,
They move in ellipfes, having one of their fociin the centre of the
Sun; and, by radii drawn to the Sun, defcribe areas proportionable to
the times. 4th, The light of their bodies, or nuclei, increafes in their -
recefs from the earth toward the Sun; and on the contrary, decreafes in »
their recefs from the Sun. sth, Their tails appear the largeft and
brighteft, immediately after their tranfit through the region of the Sun,
or after their perihelion, 6th, ‘The tails always decline from a juft op-
pofition to the Sun towards thofe parts which the bodies, or nuclei,
pafs over, in their progrefs through their orbits. 7th, This declina-
tion, ceteris paribus, is the fmalleft, when the heads, or nuclei, approach
neareft the Sun: and is lefs, ftill, nearer the nucleus of the comet, than
towards the extremity of the tail. 8th, The tails are fomewhat brigh-
ter, and more diftinétly defined, in their convex than in their concave part.
gth, The tails always appear broader at their upper extreme than near
the centre of the comet. toth, The tails are always tranf{parent, and the
{malleft ftars appear through them.


'Thefe are the chief phenomena of comets ; which, itis evident, can-
not eafily be reconciled with the wild notions of the ancients, and the
weak conjectures of many of the moderns. Indeed, there were fome,
Pliny, tells us, among the ancients, who, ‘* had jufter notions ; who
‘* took thefe ftars to be perpetual, and believed they moved in their
‘© proper orbs; but were never feen, unlefs when left by the Sun. ”
Apollonius Myndius declared, that he took comets for regular ftars ;
and ventured to foretel, that one day the periods and laws of their motion
would be difcovered. And more fully Seneca, Queft. Nat. hb. vu.
‘<I. am‘not of the common opinion, nor do I take a comet to bea fudden
‘‘ fire, but efteem it among the eternal works of nature.” Quid autem
miramur cometas, tam rarum mundi fpectaculim, nondum teneri legibus
certis, nec initia illorum finefque innotefcere, gnorum ex ingentibus nec inter-
vallis recurfus oft? Vehiet tempus quo iffa que nunc latent in lucem dies
-extrabat, & longioris evi diligentia. Veniet tempus quo pofteri nofiri tam
aperta nos nefciffe mirentur. . Erit qui demonfiret aliqguando, im quibus cometa@

“partibus errent: cur tam fe dudhi a ceteris errent, quanti qualefque fint.


This


934 AN STU LU Bot ROA Ta gon


This. prediGtion we have feen accomplifhed in our days, by the great Sir
Tfaac Newton ; whofe do€trine is as follows:


The comets, he fays, are compact, folid, fixed, and durable, bodies’;
in one word, a kind of planets; which move, in very oblique orbits,
every way with the greateit freedom ; perfevering’in their motions, even
againft the courfe and direction of the planets; and their’tail is a very
thin flender vapour, emitted by the head, or nucleus of the comet,
ignited or heated by the Sun. ‘This at once folves all the foregoing
phenomena: for, ‘‘ It is evident, that thofe which proceed according to
<¢ the order of the figns, a little before*they difappear, muft move more
«© flowly, or appear retrograde, if the earth be betwixt them and the
«¢ Sun; and fwifter if the earth be‘in a contrary part.. On the contrary,
«« thofe proceeding againit the order of the figns,” €&c. For fince this
courfe is not among the fixed flars, but among the planets; as the mo-
tion of the earth either confpires with them, or goes againit them ; their
“appearance, with regard to the earth, muft be changed; and, like the
planets, they muft fometimes appear ‘{wifter, fometimes flower, and |
fometimes retrograde. ‘* When thecomets move the {wifteft, they muft
“© proceed in ftraight lines ; but, in‘the end of ‘their courfe, decline,”
&c. Becaufe, in the end of their-courfe, when they recede almoft di-
+eCtly from the Sun, that part of the apparent motion which arifes from
the parallax, muft bear a greater proportion to the whole apparent
motion.


‘The comets muft move in ellipfes, having one of their foci in the
centre of the Sun. Becaufe they do not'wander precarioufly from one
fictitious vortex to another; but, making a part of a folar fyftem, return
perpetually, and run a conftant round. Hence, ‘their elliptic orbits be-
ang very long and eccentric, they become invifible when in that part
moift remote from the Sun. ‘From confidering the-curvity -of the paths
of comets, Sir Hfaac concludes, that, when they difappear, they are much
‘beyond the orb of Jupiter ; and that-in their perihelion, they frequently
defcend below the orbit of Mars and ‘the inferior planets. The light of
their nuclei muft increafe in their recefs from. the Sun, and vice ver fa.
‘Becaufe, as they are in the regions of the planets, their accefs toward'the
‘Sun bears a confiderable proportion to their whole diftance.


From obfervations of the comet of r680, Sir Ifaac Newton found
that the vapour in the extremity of the tail, January 25th, began to
afcend from the head before December 11; and had therefore {pent
smore than forty-five days in its afcent; but that all the tail which ap-_

peared


OF “AS TREO*L:O GN:* /. 935


peared December 10th afcended in the {pace of thofe two days, then
juit paft fince its perihelion. The vapour, therefore, at the beginning,
when the comet was .near.the Sun, afcended prodigioufly fwift; and af-
terwards continued to afcend with a motion retarded by the gravity of
its particles; and by that afcent increafed the length of the tail; but the
tail, notwith{tanding its length, confifted almoft wholly of vapours,
which had afcended from the time of its perihelion; and the vapour
which afcended firft, and compofed the extreme part of the tail, did not
vanith till it was too far from the Sun to be.illuminated by him, and
from us to be vifible. Hence alfo, the tails of comets that are fhorter
do not afcend with a quick and continual motion from the head, and
then prefently difappear; but are permanent columns of ‘vapours and ex- ».
halations, gathered.from the head, by a very gentle motion, and a great
{pace of time; which yet, by participating of that motion of their heads
they had at the beginning, continue eafily to move along with their
heads through the celeftial regions; whence alfo the vacuity of thole
regions is argued, rf
Their tails muft appear the largeft and brighteft: immediately after
their tranfit through the region of the Sun. Becaufe, then, their heads,
being the moft heated, will emit the moft vapours. From the light of
the nucleus, or apparent ftar, we infer their vicinity to the earth, and
_ that they are by: no means in the region of the fixed ftars, as fome have
imagined ;- fince, in that cafe, their heads would be no more illuminated
~ by the Sun than the planets are by the fixed ftars... The tails muit ftill
decline from a diftinct oppofition to the Sun towards the parts which
the heads pafs over in their progrefs through their orbits; becaufe all
fmoke, or vapour, emitted from a body in motion, tends upwards
obliquely, ftill receding from that part towards which the {moking body
proceeds. That declination will be ftill the leaft near the nucleus of the
comet, and when the comet is neareft the Sun; becaufe the vapour
afcends more {wiftly near the head of the comet than in the higher ex-
tremity of its tail; and.when the comet is at a lefs diftance from the San
than when ata greater. Thetail is brighter and better defined in its
convex part than in-its concave ; becaufe the vapour in the convex part,
which goes firft, being fomewhat nearer and denfer, reflects the light
more copioufly.. The'tail muft appear broader towards the higher extre-
mity of the comet than towards the head; becaufe the-vapour in a free
{pace is perpetually rarefied and dilated.. The tails muft be tranfparent,
becaufe'conlifting of infinitely thin vapour, &c. Thus accurately dozs
the hypothefis tally to the phenomena. |
* No,.48. 2:11 10 Z The


936 A N#DLOLIUOS IT MRAAAT F oi N


The nuclei, which we occafionally call the heads and bodies of comets, |
viewed through a telefcope, fhew a very different face from thofe of the
fixed ftars, or planets. ‘They are liable toapparent changes, which Sir aac
Newton afcribes to changes in the atmofphere of comets: and this opi-
nion was confirmed by obfervations of the comet in 1744. Sturmius tells
us, that, obferving the comet of 1680, with a telefcope, it appeared like
a coal dimly glowing, or a rude mafs of matter illuminated with a dufky
fumid light, lefs fenfible at the extremes than in the middle ; rather than
asa ftar, which appears with around difk, and a vivid light. .


Hevelius obferved of the comet of 1661, that its body was of a yel-
lowith colour, very bright and confpicuous, but without any glittering
- light: in the middle was a denfe raddy nucleus, almoft equal to Jupiter,
encompafied with a much fainter thinner matter. February 5th, its head
was fomewhat bigger and brighter, of a gold colour; but its light more
dufky than the reft of the ftars: here, the nucleus appeared divided into
feveral parts. February 6th, the diflk was leflened; the nuclei ftill exift-
ed, though lefs than before: one of them, on the lower part of the difk,
on the left, much denfer and brighter than the reft; its body round, and
reprefenting a very lucid little flar: the nuclei {till encompafled with
another kind of matter. February 10th, the head fomewhat more ob-
fcure, and the nuclei more confufed, but brighter at top than bottom,
February 13th, the head diminifhed much, both in magnitude and bright-
nefs. Marcly 2d, its roundnefs a little impaired, its edges lacerated, &c.
March 28th, very pale. and exceeding thin; its matter much difperfed ;

and no diftinét nucleus at all appearing. |


Weigelius, who faw the comet’ of 1664, the Moon, and a. little
cloud illuminated by the Sun at the fame time, obferved that the Moon,
through the telefcope, appeared of a continued luminous furface; but
the comet very different; being perfectly like a little cloud in the hori-
fon, illuminated by. the Sun. From thefe obfervations it was, that
Hevelius concluded comets to be like maculz, or fpots, formed out of the
folar exhalations.

f

The eftimates that have been given by Tycho, Hevelius, and fome
others, of the magnitude of comets, are not fufficiently accurate to be
depended upon; for it does not appear, that'they diftinguifhed between
the nucleus and the furrounding atmofphere. Thus Tycho computes
that the true diameter of the comet in 1577 was in proportion to the
diameter of the earth as 3 isto 14.  Hevelius made the diameter of
the comet of 1652 to that of the earth as 52 to 100. The diameter e

I ety? the


wv


OF ASTROLOGY, 037


the atmidfphere is often ten or fifteen times as great as that of the
nuclkeus; the former, in the comet of 1682,-when meafured by Flamftead,
was found to be two minutes, but the diameter of the nucleus only
eleven feconds. Some comets, from the apparent magnitude and diftance
compared, Have been judged to be much larger than the Moon, and even
equal to fome of the primary planets. The diameter of that of ITAA
when at the diftance of the Sun from us, meafured about one minute,
and: therefore its diameter muft be about three times the diameter of the
earth ; at another time the diameter of its nucleus was nearly equal to
that of Jupiter. |

The lengths of the tails of comets are various, and depend on a va=
riety of circumftances. _Longomontanus mentions a comet that in
1618, December 10th, had a tail above one hundred degrees in length;
that of 1680, according to Sturmius, about the 2oth of November,
was but fmall; at mofty not. exceeding twenty degrees in length; in a
little time it grew toa length of fixty degrees, after which it dwindled
very fenfibly. | The comet of 1744 had a tail which at one time appeared
to extend above fixteen degrees from its body; and which, allowing
the Sun’s parallax ten feconds, muft have been above twenty-three mil-
lions of miles in length.


Sir Ifaac Newton fhews, that the atmofphere of comets will furnith
vapour fu cient to form their tails ; this he argues from that wonderful
rarefaction obferved in our air at a diftance from the earth: a cubie inch
of common air, at the diftance of half the earth’s diameter, or four
thoufand miles, would neceflarily expand. itfelf fo far as to fill a fpace
larger than the whole region of the ftars. Since then the coma or at-
moiphere of a comet is ten times higher than the furface of the nucleus,
counting fromthe centre thereof, the! tail, afcending much_ higher,
muft neceflarily be immenfely tare: fo that it is no wonder the ftars


fhould be vifible through it.


Now, the afcent of vapours into the tail of the comet he fuppofes
occafioned. by the, rarefaction of the matter of the atmofphere at the
time of the perihelion. Smoke, itis obferved, afcends the chimney by
the impulle. of the air wherein it floats; and air, rarefied by heat, afcends
by diminution of its {pecific gravity, taking up the fmoke along with
it: why then, fhould not the tail of a comet be fuppofed to be raifed after
the fame!manner. by, the Sun? for the Sun-beams do not a¢ét on the
mediums. they pafs through any otherwife than by reflection and rarefac-
tion. The reflecting particles, then, being warmed by the action, will
again


a


938 AN ILEUS TRA TION

again warm the ether wherewith they ate compounded ; and this, rare-
fied by the heat, will have its fpecifie gravity, whereby it before tended
to defcend, diminifhed by the rarefaction, fo as to afcend, and carry
along with it thofe refleCting particles whereof the tail of the comet is
compofed. This afcent of the vapours will be promoted by. their cir-
cular motion round the Sun; -by means whereof, they will endeavour to
recede from the Sun, while the Sun’s atmofphere, and the other matters
in the celeftial {paces, are either at reft, or nearly fo; as having no mo-
tion but what they receive from the Sun’s circumrotation. Thus are
the vapours raifed into the tails of comets in the neighbourhood of the
Sun, where the orbits are moft curve; and where the comets, being
within the denfer atmofphere of the Sun, have their tails of the Beat
Jength. |


The tails thus produced, by preferving that motion, and at the fame
time gravitating towards the Sun, will move roand his body in ellipfes, in
dike manner as their heads; and, by this means, will ever accompany,
and freely adhere to, their head. In effet, the gravitation of the va-
‘pours towards the Sun will no more occafion the tails of the comets to
-forfake their heads, and fall down towards the Sun, than the gravitation
of their heads will occafion them to fall off from their tails; but by their
common gravitation they will either fall down together to the Sun, or
‘be together fufpended or retarded. This gravitation, therefore, does not
at all hinder but that the heads and tails of comets may receive and retain
any potition towards each other, which either the above-mentioned caufes
or any other may occafion. The tails, therefore, thus produced in the
perihelion of comets, will go off, along with their heads, into remote
“regions ; and either return thence, together with the comets, after a long
deries of years; or, rather, be there loft, and vanifh by little and little,
and the comets be left bare; till, at their return, defcending towards the
Sun, fome little fhort tails are gradually and flowly produced from the
heads ; which, afterwards, in the perihelion, defcending into the Sun’s
atmofphere, will be immentfely increafed.


The vapours, when they are thus dilated, ‘rarefied; and diffufed, through
all the celeftial regions, the fame author obferves,-may probably, by little
and little, by means of their own gravity, be attracted down to the pla-
nets, and become intermingled with their atmofpheres. He adds hke-
wife, that, for the confervation of the water and moifture of the planets,
comets feem abfolutely requifite; from whofe condenfed vapours and
exhalations, all that moifture, which is fpent in vegetations and putre-
factions, and turned into dry earth, &c. may be re-fupplied and +

cruited,


OF AS TROL OG Y., 939


cruited. For all vegetables grow and increafe wholly from fluids ; and,
again, as to their greateft part, turn, by putrefaction, into earth again ;
an earthy flime being perpetually precipitated to the bottom of putrefy-
ing liquors. Hence, the quantity of dry earth muft continually increafe,
and the moifture of the globe decreafe, and at laft be quite evaporated,
if it has not.a continual {upply from fome part or other of the univerle.
And I fufpeét, adds our great author, that the fpirit, which makes the
fineft, fubtileft, and the beft, part of our air, and which is abfolutely
requifite for the life and being of all things, comes principally from the
comets.


On this principle, there feems to be fome foundation for the popular
opinion of prefages from comets; fince the tail of a comet, thus inter-
mingled with our atmofphere, may produce changes very fenfible in ani-
mal and vegetable bodies. Another ufe which he conjectures comets may
be defigned to ferve, is that of recruiting the Sun with frefh fuel, and re-
pairing the confumption of his light by the ftreams continually fent forth
in every direction from that luminary. In fupport of this conjecture, he
obferves, that comets in their perihelion may fuffer a diminution of their
projectile force by the refiftance of the folar atmofphere; fo that by de-
grees their gravitation towards the Sun may be fo far increafed as to pre-
cipitate their fall into-his body.


There have been various conjectures about the generation of the tails
of comets. Appian, Tycho Brahe, and fome others, apprehended that
they were produced by the Sun’s rays tranf{mitted through the nucleus of
the comet, which they fuppofed to be tranf{parent, and there refracted as
in a lens of glafs, fo as to form a beam of light behind the comet. Des
Cartes accounted for the phenomenon of the tail by the refraction of light
from the head of the comet to the eye of the {pectator. Mairan fuppofes
that the tails are formed out of the luminous matter that compofes the
Sun’s atmofphere ; M. De la Lande combines this hypothefis with that
of Newton above recited. Mr. Rowning, who is not fatisfied with Sir
Ifaac’s opinion, accounts for the tails of comets in the following manner.
It is well known, fays he, That, when the light of the Sun paffes
hrough the atmofphere of any body, as the earth, that which paffes
on one fide is, by the refraction thereof, made. to converge toward that
which paffes on the oppofite one; and the convergency is not wholly ef-
fected either at the entrance of the light into the atmofphere, or at its go-
ing out; but, beginning at its entrance, it increafes in every point of its
progrefs. It is alfo agreed, that the atmofpheres of the comets are very
large and denfe. He therefore fuppofes that, by fuch time as the light

No. 49. Bi1 A of


940 A’ N@ISLIL UtsiT R AAT TUGEN


of the Sun has paffed through a confiderable part of the atmofphere of a *
comet, the rays thereof are fo far refracted toward each other, that they
then begin fenfibly to illuminate it, or rather the vapours floating there-
in, and fo render that part they have yet to pafs through vifible to us; and
that this portion of the atmofphere of a comet thus illuminated appears


to us in form of a beam of the Sun’s light, and paffes under the deno-
mination of a comet’s tail. ; :


We have an enquiry into the caufe of the tails of comets, by Mr. Eu-
ler. He thinks there is a great affinity between thefe tails, the zodiacal ©
light, and the urora Borealis; and that the common caufe of them all
is the action of the Sun’s light on the atmofphere of the comets, of the
Sun, and of the earth. He fuppofes, that the impulfe of the rays of
light on the atmofphere of comets may drive fome of the finer particles
of that atmofphere far beyond its limits; and that this force of impulfe,
combined with that of gravity towards the comet, would produced a tail,
which would always be in oppofition to the Sun, if the comet did not
move. But the motion of the comet in its obit, and about an axis, mutt
vary the pofition and figure of the tail, giving it acurvature, and devia-
tion from a line drawn from the centre of the Sun to that of the comet ;
and that this deviation will be greater, as the orbit of the comet has the ~
greater curvature, and that the motion of the comet is more rapid. It may
even happen, that the velocity of the comet, in its perihelion, may be fo
great, that the force of the Sun’s rays may produce a new tail before the
old one can follow; in which cafe the comet might have two or more
tails. The poflibility of this is confirmed by the comet of 1744, which
was obferved to have feveral tails while it was in its perihelion.


- Dr. Hamilton urges feveral objections againft the Newtonian hypothe~
fis; and concludes that-the tail of a comet is formed of matter which has
not the power of refracting or reflecting the rays of light; but that it is
a lucid or felf-fhining fubftance, and, from its’ fimilarity to the Aurora
Borealis, produced by the fame caufe, and a proper electrical phenome-
non. Dr, Halley feemed inclined to this hypothefis, when he faid, that
the ftreams of light in an Aurora Borealis fo much refembled the long tails
of comets, that at firft fight they might well be taken for fach: this


light feems to have a great affinity to that which the effluvia of elettric
bodies emit in the dark.


M. Fatio has fuggefted, that fome of the comets have their nodes fo
very near the annual orbit of the earth, that, if the earth fhould hap-
PF : ats Tees Bee pen


‘OF *. A STARE OL’ o'G. Yt ‘g4t


pen to be found in that part next the node, at the time of a comet’s paffing
by, the moft dreadful confequences might be apprehended ; as the appa-
rent motion the comet will be incredibly fwift, fo. its parallax will be-
come very fenfible ; and the proportion thereof to that of the Sun will be
given: whence fuch tranfits of comets will afford the beft means of de-
termining the diftance of the earth and Sun.


The comet of 1472, had a parallax above twenty times greater than
the Sun’s : and, if that of 1618 had come down in the beginning of March
to its defcending node, it would have been much nearer the earth, and
its parallax much more notable. But, hitherto, none has threatened the
earth with a nearer appulfe than that of 1680: for, by calculation, Dr.
Halley finds, that, November 1irth, 1 h. 6 min. P. M. that comet was
not above one femidiameter of the earth to the northward of the way of
the earth ; at which time, had the earth been in that part of its orbit,
the comet would have had a parallax equal to that of the Moon: what
might ‘have been the confequence of fo near an appulfe, a contact, or,
laftly, a fhock of the celeftial bodies? Mr. Whifton fays, a deluge!


If the paths of comets be fuppofed directly parabolical, as fome have
imagined, it would follow, that, being impelled toward the Sun by a
centripetal force, they defcend as from {paces infinitely diftant ; and by
their falls acquire fuch a velocity, as that they may again run off into the
remoteft regions: ftill moving upwards with fuch a perpetual tendency
as never to return. But the frequency of their appearance, and their de-
gree of velocity, which does not exceed what they might acquire by their
gravity towards the Sun, feems to put it paft doubt that they move, planet-
like, in elliptic orbits, though exceedingly eccentric ; and fo return
again, after very long periods. ‘The apparent velocity of the comet of
1472, as obferved by Regiomontanus, was fuch as to carry it through
forty degrees of a great circle in twenty-four hours: and that of 1770
was obferved to move through more than forty-five degrees in the laft
twenty-five hours.


Newton, Flamftead, Halley, and the Englith aftronomers, feem fatis-
fied of the return of comets: Caffini, and others of the French, think it
highly probable; but De la Hire, and others, oppofe it. Thofe on
the affirmative fide fuppofe the comets to defcribe orbits prodigioufly ec-
centric, infomuch that we can only fee them in a very {mall part of their
revolution; out of this, they are loft in the immenfe {paces ; hid not
only from our eyes, but our télefcopes. That little part of their orbit
near us, M. Caffini, &c. have found to pafs between the orbits of Ve-
nus and Mars. For the reafons of the return of comets, M. ranean

thele


e 8 ;
a+ e
4, ae -?. =


942 AUN? DESL U SsteRy A Ta UN


thefe which follow: 1.In confidering the courfe of the comets, with
regard to the fixed ftars, they are found to keep a confiderable time in
the arch of a great circle, i. e. a circle whofe plane pafles through the
centre of the earth: indeed, they deviate alittle from it, chiefly towards
the end of their appearance ; but this deviation is common to them with
the planets. 2. Comets, as well as planets, appear to move fo much the
fafter as they are nearer the earth; and, when they-are at equal diftances
from their perigee, their velocities are nearly the fame.


By fubtracting from their motion the apparent inequality of velocity
occafioned by their different diftances from the earth, their equal motion.
might by found; but we fhould not be certain this motion were their true
one; becaufe they might have confiderable inequalities, not diftinguith-
able in that fmall part of their orbit vifible to us. It is, indeed, probable,
their real motion, as well as that of the planets, is unequal in itfelf:
and hence we havea reafon why the obfervations made during the ap-
pearance of a comet cannot give the juft period of their revolution.


There are no two different planets whofe orbits .cut the ecliptic inthe
fame angle, whofe nodes are in the fame points of the ecliptic, and whofe
apparent velocity in their perigee is the fame : confequently, two comets
feen at different times, yet agreeing with all thofe three circumftances,
can only be one and the fame comet. And this were the comets of 1577
and 1680 obferved to do, and thofe of 1652 and 1698; not that this ex-
att agreement, in thefe circumftances, is abfolutely neceffary to deter-
mine them the fame comet. M. Caffini finds the Moon herfelf irregular
in them all : accordingly, he is of opinion, there are feveral which difa-
gree herein, and yet may be accounted the fame.


The great objection againft the return of comets, is, the rarity of their
appearance, with regard to the number of revolutions affigned to them.
In 1702, there was a comet, or rather the tail of one, feen at Rome,
which M. Caffini takes to be the fame with that obferved by Ariftotle,
and that fince feen in 1668, which would imply its period to be thirty-
four years, Now, it may feem ftrange, that a ftar which has fo fhort a re-
volution, and of confequence fuch frequent returns, fhould be fo feldom
feen.—Again, in April, of the fame year, 1702, acomet was obferved by
Meff. Bianchini, and Maraldi fuppofed by the latter to be the fame with
that of 1664, both by reafon of its motion, velocity, and direction. M. de.
Ja Hire took it to have fome relation to another he had obferved in 1698,

, which


OFT ASITR OD 6 GY % 94:3
which M. Caffini refers to that of 1652. On this fuppofition, its period


appears to be forty-three months; and the numberof revolutions, ‘between
1652 and 1698, fourteen: but it is hard to fuppofe, that, in this age,
wherein the heavens are fonarrowly watched, a ftar fhould make fourteen
" appearances unperceived ; e{pecially fuch a ftar as this, which might ap-
pear above a month together, and of confequence be frequently difen-
gaged from the crepufcula. For this reafon M. Caffini is very referved
in maintaining the hypothefis of the return of comets, and only propofes
thofe for planets, where the motions are eafy .and fimple, and are folved
without ftraining, or allowing many irregularities.


M. de la Hire propofes one general difficulty againft the whole fyftem
of the return of comets, which would feem to hinder any comet from be-
ing aplanet : andit is this; that, by the difpofition neceflarily given to
their courfes,. they ought to appear as large at firft as at laft; and always
increafe, till they arrive at their greateft proximity to the earth: or, ‘if
they fhould chance not to be obferved, as foon as they become vifible, for
want of attention thereto, at leaft it is impofflible but they muft frequently
fhew themfelves before they have arrived at their full magnitude and
brightnefs. But he adds, that none were ever yet obferved till they had
arrived at it. Yet the appearance of a comet in the month of Odober
1723, while at a great diftance, fo as to be too finall and dim to be
viewed without a telef{cope, may ferve to remove this obftacle, and fet
the comets, ftill, on the fame footing with the planets. Sir Ifaac New-
ton fuppofes, that as thofe planets which are neareft the Sun, and revolve
in the leaft orbits, are the fmalleft ; fo, among the comets, fuch as in
their perihelion come neareft the Sun are the {malleft, and revolve in
{maller erbits.


Dr. Halley has given usa table of the aftronomical elements of all the
comets that have been yet obferved with due care; whereby, whenevera
new comet fhall appear, it may be determined, by comparing it there-
with, whether it be any of thofe which have yet appeared: and confe~
quently its period, and rae of its orbit, be determined, and its re-
turn foretold. This table’contains the aftronomical elements of twenty-
four comets, on the fuppofition that they moved in parabolas ; though he
thought it extremely probable that they really moved in very eccentric
ellipfes, and confequently returned after long periods of time. This ta~
ble commences with the year 1337, and clofes with 1698.


™ |


Norges 2: | 3B. TABLE


944 AN ILLUSTRATION


SoA BL Eo ort O, M Pers,


HALLEY’s Tasxie oF THE ELEMENTS or COMETS.


\Perihelion dif-


Co- {Afcending node.|Incl.oforb.| Perihelion. |tance from the/Equat. time of the perihel
mets. Sun; the dif-
Seah aT Es VT aint. al ARLE REET CRC e OL eithe
AD aaah es gia o *. 4 earth being 1 DY ees = CIA fe
100000,
1337, 24 21 0/32 1 o|8 7 59 0} 40666 pats 2 6 acaitetrog.
T472\We II 46 20) 5 20 O18 5 33 30) 54273 ebru. 28 22 23 |rctrog.
T93U% 19 25 0117 56 of 139 0} 56700 |Auguft,24 21 regietrog.|@
1532 mt 20 27 0/32 36 ol 21 7 0| 50910. |Oétob. 19g 22 12, \direct.
556m 25 42 0132 6 30/p 8 50 0| 66390 - April, 21 20. 3 (direct.
I577|\V 25 52 017432 45/9 9 22 0} 18342 |OGtob. 26 18° 4g [retrog.
1580” 18 57 20/64 40 ols 319 § 50! 59628 -|Novem.28 15-° 0 direct.
1585 to} 742 3016 4 oly 8 51. 0} 109358 Septem. 27.19 20 direct,
1590) 15 30 40\29 40 go\m 6 54 30]. 57661 January,29 3 45 |fetrog.
TsqG se 12 12 30/5 12 ojm 18 16 Oj U51293 July, © 41 Ig 55 jretrog.
1607/8 20 21 off7 2 oj 2160) 58680 |Oob. 16° 3 ~ go |retrog.
1618 16. 1 0137 34 ol” 214 © 37975 |Octob. 29. 12 © 23 direct.
1652 ii 28 Io ol79- 28 ol” 28:18 40) 84750 Novem. 2 15 40 direct.
1661} 22 30 30/32 35 solos 26°58 40| 44851 ‘January,16 23 41 |direct.
(1664; 22 14 ol21 18 301} 10 41 25| 1025753 |Novem.24 11 .52 /fetrog.
1665\m 18 2 076 § oO} 11 54 30 10649 __jApril, 14 5 15 |fetrog
1672/2 27°30 30/83 22 ol 16 59 30] 69739. |Febru. 20 8 37 direct.
1677™m 26 49 10/79 3 15) 17 37 5| 28059 April, 26 o 37$/retrog.
1680¥f 2 2 0/60 56 o|f . 22 39 30] ‘oo612. |Decem. 8 o 6 direct,
1682 % 21 16 30/17 56 ols 2 52 45) 58328. |Septem. 4 7 39 |retrog.
1683 23 23 0/83 IL o|% 25 29 30| §6020 |fuly, 3 2 50 jretrog.
1684% 28 15 0165 48 401m 28 52 of 96015 |May, 29 10 16 direct.
1686, f 20 34 4031 21 4011 17 0 30) 32500 |Septem. 6 14 33 |direct.
1698 f 27 44 15\11 46 OlKP Ost 15| 69129 |Odtober;$8 16 57 |retrog.


Another table has fince been computed, from the obfervations contained
in the Philofophical Tranfactions, De la Caille’s Aftronomy, and De la
Lande’s Hiftoire de la Comete de 1759, & Connoifflance des Mouve-
mens Celeftes, 1762 & 1764. In this table are feen the elements of
twenty-five other comets, from the year 1264 to 1762. . And, .by com-
paring thefe tables it will be found that none of thefe comets, except that
of 1769, appears to be the fame with any other in either of the tables;
unlefs we admit thofe of 1264 and 1556, and thofe of 1599 and 1699, to
‘be the fame. |


£


"TABLE


OFT AS TR OU 0 GY 945


AB beh oh ere MET 8.


A SUPPLEMENT TO HALLEY’s. Tape oF THE ELEMENTS OF Comers,


Equated time of perihelion, |Afcending node. Inc.oforbit] Perihelion. Perihelion
; { diftance
,| from the
sun.


Sl eaneEaaeeeneneeeee


A.D. Dey” Hey M: ORE OL On pe


1264| July, 6-38 ov 19 0 036 30.0 21 0 44500 |direét,
HUS33klune,, £0" 190130... 5.44. 2028 4g." 27 16 20280 jretrog,
1593|July, $§ 13 38) 14 14 1537 58 o|m 26 19 8gi1 direct.


123802 -/direét.
74400 |retrog.

645090 |direct.

42686 |direct.

85904 |direct.

102565 |retrog.
| 99865 |retrog.
22 16 53| 406980 |direct.

o| 22282t\diredt,

67358 |retrog.

7655salretrog.

8381 yaidirect.

6 33 52] 52157 |retrog.
17 12 55] 22206 |direct.
IO § 41| 229388 |retrog.
5 © 50) 840667 retrog.
6 9g 24) 6552c4/direct.


1678)Auguft, 16 14 31m 11 40 Of 3 4 20
l6g9|January, 3. 8 22: 21 45 35/69 20 0
1702|March, 2 14 12 9 25 15] 4 30 ©
1706|January,Ig 4 56 13,11 23/ec 14 5
1707|Novem.30 |23 43 22 50 29/88 37 40
1718|/January, 4. 1 15 7 55 20/21 12 53
1723|\Septem.16 16 10 14,16 O49 5g 0
1729|\June, 12. 6 36 To 35 15i77 1 58
1737|January,1g 8 17 O18 20 45
1739\June, 6 Io OV 27 25 Talss 42 44
1742 panary28 Aye 21 5 3445167 4 11
1742\Decem. 30 21 15 8 Io 48) 2 15 50
1743/Septem. g (2% 16): 5 16 25145 48 21
1744|/Febru..19 8 17 15.45 20147 8 36
1747|\Febru.. 17 11 45/5. 20 58 27177 56 55
1748!April, 17 19 25/M 22°52 16185 26 57
i748iJune, 7 it _ 24/8 439 43)56 59 3
1757|October,z1 7 .5siM 4.12 5c]12 53 20 2 58 of 33754 |direct.
175giMarch,-12 13 50/8 23 45 35/17 40 3 8 Io} 584903\retrog.
1759|Novem. 27 | 2 ig! 19 39 24/78 59 22/8 23 24 20] 79851 |direct.
1759, Decem. 16 12 41{0- 18 56 19) 4 37 23/9» 19 2 48) 96193 |retrog.
1762z|May, 28 415 18} I9 23. 0184 45 off 15 14 0} 101240 direct,


~
N

w
nO
N


iS)

Ww

Re
SOMWBINOC OOO


=
N
fon)
ie)
OV


~
Nn

Wal
nN
iS)
{e)


“NI
Ww
Ww
ee
BASS)


SOKsbPsaSRsoans pli
a
iS)
N


HOCSVAHGU SHUR KCOHHO SH SOY
i}


Lal
in


There are many things in the comet of 1432, obferved by Peter Ap-
pian, which intimate its being the fame with that of 1607, obferved by
Kepler and Longomontanus; and which Dr. Halley himfelf again ob-
ferved in 1682. All the elements agree, and there is nothing contradicts
the opinion but that inequality in the periodic revolution, which how-
ever he thinks is no more than may be accounted for from phyfical caufes:
no more in effect than is obferved in Saturn; the motion of which planet
is fo difturbed by the reft, efpecially Jupiter, that its period is uncertain
for feveral days together: to what errors then may not.a comet be’ liable,
which rifes to almoft four times the height of the planet Saturn; and
whofe velocity, if but a little increafed, would change its elliptic orb
into.a parabolic one?


What


pi OA NY PD U SIT TT Oo ON


W hat farther confirms the identity, is the appearance of another comet
in the fummer of 1456, which, though obferved by none with accuracy,
yet, by its period and the’ manner of ifs tranfit, he concludes to be the
fame; and thence ventured to forete] its return in the year 1758, or the
beginning of the next year: and time has verified the prediction. The
comet of 1661 feems to be the famé with that of 1532, and to have its
period in one hundred and twenty-nine years: and Halley alfo thought
that the comet of 1680 was the fame that was obferved in-1106, 531, and
in the forty-fourth year before Chrift, when Julius Caefar was murdered ;
and that its period. was five hundred and feventy-five years.) Mr. Dun-
thorne, in the Philofophical Tranfactions, vol. xlvii. has endeavoured to
thew, from a MS. in Pembroke-hall Library, that that the comet of
1106 could not be fame with that of 1680. But.M. Dela Lande adopts
the opinion of Dr. Halley, :


To determine the place and courfe of a comet, obferve the diftance of
the comet from two fixed ftars whofe longitudes and latitudes are known:
from the diftances thus found, calculate the place of the comet by tri-
gonometry ; and, by repeating the obfervations and operations for feve-
ral days fucceflively, the courfe of the comet willbe had. We might
alfo determine the courfe of a comet mechanically, without any apparatus
of inftruments, by the following ingenious method, with a thread, which
we owe to Longomontanus. Obferve four ftars round the comet, fuch
. as that the comet may be in the interfection of the right lines that join
the two oppofite ftars ; which is eafily found by means of athread placed
before the eye, and extended over againft the ftars and comet. Find thefe
four {tars upon a globe, and extend two threads crofsways, from one


corner to the other of the fquare {pace defcribed by the four ftars, and the |


central point where the threads interfect each other will give the place of
the comet. This practice being repeated for feveral days, the comet’s
courfe will be had on the globe; which courfe will be found to bea
great circle, from any two points whereof it will be eafy to find its in-
clination to the ecliptic, and the place of the nodes, only by obferving
where a thread, ftretched through the two points, cuts the ecliptic.


Such is the do€trine of comets, as laid down from time to time both by
the ancient and modern philofophers ; but which, like moft other ab-
ftrufe phenomena, is founded pretty much upon conje@ure and arbitrary
conception. Should the comet of 1680 appear in or about the year 1792, as
predicted by the ingenious Sir Ifaac Newton, it will confirm a great deal
of the foregoing {peculation, as to their poflefling a determinate place in the

| 2 fyftem ,


ah


ORT sASS7TERLOTL (0 1G. fr: 947


fyftem ; and will convince us that their revolutions, though extremely
_ eccentric, are neverthelefs definable, and fuch as may hereafter throw


great light upon philofophical difquifitions.


My own opinion of comets, I purpofely withhold, until I have an
opportunity of making fome obfervations upon the expected phenomenon
in 1792; when, if it fhould appear, I propofe offering to the public fome
conjeclures upon it, in a feparate pamphlet, fo printed as to bind up
with this work ; and I fhall give a copper-plate print of it, defcribing.the
point where it will crofs the earth’s orbit; and point out to the moft un-
lettered mind the inevitable diflolution of the earth, when everit falls in
with, or meets, the fiery body of a comet in its approach to, or recefs
from,.the body of the Sun, which is the centre of our fyftem,.


Of Ree TL Ps ES.


An Eclipfe, from warm, Of sauxos fo fail, fignifies a failure or priva-
tion of the. light of one of the luminaries, by the interpofition of fome
dark or opaque body falling between it and the eye, or between it and
the Sun. . The Moon, being a dark and opaque body, receives her light
from the Sun by reflection ; which is proved by her increafing and de-
creafing in light as fhe is nearer or farther off from her conjunctions with
the Sun. At the ecliptical conjunttion, or new Moon, the dark body
of the Moon paffes direétly between the Sun and us, which hides that
luminary from our fight, and this conftitutes an eclipfe of the Sun; but,
at an ecliptical oppofition, or full Moon, the Sun, the Earth, and the
Moon, are in one direct and diametrical line; the dark globe of the
Earth, being then between the Sun and Moon, deprives: the Moon of
the Sun’s light, whereby fhe becomes darkened and eclipfed, having no
light of her own. The line or way wherein the Moon makes her con-
ftant periodical revolutions crofies the ecliptic: wherein the Sun moves
' at an angle of about five degrees ; the diftance of thefe lines contftitutes
the Moon’s latitude ; and the places in the ecliptic which thefe lines in-
_terfeét are called the Moon’s nodes, or the Dragon’s Head and Dragon’s
Tail. Thefe interfections do not always happen in one place of the
ecliptic, but move once through the fame, contrary to the fequel or fuc-
ceffion of the figns, in eighteen years and two hundred and twenty-
five days.


If the Moon at full be diftant from the Dragon’s Head or Tail more
than fifteen degrees, there can be no eclipfe of the Moon; and,. when at
the time of the change the Moon is more than nineteen degrees diftant

No. 49. hae from


‘


948 AR bes TRA TOON


from the Dragon’s Head, according to the fucceffion of the figns, there’
can be no eclipfe of the Sun ; neithercan there be any eclipfe of the Sun,
when the Moon at the change is above feven degrees from the Dragon’s
Tail, according to the fucceflion of the figns, or more than feven degrees
from the Dragon’s Head, contrary to the fuccefiion of the figns.


Eclipfes of the Sun are various both in quantity and quality, being
beheld from different parts of the earth ; where he will appear partially
eclipfed to a fpettator on the north fide of his body, and totally toa
{pectator on his fouth fide; whilft to others he will appear «at the fame
inftant not at alleclipfed. The reafonis, the Sun in his eclipfes is not
darkened, but only hidden from our fight by the interpofition of the Moon,
whofe various parallaxes produce this diverfity in the Sun’s eclipfe.


The eclipfe of the Moon, on the contrary, appears the fame to all parts
of the earth and toall people above whofe horizon fhe is at that time
elevated ; for, when fhe is deprived of the light of the Sun, the becomes
really darkened. To eftimate the quantities of the eclipfes of either lu-
minary, their diameters are fuppofedly divided into twelve equal parts,
called digits, becaufe their diameters appear to fight about a foot in
length ; fo that, when the Moon obfcures half the Sun’s diameter, he is
faid to be fix digits eclipfed.


Amongft the cceleftial phenomena, the doctrine of eclipfes takes pre~
cedency ; becaufe from their obfervations the primary foundation of
the whole body of aftronomy is demonftrated and confirmed. Hence the
folar eclipfes manifeft the Moon to be lower and lefs than the Sun; the
lunar eclipfes prove that the earth is not founded infinitely below us,
but that the heavens under us are diftant from the earth as far upwards,
in refpect of our antipodes, as they are here-; and confequently that the
Earth is not cubical, pyramidal, nor cylindrical, but on every fide per-
fe€tly round, or terminated by a globular figure ; not only becaufe the
fhadow of the earth in the Moon’s body is always and on every part obfer-
ved to be round, butalfo becaufe thofe who live eaftward number more
hours from their meridian, for the beginning or ending of any eclipfe,
than fuch as live weftward, proportionably to their diftance.


Lunar eclipfes demonttrate the fhadow of the earth to be conical, ter-
minating in a fharp point ; and the fame place of the Moon’s tranfits to
be fometimes thicker, and at other times. more flender, notwithftanding
acertain rule and refpect had to the Sun’s motion; and confequently

me I | that >


DIR AST BO 0G YA 949


that the Sun is moved, or fo feems to be, in an eccentrical orb, By
eclipfes of the Moon we alfo know that the Earth is moved or placed in
the middle of the zodiac, becaufe fhe is eclipfed in the oppofite places
thereof. -The lunar eclipfes beft difcover to us the longitude of places
upon the Earth, and affure us that the Earth and Water make but one
globe ; and the oriental and occidental eclipfes of the Moon inform us,
that one half of the world is always vifible, and that one half of the zo-
diac rifes above the horizon.


The true and certain place of the Moon cannot be had by any inftru-
ment whatfoever, becaufe of her parallaxes. Nature, or rather the God
of nature, hath therefore fupplied this defect by her eclipfes; for the


Moon polited in medits tenebrisis then underftood to be oppofite tothe Sun,


by which means the motions andmutations of the Moon are found out and
rationally demonftrated. And, as by lunar eclipfes we gather, that the
Sun is far greater than the Earth, and the Moon lets, fo by folar’
eclipfes we demonftrate the diftance of the luminaries from the Earth to
be different, and to be moved in eccentrics or epicycles ; whence a rule
is found for meafuring the diftances of the Sun and Moon from the Earth,
together with the magnitudes of the feveral celeftial bodies,


Eclipfes of the Moon only happen in the time of full Moon ;_becaufe
it is only then the earth is between the Sun and Moon: nor do they hap-
pen every full Moon, by reafon of the obliquity of the Moon’s way with
refpeé to the Sun’s; but only in thofe full Moons which happen either


- inthe nodes, or very near them, where the aggregate of the apparent femi-


diameters of the Moon andthe Earth’s fhadow is greater than the lati-
tude of the Moon, or the diitance between their centres:


The moft confiderable circumftances in the eclipfes of the Moon are,
That, as the fum of the femidiameters of the Moon and: Earth’s fhadow
is greater than the aggregate of the femidiameters of the Sun and Moon,
(that, when leaft, being 53; and this, when greateft, {carce 9333) it is
evident, lunar eclipfes may happen in a greater latitude of the Moon and
at a greater diftance from the nodes, and, confequently, are more often
obferved, in any one part of the Earth, than folar ones ; though, with
re{pect to the whole Earth, the latter are more frequent than the former,
becaufe the Sun’s ecliptic limits are greater than the Moon's.


Total eclipfes of the Moon, and thofe of the longeft duration, haps


pen in the very nodes of the ecliptic ; becaufe the fection of the Earth’s
“fhadow,


950 AN AISD EU Sa Rea ESIGN


fhadow, then falling on the Moon, is confiderably greater than her difk.
There may likewile be total eclipfes within a little diftance of the nodes ;
but the farther, the lefs their duration ; farther off ftill, there are only
partial ones, and at length none at all, as the latitude and the femidia-
meter of the Moon, together, are either lefs, equal to, or greater, than the
femidiameter of the fhadow. A’ lunar eclipfe, that 1s both total and
_central, lafts three hours fifty-feven minutes fix feconds from the be-
ginning to the end, when the Moon is in her apogee, and three hours
thirty feven minutes twenty-fix feconds when in perigee ; her horary mo-
tion being floweft in the former cafe, and quickeft in the latter. In
all lunar eclipfes, the eaftern fide is what firft immerges, and alfo emer-
ges; fo that, though, at firft, the Moon be more wefterly than the
Earth’s fhadow, yet, her proper motion being {wifter than the fame, the
overtakes and outgoes it. The Moon, even in the middle of an eclipfe,
has ufually a faint appearance of light, refembling tarnifhed copper ;
which Gaffendus, Ricciolus, Kepler, &c. attribute to the light of che
Sun, refracted by the Earth’s atmofphere, and tran{mitted thither. And ~
laftly, the grows fenfibly paler, and dimmer, before fhe enters within
the Earth’s thadow; which is attributed to ay Earth’s penumbra.


Solar eclipfes, being an occultation af the Son’ s body, oceafioned by
an ipterpofition of the Moon between the Sun and the Earth, are diftin-
eunnen , like thofe of the Moon, into total and partial, &c. to which muft

pe added a third f{pecies, called annular, As the Moon is found to havea
parallax of latitude, eclipfes of the Sun only happen when the latitude of
the Moon, viewed from the Earth, is lefs than the aggregate of the appa-
‘rent femidiameters of the Sun and Moon. Solar eclipfes therefore only

hppen when the Moon is in conjunétion with the Sun, in or near the,
nodes, i.e. at the new Moons. Confeqnently, the memorable eclipfe
of the Sun, at our Saviour’s paflion, happening at the time of full Moon,
when the Sun and Moon are in oppofition, was preternatural. Befides,
the darknefs in total eclipfes of the Sun never lafts above four minutes in
ene place ; whereas the darknefs at the crucifixion lafted three hours,


(Matthew xxviii. 15.) and overfpread at leaft all the land of Judea.


But, though the new Moon pafs between the Sun and the Earth, yet is
not there an “eclipfe every Moon; becaufe the Moon’s way is not pre-
cifely under the ecliptic, but is placed obliquely thereto, interfecting it
twice in every period. So that eclipfes can only be accafioned in fuch

‘new Moons as happen in thefe interfections or nodes, or very near them.
In the nodes, when the Moon has no vifible latitude, the occultation is
total,


6. LCI LP SHS , aa A


! . ond , , nee ‘ ya P ‘ ™ & :


OF TA SATIREOULIOIG Yi ost


totah; and with fome continuance, when the difk of the Moon in perigz2o.
appears greater than that of the Sun in apogzo, and its thadow is extended:
beyond the furface of the Earth; and without continuance, at moderate
diftances, when*the cufp or point of the Moon’s fhadow barely touches:
the Barth. Lafthy, out of the nodes, ‘but near: them; the echpfes are
partial. The folar eclipfes, though «total, cam never be univerfal or
vifible throughout the whole hemifphere which the Sun is. then above,
becaufe the Moon’s dark fhadow covers only a fpot on the Earth’s fur-
face, about one hundred and eighty Englith miles broad, when the Sun’s
diftance is greateft, and the Moon’s lealt; and! thus far only cam the to-
tal darknefs extend ; which explains the reafon) why. a, folar’ eclipfe does
not appear the fame in all parts of the Earth where itis feen; but, when
in one place it is total, inanother ic is only partial.. And farther, that
the Moon, when in her apogee, appears much lefs than the Sun, as hap~
pens moft fenfibly when he is in perigeo; the cufp of the lunar thadow
not then reaching the ‘Earth, fhe becomes ina central conjunétion
with the Sun, yet not able to: cover his difk, but lets his whole limb
appear like a lucid ring or bracelet ; this is hence called an annular eclipfe;
which does does not happen at the fame time inall places whete it is feen;
but appears more early to the weftern parts, and later to the eaflern, as
will hereafter be further explained.


: In moft folar eclipfes the Moon’s difk is covered with a faint dawning
light; which is attributed to the refleGtion of the light from the illumi-
nated part of the Earth. Jn total eclipfes of the Sun, the Moon’s limb
is feen furrounded by a pale circle of light ;-which fome aftronomers take
for a manifeft indication of a lunar atmofphere; but which: is: probably
the atmofphere of the Snny becaufe it has been obfervedrte move equally
with the Sun, and not with the Moon, and: befides, the Moon is now
generally believed to have noatmofphere. The foregoing ebiervations
will be further illuftrated by what follows.


. \To PROJECT ECLIPSES or tue SUN.


The Sun, being a luminous body, vaftly larger than the Earth, will
enlighten fomewhat more than, one half of it, and caufe it to project a
long conical fhadow, as reprefented in the dgnnexed plate, fg. 1 where S
is the Sun, E the Earth, and H B D its conical fhadow. ~* .


_. The height or length of, this fhadow, at the, meal diftance of the Sun,
anjay be found by this proportion: as the tangent of the angle C BD, or
No. 49. 11 D the


952 ANY DEOL IU SUPIREA T 2.0) N


the femi-diameter under which the Sun appears at the Earth, viz. A S.
16°: radius: : 1 : the length of the fhadow C B=214.8 femi-diame-
tersof theEarth: but, when the Sunis at its greateft diftance, the length.
of the fhadow CB will be equally to 217 of thefe femi-diameters. Hence.
it appears, that, though the height of the fhadow is near three. times as
great as the mean diftance of the Moon, yet it falls far fhort of the.
diftance of Mars, and confequently can eclipfe none of the heavenly bo-
dies but the Moon.


To find the height of the. Moon’s thadow,. fuppofed to be fimilar to.
that of the Earth, and confequently proportional to the diameters of
the bafes, the proportion is, as the diameter of the Earth 1oois to-the dia-
meter of the Moon 28, fois the mean altitude of the Earth’s fhadow
214.8 to the altitude of that of the Moon 60.144 of the Earth’s femi-.
diameters, The fhadow of the Moon therefore will juft reach the Earth,
in her meaa diftance, which it cannot do in her apogee; but in her pe-
rigee it will involve a fmall partof the Earth’s furface.


Befides the dark fhadow of the Moon,. there is another, called-the pe~
numbra ; to reprefent which let S, fg. 8. be the Sun,.T the Earth, D the
Moon, K CF and A B E the two lines touching the oppofite limbs of
the Sun and Moon ; then it is evident that C F E B will be the dark or
abfolute fhadow of the Mcon, in which. perfon on the Earth’s furface,
between F and E,. is wholly deprived of the Sun’s light.. Again, let K


~- B Gand ACH be two other lines. touching the fides of the Sun and
' Moon alternately, and interfecting each other at the point above the.


Moon ;. then will HCBG, a fruftrum of the cone GIH, be the pe-
numbra above mentioned, in which a fpeCtator on the Earth’s furface,
between F and H,. and E and G,, will fee part of the Sun, whilft. the
reft is. eclipfed.


To calculate the angle of the cone HIG, draw SB; then, in the ob«
lique triangle BIS, the external angle BI D is equal to both. the inter-.
nal and oppofite angles IBS and ISB; but 1S B, the angfe under which.
the femi-diameter appears at the Sun, being infenfibly {mall, the angle:
BID. will be equal to BS or KBS, equal to the apparent femi-dia-
meter.of the Sun. Therefore the part of the penumbral.cone C 1B: is
equal. and fimilar to.the dark fhadow of the Moon.


Next,. to find how much of the Earth’s furface can be at any time in=.
wolyed in the Moon’s dark fhadow, or the quantity of the arch EF, jig. 25.
| lot.


aN


OF ASTROLOGY. 953


Tet us fuppofe the Sun to be in apogee, and the Moon in perigee; and,
im this cafe, the height of the Moon’s fhadow will be about 61 femi-
diameters, and the diftance of the Moon about 56; that is, CK=61,
D T=56, and T E=1. Inthis cafe alfo, the half angle of the thadow
T K Ears’ 507, as being leaft of alt. Then the proportion is: as 1, or
the fide T E, to the fide of T K==5; fois the fine of the femi-angle TRE=
1550 to the fine of the angle T E K==1° 19‘ 10%. Wherefore TEK+ »
TKE=A T E=AE=12° 35°; the double of which FE is 3° 10'=190’",
or 220 miles, the diameter of the dark fhadow on the furface of the
Earth when greateft.


After a like manner you may find the diameter of the penumbrak’
fhadow at the Earth, GE FH, fig. 8, whem greateft of all, that is, when
the Earth is in perihelio, and the Moon in apogee; for then will the
Sun’s apparent diameter be equal to x6‘ 23° =T IG, the greateft femi-
angle of the cone ; and thence we fhall find I D—52: femi-diameters of
the earth. In this cafe alfo, the diftance of the Moon from the Earth is
D T=64 femi-diameters: Therefore as T Gor to T I=1223, fo is the
fine of the angle T I G=16° 23° tothe fine of the angle 1G N=35° 42’.
But IG N=T I G+I T G, and therefore 1 TG=I GN—TIG 95°
as‘; the double of which 70° 50’=GEFH= 4900 Englifh miles nearly,
for the diameter of the penumbral fhadow when greatelt. |


From the principles of optics it is evident, that, if the plane of the
Moon’s orbit coincided with that of the earth’s orbit, there would ne-
ceffarily be an eclipfe of the Sun every new Moon: thus, if S in fg. 7,
be fuppofed to reprefent the Sun, B the Moon, and T the Earth, fince
the apparent magnitude or difk of the Sun is: nearly the fame with that
of the Moon, it muft neceffarily be hid-or eclipfed as often as the new
Moon came between the Earth and the Sun. But if, as is really. the
cafe, the Moon’s orbit be not in the plane of the ecliptic, but inclined
thereto undef a certain angle, there may be a new Moon, and yet no
eclipfe of the Sun. To illuftrate this, let AB€ DE be a circle ia
the plane of the ecliptic, defcribed at the diftance of the Moon’s orbit
F GH, interfeGting the fame in the points Band D, and making an
angle therewith-A BF, whofe meafure is the arch GC, as being ninety
degreees diftant from the angular: points or nodes B and D. Now it is
evident, if the arch GC be fomewhat greater than the fum of the appa-
rent femidiameters of the Sun and Moon, then at G, and fome diftance.
from:G:towards B, there may bea new Moon, and yet no eclipfe of the
Sun‘; becaufe,. in this cafe, the difk of the Moon G is too much elevated


2 or


2939 OA NY DIOLIWSATIRAMT FO N


onde preffed abc+ sor below the apparent ‘dif or'face of the Sun atC,, to
: touch it, much tefs to hide or echipfeany part thereof.’ But, ata certain
point M inthe Moon’s orbit, the Moon) will-have:@ latitude, only. equal
“tothe fuiniof thé: femidiameters of theSuniand Mova 3yand, therefore,
when the Moons new in) that point, (he will appear, to d fpefator in the
point. Z,: to touch the Sun only; fronawheénce this! point M is called the
ecliptic “limit, inafmuch as itis impofiible there’ thould happen a new
Moon, iniany part between itand the node B on each fide; without eclip-
fing the Sun Jefs or more:i thus, -inithe figure, may. be feen.a partial
-eclipfe at K, and 4 total one in ‘the node itlelf B, at which point only;
-etotal eclipfes.can happen. UF


*y ‘Whatihas hitherto been faid-ragards the phenomene of an: eclipfe, of

‘the Sun, as they appear to a fpectator on the Earth’s furface, in whole
' .genith the Moon then is, and where there is no,refraction, to alter the true
latitude of the: Moon: but, when the; Moon, has any. latitude, there. the
procefs of ¢alculating the appearances of a folar eclipfe will be fomewhat
more: complex, on account of the variation, of the: Moon’s, latitude and
longitude for every different altitude, and confequently for every. moment
of theeclipfe. . y Ay


The beft way of reprefenting.a folar eclipfe is by a projeCtion, of the
earth’s difkand of the fection of the dark and penumbral fhadows, as
they appear, or would) appear, to.a {peétator at the. diftance, of the Meon
ama tight line joining the centres of the Sunand the earth. ,; In order te
— this, weare to find the dimenfions.of the apparent femi-diameters, of the
~ vearth, dark fhadow, and penumbra, at the diftance of the Moon.) As to
the firft, viz. theearth’s. femi-diameter, it is equal to the Moon’s hori-
zontal parallax. That’of the dark fhadow, is thus eftimated: Jet Cin
Jigs 5. be the center of the Moon, D B its diameter, D HB its. dark
fhadow, and KA JL, the. penumbral cone... Then let EF be the dia-
meter of the penumbraat the earth, and IG that of the dark thadow,
and ‘draw CG and CE; then is the angle CG B=BH C+G)C.H,
and foG CH=BGC—BHC ; that is, the apparent femi-diameteter
of, the dark, fhadow is. equal to the difference, between the apparent
femi-diameters of the Sun and Moon... And in like manner. the angle
 ECH=DEC+DAC; that is, the, apparent, femi-diameter of, the
penumbra, at the earth, is equal to the tum of the apparent femi-
diameters of the Moon and Sun. Now the femi-diameters of the Sun
and Moon, and alfo the Moon’s horizontal parallax, are already calcu-
Jated for their various diftances from the Earth, and: for the ‘leaft,: mean,

. and


¥


OF ASTROLOGY. 955


and greateft eccentricity of the lunar orbit, in the aftronomical tables.
Therefore, let AE, fig. 3, reprefent a {mall portion of the-annual orbit,
and F Hi the vifible path of the center of the lunar fhadows, which will
_ exactly correfpond to the pofition of the Moon’s orbit with refpect to the
ecliptic in the heavens; fo that the point of interfection @ will be the
node, and the angle H @ E the angle of inclination of the lunar orbit to
the plane of the ecliptic, which is about 5°. Hence, if A’ P Q Srepre-
fent the difk of the Earth, according to the orthographic projection, in
the feveral places 8, B, C, D,, whofe femidiameter is made equal. to the
number of minutes in the Moon’s horifontal parallax at the time of the
eclipfe; and if, in the path of the fhadows in the points 2, R, N, G,
. wedefcribe a {mall circle whofe femidiameter is equal to the difference
of the femidiameters of the Sun and Moon, that will be the circular {ec-
tion of the Moon’s dark fhadow at the diftance of the Earth: again, if a
circle is defcribed on the fame center, with a femidiameter equal to the
fum of the femidiameters of the Sun and Moon, it will reprefent the pe-
numbral fhadow, exprefied by the dotted area, Here then it is evident,
that if the Moon, when new, be at the diftance 9 G from the node, the
penumbral {hadow will not fall near the Earth’s dif, and fo there cannot
poflibly happen an eclipfe. Again, if the Moon’s diftance from the node
be equal to @ N, the penumbral fhadow will juft touch the difk, and
confequently @ Cis the ecliptic limit, which may be found by the fol-
lowing analogy, viz. as the fine of the angle N 9 Co~5° 30’ (the angle
_of inclination of the lunar orbit to the plane of the ecliptic) is to the ra=
dius=902, fo is the logarithm of the fide NC==> TC + N T62'10’’
+ 16’ 52'’+ 16/23 '=95' 25°’ to the logarithm of the fide a C equal
to the ecliptic limit, which is found to be 16° 36’, beyond which diftance
from the node @ there can be no eclipfe; and within that diftance, if the
Moon be new, the fhadow will fall on fome part of the Earth’s difk, as
at B; where all thofe places over which the fhadows pafs will fee the
Sun eclipfed, in part only, by the dotted penumbral fhadow ; but the Sun
will be centrally eclipfed in all places over which the center of the fha-
dows pafs, and, if the Moon be new in the node, then will the center of
the fhadows pafs over the center of the difk, as reprefented at 2. In this
cafe, if the apparent diameter of the Moon be greater than that of the Sun,
the face of the Sun will be wholly eclipfed to all places over which the
center of the fhadow pafies; but, if not, the Sun will only be centrally
eclipfed, his circumference appearing in the form of a bright annulus, or
luminous ring, the width whereof will be equal to the difference of the
diameters of the luminaries. The difk of the Earth, here projected, re-
prefents the cafe of an eclipfe on an equinoctial day ; A K being theeclip-

No. 50. 1£E tic,


v


ps6 ANODE 8 SOR a 0 LN


tic, A. Q the equator, X Y the axis of the ecliptic, P'S the axis of the
equator, P and S the north and fouth poles, &c. By this projection the
paflage of fhadows over the Earth’s difk me be exhibited for ion place of
the Sun, or declination of the Moon.


To find the digits clipe, add the apparent femidiameters of the
_ luminaries into one fum; from which fubtract the Moon’s apparent la-
titude ; the remainder are the feruples, or parts of the diameter, eclipfed.
Then fay, as the femidiameter of the Sun is to the feruples eclipfed, fo
are 6 digits reduced into {cruples, or ane Saat to the digits’eclipfed.


To determine the duration of a folar enters: find’ the horary motion of .
the Moon from the Sun, for.one hour before the conjunction, and ano-
ther hour after: then fay, as the former horary motion is to the feconds
in an hour, fo are the f{cruples of half-duration to the time of immerfion ;
and, as the latter horary motion is to the fame feconds, fo are the fame
{cruples of half-duration to the time of immerfion. Laftly, adding the.
time of immerfion to that emerfion, the aggregate is the total duration.


As different authors follow very different hypothefes, with regard to
the apparent diameters of the luminaries, and the greateft parallax of la-
titude, they differ much in affigning the bounds at which a eclipfes
happen. Ptolomy makes the utmoft bounds of eclipfes at 19° 25 ‘ diftance
from the ce Copernicus, at 19® 12’; Tycho, at 18° ing” ; Kepler, at
17° 16’; Ricciolus, at 18° 49% Though Ptolomy, in other places,
judges 16° 42 minutes diftance from the node necefiary ; COP Ins,
16° 25’; Tycho, 17° 9‘; Kepler, aN 553 and Ricciolus, 15° 58%
Aftronomers have generally afligned 17° as the limit of folar eclipfes ; but
this admits of fome variation: for, in apogeal eclipfes, the folar limit is
but 16; degrees, and in perigeal eclipfes itis 188°


The Moon’s apparent diameter when largeft, exceeds the Sun’s when
Jeaft, only one minute and thirty-eight feconds of a degree; and, in the
greateft. folar eclipfe that can happen at any time and place, the total dark-
nefs can continue no longer than whilft the Moon is moving through 1
38’ from the Sun in her orbit, which is about three minutes thirteen °
feconds of an hour; for the motion of the fhadow on the Earth’s difk is
equal to the Moon’s motion from the Sun, which, on account of the
Earth’s revolution on its axis towards the f#me way, or eaftward, is about
304 minutes of a degree eps hour, at a mean rate; but fo much of the
Moon's orbit is equal to 308° of a vena circle on the Earth, becaufe the

circumference


OF ASTROLOGY. 957


circumference of the Moon’s orbit is 60 times that of the Earth; and
therefore the Moon’s fhadow goes go% degrees, or 1830 geographical


miles, in an hour, or 30% miles in a minute.


To find the Moon’s apparent latitude at the beginning and end of an
eclipfe, it requires’only to fubtraGt, from the argument of the Moon’s
latitude computed for the time of the apparent conjunction, the fcruples
of half-duration, together with the motion of the Sun, anfwering to the
time of incidence; the remainder is the argument of latitude, at the be-
ginning of the,eclipfe. To the fame fum add the fame {cruples, together
with the Sun’s motion anfwering to the time of emergence; the agere- _
gate is the argument of ‘latitude, at the end of the eclipfe.. The argument
of the latitude given, the Moon’s true latitude is foundafter the common ~
manner. 7 -


To calculate eelipfes of the Sun, ithe following data are requifite: 1.
Find the mean new Moon, and thence the true one; together with the
place of the: luminaries for the apparent time of the true one. — 2. For the
apparent time of the truenew Moon, compute the latitude feen. 3. For
the apparent time of the new Moon feen, compute the latitude feen. 4.
Thence determine the digits eclipfed. 5. Find the times of the greateft
darknefs, immerfion, andemerfion.:» 6. Thence. determine the beginning,
and ending, of the eclipfe. From the preceding: problems. it is evident,,
that all the'trouble and fatigue .of the calculus arife from the parallaxes
of longitude and latitude ; without which, the calculation of folar eclipfes
would be the fame with that of lunar ones. But eclipfes, both of the
Suan and Moon, might be calculated with'much more eafeand expedition.
by the help of a book of tables, publithed for that purpofe by Mr. Fer-
gufon, to which I beg leave to refer the reader, to fave him the trouble
of fuch calculations. 4


To Projecr ECLIPSES or tue MOON.


Thefe being occafioned by the immerfion of the Moon into the Earth’s
fhadow, all that we have to'do, in order to delineate a lunar eclipfe, is
to calculate the apparent femidiameter of the Earth’s fhadow at the Moon.
Thus, let AB, jg. 6, reprefent the Earth, T its center, A E B its cont-
cal fhadow, D C the diameter of afection thereof at the Moan; and,drawing.
D T, we have the outward angle ADT=D TE+DET; fo that
DTE=ADT—DET;; that is, the angle DT E, under which
the femidiameter of the Earth’s fhadow appears at the diftance of the

. OTE . Moons.


958 A Ny Bi USiYROAT TON


Moon, is equal to the difference between the Moon’s horifontal parallax
A DT, and the femidiameter of the Sun DET. If, therefore, A E,
Jig. 4, teprefent the path of. the Earth’s .thadow at the diftance of the
Moon near the node e, and F H a part of the lunar orbit, and the fec-
tion of the Earth’s fhadow be delineated at #, B, C, D; and the full
Moon at gs, I, N, G; then it is evident there can’be no eclipfe of the
Moon, where the leaft diftance of the centers of the Moon and thadow
exceeds the fum of their femidiameters, as at D. But, where this dif-
tance is lefs, the Moon mutt be eclipfed either in part or wholly, as at B
and @ ; in which latter cafe the Moon paffes over the diameter of the
fhadow. But in a certain pofition of the fhadow, as at C, the leaft dif-
tance of the centers, N C, is equal to the fum of the femidiameters ; and
confequently .¢ C is the ecliptic limit for lunar eclipfes.: to find which,
we have this analogy, as the fine of theangle N ¢ C=5° (the inclination
of the Moon’s orbit to the plane of the ecliptic) is to the radius, fo is the
logarithm of the fide N C=63’12"’ to the logarithm of the fide ¢ C=12?
s = the ecliptic limit. Hence, if the Moon be ata lefs diftance from ~
the node.g than 12° 5’, there will be an eclipfe; otherwife none can


happen.


' If the Earth had no atmofphere, the fhadow would be abfolutely dark,
and the Moon involved in it quite.invifible ; but, by. means of the atmof-
phere, many of the folar rays are refra€ted into and mixed with the fhadow,
whereby the Moon is rendered vifible in the midft of it, and of a duiky
red colour. ©


For calculating eclipfes of the Moon, the following data are neceflary :
1. Her true diftance from the node, at the mean conjunction. 2. The
true time of the oppofition, together with the true place of the Sun and
Moon, reduced to the ecliptic. 3. The Moon’s true latitude, at the
time of the true conjunction, and the diftance of the luminaries from the
Earth: alfo their horifontal parallaxes, and apparent femidiameters.
4. The true horary motions of the Moon and Sun, and the apparent femi-
diameter of the Earth’s fhadow. With thefe data it is eafy to find the
duration, beginning, middle, and quantity, of eclipfes. .


The number of eclipfes, of both luminaries, in any year, cannot be
lefs than two nor more than feven; the moft ufual number is four, and
it is rare to have more than fix. The reafon is obvious; becaufe the —
Sun pafles by both the nodes but once a year, unlefs he paffes by one of
them in the beginning of the year; in which cafe he will pafs by the

5 , fame


‘a


OPTA SION OU O46 959


fame again a little before the year be finithed; becaufe the nodes move
backwards 19: deg. every year, and therefore the Sun will come to either
of them 173 days after the other. \ And, if either node is within v7° of


the Sun at the time of the new Moon, the Sun will be eclipfed:'and at’


the fubfequent oppofition, the Moon will be eclipfed in the other node,
and come round to the next conjunction before the former node is 17°
beyend the Sun, and eclipfe him again, When three eclipfes happen
about either node, the like number generally happen about the oppofite ;
as the Sun comes to it 173 days afterwards, and fix lunations contain only
four days more. Thus there may be two eclipfes of the Sun, and one of
the Moon, about each of the nodes. But, if the Moon changes in either
of the nodes, fhe cannot be near enough the other node.at the next full to
_ be eclipfed; and in fix lunar months afterwards fhe will change near the

other node; in which cafe there can be only two eclipfes in a year, both


of the Sun.


In two hundred and twenty-three mean lunations, afterthe Sun, Moon,
and nodes, have been once in a line of conjun¢tion, they return fo nearly
to the fame {tate again, as that the fame node, which was in conjunction
with the Sun and Moon at the beginning of the firft of thefe.lunations,
will be within twenty-eight minutes twelve feconds of a degree cf a line
of conjunction with the Sun and Moon again, when the laft of thefe lu-
nations is completed. And therefore, in that time, there will be a regu-
lar fucceffion or return of the fame eclipfes for many ages.—In this period
(which was firft difcovered by the Chaldeans) there are eighteen Julian
years eleven days feven hours forty-three minutes twenty feconds, when
the laft day of February in leap-years is four times included: but,
when it is five times included, the period confifts of only eighteen years
ten days feven hours forty-three minutes twenty feconds; confequently,
if to the mean time of an eclipfe, either of the Sun or Moon, you add
eighteen Julian years eleven days feven hours forty-three minutes twenty
feconds, when the laft day of February in leap-years comes in four times,
ora day lefs when it comes in five times, you will have the mean time of


the return of the fame eclipfe. |


But the falling back of the line of conjunttions or oppofitions of the
Sun and Moon twenty-eight minutes twelve feconds with refpect to the
line of the nodes in every period, will wear it out in procefs of time ;.
and after that it will not return again in lefs than twelve thoufand four
‘hundred and ninety-two years. “Thefe eclipfes of the Sun-which happen
about the afcending node, and begin to come in at the North Pole of the
Earth, will go a little foutherly at each return, tillthey go quite off the
Earth at the South Pole; and thofe which happen about the defcending


No. 50. ae node,


=


960 AN ILLUSTRATION


node, and begin to come in at the South Pole of the Earth, will go alit-


tle northerly at each return, till at laft they quite leave the Earth at the
North Pole. j .


To exemplify this matter, it may not here be amifs to examine fome of
the moft remarkable circumftances of the returns of an eclipfe mentioned -
-in Mr. Smith’s ingenious Differtation, which happened July 14, 1748,,
about noon. ‘This eclipfe, after traverfing the voids of {pace from the
Creation, at laft began toenter the Terra Auftralis Incognita about eighty
years after the Conqueft, which was the laft of King Stephen’s reign ;.
every Chaldean period, namely, eighteen years eleven days feven hours.
forty-three minutes twenty feconds, as above-mentioned, it has conftantly
crept more northerly, but was ftill invifible in Britain before the year 1622;
when, on the goth of April, it began to touch the fouth parts of England
about twoin the afternoon; its central appearance rifing in the American
South Seas, and traverfing Peru and the Amazons country, through the
Atlantic ocean into Africa, and fetting in the Ethiopian continent, not ~
far from the beginning of the Red Sea.


Its next vifible period was after three Chaldean revolutions, in 1676, on
the firft of June, rifing central in the Atlantic ocean, pafling us abous~
nine in the morning, with four digits eclipfed on the under limb; and
. fetting in the gulph of Cochinchina in the Eaft Indies.


It being now near the Solftice, this eclipfe was. vifible the very next
return in 1694, in the evening ; and in two periods more, which was in
1730, on the 4th of July, was feen above half eclipfed juft after Sun-rife,
and obferved both at Wirtemberg in Germany and Pekin in China, foon
after which it went off. Eighteen years more afforded us this eclipfe again,
which happened the 14th of July, 1748. The next. vifible. return hap-
pened on the 2sth of July, 1762, in the évening,, about four digits
-eclipfed; and, after two periods more, it will be vifible again, on the

16th of Auguft, 1802, early in the morning, about five digits, the center
coming from the north frozen continent, by the capes of Norway, through
“‘Tartary, China, and Japan, to the Ladrone Iflands, where it goes off.


Again, in 1820, Auguft 26, betwixt one and two.there will. be ano-
ther return of this eclipfe at London, about ro digits ; but, happening fo
near the Equinox, the center will leave every part of Britain to the Weft,’
enter Germany at Embden, pafling by Venice, Naples, and Grand Cairo,
-and fet in the gulph of Baffora near that.city... It will be no more vifible’ _
till 1874, when five digits will be obfcured (the center being now about.
to leave the Earth) on September.28. In 1892, the Sun will go down

; eclipfed.


ie aay Bi Ae Suen e Lt O; GY 961


eclipfed at London; and again, in 1928, the paffage of the center will be
in the expanfum, though there. will be two digits eclipfed at London,
October the 31ft of that year; and about the year 2090 the whole penum-
bra will be worn off; whence no more returns of this eclipfe can happen
till after a revolution of ten thoufand years. |


From thefe remarks on the entire revolution of this eclipfe, we may
gather, that a thoufand years, more or lefs, (for there are fome irregula-
rities that may protract or lengthen this period 100 years,) complete the
whole terreftrial phenomena of any fingle eclipfe: and fince twenty periods
of fifty-four years each, and about thirty-three days, comprehend the en-
tire extent of their revolution, it is evident that the times of the returns
will pafs through a circuit of one year and ten months, every Chaldean
period being ten or eleven days later, and of the equable appearances about
thirty-two or thirty-three days. Thus, though this eclipfe happens about
the middle of July, no other fubfequent eclipfe of this period will return
to the middle of the fame month again, but wear conftantly each period
ten or eleven days forward, and at laft appear in winter, but then it be-
gins to ceafe from affecting us.


Another conclufion from this revolution may be drawn, that there will
feldom be any more than two great eclipfes of the Sun in the interval of
this period, and thefe follow fometimes next return, and often at greater
diftances. That of 1715 returned again in 1733 very great; but this
. prefent eclipfe will not be great till the arrival of 1820, which is a revo-
lution of four Chaldean periods: fo that the regulations of their circuits
muft undergo new computations to aflign them exactly.


Nor do all eclipfes comein:at the South Pole; that depends altogether
on the polition of the lunar nodes, which will bring in as many from the
- expanfum one way as the other: and fuch eclipfes will wear more fouth-
erly by degrees, contrary to what happens in the prefent cafe.


The eclipfe, for example, of 1736, in September, had: its center in
the expanfum, and fet about the middle of its obfcurity in Britain; it will
wear in at the North Pole, and in the year 2600, or thereabouts, go. off
in the expan/um.on the fouth fide of the Earth..


The eclipfes therefore which happened about the creation are little more
than half way yet of their ethereal circuit; and will be 4000 years before
» they enter the Earth any more. This grand revolution feems to hays
been entirely unknown to the ancients..


Tt


964 A NY Dapp Ww sittin mT fT ON


It 8 particularly to be noted, that eclipfes Which have happened many
ecntutiés avo will not bé found by Gur prefent tablés to agree exadily with
dicient obfervations, by reafon of the great Anomalies in the lunar moe
tions ; which appears an inconteftible demonftration of the fion-eternity of
the univerfe. For it feems confirmed by undeniable proofs, that the Moon
now, finifhes her period in lefs time than formerly, and will continue by the
centripetal law to approach nearer and nearer the Earth, and to go fooner
-and fooner rotind it: nor will the centrifugal power be fufficient to com-
penfaté thé different gravitations of fuch an affemblage of bodies as confti-
tute the folar fyitem, which would come to ruin of itfelf, without fome
new regulation and adjuftment of their original motions. There aré two
ancient éclipfes of the Moon, recorded by Ptolomy from Hipparchus,
which afford an undeniable proof of the Moon’s acceleration. The firit
of thefé was obferved at Babylon, Dec. 22, the year before Chrift 383:
when the Moon began to be eclipfed about halfan hour before the Sun rote,
dnd the éclipfe was not over before the Moon ‘fet: but, by moft of our
Aftrononiical Tables, the Moon was fet at Babylon half an hour before
the eclipfe began’; in which cafe, theré could have been no poflibility of
obferving it. The fecond eclipfe was obferved at Alexandria, Sept. 22,
the year before Chrift 201; where the Moon rofe fo much eclipfed, that
the eclipfe muft have begun about half an hour before fhe rofe: whereas,
by moft of our Tables, the beginning of this eclipfe was not till about ten
minutes after the Moon rofe at Alexandria. Had thefe eclipfes begun and -
ended while the Sun was below the hofifon, we might have imagined,
that, as the ancients had no certain way of meafuring time, they might
have been fo far miftaken in the hours that we could not have laid any ftrefs -
on their accounts. But, as in the firft eclipfe the Moon was fet, and con-

- fequently the Sun rifen, before it was over ; and in the fecond eclipfe the’
Sun was fet and the Moon not rifen till fome time after it began: thefe
are {uch circumftances as the obfervers could not poflibly be miftaken in,
Mr. Struyk, in his catalogue, notwithftanding the exprefs words of Pto-
lomy, puts down thefe.two eclipfes as obferved at Athens; where they
might have been {een as above without any acceleration of the Moon’s mo-
tion: Athens being twenty deg. Weft of Babylon, and feven deg. Weft of
Alexandria. We are credibly informed, from the teftimony of the
ancients, that there was a total eclipfe of the Sun prediGed by Thales to
happen in the fourth year of the 48th -- Olympiad, either at Sardis or Mi-
, + Each Olympiad began at the time of full Moon next after the Summer Solftice, and lafted
four years, which were of unequal lengths, becaufe the time of full Moon differs eleven days every -
year: fo that they might fometimes begin onthe next day after the Solftice, and at other times not ©
till four weeks after it. “The firft Olympiad began in the year of the Julian period 3938, which
was 776 years before the firft year of Chrift, or 775 before the year of his birth; and the laft
Olympiad, which was the 293d, began A. D. 393. At the expiration of each Olympiad, the
Olympic Games were celebrated in the Elean fields, near the river Alpheus in the Peloponnefus
{now Morea), in honour of Jupiter Olympus. See Strachius’s Brev. Chron. p. AT
+ etus


a
OF PRS Re vLiota ys A 96>


Tetas in Afia, where Técles then refided.. That year cortefpon ds to the
585th year before Chrift ; when accordingly there happened a very fignal
eclipfe of the Sun, on the 28th of May, an{wering to the prefent 10th of
that month, central though North, America, the fouth parts of France,
Italy, &c. as faras Athens, or the ifles in the AZgean Sea; which is the
fartheft than even the Caroline tables carry it; and confequently make it
invifible to any part of Afia, in the total charatter ; though I have good
reafons to believe that it extended to Babylon, and went down central
‘over that city. We are not however to imagine, that it was fet before it
paiied Sardis and the Afiatic towns, where ‘the ‘prediGtor lived ; becaufe
an invifible eclipfe could have been of nofervice to demonttrate his ability
in aftronomrical fciences to his countrymea, as it could give no proof ef
its reality. .


- The reader may probably find it difficult to underftand the reafon why
Mr. Smith fhould reckon this eclipfe to have been in the 4th year of the
_ 48th Olympiad, as it was only in the end of the third year: and alfo why
‘the 28th of May, in the 58cth year before Chrift, fhould anfwer ‘tothe
prefent 10th of that month. But we hope the following explanation will
remove thefe difficulties. The month of May (when the Sun was eclip-
fed) in the 585th year before the fir year of Chrift, which was a leap-
year, fell in the latter end-of third year of the 48th Olympiad; and the
fourth year of that Olympiad began at the fummer folftice following 5.
but perhaps Mr. Smith begins the years of the Olympiad from January,
in order te make them correfpond more readily with Julian Years ; and fo
feckons the month of May, when the eclipfe happened, to be in the
fourth year of that Olympiad. The place or longitudé of the Sun at that
time was ¥ 29 degrees 43 minutes 17 feconds, to which fame place the
Sun returned (after 2300 years, viz.) A. D. 1716, on May g?@ 5° 6™ after
hoon : fo that, with refpect to the Sun’s place, the gth of May, 1716,
anfwers to the 28th of May in the s8sth year before the firft year of
Chrift; that is, the Sun had the fame longitude on thofe days.


For a farther illuftration. TAucydides relates, that a folar eclipfe hap-
pened on a Summer’s day in the afternoon, inthe firlt year of the Pelo-
ponnefian war, fo great, that the Stars appeared. Rhodius was victor ia
the Olympic games the fourth year of the faid war, being alfo'the fourth
of the 87th Olympiad, on the 428th year before Chrift. So that the-
eclipfe muft have happened in the 491ft year before Chrift ; and by com-
putation it appears, that on the 3d of Auguft there was a fignal eclipfe
which would have pafied over Athens, central about {ix'in the evening,
but which our prefent tables bring no farther than the ancient Syrtes on
the African coaft, above 400 miles from Athens; which, fuffering im that

No. 50. 11 G Cafe


/


964, AN FLLUS TRATION


cafe but 9 digits, could, by no means exhibit the remarkable darknefs re.
cited by. this hiftorian ; the center therefore feems:to have pafled Athens
about fix in the evening, and probably might go down about Jerufalem,
or near it, contrary to the conftruction of the prefent tables. I have
only mentioned thefe things by way of caution to the prefent Aftronomers
in re-computing ancient eclipfes ; and refer them to.examine the eclipfe
of Nicias, ‘fo fatal to the Athenian fleet.;. that. which overthrew the Ma-
eedonian army, &c. ;


. A longer period than the above-mentioned, for comparing and exa-
mining eclipfes which happened at long intervals of time, is. 557 years.
21, days 18-hours 30 minutes rr feconds, in which time there are-68go0°
mean lunations :. and the Sun.and node meet again fo nearly as to be but


11 feconds diftant: but then it is not the fame eclipfe that returns, as in
the fhorter period above-mentioned. 7


The following are the vifd/e Eclipfes, which will ha


time to the end of the prefent century.


ppen: from this.


Eclipfe of the Sun, Sept. 16, 1792, at 12 in the morning. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Moon, Feb. 25, 1793, at 10 at night. » Partial.
Eclipfe of the Sun, Sept. 5, 1793, at 3,in the afternoon. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Sun, Jan. 31, 1794,. at 4 in the afternoon. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Moon, Feb. 14, 1794, at 11 at night. Total.
Eclipfe of the Sun, Aug. 25, 1794, at 5in the afternoon, Partial.
Eclipfe of the Moon, Feb. 4, 1795, at 1 in the morning. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Sun, July 16, 1795, at g in the morning. Partial.
' Eclipfe of the Moon, July 31, 1795, at 8 at night. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Sun, June 26, 1797, at 8 inthe evening. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Moon, Dec. 4, 1797, at 6-in the morning. Partial.
Eclipfe of the Moon, May 27, 1798, at 7 at night. Total.
Eclipfe-of the Moon, O&. 2, 1800, at 11 at night. Partial,


In Aftronomy, eclipfes of the Moon are of great ufe for afcertaiming-


the periods of her motions ; efpecially fuch eclipfes as are obferved to be
alike in all circumftances, and have long intervals of time between them.
‘In Geography, the longitudes of places are found by eclipfes,. as already
fhewn ;, bit for this purpofe eclipfes of the Moon are more ufeful than:
thofe of the Sun, becaufe they are more frequently vifible, and the fame
lunar eclipfe is of equal largenefs and duration at-all places. where it is feen.
In Chronology, both folarand lunar eclipfes ferve to determine exactly.
the time of any paft event ;. for there are fo many particulars obfervable:

in:


OFSASTRQLOG Y - 96s


im evety eclipfe, with refpect to its quantity, the places. where itis vifi-
ble (if. of the Sun), and the. time of the day.or night, that itis impoflible
there can be two folar eclipfes in the courfe of many ages which are alike
in.all circumftances. "


OF the Ficure,and Motion of the EAR TH; the CrfANen bf
SEASONS, . the Cause. of EARTHQUAKES) &c.


The Earth, among Aftronomers, is confidered a8 one of the primary
planets.; and its figure was accounted’ by fome of the ancients to be like
that of an oblong: cylinder; by others, of the form of a drum, and by
others to be flat; But the moderns have demonttrated it to be nearly
fpherical, or rather, an oblate fpheroid, flatted towards the poles. |


Before we enter more minutely into thefe {peculations, it will be pro-
per.to deferibe, the various circles of the globe, and to explain.its feverak
divifions and boundaries, as well imaginary as real, in order to give
all my. readers a perfect idea of, the fubjett before them. For this’ pur-
pofe I have fubjoined a plate of the Armillary. Sphere, which is ar
artificial contrivance, reprefenting the feveral circles proper to the theory’
ef the mundane world, put together in their natural order, to eafe and
affift the imagination in conceiving the conftitution of the fpheres, and
the various phenomena of the celeftial bodies. For this purpote the
Earth is placed in the centre, pierced by a line fwppofed to be its axis,
the upper point of which is fixed in the arétic or north pole, and the
lower extremity in the antarctic or -fouth pole; whence the two {mall
circles defcribed near thefe points are called the arctic and antarétic cir-
cles. The outer circle, in which the axis or poles of the world are fixed,,
reprefents the meridian, or f{uppofed line over any given place, to which
when the Sun comes, it is then mid-day or noon. The broad circle,.
which croffes the whole, and divides the {phere into two equal parts, is
ealled the horifon ; becaufe it divides the heavens and the earth into two
equal parts or hemifpheres, called the upper and the lower, the one light,:
and the other dark. — It likewife determines the rifling and fetting of the
Sun, Moon, or ftars, in any particular latitude ; for, when,any of thefe
appear juft at the eaftern part of the horifon, we-fay,. it rifes ; and,. when
it does fo at the weftern. part, we fay, it fets. From. hence alfo the alti-
tude of the Sun and ftars-is reckoned, which is their height above the
horifon. The. poles. of the horifon are the zenith and the nadir, or the
points immediately over our heads, and undér our feet, diametrically


oppofite to cach. other, in the upper and lower hemifpheres. The see
) wide


566 AN ILLUSTRATION


wide circle reprefents the zodiac, the middle line df which is the ecliptie, :
or Sun’s way in the zodiac, from which he never departs. It is not fo.
with the Moon and the planets ; for, though their conftant way. is in this:
‘circle of the zodiac, yet they continually deviate from its center, or
-ecliptic line, from north to fouth, and from fouth to north; which
deviations are-called:their latitudes, and their-extent each way deter

-mines -the width of the zodiac. ‘The two circles within the zodiac,

which interfeét each other at right angles, conftitute the equinoétial co-

lure, and the-equator, or equinottial liné. The points, where thefe cir-

cles interfect each other, divide the quarters of the year. That .which

pafles through the two equino@ial points determines the equinoxes ;

and that which pafles through the poles of the ecliptic determines the
folftices. When the Sun is in the firft of them, viz. in the fpring, March

2oth, it is called the vernal equinox ; and when in autumn, September

22d, itis called the autumnal equinox; at both which times, it is equal
.day and night all over the world. So likewife when the Sun is in the other,

and at his greatedt af{cent above the equator, and feems to defcribe the
“tropic of Cancer, it is called the Summer folitice, and makes the longeft’
day ; and on the contrary, when he is at his greateft defcent below the’
equator, and.feems to defcribe the tropic of Capricorn, it is called the

“Winter folftice, or fhorteft day. Thefe tropics are two circles defcribed,

one immediately under and next adjoining’to the ar@tic circle; and the’
_other, that next above the antardtic circle. They are diftant from the’
equinoctial ‘twenty-three degrees twenty-nine minutes. That on the

north fide of the line is called the tropic of Cancer, and the fouthera

tropic has the name of Capricorn, as pafling through the beginning of
each of thofe figns. |


It muft here likewife be noted, that the Equator, or Equinottial Line,
spafles through the eaft and weft points of the horifon, and at the meri-
dian is raif@l as much above the horifon as is the complement of the
latitude of the place. From this circle, the latitude of places, whether
north or fouth, begin to be reckoned in degrees of the mieridian; but
the longitude of places are reckoned in degrees of the equator itfelf.° All
people living on or under this circle, which is called by geographers and
navigators the Line, have their days and nights conftantly equal: and
‘this is the reafon why, when the Sun enters the two points where the
ecliptic interfetts the equinodtial, afid is exa€tly upon this line, namely,
in the Spring and Autumn, as above-mentioned, the days and nights
become of equal duration all over the globe. All the ftars direCtly under
this circle have no declination, but always rife due eaft, and fet full weft.
Zhe hour-circles are drawn at right angles ‘to it, pafling caihee 8 every

fifteenth


OOP MAR HO, Oe Gar: 967


fifteenth degree; and the parallels to it are called parallels of declination.
Having premifed fo much by way of explaining the fphere, I fhall now
proceed with the fubjeét immediately before us.


‘ . ; ; o

That the Earth is a fpherical -body may be demonftrated from the fol-
lowing among other confiderations, 1. All the appearances of the heavens,
both at land and at fea, are the fame as they would be if the Earth werea


globe. 2. In eclipfes of the Moon which are caufed by the thadow of the


Karth falling upon the Moon, this fhadow is always circular, and a body
can be no other thana globe, which in all fituations cafts a circular fhadow.
3. Several navigators have failed quite round the globe, fteering their
courfe directly fouth and weit, till they came to the Magellanic Sea, and
from thence to the north and weft, till they returned to their port from
the eaft; and all the phenomena which fhould naturally arife from the
Earth’s rotundity happened to them. Befides, their method of failing


was alfo founded upon this hypothefis, which could never have fucceeded


fo happily, if the Earth had been of any other figure. It is true, the
furface of the Earth is not an exact geometrical globe, but then the ine
qualities are fo inconfiderable, that the higheft mountain bears no greater
proportion to the bulk of the Earth than a grain of duit does to a com-
mon globe. The figure of the Earth then was reckoned by mathemati-
cians and geographers as perfe@ly {pherical, excepting the {mall inequali-
ties in its furface of mountains and valleys, till an accident engaged the
attention of Sir Ifaac Newton and Mr. Huygens, who demontftratec, from
the laws of hydroftatics, and the revolution of the Earth about its axis,
that its figure was not a true {phere, but an oblate {pheriod flatted towards
the poles. Monfieur Richer, when at the Ifland of Cayenne, about five
degrees diftant from the equator, found that his clock, which at Paris
kept true time, now loft two minutes and twenty-eight feconds every day.
Now, though heat will lengthen pendulums, and confequently retard their
motion, it is certain the heats of Cayenne were not fuflicient to folve this
phenomenon, which can flow only from a diminution in t 1¢ preflure of
gravity. For, as the Earth revolves about its axis, allits parts will en-
deavour to recede from the axis of motion, and thereby the equatoreal
parts where the motion is quickeft will tend lefs towards the center than
the reft; their endeavour to fly off from the axis about which they revolve
taking off part of their tendency that way; fo that thofe parts will be-
come lighter than fuch as are nearer the poles. ‘The polar parts, there-
fore, will prefs in towards the center, and raife the equatoreal parts, till
the quantity of matter in the latter is fo far increafed as to compentfate for
its lightnefs, and an equilibrium be reftored. On which account, the
form which the Earth afflumes will be that of an oblate {pheroid, whofe
No.’ 50. iT od fhorter


968. AN wih LU S TouRjA 1130 0N


fhorter axis pafles through the poles. By virtue only of the rota-
tion of the Earth about its axis, the weight of bodies at tle equa-
tor is lefs than at the poles, in the proportion of 288 to 289. From
hence arifes, as before obferved, a {peroidical form of the Earth,
and from that fpheroidical form arifes another diminution of gravity at
the equator, by which, if the Earth were homogencous throughout, bo-
dies at the equator would lofe one pound in 1121, and fo, on both ac-
counts taken together, the gravity of bodies at the poles would be to the
fame at the equator as 230 to 229. From whence, if we fuppofe the
gravity of bodies within the Earth to be directly as their diftance from
the center, thofe numbers will alfo exprefs the relation between its polar
and equatoreal diameter. This is upon a fuppofition that the Earth was
at firft fluid, ora chaos, having its folid and fluid parts confufedly mixed
together; but if we fuppofe it at firft partly fluid and partly dry, as it
now is, fince we find that the land is very nearly of the fame figure with
the fea, except raifed a little to prevent its being overflowed, the Earth
mutt {till be of the fame form ; for otherwife the major part of the water
would flow towards the equator, and fpread itfelf like an inundation over
all the land in thofe parts. Thistheory met with great oppofition from
Monfieur Caffini, who, having meafured the meridian of France, declared
(with great reafon likewife, if the obfervations had been correct) that the
Earth, inftead of being flattened, was lengthened towards the poles, that
is, inftead of being an oblate it was an oblong fpheroid, higher at the
poles by about ninety-five miles. So wide a difference, between philo-
fophers of fo high rank, determined at length the King of France, at an
expence becoming a Monarch, to employ two companies of Mathemati-
cians, the one to meafure the length of a degree of the meridian at the
equator, and the other the length of a degree at the polar circle, that by
comparing them together, and, with the length of the degree of France,
itmight be known whether the Earth were oblong or flat towardsthe poles.


It is certain, if the lengths of the degrees of latitude decreafe as we
go from the equator towards the poles, then the axis is greater, and. the
figure an oblong {pheroid: but, on the contrary, if thefe lengths increafe
2s you remove towards the poles, the axis is lefs than a diameter at the
equator, and confequently the figure an oblate {pheroid. ‘This laft ap-
pears.as well by the theory of Sir Ifaac Newton, to be the ¢rue figure,
as it does by the refpective menfurations of thefe mathematicians, which
were performed with furprifing exactnefs. The figure of the Earth
being thus determined, we next proceed to fhew the triple means whereby -
jt is agitated and governed in its motion, and whereby night and day,
and all the phenomena of the feafons, are produced. ,


I | In


Summer


ili
: ! il i)


i
!


KOuli adeeb, Oa, 0. Gale 969


In the firft place, the earth is found to havea et motion round
its own axis, from weft to eaft, which it performs in twenty-four hours,
and thereby occafions the perpetual fucceffion of days and nights. It is
every way agreeable to reafon, that the earth fhould revolve about its own


axis, to account for the appearance of fuch a vaft number of ftars, which.


feem to perform their revolutions round the earth in twenty-four hours ;
for the motion of thefe ftars, were it real, would be incredibly {wift, and


beyond all imagination, becaufe their Piiance i in refpec& of us is almoft ’


‘infinite, and the orbit they have to run round fo prodigioufly great, that
they muft move at leaft 100,000 miles in a minute.


The Earth has, fecondly, an pote motion round the Sun, which it
performs every year, whereby it produces the different feafons, and the
lengthening and fhortening of the days. It being now an eftablithed
dotirine that the Sun is the. centre of our fyftem, and that the Earth
moves round it, we fhall avoid entering into any difquifitions upon that
head, fince it is only neceflary we fhould explain the phenomena which
arife from the Earth’s annual motion, in conjunétion with the rotation
round its axis ; having firft premifed, that the earth, in its annual mo-
tion, hath its axis always in the fame dire¢tion, or parallel to itfelf,


Su pofe w v gs «& (in the annexed figure of the earth’s motion) be
the earth’s orbit, and S the Sun. Through the center of the Sun draw


the right line v S = parallel to the common fection of the equator and.


the ecliptic, which will meet with the ecliptic in two points | y 2, And,
when the earth feen from the Sun is.in either of the points v or a, a
right line Sv orS , joining the center of the earth and Sun, will coin-
cide with the common fection of the equator and ecliptic, fa will then
be perpendicular to A.B, theaxis of the earth, or of the equator, becaufe
- it is in the plane of the equator. But the fame line ts alfo perpendicular
to the circle which bounds the light and darknefs, and therefore the axis
of the earth will be in the plane of that circle, which will therefore pats
: through the poles of the earth, and will cut the equator and all its pa-
rallels into equal parts. When the earth, therefore, isin the beginning
of =, the Sun will be feen in vy, in the common {fection of the ‘equator
and ecliptic, in which pofition, the circle of illumination touches both
poles: the Sun is vertical to the equator, and the days and nights are
equal all the world over ; and this is the {PHAE feafon, or vernal equinox.


The Earth in its annual motion going through =, m, and 7, towards


yw, and the common fection of the equator, and the can remaining


always parallel to itfelf, it will no longer pafs through the body of the
Sun a


%


hy,


970 | AN ILLUSTRA TI Og Ni: eli


Sun: but, in w, it makes a right angle with the line S P, which joins
the centers of the Sun and Earth. And becaufe the line S P 1s not in the
plane of the equator, but in that of theecliptic, the angle B P-S, which
the axis of the Earth B'A makes with it, will not now be a right angle,
but an oblique one of 66% degrees, which is the fame with the inclina-
tion of the axis to the plane of the ecliptic. Let the angleS PL be a
right angle, and the circle, bounding light and darknefs, will pafs through
the point L, and then thearch BD, or the angle B P L, will be 23? de-
grees, that is, equalto the complement of the angle BPS toa right angle.
Let the angle B P E bea right angle, and then the line PE will be in the
plancof the equator. Therefore, becaufe thearches BE and LT are equal,
each of them being quadrants; if the common arch B T be taken away,
there will remain T E equal to L B, equal to 23: degrees. Take EM equal
to ET, and through the points Mand T defcribe two parallel circles, T'C
MN; the one reprefents the tropic of Cancer, and the other the tropic of
Capricorn. And, the Earth being in this fituation, the Sun will approach
the neareft that it can come to the North Pole: he will fhine perpendi-
cularly on the point T, and confequently will be vertical to all the in-
habitants under the tropic of Cancer, when he comes to their meri-


dians, {t is manifeft that the circle which bounds light and darknefs -


reaches beyond the North Pole B to L; but towards the fouth it falls
fhort to the South Pole A, and reaches no further than F. Through
Land F, let two parallels to the equator be. defcribeds Thefe will re-
prefent the polar circles, and, while the Earth is in P, all that tract of
it which is included within the polar circle K L continues in the light,
notwithftanding the con{tant revolution round the axis. On the contrary,
thofe that lie within the antardtic circle remain in continual darknefs.


It is alfo manifeft, that all the parallels between the equator and the
arctic circle are cut by the circle bounding light and darknefs into un-
equal portions, the largeft portions of thefe circles remaining in the light,
and the fmalleft in darknefs ; but thefe parallels which are towards the
antarclic circle have their greateft portions in darknefs, and their leaft in
light; and the difference of thefe portions will be greater or lefs, ac-
cording as the circles are nearer to the pole or to the equator. There-
fore, when the Sun is feen in Cancer sw, the inhabitants of the northern
hemifphere will have their days at the longeft, and their nights at the
fhorteft, and the feafon of the year will be fummer.. The contrary of
this will happen to the inhabitants of the fouthern hemifphere.


As the earth moves on from » by «=, x, the north pole returns, the
diurnal arches begin gradually to decreafe, and the nocturnal to increafe,
4 : and


OF Ase oTLR OLi OG ¥, 971


and, of confequence, the Sun’s rays will fall more and more obliquely,
‘and his heat will proportionably diminith, till the earth comes tov, when
the Sun will appear in «, at which time the days will again be equil
to the nights to all the inhabitants of the earth, the circle bounding
light and’ darknefs pafling, in this pofition, through the poles. This
will be the feafon called autumn.


The Earth moving onthrough v, ¥, anda, the Sun will be feen to
‘go in theecliptic through = =, m,and ¢, and will appear todecline from
the equator, towards the fouth, fo that, when the earth is really in ow,
-the Sun will appearin #. And whereas the axis A B always retains its
parallelifm, the earth will have the fame pofition, and afpett, in re{peét
to the Sun, that it had when it was in wy; but with this difference, that
the tract within the polar circle K L was in continual light while the
earth was.in yw; and now, the earth arriving ates, that fame tract will be
altogether in darknefs; but the oppofite {pace within the circle F G
will be in a-continual illumination, and at the pole A there will be no
night for the fpace of fix months. Here likewife, of the parallels between
the equator and the north pole, the illuminated portions are much lefs
than the portions which remain in darknefs, the contrary of which
happened in the former pofition; fo likewife the Sun at mid-day will.
appear vertical to all the inhabitants that live in the tropic M N; {fo that
it will appear to have defcended towards the fouth from the parallel TCE
to the parallel MN, through the arch CQ.N, which is forty-feven |
degrees. This will be the feafon called winter.


Laftly, as the earth journeys on from s through a and m™ to «,
the Sun appears to pafs through « and x to », and the northern
climes begin to return, and receive more directly the enlivening beams
of the Sun, whofe meridian height does now each day increafe ; the days
now lengthen, and the tedious nights contract their ref{pective arches ;
and every thing confpires to advance the delightful feafon of the {pring,
with the equality of days and nights, as was fhewn when the earth was


in «+, from which point we began to trace its motion.


The third motion of the earth is that motion by which the poles of
the world revolve about the poles of the ecliptic, and occafion what is
commonly called the preceflion of the equinoxes, which is a flow motion
of the equinodtial points towards the weft, that is, 2 antecedentia, or
contrary to the order of the figns. This retrograde motion, by carrying
the equinoctial points to meet the Sun in his apparent annual motion,’
makes him arrive at them fooner every year than he would do if thofe

No. 51. Mane: mean ee points ©


gi


972 ANS BWE US TREAT POON


points continued immoveable ; and this arch of regreflion being fifty»


{econds a year, or one degree in feventy-two years, makes the equinoxes
happen twenty minutes in time fooner each year than they would other-
wife do. And, though this change be not fenfible in a few years, yet.
thefe points are found to have a very different fituation from what they
had two thoufand years ago. is :


By reafon of this preceffion of the equinoétial points, the fixed ftars.


feem to move towards the eaft, and thereby to have their longitude,
which is always reckoned upon the ecliptic, from the vernal equinoctial’


point, encreafed. And hence the conftellations feem to have deferted.
the places allotted them by the ancient aftronomers ; for inftance, the
beginning of the fign Aries, which in Hipparchus’s time was near“the
vernal equinoctial point, and gave name to that point of the ecliptic, is


now removed'near a whole fign, or thirty degrees, eaftward; fo that:


Aries is now'where Taurus ufed to be, Taurus where Gemini ufed to
be, &c. and thus all the conftellations of the zodiac have changed their
ancient places. But, to avoid confufion, aftronomers have thought fit
to let the feveral portions of the ecliptic, where thefe conftellations. were
at firit obferved to be, retain their old names ; fo that the vernal equi-
noctial point is ftill reckoned the firft degree of Aries. However thefe
portions of the ecliptic, where the conftellations were at firft, are called
anafira, to diftinguifh them from the places where they now are, which
are termed. /fe//ata.


The orbit, in which the earth moves round the Sun, common expe-
tence proves to be-elliptical ; for, were it circular, the Sun’s apparent
diameter would always be the fame; but we find it is not, for, if it be
aneafured with a micrometer in winter-time, it will be found confider-
ably larger than in f{ummer, and it will be greateft of all when the Sun
is in the eighth degree of Capricorn, which thews that is the place of
the aphelium, it being then thirty-two minutes forty-feven feconds ;
whereas, when the Sun is in the eighth degree of Cancer, his diameter
is but thirty-one minutes forty feconds. Hence it is evident that the
Sunisreally nearer to us in the midft of winter than in’ the midift of
fummer ; but this feems a paradox to many, who think the Sun muft
needs be hotteft when itis neareft to us, and that the Sun is apparently
more diftant from usin December than im June. Asto the Sun’s being
hotter, it istrue, it is fo toall thofe places which receive his rays direétly
or perpendicularly ; but we find his heat abated om account of the obli-
quity of the rays, and his fhorter continuance above the horizon at that


time; and, as to his diftance, it is only with refpect to the zenith of


the


v4


OO Pe ATS ee RPO tL O° Ge ¥:3 973
the place, not the center of the earth; fince it is plain the Sun may
approach the centre of the earth, at the fame time that is recedes from:
the zenith of any place; and, agreeably to the Sun’s nearer diftance in
the winter, we obferve his apparent motion is then quicker than in the

“fummer; for in the eighth. degree of Capricorn it is about fixty-one
minutes per day, but in the eighth degree of Cancer, his motion is but
fifty-feven minutes per day ; accordingly, we find the fummer half-year
eight days longer than the winter half-year, as appears by the following
computation, according to the new ftyle.


The Winter half-year includes _ The Summer half-year includes

In September, 7 Days. cohen Et wviabe 10 Days,
Oober 31 April 30
November 30 May 3h

December 31 ; June 30 -

January 31 hea: July 31
February 28 — Auguft 31
March 20% September 23
178% 186:
| Winter half-year 178:

Difference in the two half-years - - 8 Days.


For, the Sun’s attracting force being one part of the caufe of the planet’s
motion, and this force always increafing and decreafing in the inverfe
ratio of the f{quares of the diftances, it is evident the velocity of the
planet will always be greater the nearer it. is to the Sun, and wice vera.
En this manner the earth’s motion round the Sun is invariably continued,
and its revolution performed in three hundred fixty-five days fix hours
nine minutes fourteen: feconds.


The earth, in its natural and original itate, Des Cartes, Burnet, Wood-
ward, and Whifton, fuppofe to have been perfectly round, {mooth, and
equable ; and they account for its prefent rude and irregular form prin-
cipally from the waters of the great deluge, which inundated and over-
flowed the whole furface of the globe, to the height of fifteen cubits
above the higheft hills; for to that height Mofes exprefsly faith, Gen.
vil» 20, ** the waters prevailed.”’ Some have ventured .to deny there
were any mountains at all before the flood, though he exprefsly mentions
them as a ftandard for the height of the water, Others have denied the
-univerfglity of the deluge, though the words of the text be, ‘* that all
the hills over the whole earth were covered.” Others have had récourfe™

to


ay


O74 AN Thus TRA T LE O.N


to the fhifting of the earth's center of gravity, and therefore, will -have
all parts drowned fucceflively ; and our famous theorift, Dr. Burnet,
fancies an earth made on purpole to be drowned at that time, which, be-
ing in form of an orbicular cruft on the face of the fea, a3 we now call it
(for he fays there was none before the deluge), fell down into the water
and fo drowned its inhabitants.


But the Holy Scriptures tell us, that the waters of the deluge came
from two funds, ** the great deep below,” and the ‘* rains above.” Again,
when we look to the internal parts of the earth, even tothe greateft depth
men have ever reached, we find that the body of the terreftrial globe is
compofed of ftrata, or layers, lying over one another, which appear to
be fediments of a flood: befides, in the bodies of thefe ftrata, though never
fo folid, nay, even inclofed within the folidity of the firmett flints, mar-
ble, ftone, &c. we find a prodigious variety of the exuvie, or remains
of fifhes, fuch as their fhells, teeth, &c. as well marine ones, as thofe —
which live in lakes and rivers ; and from a due obfervation of thefe, and
repeated confiderations upon them, it was, that the learned: Dr. Wood-
ward founded what he delivers upon this fubje@t, which therefore is not
fo much a theory of the earth, as neceflary deduCtions, and unavoidable
confequences, drawn from the matters of fa€t, as they are laid down in
the fecond part of his natural hiftory of the earth. 1. That thefe marine
bodies, and the other {poils of frefh water fifhes, were borne forth out‘ of the
fea by the univerfal deluge, and on return of the water back again from off
the earth they were left behind on land. 2. That, during the time of the
deluge, all the ftone and marble of the antideluvian earth, all the metals
in it, all the mineral concretions, and in a word all foflils whatever,
that had before attained any folidity, were totally diflolved ; their con-
ftituent corpufcles disjoined, and their cohefion perfectly ceafed ; and that
the faid corpuicles, together with the corpuicles of thofe which were not
before folid, fuch as fand, earth, and the like; as alfo, ali animal bodies,
teeth, fhells, vegetables, in fhort, all bodies whatever, that were either
upon the earth, or that conftituted the mafs, if not quite down to the
abyfs, yet to the greateft depths we ever dig, were affumed up promif-
cuoufly into the water, and fuftained therein; fo that the water and thefe
bodies made up one common mafs. 3. That, at length, all the mats that
was thus borne up in the water was again precipitated, and fubfided to-
ward the bottom, and that this fubfidence happened generally according
to the ‘laws of gravity. That the matter fubfiding thus formed the
ftrata of ftone, earth, marble, coal, &c. of which ftrata the terreftrial
globe, .or at leaft as much of it as hath been difplayed to human view,
doth chiefly confit. 4. That-the ‘ftrata of marble, &c. attained their

aie folidity


Oe ASUS Re OuTO GC. &  ogs


folidity as foon as the fand, or other matter, whereof “they confit, was
arrived at the bottom, and well fettled there ; and that all thofe ftrata,
which are folid at this day, have been fo ever fince that time. 5. That~
thefe {trata were originally parallel, plane, and regular, and confequently
rendered the furface of the earth even and {pherical ; that they were
contiguous, and not broken and interrupted as we find them now; and
that the water lay then upon them, conftituting a fluid {phere, envi-
~ roning all the globe round. 6. That, after fome time, by the force of an
agent feated within the earth, thofe ftrata were broken on all fides of the
globe ; that they were diflocated, and their fituation varied ; from whence
thefe elevations and depreflions on the f{urface of the globe, as the moun-
tains, valleys, and other inequalities. é


From thefe obfervations he concludes, that Noah’s deluge was quite
univerfal, covering the whole earth, even the higheft mountains quite
round the globe ; that, at the time of the deluge, the water of the ocean
was firft brought out on the earth, and immediately fucceeded by that of
the abyfs ; that, upon the difruption of the ftrata, or the elevation of
fome, and the deprefflion of others, towards the end of the deluge, this
mafs of water fell back towards the loweft parts of the-earth, into lakes,
and other cavities, into the channel of the ocean, and through the fiffures
by which this communicates with the ocean, in the abyfs which it filled,
till it came to an equilibrium with the ocean ; that the deluge com-
menced in the {pring feafon, the waters coming forth upon the earth ia
the month which we call May; that the deluge did not happen from
an accidental concourfe of natural caufes, but that many things then hap-
pened which never: could poflibly happen without the affiftance of a
fupernatural power.


Mr. Whifton, on the contrary, in his new theory of the earth, fup-
pofes the deluge began on the 18th of November, in the 2365th year of
the Julian period, that is, 2349 years before the Chriftian zra ; that
acomet, defcending towards its perihelion in the plane of the ecliptic,
paffed quite near the globe of the earth, the very fame day that the deluge
began: he afcribes to the univerfal deluge all the changes and alterations
that have happened in the furface and infide of the globe: he adopts the
hypothefis of Dr. Woodward, and indifcriminately makes u‘e of all the
oblervations of this author with regard to the prefent ftate of the globe.


The terreftrial globe having once met with the tail of the comet, con-
fitting of atranf{parent fog, or aqueous atmofphere, it muft, in pafling
through it, appropriate to itfelf fome part of the matter it contained.

No. 51. 51K All


#


976 ANCHE MU SRA TT oN


All that was found within the fphere of attraction of the globe muft have
fallen upon the earth, and that in form of rain, fince this tail partly con-
fitted of aqueous vapours. This tail being ‘* the cataracts of heaven
that were opened,” the rain may be made as plentiful as one pleafes, even:
to occafion an univerfal deluge, the waters of which would eafily cover -
the higheft mountains. However, Mr. Whifton does not attribute the
whole deluge to thefe waters only, for, agreeably to Scripture, he affirms
that the earth, upon the approach of the comet, would no doubt feel the
force of its attraction ; fo that the fluid, contained in the great abyfs,.
would be agitated by fo violent a flux and reflux, that the fuperficial cruft
ef the earth could not refift it, but be broken in feveral places, and the -
interna waters diffufed over the furface,’** and the fountains of the great
deep broken up.” Mr. Whifton, to difpofe of all this water, fuppofes,.
that, as foon as theearth in continuing its courfe had got fome way from.
the comet, the effects of its attraction, the flux and reflux ceafed im the
great abyfs, and then the fuperior waters were violently precipitated.
through the fame paffages by which they came out; the great abyf{s
fwallowed up all the fuperfluous waters, and its cavity was found capable:
enough toreceive, not only the waters which it had already contained,.
but alfo all thofe which. the tail of the comet had left behind it ;. fince,.
during the time of its agitation, and the burfting of its cruit, it had en-
Yarged the fpace by breaking-down on all hands.the earth that environed:
it. It was, in like manner, at this time, that the earth, which till then-
was fpherical, became elliptic, occafioned not only by the effect of the
centrifugal force caufed by its diurnal revolution, buat likewife by the -
action of the comet = and that, becaufe the earth, in pafling through the:
tail of the comet, was fituated in fuch-a manner that it prefented its.
equatoreal parts. to this body ; and becaufe the force of the comet’s
attraction, concurring with this centrifugal force of the earth, took
‘away thofe parts of the equator with fo much the more facility as the
eruft was broken and disjoined in a vaft many places; and becaufe the ac
tion of the flux and reflux of the aby{s made a more violent impreffion.
upon the parts under, the equator than any where elfe, -


Dr. Halley refolves the deluge into the fhock of a comet, or fome other
fuch tranfient body: the great agitation that muft have been oceafioned
by itin the fea, he obferves, would be fufficient to account for all thofe
ftrange appearances of heaping vatt quantitiesof earth, and high cliffs,
upon the beds of fhells, which once were the bottom of the fea, and.
raifing up mountains where none were’ before: fuch a fhock as this,
impelling the folid parts, would occafion the waters, and all fluid
fybftances that were. unconfined, as the fea is, to run violently with an

i impetus.


Oo BTA Stim Oo. 0° Cy 977


bmpetus toward that part of the globe where the blow was received, and —
that with force fufficient to take with it the very bottom of the ocean,
and would carry it upon land. ‘There are various other fyftems of the
univerfal deluge, feveral of which may be feen in Monfieur Buaffon’s
Natural Hiftory, tom, i.


Monfieur ‘de Buffon, arguing fee the fpheroidical figure of the earth, '
and the laws of hydroftatics, fuppofes that the earth, as well as the ater
planets, are parts ftruck off from the body of the Sun by the collifion of
comets ; and confequently, when the earth aflumed its form, it was in a
{tate of liquefaction by fire. Of this, fays he, we fhall be the more eafily
convinced, when we confider the nature of the matter contained in the
' body of the earth, the greateft part of which, as fand and clays, ‘are vi-
trified or vitrifiable fubftances ; and, on the other hand, when we reflect
upon the impoffibility of the earth’s being ever in a ftate of fluidity pro-
duced by water, fince there is infinitely more land than water; and, be-
fides, water has not the power of diffolving fand, ftones, vd se tr
fubftances of which the earth is compofed. How far the inequalities in
the face of the earth, the beds of rivers, lakes, &c. and the various ftrata
in its internal parts, ferve to confirm this hypothefis, may be feen in
Hiftoire Naturelle, &c. tom. i. by M. de Buffon.


The arguments of different philofophers and hiftorians, relative to
the deluge, and theory of the earth, have founded matter of enquiry
to naturalifts, how far the fame caufes, which mutt have produced not
only the mixtures, but the cavities and fiffures, in the earth, have been
the inlet and caufe likewife of earthquakes and volcanos. Earthquakes
confit of a violent agitation or trembling of theearth, generally attended
with a terrible noife like thunder, and fometimes with an eruption of:
fire, water, wind, &c. Volcanos are hollow fubterraneous combuttible
mountains, which vomit forth fire, flame, athes, cinders, &c. Earth-
quakes and volcanos are both accounted for upon the fame principles,
and may be thus.explained :—Thofe countries which are hollow and
_ fabterraneous, and which naturally yield great {tore of fulphur and. nitre,
or where fulphur is fablimed from the pyrites, are by far the moft in
jured and incommoded by earthquakes ; for, where there are {uch mines,
they muftfend up exhalations, which, meeting with fubterranedus ca-
‘verns, mutt ftick to the arches of them, as foot does to the fides of our
chimneys ; where they mix themifelves with the, nitre-or faltpetre which
comes out of thefe arches, in like manner as we fee it come out of the
infide of the arch of a bridge, and’ fo makes a‘kind of cruft which will
very eafily take fire 3. there are Several ways by which: this cruft may

take


978 A Nioal DU Sete Re ae, 1 ON


take fire, viz. by the inflammable breath of the pyrites, whichis a kindof
fulphur that naturally takes fire of itfelf. 2. By a fermentation of va-
pours to a degree of heat equal to that of fire and flame. 3. By the
falling of fome great{tone which as undermined by water, and, {triking
againit another, produces fome fparks that fet fire to the neighbouring
combuttible matter, which, being akind of natural gunpowder, at the
appulfe of the fire goes off with a fudden blaft or violent explofion, ram-
bling in the bowels of the earth, and lifting up the ground above it, fo
as fometimes to make a miferable havock and devaftation, -till ic gets
vent or adifcharge. Burning mountains and volcanos are only fo many
{piracles ferving for the difcharge of this fubterranean fire, when it is
thus preternaturally aflembled ; and, where there happens to he fuch
a ftructure and conformation of the interior parts of the earth, that the
fire may pafs freely and without impediment from the caverns therein,
it affembles into thefe fpirals, and then readily and eafily gets out from
time to time without fhaking or difturbing the earth; but where a
communication is wanting, or the paflages are not fufficiently large and
open, fo that it cannot come at the faid fpiracles without firft forcing and
removing all obftacles, it heaves up and fhocks the earth, till it’ hath
made its way to the mouth of the vulcano, where it rufheth forth,
fometimes in mighty flames, with great velocity, and a terrible bellow-
ing noife. Earthquakes are fometimes confined to a narrow {pace, which
is properly the effect of the re-action of the fire ; and they thake theearth
jet as the explofion of a powder-magazine caufes a fenfible concuflion at
the diitance of feveral leagues. Thus a violent eruption of Etna will
caufe an earthquake over all the ifland of Sicily ; but it will never extend
to the diftance of three or four hundred leagues. In like manner, when
fome new vents of fre have been formed in mount Vefuvius, there are
felt at the fame time earthquakes at Naples, and in the neighbourhood
of the volcano; but thefe concuffions have never fhaken the Alps, nor
been communicated to France, or other countries remote from Vefuvius,
Sometimes they are felt. at confiderable diftances, and fhakea long trac
‘of ground without any.eruption or vulcano appearing. We have in-
ftances of earthquakes which were felt the fame time in England, France,
Germany, and even'in Hungary; and thefe extend always a great deal
more in.length than in breadth ; they fhake a tract of ground with mare
or lefs violence, in different places, in proportion as it is remote from the
fire; and they are almoft always accompanied witha dull noife, like that
of a heavy carriage rolling along with great rapidity.


Dr. Woodward gives us another theory.of earthquakes. He endea-
vours to fhew, that the fubterraneous heat or fire, which is continually


3 - elevating


‘OF CAS T'ROO-L 0G ¥. , 949


elevating water out of the abyfs to furnifh the earth with rain, dew,
f{prings, and rivers, being ftopped in any part of the earth, and fo di-
verted from its ordinary courfe by fome accidental glut or obftruction in
-the pores or paflages through which it ufed toafcend to the furface, be-.
‘comes by fuch means preternaturally afiembled ina greater quantity than
ufual into’ one place, and therefore caufeth a great rarefaction and intu-
_mefcence of the water of the abyfs, putting it into great commotions and
diforders, and at the fame time making the like effort on the earth ; which,
being expanded upon the face of the abyfs, occafions the agitation and
concuflion which we call an earthquake.


But Dr. Stukeley has introduced a new notion in the theory of earth-
quakes, and ‘thas endeavoured to prove that they are caufed by electricity.
He urges a variety of objections againft the foregoing hypothelis, which
afcribes earthquakes to fubterraneous winds, fires, vapours, or any thing
that occafions an explofion, and thus heaves up the ground. He thinks
there is ‘no evidence of the cavernous ftructure of the earth, which this
hypothefis requires ; but that, on the contrary, there is reafon to believe
that it is in a great meafure folid. Earthquakes have alfo frequently
happened without any eruption of fire, vapour, fmoke, or f{mell, which
he thinks is utterly inconfiftent with the fuppofition of their being oc-
cafioned by any fubterraneous vapours ; efpecially in cafes where the
fhock is of confiderable extent ; -befides, this is a caufe altogether inade-
quate to fuch an effect ; fora fubterraneous power, capable of moving a
furface of earth only thirty miles in diameter, muft be lodged at leaft
‘fifteen or twenty miles below the furface, and move an inverted cone of
folid earth, whofe bafe is thirty miles in diameter, and its axis fifteen or
twenty miles, which he judges to be abfolutely impoflible; how much
4more-inconceivable, then, that any fuch power could produce the earth-
quake of 1755, which was felt in various parts of Europe and Africa,
and-the Atlantic Ocean ; or that of Afia Minor, A. D. 17, by which
thirteen great cities were deftroyed in one night, and which fhook a
mafs of earth three hundred miles in diameter, in order to which the
moving power, if it had been internal fire or vapour, muft have been
lodged two hundred miles below the furface! Farther, in earthquakes
the effect is inftantaneous ; whereas the operation of elaftic vapour and
the difcharge of it muft be gradual, and require a long {pace of time ;
and, if they were owing to explofions, they muft alter the furface of the
country where they happened, deftroy the fountains and fprings, and
change the courfe of its rivers, which is contradicted by hiftory and ob-
fervation. “Fo all which itis added, that the ftrokes which fhips receive
during anearthquake muft be occafioned by fomething that could commu-

No. 51. 11 L. nicate


98a A Nw ELgk UeS FoR AT # ON


nicate motion with a much greater velocity than any heaving of the earth ~
under the fea by the elafticity of generated vapours, which would only:
produce a gradual fwell, and not an impulfe of the water, refembling a
thump againft the bottom of a fhip or ftriking againft a rock. Dr.
Stukeley, finding the common hypothefis infufficient, was led to con-
clude that earthquakes were proper electrical fhocks ; and a_ parti-
ticular furvey of the phenomena, that either precede or attend them,
confirmed this opinion: he obferved that the weather was ufually dry
and warm for fome time before an. earthquake happened, and that the
furface of the ground is thus previoufly difpofed for that kind of elec~
trical vibration in which it confifts; whilft at the fame time, in fome
places were earthquakes have happened, the internal parts, at a {mallk
depth below the furface, are moift and boggy ; and thence he infers, that
they reach very little below the furface. Headds, that the fouthern re-
gions are more fubject to earthquakes than the northern, on account of
the greater warmth and drinefs of the earth and air, which are qualities
fo neceflary to electricity. It was alfo obferved, that before the earth=
quakes at London in1749, all vegetables were remarkably forward, and:
electrity is well known to quicken vegetation. They were likewife:
preceded by frequent and fingular appearances of the aurora borealis and
auftralis, and by a variety of other meteors which indicate an electrical
ftate of the atmofphere.. Dr. Stukeley apprehends, that, in this ftate of
the earth and air, nothing more is neceflary to.produce an earthquake
than the approach of a. non-electric cloud to any part of the earth, when
in an highly electrified ftate, and the difcharge of its contents upon it ;.
and that, as the difcharge from an excited tube occafions a commotion:
in the human body, fo the fhock, produced by the difcharge between
the cloud and many miles in compafs. of folid earth, muft. be an earth.
quake, and the {nap from the contact be the noife attending it. He
iuppoies, that a large black. cloud which fuddenly covered the hemifphere
a little before the earthquake of 1749 might have occafioned. the fhock,.
by the difcharge of a fhower. The noife, it has. been obferved,. ufually
precedes.the fhock ; whereas, if the concuffion depended upon a. fubter-
raneous eruption, it muft have been quite the contrary. .The flames.and
fulphureous fmells which fometimes attend earthquakes. are.more eafily
accounted for, as Dr. Stukeley thinks, from the fuppofition. of their. be-
ing electrical, phenomena than on any other hypothefis. The fudden
extenfive agitation, both of land and water, accafioned by earthquakes,
can only be effected by electricity. The little damage generally done by
earthquakes, and the nature of the impulfe which they give to fhips,
_ already taken notice of, fuggeft an argument, that they.are owing not to

any convulfion in the bowels of the earth, but. to an uniform vibration.


along


OIF, A’ Stk RIO LOG WiA.- 66s


along its furface, occafioned by an electrical fnap; and that they are
_ electrical phenomena, Dr. Stukeley farther infers, from their chiefly
affecting the fea-coaft, or places near rivers ; we may add alfo, eminences;
and finally from the effets which they produce on weak conttitutions,
fuch as pains in the back, head-achs, cholics, &c. fimilar to thofe oc-
cafioned fometimes by electrification. After all, he does not prefume to
fay, how the earth and atmofphere are put into that eletrical and
vibratory {tate, which prepares them to give or receive that fnap, and
fhock, which is called an earthquake; but this he thinks as difficult to
account for as magnetifm, gravitation, mufcular motion, and many other
fecrets in nature. Several circumftances have been remarked by other
writers, which confirm the theory that fuppofes earthquakes to be elec-
trical phenomena. Signior Beccaria, whofe name often occurs in the
hiftory of electricity, agrees with Dr. Stukeley, in fuppofing, that earth-
quakes are electrical . phenomena; but he imagines that the electric
matter which occafions them is lodged deep in the bowels of the earth;
and, if inthis fituation its equilibrium fhould by any means be deftroyed,
fo that the beft method of reftoring it fhall be by the fluid’s burfting its
way into the air, and traverfing feveral miles of the atmofphere to come
to the place where it is wanted, it may eafily be conceived, that violent
concuflions may be given to the earth, by the fudden paflages of this
powerful agent; and that the electric fluid is fometimes collected
in the .bowels of the earth, he thinks probable from the appear-
ance of ignes fatui in mines, which fometimes happens, and is very
probably an electrical phenomenon. This ingenious philofopher ob-
ferves, that, if two pieces of glafs, inclofed in a thin piece of metal, be
held in.the hand, while a large fhock is fent through them, a ftrong
concuflion or vibration will be felt, which fometimes breaks them to
pieces. Mr. Henly, another excellent electrician, has difcovered a me-
thod of increafing the effect of the explofion upon glafs, fo as to afford a
very natural idea of an earthquake. Between the ends of two wires, laid
on a piece of glafs, with their extremities pointing to each other, and
about an inch diftant, through which the difcharge is to be made, he
places a thick piece of ivory upon the glafs, and on the ivory a weight
at pleafure, from one-fourth of an ounce to fix pounds; the glafs is
broken by an explofion into innumerable fragments, and fome of it is
reduced into an impalpable power: the weight is fhaken by the explofion
and fometimes thrown off fromthe ivory. In this experiment, if the
glafs is very thick, fo that the force of the explofion is not fufficient to
break it, it will be found marked with the moft lively prifmatic colours.
The appearance of an earthquake may be alfo reprefented by caufing the


explofion of a battery to pafs over the furface of any fubstances on aay.
mall.


~982 AN LG@TLUSTRA TION


fimall fticks or cards are placed, which will never fail to be fhaken, and
often be thrown down, by the explofion ; or, by making a difcharge over
the farface of water, in which cafe the report will be much louder than |
when the difcharge is made through the air; anda hand plunged deep

into the water will feel the concuflion; and we may add, that the {park
which paffes over the furface of the water in this experiment bears a
great refemblance to thofe balls of fire that have fometimes been feen over
the furface of the fea or land ia the time of a earthquake. . Dr. Prieftley
contrived Various methods of exhibiting the phenomena of earthquakes.
He made the eleGric flafh to pafs over wet boards {wimming in water,
over either of thefe‘feparately, or over both at once, on which pillars,
é&c. were erected ; and thus, whilft the board reprefented the earth, and
the ‘water the fea, the phenomena of both during an earthquake were
exhibited at the fame time. Dr. Prieftley, the ingenious hiftorian of
electricity, after having largely tecited the obfervations of Dr. Stukeley
and Signior Beccaria, does not abfolutely decide which of thefe two phi-
lofophers has advanced the more probable opinion concerning the feat
of the electric matter which occafions earthquakes ; but he thinks a more
probable general hypothefis than either of them may be formed out of
them both. Suppofe, fays he, the electric matter to be fome way or
other accumulated on one part of the furface of the earth, and, on ac-
count of the drinefs of the feafon, not eafily to diffufe itfelf ; it may,
as Signor Beccaria fuppofes, force itfelf away into the higher regions of
the air, forming clouds in its paflage out of the vapours which fioat in
the atmofphete, and occafion a fudden fhower, which may ‘farther pro-
mote the paflage of the fluid. The whole furface, thus unloaded, will
receive a concuffion, like any other conducting fubftance, on parting
with, or receiving, a quantity of the electric fluid ; the rufhing noife
will likewife {weep over’the whole extent of the country; and, upon
this fuppofition alfo, the fluid, in its difcharge from the country, will
naturally follow the courfe of the rivers, and alfo'take the advantage of
any ‘eminences to facilitate its afcent into the higher regions of ‘the air.
‘See farther on this fubje&t, Phil. Tranf. vol. xli. page 641, &c. Beccaria’


Lettre dell’Electricifmo, page 216, 362, &c. or Prieftley’s Hiftory of
Electricity, Period. x.-fect. 12.


How far thefe arguments and obfervations are fufficient to explode
the former theory of earthquakes, and to folve the various and compli-
cated effects of their deftructive operation, muft be left to the determina-
‘tion of the attentive reader, after he has maturely contemplated the
following authentic narration of fome of the moft fatal earthquakes that
ever excited terror and trepidation in the minds of men,


3 The


OW F ¢A°S#TUREO’ L'0'G Yi 4 93


The earthquake, which happened in Sicily in the year 1692 3, as re-
lated by Mr. Hartop, F. Burgos, and.Vin, Bonajutus, is one of the
moft fatal, and exhibits the moft lamentable cataftrophe of the kind,
recorded in hiftory. It extended over the whole ifland ; and even Naples
and Malta were affected by the fhock. It was of the fecond kind men-
tioned by Ariftotle and Pliny, viz. a perpendicular pulfation or fucceffion.
The motion was fo rapid and violent, that no body could ftand upon
their legs ; thofe who lay on the ground were toffed from fide to fide as
ona rolling billow, and high walls leaped from their foundations many
yards diftant. The mifchief it did is amazing ; almoft all the buildings
in the country were thrown down. Fifty-four cities and towns, befides
an incredible‘number of villages, were either deftroyed or greatly da-
maged. We fhall only inftance the fate of Catania, one of the moft
famous, ancient, and flourifhing, cities in the kingdom, the refidence of
feveral monarchs, and an univerfity. This once famous, now unhappy,
Catania, to ufe the words of F. Burgos, had the greateft fhare in the
tragedy. F. Anton. Serrovita, beingon his way thither, and at the dif-
tance of a few miles, obferved a black cloud, like night, hovering over
the city ; and there arofe from the mouth of Mont Gibello great fpires of
flame, which fpread all around. The fea, all of a fudden, began to
roar, and rife in billows ; and thete was a. noifeas if all the artillery in
the world had been at once difcharged. The birds flew about aftonithed ;
the cattle in the fields ran crying, &c. His and his companions hortes
{topped fhort, trembling ;'fo that they were forced to alight. - They
were no fooner off, but they were lifted from the ground above two palms ;
when, cafting their eyes towards Catania, he with amazement faw no-
thing but a thick cloud of duft in the air. ~ This was the fcene of their
calamity; for of the magnificent Catania there was not the leaft foot-
itep to be feen. .S. Bonajutus affures us, that, of 18,914 inhabitants
18,000 perifhed therein. ‘The fame author, from acomputation of the
inhabitants, before and after the earthquake, in the feveral cities and
towns, finds that near 60,000 perifhed out of 254,900.


Jamaica is remarkable for earthquakes.’ The inhabitants, Dr. Sloane
informs us, expect one every year. This author gives us the hiftory of
on: in 1687; and another horrible one in 1692 is defcribed by feveral
anonymous authors. In two minutes time this fhook down and drowned
nine tenths of the town of Port Royal. The houfes funk out-right, 30
or 40 fathoms deep.’ The Earth, opening, fwallowed up people; and
they rofe in other ftreets, fome in the middle of the harbour; and yet
many were faved, though there were 2000 people loft, and 1000 acres of
land funk.~ All the houfes were thrown down throughout the ifland,
PeaNO. £1 11 M One


984 ANNs EhloLoUis T RA TEGN
One Hopkins. had his plantation removed half a mile from its place..
Of all wells, from one fathom to fix or feven, the water flew out at the
top with a vehement motion. While the houfes on one fide of the {treet
were {wallowed up, on the other they were thrown on heaps ; and the
fand in the ftreet rofe like wayes in the fea, lifting up every body that
ftood on it, and immediately dropping down into pits ; and at the fame-
inftant a flood of water, breaking in, rolled them over and over ; fome-
catching hold of beams and rafters, &c. Ships and floops in the har-
bour were overfet. and loft ;. the Swan frigate; particularly, was thrown.
over by the motion. of the fea and finking of the wharf, and was driven
over the tops of many houfes, The calamity was attended with a hollow
rumbling noife like thunder. In lefs than a minute, three quarters of the
houfes, and the ground they ftood on, with the inhabitants, were all.
funk quite under water ; and the little part left behind was no better
than aheap of rubbifh. The fhake was.fo violent, that it threw people.
down on their knees or their faces as they were running about for fhelter..
The ground heaved and {welled like a rolling fea ; and feveral houfes {till
ftanding, were fhuffled and moved fome yards ont of their places. A.
whole ftreet is faid to be twice as broad now as before; and in many:
places, the earth would crack, and-open and fhut, quick and faft. Of -
which openings, two or three hundred: might be feen atatime; in fome
whereof, the people were fwallowed up ; others, the earth clofing, were.
caught by the middle, and preffed to death ;. as to.others, the heads only.
appeared. The larger openings {wallowed up houfes ; and out of fome
would iffue whole rivers of waters, {pouting up a great height into the-
air, and threatening a deluge to that part the earthquake pared. The-
whole was attended with ftenches and offenfive{mells, the noife of falling
mountains at a diftance, &c. and the {ky in a minute’s time was-turned:
dull and reddifh like a glowing oven. Yet, as great a fufferer-as Port-
Royal was, more houfes were left ftanding therein than on the whole-
ifland befide. Scarce a planting-houfe or fugar-work was left ftanding
' inall Jamaica. A great part of them were {wallowed up,. houfes, peo-=.
ple, trees, and all at once ; in-lieu of which, afterwards appeared great
pools of water, which, when dried up, left nothing but fand, without
any mark that ever tree or plant had been thereon. About. twelve miles.
from the fea the earth gaped, and fpouted out with a prodigious force
vaft quantities of water into the air; yet the greateft violences were
among the mountains and rocks ; and it is a general opinion, that the.
nearer the mountains. the greater was the fhake, and that the caufe
thereof lay, there. Mott of, the rivers were ftopped up for twenty-four.
hours, by the falling of the mountains, till, fwelling up, they made
themfelves new. tracts. and channels,. tearing up in their paflage trees, &c.
ee After


.


OPA: SHAT yRYOFEIO! Gs Yr 985
After the great fhake, many of thofe people who efcaped got on-board
fhips ‘in the harbour, where many continued above two months; the
fhakes all that time being fo violent, and coming fo thick, fometimes
two or three in an hour, accompanied with frightful noifes like a
ruftling wind, or a hollow rumbling thunder, with brimftone blatts, that
they durft not come afhore. The confequence of the earthquake was a
general ficknefs, from the noifome vapours belched forth, which {wept
away above 3000 perfons of thofe who were left. After the detail of
thefe horrible convulfions, the reader will have but little curiofity left
for the phenomena ofthe earthquake at Lima in 1687, defcribed by Fa.
Alvarez de Toledo, wherein above 5000 perfons were deftroyed ; this
being of the vibratory kind, fo that the bells in the church rang of them-
felves; or that at Batavia, in 1699, by Witzen; that-in the north of
England, in 1703, by Mr. Thorefby ; thofe in New England, in 1663
and 1670, by Dr. Matthew ; that of Italy in 1742; that of Lima and
the port of Calas in Peru, in 1746, which lafted fifteen minutes, and
demolifhed moft of the buildings in the city, and deftroyed moft of the in-
habitants, and fwallowed up feveral fhips then in the port; that of Lon-
don, in 1749; thofe in 1750, felt.in many parts of England; that of 1777,
felt in the north of England; or that at Lifbon, in 1755, though
this deferves a more particular account than many others of much lefs
confiderable extent and duration. ‘The three preceding years had been.
remarkably dry, infomuch that fome {prings which had been plentifully
fupplied with water were totally loft ; and the predominant winds were
eaft and north-eaft, accompanied with various, though very {mall, mo-
tions and tremblings of the earth. The {pring of the year 1755 was very
rainy and wet; the weather on the day preceding the earthquake, which
happened on the 1ft of November, was clear and uncommonly warm for
the feafon, and had continued clear and rather warmer than ufual for fe-
veral days before: The day of the earthquake broke with a ferene fky,
the wind continuing at eait; but about nine o’clock the Sun began to
grow dim; and foon after was heard a rumbling noife, like that of car-
riages, which increafed to fuch a degree as to equal that of the loudeft
cannon; upon which the firft fhock was felt, which was immediately
fueceeded by a fecond and a third, the whole duration of which was
about eight minutes; about twelve o’clock another fhock was felt.


During the firft fhock, the greateft part of the public edifices and
other buildings of the city were thrown down; and not lefs than fixty
thoufand of its inhabitants buried in the ruins. The earth opened in
fiffures in feveral parts, and feveral light flames of fire were obferved to
iffue from the fides of the mountains, refembling thofe of kindled pan

coal...


of6- ANY DELI Str ReAtT TO N


coal. Subterraneous rumblings were alfo felt, attended with a difcharge .
of great quantities of fmoke. The water in. the fea rofe feveral times,
and in a few.minutes made three fluxes and refluxes, rifing above the
greateft {pring-tides no lefs than fifteen Englifh feet. The fhock was
fo violent fifty leagues off at fea, as greatly to injure the deck of a fhip, -
and to lead:the captain to apprehend, that he had miftaken his reckoning
and ftruck on a rock. The thock was alfo felt about the fame time at
‘Oporto, by which the whole city was fhaken, feveral chimneys, ftones, —
and crofles, were thrown down, and fome buildings opened at top; and
the {welling in the river was fo confiderable, thattwo large fhips, which
were juft got over the bar, were driven back into the harbour. The
fame fhock was equally violent at Madrid, Seville, and Cadiz; andin this
Jaft place the fea rofe in a wave at leaft fixty feet higher than ufual, dafhed
againft the rocks on the weft part of the town, and againft the walls with
fuch violence as to beat in the breaft-work and a great part of the walls,
fo that feveral perfons were drowned by it. .-The day when the earth-
quake happened at Cadiz was as clear and ferene as the fineft fummer-day
in England. Many other cities, both in Spain and Portugal, were con-
fiderably damaged. The effects of this earthquake, in violently agitating
the waters, were perceived in many parts of England, Scotland, and Ire-
land; and the fhock not only reached to Switzerland, Holland, and other
parts of Europe, but it was communicated to Africa, and deftroyed fe-
veral cities on the coaft of Barbary; and it was alfo felt about the fame
‘time in the ifland of Madeira, where the water rofe full fifteen fect
perpendicular above high-water mark.


The laft terrible earthquake of which we have any account happened
in Sicily and Calabria in the year 1782.) It began about fix o'clock in
the morning of the 5th of Pebruary, and the fhocks continued to be felt
with more or lefs violence for near two months. The-commotions firtt
‘broke out at Mount Caulone, one of the Apennines, which traverfes
through all Italy. The undulations were obferved te be in every direc-
tion; but the vertical ones were the moft fatal. The towns and villages
in Calabria, that were either totally or partly deftroyed by it, are very
numerous: among the principal ones are Franc Villa, Batatico,, Mon-
teleone, Vallelonga, Francia, Mileto, Soriano, Areta, Roffano, Palma,
Cinquefronde, Sinopoli, St. Euphemia, Scilla, Reggio, Beva, Meffina,
Oppido, Bagnara, Cozenza,: Catanzara, Maide,: Caftiglone, &c. ‘The
face of the whole country became entirely changed; the courfes of
many {prings and rivers were either totally abforbed, or turned into new ©
directions ; and feveral water-mills ‘were left dry, without the leaft
veftiges of the channels by which they had been driven. A confiderable
ae 3 tract


iO Fy A SET RE OT O.G- Yu: . 987
tract of country was entirely fwallowed up by the fea; and that which
was before covered with water became dry land. Whole flocks of
fheep. and herds of cattle were {wallowed up as they were grazing;
the earth opened and fhut, exhibiting chafms of the moft horrible depth, ~
“vomiting forth fulphureous flame and vapour. Upwards of twenty-fix
thoufand fouls were either precipitated into the bowels of the earth, or
mangled by the fall of buildings, and buried in the ruins! By this’
no lefs fatal than recent example of the phenomena of earthquakes, it
fhould feem that the caufe or feat of them lies far below the furface of ~
the earth or depths of the ocean.


Of the “YE DES.


The Tides are two periodical motions of the waters of the fea, called
alfo the flux and reflux, or the ebb and flow. When the Moon is in
the firft and third quarter, i. e. when fhe is new and full, ‘the tides are
high and fwift, and are called /pring-tides—when fhe is in the fecond
and laft quarter, the tides are lower and flower, and are called neap-tides,


In the phenomena of the tides, the fea is obferved to flow, for certain
hours, from fouth towards north ; in which motion, or flux, which lafts
about fix hours, the fea gradually fwells; fo that, entering the mouths
of rivers, it drives back the river-waters toward their heads, or {prings.
After a continual flux of fix hours, the fea feems to reft for about a
quarter of an hour; after which it- begins to ebb, or retire back again
from north to fouth, for fix hours more; in which time, the water
finking, the rivers ref{ume their natural courfe. Then, after a feeming
paufe of a quarter of an hour,. the fea again begins to flow, as before ;
and thus alternately. Thus does the fea ebb twice a-day, and flow as
often; but notin the fame hours thereof. The period of a flux and »
reflux is twelve hours forty-eight minutes, fo that the tides return later
and later each day, by forty-eight minutes, or three quarters of an liour
and three minutes. Now twelve hours forty-eight minutes is a lunar
day ; i. e. the Moon paffles the earth’s meridian later and later each day
by forty-eight minutes. So that the fea flows as often as the Moon
paffes the two meridians of the world, namely, that above and that
below the horizon ; and ebbs as often as fhe paffes the horizon, both
the eaftern and weftern points thereof. This farther agreement we
likewife obferve between the Moon and the fea, that the tides, though
conftant, are not equal, but are greateft when the Moon is in conjunc-
tion or oppofition, and leaft when in quartile, thereto. But thofe tides
are the greateft which happen in the new and full Moon, at the time

No, 52. Pe EE IN eo lige of


988 A Mi BDU STRAT TON


of the equinoxes. And thefe fame effe€ts are obfervable-throughout moft
of the coafts of Europe; only that the tides are fo much the‘lefs, and
happen later, as the coafts are the more northerly.


_ Thefe phenomena of the tides are admirably accounted for, from the
principles of gravitation. All that is requifite to their folution is, that
the Earth and Moon, and every particle thereof, mutually gravitate to-
wards each other; the reafonablenefs of which affumption is every way
apparent. Indeed the fagacious Kepler, long ago, conjeCtured this to
be -the caufe of the tides. <‘If,” fays he, “* the earth ceafed to atrract _
its waters towards itfelf, all the water in the ocean would rife and flow
into the Moon; the {phere of the Moon’s attraction extends to our earth,
and draws up the water.” Thus thought Kepler, in his Introd. ad
Theor. Mart. . This furmife, for -it was then no more, is now abun-
dantly verified in the theory firft amply deduced by Dr. Halley, from
the Newtonian principles. However, we may obferve with M. de la
Lande, (Aftronomie, vol. iv. Paris, 1781.) that feveral of the ancients,
and among others, Pliny, Ptolomy, and Macrobius, were acquainted
with the influence of the Sun and Moon upon the tides. And Pliny
fays expefsly, that the caufe of the ebb and flow is in the Sun, which
attracts the waters of the ocean; and adds, that the waters rife in pro-
portion to the proximity of the Moon to the Earth. i


- To illuftrate the foregoing obfervations, let NESQ, in the annexed
plate, fg. 1. reprefent the earth, covered over with water ABDF; NS the
axis of the earth, EQ the equator, TR the tropic of Cancer, ¢r the
tropic of Capricorn, M the Moon in her orbit, S the Sun in his. Now,
fince all bodies are endued with an attracting virtue, the Moon will attract
all the water in the neareft hemifphere F A B with degrees of force which
are inverfely as the {quares of the diftances from all parts; and therefore
~ with the ftrongeft force where the diftance is leaft, viz. in the point A,
directly under her: and this attraction being in this hemifphere contrary
to that of the earth, the water in all parts from B to F towards A will
have its gravity decreafing, and be higheft of all at the part A; and con-
fequently muft there ftand higher than at the point F, where, being more
attracted by the Earth, it muft be heavier and nearer to the center, as is
evident from the laws of hydroftatics. Again, in the hemifphere F D B,
the attraction of the Moon confpires with that of the earth; but, de-
creafing as the fquares of the diftances increafe, the joint force of attrac-
tion will every where decreafe from F and B towards D, the point op-
pofite to the Moon; where, again, the waters will be lighteft, and there-
fore ftand higheft to preferve the equilibrium. Whence it appears, that,
| Oy


»


OFA ST ROL AG Ye4- > a5


by this {um and difference of the Moon’s and Earth’s attra¢tion, there
will neceffarily enfue a protuberance or {welling of the waters, which
we call tides of flood, in the two points A and D direfly under the
Moon. Alfo in the two points F and B, as the waters are there moft
attracted, fo they will be heavieft, and confequently rife to the leaft
height from the earth’s furface, whence they are called tides of ebb, or
the ebbing of the water. If to the power of the Moon we add that of
the Sun, we fhall have the tides confiderably augmented at the conjunc-
tion. in $,.or_oppofition in H, that, is, at the new and full Moons,
which are called the {pring-tides; as thofe which happen when the Sun
is at O or P are called neap-tides, the waters at A and D being then
loweft, becaufe the attrattion of the Moon is then counterbalanced by
that of the Sun. It is farther to be obferved, that of the two tides of
~ flood, at A and D, that at A is greateft to any place T in the northern
latitude, when the Moon is in the northern figns, and above the horizon:
for the point A is then nearer the zenith of the place G than the oppo-
fite point D is to the fame place at R twelve hours afterwards ; and con-
fequently, the height of the tide T G is greater than that of the oppofite
tide R g. The contrary of this happens when the Moon is in the
fouthern figns. |


That there are two tides of flood, and two of ebb, fucceeding each’
other alternately at about the interval of fix hours, is obvious from the
figure: and that they happen later each day near an hour, is owing to
their exact correfpondence to the motion of the Moon, which daily ‘cul-
minates fo much later, That they happen not when the Moon is in the
meridian, but, about three hours after, is owing to the force of the
Moon being then greater than when in the meridian.of any place; as the
heat of the day is greater at three o'clock than at twelve; and the heat
of the fummer is greater in Auguft, than at the 21ft of June. Laftly,
that the greateft {pring-tides happen not at the a1ft of March and 23d
of September, but in February.and October, is becaufe the Sun. being
neareft the earth in December, ‘his influence is then ftrongeft, and {fo
muft quicken the.time of the greateft vernal tides; and, being Weakeft in
June, the time of the autumnal tides will neceffarily be retarded. The
{um of what has been faid is this: if NOPQ, jg. 2. be the furface
of the earth, T its center, IF KGLHCE a circle reprefenting the
{pherical furface of the waters covering the earth, and affected only by
the attractive power of the earth ; upon placing an attracting body atS,
the waters will no longer continue their {pherical figure, but be imme-
diately drawn into the {pheroidical figure A CBD, in fuch manner as
to be depreffed at Cand D to M and K, and elevated from L and I to *

1a ani


990 ANE 2G U's TR A TOON


and B; and the elevation AL or BI is double the deptefiion C M or
DK. That, if S bethe Sun, then A P—O K=A L+K D= 2¢ inches;
or 114 feet, if S be the Moon. ‘That, at the points E, F, G, H, (which
are called the octants,) the water is neithér elevated nor depreffed. That,
if any other body be placed at O, as the Moon, in the fame right line
TS; then, by the joint influence of both S and O, the elevation at A and
B will be incieafed, and the depreffion at C and D likewife. Laftly, if
S be in the fituation S, or vertical to the point D, it is plain its action to
raife the water D will be dire€tly contrary to that of the Moon in de-
prefling it there; wherefore the depreffion will not be fo great as before ;
for the fame reafon the elevation at A and B will be diminifhed, being -
now only as the difference of the two forces, whereas before they were
as the fum. :
We hall now confider the phenomena of the-tides which remain; and
firft, it is evident, that, if PN be the axis of the earth, and Q O the
diameter of the equator, then the Moon fituated at O, over one of the
poles, would accumulate the water over each pole, and the fpheroid would
be fo pofited as to have its longeft axis A B coinciding with the axis of the
earth PN. In this pofition of the fpheroid, it is:plain, there could be
no fuch thing as a tide in any part of the ocean over all the earth; for
every fection of the {pheroid, parallel to the equator, would be a circle;
coniequently, in any parallel of latitude, the water would beat an equal
diftance from the earth’s furface every mement of the diurnal revolution,
or natural day. Suppofe the Moon were removed from the direétion of
the earth’s axis, and pofited at S, fg. 3,. then will the axis of the aque-
ous {pheroid A B be turned towards S, and make an angle with the earth’s
axis, as A IT Por BTN. Then we obferve, that fince C, D,-are the
places of loweft water, that parallel ] K which pafles through the point
I on one fide the equator, and L M which paffes through M on the other,
will divide the earth into three zones, in two of which, viz. EN K and
LMP, there will be but one tide each day of the fame kind; for in-
{tance, in the parallel E F, a perfon at F will have high water, and at
E low water for twelve hours after. Again, in all the zone IK ML,
there will be two tides of the fame kind each day, as is evident from the
figure. Thefe limits, or the arch QI or OM, is the complement of
the Moon’s declination from the equator. If the Moon at S, fig. 4. be
over the equator, the longer axis of the {pheroid A B will now coincide
with the plane of the equator QO, and the fhorter axis C D with the
axis of the earth NP. Here it is obvious, that, in this fituation of the
Spheroid, the waters in the parts A B, with refpeét to thofeat C D, will
give the greateft difference of high and low water poffible to all parts of


the


OF AST ROL OG Y. 991
theearth ; and that there is no place but thofe two at the poles N, P, but
what has two tides of flood and two of ebb every twenty-four hours.
And this difference of the flux and reflux will decreafe from the equator
tothe poles.


It has been already obferved, that the greateft elevation of the waters
isnot when the luminary is in the meridian, but about three hours after,
becaufe the motion communicated to the waters during the arrival of the
meridian is not immediately deftroyed, but remains for fome time, and
receives a farther augmentation from that which is impreffed for about
three hours after. For the fame reafon, we obferve, the greateft and
leaft tides happen not on the day of the fyzygy, or quadrature, but on
the third or fourth after ; the fum or difference of the forces of the lu-
minaries not being till thenat a maximum. Let SFEG, fig. 5. be the
orbit of the Moon about the earth QN OP; but, as this is not circular
but elliptical, the center of the earth T will not be always at an equal
diftance from the Moon: but the Moon will be fometimes neareft the
earth, as when at S, and fometimes fartheft off, as at E. The point §
is called the perigeum, or perigee; and the point E the apogeum,
or apogee. The power of the Moon in her perigee is to that in the
apogee nearly as T'E3 to T'S?; and confequently the greareft tides will
be on the day of the perigee, or rather a few days after, for the reafons


above mentioned.


Such would the tides regulatly be, if the earth were all over covered
with fea very deep, fo that the water might follow the influence of the
Sun and Moon; but, by reafon of the fhoalnefs of fome places, and
the narrownefs of the {treights in others, by which the tides are propa-
gated, there arifes a great diverfity in the effect, not to be accounted
for without an exact knowledge of all the circumftances of the feveral
places where they happen ; as the pofition of the land, the breadth and
depth of the channels, direction of the winds, &c.


For a very flow and imperceptible motion of the whole body of water,
where it is (for example) two miles deep, will fuffice to raife its furface
ten or twelve feet ina tide’s time ; whereas, if the fame quantity of water
were to be conveyed through a channel forty fathom deep, it would re-
quire a very great ftream to effect it in fo large inlets as are the channel of
England and the German ocean; whence the tide is found to fet
ftrongeft in thofe places where the fea grows narroweft, the fame quan-
tity of water being, in that cafe, to pafs through a fmaller paflage. This
is moft evident in the ftreights between Portland and Cape la Hogue in

FINO. 52. 11 O Normandy,


992 A NWISLAL UsS TRA T LO N


Normandy, where the tide runs like a fluice ; and would be yet more’
between Dover and Calais, if the tide coming round the ifland did
not check it. This force, being once impreffed upon the water, conti-
nues to carry it above the level of the ordinary height in the ocean, par-
ticularly where the water meets a direct obftacle, as it does in St. Ma-
loes.; and where it enters into a long channel, which, running far into the
land, grows very ftraight at its extremity, as it does into the Severn fea
at Chepftow and Briftol. This fhoalnefs of the fea, and the intercur-
rent continents, are the reafons that in the open ocean the tides rife but —
to very {mall heightsin proportion to what they do in wide-mouthed
rivers, opening in the direction of the ftream of the tide, as it is obferved
upon all the weftern coafts of Europe and Africa, from Ireland to the
Cape of Good Hope; in all which a fouth-weft Moon makes high wa-
ter; and the fame is reported to hold in the weft of America. So that
tides happen to different places at all diftances of the Moon from the
meridian, and confequently at all hours of the lunar day.


It is to be confidered that, in order to allow the tides their full mo-
tion, the ocean, in which they are produced, ought to be extended from
eaft to weft ninety degrees at leaft. Becaufe the places, where the Moon
raifes moft and moft depreffles the water, are at that diftance from each
other. Hence it appears, that it is only in the great oceans that fuch
tides can be produced, and why in the larger Pacific ocean they exceed
thofe inthe Atlantic ocean. Hence alfo it is obvious, why the tides are
not fo greatin the torrid zone, between Africa and America, where the
ocean is narrower, as in the temperate zones on either fide; and we may
hence alfo underftand, why the tides are fo {mall in iflands that are very
far diftant from the fhores. It is manifeft that, in the Atlantic ocean,
the water cannot rife on one fhore but by defcending on the other; fo
that, at the intermediate diftant iflands, it muft continue at a mean
height betwixt its elevation on one and on the other fhore. But when
tides pafs over fhoals, and through {traits into bays of the fea, their mo-


tion becomes more various and complicated, and their height depends on
many circum{tances.


The tide that is produced on the weftern coafts of Europe, in the At-
-Jantic, correfponds to the fituation of the Moon already defcribed. Thus
itis high water on the coafts of Spain, Portugal, and the weit of Ireland,
about the third hour after the Moon has paffed the meridian; from thence
it flows into the adjacent channels, as it finds the eafieft paflage. One
current from it, for example, runs up by the fouth of England, another
comes in by the north of Scotland ; they take a confiderable time to


move


© Fy A SuTeRV Op L: OG Ye 952


move all this way, anditis high water fooneft at thofe places to which
they firft come, and it begins to fall at thofe places while they are {till
going on to others that are farther in their courfe. As they return, they
are notable to raife the tide, becaufe the water runs fafter off than it
returns, till, by a new tide propagated from the open ocean, the return
of the current is ftopped, and the water begins to rife again. The tide,
propagated by the Moon, in the German ocean, when fhe is three hours
_ paft. the meridian, takes twelve hours to come from thence to London-
bridge; fo that, when it is high water there, a new tide is already come
to its height in the ocean; and, in fome intermediate place, it muft be
low-water at the fame. time. Confequently, when the Moon has north.
declination, and we fhould expect the tide at London to be the greateft
when the Moon is above the horizon, we find it is leaft: and the con-
trary when fhe has fouth declination. At feveral places it is high water
three hours before the Moon comes to:the meridian ; but that tide which -
the Moon pufhes, .as it were, before her, is only the tide oppofite to that :
which was raifed by. her when fhe was nine hours paft the meridian. .


It would be endlefs to recount-all the particular folutions which are -
eafy corollaries from this doftrine ; as, why the lakes and feas, fuch as -
the Cafpian fea and the Mediterranean fea, the Black fea and Baltic, have
no fenfible tides :=for lakes are generally fo fmall,. that when the Moon
is vertical fhe attracts every part of them alike, and therefore no part of »
the water can be raifed higher thananother: and, having no communica-.
tion with the ocean, it can neither increafe nor diminifh their water, in »
order to rife or fall; and feas, that communicate by fuch narrow inlets, .
and are of fo immenfe an extent, cannot, in a few hours time, receive
and empty water enough to raife-or fink their furface any thing -fenfibly.
To demonftrate. the excellency of this dottrine, the example: of the:
tides in the port of Batfha, in the kingdom of Tonquin in the Eaft In-
dies, in 20 degrees 59.minutes north latitude, which are fo extraordinary .
and different from all others. we-have yet heard of; may fuffice. The :
day in which the Moon paffes the equinottial, the water .ftagnates there
without any motion; as the Moon removes from the equinocétial, the ~
water begins to rife and fall once a day.; and it.is high-water at. the {et- .
ting of the Moon, and low-water at her rifing. This daily tide, in
creafes for about feven or eight days, and then decreafes for as many days .
by the fame degrees, till this motion ceafes, when the Moon has returned .
to the equinoctial. When fhe has paffed the equinoctial, and declines .
toward the fouth pole, the water rifes and falls.again as before;. but it is
high water nowat the rifing, and low water at the fetting, of the Moon.
Sir Ifaac Newton, in order to account for this extraordinary tide, 004s

| eFS.


&.


> :
oop ” ANT PUD siTeROAYT 1-0 N


ders that there are two Mhlets to this port of Batfha, one from the Chinefe
ocean, betwixt the continent andthe Manillas, the other from the Indian
ocean, betwixt the continent and Borneo. This leads him to propofe, as
a folution of this phenomenon, thata tide may arrive at Batfha, through
one of thefe inlets, at the third hour of the Moon, and another through
the other inlet, fix hours after, at the ninth hour of the Moon. For,
while the tides are equal, the one flowing in as the other ebbs out, the
water muft ftagnate ; now they are equal when the Moon is in the equi-
-noétial; but, asfoonas the Moon’ begins'to decline on the fame. fide of
the equator with Battha, it has been fhewn that the diurnal tide muft
exceed the noéturnal, fo ‘that two greater and two lefs tides muft arrive
at Batfha by turns. Thedifference of -thefe will produce an agitation of
the water, which will rife to its greateft height at the mean time betwixt
the two greateft tides, and fall loweft at a mean time betwixt the two
leaft tides ; fo that it will be high water about the fixth hour at the fet-
ting of the Moon, and:low water at her rifing. When the Moon has got
‘to the other fide cf the equinodtial, the nocturnal tide will exceed the
diurnal ; and, therefore, the high water will be at the rifing, and low
“water at the fetting, of the Moon. The fame principles will ferve to
account for other extraordinary tides, which, we'are told, are obferved
in places whofe fituation expofes them to fuch irregularities, and which
appear to admit of no other folution.


“When the timeof high water at any place is, in-general, mentioned,
-it is to be underftood on the days of the fyzygies, or days of new and fall
Moon ; when the Sun and Moon pafs the meridian of the place at the
fame time, Among pilots, it is cuftomary to reckon -the time of flood,
or high water, by the point of the compafs: the Moon bears.on, allowing
three quarters of an hour for each point, at that time; thus, on the full
and change days, in places where it is flood at noon, the tide is faid:to
flow north and fouth, or at twelveo’clock.; in other places, on the fame
days, where the Moon bears 1, 2,3, 4, or. more, points to the eaft or
weft -of the meridian, when it is high water, the tide is faid to flow on
fuch point.; thus, if the Moon bears S. E. at flood, it is faid to flow
S.E. and N. W..or three hours defore the meridian, that is, at nine
o'clock: if it bears 5. W. it flows S. W. and N. E. or at three hours
after the meridian; and in like manner for other times of the Moon’s
‘bearing. The times of high water inany place fall about the fame hours
after a period of about fifteen days, or between one f{pring-tide and ano-
‘ther ; but, during that period, the times of high water fall each day later
‘by about forty-eight minutes. From thefe calculations, affifted by the
.obfervations of a number of different perfons, there have been collected,

| I ~ OR


O,P 7 A\Syur RzO0°L) 0; & Y; 995


onmoft of the fea-coafts of Europe, and many other places, the times when
itis high water, on the days of the new and full Moon; of which the
following exhibits a correét and ufeful Table.


O=05


O0000 0


H. . Mg
Abbrevrak, in France - Englifh Channel B 4. 30
Aberdeen, Scotland ~ German océan e Oo 45
Aldborough, England ahr! 4 Ditto 2 ~ 9 45
Ifle of Alderney, ditto - Englifh Channel - 125.0
River Amazon’s mouth, America Atlantic ocean “ 6.0
Ifle of Ameyland, Dutchland - = Germanocean - 7 30
Amfterdam, ditto j m Ditto . SG
St. Andrew’s, Scotland 2 Ditto at 2215
Ifle of Anholt, Denmark “ Sound . Pe hy Oto"
Antwerp, Flanders, ~ River Schelde ‘ 6.0
Archangel, .Ruffia, - White fea | 6
Ifle of Arran, Ireland - St. George’s channel - 14 00
R. Afhley, Carolina a Atlantic ocean = O. 4g
St. Auguftine, Florida -  - Ditto ae 4. 30
Baltimore, Ireland ~ Welttern ocean =e 4. 30
Cape Barfleur, France “ Englifh channel ~—- 7 30
Ifle de Bas, ditto - Ditto é 8 45.
Bayonne, ditto - - Bay of Bifcay - - 3/5 /90.8
Beachy Head, England. -~— Englith channel - O.
eet noe \Labrador - Hudfon’s Bay = NEO st Ome
Belfaft, Ireland a Irith fea =~ 10:0
Bellifle, France ~ - Bay of Bifcay =F) 43.30
Ifle Bermudas, Bahama lIfles - Atlantic ocean —. . va
Berwick, England ~ German ocean - 2:39
Ifle du Bic, Acadia “- River St. Lawrence aie Be
Blackney, England _- German ocean - 6 3
Cape Blanco, Negroland: = Atlantic ocean,» =- 9,45
Blanchart Race, France « Englifh channel - O°.
Port Louis, ditto - Bay of Bifcay =. 3.
Cape Bojador, Negroland — - Atlantic ocean . - fe)
Bourdeaux, France ecm Bay of Bifcay -. -= 3,
Boulogne, ditto - Englifh channel: . 10.,:,3
Bremen, Germany = River Wefer Bigs je, Oued
Breefound, Dutchland - German ocean. - 4 . 30
_ Breft, France : - Bay of Bifcay . nite une 45
Bridlington Bay, England German ocean = 8.45
Brill, Dutchland es Ditto “ 1,30


No. 52. 11. P Briftol, ;


v


‘996 «OA NY PLIOLiUs TR A‘T ION


Briftol, England is St. George’s channel =: 6 ;
Buchannefs, Scotland ~ German ocean x B.D
Button’s Ifles, North Britain =  Hudifon’s ftraits ae. 6 50
Gadiz, Spain ~ Atlantic ocean SO Ae ria LO
’ Gaen,” France we Englith channél : 9 6
Calais, ditto - - / - Ditto - ‘ 11 30
Tfle of Caldy, Fielend - St. George’s channel? << gp 11g
Camfer, Dutchland ~ German ocean > 1.2236
Tfle of Canaria, Canaries - Atlantic. ocean “ OCT
Cape ‘Cantin, ‘Barbary “ Ditto Sa”.
Cafkets, Ile of Guernfey ~ Englith channel’ % 8 15
Caithnefs point, Scotland ~ Wettern ocean : 9 Oo
Charles town, Carolina - Athley river = E leate |
[fle of Charles, Labrador - Hudfon’s ftraits = 10° 18
Chignectow, Nova Scotia - Bay of Fundy “< OQ 45
‘Cherbourg, France Englith channel RS oy tans =)
Cape and R.*Churchill, N. Wales Hudfon’s bay ss LO RO gad
Cape Clear, Ireland = ~Weltern ocean. 2 4 30
Concarneau,* France de Bay of Bifcay le 3 Lo
Conquet, ditto _ Englifh channel Ja 2 15
Ifle of Coquet, Pneland? “ -German ocean ” 3 76
‘Corke, Ireland - St. George’s channel - 6 30
. . Cape Corfe, Guinea ~ Ethiopian fea - 3 «30
Cromer, England a ‘German ocean - PAD
‘Dartmouth, ditto - ' Englith-channel »-- GRO
St. David’s Head; Wales * ~ St.:George’s.channel 2! . 65/26
Dieppe, France - ‘Englifh channel S 410 30
Dort, Dutchland - German ocean “1 e018
‘Dover, England a Englifh channel =~ T1 30
‘Downs, ditto = “German ocean - ‘we 1S
Dublin, Ireland _ Trifh fea % 901s
‘Dunbar, Scotland - German ocean _ 2 Ge
» Dundee, ditto - Ditto ~ - 2 Dae 4
Dungarvan, Ireland as Atlantic ocean “ 4 30
Dungenefs, England ° = Englith channel - 9 45
Dunkirk, France = German ocean iL 6.49
Dunnofe, Ifle of Wight — - Englifh channel * 9 45
‘Edinburgh, Scotland - German ocean i 4 30
Eddyftone, England . Englifh channel. - $46
AR. Elbe mouth, Germany =  Germanocean eats:
Embden, ditto - Ditto z oO
‘Enchuyfen, Dutchland of Zuyder fea i oo
| : 4 1 Eftaples,


Bttaples, France


Falmouth, England . Ditto - 30
Flamborough Head, ditto - German ocean = Oo
Florida Cape, Florida - Gulf of Mexico’ = 30
Fluthing, Dutchland © . German ocean As
Fly Ifle “of, ditto Ditto . 30
Foreland North, Brolga ‘ Ditto - 45
Foreland South, ditto = Englith channel 3 45


OF ASTROLOGY. 997
& Englith channel mills


i]


Foulnefs, ditto U . German ocean : AS
.. Foye, ditto “ Englith channel ’ i.

Garonne River, France . Bay of Bifcay -

Gafpey bay, Arcadia Gulf of St. Lawrence - 3


Gibraltar, Spain


Good Hope Cape of, Caffers - Indian ocean -


Ice Cove, North Main - Hudfon’s Straits -
John’s Fort St. Newfoundland Atlantic ocean he


Mediterranean fea -


Granville, France Englifh channel = -
Graveline, ditto = Ditto a
Gravefend,. England = River Thames - - %
Groine, of Cape Corunna, Spain Bay of Bifcay - fe)
Guernfey Ifle of, England © -  Englifh Channel > 30
Hallifax, Nova Scatia - Weftern ocean t 30
Hamburgh, Germany - River Elbe s
Haarlem, Dutchland 3 - German ocean . fe)
Hartlepool, England ars Ditto . fe)
Harwich, ditto - Ditto - I 15
‘Havre de Grace, France * Englifh channel - fe)
Henry Cape, Virginia : Atlantic ocean - mae ie
Holyhead, Wales - _ Irith fea ; “30
Honfleur, France . River Seine - fe)
Hull, England -- River Humber - fe)
Humber River, entrance, ditto German ocean 13
I So


Amo Unrtonw Aon HOH HO HWE ANH HONDO HON QODON OAM
fe)


John de Luz St. France i Bay of Bifcay - 30
Julian Port St. Patagonia -- South Atlantic ocean - 45
Kentifh Knock, England : German ocean - e)
Kilduin Ifle of, Lapland Os North ocean - 30
Kinfale, Ireland - Atlantic ocean * 15
Land’s End, England Hoi ote George ¢channel *:,’- 30.
Leith, Scotland A German ocean : 30
Leoftoffe, England ~ Ditto Pen - 45
Liverpool, ditto Irith fea < me a ee
Lewis Ifle of, North Port, Beceland Weftern ocean - . 30
ime,


998 AN TIeaL U $-ToR A T1790 N


Englith channel
River Tagus


Lime, England ©
Lifbon, Portugal - «=
Lizard, England Do ea
London, ditto a


North London, New England
Long Ifland, ditto Z a
Longfand-Head, England -
Lundy Ifle of, ditto ” 4
Lynn, ditto - “
Madeira Ifle of, Canaries =
Maes Mouth, Dutchland be
Maloe’s St. France


Man Ifle of, weit end of England


Margate, ditto

Milford, Wales 5
Mount’s Bay, England -
Nantes, France *
Naze, Norway -
Needles, England -
Newcaftle, ditto =
Nieuport, Flanders =
Nore, England ly
North Cape, Lapland =
Orfordnefs, England -
Orkney Ifles, limits of Reotlage
Oftend, Flanders

Placentia, Negtanndinde ae
Plymouth, England -
Portland, ditto ™
Portimouth, ditto “
Quebec, Canada &


‘Rhee Ifle of, France uw


Rochefort, ditto -
Rochelle, ditto e
Rochefter, England -
Rotterdam, Dutchland
Rouen, France -
Rye, England s
Sandwich, England -
Scarborough-Head, ditto -
Scilly Ifles, ditto |

Senegal River, Negroland. =


Englith channel
River Thames
Weftern ocean


Ditto ce


German ocean

St. George’s channel
German ocean
Atlantic ocean
German ocean
Englith channel
Trith fea Z
Englith channel

St. George’s channel
Englifh channel.
Bay of Bifcay.
Weitern ocean
Englith channel
German ocean

Ditto -
River Thames


_ Northern ocean


German ocean
Weitern ocean
German ocean
Atlantic ocean
Englifh channel
Ditto ~
Ditto

River St. Money?
Bay of Bifcay

Ditto 3
Ditto © -
River Medway
German ocean

River Seine 2
Englith channel
Downs

German ocean


St. George’s channel ©


Atlantic ocean


Lan!


GN HONDO HNWOW ONW ORD AUN 4
ay


‘ be
ON bOI OoW PWN NN
oo
aN (e)


bm


—


eal


ted


| a nd
Ww ht se BO OW BR
O


IO 1°)


* Severn


OF A‘ S-T RO L_O.GrY.


Severn, R. England J
Seine, R.> France *
Sheernefs, England *


Sierra: Leona, Guinea !: ea
Shoreham, England

Ifle of. Sitettind, limits, Scotland
Ifle of Sky, ditto bt las
Southampton, England -
Spurn, England site.
Start-Point,) ditto -
Stockton, ditto
Strongford Bay, Seblamdine Rear taj
Sunderland, England -
Swin, ditto 4 *
Samarin Town, Sokotra a
R. Tees, mouth, England | \-
Ifle of Teneriffe, Canaries bs
Ifle of Texel, Dutchland. © -
R. Thames, meine SEoethe =
Tinmouth, ditto

Topfham, ditto a ~
Torbay, ditto a c
Ifle of ‘Torey, : Ireland -
St. Valery, France -
Vannes, ditto 7 2
Ifle of Ufhant, France «= -
Waterford, Ireland -
-Weymouth, England . -
Whitby, ditto -

Ile of Wight, N. S.E,& W. ena
Winchelfea, England ‘
Wintertonnefs, ditto _
Yarmouth, ditto - ~
York Fort, New Wales ;
New York, America Ms
Youghall, Ireland =


St. George’s channel
Englith channel 2
R. Thames - -
Atlantic ocean -
Englith channel -
Weftern ocean -
Ditto . -
Englifh channel =
German ocean . &
Englith channel -
German ‘ocean -
Irith fea eS fe) rik
German ocean

Entrance of the Thaties I
Indian ocean -
German ocean -
Atlantic ocean -
German ocean ~
Ditto - -
German ocean “
Englifh channel a
Ditto - -
Weftern ocean -
Englith channel “
Bay of Bifcay -
Englith channel ~
St. George’s channel >
Englith channel -
German ocean -
Englifh channel ._ -
Ditto
German ocean -
Ditto - - ~
Hudfon’s bay -
Atlantic ocean -
St. George’s channel


Ld ~


BWOOWWM O OWN DOW OWN DA 4 NY OWWSO Nw OWN @uNOWnNWOMOOU RN


eal


89


By the foregoing Table, the times of high water at all the places con=


tained in it may be found for ever.


The firft columns contain the


names of all the places re{pectively ; the fecond, the coaits of the fea by


which they are bounded ;


No. 52. 11 Q.


and the figure- column the hour and minute
when it is 4igh water at ‘each of thofe places on the days of every ee
an


1000 A NIALL US ITREAAT 20 N


and Full Moon, which will happen conftantly the fame for ever, becaufe
‘the Moon fouths, or comes to the meridian of the fame places, every firit
and fixteenth-day, i. e. at every firft and third quarter, when fhe is new
and full, and confequently the tides muft return at the fame intervals of
time ; therefore, to know the time of high water on any given day, find
the time of the Moon’s fouthing, and then add the time which the Moon’
has pafled the meridian at the full and change days, to make high water
at that place ; and the fum will be the time of high water on the given
day... For example, at what time) was it high water at Portfmouth,
on. the 21ft of Oober, 1789? Moon fouths at 2h. 39m. to, which add
3; and the fam 5h. 39m. fhews, that it was -high water at'thirty-nine
minutes paft five o’clock in the afternoon. . And),fo ‘fot any other place
insthe Table. - hia


This theory of tides has) been extended fo far, as to eftimate the tides,
or elevations of the waters of the Moon,+produced by the ateraction of
the earth: thus, let us; fuppofe the quantity of matter ( Q:)incthe earth’
tobe to that in the Moon (g), as forty to.one, ‘thats, Q: gz 4os ay
and let us firft {wppofe the earth and Moon of equal bulk, and reprefented
by ALK, fg. 6. and BDE, and the force (F) of the earth, at the fur-
face of the Moon B, will be to the force-(f) of the Moon. at the fur-
face of the earth A, directly as the maffes of matter-in each \(becaufe of
the equal diftances T B and L A); that is,-F: f:.: Qi: gqeaal4on: ob.
Again, let L B be to;L C as the diameter of the earth to that of the
Moon, which is as 365:to 100, then will the force at B be to the force at C
as L Bto LC, which let be as F to f, then F: f:: 36% : 100, whence


F=%/; and above we have F=40 f, therefore 4000 f=36¢ fy and fo


Fi: f:2 365% 400072: 1: 11 nearly; that ts, the powes of the Earth to
faife the water at the Moon C is to that of the Moon at the Earth A as
éleven-to one, very nearly. If the Moon-can-raife the- water ‘heré ‘10
feet, the Earth can raife the water there to the height of 'r10 feet; but

becaufe the Moon always*turns about her-axis in the fame time as the
revolves about the Earth, the waters (if any there be). will bé raifed on
this and the oppofite fide, and always continue over the fame part of the
Moon's furface, fo that there can be no different heights of water there.
and confequently no tides, except-what finall ones may happen on SEBS
of the Sun’s attraction, and her various inequalities of motion, and dif-
tance from the Earth. if yal


OCP Ar Grrl he Oe OF GY, tOoL


Of th WINDS.


» The Wind, ventus, is a fenfible agitation of the air, whereby a large
quantity thereof flows in a current or ftream out of one place, or region,
into another. ‘The winds are divided into perennial, fiated, and variable.
They are alfo divided into general and particular. Winds perennial, or
conftant, are fuch as always blow the fame way: of thefe we have a
very notable one between the two tropics, blowing conftantly from eaft to
weft, called the general trade wind. Winds ftated, or periodical, are fuch
as conftantly return at certain times: fuch are the fea and land breezes,
blowing from fea to land in the evening and from land to fea in the
morning; fuch alfo are the fhifting or particular trade-winds, which,
for certain months of the year blow one ‘way, and the reft of the year
the contrary way. Winds variable, or erratic, are {uch as blow now this
now that way; and aré now up, now huthed, without any rule or regu-
larity either as,to time or place: fuch are all the winds obferved in the
inland parts of England, &c. though fevera] of thefe claim their certain
times of the day; thus, the weft wind is moft frequent about noon;
the fouth wind in the night; the north inthe morning, &c.. Wind ge-
neral, is {uch a one, as at the fame time blows the fame way, over a very:
large tract of ground, almoft all the year: fuch only is the general trade
wind. But even this has its interruptions; for at land it is tearce fenfible
at all, as being broken by the interpofition of mountains, valleys, &c.
at fea, near the fhore, it is difturbed by vapours, exhalations, and parti-
cular winds blowing from landward ; fo that it is chiefly coniidered as
general only at mid-fea; and even there it is liable to be difturbed
by,.clouds driving from other quarters. Winds particular, include all
others, excepting the general trade-winds. Thote peculiar to one little
canton, or part, are called sopical or provincial winds: fuch is the, north
wind on the weftern fide of the Alps, which does not blow above one
or two leagues lengthwife, and much lefs in breadth: fuch alfo is the
pontias in France, &c.


Some, philofophers, as Des, Cartes, Rohault, &c. account for the
general wind fromi;the diurnal rotation of the earth; and from this ge-
neral wind derive all) the particular ones. The atmofphere, fay they,
invefting the earth, and moving round it, that part will perform its cir-
cuit, fooneft, which has the finalleft errcle to deferibe: the air, therefore,
_ near. the equator, will require a fomewhat longer time to perform its courte

in, from weft to eaft, than that nearer the poles: Thus, as the earth
-turns.eaftward, the particles of the ait near the equinoctial, being ex-
2 ate | ceedingly


1002 AN. ToLQL 7 U.S of oR AT. Ep Gy N


cecdingly light, are left behind; fo that, in refpect of the earth’s furface,?
they move eaftward, and become a conftant eafterly wind. This opi-

nion feems confirmed by this, that thefe winds are found only between

the tropics, in thofe parallels of latitude where the diurnal motion 1s

{wiftet. But the conftant calms in the Atlantic fea, near the equator,

the wefterly winds near the coaft of Guinea, and the periodical wefterly

monfoons under the equator in the Indian feas, declare the infufficiency

of this hypothefis. Befides, the air, being kept clofé to the earth by the:
principle of gravity, would, in time, acquire the fame degree of velocity

that the earth’s furface moves with, as well in refpect of: the diurnal’
rotation as of the annual about the Sun, which ts about thirty times

{wifter. Dr. Halley, therefore, fubflitutes another caufe, capable of
producing a like conftant effect, not liable to the fame objections, but

agreeable to the known properties of the elements of water and air, and

the laws of the motion of fluid bodies. Such a one is the action of the
Sun’s beams upon the air and water, as he pafles every day over the ocean,

confidered together with the quality of the foil and the fituation of the
adjoining continents.

According to the laws of ftatics, the air which is lefs rarefied, or ex-
panded by heat, and confequently is more ponderous, muft have a motion
towards thofe parts thereof which are more rarefied, and lefs ponderous,
to bring it to an equilibrium; alfo, the prefence of the Sun continually
fhifting to the weitward, that part to which the air tends, by reafon of
the rarefaction made by his greateft meridian heat, is; with him, carried
weitward; and, confequently, the tendency of the whole body of the
lower air is that way. ‘Thus a general eafterly wind is formed, which,
being imprefied on the air of a vaft ocean, the parts impel one the other,
and fo keep moving till the next return of.the Sun, whereby fo much of
the motion as was loft is again reftored; and thus the eafterly wind is
made perpetual, From the fame principle it follows, that this eafterly
wind ihould, on the north fide of the equator, be to the northward of the
eaft, and in fouth latitudes to the fouthward thereof ; for near the line
the air is much more rarefied than at a greater diftance from it, becaufe
the Sun is twice in a year vertical there, and at no time diftant above
twenty-three degrees and a half; at which diftance the heat, being as
the fine of the angle of incidence, is but little fhort of that of the per-
pendicular ray; whereas, under the tropics, though the Sun ftays longer
vertical, yet he is a long time forty-feven degrees off, which is a kind of
winter, wherein the air fo cools, as that the {ummer heat cannot warm it
to the fame degree with that under the equator. Wherefore, the air
towards the north and fouth being lefs rarefied than that in the middle,


it follows, that from both fides it ought to tend towards the. equator.


This


OF; AS.TROLAGY: 3003


_. This motion, compounded with the former eafterly wind, accounts
for all the phenomena of the general trade-winds, which, if the whole
furface of the globe were fea, would undoubtedly blow quite round the
world, as they are found to do in the Atlantic and the Ethopic oceans,
But, feeing that fo great continents do interpofe, and break the continuity
of the ocean, regard muft be had to the nature of the foil, and the pofi-
tion of the high mountains, which are the two principal caufes of the
variations of the wind from the former general rule ; for, if a country
lying near the Sun prove to be flat, fandy, and low land, fuch as the
defarts of Lybia are ufually reported to be, the heat occafioned by the
reflection of the Sun’s beams, and the retention thereof in the fand, is
incredible to thofe who have not felt it ; whereby the air being extremely
rarefied, it is neceflary that the cooler and more denfe air fhould run
thitherwards to reftore the equilibrium. This is fuppofed to be the caufe
why, near the coaft of Guinea, the wind always fets in upon the land,
blowing wefterly, inftead of eafterly, there being fufficient reafon to be-
- lieve, that the inland parts of Africa are prodigioufly hot, fince the
northern borders thereof were fo very intemperate, as to give the ancients
caufe to conclude, that all beyond the tropics was uninhabitable by ex-
cefs of heat.


Mr. Clare, in his Motion of Fluids, p. 302. mentions a familiar ex-
periment, that ferves to illuftrate this matter, as well as the alternate
courfe of land and fea breezes. Filla large difh with cold water, and
in the middle of it place a water-plate filled with warm water: the firft
will reprefent the ocean, the other an ifland, rarefying the air above it.
Then, holding a wax-candle over the cold water, blow it out, and the
fmoke will be feen, in a ftill place, to move toward the warm plate, and,
rifing over, it will point the courfe of the air, and alfo of vapour, from
fea or land. . And, if the ambient water be warmed, and the plate filled
-, with cold water, and the {moking wick of a candle held over the plate,
the contrary will happen. |


From the fame caufe it happens, that there are fo conftant calms in
that fame part of the ocean, called the rams; for this tract being placed
in the middle, between the wefterly winds blowing on the coaft of
Guinea, and the eafterly trade-winds blowing to the weftward thereof,
the tendency of the air here is indifferent to either, and fo ftands in equi-
librio between both ; and the weight of the incumbent atmofphere being
diminifhed by the continual contrary winds blowing from hence, is the
reafon that the air here holds not the copious vapour it receives, but lets
it fall in fo frequent rains. But, as the cold and denfe air, by reafon

No. 53. | irR of


1004. A NSCOR OS TR, ATO UN


of its greater gravity, preffes upon the hot and rarefied, it is demon-
ftrable, that this latter muft afcend in a continued ftream, as faft as it
rarefies ; and that, being afcended, it muft difperfe itfelf, to preferve the
equilibrium ; that is, by a contrary current, the upper air muft move
from thofe parts where the greateft heat is; fo, by a kind of circulation,
the north-eaft trade-wind below will be attended with a fouth-wefterly
wind above; and the fouth-eaft with a north-weft wind above.


That this is more than a bare conjecture, the almoft inftantaneous
change of the wind to the oppofite point, which is frequently found in
paffing the limits of the trade winds, feems ftrongly to aflure us; but
that which above all confirms this hypothefis, is the phenomenon of
the monfoons, by this means moft eafily folved, and without it hardly
explicable. Suppofing, therefore, fuch a circulation as above, it is to be
confidered that to the northward of the Indian ocean there is every where
land, within the ufual limits of the latitude 30°; viz. Arabia, Perfia,
India, &c. which, for the fame reafon as the Mediterranean parts of
Africa, are fubject to infufferable heats, when the Sun is to the north,
pafling nearly vertical; but yet are temperate enough when the Sun is
removed towards the other tropic, becaufe of a ridge of mountains at fome
diftance within the land, faid to be frequently, in winter, covered with ©
fnow, over which the air, as it paffes, muft needs be much chilled.
Hence it happens, that the air coming, according to. the general rule,
out of the north-eaft, to the Indian fea, is fometimes hotter, fometimes
colder, than that which, by this circulation, is returned out of the
fouth-weft ; and, by confequence, fometimes the under current, or wind,
is from the north-eaft, fometimes from the fouth-weft. That this has
no other caufe, is clear from the times wherein thefe winds fet, viz. in
April: when the Sun begins to warm thefe countries to the north, the
fouth-weft monfoons begin and blow, during the heats, till Oétober, ~
when the Sun being retired, and all things growing cooler northward,
and the -heat increafing to the fouth, the north-eaft winds enter, and
blow all the winter, till April again. And it is, undoubtedly, from the
fame principle, that, to the fouthward of the equator, in part of the
Indian ocean, the north-weft winds fucceed the fouth-eaft, when the


Sun draws near the tropic of Capricorn.. Phil. Tranfatt. No. 183, or
Abridg, vol. il. page 199.


Some philofophers, diffatished with Dr.-Halley’s theory above recited,
or not thinking it fufficient for explaining the various phenomena of the
wind, have had recourfe to another caufe, viz. the gravitation of the earth
and its atmofphere towards the Sun and Moon, They alledge that, though

7 we


OFRTA STE OU OG YY 1004


we cannot:difcover aerial tides, of ebb or flow, by means of the baro-
meter,. becaufe columns of air of unequal height, but different denfity, '
may have the fame preflure or weight; yet the protuberance in the at-
mofphere, which is continually following the Moon, mutt, they fay, of
courfe produce a motion in all parts, and fo produce a wind more or lefs
to every place, which, confpiring with, or counteracted by, the winds
arifing. from other caufes, makes them greater or lefs. Several differta-
tions to this purpofe were publithed, on occafion of the fubje& propofed
by the Academy of Sciences at Berlin for the year 1746. M. Mauf-
chenbroeck, however, will not allow that the attraction of the Moon is
the caufe of the general wind; becaufe the eaft wind does not follow the
motion of the Moon about the earth; for, in that cafe, there would be
more than twenty-four changes, to which it would be fubject in the
courle of a year, inftead of two... Mr. Henry: Eeles, apprehending that
the Sun’s rarefying of the air cannot fimply be the caute of all the regalar
and irregular motions which we find in the atmofphere, afcribes them to
another caufe, viz. the afcent and defcent of vapour and exhalation, at-
tended by the electrical fire or fluid; and on this principle he has endea~
voured to explain at large the general phenomena of the weather and.
barometer.


The induftry of the above-mentioned, and that ‘of fome of the later
writers, have brought the theory of :the production and motion of winds »
to fomewhat of, a mathematical demonttration, which is thus defined: .
if the {pring of the air be weakened in any place more ‘than in the ad-

joining places, a wind will blow through the place where the diminu-
tion is. For, fince the air endeavours, by its elaftic force, to expand °
itfclf every way; if that force be lefs in one place than in another, the
effort of the more again{ft the lefs elaftic will be greater than the effort '
of the latter againft the former. The lefs elaftic air, therefore, will :
refift with lefs-force than it is urged by the more elaftic; confequently, .
the lefs elaftic will be driven out of its place, and the more elaftic will
fucceed. If, now, the excefs of the fpring of the more elaftic above
that of the lefs elaftic air, be fuch as to occafion a little alteration in the
barof{cope; the motion both of the air expelled, and that which fucceeds
it, will become fenfible, i. e. there will be a wind. MHence, fince the
{pring of the air increafes, as the comprefling weight increafes, and com-
preffed air is denfer than air lefs comprefied; all winds blow into rarer .
air, out of a place filled with a-denfer. Wherefore, fince a denfer air is |
fpecifically heavier than a rarer, an extraordinary lightle{s of the air in .
any place muft be attended with extraordinary winds, or ftorms.


Now; |


7006 ANY 2DMU KSITR ATUCO N


Now, an extraordinary fall of the Mercury in the barometer fhewing
an extraordinary lightnefs of the atmofphere, it is no wonder if that fore-
tels ftorms. For, if the air) be fuddenly condenfed in any place, its
{pring will be fuddenly diminifhed: hence, if this diminution be great
enough to affect the barometer, there will a wind blow through the
condenfed air. But, fince the air cannot be fuddenly condenfed, unlefs
it have before been.much rarefied, there will a wind blow through the air,
as it cools, after having been violently heated. -In like manner, if air be
fuddenly rarefied, its fpring is fuddenly increafed: wherefore, it will
flow through the contiguous air, not acted on by the rarefying force.”
A wind, therefore, will blow out of a place, in which the air is fud-
denly rarefied; and on this principle, in all probability, it is, that, fince
‘the Sun’s power in rarefying the air is notorious, it muft neceffarily
have a great influence on the generation of winds; which hkewife pe-
netrate the very bowels of the earth, fince moft caves and chafms are
found to emit wind, either more or lefs. M. Mufchenbroeck has enu-
merated a variety of caufes that produce winds, exifting in the bowels of
the earth, on its furface, in the armofphere, and above it. See Intr. ad
Phil. Nat. vol. 11. page 1116, &c.".


The rifing and changing of the winds are determined experimentally,
by means of weather-cocks, placed on the tops of houfes, &c. But
thefe only indicate what paffes about their own height, or near the furs
face of the earth: Wolfius affures us, from obfervations of feveral years,
that the higher winds, which drive the clouds, are different from the
~ Jower ones, which move the.weather-cocks. And Dr. Derham obferves
fomething not unlike this: Phyf. Theol. lib. i. cap. 2.. This author
alfo relates, upon comparing feveral feries of obfervations made of the
_ winds in divers countries, viz. England, Ireland, Switzerland, Italy,

France, New England, &c. that the winds in thofe feveral places feldom
agree; but, when they do, it is commonly when they are ftrong, and of
long continuance in the fame quarter; and more, he thinks, in the nor-
- therly and eafterly than in any other points. Alfo, thata {trong wind in

one place is oftentimes a weak one in another, or moderate, according as
the places are nearer or more remote. . Phil. Tranf. No. 267 and gar.


Philofophers have ufed various methods for determining the velocity
of the wind, which is very different at different times.. The method ufed
by Dr. Derham was that of letting light downy feathers fly in the wind,
and accurately obferving the diftance to which they were carried in any:
number of half-feconds. This~method he preferred to that of Dr.
Hooke’s mola alata, or pneumatica, (fee Phil. Tranf. No. 24. and Birch’s
Hiftory of the Royal Society, vol. iv. page 225.) He tells us, that he

1 thus


OF ASTROLOGY. 1004


thus meafured the velocity of the wind in the great ftorm of Auguft,
i705, and by many experiments, found that it moved at the rate of
thirty-three feet per half fecond, or of forty-five miles per hour: whence
he concludes, that the moft vehement wind (as that of November, 1703)
does not fly at the rate of above fifty or fixty miles per hour, and that at
a medium the velocity of wind is. at the rate of twelve or fifteen miles
per.hour. Phil. Tranf. No. 313. or Abr. vol. iv. page 411. Mr. Brice
obferves, that experiments with feathers are fubject to uncertainty; as
they feldom or ever defcribe a ftraight line, but defcribe a fort of {pirals,:
moving to the right and left, and rifing to very different altitudes in
their progrefs. He therefore confiders the motion of a cloud, or its
fhadow, over the furface of the earth, as a much more accurate meafure
of the velocity of the wind. In this way he found, that the wind, in a
confiderable ftorm, moved at the rate of 62.9 miles per hour; and that,
when it blew a freth gale, it moved in the fame time about twenty-one
miles; and that, in a {mall breeze, the wind moved at the rate of 9.9
miles per hour. Phil. Tranf. vol. lvi. page 226.


A TABLE of the different Velocities and Forces of the WIN DS.


Velocity of the


Wind. Perpendicular
force on one fquare| | Common appellations of the
Mites in i= yea Pleas foot in avoirdupois forces of winds.
one Hour. ~~ fecond. ioe ag
1 1.47 .005 Hardly perceptible.
2 2594 pA ft perceptible.
3 ae oie Juft percepti
i: ey othe Gentle pleafant wind.
sual Lu Asad -123
on 14:07 1A0F Pleafant brifk gale.
sis 22.00 1.107
AP al) 89 Be pened Very brifk.
25 36.67 3-075
BO ait tee Qt BU iid High wind.
De BB 34. if, 6 027
dich BeOrs fa 202231) i Wory high,
45 66.01 9-963
50 wtiehs 12.300 ___ |A ftorm or tempetft.
60 88.02 17.915 A great ftorm.
raed ile Oy oe 18 31.490 A hurricane.
100 | 146.70 49-200 A hurricane that tears up
trees, and carries buildings, &c. before it. |


Te  eeenusinmnneineneeeeeemnennaa
No. 53. 119 The |


1008 A Nov IgG SL oU<S FR Ae TOON


The force of the wind is as the {quare of its velocity; as Mr. Fergufon
has fhewn by experiments on the whirling table; and in moderate velo-
cities this will hold very nearly. It is obferved, with regard to this
- table, that the evidence for thofe numbers, where the velocity of the
wind exceeds fifty miles an hour, does not feem of equal authority with

that of thofe of fifty miles or under: Phil. Tranf. vol. li. page 165.
Dr. Hales found (Statical Eff. vol. ii. page 926.) that the air rufhed out
of a pair of fmith’s bellows at the rate of 68.73 feet in a fecond of time,
when compreffed with a force equal to the weight of one inch perpendi-
cular depth of mercury, lying on the whole upper furface of the bellows. —
The velocity of the air, as it paffed out of the trunk of his ventilators,
was found to beat the rate of three thoufand feet in a minute; which is
at the rate of thirty-four miles in an hour. Dr. Hales fays, that the ve-
locity with which impelled air pafles out at any orifice, may be deter-
fined by hanging a light valve over the nofe of a bellows, by pliant
leather hinges, which will be much agitated and lifted up from a per-
pendicular to a more than horizontal pofition by the force of the rufhing
air. There is another more accurate way, he fays, of eftimating the
velocity of air, viz. by holding the orifice of an inverted: glafs fiphon’
full of water, oppofite to the ftream of air, whereby the water will be
depreffed in one leg, and raifed in the other, in proportion to the force
with which the water is impelled by the air.


As to the qualities and effeéts of the wind, it is to be obferved, that
a wind blowing from the fea is always moift: in fummer, it is cold;
and in winter, warm, unlefs the fea be frozen up. This is demonftrated
thus: there is a vapour continually rifing out of all water, (as appears
even hence, that a quantity of water, being left alittle while in an open
veffel, is found (enfibly diminifhed,) but efpecially if it be expofed to the
Sun’s rays; in which cafe the evaporation is beyond all expeétation.
By this means, the air incumbent on the fea becomes impregnated with
a quantity of vapours. But the winds, blowing from off the fea, {weep
thefe vapours along with them; and confequently they are always moitt,
Again, water in fummer, &c. conceives lefs heat than terreftrial bodies,
expofed to the fame rays of the Sun, do; but, in winter, fea-water is
warmer than the earth covered with froft and {now, &c. Wherefore,
as the air contiguous to any body is found to partake of its heat and cold, -
the air contiguous to fea-water will be warmer in winter, and colder in
fummer, than that contiguous to the earth. - Or thus; vapours raifed
from water by the Sun’s warmth in winter, are warmer than the air they
rife in, (as appears from the vapours condenfing, and becoming vifible,
almoft as foon as they are got out into air.) - Freth quantities of vapours,


therefore,


ROM TA Oh wae OGY. 1009
therefore, continually warming the atmofphere over the fea, will raife
its heat beyond that of air over the land. Again, the Sun’s rays refle@ad
from the earth into the air, in fummer, are much more than thofe from
the water into air: the air, therefore, over the earth, warmed by the
reflection of more rays than that over water, is warmer. Hence, fea.
winds make thick, cloudy, hazy, weather.


Winds blowing from the continent are always dry; in fummer,
warm; and cold in winter. For there is much le{s vapour arifing from
the earth than from water; and therefore the air over the continent
will be impregnated with much fewer vapours. Add, that the vapours,
or exhalations, raifed by a great degree of heat out of the earth, are
much finer, and lefs fenfible, than thofe from water. The wind, there-
fore, blowing over the continent, carries but little vapour with it, and
is therefore dry. Farther, the earth in fummer is warmer than water
expofed to the fame rays of the Sun. Hence, as the air partakes of the
heat of contiguous bodies, that over the earth in fummer will be
warmer than that over the water. After the like manner it is fhewn,
that the land winds are cold in winter. Hence, we fee why land-winds
make clear, cold, weather. Our northerly and foutherly winds, how-
ever, which are commonly efteemed the caufes of cold and warm weather,
Dr. Derham obferves, are really rather the effect of the cold or warmth
of the atmofphere. Hence it is, that we frequently fee a warm foutherly
wind, ona fudden, changed to the north, by the fall of {now or hail;
and, that in acold, frofty, morning, we fee the wind north, which after-
wards wheels about toward the foutherly quarter, when the Sun has well
warmed the air; and again, in the cold evening, turns northerly or eafterly.


The utility of winds has been univerfally acknowledged. The an-
cient Perfians, Phcenicians, Greeks, and Romans, facrificed and erected
temples to the winds; as we learned from Voflius, Theolog. Gentil. lib.
iii. part i. cap. 1. Befides their ufe in moving bellows, mills, and
other machines, applied in various ways to the fervice of mankind, and
the benefits refulting from them to navigation and trade, they ferve to
purify and refrefh the air, to convey the heat or cold of one region to
another, to produce a regular circulation of vapours from the ocean to
countries remote from it, and to fupply, by wafting them in their pro-
grefs againft hills, &c. {prings and rivers,


Wind has been, by many authors, made the bafis of many different
difeafes: among others, Dr. Reyn has given it as his opinion, in a


Treatife on the Gout (De Arthritid.) that flatufes, or wind inclofed be-
1 | tween


1010 A N» InL.L U.S ToRpA,T 1.0, N


tween the periofteum and the bone, are the true caufe of that difeafe,
and accordingly, that all the methods of cure ought to tend to the ex-
pelling of that wind. He fuppofes this wind to be of a dry, cold, and
malignant, nature, conveyed by the arteries to the place affected, where,
forcibly feparating that {énfible membrane, the periofteum, and diftend-
ing it, the pain muft needs be very great. He is alfo of opinion, that,
head-achs, palpitations of the heart, tooth-ach, pleurify, convulfions,
cholics, and many other difeafes, are originally owing to the, fame caufe,
and only differ in regard to the place affected, and to the various mo-
tions and determinations of the wind. ‘The moveablenefs of the pain in
gouty perfons from one part to another, he looks upon as a proof of
this, and thinks that the curing of the gout by burning moxa, or the cotton ©
of the mugwort leaves, upon it, is owing to its giving way to the wind
in the part to evaporate itfelf. That thefe winds are cold appears from
the fhivering fits which generally precede a paroxy{m of the gout; and,
that the fhiverings in the beginning of fevers, and before all fits of


agues, are owing to the fame caufe, is fuppofed by this author a natural.
conclufion from the former obfervations.


The winds, according to this author and Fienus, area fort of halituous
{pirits, raifed by the improper degree of cour native heat, or out of our
meat and drink; or, finally, out of an abundance of black choler. Their
differences,.he fays, principally proceed from the various ferments, pro-
‘ducing in us a variety of humours; which, acting upon one another, do
in their effervefcences create winds of various effects, and denominate
difeafes from the places which are the {cenes of their action. It is on
this account that the acupunctura, or pricking with long needles,
among the Chinefe, is of ufe: the Japonefe, and other neighbouring
nations, having no other cure for moft difeafes .than. the pricking with
the needle, ‘and the burning of the moxa on the part.


- The hufbandman often fuffers extremely by high winds, in many dif-
ferent refpects. Plantations of trees, ata fmall diftance from the barns
and houfes, are the beft fafeguard againft their fuffering by winds; but
they muft not be planted fo near as that their fall, if it fhould happen, would
pendanger them. Yews grow very flowly, othetwife they are the beit of
all trees for this defenfive plantation. Trees fuffer by winds, being ei-
ther broken or blown down by them; but this may be in a great meafure
prevented by cutting off part of the heads and branches of them in
places where they ftand moft expofed. Hops are the moft, fubje@ tobe
injured by winds of any crop; but this may be in a great meafure pre-


vented by a high pale or very thick thorn-hedge; this will both keep off
! bap et the


20 Bo A SOTTRE OF Ls Oe Y: ort


the {pring wind, which nips the young buds, and be a great fafeguard
againft other winds that would tear the plants from their poles. The
poles fhould always be very firm in the ground ; and the beft fecurity to
be added to this is a row of tall trees all round the ground. Winds at-
tended with rain do great injury to the corn, by laying it flat to the
ground. The beft method of preventing this, is to keep up good en-
clofures; and, if the accident happens, the corn fhould be cut immedi-
ately, for.it never grows at all afterwards. It fhould be left on the
ground, in this cafe, fome time after the cutting, to harden the grain
in the ear. :


Many valuable obfervations on the winds, as they relate to navigation,
have been made by fkilful feamen, and particularly by Dr. Halley. It is
found, that between the limits of 60 degrees, viz. from 30 degrees of
north latitude to 30 degrees of fouth latitude, there is a conftant eaft
wind through the year, blowing in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, called
the trade-wind. ‘Thefe trade-winds, near their northern limits, blow
between the north and eaft; and, near their fouthern limits, they blow
between the fouth and eaft; but their general motions are difturbed on
the continents and near their coafts. In fome parts of the Indian ocean
there are periodical winds, which are called monfoons.


In the Atlantic ocean, near the coafts of Africa, at about a hundred
leagues from the fhore, between the latitude of 28 degrees and 10 degrees
north, feamen conftantly meet with a frefh gale of wind blowing from
the N. E. Thofe bound to the Caribbee iflands, acrofs the Atlantic
ocean, find, as they approach the American fide, that the faid N. E. wind
becomes eafterly; or, feldom blows more than a point from the eaft,
either to the northward or fouthward. Thefe trade-winds, on the Ame-
rican fide, are extended to 30, 31, or even to 32, degrees of N. latitude;
which is about 4 degrees farther than they extend to on the African fide:
alfo, to the fouthward of the equator, the trade-winds extend three or
four degrees farther to the coaft of Brafil, on the American fide, than
they do near the Cape of Good Hope on the African fide.


Between the latitudes of 4 degrees N. and 4 degrees S. the wind al-
ways blows between the fouth and eaft: on the African fide the winds are
neareft the fouth; and, on the American fide, neareft the eaft. In thefe
feas, Dr. Halley obferved, that, when the wind was eaftward, the wea
ther was gloomy, dark, and rainy, with hard gales of wind; but, when
the wind veered to the fouthward, the weather generally became ferene,
with gentle breezes, next toacalm. Thede winds are fomewhat changed

No. 53; i T by


1012 A Ny ByplsLy UsSeTeReZAAT 1 ON


by the feafons of the year; for, when the Sun is far northward, the
Brafil S. E. wind gets to the fouth, and the N. E. wind to the eaft; and, —
when the Sun is far fouth, the S. E. wind gets to the eaft, and the N. E,

winds on this fide of the equator veer more to the north.


Along the coaft of Guinea, from Sierra Leona to the ifland of St.
Thomas, under the equator, which is above five hundred leagues, the
foutherly and fouth-weft winds blow perpetually ; for, the S.-E, trade-
wind, having pafled the equator, and approaching the Guinea coaft within
eighty or a hundred leagues, inclines toward the fhore, and becomes _
fouth, then S. E. and by degrees, as it comes near the land, it veers
about to fouth, S. S. W. and in with the land it is S. W. and fometimes
W.S. W. This tra is troubled with frequent calms, and violent fudden
guits of wind, called tornadoes, blowing from all points of the horizon.


Between the fourth and tenth degrees of north latitude, and between
the longitudes of Cape-Verd, and the eafternmoft of the Cape-Verd ifles,
there is a tract of fea fubje@ to perpetual calms, attended with frequent
thunder and lightning, and rains: fhips, in failing thefe fix degrees, are
faid to have been fometimes detained whole months. :


The three lait obfervations account for two circumftances which ma-
riners experience in failing from Europe to India, and in the Guinea trade.
The firftis, the difficulty which thips, in going to the fouthward, efpe-
cially in the months of July and Augutft, find in paffing between the
coafts of Guinea and Brafil, although the breadth of this fea is more than
five hundred leagues. This happens, becaufe the S. E. winds at that
time of the year commonly extend fome degrees beyond the ordinary li-
mits of four degrees N. latitude ; and, befides, coming fo much foutherly,
as to be fometimes fouth, fometimes a point or two to the weft; it then
only remains to ply to windward: and if, on the one fide, they fteer
W.S. W. they get a wind more and more eafterly ; but then there is a
danger of falling in with the Brafilian coaft, or fhoals; and, if they fteer
E.‘S. E. they fall into the neighbourhood of the coaft of Guinea, from
whence they cannot depart without running eafterly as far as the ifland of
St. Thomas; and, this is the conftant practice of all the Guinea fhips.
Scondly, all fhips departing from Guinea for Europe, their direét
courfe is northward; but on this courfe they cannot go, becaufe, the coaft
bending nearly eaft and weft, the land is to the northward: therefore, as
the winds on this coaft are generally between the S. and W. S. W. they
are obliged to fteer S. 5. E. or fouth, and with thefe courfes they run off
the fhore; but, in fo doing, they always find the winds more and more con:

1 trary; _


OF ASTROLOGY. 1013


trary; fo that, when near the fhore, they can Jie fouth; at a greater dif-
tance they can make no better than S. E. and afterwards E. S. E. with
which courfes they commonly fetch the ifland of St. Thomas and Cape
Lopez, where, finding the winds to the eaftward of the fouth, they {ail
wefterly with it, till coming to the latitude of four degrees fouth, where
they find the S. E. winds blowing perpetually. On account of thefe
general winds, all thofe that ufe the Weft-India trade, even thofe bound
to Virginia, reckon it their beft courfe to get as foon as they can to the
fouthward, that fo they may be certain of a fair and frefh gale to run be-
fore it to the weftward : and, for the fame reafon, thofe homeward-bound
from America endeavour to gain the latitude of thirty degrees, where
they firft find the winds begin to be variable; though the moft or-
dinary winds in the north Atlantic ocean come from between the fouth
and weit.


Between the fouthern latitudes of ten and thirty degrees, in the Indian
ocean, the general trade-wind, about the S. E. by S. is found to blowall
the year long in the fame manner as in the like latitude in the Ethiopic
ocean ; and, during the fix months from May to December, thefe winds
reach to within two degrees of the equator ; but, during the other fix
months, from November to June, a N. W. wind blows in the tract'ly-
ing between the third and tenth degrees of fouthern latitude, in the me-
ridian of the north end of Madagafcar; and, between the fecond and
‘twelfth degrees of fouth latitude, near the longitude of Sumatra and Java.


In the tract between Sumatra and the African coaft, and from three
degrees of fouth latitude quite northward to the Afiatic coaits, including
the Arabian fea and the gulf of Bengal, the moonfoons blow from Sep-
tember to April on the N. E. and from March to October on the S. W.
In the former half-year the wind is more fteady and gentle, and weather
clearer, than in the latter fix months; and the wind is more ftrong and
fteady in the Arabian fea than in the gulph of Bengal.


Between the ifland of Madagafcar and the coaft of Africa, and thence
northward as far as the equator, there is a tract, wherein from April to
Otober there is a conftant frefh fouth-fouth-weft wind; which to the
northward changes into the weft-fouth-weit wind ; blowing at that time
in the Arabian fea.


_ To the eaftward of Sumatra and Malacca on the north of the equator,
and along the coafts of Cambodia and China, quite through the Philip-
pines as far as Japan, the monfoons blow northerly and foutherly ; the

northern


-


oi, «6c AM TRUEST RATHO N


northern fetting in about O@ober or November, and the fouthern about
May : the winds are not quite fo certain as thofe in the Arabian feas.


Between Sumatra and fava to the weft, and New Guinea to the eaft,
the fame northerly and foutherly winds are obferved, but the firft half-
year monfoon inclines to the N. W. and the latter to the S. E. Thefe
winds begin a month or fix weeks after thofe in the Chinefe feas fet in,
and are quite as variable. Thefe contrary winds do not fhift from one
point to its oppofite all at once; in fome places the time of the change
is attended with calms, in others by variable winds; and it often hap-
pens, on the fhores of Coromandel and China, towards the end of the
monfoons, that there are moft violent ftorms, greatly refembling the
hurricanes in the Weft-Indies ; wherein the wind is fo very ftrong,’ that
hardly any thing can refift its force. All navigation in the Indian ocean
mutt neceflarily be regulated by thefe winds; for, if mariners fhould de-
lay their voyages till the contrary monfoon begins, they muft either fail
back, or go into harbour, and wait for the return of the trade-wind. See
Phil. Tranf. No. 183, or Abr. vol. ii. page 133, &¢c. Robertfon’s Elem.
of Nav. book vi. fect. 6. | ban fs

The winds are divided, with refpeét to the points of the horizon from
‘which they blow, into cardinal and collateral. Winds cardinal, are thofe
‘blowing from the four cardinal points ; eaft, weft, north, and fouth.
Winds collateral are the intermediate winds between any two cardinal
winds ; the number of thefe is infinite, as the points from which they
blow are; but only a few of them are confidered in practice, i. e. only.a
few of them have their diftinguifhing names. The ancient Greeks, at
firft, only ufed the four cardinal ones ; at length they took in four more.
Vitruvius gives us a table of twenty, befides the cardinals, which were
‘in ufe among the Romans. ‘The moderns, as their navigation is much
more perfect than that of the ancients, have given names to twenty-eight
collateral winds ; which they range into primary and /econdary ; and the

_fecondary they fubdivide into thofe of the j7/# and /econd order. The
Englifh names of the primary collateral winds and points are compounded
of the names of the cardinal ones, north and fouth being {till prefixed.
The names of the fecondary collateral winds of the firft order are com=.
pounded of the names of the cardinals and the adjacent primary oné.
Thofe of the fecond order are compounded of the names of the cardinal
or the next adjacent primary and the next cardinal with the addition of
the word éy. The Latins have diftin@ names for each; all which are
exprefied in the following table.


a


NaAMEs '


1 OPPVASTROLOGY. ters


. PR AMEE ow the Winbs; and Points of the a

OLDE CoA Se een Ditancessor i
! the Points, &c.

~———| from the. North,


Sem eh


fe nn nenglifh.. |_| Latin and Greek,
: 5


et


x. NORTH. = ‘Septentrio, or Boreas. o° ol
- 20 North-by-eaft. .. |;Hyperboreas, Eis aT


.. Hypaquilo.
3h pes i _Gallicus, 7 |
3. North-north-eaft, | Aquilo. 2% 30
4. North-eaft by Mefoboreas. : Bia coid age, 45
north. Mefaquilo. Fg 2 abi 2
| Supernas... |
g-, North-eat, Arétapeliotes.” AS
; Ricoh
Grecus.
6.. North-eaft iby, Hypocelias._ 56 45
éalt.
7, Eaft- Herth teat, Cefias,, Hellen: Sy ee Oe Ee Fe)
8. Eaft-by-north. | Mefocefias, Uke Mins aren ot
<yr Carbas.


9g. EAST. ae Solanus, Jubphenus, oo Hot ‘he Eaft.
Ns ft opelites. ie Oe ae ome
10, Eaft-by-fouth, - Hypeurus, or AY Pet Ir od 5
Sark ead eurus.
11, Eaft-fouth-eaft: Eurus, or pala ps, ive? 30
12. South-eaft-by-eaft.| Mefeurus. BE os whee dk
13. South-eaft, | Notapeliozes, eurafter. 45 .
14. South-eaft by Hypophenix. 56. 15
4 fouth, Pheenix, . pheenicias, 67 30
1s. South-fouth-eaft. | leuco-notus, gan-
. - geticus. Vis eh eit

16, South-by-eaft, sel a | 78 as 45 We


PDI. Ss Lis 11 °U NAMES


Englith. Latin and Greek.
riz. SOUTH. | Aupter, notus, meridies.|~ 0° o”
18. South-by-weft. Hypolibonotus, alfa- {| 41 15
mus.
ig. South-fouth-weft. | Libonotus, ‘notoliby- | 22. 30
cus, auftro-africus,
20. South-weft by Mefolibonotas. ee 45
fouth.
21. South-weft. Noto-zephyrus. 45
Noto-libycus,
his "oa PCey s |
22. South-weft by Hypolibs: 56 ré
welt. Hypafricus.
Subvefperus,
1 23. Weft-fouth-weft. | Libs. 67 30
24. Weft-by-fouth: Mefolibs. pps WRN ed ae
Mefozephyrus. sh eigen
From the Welt.
| 25. WEST. Zephyrus, favonius, oc- | 0° od
q cidens. . oe
| 26. Weft-by-north. | Hypargeftes; wT ae eb
Hypocorus.
27. Weft-north-weft. | Argeftes. 22 30
Caurus, corus, iapix. :
28. North-weft by Mefargeftes. 33 45
weit. Mefocorus. ? | |
29. North-weft, | Zepbyro-boreas, boroli-|. ‘45
: bycus, olympias. ‘
1 30. North-weft by | Hypocircius. ny Co 1s
i north; : Hy pothrafcias. |
cirem.
| 31. North-north- Circius, thrafcias, Oa 30
| weft, ° AT ah 4
i. 32. North-by-wett. Mefocircius. 78 ae


1016" AN TELUSTRATION


————~>—qq—q———eeeee___ee—= Fare ene ee . sapueeccsindioemecee ee aocneieee <


Names of the Winns, and Points of the | - 4;
COMPASS. _Diftances of

the Points, &c.

oe | from the Souutik


OF AST ROL OG y, 1017


APPLICATION of all the foregoing PHENOMENA in waTurat
and METEORoLoGIcaL ASTROLOGY.


Having defcribed the nature and properties of meteorolic appearances,
and explained the phenomena of eclipfes, comets, &c. with the motions
and attractions of the Earth, Moon, and Sun, as they affect the tides,
winds, and atmofphere, we fhall now confider their influence, jointly
with that of the other planets and ftars, in producing the continual
changes and mutations in the general affairs of ftates and empires; and
in the variations and changes of the weather, whereby plagues and
peftilences, droughts and inundations, and the confequent calamities of
fickly and diftrefsfal times, are fought out and predicted; for, all having
the fame primitive caufe, namely, the attrattive power and influence of
the planetary fyftem upon the elementary and terreftrial matter, they are
alike definable froma contemplation of the occult properties of that ce-
leftial influx, which this department of the aftrologic {cience has in all
ages been found to teach.


From what has been premifed concerning the foregoing pheriomena,
it becomes evident, that, whatever affeéts the ftate of the air or atmof-
phere, muft neceffarily, in an adequate proportion, alter the ftate of the
weather ; and that, by how much the more the elements are impregnated
or charged with electrical matter, or that the motions of the winds are
increafed or diminifhed, or, that the clouds are furcharged with moitt
and difcordant vapours, by fo much the more will ftormy, tempeftuous,
and unfettled, weather, be produced. So likewife, it is equally demon-
ftrable, that, as the temperature of the air, and the ftate of the ambient
and elementary matter, is from time to time varied and changed, or
- furcharged to a greater or lefs excefs with any particular quality, fo ina
_ proportionate degree will the animal functions and fpirits of men be raifed

or deprefled, their minds agitated, and their paflions inflamed; whence
arife putrid and malignant complaints throughout whole provinces, and
difcord and malevolence among the different governments and orders of
fociety. And, feeing thefe things are fo, that their caufes are brought
about by the attractions and mutations of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in
their different motions and pofitions, and in their conjunctions and op- -
pofitions, and various configurations among themfelves and with the
earth; and, fince we have feen that thefe motions and pofitions of the
planets, and all their different afpects, can be afcertained for any feries
of years to come; fo, it is manifeft, that, by knowing their influences


and effects upon the air, earth, winds, and elements, and upon the
| confti-


10418: AN. 4D U0 ST. R.A TION


conftitutions and paffions of men; a prefage of times and feafons, of
famines, ‘peftilences, inundations, and of all great and univerfal.calami-
ties arifing therefrom, is fought out, and indifputably effablithed.


‘This {peculation is therefore defined to be, the art of prognoftication
by the rules of afrouomy. .It is divided into two principal. or diftinct.
parts; the one-whereot is called genera/, or untverfal, becaufe it relates to
whole empires, nations, or provinces; and the other /oca/, or particular,
fince it relates only to the weather applicable to particular. and. diftin€d.
climates; which, from the foregoing theory of eclipfes, tides, and winds,
it is manifeft, might be afcertained with very great degrees of exactnefs.


In thefe confiderations, two things are.to be regarded,.as thé principal
ground-work of the whole, namely, the ¢endency and familiarity of: the.
twelve figns of the zodiac, and the planets and ftars, to the temperature.
of the different chmates.; and the qualities. produced in certain feafons by
the ecliptical conjunctions of the Sun and Moon, and by the revolutions
and tranfits of the planets, with their rifings and (tations. The firft and
greater caufe hath refpect unto whole regions, and fheweth the uncer-
tainty of national glory and perfection, fo liable to be difturbed by wars
and inteftine broils, or deftroyed by famine, peltilence, earthquakes, ‘or.
inundations. The fecondary or inferior caufe is produced in certain
times, as in the contrariety of feafons, and their mutations more-or lefs in
their different quarters ; as heats or winds more vehement-or remifs, out
of their proper and accuftomed times, whereby plenty or.fcarcity, or-dif-
eafes, are, produced, as the caufe and quality fhall happen to be. Hence are
difcovered the fympathies exifting between the motions and configurations
of the planets, and between the-mutations and varieties of weather obfervs-
able in the fame feafons of the year; and of the general good or evil attend-
ant on mankind; all which are here accounted for according to the prin-
ciples of natural reafon. For it is an undeniable fact, that every diftin&

property will have its diftinét effect; and that the knowledge of thefe
effects point out the property, whether it be good or evil. Thus we
‘know that.the property of the planets ruling particular feafons, as the
Moon does the tides, will conftantly produce the fame effect, when un-
impeded with the property or influence of other attractive bodies; for
then the effective property is changed, and can only be determined by
contemplating the proper force and mixture of the different planets, ac-
cording to their co-operation and power, or places in the zodiac. |


In this fpeculation, likewife, not only the natures_and mixtures of the.
planets amongft themi{elves are to be obferved, but alfo the mixtures of


thofe |


Oty A WTO ReO LO G ¥. - 1019


thofe qualities which communicate their properties to the planets and
figns: fuch as the more powerful influences of the Sun and Moon, and
the parallels of attraCtion made with the earth. But, when any of the
planets act diftinétly of themfelves, regard muft folely be had to their
own proper government and quality. Therefore, if the ftar of Saturn
rules alone, he caufeth corruptions by cold, confpiracies in ftates, with
difcontents and fedition. But the influx which properly feizeth men,
engendering cold and crude matter, produces chronical difeafes and con-
fumptions, colloquations, rheumatifms, cold moift diftempers, agues,
epidemic fevers, defluxions, &c. which will be the general or prevailing |
complaints in thofe countries over which this planet bears rule, and
-where his parallels or afpetts zz mundo are vifibly made. With refpe@
to the political government of thofe countries, it ftirs up diffentions
amongft kings and princes, begets violence and contention betwixt ma-
giftrates and rulers, and anarchy and confufion amongft the people; it
forebodes war, forrow, and defolation, and often terminates in the over-
throw of ftates, and in the death of princes. Among irrational animals,
it meftly feizeth thofe of the domeftic kind, producing the diftemper in
horfes and dogs, the rot in fheep, and the murrain amongft horned
cattle. Its effect upon the atmofphere will produce mifty, dark, clofe,
humid, lowering, corrufcuous, weather ; or elfe turbulent, and violently
intemperate; or extremely intenfe cold, durable frofts, and {now, as the
-clime and feafon of the year fhall chance to be. Hence will arife inun-
dations of waters, fhipwrecks, and diftrefs at fea, and drowning, or
freezing to death on:land. The fruits of the earth will be diminithed,
and chiefly thofe which are moft needful for the fuftenance of man will
totally fail, being ftruck with blight, {mut, blaft, and mildew, or
overcome with floods, rain, hail, {now, or frofts, {fo that the evil begets
a paucity of the neceflaries of life, and proceeds to famine,


If Jupiter alone be lord of the year, he influences all things to the
greateft good. Amongit men will be a time of blefiednefs, vigour, and
uninterrupted health; of long and happy days of tranquillity and peace.
Thofe things which are neceflary for man’s ufe and benefit are nourifhed
_and augmented, and all nature tends both to mental and corporeal good.
In political events, thofe countries more immediately under his dominion
and influx, will: be the moft. happy and profperous, the affairs of ftate
will tend to the promotion of national wealth, magnanimity, and honour ;
the government will be mild, and the laws difpenfed with juftice and
moderation; there will be mutual agreement between kings and princes,
and an univerfal-difpofition to peace; alliances will be formed for the
profperity. of the people, and trade and commerce will flourifh under

No. 54. a1 X them,


96 A NO LE OST Te Ae © oN


them, The increafe amongit irrational animals, of the domeftic and
ufeful kind, will be great, and men will be enriched thereby, particularly
fuch as deal in fheep and black cattle. The conftitution of theair will -
be mild and healthful, tempered with gentle winds and refrefhing
fhowers, whereby the fruits of the earth will be replenifhed, and feed-
time and harveft, and heat and cold, fucceed each other in their proper
and accuftomed feafons. The elements, participating in a more equal
- mixture of their qualities, will be lefs difturbed ; lakes and rivers {well
only to a moderate height, fo as to encreafe fertility and vegetation.—
The reftlefs ocean, now unaflailed by turbid ftorms and winds, affords
fafe paflage to the richly-freighted fhips from every quarter of the globe. —
In fhort, under the unimpeded influence of this benign ftar, the pro-
ductions of the earth will be poured forth in abundance, and all things
contribute their ftore for the health and profperity of man.


Mars, having a/one the dominion of the year, produces thofe evils
refulting fpontaneoufly from his nature, which are intemperate heat
and drought, Mankind will hence be feized with violent corruptions
of the blood, apoplexies, and fudden deaths. Spotted and fcarlet fevers
will abound principally in thofe countries over which he prefides, and
where his mundane afpe&ts moft forcibly pervade the earth; for, there
will his noxious influence prove moft fatal. Political affairs, under this
influx, are marked with violence and oppreflion. Wars break out be-
tween contending princes, and fire and {word defolate the country,
and level all before them. Inteftine broils, infurrections, treafon, ‘and
murder, ftain the land with innocent blood, and complete the fad cata-
Jogue of human misfortunes. The brute-creation, and particularly thofe
appropriated for the food and fervice of man, will be gricvoufly afflitted ;
epidemic diforders will break out amongft them, and the heat: and
drought will prove extremely fatal to horfes. The fruits of the earth
will be burnt up, fodder and grafs for cattle every where deftroyed, and
all vegetation ina manner fufpended. Rivers; lakes, and ponds, will be
dried up, the fprings of the earth exhaufted ; and, at the rifing of the
dog-flar, nature, as it were, will ficken, and refpiration be difficult and
- faint; dogs will run mad, and epidemic contagion {pread throughout
whole empires. The fea, in a manner ftagnated with calms, will put
navigation and commerce almoft to a ftand, whereby a dearta of corn,
and other neceflaries of life, will be felt in many countries, and pave


the way to the fevereft ravages of peftilence and plague..


The fo rule and government of Venus will draw our attention from.
this waite and barren wild to a fcene more grateful and pleafing. Under
| | ian re her


O °F A SITY RPO NOG Y. rozr


her mild and gentle fway, all nature inclines to moderation and delight.
‘The influx which feizeth men will difpofe them to cultivate the ble!
fings of peace, and conciliate the- jarring interefts of contending ftates.
Fruitfulnefs and fecundity will blefs the land; the minds of men will
be foftened by the all-fubduing charms of the. fmiling fair, whofe be-
nignant influences harmonize fociety, and prefage the golden era.of
felicitous and happy marriages, harbingers of joy, of children, and de-
light. Political affairs will now grow mild and peaceful; and the:minds
of monarchs more inclined to negociations for family-alliances, and the
chains of wedlock, than to enforce the favage rage of war, and painful
fhackles of imprifonment or flavery.. All animated nature will increafe
and multiply, and the creatures, which do not fly the dominion of man
will be healthful and profitable. The ftate of the air will be prolific
and ferene, tempered with refrefhing fhowers and falubrious winds,
producing heavy and luxuriant crops of all the fruits of the earth. Ships
fail brifkly and fafely at fea, and the produce of different climes are wafted.
from fhore to fhore, trebling their value. The f{prings and rivers murmur
through the groves, pouring over their mofly banks the beverage of fat+
nefs on the verdant plains, {miling in all the variegated drefs of blooming
fpring. ‘The alternate feafons will fucceed, without turbulent or violent
exceis; and the delicious fruits and ripened corn, gathered into the
garner in plenty and perfection, will influence the minds of m¢gn, while
fitting in fafety and peace under their own vine and their own fig-tree,
to pour out, toa bountiful and gracious PRovipEeNncsz, the unbounded
effufions of pious and grateful hearts.


When Mercury hath alone the’dominion,. and not allured to the qua~
lity of other bodies by the force of attraction, or the mutability of his
own nature, he quickens the minds of men, and difpofes to induftry and
sinvention. The conftitution of the air under him will be aétive and un-
fettled, frequently changing in the fpace only of a few hours; and, by
reafon of his proximity to the Sun, when in his fwifteft motion, he oc.
_cafions drought, and difturbs the ambient by generating winds and va-
pours, thunder, lightning, corrufcations, and dark lowering clouds; and
on this account he induceth corruption in animals and plants, particu-
larly fuch as,are moft ufeful and profitable to man. In matters of ftate-
policy and government, he infufes artifice and cunning into the conduct
of princes, gives fagacity to minifters and difpatch. to the deliberations
of council ;. he promotes the liberal arts, and forwards the improvement
of {cience, difpofing all men to fobriety, perfeverance, and labour. In
voyages and navigation, the influx of this planet is not very propitious,
fince it.occafions {udden and violent ftorms, and perpetual changes eS

wind.


* ex
sf. A NO DULI WS RIA Te ON


wind. Lakes and rivers, under this dominion, fwell on a fudden to
immoderate heights; break down their banks, and carry away their
bridges; inundate the country for miles round, and lay whole towns
under water; thefe again, as fuddenly fubfide, and droughts frequently
enfue. Hence the difeafes engendered will be quotidian agues, violent _
colds and coughs, eruptions of blood, afthmas, and confumptions. In

the occidental quadrants he diminitheth the waters, and in the oriental
he increafeth them. Under this influence, therefore, when it acts alone,
men will experience a mediocrity of good and evil; the fruits of the earth
will in general be fufficient, but vary much in quality and value, accord-
ing to the mutation of the weather, and as the blights and rains fhall
have been mote or lefs general or partial. Peace will for the moft part
prevail under this governance; fince the animofities of princes will be


more likely to cool by negociation, than be inflamed or exhaufted by
the devaftations of war. )


Thus each planet, according to its nature, quality, and force, pro-
duceth thefe things, when left to its own proper action and effect, un-
mixed with the influx of other bodies, and the beams and copulations
of the luminaries unoppofing or correfponding thereto. But, when one
ftar is mixed with another by afpect, or by familiarity in figns, then the
effet will happen according to the mixture and temperament arifing from
~ the communication of thofe mixtures, which being as it were manifold

and infinite, from the number and diverfities of other ftars and afpects,
they can only be afcertained by attentive calculations, founded on-ma-
thematical precepts. And, in our judgment of events which appertain
to certain diftricts, we ought moft attentively to weigh the familiarities of
thofe planets which bring up the event; for, if the planets are benefics,
and conformed to the region upon which the effect falls, and are not
overcome by contraries, they more powerfully produce the benefit ac-
cording to their proper nature; as, on thecontrary, they are of lefs ad-
vantage, if any impediment happens in the familiarity, or their influence
be overcome by oppofing afpetis. So again, if the ruling ftars of the
events are malefics, and have familiarity with the regions on which the
accident falls, or are overcome by contraries,-they do lefs harm; but, if
they have no familiarity with thofe countries, nor are overcome by them
that have familiarity therewith, they do much greater harm. As to their
effects upon the difeafes of men, they are feized by more univerfal af-
fections, having the feeds thereof in their nativities, and receive, by
fympathy in their conftitutions, the more fenfible operation of thefe ge-
neral accidents. Thefe confiderations form the grand outline of this


department of aftrology ; from which particulars are alone deducible.


at


Seeing


OF AS TROLOG ¥Y. 1023
Seeing, therefore, that this {peculation comprizes two different and


diftin&t fubjects, namely, the general {tate of the weather; and, fecond-
ly, the mutations and revolutions of Countries and Enapires: it will be


~- proper to confider them :upon the bafis already laid down, under their


refpective and particular heads; and, firft,


; won Of th WEATHER.


As it is in the air or atmofphere that all plants and animals live and
breathe, and as that appears to be the great principle of moft animal and
vegetable productions, alterations, &c. there does: not fegm any thing,
in all philofophy, of more immediate concernment to us, than the ftate
of the weather, In‘ effett, all living things are only aflemblages or
bundles of -veflels, whofe juices are kept moving by the preffure of the
atmofphere ; and which, by that motion, maintain life. ‘So that any al-
terations in the rarity or denfity, the heat, purity, &c. of that, muft
neceffarily be attended with proportionable ones in thefe. What great,


yet regular, alterations, a little change of weather makes in a tube filled
‘with mercury, or:fpirit of wine, or in a piece of ftring, &c. every body
‘Knows, in the common inftance of barometers, thermometers, hygro-


meters, &c. and, it is owing partly to our inattention, and partly to our,
unequal intemperate courfe of living, that we do not feel as great and as
regular ones in the tubes, chords, and fibres, of our-own bodies. It is


“certain, a great part of the brute creation have a fenfibility, and fagacity,


this way, beyond mankind; and yet, without any means or difpofition


“thereto, more than'we; except that their veffels, fibres, 8c. being, in
‘other refpects, in one equable habitude, the fame or a proportionable


~caufe from without has always a like or proportionable effect on them ;


that is, their veflels are regular barometers, &c.‘ affeGted only from one
external principle, viz. the difpofition of the atmofphere; whereas ours


‘are acted on ‘by divers from within, as well as without: fome of which
‘check, impede, and prevent, the a€tion of others. --But to afcertain the
‘Jimits of thefe various affetions requires a theory of the weather founde


on aftrological and mechanical principles.


"To obtain ‘a proper ‘knowledge of ‘the. weather for any given: year,
“4t ds réquifite exaétly ‘to’ obferve the “ingrefs of the ‘Sun into the firft


point of Aries, Cancer, Libra, andCapricorn, at’ the change or com-


' 'mencement of the four different quarters of the year; together with the


conjunétions or-oppofitions of the luminaries next preceding the fame in-
refles; ‘Then to the time of ‘the ingrefs ere€t the {cheme of heaven, and


: obferve whether the places'of the luminaries, at the time of their conjunc-
~“iliiNo, 54- Se OS ye tion


ts


1024 AN PDL WSTIRA TY ON


tion or oppofition, happen in a moift, dry, or cold, manfion; and of what
planets they are afpeCted, and likewife if the ruling planets be conjoined
in fuch a manfion with the lord of the fign of that conjunction or oppo-
fition, and the lord of the afcendant; as alfo the a/muten, or general lord
of the figure, not neglecting the fixed ftars of the firft, fecond,:and third;
magnitude, their rifing, fetting, and culminating, with planets of the fame
nature, or having conveniency of afpect or radiation. Alfo, diligently
confider the lord of the eclipfe, or ruling planet of the great conjunction
next preceding, if any do.immediately precede; which, being truly
noted, obferve carefully what planet or fixed ftar he fhall be corpo
rally conjoined with, or apply to, next after the conjunction or oppofition
of the Sun and Moon; for, according to the nature thereof will the feafon
generally be inclined... If Saturn therefore be well difpofed in an angle,
and in a moift afterifm, without impediment, or applying to another
planet at the time of the Sun’s ingrefs, it prefages temperate and feafon-
able fhowers, and filleth the heaven with obfcure clouds, efpecially in that
lunation wherein he hath the chief dominion. But if, on the con-
trary, he be impedited, or evilly difpofed, it portends turbulent ftorms
of wind and rain, and cold, denfe, and thick, clouds, efpecially if Ve-
nus or Mercury be in moilft figns, and behold him from an angle: for,
in that cafe, there will be much rain. Jupiter, in fuch a pofition, pro-
duceth winds: and rain, with reddifh clouds; Mars engenders yellow
clouds, thunder, corrufcations, and rain, ef{pecially in thole times and
places proper and convenient, and the rather if Jupiter and Mercury give
any teftimony thereto. The.Sun, irradiated in: that :manner, produces
red clouds and a great deal of wet.. The Moon, applying to Venus, and
affuming the above prerogatives, brings gentle rain; but, if the Moon ap-
plies to Mercury, or if Mercury be lord.and ruler of the figure with Jupi-
ter, it portends {howers and violent winds, and cloudy air; yet fometimes
more violent, and fometimes more remifs, according to the figns, afteri{m,
manfions of the Moon, and-the conjunctions of the other ftars, either
fixed or erratic. And here note, that, if the ruling planet be oriental,
his effects will appear in the end; if occidental, in the beginning, whe-
ther it be in a revolution, folar ingrefs, or a lunation.


A {cheme of the heavens, erected for the Sun’s entrance into the firt
{cruple of Aries, will, with the help of the Moon’s principal afpeéts
and configurations with the Sun and other planets at her feveral changes,
determine the general ftate of the weather for that quarter. But, in this
{pecies of prediction, we muft never lofe fight of the influence and at-
traction of the earth, nor of the force and peculiarity of each climate
refpectively, as heretofore laid down in our confideration of tides, winds,


I earth-


OF ASTROLOGY. 1025


earthquakes, &c. becaufe thefe peculiarities arife entirely from the particu-
lar fituations of different climates or countries with re{pe& to the Sun, and
would have their weather fixed and certain, the fame as their increafe or.
decreafe of day or night, were it not for the attractive and expulfive force’
of the other celeflial bodies, which are inceffantly varying that of the Sun, —
and of one another, according to their different pofitions and afpects.
Hence it is neceflary, before we attempt to give judgment of the wea-
ther in any particular country or climate, to be well informed of its par-
ticular fituation with refpect to land and fea, mountains and vallies,
iflands and continents, caverns and lakes, as well as of its geographical
pofition, with refpect to the tropics, equinottial, ecliptic, &c. for, as
every different climate is differently affected by the Sun’s influence upon
it, as well as by the quality'of its own proper foil or component parts,
fo will the action of the other celeftial bodies thereupon be more power-
ful or -remifs, as their nature.and quality fhall be found to agree with or
oppofe the ftate and temperature of thofe climates, and the Sun’s influence
at thofe times upon them. Hence we fee clearly the extreme difficulty
of calculating the weather for England, Ireland, or any of the iflands,
which, being furrounded by the fea, are fubject to much greater varia-
tions of weather than any of the continents or great oceans. The
caufe is apparent. In England, we find almoft every flight configura-
tion of the Sun and Moon, and the rifing and fetting of particular {tars,
will change the ftate of the atmofphere almoft inftantaneoufly ; and, from
the proximity of the fea every way round us, and the confequent moift
vapours inceflantly drawn up into the air by the attraction of thefe bodies,
we become fubject to wet, cloudy, corrufcuous, weather, which.extends
not to any of the furrounding coafts, but is peculiar only to the ifland
over which thefe vapours are engendered. And, hence it is we fo often
fee fhowers, which, though accompanied with violent thunder, lightning,
-wind, and hail, are frequently not heard of at a few miles diftance; and that
when, in one county, there has been a drought, and the land and corn
almoft-dried and parched up, in the next adjoining county they fhalt be
vilited with frequent fhowers, and the fruits of the earth be luxuriant
and flourifhing. This fact muft be within every man’s obfervation who
réfides in England, and the caufe is entirely peculiar to the country. The
moift vapours of the contiguous ocean are drawn up into the clouds one
hour ; and, by the.oppoting influence of fome planet or {tar then rifing
or culminating, are driven Gown the next; whence it is obvious, that all
attempts to foretel {uch mutations and changes as thefe are abfurd and
_ futile. The object of this part of Aftrology means only to afcertain thofe
great and powerful operations of the ftars, which {hall be felt generally
throughout whole provinces ; that, having their caufe in the principal

; | con-=


1026 AN-ILLUSTRATION


conjunctions, oppofitions, or quadratures, of the fuperior bodies, will
raife tempefts over a whole continent; pervade the bowels of the earth
in porous*and fubterraneous countries, and produce earthquakes ; that
thall clothe the whole face of nature with fleecy fnow or hoary frott ;
or, from humidity and heat, fhall either parch the land, while its faint-
ing inhabitants gafp for breath, or putrify its air with peftilential qua-
lities, which fends them by thoufands to the grave.


‘The next thing to be confidered in relation to the weather, is the cons
junctions and afpects of the planets. The conjunction of Saturn and fue
piter, which ought accurately to be obferved, produces its effects in the
mutation of the air many days before and after, in regard of the tardinefs
of their motions. This conjunction happening in hot and dry manfions,
ot with fixed ftars of that nature, generally produces drinefs; increafeth
heat in fummer, and mitigates the: cold in, winter; but in moift figns
it portends rain and inundations. Yet this is diligently to be noted, chat
the effects produced by this conjunction will be of the mature of the rul-
ing planets for, if Saturn claims principal dominion in the place of the
conjunction, ands elevated above Jupiter ine{pect of latitude, it denotes
many difeafes, and much evil in general ; but pthe contrary, lif Jupi-
ter prewails.. So likewife thefe two ponderous planets bermg in oppofition, -
quartile, trine, or fextile, is a fign of continuance of feafons 3 but for
the moft part they bring forth impetuous ftorms of rain and hail ; parti-
«ularly happening in the {pring time, in morft afteri{ms, they produce tur-
pbulent air; infummer, hail:and thunder; in autumn, winds.and wets; in
ewinter, obfcure and thick clouds, and dark air. . Saturn and Mars in
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, and Jupiter giving teftimony, ufa-
ally prefage winds and rain, hail, thunder, lightnings, and .corrufca-
tions, according to the feafons of the year; for, in the {pring at portends
wind, rain, and thunder; in fummer, hail and thunder; ijn autumn, vio-
lent rain; and in winter, diminution of cold; but abovesall, obferve the
ruling planet, and, according to his nature judge. Saturn.and ithe Sun in
conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, is apertzo potarum, efpecially if it
happens in a moift conftellation; for then, in the {pring time, at threa-)
tens dark and heavy clouds ; in fummer, hail, thunder, and remiffion of
heat; in autumn, rain and cold; in winter, froft, fnow, and clouds
weather. Saturn and Venus in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition.
generally produce cold rain and f{howers; in fpring, they bring fortl.
rain and cold ; in fummer, fudden and hafty fhowers; in ‘autumn, colc
tain (as, in {pring or winter, {now or-cold rain.) Saturn.and Mercury
in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, in dry figns and manfions, bring
forth drinefs; in.moit figns, rain; in the airy, winds; in the earthy,


cold


Of A‘S T RRO LOG Y. 1027
cold air and drinefs; pagticularly in the fpring, it produces wind and
rain; in fummer, wind and fhowers; in autumn, wind and clouds;
and, in winter, wind and fnow. Saturn and the Moon, in conjunGtion,
quartile, or oppofition, affect the air according to that part of the afterifm

“wherein they are conjoined or afpetted. In the moift figns, it portends
clouds and coldnefs; in the airy, and in Sagittarius and Capricorn, it in-
creafeth cold, efpecially when the Moon is of full light; and, when the
is void of courfe, it brings forth drinefs; but, in dry figns, it begetteth
fharp air; and a frofty feafon, if it be in winter; generally the Moon and
Saturn ftir up thick clouds and gentle fhowers. In the {pring it is a
fign of a turbid and moift air; in fummer, moifture, with remiffion of
heat, and fometimes hail, if there be any afpeét of Mars or Mercury;
in autumn, it prefages a cloudy air; in winter, clouds and fhnow, with
vehement cold.


Jupiter and Mars, in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, change the
quality of the air, according to the nature of the figns and ftars to which
they are conjoined or otherwife afpetted. In hot and dry manfions, it
caufeth great heat; in the moift figns, thunder and rain; but, particularly
in the {pring time, it produceth winds and turbulent air; in fummer,
heat, and thunder and lightning; in autumn, tempeftuous and windy
air; and, in winter, remiflion of cold and temperature of air. But, in
this conjunction, we muft obferve the ruling planet; for, if Jupiter fhall
rule and be elevated above Mars, it fignifies much good and felicity, plenty
of fruit, and fuch things as ferve for the fuftenance of mankind, accord-
ing to his benevolent nature; but, Mars ruling, produceth many difeafes,
drinefs, houfe-burnings, and the like. Alfo, Jupiter and Mars, with tem-
peftuous ftars, as Arcturus, the Eagle, tail of the Dolphin, light ftar of
the Crown, &c. ftir up wind and hail, and in fummer alfo thunder ;
in winter, he inclineth the air to warmth, efpecially if Jupiter be then
{tationary. Jupiter and the Sun, in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition,
bring forth wholefome winds and ferenity; particularly, in {pring and
autamn, they fignify winds; in fummer, thunder, and, in winter, re-
miffion of cold. Jupiter and Venus, in conjunction, quartile, or oppofi-
tion, do generally produce ferenity and temperature of air; in the moift
figns they promife gentle fhowers; in other figns, fair weather, wholefome
winds, and fertility of all things. Jupiter and Mercury, in conjunction,
quartile, or oppofition, ftir up the winds, and fometimes there 1s aper-
éio portarum to winds and rain; in the fiery figns they bring drinefs and
warm winds; in the airy figns, fair weather, but winds in all feafons of
the year; particularly, in the fpring and autumn, they portend hail, and
in winter {now. Jupiter and the Moon, in conjunction, quartile, or oppo-


No. 54. 11 Z fition,


1028 AN GLH v OTR aT Lon


fition, produce gentle winds, ferenity, and temperature of the air; yet.


they alter the weather, according to the quality of the fign and afterifm


which they poflefs; but at all times they generally denote a mild and
temperate feafon. ,


Mars and the Sun, in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, in the fiery
figns, portend heat and drinefs ; in the watery, hail, thunder, and light-
ning; in the airy, clouds; and, .in the earthy, violent winds; in the
fpring and autumn, they excite dry winds; in fummer, great heat, light-
ning, and thander; and, in winter, remiffion of cold. Mars and Venus,


in conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, are apertio portarum to much


rain, if it happen in moift figns, efpecially in {pring and autumn; in
fummer it engendereth fhowers; in winter, remiffion of cold, yet of-
tentimes {now when Saturn beholds them. Mars and Mercury, in
conjunétion, quartile, or oppofition, in winter and {pring, foretel fnow ;
in fummer, thunder and-hail; in autumn, hail and great winds; and,
in fiery and dry figns, they prefage warmth and exceflive drinefs. Mars
and the Moon, in conjunction, quartile, or*oppofition, in moift figns,
_ demonftrate rain ; in fiery, drinefs, red clouds, and fometimes rain; in
fummer, lightning, hail, and corrufcations. Mars, entering new figns,
very often changeth the air, fo Mars, pafling by Sucule, or Hyades, cau=
feth clouds and moifture. Mars in Cancer, ‘with north latitade, in -au-
-tumn and winter, bringeth warm weather, with wind and rain, and
fharp difeafes, if Mars fhall afpect Saturn, Venus, or Mercury. Mars
pafling by the Pleiades maketh a cloudy feafon, and, ‘being accompanied
_with {tars of a tempeftuous nature, as Arcturus, the Eagle, bright ftar of
the Crown, Bull’s eye, Tail of the Dolphin, Procyon, tidicula, Scorpi+
‘on’s Heart, Virgin’s Spike, &c. rifing or fetting with them, fignifies‘a
turbulent, windy, and oftentimes a fuitry and unwholefomie, air.


_. The Sun and Venus in conjunction commonly produce moifture ; -in
{pring and autumn, rain; in fummer, fhowers and thunder ; in winter,
rain. The Suniand Mercury in conjunction, in the airy figns produce
winds, in the watery figns rain, in the fiery drinefs and warm winds,
(hurtfal to.mankind.) The San and Moon, in conjunétion, quartile,
or oppofition, in moift figns, -portend rain; in fiery figns, fair weather,
but generally it alters the air according to the nature of the ruling planet
and the nature of the feafon. The conjunction, femi-fextile, and fex-
tile, of Venus and Mercury, infer ftore of .winds, and wet; and, in
winter, {now ; provided they be almoft equal in motion; Venus<an the


firft decade of Cancer prefageth rain: allo, her being with the Pierades,


Hyades, and tae Affeli, prenotes a moift feaion.
In


os


O:. FP oA ST Reo L’0-G Y; KO2g'


; In the revolution of the year, if Mars thall be in his own fign, it por-

tends much rain; if he be in the houfe of Saturn, it thews but little; in
others, but a mediocrity. In the revolution of the year, when Venus,
Mercury, and the Moon, are found in moift manfions, it portends much
rain. At the ingrefs of the Sun in tropical figns, if Venus fhall afpeé the
‘Moon from a moift place, it is a token of much rain, or, if Mars from’
Scorpio fhall afpett Venus, it portends likewife rain. When the Sun is
in Aries or Taurus, if Venus be then retrograde, the {pring will be
moift. The Sun in the terms of Mars increafeth the heat in fummer,
and drinefs of the fprings in winter. In the conjunttion or oppofition
preceding the entrance of the Sun into Aries, and alfo in the ingrefs it-
felf, if the Moon behold Saturn, and both be in moift figns, it is the
prefage of thick clouds, or foft and gentle fhowers continuing long ;
but, if Venus or Mercury behold Saturn, then the rain will: be more
vehement, and of long continuance.


If, in the autumnal quarter, more retrograde planets be with the Sun:
than in the other feafons, which in the winter following will become di-
re(t, it,isa fign of great drinefs. When the Sun enters the eighteenth de-
gree of Scorpio, if Mercury be in a moift place, it is.afign of rain ; and
obferve alfo the planet that is then a/muten of the figure erected for that
moment, and pronounce judgment according to his nature and pofition.
Venus in winter, direct and oriental of the Sun, -fignifies:but little rain
in the beginning of winter, and more ftore towards the end. When
Venus applies to Mars in Scorpio, it brings rain immediately. When:
the Sun, Moon, Venus, and Mercury, are all conjoined together, it ar-
gues continual fhowers that day, if the Moon beholds them from fome
other place, or if fhe be.in oppofition to,them. When, at the time of
the conjun@tion or oppofition of the luminaries, Venus fhall be in an
angle, it is a certain fign of rain; ithe lord of the afcendant in.a:watery
fign»begetteth rain.


To determine judgment of the particular ftate of the air, wemuft.con-
fider thefe fix things: firfl, at the time of the conjunction, quartile, or
oppofition, of the luminaries, ‘to obferve the planet that is)lord or elmu-
ten ; for, according to/his quality: and nature, wwiil the feafon be.inclined.
sSecondly, toiconfiderithedign which the :taid lord pofleffeth, with »his


inaturevand quality.. Thirdly, tovobfervethe fign afcending, the nature,


and of what manfion of the Moon it isiin. . Fourthly, the places.of the
planets, both in the zodiac and the celeftial houics, whether they be
in angles or elfewhere. »Fifthly, to obferve, next after the conjunction,
oppolition, or quartile, »what planet the: Moon is: frit conjoined with sg
bie fie alpect,


{6x6 A NY DIOL UM eTPRAAAT TOON


afpect. And, laftly, to confider to which of the planets, or fixed flars,
the lord is firft joined, or of whom he is beheld. Thefe things being
well confidered, judgment may be given as follows; namely, if the lord
® of the conjunction, quartile, or oppofition, be of a moift nature, and the
planets in moitt places, and the faid lord alfo be joined to ftars or planets
of a moift nature, and the Moon after feparation fhall conjoin or have af-
pect with a moift planet, the nature of the time will be wet and rainy ;
if all incline to drinefs, it will be dry; if to warmth, pronounce hot
weather ; if to cold, cold weather. The nature of the time will then
chiefly be moved, when the Moon, after conjuntiion, quartile, or op-
pofition, fhall be conjoined by body or any {trong afpect to the figni-
ficator. And, when the Moon comes to the fign afcending of the con-
junction, quartile, or oppofition, the time will be changed according
to the quality and nature of the fign and afterifm.


Daily experience fhews, that the weather is much varied by the fitua-
- tion of the winds; for, according to their different bearing is the feafon
much inclined, fometimes to hail, rain, and fnow, and again to fair
weather ; wherefore | fhall ftate thofe afpects which are found to attract,
raife, vary, or alter, the pofition of the winds, as they alternately rife or
fet in parallels to the different bearings of the earth. Befides thefe,


there are the lateral and collateral winds, blowing between thefe points, ©


which partake more or lefs of the quality of the foregoing, as they ap-
proach or recede from them. In the figure of the Sun’s ingrefs into any
of the cardinal figns, or conjunction or oppofition of the luminaries
preceding, or monthly lunation, obferve carefully what planet is predo-
minant in the figure; and their pofitions one to another mutually, as
before ftated, will give a near conjecture of the wind,


Saturn is the mover of the eaftern winds, Jupiter of the northern,
Mars of the weft and fouth, Venus of the fouthern, and Mercury ac-
cording as he fhall be conjoined with others; the Sun and Moon of the
weftern winds. The quality of the winds, and their bearing, is alfo
known from their pofitions in the figure; for, the planets with latitude
and fouth declination, from the mid-heaven, move the fouthern winds
to blow. From the swum cel, with latitude and northern declination,
the northern winds; the oriental planets move the eaftern winds, but
the occidental the weftcrn winds ; and, when they are weak, they attract
or caute the intermediate winds to blow. wr


Alfo the fituation and quality of the winds are gathered from the lati-
tude of the Moon, as fhe inclines to the north or fouth; fo the figns do


2 . alfo


v


O F ASS FTIR COUL OOF Y: 1031


alfo demonftrate the winds: for Aries, Leo, and Sagittary, excite the


northweft winds; Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, the fouth-eaft ; Ge-


mini, Libra, and Aquaries, the north-eaft ; Cancer, Scorpio, and Pifces,
the fouth-weft. Likewife, from the application of Mercury to the other
planets, we may in fome meafure prognofticate the quality of the winds ;
for, if Mercury apply to Saturn, it produces great winds, clouds, and
rain ; if to Jupiter, mild winds; if to Mars, warm winds; if to Mars
and the Sun, warm and hurtful winds; if to Venus, cold winds.


 Alfo the rifing, culminating, and fetting, of the fixed ftars, with the
Sun, Moon, and other planets, alter the ftate of the winds in the follow-
ing manner: Regulus, or the Lzon’s Heart, fetting with the Sun, excites
the weft winds to blow many days together. The rifing of Pleiades with
the Sun moveth the eaft wind. The fetting of 4réurus ftirreth up the
fouthern winds. The fetting of Plesades with the Sun excites the north.
eaft wind. The rifing of the Do/p4in with the Sun alfo produceth wind,
The rifing or fetting of Aréturus, (the head of the former twin,) the
fouthern belly of Pi/ces, the ftar.of the Triangle, with the Sun, Saturn;
Jupiter, Mars, or Mercury, begetteth winds. The {etting of Hyades
troubleth both fea and land, efpecially when Mars and Mercury give
teftimony. If, at the time of the matutine fetting of the Do/phin, there
be fhowers, there will be none at the rifing of Aréturus. The rifing of
- the Haedi produces rain, The matutine rifing of the greater Dog be-
getteth heat, troubleth the feas, and changeth all things.


The great Ptolomy, from many years obfervation, deduced the follow-
ing effects from the fixed ftars rifing with the Sun. Orion's Girdle, rifing
with the Sun, maketh a turbid air. The fetting of the Crowz pre-~
fageth tempefts. Syrius and Agquilo, rifing in the evening, produce tem-

efts. The fetting of Regu/us caufeth the north wind, and fometimes
alfo rain. The fetting of the Do/phin produces wind and fnow, The
fetting of Vindemiator moveth the north-eaft wind. The rifing of the
Ram’s- Horn brings forth rain and fnow. The vefpertine rifing of Arc-
turus portends tempefls. The rifing of the Pleiades maketh the weft
wind to blow. The vefpertine fetting of Syrius produceth the fouth
and north-north-eaft winds. The matutine fetting of the Hyades pre-
fageth rain and the fouth wind. ‘The vefpertine fetting of the Pleiades
moves the fouth wind, terminating in the weft. The rifing of the Suc-
cule brings rain. The rifing of Orion maketh the weft wind to blow.
The matutine fetting of Arcurus promifeth good weather. The matu-


is


tine fetting of the Bag/e caufeth great heat and the fouth wind. The ,


matutine rifing of Regulus moveth Aguilo, The matatine fetting of
No. 54. . 12 A ‘ Arcturus


1032 A NYVQOEL O'S -T RAAT ff OoN


Aréturus prefageth fhowers. The matutine fetting of the Succule be~
getteth rain, {now, and winds.


The Sun, rifing with the 4/e/i, troubles the air with thunder, light-
ning, fhowers, and the like. The Sun rifing with the Eag/e produceth
{now, as alfo with the tail of the Goat and head of Medufa. His rifing
with A/debaran and the ftars of Orion moveth wind, rain, thunder, and
lightning. When he rifeth with the cloudy ftars in Leo, with Oriz,
with the tail of Leo, the light ftar of Hydra, the Crown, or the ftars
in the forehead of the Scorpion, it portends a cloudy feafon. The
Sun fetting with the Harp prefageth a cold and moift time; with the
Pleiades, it begets wind and rain; with Regulus, fhowers, thunder, and
lightning ; with the Greater. Dog, a fair warm time, with thunder and
lightning; with Orion and Aldebaran, a turbid, windy, and wet, air ;
with Acarnar and the ftars of fupiter, a ferene and temperate feafon ;
with the ftars of the nature of Saturn, he produceth cold rain or fhow ;
with the ftars of Venus, rain and moifture; with the ftars of Mars,
thunder and lightning. Saturn, with the Head of Medufa, begetteth
cold and moifture; with the Pleiades, he troubleth the air, and engenders
clouds, rain, and fnow; with the ftars of Orzoz he produceth wind and
fhowers; with 4réfurus, wind and rain; with the Vargin’s Spike, fhow-
ers and thunder; with the Do/phim, bright ftar of the Crown, Goat's
Tail, or the Harp, it caufeth a moift and cloudy time, fometimes fnow
and rain; with Pre/épe, and the Hyades, it begetteth winds, clouds, rain,
and thunder; with the Lzon’s Heart, it produceth thunder and rain, and
inftability of weather; with the Greater Dog, it fignifies winds, rain,
thunder, and lightning.


Jupiter, rifing with Regu/us, brings fair weather in winter, and miti-
gates the cold, and increafeth the heat in fummer; with the Neck of
the Lion it raifeth the winds, and with Acarnar it promifeth ferenity.
Mars rifing with the Goaz’s Tad foretelleth a moift time; with the ftars —
in the Scorpion’s Forebead it denotes cold rain or fnow; with <Aréfurus,
vehement winds, rain, thunder, and lightning; with the Eagée, rain,
fnow, and great coldnefs; with the ftars of Orion, Hyades, Regulus, and
the Dogs, it fignifies great heat. Mercury with the Péerades begetteth
winds and rain; with the Eag/e, {now or rain; with the ftars of Orzon,
Hyades, Regulus, and the Dogs, it produceth winds, thowers, thunder, and
lightning; with the Goat's Taz/, cold winds, fnow, or fhowers; with the
back and neck of the Lion, moiftnefs with winds; with the Lzon’s Tai/,
Spica Virgo, the Harp, &c. it portends a fudden change to wind and rain.


z Te


Gi MAUS aT REOWL 0. G- Y: 1033


. The rifing and fetting of thefe ftars and conftellations might be known,

and their effects in fome degree pre-determined, by the fudden alterations
and changes we perceive in the atmofphere; from which, by diligent
obfervation, and repeated experience, we may derive pretty accurate rules
how to judge of the weather, fo as to regulate our condutt in the profe-
cution of journeys, or the management of bufinefs, particularly fuch as
relates to gardening and hufbandry.


The air, in which we breathe, being co-mixt with inflammable va-
pours, at which time it is hotter than ordinary, and unapt for refpirati-
on, fhews thé approach of thunder and lightning.—When the ringing
of bells, or other founds, are heard loud and faint, with difcordant parti-
cles, and by intervals, it fhews the air to be dilated and difturbed, pre-
fages either wind or rain, and fometimes both.—A fharp and cold wind
after rain forefhews more to come, the exhalation or vapour not be.
ing {pent in the former fhower.—Winds, that continue long in any one
of the cardinal points, will caufe the weather to continue the fame,
whether it be fair or foul; but, if it thifts often in changing its place, it
prefageth rain quickly after toenfue; but, in times of froft, it isa fign
that the weather is about to break.—Whirlwinds predict approaching
{ftorms of rain and hail; thefe winds are known by raifing the duft or
any light materials, and they are oftentimes forerunners of great tem-
pefts, for it is a windy exhalation driven obliquely upon the horizontal
plane, and forced down by the coldnefs or moifture of the lower region ;
-this repercuflion of the air caufeth chimneys to {moke which do not at
other times, and. forefhews great winds.—Sometimes whirlwinds are
caufed by the meeting of one another, and fo, raifing light particles of
matter, as it were in contention with each other, hurls them to and fro at
the pleafure of the prevailing power; and fuch as thefe ufually prefage
tempefts, and may be known by the clouds moving feveral ways at once,
from the fame caufe above as below.—When the air is dilated or rarefied,
it is a fign of much heat, or elfe produces rain, which might be known
by the ftench of fewers, foul places, or things corrupted, which are
more offenfive than at other times.—When the clouds be dark, deep,
and lowering, it is a figa of rain, and fometimes of tempeftuous weather,
or of violent ftorms of thunder and lightning.—If there be more thunder
than lightning, it argues a ftrefs of wind from that part whence it thunder-
ed,.and alfo of rain.—When it lightens and no clap of thunder fucceeds,
it isa fign in fummer of much heat, and fometimes of rain. —Whenitlight-
ens only from the north-weit, it betokens rain the next day.—Lightning
from the north prefages winds; and oftentimes great tempefts.—If from
the fouth or weit it lightens, expect both wind and rain from thofe parts.

—Morning


1034 A Ny Ij LeLs0csS TR Asl LOIN


—Morning thunder produces winds ; but mid-day, or in the evening,
{torms of rain and wind,—lIf the lightning appears very pale, it argues:
the air to be full of elettric fluid; if red or flery, it forefhews winds and
tempefts.—-When the flafhes of lightning continue long before they va-
nith, they denote the ftorm to be general throughout a whole province.
~—Thunder and lightning in winter in hot climates is ufual, and hath
the fame effects; but in thefe northern climates it is held ominous, and
feldom occurs without being the forerunners of much mifchief.—Many
{cattering clouds wandering in the air, and moving {wiftly, argue wind
or rain; if from the north or fouth, it denotes an approaching ftorm ; but,
if the rack rides both ways, it forefhews a tempeft.—If the rack in the
forenoon rides in the air from the eaftward, it argues rain at night; but,
if from the weft, it forefhews a cloudy morning, and rain; and at any
time of the day, when the fun-beans and wind meet, it may caufe ‘the
fame effet by virtue of his rays.—-When the clouds feem piled upon
heaps like fleeces of wool, it prefages wet weather to be near at hand.—
If the clouds fly low in fummer, it isa fign of rains and in winter it
forefhews {now and cold weather will enfue.—When the clouds feem
white and jagged, as if rent afunder, gathering together in a body, their
forces uniting, they foretel a ftorm; the nature of the exhalation is ap-
parently turbulent by the form and colour.--Hollow and murmurin
winds prefage ftormy weather, for it fhews the air to be moift and dilated,
and cannot find paffage, but is oppofed or hindred in its motion by
hills, trees, and hollow places, which it gets into, and then evacuates
with a roaring noifem—The air, being a fubtile body, infules itfelf. into
the pores of timber, boards, &c. and denotes rain, by being converted
into drops of water, or a moifture on the furface, which makes doors and
boards fwell, wainfcots crack, &c. for fome time before the rain comes
on.—=Paper againit wet weather will grow weak, damp, and {well; the
reafon is the fame with the laft; but, in writing paper it will fooneft be
perceived, and more certainly predict the weather, becaufe it is fized
with a thin fubflance of a gummy nature, which, with the waterithne{s
of the air, diffolves and grows moilt, giving way for the ink to foak into
the paper, which the fize in dry weather will not permit.—When the
clouds feem overcharged, and collect in white {pirals or towers, expe&
then rain, hail, or fnow, according to the feafon of the year.—After a ftorm
of hail, expeCt froft to follow the next day.—Mifis defcending from the
tops of hills, and fettling in the valleys, is a fign of a fair day, efpeci-
ally in fummer time, and is then an argument of heat; for, they are exha-
_ Jations raifed by the fervour of the Sun, which by the air in the evening
are converted into mifts and dews, as a neceflary provifion for nature to
cool the earth, and refrefh her fruits, whereby to enable them that they


may


“4°


OF “als T RAOUL :0'G Y: 1035


may endure the next day’s heat. White mifts are the fame, but more
waterifh, and inclining to rain; and if they afcend it prefageth rain, and
argues that the middle region of the air is temperate, the loweft waterith,
and the vapours warm.—If in calm and ferene weather the rack be ob-
ferved to ride apace, expect winds from that quarter; for, it is evident, ©
that the exhalations in the clouds are converted into wind or rain, and
will defcend; but, if the clouds afcend, it fhews the ftorm is paft, and
has happened at fome little diflance.——-A thick or dark fky, lafting for
fome time in a morning, without either fun or rain, becomes fair to-
wards the middle of the day, but foon after turns to wet rainy weather.
A change in the warmth of the weather is generally followed by a change
inthe wind. Hence it is common to fee a warm foutherly wind f{ud..
denly changed to the north by the fall of fnow or hail; or to fee the
wind in a cold frofty morning, after the fun has well warmed the earth
and air, wheel from the north towards the fouth; and again to the
north or eaft in the cold evening. |


Mott vegetables expand their down and flowers in fair fun-fhiny wea-
ther; but clofe them previous to cold weather or rain. This is remark-_
ably vifible in the down of dandelion, and eminently diftinguithed in
the flowers of pimpernel* ; the opening and fhatting of which ferve as
the hufbandman’s weather-glafs, whereby he foretels the weather of the
enfuing day with aftonifhing exattnefs. The rule is, if the bloffoms are
clofe fhut up, it betokens rain and foul weather; if they be expanded
and {pread abroad, the weather will be fettled and ferene. The ftalks
of trefoil fwell againft rain, and become more upright and ere@; and
the fame may be obferved, though not fo fenfibly, in the ftalks of almoft
every other plant. =


Now, by way of example to the reader, I fhall here give the figure of
the Sun’s ingrefs into the equinoctial fign Aries, which commenced the
vernal or fpring quarter in the year 1789, together with the afpects of
the Sun, Moon, and planets, throughout that quarter; which will be
fufficient to enable any attentive reader to perform this part of the {cience
with fatisfa€tion and pleafure for any length of time to come.


* See thefe curious properties, amongft a thoufand) others peculiar to the herbary creation,
more particularly defcribed in my Notes and Illuftrations to the improved Edition of Culpeper’s
Engliih Phyfician and Complete Herbal, now publifhing in 4to, with upwards of four hundred
engravings of the different Britith plants, coloured to nature,


No. 55. 12 B Such


9 A NOU U's TR AMT ON


Marcu soth, 15h.


52 min. P. M. 1789-


Such was the pofition of the heavens at the time of the Sun’s en-
trance into the firft point of Aries, being the commencement of the {pring
of verna] quarter of 1789, which happened that year on the 19th of
March; at.15 h. ¢2 m. or, according to civil time, at fifty-two minutes


paft three o’clock in the morning of the 2oth day, for which the above
{cheme is accurately calculated.


In drawing judgment of the ftate and temperature of the weather from
this figure, we muft not only confider the afpects and configurations, of
the luminaries and planets, but note the quality of the figns and tripli-
cities wherein they are pofited, and what will be the chief or predomi-
nant influence of the fuperiors. After which, the afpe@ts muft be regus
larly fet down in fucceflion till the commencement of the next enfuing
quarter, when a figure of that ingrefs muft alfo be calculated, and con-
fidered in the fame manner as the preceding, together with the place of
the Sun and quality of the feafon; by which means we fhall find the

2


weather


ORFy 2S) We O.L OG Ye us Goae


weather will be pretty accurately afcertained, for any length of time that


the calculation is made.


At the commencement of the {pring quarter, we find the cold ponder-
ous planet Saturn juft departed from an almoft abfolute rule and govern-
ment in the watery fign Pifces, and in no afpect either with Jupiter or
the Sun. This is a demonftrable proof of the intenfe coldnefs of the pre-
ceding quarter; for, fince Saturn is of a hardening aftringent nature, the
waters muft be congealed, and a cold durable froft evidently diftinguithed
the commencement of the year 1789. But the cafe was materially dif-
ferent towards the approach of the vernal equinox, when the Sun entered


into the fign Aries ; at which time the cold influence of Saturn was-mi-,


tigated by a trine afpect of Jupiter, and by the encreafing ftrength of
the beams of Sol. Neverthelefs, fince there are five planets configurated
in watery figns, and the influx of Saturn not entirely abated, and alfo,
fince we find the preceding provential -Full Moon in a watery fign, we
fafely concluded that the {pring quarter muft. for the firft part be cold
and wet; the wind, leaning moftly to the north and eaft, occafioned fleet,
and fnow or hail intermingled with rain; towards the middle, wefterly
gales of wind, and ftorims of rain and hail; but moderate towards the
end, with the wind moftly down to the fouthern point of the compafs.
The following afpects, particularly of the Sun and Moon, will thew the


-precife variations and general inclinations of the weather oa each of


thofe days. |


ASPECTS of the PLANETS operating on the WEATHER, from
the 17th of March to the 29th of June, 1789.


The Moon’s laft afpect, previous to the following, was co-mixt with
Saturn, a cold aftringent planet, in a watery fign,


March ; i" befe quartiles will produce


17, 9 2 Moon in # Saturn ‘in x cold and moift weather,
18, 0 0 .)Sun ~~. in * Moon in tJ fnow, fleet, and rain
19, 6 3 8 Mars Se Oh Venus” 1h * | Mans having: fo great rule
é ¢ 3 Mars. in X Mereuty panic. th ae thefe conjunctions which,
é 2 % Venus in x Mercury pe fe | though made in a watery
# > ¢ Moon in w Venus in x \ Sign, yet be will abate the
* > ¢ Moon TEs Te Mars Phe watery element, and make
A * >) ¥ Moon’ . in w Mercuryin x |” 77, day particularly jine
20, § ») # Moon. in Jupiter. In = | J
21, * ©.) Moon in Sun any, |
AER aN 23, 3
; r
eh ¥
a . *


1038
March


235
245


4,


a


9»


¥O Pak Pa


*¥ > EG *


a


Donaonke pwoPapapaprpapoos


AN


¥ Stationary
bh ¢@ Saturn in
>» ¢éMoon in
é in perihelion
§1n &


y Jupiter in
4,5Moon~ in
xy Moon in
'¢ Moon in
» Sun in
¢ Moon in
y 4 Moon in


>» b Moon in
>» ¢ Moon in
> 2%Moon in
h od in
© D- in
ug Jupiter in
>» u%Moon = in
>» 8 Moon in
D in apogee

>» 2% Moon in
> 6 Moon in
> ¢ Moon in
>» b Moon in
ug Jupiter in
© »)Sun in
>» 3 Moon in
>» Moon in
>» Moon in
4% s Jupiter in
>» ¢Moon in
>) Moon in
>» § Moon’ in
> uMoon in
> ¢Moon in
© > Sun in
>» ¢@Moon in
bh Saturn in
© ) Sun in
>» b Moon in
u

»))

d

>

©

»))


x<3sUuUskxArAR AR


2Huackaed


PPSsssshsrtxHsHaHearaRAR


Venus in
Mars in


Saturn “in


Venus in
Jupiter in


Venus in
Jupiter in
Mercury in


Jupiter in


Mars in
Venus in
Saturn in
Mars in
Moon in
Mercury in
Saturn in
Mars in


Mars in
Venus in
Saturn in
Mercury in
Jupiter in
Mars in
Moon in
Venus in
Mercury in
Moon in
Saturn, in
Mercury in
Jupiter in
Mercury in
Mars in
Moon in
Venus in
Jupiter in


LL. ST. RA T1250 °N


Cold and cloudy.


* (Cold foarp winds, and thick
pe aie’


Thick dark clouds, ane wind
and fnow.


Cold weather with winds and
Showers.


Cold and cloudy.


chive air, but no rain.


x*
pera
x


the feafon.


Unfettled, but for the moft
part fine.


HRA KR A


geo and fine weather for


x
% inal and turbulent air, with
7 hafty foowers of rain.


* | According to the mixture of


thefe flars, there will be.
dark clouds and fleet.


En


ba
ail
J
| Some rain and wind.


Fine dry rarefied air.
‘|


ah urbulent cold winds, with


rain.
Gentle fhowers,


Fine pleafant weather


HSspxeKBRKRKORKRRKAR


11, 4


DD?


JT EG. oes Rae eee


24,


ab,


HOR GK |
PORY YUE BZ ZOVKXY VU RY VYOVYYESOVY YY YUN OVE YVYUYY


2° i]


“AOFTASTROLOGY.


in m Saturn


bh Moon in
% Moon in m Jupiter in
¥ Moon in m Mercury in
é Moon in m Mars in
in Perigee

¢ Moon in ¢ Venus” ee
D Moon in ¢ Sun in
% Moon in ¢ Saturn in
$ Moon in ¢ Mars in
% Moon in g Mercury in
h- Moon in » Saturn’ in
% Moon in vy Jupiter © in
¢ Moon.iny Venus in
D Sun in w Moon in
xy Mars in x Mercury in
$ Moon in w Mars in
8 Moon in w Mercury’ in
¢ Moon in « Venus in
> Sun= in-y Moon in
h» Moon in. Saturn in
4% Moon in x Jupiter’ in
¢ Jupiterin = Venus in
é Moon in w Mars in
¢ Moon in » Mercury’ in
@ Moon in » Venus in
4 Moon in v Jupiter in
» Sun in % : Moon in
h ‘Moon in’? Saturn in
“Yin apogee | 8% |
4% Moon in x Jupiter in
% Moon in n Saturn in
3 Moon :in’ a ' Mars in
x Moon in un Mercury in
‘8, Jupiterin w ~Mereury - in
>» Sun in x Moon in
2 Moon in 3 Venus in
hb Moon in 2 (Saturn = ins
u Dd and 2} ¢ ine
2g Moon jn. Mercury in

gy it $2 ef

Le


ieee eo ee eae.


eeerase"


1038
% Cold rain.
an Gp
a Much rain. .
oe Fine day.


Warm breezes.


Pleafant weather.


Tain.


Good weather


Jfeafon.


Clear fry.
Warm weather.


Some dark cling
fhowers.


ee dark clouds, but xo
4 jor the
with


Ly clear and pleafant day.
f Gentle fhowers.


A piciniy day.
Some sory clouds
Dull morning, but see
afternoon.»
~ Pleafant day.
$e pen Mai ar.
3 :
a Sone froers
op - t .
! l 2,


Vi


May


135
14,


16,


19;


AKOKHKOOKKE DOOKHRHEOHRWHED D DOKAD SD


0 mM to UO FO Pb Papa


Ovrh¥Yevvuvu vr OvuUvV OTOP RYE EVO YUVVOWHYVYOUNVYYUYNYHYOWYSO


AN
>» Sun’. inv s Moon
$ Moon in a Venus
¢ Moon in wg: Venus
> Sufi in »-.Moon
¢ Moon in m Venus
3 Moon in m~Mefcury
® Moon in m Saturn
4% Mooh ih m Jupiter
4 Moon in « Jupiter
@ Méon if « Mars

3 Moon in mg Mercury i
gy Moon ih m Venus
>» Moon: ih nm Sun

in perigee

k Moon ‘in * Saturn
4 Moon. in Jupiter
y Venus in g Mercury 1
® Sun in » Saturn
» Moon «in, # Saturn
¢ Moon in » Venas
y Moon in w» Mercury: i
>» Sun in y Moon i
hb Moon in. Saturn
4 Moon in » Jupiter
¢ Moon in = Mars

é Jupitérin «= Mars

y Jupiterin <= Mercury
y Sun in yx Jupiter
g Saturn in # Venus
y Sun and y .

b Moon in >» | Saturh
4 Mooi in x Jupiter
¢ Moon in x Venus

» Sun. \ in. § Moon

8 Moon in > Mercury
¢ Moon in » Mars
% Moon in ¥ Jupiter
® Moon in ¥& ‘Saturn
4° Moon ihovg. Jupiver
¥ Moonand 8 -

¢ Moonand ¢

p_ Sun and Moon both


ILLUSTRATION


in R r

in » ferment pte pleafaht weatir.
in
~ es ary phages weds
F ther. ; ?
in &

1g. { some dark clouds.

in -& §°"

in @ Pi bi

ahh trvarm Jhowers.

rele A aany fhowers.

in 8 Windy and Wet.

in & i a

in 3 lowe clouds with fhowers.
in ¥ ) rN

in. % . Dull day.

in * . Condenfed air.

anise bi me clouds but ho Fain,
m 8

in

In xX

ins be fr ine sprig weather.

in \¥ 2

in « |

in & | acearding to the mixture of
in ow ? thefe_ rays, fine pring
in ¥ ig weather may be expected.
in s J '

in +t ' A.

lsat Many Laceby

in 8

in xJe

Pron Tu shania twinds.

in» ,

in gs tine warm weather.

an a l-aG@a ¢
In ‘3
in 8} Fine ferene Scutler

in ¥ .

ine J,


oD %


we
w
ve


149.


ASTROLOGY.


oO F
o> ® Moon in a Saturn in
* >% Moon in a Mars in
4) Moon in & Saturn in
é>% Moon in & Jupiter in
*@>D Sun in 2 Moon in
o> @ Moon in & Mars in
x >») g Moon in & Venus in
* D) 8 Moon in & Mercury in
6©8 Sun in a Venus in
a) & Moon ‘in 2 Mars in
'o ») @ Moon in m Vehus in
oO > Suh in on Moon in
8 >) % Moon in m Saturn in
* »% Moon in m Jupiter in
'o >» ¥ Moon in m Mercury in
o 6» Sun in ao Moon in
4 >» ¢ Moon in & Venus in
o >» 2x Moon in & Jupiter in
g¢ » @ Moon in m Mars in
aw 8 Moon in m Mercury in
“> in perigee
4 > Moon in m Saturn in
4» 2 Moon in m Jupiter ‘in
go> Sun in a Moon in
g >» ¢ Moon in # Venus inl
o > 2% Moon in f Saturn in
a» é Moon in # Mars in
s > ¥ Moon in-v Mercury «in
x » » Moon in w Saturn in
g > 2% Moon in » Jupiter in «
io ® ¥ Saturn in x Mercury in
‘g > # Mars in &. Mercury in
aq). Sun. in a Moon in ;
o » @ Moon in & Mars in
‘sa >) @ Moon in & Venus’ in |
no} Sun in w Saturn in
x p@ Moon in x Mars in
a), Moon in x Mercury — in |


7s eee


Gerken ds ox ax xa Gx


i


ro4a


% Some sole
v Fine day


Some aio


arm weather, but ui
ees “and perbaps thun-
der.


‘ Pleafant day,


15 Jine pleafent wea-


ther.


Some clouds, but mild and


fair.


Pheafant warm weather,


A good day.
we thunder, with forms


Se


of rate.
Dark clouds with rain.
Gentle fhowers.
© Pleafant weather.
Fine day.
Warm day.


clouds.


| ad breezes with fome
ia pleafant weather.


Some clouds.
Some gentle fhowers.
: 15; 5)


ss


20,


395


¥ PMO, HOaAKRyY PpOADKeK KK


OF O* PO_OD


OS 40 Ope Po Mince O/T OO cx Pg


%


Sm Ue MEP os &


in aphelio


AN ®


Sun:
Moon in
Moon in
Moon. in
Saturn in
Sun in
Moon in
Moon in
Moon in
in, apogee
Moon. in
Moon i
Moon i
Saturn 1
Moon i
Sun °1
Venus. i
Moon
Moon
Meon
Moon.«i
Moon i


Sun


-


Sun in


Mars in’


in aphelio


in.”


x
nu
a
vr
&


S88 Sh og, & ORAM Kae «


a


e hb 8 aoe


bLiLouU ss T RA TrI50 N


x
oY)


%


Moon
Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury


~ Mercury ;


Moon
Jupiter
Venus
Mars


Saturn
Jupiter
Mercury
‘Mars
Saturn
Moon
Mercury
-Saturn
Mars
Jupiter
‘Mercury
Mars
Moon
Venus -
‘Saturn
Mars


Mercury» i


-Moon v"
jupiter
Venus


Mercury


in,
in,’


VIO


in x ber rain ‘with dark. clouds.

os Fine days :

x {Dull morning but ‘tne

5 days, er :

hoy

6 3: 2 Od
tesa dark clouds, with
> forms of thunder and

- lightning. « ,


Some gentle BOD with
clouds... «

Fine morning y with much
_ dew in the evening.


i v


PRET BS BN Bi Ses Ea


Coie gentle Saowers.


Cilade theater Lap rain.


a ey YN


he ine cit.
© sae dir dark ceil


on iobatber: ,


;


5


Warm and are wea=
- , ther. le


ine Sse . : [ * TY
% x * e:


By.-continuing . thefe. afpects,, ‘the difpofition of the weather’ “will be
found throughout the year, paying due attention to the place. and power
of the Sun, and the afpects of the Moon, which, are: the principal tegu~
lators of the weather 5 the Sun for dry, : fettled, and ferene ; and the
Moon for moift, wet; and’ thowery. And as; the afpeas. of the lumina
ries are on this account the’ moft effential to be known, I fhall here in-
fert the following fhort but infallible rule how to find them for ever.


Having


ad


OF AS TROL 0G Y. - 1043


Having the time given of the frff New Moon in January, all other
Afpects of the Sun and Moon may be collected throughout the year,
by adding to . 3

| D. h. min. fec.
Jan. 1. the Moon being New or Full, her Age 00 00 00 Ooo
For the Sextile Afpect take — eae f Nete Seeds Tied


For the firft Quartile Qe ee ey
For the Trine Afpect _—— eeaeel G20" 24 HY
Full Moon or Oppofition moe Sai RAYS aah oo
Full Moon’s laft Triangle ee ee POE IS 11 Aoi CG
Second Quartile | 2 —— B29! $9. eS
Second Sextile Afpec —— aa TA SG 4
For the next New or Full-Moon —— Bi aa Ads


By thefe additions, all the afpetts the Sun and Moon make with each
other may be found at any time, or for any number of years ; and can-
not fail to be extremely ufeful in all calculations of the weather; in do-
ing which, let particular attention be paid to the qualities and affections
of the figns wherein thefe afpects are made, and judge of them according
to the following rules, which, from obfervation and experience, are
found pretty correct,


The fign Aries always inclines to thunder and hail, becaufe of its equi-
noxial prefence ; but the divifions thereof caufe fomething more or lefs,
according to the nature of fixed ftars that are in Aries; for its fore-
parts move fhowers and winds; the middle parts are temperate ; the
latter parts are hot and peftilential. Moreover, the northern parts are.
hot and corruptive ; the fouthern, freezing and cold. Taurus partici-
pates of both tempers, and is fomewhat warm: the fore-parts, and chiefly
about the Pleiades, produce earthquakes, clouds, and winds; the middle
parts moifter and cooler; the latter parts and about the Hyades are fiery,
and caufe lightning and thunder. Further, its northern parts are tem-
perate; the fouthern, diforderly and- moveable. Gemini is generally
temperate: the firft parts moift and hurtful, the middle parts temperate,
the latter parts are mixed and diforderly. Moreover the northern parts
create earthquakes and wind; the fouthern are dry and burning. Can-
cer is gentle and warm: the firft parts and about the Prefepe are fuffo-
cating; the middle parts temperate ; the Jaft parts windy: the northern
and fouthern parts are each of them fiery and burning. Leo is wholly
burning, fuffocating, and peftilential: the middle parts temperate, the
laft parts moift and hurtful: the northern parts are moveable and burn-


_. ing: the fouth parts moift. Virgo is moift, and caufeth thunder: the firft


No. 55. 12 D parts


tose A NO TS RRA a 1aOGN


parts are more hot and hurtful, the middle parts temperate, the laft parts
watery. Moreover, the north parts move winds, but the fouth are tem-
perate. Libra is generally variable and mutable: the fore and middle
parts are temperate, the latter parts are watery: the north parts are
windy, and fouth parts moift and plentiful. Scorpio caufeth thunder,
and is-fiery: the fore-parts produce fnow ; the middle parts are tem-
perate ; and the laft parts caufe earthquakes :, its north parts are hot; the
fouth parts moift. Sagittary produces winds ; the fore-parts are moift,
the middle temperate, the laft parts.caufe earthquakes. ‘The north parts
are windy, the fouth parts caufe variety and moifture. Capricorn is
wholly moift: the fore-parts are burning and hurtful, the middle tem-
perate, and the laft ftir up fhowers: the north and fouth parts are moitft
and hurtful. Aquaries is cold and watery : the firft parts are moift, the
middle temperate, and the laft windy: the north parts are heating, and
the fouth caufe fnow.  Pifces is moift and a caufer of winds: the fore-
parts are temperate, the middle moift, the laft parts burning: the north
parts ftir up wind, and the fouth parts are watery.


Of the REVOLUTIONS of KINGDOMS and STATES.


The fignificators which take precedence in this department of the oc- .
cult fcience, and the governing afpects, having already been amply ex=.


plained, it will in this place be only necefiary to lay down the general
ground of its theory, and to offer fome recent examples in juftification
of its practice, and in proof of its utility. :


After the impreflive influx of the planetary configurations, the uni-
verfal and particular effects of comets, eclipfes, and great conjundtions,
are next to be confidered in this fpeculation. Comets, indeed, rarely
appear; but, whenever they do, fome great and fignal event has always.
been remarked to follow, and of the nature and quality of thofe figns
and manfions of the heavens where they form perfect afpects with the
earth; but which is moft fenfibly felt in thofe countries or {tates to
which the nucleus or tail of the comet is at thofe times apparently di-
reCted. There the particular effect becomes univerfal, and overfpreads
that whole region with defolation, diforder, or famine, according to the
ftate and quality of the comet, and its pofition with regard to the Sun
The manifeftation of its effect will be in proportion to its proximity tis
the earth; and the revolution or event will immediately follow, Hence
we have feen recorded the unhappy defolation of whole provinces either
celuged by inundations of water, engendered and fent forth from the


nucleus


Gt ats IRE Gln! old vA0%. > Poe


nucleus of the comet ; or burnt up by its intemperate heat, in its recefs
from its perihelion, whereby the ambient becomes unapt for refpiration

radical moifture is dried up, and all nature, as it were, fickens under ié
Hence the depopulation of ftates, the extirpation of whole families, of
difcontents and infurrections amongft the people, and finally a change in
the politics and government of the country. ;


The influence of Eclipfes upon mundane affairs hath been much
queftioned by fome modern authors of no finall weight in the literary
fcale; but I beg leave to remark, that the moft perfect of human beings
are at beft but imperfect, and confequently fubjeét to be fwayed by pre-
judice, and to adopt falfe notions of whatever doéirines they oppofe.—
That fuch is the cafe. with thofe authors who deny the force of eclipfes,
requires nothing more than unprejudiced enquiry and experimental ob-
fervation to prove. ‘The precifion with which they are foretold, and the
familiarity of their phenomene, feems to leflen their importance, and to
take off from their external awfulnéfs and grandeur; but their effeet

upon the ambient, and confequently upon the affairs of the world, will
~ be ever found to remain the fame.


_ The effects of eclipfes arife not merely from the obfcuration of light,

‘but from their pofition, the quality of the figns wherein they fall, and
of the fignificators with which they are conjoined. Hence their confi-
deration is diverfe ;' of which one is /oca/, and by it we know over what
countries eclipfes will happen, and the {tations of the impulfive planets
acting with them, which will be either Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, when
ftationary ; for then they are fignificative. Another confideration is ¢em-
poral, by which we know the time when the event prefaged will happen,
and how long its effect will continue. Another is genera/, as in what
kind or quality the event will be comprehended. And laftly, /pecial, by
which is foreknown what the event will be that thall happen. To digetft
thefe feveral fpeculations, we muft carefully confider the ecliptical place
of the zodiac, and the countries or ftates, which, according to that
place, have familiarity with the Trigon ; for thofe will unqueftionably
be moft fenfibly affected.


Thofe cities and countries which fympathize with the fign of the
eclipfe, either becaufe the fame horofcope correfponds to the time of
their building and incorporating, or the irradiation of the luminaries in
both cafes to the fame place; or the midheaven comes by direction to
the fame point of the geniture of the king, prince, or governor; then,
whatever city of country be found in thefe familiarities, they will be firft
ee . {eized


1046 A Ny - Kile ly UsSeTgReAagT ft ON


{eized by the accident ; and with greater or lefs violence, in’ proportion
to the guantity of digits eclipfed over each place refpeCtively. For eclip-
fes have no influence where they are invifible, and at with the greateft
force where they are central and total; and therefore fubterranean ~
eclipfes have no effect or influence whatever, notwithftanding what hath
been written to the contrary by common aftrologers, almanac-makers,
and the like.


The fecond confideration is temporal, by which we know the time
when the events fhall happen, and how long they will continue. This
we furvey after the following manner. In eclipfes which are made at the
fame time, fecing they do not fall every where alike, nor fuftain univer-
fally the fame degrees of ob{curation, nor continue alike in point of time
at any two given places, it is neceffary to erect a figure under the eleva-
tion of the pole of that particular place for which its effect is to be cal-
culated. By means of this, we exactly fee the beginning, middle, and end,
of the eclipfe, and the content of its duration; by which the time is
known when the portended event will begin to happen. If the eclipfe
be of the Sun, fo many years are allowed for the event as the obf{curation
meafured hours; but, if an eclipfe of the Moon, inftead of years fo many
months are to be accounted; becaufe of her proximity to the earth, and
quicker influence. The beginning of the event and the general intention
are known from the fituation of the eclipfe with refpect to the ecliptical
line, and the angles of the figure. If the middle time of a folar eclipfe
falls in or near the afcending horizon, its effect will begin to appear, in
that country over which it is elevated, in the firft four months after its
appearance ; but its greateft effect will happen in the firft third-part of
that given time, Should the middle time of the Sun’s eclipfe fall in or
near the midheaven, the event will not begin till the fecond four-months;
and the intention or grand effet will not take place.till the fecond third-
part of the time given. And fo likewife, if the middle of the eclipfe.
happens in or near the weftern horizon, the effect will take place in the
third four-months after, and its intention or greater force in the laft
-third-part thereof. But, in eclipfes of the Moon, the time is equated
differently ; for, if they happen in or near the eaftern horizon, their ef-
fe& will fall upon the place over which they are elevated almoft imme-
diately; and, if in or near the meridian, within a week or ten days; or,
if in or near the weftern horizon, then their influence will be felt within a
fortnight or twenty days after; and the general intention or moft vifible
influence will in each cafe almoft inftantaneoufly fucceed.


From thefe confiderations it will by confequence follow, that the |
nearer any planet or ftar, afpect or familiarity, congrefs or conjunction,


1 hap Dee.
te +. ‘ae >:


}


OFA STOR OL 0 G y: 1047


happens to the ecliptic line, the more forcibly will this influence and

effect be found to operate. So likewife the planets or ftars, concerned

* in the influence of eclipfes or other configurations, happening in an ori-

ental quarter, bring a more immediate appearance of its effett’; whilean

occidental pofition retards and keeps it off. After the fame manner, by

yr, obferving the ecliptical new and full Moons, and their quartile af{pects,

and how they unite with or behold the principal place or medium of the

eclipfe, the particular times in which the effects of eclipfes will increafe

or diminith are fought out and difcovered. According to which we find,

that, when ftars emerge, or are relieved from the ob{curation of the Sun-

f beams, and increafe in light and motion, their influence and power in-

‘df creafes; but, when a planet is flationary, and flow of motion, they caufe

the greater intention of the accident. And hence it is that Saturn and

Jupiter, being flower of motion than the reft of the planets, have much

more influence and power upon the particles floating in the ambient, and
confequently upon the minds and paffions of men.


The third confideration is to define what kind or fpecies will fuffer
under the effects ; and this is judged from the form of the figns and their
property; and from the quality of the ftars, both fixed and wandering,

| _ that/are pofited in the fign where the eclipfe happens, or in the angle
preceding. ‘The Almuten, or lord of the eclipfe, is thus to be confi-
dered, and may be thus taken; of the wandering ftars, which ever hath
moft affinity to the place of the eclipfe and angles of the figure, and ap-
plies or recedes, according to vicinity and appearance; hath more re-
fpect to thofe that have familiarity of afpect, and is either lord of the
houfes, trigons, exaltations, or terms; fuch alone is to be contftituted
lord of the eclipfe. But, if feveral planets are found nearly equal and
alike in power, we elect him to the dominion which is moft angular, or
that hath greater familiarity of ation. So far it is the rule with the pla-
nets. But, of the fixed ftars, we chufe the brighteft of the firft magni-
2 tude, which, at the time of the eclipfe hath commerce with the preced-
P ing angles, and is neareft to the ecliptical conjunttion. We alfo prefer
that which at the ecliptic hour is ina vifible fituation, either rifing with,
or culminating upon, the angle fucceeding to the place of the eclipfe.


; —By the quality of thefe, and the figns wherein they fall, are for the
moft part judged the kind and quality of the accident portended. If
they fall in figns of human fhape, the effects will fall on the human fpe-


cies; but, if they are not of human fhape, but of terreftrial, or fours
footed, it is evident the misfortune will fall upon that {pecies of animals.
“If the ftars and conftellations partake of their nature, which fly the do-
sinion of man, evil will occur by their means; but, if the affinity be by
i: CO 12 E thofe
oe


ag
et \
‘ ‘Nag


1048 A Nw HIST SiTCRE AVE DON?


thofe which are fubfervient to man’s ufe, it argues the evil will arife
through them, as a murrain, rot, or epidemic difeafe. Moreover, if the
ruling places fall in or near the Eagle, or fimilar conftellations, the evil


will fall on volatiles, and fuch chiefly as are apt for the food and fufte~ —
nance of man; but, if they fall in or near the Dolphin, the effeéts will ~


happen at fea, and deftruction is portended to the fleets and navies of that
country over which the influence bears the greateft rule. If they happen
in tropical or equinodtial figns, the evil comes by intemperate feafons,
and by inundations of many waters. If in the midheaven, they threaten
evil to the reigning powers. of that country over which they prefide ;
and a vifible alteration either in its government or laws commonly hap-
pens. But the quantity or importance of the event is known from the
greatnefs of the obfcuration, confidered with regard to the fignificators


or ruling planets which have dominion with the eclipfe. For occidental


configurations made to folar eclipfes, or oriental to lunar, diminifh the —


effetis; whereas, on the contrary, oriental afpects made with folar
eclipfes, and occidental with lunar, greatly augment them.


The fourth and laft confideration is, the knowledge and prefcience of
the effect, whether good or evil; and this we know, from the virtue of
the ftars ruling or claiming dominion over the principal places of the
figure; and, from the mixture which they have with each other, and with
the influences of the eclipfes over which they have dominion. For the
Sun and Moon, as it were, rule and govern the ftars; becaufe they have
acertain power and dominion over them. And the fpeculation of the
mixture of the ftars, as they are fubordinate to each other, manifefts the
quality of their effect ; and hence it is that the effective power is deduced,
whether good or bad, from the temperature of thofe fignificators which
hold the dominion and produce the effect, agreeable to their own proper
mature and quality, as hath been heretofore abundantly fhewn.


To reduce what has been faid into practical obfervation, we will re-


vert back to the foregoing fcheme or figure of the heavens, erected for


Se
. .*


OF AST R OFPL'OG Y. 1049


The fcheme being erected for the meridian of London, of courfe its
application applies moft nearly to the affairs of this country; but in a
fecondary degree to our natural enemies and allies, and to the general
affairs of the northern hemifphere. For, if great exactnefs be withed in
any particular calculation, the fcheme muft in all fuch cafes be erected
for the precife latitude of the place or province to which the calculation
more immediately appertains ; and, where any ftruggle exifts, or event
is foreboded, between any two particular fates or empires, the fafett
way is to erect a {cheme for the meridian of each, and to examine them
by the fame rules as have been laid down for comparing a revolutional


- figure with the radix of a nativity.


In the figure before us, we find twenty-feven degrees fifty-two mi-
nutes of Capricorn afcend the eaftern horizon; with thirty minutes of
Sagittarius upon the cufp of the midheaven; which imports ina general
view peace and honour to the government of Great Britain. Saturn we
find is lord of the afcendant, in conjunétion with Mars, lord of the
ninth and fecond houfes; and Venus, lady of the third and eighth, in
familiar congrefs with Mercury, lord of the fourth, fifth, and eighth,
houfes. Thefe are configurations particularly interefting and important ;
and, being in the watery fign Pifces, they forebode amazing ftruggles and
contentions upon the continent; in which France, Germany, Ruiflia, and
Turkey, will be moft effentially concerned,


Now, if we examine the introductory part of this work, page 100, &c.
we fhall find Great Tartary, Sweden, Ruffia, &c. under the fign Aqua-
ries; and that Mufcovy, Saxony, Turkey, &c. are under the fign Capri-
corn; and are confequently reprefented by the afcendant of this figure,
and by the ponderous planet Saturn. The countries under the fign Scor-
pio and Aries, which are the houfes of Mars, are England, France, Ger-
many, Poland, Denmark, &c. and therefore Mars becomes fignificator
of them, and, being in conjunction of Saturn, forefhews violent debate
and. contention between them. Thofe countries that are under. Taurus
and Libra are Ireland, Ruflia, Poland, South of France, Auftria, &c. and
therefore under the planet Venus; and the places under Virgo and Ge-
mini are Flanders, America, &c. with the cities of London, Paris, Ver-
failles, Lyons, &c. and Mercury, being lord of thefe figns, muft of ne~
ceflity more or lefs unite thofe powers in this counfel of ftate, held in
the watery triplicity. And, as Jupiter difpofes of all of them, and is in
his own exaltation in the fign Cancer, and in the fixth houfe, it repre-
fents ina moft extraordinary and pleafing manner the peculiar {tate of Great


Britain, which he difpofes to peace and amity with all the contending
_ ftates; particularly as Jupiter is in his effential dignities.


wt, The


oft


‘ae


| a
1050 AN’ PYLa'S- TRA T ASO N


The fign Cancer, wherein Jupiter is pofited, is the fign under which
the city of Conftantinople is feated, and therefore -reprefents the Grand
Signior; and, as Jupiter is pofited therein; ‘it declares he will not be
overthrown or conquered, though affailed on all fides by powerful ene-
mies; but, what is worfe, I find there will be occafional infurrettions
amongft themfelves, which is declared by the Moon’s approach to the.
oppofition of Jupiter ; but, as the Moon is difpofed of by Saturn, and
in fextile to her difpofitor, and her difpofitor beholding Jupiter with a

good trine afpett, it declares that the evil which hath been ftirred up by
the enemies of the prefent Signior fhall be defeated and eventually done
away by his fucceffor, who will commence his reign in the midft of thofe
troubles, with the moft vigorous preparations for war, though his incli-
nation is for peace; which will be at length brought about by the aid
and interpofition of thofe powers pointed out by Mercury, Venus, Mars,
and Saturn, who are all in conjunction in the afcendant, in thedignities
_of Jupiter, Mars, and Venus; and thefe three planets declare that Great
Britain fhall be the principal actor in bringing all animofity to a conclu-
fion between Sweden, France, Ruffia, Denmark, and the Grand Turk.
This appears to be the natural interpretation-of ‘the. effect of thefe four
planets in the afcendant, in the vernal equinox; but, to know when thefe
matters will come to pafs, we muft have recourfe to new figures for the
Sun’s entrance into the next two tropical -points, and the equinoctial
fign Libra, and muft likewife obferve the preceding full Moon, .and the
new Moon fucceeding, according to the doétrine of the immortal
Ptolomy, heretofore laid down; .as well as to obferve the dignities and
debilities of the planets, whence particular judgment will arife the fame
as from the directions in a nativity, and afford pleafure and {atisfa¢tion to
the {peculative mind. 7 |


The fignificators which reprefent the Court of France fhew a difpo-
fition to difturb. the peace of Great Britain, through the infidious and
ambitious views of -a female, whotakes the lead in ftate-affairs. The
active pofition of Venus and Mercury, conjoined in this fcheme, denotes:
much reftleffnefs and inftability in the councils of that country, which
feem diftratied by-the arbitrary will of the Gallic Queen, here reprefented
by Venus, upheld and affifted by light, volatile, time-ferving, men, pre-
noted by Mercury, the creatures of the Queen, who, from motives of ava-
rice, and.views of ambition, will be forward to raife cabals; to oppofe
the common hopes and intereits of the people; to plunge the nation into
difcord and contention, and eventually to bring about difputes with their
neighbours, or wafteful war among themfelves. Saturn, the fignificator
of the French King, being united in a friendly conjunction with Mars,

3 the
“y -


QO FA S-TeR-0;>L'0:G Y. 1051


the co-fignificator of Great Britain, and difpofed of by Jupiter, the
princely fignificator of George the Third, fhews that amity and concord
will ftill exift between the two powers, notwithflanding their domeftic
broils, and the endeavours of reftlefs {pirits to ftir up the minds of the
people to rapine and war. Hence will probably follow great difturbances
amongft the heads of the church, and lead to new difcoveries in the an-
nals of popith fuperftition and religious perfecution, which the people
of that unhappy country feem inclined to fhake off, with the fhackles
of flavery, mifery, and want. In fine, here is every profpect, from the
difpofition of the fignificators in this fcheme, that fome very important.
event will happen in the politics of France, fuch as may dethrone, or
very nearly touch the life of, the king, and make victims of many great
and illuftrious men in church and ftate, preparatory to a revolution or
change in the affairs of that empire, which will at once aftonith and
furprife the furrounding nations.


England, I am happy to fay, has every profpect of harmony and peace; -
and, from the fuperior {trength and elevation of her fignificators, will give
laws to her enemies, and peace and profperity to her allies. She will be
looked up to from the belligerent powers in the north, to interpofe her
potent arm to bring about a reftoration of peace amongft them, and to
awe, with her thunder, thofe who afpire to extend their dominion by the
ravages of war. In the internal management of her affairs, the prefent
epoch will be glorious; and fave a few anxieties amongft party men, and
a temporary alarm for the fcarcity of corn, which will be augmented by
the uncommon continuance of wet weather, occafioned by the long fta-
tions of the Moon and other fignificators in the watery trigon, I do not
fee any probability of the peace and harmony of Great Britain being dif-
turbed by the prefent contentions between other ftates ; but on the con-
trary, fhe will act as a mediator between them, and will advance in glory
and renown over every part of the habitable globe.—Let the reader com-
pare the foregoing remarks with the events that have happened, particu-
larly in France, fince the firft editions of this work were publifhed, and.
I truft I fhall obtain credit for other matters which I have predicted, but
which are as yet in the womb of time.


I thall now call the attention of my reader to that remarkable era in
the Britifh hiftory, which gave independence to America, and reared up
a new Empire, that fhall foon or late give laws to the whole world. The
revolution carries with it fomething fo remarkable, and the event is fo
important to this country, that I fhall make no apology for introducing
the {cheme of the heavens for the {pring and fummer quarters of the
year 1776, when this revolution happened, and for examining and ex~-

No. 56. No eae S plaining


1052 A'N?’ PWLIWS'ITR AT 1 ON’


plaining the fame, according tojthe rules I have fo amply laid down for
that purpofe. The Sun’s revolutional ingrefs into the fign Aries in the’
year 1776, under which the independence of America was eftablifhed,
and the face of the heavens at the fummer folftice, may be feen in the
annexed figures, which were calculated with great accuracy and preci-
fion for this purpofe.


In the vernal equinox, we find Jupiter is lord of the afcendant, and in
his detriment. Mars we find in Aries, which is the afcendant of England,
ftrong ahd powerful in his own houfe, but under the earth. The Moon,
who reprefents the common people, we find under affliction, being com-
buft of the Sun; and Mars, being combutft alfo, forefhews that poor Eng-
land, though her internal ftrength be great and permanent, yet was
this year accidentally afflicted and depreffed ; more efpecially as we find
Mars going to an oppofition of Saturn, and Saturn uncommonly ftrong in
the 'midheaven, in his exaltation, and beheld by the two fortunes Jupiter ©
and Venus; and confequently fuperior to Mars in power and dignity, who
igs under the earth, and combuft of the Sun, though located in his own
houfe; which in this cafe ferves however to fhew the permanency and
ftability of Great Britain during the whole of this trying conflict.


In this figure the planet Saturn is the fignificator of America, and Mars
reprefents the people of Britain; as may very eafily be feen by taking
down the dignities of Saturn and Mars, according to the table in’ page
130 of this work. That Saturn hath the fuperiority of power, and that
Mars and Saturn are inimical:in their nature to each other, are facts too
evident to be denied ; and as the afpe& which is about to be formed be-
tween thenr is a malevolent one, namely, a partile oppofition, it declares
the event fhall be fuchas to caufe a total and eternal feparation of the two
countries from each other; ‘and that the congrefs, which is reprefented by
Saturn, will eftablifh an independent and complete revolution, which
fhall be built upom a firm and durable foundation ; and the increafing
ftrength and durability of the new ftate is reprefented by Saturn in his
exaltation, fupported by the benefice rays of the two fortunes. And fince
there is a remarkable reception between the two planets Saturn and Venus,
i. c. Venus in the houfe of Saturn, and Saturn in the houfe of Venus;
fupported by a propitious trine afpect of Venus and Jupiter, while Jupi-
ter and Saturn, and Saturn and Venus, with the three preceding planets,
eccupy and poffefs the whole expanfe of the heavens; itis hence de-
clared, that whatever is effected under this revolution of the San’s'ingrefs
into Aries by the Americans, {hall not only be permanent and durable, but
fhall be fupported’ by thofe three grand pillars of flate, wifdom, ftrength,
_ and’ unanimity; which are-pointed out by thofe three planets, agreeable

1 to


Arr


Sete
&


Sox


| isp


3 a
TY ea ke
4


Blass
4 <2


A eA


ScuemMe of. the Sorar INGResseEs governing the YEAR 1776.


iy " = cS LZ, SS =e x on SE, S < 4 LF, = ‘A = eS ~
"i! . my a
( Gs eee ee A /
Y % *s . e  &N
a to RSo = 2% & oat
\
< \
% &, by |
i 42 os /;
a zo IN | | /SUN’s INGRESS
7 i «
f < f Into the Equinodctial >> : Into the Tropical
bes Sion ARIES, a Vay : & Sign CANCER,
Se { = Marcu igth. 12 h. ax 2 2 ed : ; J UNE 20th. 10 h.


20 Min. P. M. 1776+ go Min. P. M. i946.


LATITUDE of the PLANETS at the VERNAL EQUINOX.


b 2 36 North. . 2 0 527 South.
wo 18 South. . % o 53 North.
$ 0°44 South. > 3° 42 South.


LAE RANTES CB CE ELIA WANG MGT


GTO DEG ON DORI ORI NEE LIGIER ANG LISTE LIE NGG PLEO IORI OLE ODA,


mm


Greed SU EE


; No. She.


a


og


i
wv


Fe ee ee a


as
og x
IS


Toface page 1052


:


Pas.


pee a


‘ip capa nse.


 Pieeat srohiah oe phre ele
. . Meo)


¢ he , i G Kind ber a ae


ye


ean oe
Re er Gk Tait
Peat ep Ott


OF ASTROLOGY. 1053


to their tendency and nature, viz. Saturn, ftrength and durability; Ju-
piter, wifdom and juftice ; and Venus, unanimity and perfeverance; and
their mutual trine afpect to each other is expreflive of future perfection
and harmony; fo that, if we attentively contemplate the above pofition
of the heavenly bodies, we fhall find no point ftrained, to thew their
natural tendency towards the good fortune and fuccefs of the Americans ;
and confequently the difappointment and prejudice of the Britifh arms
and adminiftration. |

We fhall now take notice of the time in which this extraordinary re-
volution fhould come to its crifis, or completely take place, as pointed out
by the feveral fignificators in the figure. To do this, we muft equate the
diftance of Mars from Saturn, they being the two principal actors in this
revolution. Their diftance is taken by right afcenfion, according to their
latitude ; becaufe Mars, which is the fignificator of Great Britain, is
within three degrees of the cufp of the fourth houfe.


deg. min.
The right afcenfion of Saturn is - - - 18 52
The right afcenfion of Mars is - - —_ Fa EN Sake:
Subtract, and the remainder is the diftance of Mars from
‘Saturn - “ - - “ - 16 22


Which arch of dire€tion muft be converted into time, by adding to it
the right afcenfion of the Sun, as taught in the doctrine of nativities; by
which rule we are to examine how many days the Sun takes in going that
{pace in the ecliptic; and this being an annual revolution, with the two
fignificators in common figns, which denote weeks, we muft therefore
allow for each day’s motion of the Sun one week; by which it will
appear that the crifis or effect of the oppofition of Mars and Saturn came
up in fifteen weeks and two days from the time the Sun came into the
firtt {cruple of the equinoétial fign Aries; at which time, toa day, the
Americans declared themfelves independent of the Britifh government,
and became a free ftate.


- At this time the heavenly intelligencers were pofited as in the {eroll
prefented by the hand of Fame in the annexed plate; and from whence
the following conclufions naturally follow. So many fignificators being
pofited in the fifth houfe, in the watery and fruitful fign Cancer, the fign or
houfe of the Moon, with the Moon in the afcendant; and Venus, Jupiter,
Sol, and Mercury, all behotding the afcendant with a trine afpect, clearly
evinces that the ftate ef America fhall in time have an extenfive and flou-

rifhing


1654 ASN 2 ISLS U8 -T ReALT ON
rifhing commerce; an advantageous and univerfal traffic to every quarter of
the globe, with great fecundity and profperity amongft the people. At this
period we are in fome meafure enabled to fpeak experimentally of the truth
of this prefcience ; though the ftars point out thefe particulars, with all
other important incidents relative to the rife and progrefs of the United
States, with as much certainty and precifion as by the Moon we calculate
the ebbing and flowing of the fea, the times and periods of eclipfes, the
courfes and effetts of comets, or any other extraordinary phenomena,
wherein nature, and the ordinations of God, the great and primary caufe
of all things, are at the bottom.


a


The better to fatisfy the curious in thefe mundane revolutions, and to
enable them to draw conclufions with greater exactnefs, I have fubjoined
the figure of the Sun’s ingrefs into the tropical fign Cancer, which took
place near fourteen days before the Americans declared their independence ;
and, what is very remarkable, Mars, who is the fignificator of Great Bri-
tain, is difpofed of in the imum cceli by Mercury, the fignificator of the
French King, who, when the Sun entered into Aries, was lord of the
feventh houfe, the houfe of public enemies, of falfehood, and deceit. He
likewife difpofes of Jupiter, lord of the afcendant at that time, which had
co-fignification with Mars, in reprefenting the people of England. From
thefe remarkable pofitions and effects, we may fairly conclude, that the
Americans had not only the French nation to aflift them, but had many
{trong and powerful friends in Great Britain, who fhould fupport the caufe
and fecond the exertions of the French in eftablifhing their independence.


It is to be noted, that, in the preceding figure of the Sun’s entrance ia-
to Cancer, Mars is found in conjunction of Venus ; and, although Venus
is a fortune, and declares England fhould not be ruined by the ftrong in-
_ fluence of Mercury, their difpofitor, yet the foftens and takes off the war-
like courage and intrepid impetuofity of Mars, and inclines him more to
amity and peace than to bloodfhed and flaughter. Befides, we find the
Sup, who is king amongft the planets, inftead of being in conjunCtion of
Mars, the implicative afpect of war and conqueft, is in conjunction
with Jupiter, who is the natural fignificator of peace and concord; fo
that the Sun’s ingrefs into Cancer declares that the counfels of his Bri-
tannic Majefty fhould not prove effective, nor his arms victorious; but
inclined only to pufh on a defenfive war with the Americans, as the na-
ture of their fituation and the neceflity of the times might require,
though an unlimited thirft for conqueft was predominant ; which exaétly
correfponds with the fituation of the heavenly ordinances at the time the.
Americans chofe to declare their defection from:the mother-country,


At


Of


Or


ae


et


Ne


a


€.


a


ee a asta he ee
ee “e


ed


OF ALS FR OL O- CG ¥:. tore


At this time Jupiter and Venus were in conjunction, and appeared to
meet as counfel with the Sun and Mercury in the celeflial Crab, in that
part of the heavens appropriated to the manfions of the Moon., The
Moon was then alfo arrived at the oppofite point of that particular place
in the heavens where fhe was pofited at the time of the ingrefs, and dif-
pofed of by Saturn, the fignificator of America. Hence it will appear,
that if we'read the Hiftory of the American war, and examine with at-
tention the various tranfactions of thofe who were the principal actors
in the bufinefs, and compare the refult with what is prenoted by the
foregoing figures, according to the rules heretofore laid down to deter-
mine planetary influx, we fhall find no difficulty in tracing every impor-
tant event, with aftonifhing exactnefs and precifion, that can in any fhape
relate to this department-of the aftral fcience.


I could here adda variety of other examples, in fupport of aftral influ-
ence upon fynods and ftates, and in promoting, as fecond caufes under
heaven, the rife and fall of empires, and the revolutions of the world.
But enough has furely been {aid to illuftrate this enquiry to the fulleft
extent, and to render it obvious to the meaneft capacity, particularly as
the nature of the planets and figns, and the houfes and manfions of the
heavens, continue unalterably the fame in all cafes, with refpect to their
influence and tendency ; and require only to be applied to the nature of
the queftion, nativity, or revolution, whichever it may chance to be,
agreeable to the rules fo amply given for that purpofe; and I will be
bold to fay, that the utmoft fatisfaction will refult to every fober en-
quirer, the more he purfues, and the deeper he contemplates, this in-
comparable ftudy.


I am not, however, to expect, that all’men will be converts to my
opinion, or fubfcribe to the evidence I have fo abundantly brought in
defence of my doétrine.’ The felf-willed, and the claffically obftinate,
are not to be moved by any fpecies of reafoning incompatible with their
own way of thinking; and it would be the extreme of folly, after the
arguments I have adduced, to attempt to remove that mift from before
their eyes, which blinds their reafon, and contaminates their fenfe. If
proofs of all denominations, and the experience of every day and hour we
live, are incapable of impreffling the mind with the truths of elementary
influx and fidereal affections, it is not all my faint ideas can furnith,
through the medium of my pen, that will either penetrate the heart, or
operate to convince on this occafion. Others there are, who moft cor-
dially believe whatever their own eyes and their own ears'can demon-
ftrate ; but who are infidels to every occult property, and to the fecret

No. 56.. ee Pa influence


y0r6 A NE Lee) ST REAL Ba Ou, «Goer


influence and effect of fecond caufes. Yet they know ‘there is a fecret
power in the magnet, which they can neither fee nor comprehend. They
are fenfible of all the phenomena and furprifing properties of air, though
they cannot fee it, nor demonftrate its particles. ‘They admit the cats
ing and flowing of the tides, and allow the Moon produces the effect ;
yet in the fame moment they deny her influence, and queftion the ordi-
nations of Providence. ‘To contend with fuch men, would be ridiculous
and abfurd, fince it could neither fupport arguments. nor alter facts ;
nor would the fanétion or applaufe of fuch a defcription of beings add
either to the merit or reputation of the fcience. _


END or tus THIRD PART.


jan


Ay OO Mie LR TE


Pe Se ee OP 1 ON


Or THE ASTROLOGICAL anp


OCCULT SCIENCES.


PARE ran JK.O U Rit HH.


CONTAINING THE


DISTINCTION between ASTROLOGY
WICKED PRACTICE or EXORCISM.


WITH A_-GENERAL DISPLAY OF


WITCHCRAFT, MAGIC, ayp DIVINATION,


FOUNDED UPON. THE


EXISTENCE or SPIRITS coop and pap, and their


AFFINITY with the Affairs of this WorLp.


By E. SIBLY, M. D. of the King’s College in Aberdeen; and Fellow of the
Harmonic Philofophical Society in Paris.


ee EL
hares pe omens cicmeyp esac nee ae eae RR LOD a SCN TE NOD eee ee Le EE eer ae Te et Lt On ie? ieee


DUOMNEDiLOUNe:


PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETOR; AND SOLD BY CHAMPANTE AND WHITROW, JEWRY-
STREET, ALDGATE; AND AT THE BRITISH DIRECTORY OFFICE, AVE-MARIA-LANE,


ae .
bie U8 TR AL TL ON
Of the ee SCIENCE of
AES PR te Qa gy sins Ge. N,
PART tun FOURTH.


ROM. what has been premifed in the foregoing parts of this work
it will now become manifeft to every unprejudiced reader, that Af-
trology and Magic, how much foever they have been confounded with:
each other, and confidered by the vulgar as one and the fame doétrine,
are neverthelefs two very oppofite and diftin purfuits. The one not
only fuppofes, but in truth is, an attainment of the contingencies and
events of futurity, from a natural caufe implanted in the motion and -
influence of the fpheres, which it is at once honourable and praife-
worthy to ftudy ; the other, an acquirement of particular events to come,
or mifchiefs to be performed by means of occult fpells, diabolical in-
cantations, the agency of fpirits, or confederacy with the devil. This
conftitutes what is termed Magic, Exorcifm, Witchcraft, and Divina-
- tion, very aptly termed, ‘* The Black Art,” which it fhall be the prin-
cipal object of the following pages to illuftrate ; as well to give the reader
fome rational idea of that very ancient but mifchievous practice, as to
clear the fublime contemplation and ftudy of the ftars from the grofs
imputations it hath on that account fuftained.


I have no doubt but the greater part of my readers, and perhaps the
bulk of mankind at this day, totally difbelieve the poffibility of witch-
craft, magic, or divination ; becaufe, they deny the very exiltence of fpi-

“rits, the agency of the devil, and the appearance of ghofts or fpirits of
deceafed men, upon which belief the practice of the black art entirely
depends. But however incredulous the wifeft critic may be, as to what
has been related on this fubject, certain.it is, that fuch fpirits really do
exift, and that confederacy and compact with them was in former times ~


No. 56. : 12 H no


SES AN LLL uS RR ATION


no uncommon thing. Blackftone feems to have eftablifhed this fact in a
very fatisfactory manner, where he {peaks of the laws formerly provided
in this.country againft magicians and witches, and thofe who held con-
federacy with fpirits ; which to difbelieve, would not only be found to
militate againft numerous important paffages of Scripture, but would
call in queftion the exprefs words of our Saviour himfelf, and, give -the
lie to authors and atteftators of the firft reputatton and character. Indeed,
the force of Revelation, and the doctrine of Chrift, depend entirely upon
our epinion of the exiftence of {pirits 5. for that, being confefled or doubt-
ed, either affirms or denies the eternity of the foul.


Thofe perfons, who have taken pains to contemplate the nature and
ftru€ture of man, will have no difficulty to believe, from the principles
of reafon and common fenfe, that a foul, effence, or fpirit, abfolutely
exifts within his body, totally independent of all material funCtions or
defires ; that flies in his face upon the commiffion of every unjuft or im-
proper act, and that leads the human ideas to a ftaté of being, infinitely
beyond the bounds of the terreftrial globe, and unconftrained by the limits
of time. This applies to the effence, foul, or {pirit, of man; whereas
the body, being compounded of the elements of this world, is {wayed,
ruled, and eventually overcome, by them, in proportion as the elements
operate upon one another, foas to produce difeafes, imbecility, and death.


As it is agreed by all authors, and admitted in the creed of all feé&s
and perfuafions of people, that before the fall, the feafons and elements
were in one unalterable ftate of perfection and harmony; fo the condi-
tion of man was not then under the power of the elements, but he was
cloathed with purity and immortality as with a garment. |The exter-
nal grofs elements had then no fway ; and the aftral powers, inftead of
inflaming his defires, contributed unto him the influences of like unto
dike, forming an union of delectable ideas between foul and body, which
led to the unabated praife and adoration of his beneficent Creator. The
pure elements were then congenial to his ftate of immortality, and the ~
aftral powers were turned upon his back, while innocence and incor-
raptibility fmiled on his brow. His food was not limited to palpable
matter, but was combined with the pure etherial {pirit of the univerfe,
which perfumed the air, and enriched the feat of paradife.


Such was the prime-eval happy ftateof Man. But departing from his
forocency, by the fecret infinuations infufed into his mind by the fal-
len fpirit Satan, he lufted after palpability in the flefh, turned his face
to the elements, deferted his reafon and his God, and fell from his ethe-

real


HY,
eeu


wale ow


ae iow. ‘wmv the ta


shetk: Baio os fiat


hes a Mase Padi: hy bahar Seta


%
f+
wT


ay tig ? it


Si


_ s aaron 1 Se eee eer see sess ae esr ee = <P Steeaneee pees oe ae ae s. == oa
Ae mm ee | Re ete ttatntatal ; ee:

| =
NF Sy s
8 ‘ :


ral


)
ct


J


y


AI


Mr


ind


ise me
Omer


1)
mais in


)
ai


ff
He


)
(hy


(


s i


jeower


Luce fer, kunderth :


NAAN

N |
RA Be TenSN ee

as HS
= oh 7 | ‘
=f af |S
& oN x bes
4 Sees


0) F AS .T R O'L-.OGTY. 1061


{tate into all the perils of mortality and death. Having no longer
all powers under his fabje€tion, he became fubjeGt to fidereal and ele-
mentary influx, with his underftanding datkened, and his mental facul-
tiés abridged ; which I have exhibited by the four figures in the annex.
ed plate. The firft reprefents the prime-eval {tate of man, with his hand —
lifted up to his head, denoting the feat of comprehenfive fenfibility, to
which the light of reafon and fenfe flowed from the mirror of the Deity,
in whofe image he was formed. The fecond figure fhews the elemen-
tary and aftral influence in the prime-eval ftate of man, as having no ac-
. tion whatever internally, but falling on his exterior or back parts ;
whilft his face, turned to the light, received the beatific vifion of im-
mortality and life from the gate of heaven. The third figure fhews the
internal action of the elementary and planetary influx after the fall, upon
the vital parts‘of man, whence difeafes:and death follow in a direét and
regular courfe. For, as the action of the ftars on man are agents, and the
elements of which he is compofed patients, the fame as in the outward
world; fo we find, as they are fituated in the outward world at the time
of birth,‘ either as to ftrength or imbecility, fo fhall be the inward
weaknefs or vigour of the vital parts of man*born under them; and of
- fach fhall be the inbred quality ofthe difeafe thusimplanted in our fallen
nature to bring on corruptibility and death. ‘The fourth figure is in-
tended to fhew a faint refemblance of an abandoned and more degenerat-
_ ed ftate of fallen human nature, when the will and paflions of man are
sys od and contaminated with the grofs or beftial quality of
deadly MMe ec ssanec: He is led captive by an evil fpirit, the agent
of Lucifer, having ‘bis will darkened; and every fpark of light extin-
guifhed, that could flow froin the intelleGtual faculties of the foul, or
from the collifion of vittue and fenfe. ‘Such are the men defcribed by
St. Paul in his Epiftle to the Romans, chap. i. ver. 28,°29, 30.


~ Tn this aGtion of the ftars upon man, it leaves the will and the foul
‘totally unconftrained ; whilft the body or corruptible part only is influ-
enced, which allurés and attracts the will; and, as obfervation and ex-
perience fhew us, too commonly leads it captive to all the exceffes and
intemperance of the paflions. But, as this is the utmoft effect the force
of the ftars, or the power of the elements, is found to produce in our na-
‘ture; fo the dottrine of aftrology goes no further than to define and ex-
‘plain them through all the tracks of occult {peculation and {cience.
‘Whereas the art of magic, of divination, and exorcifm, forms an alli-
ance with the agents of the devil, Jufts after compact with damned
fouls, and holds converfe with the departed fpirits of men.


To


yia eo NSE es TOR AAT NOON


To illuftrate this extraordinary practice of the ancients, I fhall: here
confider the nature of the world of fpirits, their quality and office; and
the affinity which they bear’to this world, agreeable to the doctrines:
laid down by thofe ancient authors, whofe works are now rarely to
be feen, though fanlioned by the moft remarkable experiments, and


confirmed by the ftrongeft evidence that can be colleéted at fo diftant.
a period. : | . :


The noble and learned Swedenbourg,..whofe nativity we have confi-.
dered in the foregoing part of this work, has with great ingenuity ex-
plained the nature and fituation of the departed {pirits of men, after their
recefs from this life. The world of fpirits, fays this author, is neither
heaven nor hell, but.a place or ftate betwixt both, into which man im-.
mediately enters after death; and, after ftaying there a certain time, longer
‘er thorter, according to what his paft life had been in this world, he is
either received up into heaven, or caft down into hell. It muft be
noted here, that this intermediate ftate has nothing in it of the pro-
bationary kind; for that is all over withthe life of this world ; but isa
ftate of a feparation or reducing every one to ‘his’own proper prevails


ing principle, and as fuch finally preparatory for an eternal happinefs
or mifery.


‘In the world of fpirits is always a very great number of them, as be-
ing the firft fort of all, in order to their examination and preparation ;
but there is no fixed time for their ftay; for fome are tranflated to
heaven and others configned to hell foon after their arrival ; whilft fome
continue there for weeks, and others for feveral years, though none more
than thirty, this depending on the correfpondence or non-correfpon=
dence between the interior and exterior. of men. As foon as they arrive
in the world of f{pirits, they are claffed according to their feveral qualities,
inclinations, and difpofitions. The evil, with fuch infernal focieties as
they had communication with in this world, in the ruliag paffion ; and
the good, with fuch heavenly focieties as they had communicated with,
in love, charity, and faith. But, however they are diverfely claffed,
they all meet and converfe together in that world, when they have a de-
fire {o to do, who have been friends and acquaintances in this life ; more
efpecially hufbands and wives, brothers and fifters, &c, . But if they are,
according to their different ways of life, of different inclinations and-ha-
bits of mind, they are foon parted; and it may be obferved, both con-
cerning thofe who finally go to heaven, and thofe that go to hell, that,
after their arrival in thofe two different kingdoms, they no more fee or
know one another, unlefs they are of like minds and affe@tions. The


I reafon


OF ASTROLOGY. 1063


reafon why they meet and know one another in the world of fpirits, and
not fo in heaven or hell, is, becaufe in the world of fpirits they pafs
through the fame flate they were in in this life, and fo from one to an-
other ; but afterwards all are fixed in one permament ftate refpectively
according to the ftate of that love which prevails in them, in which one
knows another from fimilarity of condition ; for fimilitude joins, but
diflimilitude feparates.


As the world of fpirits is a middle ftate with man, between heaven
and hell, fo it is alfoa middle place, having the hells underneath and
the heavens above ; all the hells are fhut next to that world, except that
fome holes, or clefts, like thofe in rocks or caverns, are left open; and
thefe fo guarded, that none can pafs through them. but by permiflion,
which is granted on particular occafions. Heaven likewife appears as
fenced all round, fo that there is no pafling to any of the heavenly foci-
eties, but by a narrow way, which is likewife guarded.  Thefe outlets~
and inlets are what in {cripture are called the doors and gates of heaven
and hell. ~ ¥


The world of fpirits appears like a valley, between mountains and
rocks, here and there finking and rifing ; the doors and gates opening to
the heavenly focieties are only feen by thofe who are in their prepar-
ation for heaven ; nor are they to be found by any others. To every fo-
ciety in heaven there is an entrance from the world of fpirits, after paf--
fing which there is a way; which as it rifes branches into feveral others :
nor are the doors and gates of the hells vifible to any but thofe that are
going to enter therein, to whom they are then opened; at which time
thefe appear like as it were dark and footy caverns, leading obliquely
down to the infernal abyfs, where there are alfo more gates. Through
thefe dark and difmal caverns exhale certain foetid vapours, which are
moft offenfive to the good fpirits ; but which the evil ones are greedily
fond of; for, as were the evils which any one took moft delight in when
in this world, fuch is the ftink correfponding thereto which mott pleafes
him in the other; in which they may be aptly compared to thofe birds
or beafts of prey, as ravens, wolves, and {wine, which are attracted by the
rank effluvia emitted from carrion and putrid carcaffes. —


There are alfo in every man two gates, the one of which opens to-
wards hell, and to all that is evil and falfe proceeding therefrom; the
other gate opens towards heaven, and to all that good and truth iffuing
thence. The infernal gate is open in thofe who are in evil, and they
receive from above only fome glimmering of heavenly light, juft fuffici.

No; 56. 121 | ent


1064 A Ny Big lr SaTrR A TALON


ent to ferve them to think, reafon, and. talk, of heavenly things ; but
the gate of heaven ftands open in thofe who are good and in truth. ‘There
are alfo two ways leading to the rational mindin man; the fuperior, or
internal, by which good and truth are communicated from the Lord ;
and the inferior, or external, by. which evil and falfehood are communi-
cated from hell; and the rational mind is in the midft of thefe two ways ;
hence it is, that, as much of the heavenly light as any man receiveth into
his mind, fo far is he truly rational ; and fo much as he admits not of it,
in {uch proportion he is not rational, however he may think himfelf fo.
Thefe things, here offered, fhew the correfpondence that fubfifts between
man and heaven and hell; for his rational mind, during the formation |
of it, correfponds to the world of {pirits, things above it being in heaven,
and things beneath it in hell ; the former are opened and the latter (as
to all influx of evil and falfehood) are fhut, with refpect to thofe who
are in their preparation for heaven ; but, on the other hand, the things
from beneath are opened, and the things above are fhut (as to all influx
of good and truth) with refpett.to thofe who are in their preparation for
hell ; confequently the latter can only look down to the things beneath “
them, or to hell, and the former only to things above: them, or to heaven.
Now to look up is, by correfpondence, to look to the Lord, who is the
common center to which all heavenly things point their afpeét and tens
dency; but to look downwards is to turn from the Lord to the oppofite
center of attration, and.confequently to all things of a hellith nature. =


Thefe confiderations are applied only to the immediate after-ftate of the
foul and fpirit of man, as the confequence of the mortality of this world.
Many there are, however, whoentirely difbelieve the faculty of the foul,
or the exiftence of the fpirit ; but whoever rightly confiders the matter,
cannot but know, that it is not the body, or material part, but the foul,
or fpiritual part, that thinks within him. Now the foulis his f{pirit,
immortal in all its properties, and receptive of what is. {piritual, as
having a fpiritual life, which confifts in thinking and willing; con-
{fequently, the whole of the rational life appertains thereto, and not to
the body, though manifefted therein : for the body is only thoughtlefs_
matter, and an adjunct or inftrument to the: {pirit of man,- whereby it
may manifeft its vital powers and functions in this natural world, where
all things are material, and, as fuch, void of life : itis indeed cuftomary
toafcribe a€tion, motion, and power, tothe body in the common forms
of {peaking ; but to fuppofe that the properties belong to the inftrus
ment, and not folely to the principle that aCtuates it, is erroneous and
abfurd, | efits.


As


OF - AVSeTeReOUL:01G Yir s 1068


_As.all vital power, both of acting and thinking, appertains folely to
the {pirit, and in no wife to the body, it follows, that the fpirit is truly
and properly the man, and that without its influence and operation there
is neither thought nor life from the crown of the head to the fole of the
foot :. confequently, that the feparation of the body from the fpirit,
which we call.death, takes nothing from that which in reality confti-
tutes the man. For man would not be capable of thinking and willing,
unlefs there were in hima fubftance to ferveas the fubject of thefe opera~
tions; and to fuppofe otherwife would be afcribing exiftence to non-
entity, as may appear from man’s not being able to fee without that organ
which is the fubje& of vifion, or to hear without the organ of hearing;
thefe fenfes being nothing without fuch fubjects of their operations.
Now thought is internal vifion, or the fight of the mind, as perception
is the internal hearing ; and thefe without internal organized fubftances,
as their proper fubjetts, cannot exift: fo that the {pirit of a man has
equally aform, and that a human one, asalfo its fenfory and fenfes, when
divefted. of its material body, as it had before ; forall the perceptive life
of the eye and the ear, and of every other fenfe that appertains to man,
is not from his material body, but from his fpirit and the vital powers
thereof, inall and fingular the organs and parts of his body: henceit is,
that {pirits fee, hear, and feel, as well as men, in the fpiritual world*,
though not in this natural world after their feparation from this mortal
body. That the fpirit had natural fenfations' in this world, was owing
toits union with a natural or material body; but then alfo it had its fpi-
ritual fenfes in various modes of thinking and willing.


The foregoing doctrine is here offered, to convince the rational reader,
that man, confideredin himfelf, isa {pirit, and that the corporal part of
his compofition annexed to him in this natural and material world is in
order to his relation thereto, and what he has to do therein, but is not
the man himfelf, but only defigned to be inftrumental to the operations
of his fpirit: but, as few. are capable of receiving abftratt reafonings,


- * ‘To fuppofe a human fpirit void of a human form and fenfes, is to annihilate the very idea of
fpirit ; foras every eflence has. its proper form, and every form its own eflence, (they being ne-
ceflary corrolatives,):{o every fpirit has its body fuited to. the worldit belongs to, according to
that diftinétion laid down by the apoftle: “* There is a natural body, and there isa {piritual
body :”’ and indeed, itis as rational to conclude, that a human fpiritawould have a human, orga-
nized, body, endued with fpiritual fenfes in. a fpiritual world, as that the fame fpirit fhould be ins
vetted with a material organized body with natural fenfes in this natural world. It is to be lament.
ed, and the more for its tendency to promote infidelity, that many of the learned, fo called, have
in a manner defined and refined fpiritual nature into nothing, by divefting it of fubftantiality, to
which it-has a more peculiar right by far than matter ; nor is the body of an angel lefs {ubftantial
in a proper fenfe of the word than a folid rock, though not according to the condition of material
natures Upon the whole, the common ideas of the vulgar and illiterate come much nearer to the
truth.and reality.of heavenly things, than the vain conceits of {uch {peculating {ciolifts,


and


066 |= Ul GC ANCL ILLUS TRA T IY O'N

and many are apt to run them into matter of doubtful difputation, by
arguments drawn from fallacious appearances of fenfe, I chufe, for con-
frmation of the doctrine in hand, to appeal to truths founded on expert-
ence. Such as have confirmed themfelves in the belief of the contrary
fide, are given to think, that, as the beafts have life and fenfations as well
as men, fo they have both the fame fpirit and the fame end; but this is
a grofs error, as the fpirit-of a beat immenfely differs from that of a man,
as being deftitute of that fublime principle of a heavenly life, by which
the latter is made receptive of. the divine influx, and capable of being
exalted to a participation of the divine nature; and therefore it is that
man is fo highly privileged above the beafts, that he can think of God,
_and the things pertaining to his kingdom both in heaven and earth, and
be led thereby to love the Creator, and‘te be united to him: now that
which is in the capacity of fuch union is not liable to perifh, like that
which is not... For there is in every angel and in every man an inmoft
and fupreme degree or part, which more immediately admits the divine
influx from heaven, whereby all that is within man in the inferior de-
grees are orderly difpofed and regulated. This inmoft or fupreme part
of the fpirit or foul may be called the Lord’s entrance into angels and
men, nay, his very habitation in them; and hereby it is that man is dif-
tinguifhed from the brute animals, which have it not, and is rendered
capable of near communications with heaven in the inner man, of be-
lieving in the Deity, of loving him, and of feeing him; nay, from hence
it is that man is a recipient of underftanding and wifdom, and alfo that
he is endowed with a rational life, and an heir of immortality: but how
or what the Creator operates, in this inmoft recefs or fupreme part of
man, exceeds the capacity of an.angel to comprehend.


When the body of a man is no Jonger able to perform its natural
functions correfponding to the thoughts and affections of his fpirit, and
which are derived to him from the {piritual world, then he is faid to die;
which comes to pafs when the lungs and the heart ceafe their refpiratory
and contractile motions; not that man then fuffers extinétion of life,
but only is feparated from that corporeal part of his compofition which
ferved him for an inftrument of ufefulnefs in this world; but he ftill
continues a living man, and that in a proper and literal fenfe of the ex-
preflion, inafmuch as man receives his denomination not from his body,
but from his fpirit, fince it is the latter that thinks in him, and that
thought, with affection, effentially conftitute the man; fo that, when any
man is faid to die, it means no more than that he pafles from one world
into another ; and hence it is, that by Death in the Scripture, according


to the internal fenfe of the word, is fignified refurrection, and continua-
tion of life,


rs


I There


QF ASTFROL OGY, 1069


‘There is a very near communication and correfpondence betwixt. the
fpirit and refpiration, and the motion of the heart ( /ffole\, betwixt
siekiiig and ref{piration, and betwixt the affection of love and the heart ;
fo that when thefe two motions ceafe in the body, a feparation prefently
enfues ; for thefe two motions, viz. that which is refpiratory in the
lungs, and that which is called the fyftole or contra@tile power of the
heart, are the two bonds of union, which, when broken, the fpirit is
left to itfelf, and the bady, being deftitute of life from the fpirit, be-
comes cold and putrefies. That fo intimate a communication fubfitts
between the human fpirit and refpiration, and the heart, is, becaufe all
the vital motions in this world depend thereon, not only in cammon,
‘but alfo in every particular part of the body.


The fpirit of a man remains fome little time in the body after all figns
of life difappear, but not longer than till a total ceffation of all power in
the heart enfues, which varies according to the nature of the difeafe he
dies of, for the motion of the heart continues long after in fome, but
not fo in others; but, as foon as the total ceffation of it happens, the re-
fufcitation of man commences, and this by the fole power of the Lord.
By refufcitation here is meant the liberation of the fpirit of a man from
his bedy, and the introduction of it into the world of {pirits, and com-
monly called Refurre€tion. That the fpirit of a man ts not feparated

__from his body before all motion and power in the heart entirely ceafes,
is becaufe the heart correfponds to the affection of love, which is the
very life of man, for it is from love that every one derives his vital heat ;
therefore, fo long as this conjunction lafts, fo long the correfpondence
continues, and it is from correfpondency that the fpirit actuates and
communicates life to the body, ;


That the form of the fpirit of aman is ahuman form, or, in other

, words, that the fpirit is the true formed man, may be evinced from many
articles, particularly from thefe, viz, that every angel is in a perfect hu-
man form, and alfo, that every man is a f{pirit as to his inner man; and
that angels in heaven are from the human race. This alfo more evident-
ly appears fram man’s being denominated man from his fpirit, and not
fore his body, and becaufe the corporeal form is an adjunct to the fpirit
after its form, and not contrariwife, the former being but the clothing of
the latter. Morcover, the {pirit is the fole moving power in man, acting
upon and actuating every the mofk minute part of the body, infomuch
that, when any part no longer derives vital influence therefrom, it pre-
fently dies. Now, the ruling powers, which gavern the body as their fub-
ject, are the thought and the will; but thefe are from the fpirit only,
nay, conftitute its very effence. The reafon why we do not {ce any f{e-
Ov 57. 2K parate


1068 A NEST Bi US ER AcTHIDOON


parate fpirit, nor yet that of another man whilft in his body, in its hu-
man form, with our prefent organs of fight, is becaufe thefe organs of vi-
fion are material, and therefore only capable of difcerning objects of a ma-
terial nature, whereas fpiritual things muft be feen by a f{piritual eye *;
but, when the corporeal fight is extinguifhed by the death of the body,
and the fpirit’s eye is opened, then fpirits appear to one another in their
human form, not only in the fpiritual world, but they alfo fee the {pirits
of thofe who yet live here in the body,


That a human form is proper toa human fpirit, follows frem man’s
being created in the form of heaven, and alfo receptive of all things of a
heavenly nature and order, confequently with the faculty of receiving
underftanding and wifdom; for, whether we exprefs it by the words, fa-
culty of receiving underftanding and wifdom, or, the faculty of receiving
heaven, it comes to one and the fame thing. ‘So that what has hitherto
been faid on this fubject, may be underftood by the rational man, from
his view of caufes and their effects, of premifes and their confequences ;
but not fo by the obftinately irrational, and that for many aflignable rea-
fons; but principally, becaufe he is averfe to all doctrines which are con-
trary to the falfe principles that he has adopted in the room of truths ;
and, he that has thus fhut up his mind hath faut the gate of heaven
againft himfelf, fo that no light from thence can illuminate his rational
faculties ; and yet that gate might be opened, if his will did not refift.
This makes it evident, that they, who are in falfe thinking from an evil
principle, might be poffeffed of a rational underftanding, if they were in
a willing difpofition for it; and, that the reafon why they are not fo, is
becaufe they love the falfe above the true, as more agreeing with the evil
they have adopted, and which.they chufe to follow. Itis to be obferved,
that to love and to will a thing is the fame; for, what a man wills he
loves, and what he loves that he alfo wills.


When the fpirit of a man firft enters into the world of fpirits, which
is foon after his refufcitation, (of which mention has been made before,)
he as yet retains the fame face and voice that he had in this world, as be-
ing hitherto in his exterior ftate, that of his interior being yet unmani-
feited ; and this is his firft ftate after death: but fome time after, his
face becomes entirely changed, fo as to correfpond with the particular
affection, or love that poffefled his {pirit when in the body; for the face
of a man’s {pirit differs greatly from that of his body, the latter being


_ * Tt is tobe noted here, that, when fpirits are feen by any one in the body, they are not f i
the corporeal organs of vifion, but by the fpirit of the beholder abftractedly fant nhs ede
though the appearance is exactly the fame in both cafes, as implied in thofe-words of the Apoftle,
where, {peaking of his vifions, he fays, “ Whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell.”?
| derived


a


OF ASTROLOG Y. 1069


derived from his parents, but the former a correfpondent to his predo~
minant affeclion, of which it is the fignature or image, and which bes
‘comes appropriated to man in the other world, upon the manifeftation of
his interior ftate ; for the fpirit of a man, rightly confidered, is the fame
with his predominant affection or love, and his face is the external form
of it. This change refpecting faces, in thofe who pafs from hence into
the other world, is founded on this law, that no diflimulation or coun-
terfeiting is there allowed, but all muft appear to be what they really are,
and confequently exprefs their thoughts in their words, and their affec-
tions and defires in their looks and actions, fo that the faces of all there
reprefent their minds refpectively. Hence it is, that, though all who
knew one another in this world are alike mutually acquainted in the
world of {pirits, yet it is otherwife in heaven and hell.


The faces of hypocrites undergo not their proper change fo foon as the
‘faces of others, and that becaufe they have by cuftom contracted a habit of
forming their minds to a kind of imitation of good fentiments and affec-
tions, and therefore they appear not uncomely for fome time; but as the
difguife gradually wears off, and their inmoft thoughts and affections ma-
nifeft themfelves, they appear more ugly than others. The hypocrites
here fpoken of, are fuch as know how to talk like angels upon divine
fubjeéts, and yet in their hearts exalt nature on God’s throne, and difbe-
lieve all heavenly truths, acknowledged in the Chriftian church.


It is to be obferved, that the human form of every man after death is
beautiful in proportion to the love he had for divine truths, anda life ac-
cording to the fame, for by this ftandard things within receive their out-
ward manifeftation and form, fo that the deeper grounded the affeétion for
what is good, the more conformable it is to the divine order in heaven,
and confequently the more beauty the face derives from its influx. Hence
it is, that the angels of the third or inmoft heaven, whofe love is of the
third or highett degree, are the mott beautiful of all the angels; whereas
they whofe love for divine things had been in a lower degree, or more
external than that of the celeftial or highett angels, poflefs an inferior
degree of beauty; and the tranflucent luftre in their faces, as proceeding
from a {maller degree of divine virtue within them, is comparatively dian:
for, as all perfection rifes in degrees from the inward to the inmotft, fo
the external beauty, to which it gives life and vigour, has its degrees in
the fame proportion. .


When a man pafles from this natural world into the fpiritual, which
is at the time of his death, he takes with him all that belonged to him as
4 man,


wre «6 AN ELLUSFRAPFLEON


man, and poffeffes every fenfe, both external and internal, that he poffefitd
before. Thus, for inftance, all in heaven haye their fight, their hearing,
and all their fenfes, in far greater perfeCtion than when in this world,
and alfo their minds more abundantly replete with wifdom: for they fee
by the light of heaven, which greatly exceeds that of this world, and they
hear through the medium of a fpiritual atmofphere, to which that of our
earth is not comparable. ‘The comparative difference between thefe two
fenfes there and here, is as that of a bright fky to a thick fog, or as the
luftre of the meridian fun to the dufk of the evening. Now the light of
heaven, which is divine truth, makes manifeft the minuteft things to the
perception of angels; and, as their external correfponds to their internal
or intellectual fight, fo by mutual influx they co-operate in forming the
high perfection of angelical perfpicuity, In like manner their fenfe of
hearing correfponds to their perception, both in the underftanding and
will; fo that in the found of the.voice, and in the words of the {peaker,
they can trace the minute particulars of his affections and thoug its; in
the found what relates to his affections, and in the words what concerns
his mind or thoughts; but it is to be obferved, that the other fenfes of
the angels are not in the fame high degree of perfeCtion with thofe of
fight and hearing, and that becaufe the latter are fubfervient inftruments
to their underftanding and wifdom, and not fo the others, which, if equal
in power, would lcfien their preference to intelle@tual delights over and
above thofe of their {piritual bodies, as we find to be the cafe with men
in this world, who, according to their greater relith and indulgence ag to


their grofler fenfes, have the lefs appetite and fenfibility with refpec to
fpiritual things. :


A few words fhall here be fpoken concerning the cultivation of the rati-
onal ‘ope: in man. Genuine rationality confifts in truths, notin falfe.
hoods. ow truths are of three kinds, civil, maral, and fpiritual : civil
truths relate to judicial matters, and fuch as refped public government,
and, in a general confideration, juftice and equity: moral truths have
relation to the conduét of life with refpedt to focieties and inferior con-
nections; in general, to fincerity and rectitude; and in particular, to
virtues of every clafs; but fpiritual truths relate to the things of heaven
and of the chureh on earth; and in general to the good of love, and tee
truths of faith, There are three degrees of life in every man: the rae
tional part in man is opened to the firft degree by civil truths; to the fe-
cond by moral truths ; and to the third by fpiritual truths, But let it
here be obferved, that man’s rational part 1s not opened and formed mere-
ly by his knowing fuch truths, but by living according to them when


known,


OF ASTROLO G’Y. 107%


krown, that is, by loving then with a {piritual affection, or the affection
of his fpirit, or, in other words, by loving juftice and equity as fuch,
fincerity and rectitude of manners as fuch, and good and truth as fuch;
whereas, to love them only from external regards, is loving them for the
fake of felf, For one’s own character, honour, or profit; and therefore fuch,
a love, as it terminates in felf, gives not a man any right to the charac-
fer of rational, as fuch a one ufes truths as a lordly matter ufes his fer=
yants, viz. for his pleafure or intereft: and, where this is the cafe, they
make no part of the man, nor open fo much as the firft degree of life in
him, but only have a place in his memory, like other fcientifical ideas,
under a material form, where they unite with the love of felf in mereani-
mal nature. Hence jt may appear, how man becomes truly and properly
rational, viz. in the third or higheft degree, by the fpiritual love of

ood and truth, or the things of heaven, and its reprefentative the church;
in the fecond degree, by the love of fincerity and re¢titude; and in the
firft degree, by the love of juftice and equity ; which two laft laves be-
come {piritual by influx of the fpiritual love of good and truth from the
highefi degree, by joining itfelf to the inferior loves, and forming in them
its own likenefs, There are three degrees in man correfponding to the
three heavens; and, as the third or higheft heaven does, as it were, fanc-
tify the two inferior heayens by the defcending influx of its celeftial fu-
perior virtue, fo the {piritual love of all that is good and true in man (cor-
refponding to the third heaven) {piritualizes or fanctifies his virtues,
though of an inferior clafs; thus, to give a cup of cold water to another
is a little thing; but, when it is the moft we can. do, and love is in the
doing of it, the aéi has in it the eflenee of Chriftian charity.


There are three flates which man goes through after death, before he
enters into heaven or hells the firft refpects his exterior part; the fecond
his interiors and the third is his ftate of final preparation. . Thefe fiates
man paffes through in the world of fpirits; however, there are exceptions,
as fome are immediately after death taken up into heaven, or calt into
hell; of the former clafs are they who are regenerated, and fo prepared
for heaven in this world, and that in fo high a degree as to need only the
putting off all their natural impurities; in order to. be carried by the
angels jnto heaven, On the other hand, fuch as have been internally evil,
under the mafk of externally apparent goodnefs, and fo have filled up the
meafure of their iniquities by hypocrity and deceit, ufing the cloak of
goodnefs as a means whereby to deceive others; thefe are immediately
caft into hell. There are alfo fome who are committed to caverns im-
mediately after their deceafe, and fo feparated from others in the world of
fpirits, but afterwards releafed, and remanded thither by turns; fuch
are they who, under civil pretexts, dealt fraudulently with their ncigh-

No. 57. pinged 5 bours ;


1092 ANOSRILUD Wis TORT AoT TO N


bours; but the fore-mentioned are very few compared to the many clafles
of thefe who are detained in the world of {pirits, in order to their pre


paration for heaven or hell, according to the eftablifhed order of divine
economy.


As to the firft ftate before-mentioned, or that which refpects the ex-
terior, this man enters upon immediately after death. Every one’s fpirit
has belonging to it properties exterior and interior ; the former are thofe
by which he governs and accommodates the corporeal fanctions in this
world, more etpecially the face, fpeech, and bodily geftures, according to
his focial conneCtiions; the latter are proper to his will and free thoughts,
which are feldom made manifeft by the face, fpeeeh, and outward be-
haviour, man being accuflomed through education and example to coun-
terfeit friendfhip, fincerity, and benevolence, and to conceal his true
thoughts even from his infancy. Henee it is, that fo many learn the ex-
ternal practice of morality and good manners, however different they may
in reality be within, and fo, miftaking cuftom for priaciple, know not
themfelves, nor enter into any examination concerning the matter.


As the life of men newly become fpirits is fo like to their natural life
in this world, and as they are at firft {trangers to their new ftate, without
knowing any thing more of heaven and hell than what they have learned
trom the letter of icripture, and their preachers ; therefore, after wonder-
ing for fome time at their being clothed with a body, and poffefling every
fenfe as in this world, and alfo at their feeing things under the like ap~
pearance as before, they find themfelves urged by a defire of knowing
what and where heaven and hell are: upon which they are inftructed. by
‘their friends in things relating to eternal life, and are conduéted to various
places, and different focieties, and fome into cities, gardens, and beauti-
ful plantations, and more particularly to fee magnificent buildings, as
fuch external objects {uit with the prefent external ftate of their minds.
Then they are led to infpec&t thofe interior fentiments and ideas, which
they had in this life concerning the ftate of fouls after death, and con-
cerning heaven and hell, not without indignation to think of their own
paft ignorance, and alfo that of the church, in relation to thefe important
fubjects. Almoft all in the world of fpirits are defirous to know whe-
- ther they fhall go to heaven or not, and the greater part judge in favour

of themfelves as to this particular, ‘efpecially fuch as had lived by the
external rules of morality and civil obligation here; not confidering that
both. good and bad do the fame to outward appearance, as alfo do many
good offices to others, and in like manner go to church, hear fermons,
and bear a. part in the public worfhip; not. reflecting that thefe external


acts,,


OF 'A'STROLOG Y. 1073


acts, and this outward form of worfhip, avail nothing in themfelves, con-
fidered feparately from the difpofition and principle of the worfhipper,
and that it is the interior or inner man that ftamps the character and
value upon the outward work and form; but fcarcely one in a thoufand
knows what is meant by the interior, and, even after being taught it,
place all in the words and bodily fervice; and fuch is the greater part of
thofe who at this day pafs from the Chriftian world into the other.


The fecond ftate of man after death is called his interior tate, as he
then paffes into the more recondite things of his mind, or Of his will
and thoughts, whilft the more external functions of it, as exercifed in
his firft ftate, are then quiefcent or dormant. Whoever carefully attends
to the lives, words, and actions, of men, may foon find that every one has
both his exterior and interior thoughts and intentions ; thus, for exam-
ple, the man of civil connections and manners forms his judgment of
others by what he knows of them by charaer and converfation ; and,
though he fhould find them to be far otherwife than men of probity and
worth, yet he does not fpeak and behave to them according to his real
fentiments of them, but with fomething of feeming refpect and civility :
and this is ftill more ftrongly exemplified in the behaviour of perfons
addicted to diffimulation and flattery, who fpeak and aét quite contrary
to what they think and mean; and alfo in hypocrites, who can talk of
God, of heaven, and fpiritual things, and alfo of their country and neigh-
bour, as if from faith and love, when at the fame time they have neither
the one nor the other, and love none but themfelves. This evinces that
there are thoughts in the fame mind of two different complexions, the
one interior, and the other exterior, and that it is common for men to
fpeak from the latter, whilft their real fentiments in the interior are con-
‘trary thereto; and that thefe two arrangements of thoughts are of diftinct
and feparate apartments in the mind, appears from the pains fuch perfons
take to prevent thofe that are interior from flowing into the exterior to
manifeftation. Now, man was fo formed by his original creation, that
both thefe were as one by correfpondence and confent, as is the cafe now
with the good, who both think and {peak what is good and true; whereas,
in the evil the interior and the exterior are divided, for they think evil,
and {peak good, thus inverting the order of things, whilft the evil is in-
nermoft, and the good outermoft, the former exercifing rule over the
latter, and ufing its fervices for temporal and felfith ends, fo that the
feeming good which they fay and do is corrupted and changed into evil,
however the undifcerning may be deceived by its outward appearance.
On the other hand, they who are in the good principle ftand in the divine
order of God’s creation, whilft the good in their interior flows into the
exterior


174:CA NNO TLL UR TRATION


exterior of their minds, and thence into their words and actions. This.
is the ftate in which man wascreated, and thus they haye cammunig¢atian
with heaven, and have the Lord for their leader. Thus much may ferys
to fhew, that man thinks from two diftinét grounds, the one called the
interior, the other the exterior; and, when we {peak here of his think-
ing, we include likewife his faculty of willing, as his thoughts are from
his will, neither can they exiit feparately,


After that man, now become a fpirit, has gone through his firft
ftate, which is that of his exterior thoughts and will, he then pafies
into his fecond or interior ftate, and this he enters upon infenfibly,
which refembles that of a man in this world, who, finding himfelf at
liberty from every reftraint and diffipation, recollects himfelf, and enters
into the moft fecret receffes of his foul, Now in this ftate of introverfion,
when he thinks freely from his inmoft difpofition and affections, he is
properly himfelf, or in his true life. All without exception enter into
this {tate in the other world, as proper to {pirit, for the former is aflumed
and practifed in accommodation to fociety and tranfaétions in this world;
and therefore, though it remains with man for fome time after death, yet
it is not long continued in, as not being fuitable to the nature of a {pirit,
for the following reafons; firft, becaufe a fpirit thinks and {peaks from
the governing principle of life without difguife; nay, the fameis the cafe
of man in this world, when he enters into his inmoft felf, and takes ap
intuitive view of his inward man, in which kind of furvey he fees more
in a-minute than he could utter in an hour. Secondly, .becaufe in his
converfation and dealings in this world, he {peaks and acts under the re-
ftraint of thofe rules which fociety has eftablithed for the maintenance of
civility and decorum, Thirdly, becaufe man, when he enters into the
interior recefles of his {pirit, exercifes rule over his outward economy,
prefcribing laws thereto, how to fpeak and act in order to conciliate the
good will and favour of others, and that by a conftrained external beha-
viour, Thefe confiderations may ferve to thew, that this interior ftate
of liberty is not only the proper ftate of the {pirit of a man after death
but even in this life. Whena fpirit has pafled into this fecond or Page ieil
flate, it then appears outwardly what manner. of man he had been in this
world, as he now aéts from his proper felf; thus, if he had been a wife
and good man before, he now manifetts Mill higher degrees of rationality
and wifdom in his words and actions, as being freed from thofe corporeal
and earthly embarrafiments which had fettered and obfcured the inward
operations of bis mind, whereas the bad man evidences greater folly than
‘before for, whilft in this world, he fathioned his external behaviour by
the sules of prudence, inorder to fave appearances; but, not bein g under
the like reftraints-now, he gives fall {cope to his infanity,
/ an All


OFT CA Sut Reon. 0. GY: | 1075


_ All who in this world lived uprightly, and preferved a good con{cience, -
walking in the fear of God, and in the love of divine truths, applying
the fame to practical ufe, feem to themfelves as men awaked out of fleep,
and as having pafled from darknefs to light, when they firft enter upon
their fecond or interior flate ; for they think from the light of pure wif-
dom, and they do all things from the love of goodnefs; heaven influ.
ences their thoughts and affections, and they are in communication with
angels. But the condition of the evil in this ftate is according to his par-
ticular concupifcence. - They who had been abforbed in felf-love, fo as
not to attend to the good ufes of their refpective offices and funftions, but
difcharged them only with a view to their own eftimation and honour,
appear more ftupid than others ; for, in proportion to the degree of felf.
love in any one is his diftance from heaven, and confequently from wifdom:
but they, who to the evil of felf-love had added crafty devices, and by
means thereof advanced themfelves to worldly honours, affociate them-
felves to the worft of fpirits, and addict themfelves to the magical
arts, which are profane abufes of the divine order, by means of which
they moleft and vex all that pay them not honour; the prattifing
of infidious wiles, and to kindle ftrife and hatred, yield them the
higheft pleafure ; they burn with revenge, and long for nothing more
than to tyrannize over all that fubmit not to their will; and all thefe
wicked paffions they gratify as far as their evil aflociates give them
afliftance ; nay, fo far does madnefs hurry them on, as to make them
wifh to {cale heaven, either to fubvert the government of the holy king- 7
dom, or to caufe them{elves to be worfhipped for. gods therein. As to
thofe who in this world afcribed all creation to nature, and fo in effect
denied a God, and confequently all divine truths, fuch herd together in
this ftate, calling every one a god who.excelled in fubtlety of reafoning,
and giving him divine honour. Such in the world of {pirits are feen in
their conventicle worfhipping a magician, holding conferences concern~
ing nature, and behaving more like brute-beafts than human creatures,
and among them fome who were dignitaries in this world, and had the
reputation of being learned and wife, and others of a different character.
From thus much we may gather what they are, the interior of whofe
minds is fhut againft divine things, as theirs is, who receive no influx
from heaven through looking up to God and a life of faith,


The third ftate of man, or of his {pirit, after death, is the ftate of in-
ftruction, which is appointed for thofe that go to heaven, and become
angels; but not for thofe that go to hell, as {uch are not ‘in a capacity of
inftruction, and therefore their fecond ftate is their laft, and anfwers to
the third in others, as it terminates in their total change into that. pre.
vailing love which conftitutes their proper principle, and confequently

No. 57. 12 M inte


46. CA NE IRDA OS TAR AT ROUN


into a conformity to that infernal fociety with which they have fellowfhip.
When this is accomplithed, their will and thoughts flow {pontaneoully
from their predominant love, which, being infernal, they can only chute
~ the evil and falfe, and reject all that apparent good and truth which be-
fore they had adopted, folely as means {ubfervient to the gratification of
their ruling paflion. On the other hand, the good {pirits are introduced
from their fecond into their third ftate, which is that of preparation for
heaven by the means of inftru€tion; for none can be qualified for heaven
but through the knowledge of fpiritual good and truth, and their oppo~
fites, evil-and falfehood, which can only come from previous inftruction.
As to good and truth in a civil and moral fenfe, commonly called
juttice and fincerity, thefe may be learned from the Jaws of nations, and
from converfation in virtuous company; but fpiritual good and truth, as
ingrafted principles in the heart, are only received by the teachings of a
divine light: for though they are literally fet forth in the {cripture, and
the doétrines of the Chriftian churches founded thereon, yet they only
gain the efficacy of a vital principle from a celeftial influence manifefting
itfelf in a confcientious obedience to the divine laws, as promulgated in
the written Word, and that in refpect to the divine authority of them, and
not from felfifh and worldly motives; then a man is in the heavenly life,
or in heaven, even whilft in this world.


The way of conveying inftruction in the other world differs from that
on earth, inafmuch as truths there are committed, not to the memory; but
to the life; for the memory of f{pirits is in their life’s principle, and they
receive and imbibe only what is conformable thereto, for {pirits are fo
many human forms. of their own affections. As the nature of fpirits is
fuch, therefore they are continually infpired with an affection for truth
for the ufes of life; for the Lord has fo ordered it, that every one fhould
love the ufes that accord with their particular gifts and qualities; which
love is likewife heightened by the hope of their becoming angels; for in
heaven all particular and fingular ufes have relation to the general ufe or
good of the Lord’s kingdom, and may be confidered as fo many parts of
one whole, fo that the truths which they learn are both truths and the
ufes of truths conjunctly : thus the angelical f{pirits are prepared for hea-_
ven. The affection or love of truth for the purpofes of ufe is infinuated
into them many ways not known in this world, more particularly by
various reprefentations of ufe under fuch delightful forms as affe@ both
their minds and fenfes with unf{peakable pleafure; fo that, when any {pirit
is joined to the fociety for which he was prepared, he then enjoys life
moft when he is in the exercife of its proper ufes, Hence it may appéar,
that not the ideal knowledge of truths, as things without us, but an ims.


3 plantation


OF AS TIREGIL O16 YI. -. Foe


plantation of them in the affeGtions and life for the purpofe of ufes, is that
which qualifies for the kingdom of Heaven.


After that the angels are duly prepared for heaven in manner defcribed,
which comes to pafsin a fhort time, as {piritual minds are of quick com-
prehenfion, they are then clothed in angelical garments, which, for the
moft part, are white as of fine linen, and conducted to the way which
leads up to heaven, and delivered to the guardian angels there: after
which they are received by other angels, and introduced to different fo-
cieties, where they partake of various delights: after this every one is
led by the Lord’s guidance to his particular proper fociety, and this by
various ways, fometimes direct, fometimes otherwife, not known to any
of the angels, but tothe Lord only. Laftly, when they are come to their
own fociety, their inmoft thoughts and affections open and expand them-
felves, which meeting with the like returns of cordial fympathy from
their fellow-angels, they are immediately known and received by them
with a joyful welcome.


An equilibrium is neceflary to the exiftence and fubfiftence of all things,
and confifts in the equality of action and re-action between two oppolite
powers, producing reft or equilibrium; and this according to an elta-
blifhed law through the natural world, obferved in the very atmofpheres,
in which the lower and denfer air re-acts on the fuperincumbent columns ;
nay, even betwixt heat and cold, light and darknefs, dry and moift; and
the middle point is the temperature or equilibrium. The fame law ob-
tains throughout the three great kingdoms of this world, the mineral,
vegetable, and animal; wherein all things proceed and are regulated ac-
cording to action and re-action, or actives and paffives, producing or re-
ftoring an equilibriam in nature. In the phyfical world, the agent and
re-agent are called power and conatus; and in the fpiritual world, life
and will, as being living power and conatus; and here the equilibrium is
called liberty. Thus there exifts a fpiritual equilibrium or liberty be-
twixt good and evil, by the action of one, and the re-action of the other ;
for example, in good men this equilibrium is effected by the action of the
good principle, and the re-action of the evil principle; but, in bad men,
evil is the agent, and good is but the re-agent. That there is a fpiritual
equilibrium betwixt good and evil, is becaufe every thing appertaining to
the vital principle in man, has relation to good or evil, and the will is
the receptacle of both. There is likewife an equilibrium betwixt true
and falfe; but this depends on the equilibrium betwixt good and evil, ac-
cording to their kinds refpectively. ‘The equilibrium betwixt truth and
falfchood is fimilar to that which is betwixt light and darknefs (wmébram),

which


108 AN dU So RAC THIOO N


which operates, according to the heat and cold therein, on the fubjeéts of
the vegetable kingdom; for that light and darknefs have no {uch operation
in themfelves alone, but only through the heat in them, may appear from
the fimilarity there is betwixt the light and darknefs in winter and in
fpring. The comparifon of truth and falfehood with light and darknets
is from correfpondency ; for truth correfponds to light, and falfchood to
darknefs, and heat to the good of love. Spiritual light alfo is the fame
with truth; and {piritual darknefs is the fame with falfehoad.


_ There is a perpetual equilibrium betwixt heaven and hell; from the
latter continually exhales and afcends a conatus of doing evil; and from
the former continually emanes and defcends a conatus (tendency to or
will) of doing good. In this equilibriam is the world of {pirits, which
‘is fituated in the midft betwixt heaven and hell ; and this may appear
from hence, that every man immediately after death enters into the world
of {pirits, and there continues in the fame flate in which he died; is ex-
amined and proved thereby, as a touchftone of his principles; and re-
mains under the fame free will, which al] indicate an equilibrium; for
fuch a fpiritual equilibrium there is in every man and {pirit, as obferved
‘before. The particular kind and tendency of this liberty or free will is
well known by the angels in heaven, by the communication of thoughts
and affections ; and it appears vifibly to the evangelical {pirits, by the

aths and ways which they chufe to walk in, as the good {pirits take
thofe which lead to heaven, and the evil {pirits thofe which lead to hell;
for fuch ways and walks have a@tually a vifible appearance in that world,
and this is the reafon that the word wey or weys in {cripture fignifies
thofe truths which lead to good, and, in an oppolite fenfe, thofe falfe-
hoods which lead to evil; and hence alfo it is, that to go, walk, or joure .
ney, fignify the progreflions of life in the fame facred writings.


That evil continually exhales and afcends from hell, and that good-con-
tinually flows and defcends from heaven, is becaufe every one is {urround-
ed by a fpiritual fphere, flowing or tranfpiring from his vital affections
and thoughts; and confequently the fame from every fociety celeftial or
infernal, and collectively from the whole heaven and the whole hell,
This univerfal efflux of good from heaven originates in the Lord, and
pafles through the angels without any mixture of their property or felf-
hood; for this is fupprefied in them by the Lord, who grants them
to live in his own divine property ; whereas the infernal {pirits arein their ~
property of felfifh nature, or what only belongs to them{elves, which, as
unblefied with divine communications from the fole fountain of all good,
is only evil in every one conunually.


The |


OP ATT wELoG v. 1079


‘ The heavens, in the general, are diftinguifhed into two kingdoms; the
one of which is called the celeftial, the other the fpiritual, kingdom. The
hells likewife are diftinguifhed into two kingdoms; the one of which is
oppofite to the celeftial, the other to the fpiritual, That which is op-
pofite to the celeftial is in the weft, and they who belong to it are called
genii; and that which is oppofite to the fpiritual kingdom is in the
north and fouth, and they who belong to it are called évil {pirits, All
in the celeftial kingdom excel in love to the Lord, and all that are in the
hells oppofite to that kingdom are under the prevailing power of felf-
love; all that belong to the fpiritual kingdom are diftinguithed in excel-

‘lence by love to their neighbour, and all that are in the hells oppolite to
this kingdom are flaves to the love of the world; fo that love to the
Lord and the love of felf are in the fame diametrical oppofition to each
other as the love of our neighbour and the love of the world. EffeGiual
provifion is made by the Lord, that no power of evil, from the hells that
are in oppofition to the celeftial kingdom, may reach the fubjéedts of the
fpiritual kingdom, as the confequence in that cafe would be the fubver-
fion of the latter. ‘Thus does the Lord keep the balance betwixt good
and evil in his own hand for the prefervation of his kingdoms.


As good and evil, truth and falfehood, are of a {piritual nature, fo alfo is
that equilibrium in which confifts the power of thinking and willing the
one or the other, and the liberty of chufing or refufing accordingly,
This liberty, or freedom of the will, originates in the divine nature, but
is given to every man by the Lord for a property of his life, nor does he
ever take it back again. This good gift to man is to the end that he may
be regenerated and faved, for without free will there is no falvation for
him ; but that he actually poffeffes it, he may know from the operations
of his own mind, and what pafles inwardly in his fpirit, he being able to
think and chufe either good or evil, whatever reftraints he may be under
from uttering or acting the latter in refpe&t to laws divine or human.
Now this inward experience evinces, beyond a thoufand arguments, that
liberty belongs to man, as his fpirit is his proper felf, and it is that
which: freely thinks, wills, and chufes ; confequently,. liberty is. to be
eftimated according to the inner man, and not from what he may be out=
wardly through fear, human refpects, -or other external reftraints.


That man would not be capable of being reformed or regenerated with-
out free will, is becaufe he is by the original conftitution of his natute
born to evils of every kind, which muft be removed in order to-his fal-
vation; and that can only be by his knowing, owning, renouncing, and
abhorring, them. To this-end, he muft be inftructed ip the. nature of

No.3. 12 N good ;


1080 AN. dE bt & Teh A Talo N-


good ; for it is by good only that he can fee the evil, but by evil he ¢an-
not fee the good: nae Re he muft be early educated in the knowledge
of fpiritual truths, by teaching, by reading the {criptures, and by the
preaching of the word, that fo he may attain to a right underftanding of
what is good; as he is likewife to cultivate his mind with the knowledge
of moral and civil truths from his intercourfe with fociety in the different
relations of life; all which imply the ufe and exercife of freedam, Ane
other thing to be confidered is, that nothing becomes appropriated to man,
or can be called his own, that is not received into the affectionate part ;
other things he may apprehend or form an ideal knowledge of, but what
enters not his will or love, which is the fame thing, (for what a man
wills he loves,) that makes no part of him, nor abides with him. -Now,
man being naturally prone to evil, he could not receive its contrary,”
the good, into his will or love, fo as to become appropriated to him,

unlefs he were endowed with liberty or freedom of will, feeing that the
good is oppofite to the evil of his nature. De,


As man is poffefied of liberty or free will, in order to be capable of re-
generation, therefore he can have communication in f{pirit with heaven
or with hell; for evil fpirits from the one, and angels from the other,
are prefent with him; by the former he poffefies his own evil; by the
Jatter he is in the principle of good from the Lord; and herein ftands his
equilibrium or liberty. Not that this conjunction of man with heaven
or hell is an immediate conjunction, but mediate only, and that through
the fpirits that belong to the world of {pirits; for thefe are the {pirits
that attend on man, and not any immediately from heaven or hell. By
the evil {pirits belonging to the world of {pirits, man joins himfelf to
hell; and by the good fpirits of the fame world he has communication
with heaven ; for the world of {pirits is intermediate between heaven and
hell, and conftitutes the true equilibrium, Let it be obferved, as touch~
ing thofe fpirits that are appointed to be man’s affociates here, that a
whole fociety may hold communication with another fociety, and. alfo

with any individual wherefocver, by means of any emiffary {pirit, which
{pirit is called, ‘Tbe fusject of many. The cafe is fimilar with refpeét to
man’s communication with’ the focieties in heaven and in hell, by the
intervention of his affociate fpirit from the world of {pirits. The good
fpirits belonging to the world of {pirits, being in their final preparation
for the angelical {tate, are called angelical {pirits; and, as they have im-
mediate commuyication with the heavenly angels, fo has man, through
them, 4 mediate communication with the fame. And the bad {pirits
vice verfa.  Thus’all communications between man, and the higheit and
loweft in heaven and hell, are conducted through mediums adapted to ~
his nature and ftates refpectively. | |


What


a als taal a i le i ial


Pe ae


OiFr ASTRO L.O G Y. 1081


What hs been delivered concerning heaven, the world of fpirits, and


hell, will appear obf{cure to thofe who have no relith for fpiritual truths,


but clear to fuch as take delight therein, more efpecéally to all who are
in the love of truth for its own fake. What we love, we readily receive
and underftand ; and, where truth is the object of our affeCtions, it re-
commends itfelf to the mind by the evideace it brings with it; for-truth
is the light, by which all things are known and diftinguifhed.


Such is the opinion of Baron Emanuel Swedenbourg, with refpect to
the fpirits and departed foulsof men. But the Magz, or wife men of the
eaft, have defined fpirits, good and bad, of a great variety of kinds and
orders, whereof fome are fuited to the purpofes of witchcraft and exor-
cifm, and others not. The form and nature of {pirits, fay they, are to
be confidered according to the fource to which each caterva doth belong ;
for fome, being altogether of a divine and celeftial nature, are not fubject
to the abominable conjurations and inchantments of vicious men ; whilft
others, of a diabolical and infernal nature, are not only ready upon all
occafions to become fubfervient to exorcifts and magicians, but are ever
watching opportunities of exciting evil affections in the mind, and of ftir-
ting up the wickedly inclined to, the commiflion of every {pecies. of ini-
quity and vice. As to the fhapes and various likenefles of thefe wicked
{pirits or devils, it is generally believed, that, according to their different
capacities in wickednefs, fo their fhapes are an{werable after a magical
manner, refembling-{piritually fome horrid and ugly monfters, as their
confpiracies again{t the power of God were high and monftrous when
they fell from heaven. For the condition of fome of them is nothing
but continual horror and defpair, whilft others triumph in fiery might
and pomp, attempting to pluck the Almighty from his throne; but the
quality of heaven is fhut from them, and they can never reach it, which:
aéts upon them as an eternal fource of, torment and mifery. But that
they are materially vexed and {corched in flames of fire, is only a figura-
tive idea, adapted to our external fenfe, and by no means to be literally
underitood ; for their fubftance is {piritual, and their effence too fubtil
for any external torment. Their mifery is unqueftionably great.and in-
finite; but not through the effect of outward flames; for their bodies
are capable af- piercing through wood and iron, ftone, and all terreftrial
things. Neither is all the fire or fuel of this world able to torment
them, for in a moment they can pierce it through and through. The
endlefs fource of their mifery is in themfelves, and ftands continually
before theii, fo that they can never enjoy any reft, being abfent from the
prefence of God; which torment is greater to them-than all the tortures
of this world combined together.
ee | The
Z ;


1082 ANS DER © Ss TRE TAO ON


The wicked fouls that aré departed this life, are alfo capable of ap-
pearing again, and of anfwering the conjurations and magical queftions of
exorcifts, becaufe, the quality of their minds, and the bent of their incli-
nations, being fimilar to thofe of the fallen angels or devils, it eannot be
conceived that their torment and purfuits hereafter are much different ;
for the Scripture faith, rat every one ts rewarded according to bis works ;
and, chat which aman fows, that he fhall reap. Hence it follows, that, as
the damned fpirits of departed men, while they lived on earth, heaped up
vanity, and loaded their fouls with iniquity and vice; fo, when they en-
ter the next world, the fame abominations which here they committed
ferve them ‘to ruminate and feed upon, and, the greater thefe offences have
been, the greater is the torment arifing from them every moment. But
very contrary to this is the ftate of the righteous fouls departed, wha
are entered into eternal reft; and of the different degrees and. orders
of the angelic hoft, which appertain to heaven, and have places in the
manfions of the blefled. Nor is it poffible for any one, how expert fo-
ever in magical experiments, to compel thefe blefled fpirits, of any de-
gree, order, or quality, of creation, to be exorcifed, or called up, or made
appear, at the will of the magician, by any forms of convocation or com-
munication, or by the power of rhagical rites and ceremonies of any clafs
or defcription whatfoever. It may indeed be believed, and it is by moft
authors admitted, that infinite numbers of the angelic hoft’are employed
for the glory of God, in watching over and prote€ting the purfuits of
good men ; but they are not fubjett to fpells or conjurations of any kind
jet on foot by the impious profeffors of the Black Art. .


Of a different opinion, however, are fome of thofe who attempt to
juftify the magic art under fanction of the holy fcriptures, and for this
purpofe inftance the fupplication of Saul to the witch of Endor. This
paflage undoubtedly ferves to fhew, how greatly the practice of exorcifm,
reigned amongft the Jews, and proves the poflibility of raifing up fpirits
in thofe ancient times; but that the exorcift never meant to bring up
the fpirit or ghoft of Samuel, but that of an evil demon to reprefent him,
’ 1s apparent from her exclamations to Saul, when fhe accufes him of hav-
ing deceived her; and is a convincing proof, that this particular inftance,
of the fimilitude of a bleffed {pirit being called up by a profeffor of {pells
and incantations, was owing to the immediate permiflion of the Deity,
for the purpofes of forwarding the Jewith difpenfation, and manifefting
his peculiar regard to the perfon of David, through whofe loins the’
Mefiiah was to come. | :


Such fpirits as are termed afral /pirits, which belong to this out-
ward world, and are compounded of the elemental quality, having their
as


3 fource
”


e


Qy Bo yAAS DR 2OUL 10.1G Yi» 1689


fource from the ftars, and being fubjeét to a beginning and ending, may’
be folicited and brought into league with magicians and witches; and
can alfo inform them of many wonderful and occult properties in nature,
and, of, many important concerns relating to the ftate and affairs of men in
this, terreftrial world. This defeription of fpirits:is faid to occupy vas:
rious \places: of the earth ; as woods, mountains, waters, air, fiery flames,
clouds, ftars, mines, fea-fhores, ancient buildings and ruins, and places
of the flain. They are capable of hunger, grief, paflion, and vexation,
being in fome meafure temporal, and compounded of the moft fpiritual
part of the elements, into-which they are eventually refolved, as ice into
water ; and have-been more or! lefs celebrated by hiftorians and poets in
all.ages of the world. sf act


There are likewife another fpecies, called igneous or fiery {pirits,
that inhabit the burning mountains of Hecla, Vefuvius, Aitna, Poconzi,


&c.- which fome authors have affirmed to be’ infernal {pirits, and damned —


fouls, who, for a term of years, are confined to thefe burning mountains
for. their iniquities. But the moit)received opinion is, that they are of a
middle vegetative nature, and perifhable, which, at the diffolution of the
media natura, {hall be again reduced into their primary ether. And from
natural caufes it may be eafily demonftrated, that there is great corref-
pondence betwixt fuch fubftances and the element of fire, by reafon of
the internal flagrant and central life proceeding from the quinteffence of
one only element, which upholds them in motion, life, and nourifhment;
as ‘every, natutal and fupernatural being is upheld and maintained out of
the felf-fame root from whence it had its original. So the angels feed
upon the celeftial manna; the devils upon the fruits of hell, which is
natural to the propenfity of their appetites the aftral {pirits upon the
fource cf the ftars, and the gas of the air; upon a principle that every
thing is nourifhed by its mother, as infants at the breaft, or chickens from
the, egg, &c.,. The proper nourifhment of fiery fpirits, however, is
radical heat, and the influence of the airy region; nor is it to be wondered
at that they are,fo much delighted with the fiery quality, in regard of
their affinity and near approach to-the effence and quality of infernal
{pirits or devils, whofe ftate and being is altogether damnable and deplor-
_able;. for, although they, have not the ability of attaining either the
heavenly or infernal quality, by reafon that they are utterly void of the
innermoft centre, and may be rather termed monfters than rational ani-
mals, yet, becaufe they are compounded of the outermott principle, fach
is their innate,affinity and unity with the dark world or infernal kingdom,
that they often become the devil's agents, to propagate his works upon


the face of the earth: Thus by the inftigation of infernal fpirits, and’


No. 58. . 12°0 their


s


1084 ANY S2LOLJ06s TRAST EON


their own promptitude, they often terrify men with nocturnal vifions ;
provoke melancholy people to fuicide ; tempt drunkards and incendiaries
to fet houfes on fire, to burn thofe who ate in them, and allure carelefs
fervants and others to found and incautious fleep, that fuch unlucky
accidents might happen; befides innumerable other ways they have of
executing the devices of iniquitous {pirits through malicious inftigations,
or fecret ftratagems, projected for the overthrow and deftru@tion of mortal
men; efpecially when the work to be effected by the devil is too hard for
his fubtle and fpiritual nature to effect, becanfe the fame belongs to the
outward fource or principle to which thefe dubious f{pirits more imme-~
diately belong. For, being compounded of the fiery element, they are
moft officious in this kind of fervice, being fuch as the antecedent miat-
ter hath fufficiently demonftrated ; but, according to their different ranks
and orders, fome of them are much more iaveterate and malicious in their
agency than the reft. Thefe,-as well as every other kind of aftral fpirits,
are more or lef{s obfequious to the kingdony of darknefs; and the devil,
it feems, can effect little or nothing without their affiftance im this out-
ward or elementary world, upon the paffions of mankind; becaufe therr
bodies are too crude for the direct conveyance of their influence, -either
in dreams, charms, viftons, raptures, or other foft and alluring means.
Thefe fiery f{pirits are likewife apt for conjuration, and are always ready
at the call of the magician, for the execution of any cruel or diabolical
purpofe. :


Diftin& from fiery {pirits area {pecies which properly belong: to the:
metallic kingdom, abiding in mountains, caves, dens, deeps, hiatas or
chafms of the earth, hovering over hidden gold, tombs, vaults, and fe-
pulchres of the dead. Thefe fpirits are termed by the ancient philo-
fophers ‘‘ protectors of hidden treafure,’ fronva’ principle or quality'in’
their nature whence they exceedingly delight in mines of gold and filver,
and places of hidden treafure; but are violently inimical to-man,.and en-
vy his benefit or accommodation in the difcovery thereof; ever haunting
thofe places where money is concealed, and retaining malevolent and
poifonous influences to blaft the lives and limbs of thofe who attempt to
make fuch difcoveries; and therefore extremely dangerous for magicians
to exorcife or callthem up. It is recorded in feveral of the ancient Bri-
tith authors, that Peters, the celebrated magician of. Devonfhire, together
with his aflociates, having exorcifed one of thefe malicious {pirits to con-
duct them toa fubterranean vault, where'a confiderable quantity of treafure
was known to be hid, they had no fooner quitted the magic circle, than
they were inftantancoufly crufhed into atoms, as it were in the twinkling
of an eye. And in this particular. we have too many fatal examples

upon


a ‘


OF AS TROL OG Y. : 868%
upon récord, of the fudden deftruation of thofe who by magical fpells
had called upon this defcription of fpirits, for the purpofe of difcovering
hidden gold; which examples feem to prove, that the(e {pirits have more
affinity with the infernal than with the aftral hierarchy; and that they
are the diabolical agents of Mammon bringing about all the evils of this
world, which {pring from an infatible luft after gold ; whence the faying
in fcripture, that ** wecannot ferve God and Mammon,” and that ‘§ 7f 23 ea-
fier for acainel to pafs through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven; ” hyperbolically fpoken, in referéncé to the
innumerable fins and wickednefs committed by mankind, for the fake of
temporary wealth and‘riches! Hence too reafon offers, why, of all other
fubordinate fpirits, thefe are the moft pernicious to mortal men. The na-
ture of them 1s fo violent, that in the hiftories' of the gold and filver mines
abroad, it is recorded that whole companies of labourers have been de-
ftroyed. by them at once; and that their delight'is in tormenting, killing,
and crufhing to death, thofe who moft greedily luft after and feek for fitch
treafures. The richeft and largeft filver mine im Germany was haunted
by one of thefe fpirits, who fometimes ufed to appear in the fhape of an
he-goat,. with golden ‘horns, pufhing down the workmen with uncom.
mon violence; and.at' othersan, the fhape of a horfe, breathing fiery —
flames and peftilential vapours at his noftrils, till, by continual déftruction,
fear, and alarm, they were obliged to defift from working that mine any
longer ;, and it continues fhut to this day. fe


 Thusfar we have confidered fpirits /udordinate, or fach as properly
belong to the elemémtary or outward world. We will now take a view
of the infernal fpirits or devils, and damned fouls; which are to be claffed
according to their refpective ranks and orders, exactly correfpondent ' or
oppofite to the choirs and hierarchies of the angels, or bleffed fpirits, in
heaven,


. The origin of devils and infernal {pirits, as’ fcripture revelation hath
confirmed and eftablifhed, proceeded ‘from confpiracy and rebellion’ in
heaven; under the arch-fiend Lucifer, who was originally of the higheft
order.of the angelic hoft ; becaufe it is written of him, ‘* Iz Cherabim
extentus, protegeus, pofur te. monte fanéto Der”—Extended upon a Che-
rubim, and protecting, L have put thee in the holy mountain of God. And:
further, becaufe it is alfo written, ‘* Quomodo enim mane oriebaris, Luct-
Ser’ —For then didft thow rife in the morning; O Lucifer? Various are
the opinions as to the exprefs occafion of his fall: Some fay, it was for.
{peaking thefe. words: ‘§ Pouem fedem > meam ‘in aquilone, fimilis ero
eave vi pte Yd hott 9 Mea


"ss


—
ere | ha 7 2


1036 AN> EDUWSER A TUON


altifime' 1 wilk put, my feat'in the North; andi Diwill: be likeothe moft
High. “Others affirm, thatit proceeded fromhis utterly refujing fehcity,
and holding the blefings of beaven in derifion. Someagain, because be afferted
that all bis firength., proceeded from bimfelfy.and not. from God.’ Others
becaufe he attempted to effect that by bimfelf and his own frengta, which was
alone the proper gift of God., ‘Other opinions fay, Libat bis condemnation
proceeded from-his.challenging the place of the Mefiahs whilft others infift,,
that it was becaufe he wpioufly challenged the omnipotency of God, with
whom.he claimed equal power. But the Chtiftian :church in all countries
agree, that it was, for all thefe crimes put together; and many more 5\\ex-
clufive of his drawing alide the allegiance jof ‘other angels, and fuborning
the whole of his own legion in confpiracy, toatteémpt to pluck the Al-
mighty from his Throne; ,whereupon a dreadful conflict ienfued ‘between
Michael the archangel with the heavenly hoft.on onerfide, and Lucifer
and his.rebellious tribes on the other, »which ended imtheir total extermi-
nation from the manfions and light of heaven, to fuffer eternal torment in


the dark abodes of the infernal regions.


: zi Y otiw igs tiaird hs 59 gees (| co
Here began the kingdom ofdarknefs, and the devil’s!enmity'to mortal
man; who being created:of a nature inferior to the angels, ‘but,’ by @
ftate of probation, capable of arriving to the:dame degree of excellence,’
and of filling up the vacancy in heaven, occafioned by the fall off Lucifer
and his legions, it excited his envy {till the more,: and laid the: graundiof
that ceafelefs warfare, which, from the fall of Adam, to the prefent hour,
hath exifted between the king’of darknefs-and the fouls of men’! And
though this conflict is not conducted by outwardiand vifiblé’ means;' yet
it is effected by fecret {nares and ambutcades, which take us at unawares,’
and when we are moft off our guard. Forthe devil, while we feed,
allures us,to fin by gluttony ;, he thrufteth luft into our generation, and’
floth into our exercife ; into our converfation, envy, into our trafae,:
avarice ; into our. correction, wrath; into our government, pride; he
putteth into our hearts evil cogitations 3:and into our mouths, lies.
When we, awake, he moveth-us to evilworks ; when we fleep, ‘to evil
and filthy dreams ; he provokes the jocund to lafcivioufnefs, and the fad
to defpair ;. whence {pring the various evils-with which frail human na
ture is furrounded ; and which nothing, but a full confidenceiin heaven,
and the -gofpel difpenfation,, can alleviate or remove. tea


But, as to the locality or circum{cription of the kingdom of darknefs, -  -
it is far otherwife to be confidered than-the common and vulgar idea of
it, which efteems the infernal habitation asa diftin@ chafm-or gulph ina:
certain place, cither above, under, or in the centre of, the earth, where

innu-


ie


OR [AS A’ RIOUolgG yh / 1689


fource from thé ftars,: and being fubjeét to a beginning and ending, may
be Jalicited ‘and biought into league with magicians and witches; and
ean'alfo inform them of many wonderful and occult properties in nature,
~ andof:many important concerns relating to the ftate and affairs of men‘in’
this terreftrial world. This defcription of fpirits is faid to occupy va-’
rious places. of the earth ; as woods, mountains, waters, air, fiery flames,’
clouds, ftars, mines, fea- “Hioudl: ancient buildings and ruins, and places
of; the flain. . They are capable of hunger, grief, paffion, and vexation,

being in fome meafure temporal, and compounded of the moft {piritual
part of the elements, into which they are eventually refolved, as ice into’
water; and have been more or lets: celebrated by hiftorians and poets in’
all ages of the world. ouiad.,


‘There are emi another fpecies, called igneous or fiery fpirits,
that:inhabit the burning mountains of Hecla, Vefuvius, Aitna, Poconzi,
&c. which!fome authors have affirmed to be infernal fpirits, and damned
fouls,:'who, for a term of years,/are confined to thefe burning mountains
for their iniquities.. Butthe mott received opinion is, that they are of a

middle vegetative nature, and perifhable, which, at the diffolution of the |
media natura, {hall be again reduced into their primary ether. And from
natural caufes it may: be eafily demonftrated, that there is great corref-
_ pondence betwixt fuch fubftances and the element of fire, by reafon of
the internal flagrant and central life proceeding from the quinteflence of!
one only element, which upholds them in motion, life, and nourifhment;
as ‘every naturalyand fupernatural being is upheld ‘and maintained out of
the felf-fame root from whence.it:had its origitial. So the angels feed
upon the.celeftial manna ;) the devils: upon | the fruits of hell, which is’
natural to the propenfity of ‘their appetites ; the aftral fpirits: upon the
fource of the ftars,:and: the gas of .the airs upon a‘principle that every
thing i is nourifhed: by its:mother,.as i fans: at’the breaft, or chickens frort’
the» égg,.&c. «The: proper‘nourifhment of fiery: fpirits, however, is
radical heat, and the influence of the airy region; nor is'it to be wondered
at that they dre fo much delighted with the fiery quality,’ in regard of
theirjaffinity and: near approach ‘to ‘the! effence'and quality of infernal!
{pivits or dewils, whofe ftate and beingiis altogether ‘damnable and deplor-
able; : for, although they have not?the! ability: of ‘attaining either‘ the
heavenly: or infernal.quality,) by reafon' that’ they. ‘are: utterly void of the
innermoft centre, and: may. be rather termed monfters than rational ani-
mals, yet, becaufe they are compounded of the outermott principle, fuch
is their innate affinity:and unity withthe dark world or infernal kingdom,
that they often become the devil’s agents, to propagate’ his ‘works upon
the face of ithe!earth: cPhussby the infligation’ of infernal {pirits, ‘and’
cNo. 58. 1270) their


1084, A Ny bLcL.Ucs TR AT FON ;


their own promptitude, they often, terrify men with nocturnal vifions:;
provoke melancholy. people to fuicide; tempt drunkards and incendiaries:
to fet houfes on fire, to burn thofe who are in them, and allure carelefs
fervants and, others to found and incautious fleep, that fuch unlucky
accidents might happen ; befides innumerable other ways they have of
executing the devices of iniquitous {pirits through malicious inftigations,.
or fecret ftratagems, projected for the overthrow and deftruction of mortab
men; efpecially when. the work to. be effected by. the devil is too hardifor
his. fubtle and fpiritual, nature: to, effe&, Becaufe: the fame belongs to the: .
outward fource or principle to, which thefe: dubious, {pirtts: more! imme~,
diately belong. For, being compounded of the: fiery element, they-are
moft.officious in this kind of fervice, being fuch as. the antecedent mats:
ter hath fufficiently demonftrated’; but, according to their different ranks
and orders, fome of, them) are much more inveterateand maliciousin their
agency than. the reft,. Thefe,.as well as.everyother kind of aftrali{pirits,:
are more or lefs obfequious to, the kingdom» of: darknefs ; andi the devil,
it feems, can effect little or nothing, without their affiftance in: this, out»
ward or elementary. world, upon the paflions: off mankind); \becaufe their:
bodies aré too crude for the direct conveyance of their influence; ‘either:
in dreams, charms, vifions, raptures, or other: foft and alluring means.
Thefe fiery fpirits. are likewife apt for conjuration, and: areialways. ready:
at the call of the magician, for the! execution of any: cruelvor: diabolical;
purpofe. ror


Diftin& from fiery {pirits are a {pecies. which: properly! belong,tovthe: .
metallic kingdom, abiding.in mountains,. caves, dens, .deeps, hiatas or!
chafms of the earth, hovering-over hidden gold, tombs, vaults,» and: fexi
pulchres of the dead. Thefe fpirits, are. termed ‘by the: ancient: philo-:
fophers. ** protectors of hidden treafure,” from:-a: principle or quality:in:
their nature whence they.exceedingly delight in:mines! of gold and: filver,.
and places of hidden treafure; but aré violently inimical to man, and en-!
vy. his -benefit or accommodation in the difcovery thereof} ever haunting
thofe places where money is concealed, and retaining: malevolent and
poifonous influences to blaft the lives and:limbs:of thofe|who attempt to:
make fuch difcoveries; and therefore-extremely. dangerous: for magicians |
to exorcife or call them up. It istecorded:in. feveralrof the ‘ancient Bris.
tifh authors, that Peters, the celebrated»magici2n of Devonthire, together.
with his aflociates, having exorcifed one of thefe:malicious:fpirits to:cons.
duct them toa {ubterranean.vault, wherea confiderable quantity of treafure:
was known, to be. hid, they;hadino-fooner quitted the :magicocircle; thami
they were inftantaneoufly crushed into.atoms, as it were in the twinkling:
of an eye, And.in, this, particular. we have too manyp fatal examples:

upon


OFTARNTYROL GG ¥. 1085


upon record, of the fudden deftruction of thofe who by magical fpells
had. called upon this-defcriptiom of fpirits, for the purpofe: of difcovering:
hidden gold; which examples feem to prove, that thefe {pirits have more
affinity with the infernal than with the aftral hierarchy; and that they”
are the diabolical, agents, of Mammon bringing about all the evils of this
world, which {pring from aminfatible luft after gold ; whence the faying”
im feripture, that'** we cannot ferve\God and Mammon,” and that ‘* if 7s ea-
fier for'acamel to pafs through the eye of .a needle than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdour of heaveni;.” hyperbolically-fpoken, in reference to the


innumerable fins:aind:; wickednefs committed by’ mankind, for the fake of


temporary wealthiandviches! Hence too a'reafon offers, why, of all other
{ubordinate fpirits, thefeare the moft| pernicious to mortal men. The na-
ture of. them) 1s-fo-violent,:that-im thechiftories’of the gold‘and filver mines’
abroad,| it.is: recorded that whole: companies of labourers have been de
ftroyed. by them at:once ;.and thattheirdelightis in tormenting, killing,


and, ecru(hing to:death, thofe who moft greedily luft after and feek for fuch'
treafures. The richeft and largeft: filver: mine in. Germany was haunted.


by one of thefe fpirits, who fometimes ufed to appear in the fhape of an
he-goat,,, with golden, horns, ipufhing: down the workmen with uncom-
mon}! violence';. and at; othersiini the fhape of a horfe, breathing fiery
flamesiand-peftilential,vapoursat hisnoftrils, till, by:continual defttuCtion,
fear, andyalarm, they!were obliged to defift from working’ that mine'any
longer ;, and it continues-fhut to this day.


Thus for, we have confidered: {pirits Subordinate; ‘or fueh as properly


belong.to. the elementary or outward world. We will now take a view’
of the.infernal {pirits or devils, and damned’ fouls; which'are tobe clafled:
according to their refpeCtive ranks and orders, exactly correfpondent or-
oppofite.to the choirs and ‘hierarchies of the angels, or bleffed {pirits, in:


heaven, 255 09


The.origin of, devils and infernal fpirits, as? fcripturé'réevelation hath!
confirmed, and eftablifhed, . proceeded: from: confpiracy and rebellion’ in.
heaven, under the arch-fiend Lucifer, who-was originally of the higheft
order, of the angelicshoft ; becaufe itis written? of him, ** Iz Cherudine-
‘extentus; protegeus, pofut te: monte fantto Der’—Bxtended upon’ a Che-
rubim, and protecting, I have put thee in the holy mountain of God. And? .
further, becaufe it is alfo written, ‘* Quomodo enim mane oriebaris, Luci-.


Ser’ —For then-didft thou;rife in the morning, O¥ Lucifer: Various are


the opinions. as \to.the:.exprefs occafion of his ‘fall’ Some’ fay, it was for:
fpeaking; thefe ,-wordss1i % Ponem fedem meam in aquilone, fimilis ero


s bh pLFtiao


1086 ANY DEW OST ROA TAO N


altifime”—1 will put.my feat in the North) and P'willbeclike the moft
High. Others affirm, thatit proceeded from his wtterly refujing felicity,
and holding the blefings of heaven in derifion. Some again, betaufe be afferted
that all his firength proceeded from bimfetf, and' not from God.’ Others
becaufe he attempted.to effet that by bimfelf and bis own Brengih; which was
alone the proper gift of God. ‘Other opinions fay}: Lihat bis condemnation
proceeded.from bis challenging the place of the, Mefiabs whilf? others infilt,
that it was becaufe he smpioufly..challengéed the omnipotency of God, with
whom be claimed equal power. Bat. the,Chriftianschurehn all countries
agree, that it was for all thefe-crimes put together;/and many more ; ex
clufive of his drawing afide the allegianceof other: angels, and fuborhing
the whole of his own -legion.in con{piracys rtovattempt to ipluck the Al!
mighty from his'Throne; whereupon a dreadfuliconflict enfued between’
Michael the archangel with the heavenly hoft on one fide, and Lucifer
and his-rebellious tribes on the other, which ended:an their total. extérmi-:


the dark abodes ofthe infernal; regionsiise7sl brs ovo sat gor


4 (i


c


Here, began the kingdom-of darknefs;'and the devil's enmity to:imortal!


{tate of probation, capable of arriving: to the: fame‘deeree ‘of excellence, '
and of filling up the vacancy in heaven,: ocedfioned’by the: fall of Lucifer’
and his legions, it excited his envy ftill the morej°and: laid the ground of
that ceafele(s warfare, which, from the fall of Adam, to the prefent hour,
-hath exifted between the king of darknefs and the: fouls of mén.'” And-
though this conflict is not conducted. by outward'and vifible means, ‘yet
it is effected by fecret {nares and ambufcades,: which take'ts at unawares, ’
and when we,are moft off oun: guard. ‘For the: devil; while we feed"
allures.us to fin by gluttony ; heithrufteth luft into our generation} and”
floth into our exercife ; into our converfation, envy, into our trafie!!
avarice ; into our correction, wrath; into our government, pride; he
putteth into our, hearts evil cogitations ;:and“into’our mouths, lies.
When we awake, he moveth us. to eviloworks; when we fleep, to evil?
and filthy dreams|; he provokes the. jocund'todafcivioufnefs, and the fad-
-to defpair ;..whence {pring the various evils with which fraib human'na.?
ture is furrounded ; and which nothing, but a-full confidence in heaven; ®
and the gofpel, difpenfation, can’ alleviate iorjremove.1)) 2201) Oh uid


. Airy ‘my £2


_But, as to the locality or, cireumfcription ofithe kingdom of datknefs,
it is far otherwife to be confidered: than the! common and vulgar idea of’
it, which efteems the infernal habitation as a difttin& chafm or gulph’ ita!
certain.place, either above, under, or in the centre of, the earth, where
; | innu-


OVP TAs. of IR AOUL.0.161 y, 4 1084


ftonumerable devils and wicked fouls inhabit, and are perpetually feorched
and tormented with mareria/ flames of fire. This is the opinion which
the vulgar are naturally addicted and prone to believe. But, if we rightly
eonfider the kingdoms of heaven and hell, in refpect of each other, we
muft look upon the fimilitude of “ght and darkne/s in this outward world
which is not circumfcribed, nor feparate, as to locality, from one ano-~
ther; for, when the Sun rifes, the darknefs of the night difappears ; not
that it removes itfelf to fome other place or country, but the brightaefs
- of the light overpowers and {wallows itup, fo that, though it difappears,
yet it is as abfolutely there as the light itfelf. The fame fimilitude is
alfo to be confidered in the defcription of the habitations of good and evil
beings, that they are really in one another, yet not comprehended of one
another ; neither indeed can they be, for the evil fpirits, though they
fhould remove ten thoufand miles, yet are they in the fame quality and
fource, never able to find out or difcover where the kingdom of heaven is,
though it be really through and through with the dark kingdom; but
-inanother oppofite quality, which feparates and makes them eternal ftran-
gers to each other. A fimilitude hereof we have in the faculties of hu-
man life, confidered with refpect to the endowments of the foul in the
juft, and in the wicked ; for to be good, pure, and holy, is really pre-
fent as a quality in potentia with the depraved foul, although at that in-
ftant the foul be cloathed with abominations, fo that the eye which
fhould behold God, or goodnefs, is putout. Yet, if the foul would but
come out of itfelf, and enter into another fource, or principle, it might
come to fee the kingdom of heaven within itfelf, according to the Scrip-
ture and Mofes, ‘* the word is nigh thee, in thy beart, and in thy mouth.”


_ True itis, that the devils, or fallen angles, cannot all alike manifett
themfelves in this aftral world ; becaufe the nature of fome of them ap-
proaches nearer to the external quality than others ; fo that, although pro-
perly the very innermoft and outermoft darknefs be their proximate
abode, yet they frequently flourifh, live, move, and germinate, in the airy
region. But, according to their fiery nature, it is very difficult for them
to appear in this outward world, becaufe there is a whole principle or.
gulph betwixt them, namely, they are fhut up in another quality or ex-.
iftence, fo that they can with greater difficulty find out the being of this’
world, or come with full prefence intoit, than we can remove into the
kingdom of heaven or hell with our intelle€tual man. | Fory if it were
otherwife, and the devils had power to appear unto mortals as they lift,
how many towns, cities, &c. would be deftroyed, and burnt to the
ground ! how many infants would be pluckt away in their innocency, and
unoffending creatures be deftroyed by their malicious power? Indeed
No, 58. 3 22.0 e few


1088. ANvELLUSTRA‘TION


few or none would efcape with their lives, or poffeffions, or found minds 3
whereas now all thefe enjoyments are free amongft mankind; which
proves, that it is extremely hard for infernal {pirits to appear in the
third principle of this world ; and as difficult as for a man to live under
water, or fithes on the fhore. Yet we muft grant, that, when the imagi-
nations and earneft defires of the wicked have ftirred up the centre of hell
within themfelves, then the devil hath accefs to this world in their
defires, and continues here to vex and torment them, fo long as the
ftrength of thofe defires remain, which was the firft attractive caufe.


The caufe.of the paucity of appearances of evil fpirits in thefe days,,
is the fulnefs of time, and the brightnefs of Chriftianity, difpelling the
mifts of herefy and idolatry, asthe Sun doth the fogs, which vanith on:
its appearance ; not by any violence or compulfion, but from a caufe im-
planted in the nature of things and their oppofites. Even fo the king-
dom of light, as it overfpreads the foul in power and dominion, clofes.
up the centre of darknefs, and {catters the influences of the devil before it,,
who becomes as it were entirely pafive as to the works and will of man.
In the time of the law, when the wrath and jealoufy of the Father had.
the dominion in the kingdom of nature, infernal {pirits had more eafy ac-
eefs to mankind than they now have ; for, before the incarnation of Chrifty,
the anger of God was unappeafed, and had more dominion over the foul
of man, which was then at greater diftance from the divine goodnefs ;
confequently the devils could with more facility {pring up in the element
of wrath, and manifeft themfelves in this outward principle; becaufe
the very idea and bafis of hell is founded on the wrath of God, which is
the only channel by which the devil is conveyed into this world. So,
when the miracles of Chrift began to manifeft themfelves in the world,.
the multiplicity of diabolical appearances, and poffeffed with the devil,
began infenfibly to decay and vanifh. It is true, that the greateft inftances
known of the temptations and power of Satan, were exercifed in that {pace
of time betwixt the incarnation and crucifixion of our Saviour ; yet it is as
certain, that the devil knew he had but a fhort time longer to uphold his.
kingdom here, and therefore he employed all his ftrength and forces to
torment thofe captive and miferable fouls to whom Chrift:came to preach.
deliverance. But, after the partition-wall was broken down, and the vail
of Mofes, and the wrath of God, were removed, there was a fenfible and
vifible decay of Satan’s power in the world; fo that, though it be pof-
fible, even in thefe days, by a renunciation of the falvation of Chrift,
and by becoming a difciple of the devil, to hold correfpondence with,
ar to be wholly poffefied by, him ; yet thefe things happen fo rarely, and.

require ©


OF ASTROLO-GY. 1089


require fo depraved a ftate of mind and condu, that, whenever they are
pretended fo to be, there is great room to doubt the truth of {uch affer-
tions, though apparently well authenticated.


But, notwithftanding that the coming of Chrif hath thus curtailed
the power of the devil over all Chriftian countries, yet fuch nations as
have never embraced the Chriftian faith, but purfue the ancient fupertftition
and idolatry, are ftill deluded and bewitched by him, becaufe, the centre
of truth and light never having been awakened in them, the power of
Satan eafily prevails to feduce them to worfhip things vifible, inftead of
the true God:, for, where moft darknefs and fuperftition is found, whe-
ther in religion or perfonal underftanding, there his power is always moft
predominant. Thus it is now with the miferable inhabitants of the
greateft part of Afia, and the uncultivated and ferocious parts of Africa
and America; yet we have hopes that the goodnefs of Providence, in his
own fit and appointed feafon, will, through fome favourable channel,
communicate the light of the gofpel to thofe miferable beings, whereby
the fhocking idea of feeding on human flefh, of devoting one another
to deftru€tion and flavery, and of purfuing the infinuations and works
of the devil, may be totally abolifhed, and every part of the habitable
globe be united in the acknowledgment of one God, of one Saviour, and
of one liberal, candid, and impartial, Chriftian perfuafion.


As to the different thapes and forms of the devils, it is fuggefted by
Scripture, and admitted by all writers upon the fubject, that they were
anfwerable in monftrofity and hideoufnefs to the fuperior rank they held
in heaven, and to the enormity of the offence which was the caufe of their
fall. Thus in Revelation, Lucifer, as the leader and prime apoftate, is
termed the great dragon, and king of the devils. And hence it is con~
ceived, that thofe who belonged to the fupreme hierarchies in heaven,
and were the foremoft to rebel, were, immediately on their expulfion
from the realms of blifs, transformed from angels of {plendour and glory,
to devils in the fhape of dragons, crocodiles, ferpents, tygers, and the
like; fo that the moft perverfe and potent among the devils poflefs the
moft ugly and frightful of the beaftial fhapes, but a thoufand times more
terrific and frightful than can poflibly be conceived from the moft fero-
cious of thofe animals. In this confideration, however, there is a mate«.
rial diftinction to be made between the apoftate angels and the damned
fouls, which have deferted God.in this world, and become inhabitants of
the infernal regions in the other. For the moft part, thefe unhappy crea-
tures retain the human fhape, but with afpects difmal and melancholy,
and expreflive of the unfgeakable orments they are doomed to fuffer; for

3 in


1090 ANY ELD US FT RAT L-OON

in themfelves they reft not, ‘neither are they capable of the fhortnefs or
duration of time, nor‘of the alternate courfes of day and night. The fins
and wickednefs they committed in this life 1s the fource of their conti-
nual torment, which gnaws and corrodes them, rifing and boiling up
continually:in their minds, without reft or intermiffion. ‘All the refri-
geration they have, is by intercourfe with the'devils, when the height of
wickednefs ftirs them up to blafphemies againft God, and towering up
above heaven and omnipotence in their adulterated and deluded imagina-.
‘tions, which, figuratively fpeaking, ferves as {port and paftime among ft
one another, but of a fhort and certain duration. Not that this is of the
f{malleft advantage, or the leaft mitigation of their torments ;° for pain dif-
continued returns the greater; neither would vexation be vexation, if
-it had no refpite nor forbearance that the contrary might be alfo manifetft,
 nam-contrarta juxta fe pofita majus elucefcunt. Yet is their torment exceed-
ingly different; fo that the fuffering of one in refpect to that of another
is but a mere dream or phantafy.—I mean,’ amongft the damned fouls,
and not the devils; for the pain and torment of the devils is greater than
the greateft of the loft fouls by many million degrees, according to the
courfe of nature and reafon.; for that which falls higheft fuffers moft,
and optima corrupta fiunt peffima.


But wonderful and manifeft are the torments. which loft fouls en-
dure, according to the various lufts and licentioufnefs they indulged in
whilft they lived:upon earth, or died in without expiation or repentance.
The cruel murderers, who died in the boiling fource of blood and envy,
fuffer the greateft torment, becaufe. they are continually murdering in
their imaginations, and feeking, like dreaming men, to effe@t what the
want of the correfpondent organ will not permit them to do. For, ac-
cording to fcripture, and the wifeft authors upon this fubject, the prin-
cipal torment and mifery of damned fouls proceeds from their continu-
ally wifhing and willing; whence they generate ideas and reprefenta-
tions, founded in impoflibility, which is the: fource of their continual
aggravation, difappointment, and mifery. By the fame reafoning, thofe
who died in luft and gluttony, lafcivioufnefs and inebriety, are over-_
whelmed with correfpondent torments, though much inferior to the firft.
They are continually imagining their former pleafures in the magia as in
a dream, which, when they awake, torments them cruelly; as with us,
when we awake from a frightful dream, and find it is only a dream, our
pleafure is more fufceptible—whereas, with them, the cafe is reverfed;
for, as their time is {pent in eternal torment, fo their dreams of blifs,
when-they awake, or become more fenfible to their mifery, but aggra-
vates their misfortunes, and gives freth poignancy to the torments they —

endure.


(OOK Ae F ROL OG ¥, fogr


endure. Such fouls in whom the boiling fource of anger and revenge
hath had a dwelling or receptable here, if they depart this life in their

fins, do likewife endure a moft dreadful kind of torment, which arifes
continually as a biting worm and hungry fire, to double and accumulate

an excefs of defpair upon them. Thofe alfo, who reigned in pride and

oftentation upon earth, treading under foot the meek and humble ia
heart, are tortured with the utmoft reverfe of their defires, which are ever

uppermoft in their infatuated imaginations. They are ever feecking to.
pull the Almighty from his throne, and towering up in the pride of
their hearts, hoping to gain the kingdom of heaven to infult and boatt in.

But the quality of the beatific fource is utterly occult and eftranged from

them, fo that they can never find, tafte, hear, nor fee, it, though it be.
wrapt round and round with their own peculiar fource and principle,

This adds eternally to their mifery, and rifes upon their fenfes with

horrible pangs and bitter gnawings, like the irkfome and vexatious pains —
andachs of man’s body, only a thoufand times more acute and infuppor-
table. The nature alfo of their habitation is fuch, that their punith-

rent is exceedingly aggravated that way ; becaufe the extremity of the
four elements is there converted into a whole principle of wrath and ter-
ment. The excefs of coldand heat, drought and moifture, are alternate-
ly raging amongft them by intercourfe ; nor is there any light or luftre
within their courts, but that which is emitted from their fiery eyes, or
flaming noftrils, as a deadly glance.or glimmering, which ferves only to
render the momentary glance of their miferable habitation ten times more
difgufting and intolerable. And, as every kind of being feeds upon fome-
thing. proper toits own nature or element, whether it be plant, animal,
or metallic produdtion, fo the devils are neither deftitute of meat nor
drink, according: to their own kingdom and ‘quality, having fruits
{pringing up and growing before them, of hellith, four, and poi-
fonous, natures, which are real and palpable to them, and not imagi-
rary or typical, though to us magical and invifible. Neither is this
at all to be wondered at, if we conlider the nature of man’s foul in media
natura; for, if it feed not upon the internal and fubfantial Word, which
is the very head of life itfelf, it mutt and will of neceflity ruminate on
fomething elfe, viz. the fruits of iniquity ;: which it takes in’ and {wal-
lows up, even-as an ox drinks the water; fo that to the foul the fin be-
comes-palpable, glutting, and fatiating, from whichit never can be freed,
but by works of expiation and repentance. Alfo, in the aftral fource,
when called up by magical f{pells and incantations, or otherwife, they are
not deftitute of food, but receive the influences of the air and water ifito
their /mibus, which they convert into food, according to their own poi-
fonous, quality ; as of {weet and wholefome herbs the filthy toads and:
other venomous reptiles form their poifon, converting them into a nature


No. 58. Pare 7 like


1092° AN. 13 L:U‘S.-F ROAST Y30UN


like their own. And*fo likewife thefe infernal (pirits, confidered in re»
fpeft of the four elements, have a tone or language peculiar to themfelves
which they exercife and {peak one amongft another, as mortals do ; but
they have utterly loft the dignity of their founds according to the eternal.
nature, and are totally corrupted in their.pronunciation or dialect, fince
they fell from their firft celeftial glory ; fo that their articulation is harfh,.
doleful, fierce, and terrible, like the fruits they feed upon and place:
they dwell in. This deprivation is very apparent in the kingdom of
this world, in the divided languages of every region, according to the con-
ftellation under which they: are fituated ; the true and magical language
of nature, notwithftanding the induftrious lexicographers, {till remain-
ing hidden from the knowledge of every country in the habitable world.


Thus far I have endeavored to illuftrate the caufes, natures; and pu-
nifhments, of infernal fpirits; which, notwithftanding, is a fubje& fo.
iptricate and copious in itfelf, by reafon of the variety of their qualities.
in the fource of darknefs, wherein they live, move, eat, breathe, and in-
habit, having qualities, aCtions, and paffions, innumerable, and which are
to mankind almoft utterly unknown. and incomprehenfible. So. that to.
attempt an ample demonftration of the matter would require deeper. {pe-
culation.than the fubje@t deferves, or than Lam matter of ;, particularly.
as the inhabitants of that gloomy kingdom. are never in one regular flay,
continuance, or property, but from one hour to another are continually
floating and changing; like the fwiftnefs of the winds, or the gliding |
along of running waters, which pafs away as a thought, and are no more
remembered. So it is with the devils and damned {pirits in that lachry-
mable ftate of darknefs, where their exiftence is a continual anguifh and
torment, fhifting from the pangs of one ferrow to the bitternefs of ano=
ther, unto all eternity !


_ Now according to the fpirit of Chriftian. Revelation, there hath: been.
always oppofed to the machinations of the devil. and his imps upon earth,
who ‘* go about like roaring sons. feeking whom they may devour,” a certain,
defcription of good and holy fpirits,. whofe province it is to watch over
the affairs of men, and to guard them from the invifible affaults of the
devil; exclufive of the miniftration of God’s holy angels; which hath
heen manifefted in a thoufand different inftances in Scripture; but whofe
appearances and manifeftations to the eyes of mortal man, never has.
been, nor can be, permitted, but on the moft important difpenfa-
tions of divine Providence. The received opinion however is, as
to the former do¢trine, that there is, according to the difpofition of the
tind or foul, a good or evil Genzus, that accompanies invifibly every. per~

| a,


MORAG Reet: .0.659. 9 A! soa:


fon born into the world. Their office is principally that of forewarning
the perfons they attend of any imminent impending danger, fometimes

by inward inftintt, or by outward ap perenet and fometimes by dreams

in the night. Thefe Geni change their quality and office as the perfon

or party change their's; if from good we degenerate to evil, then by de-

grees the good Genius is eftranged from us, and’an evil Demon naturally

fucceeds, according to that fympathy of things, wherein each draws af-

ter it that which is its like. There have been likewife defined, by the

learned Doctors and Rabbi's who have written on this intricate fubject,.
feven good angels, who watch.over and fuperintend the general affairs of

mankind, and who are ever ready to. forward, by intellectual affociation, ,
mental inftigation, or {trong nofturnal vifionary manifeftation, the gene-.
ral profperity and fuccefs of all men’s affairs, who are governed by the laws

of integrity and religion, and who are, by fome. one or other of thefe

means, allured or prompted to fuch particular conduct or determination,

as. fhall tend ultimately to. their honour and preferment,. to the good of

fociety, and to the glory of God and true religion, which is the grand

office of thefe feven good fpirits to promote. And oppofed to thefe are

feven evil Spirits or Demons proper to the-infernal world, whofe oftice is

to infufe evil into thofe men’s minds who are naturally fo addifted, and

who never fail to join in aflociation, though invifibly, with depraved

perfons of every defcription, whofe paffions they influence, and whofe de-

fires they lead to the commiflion of all the abominations of .this world,

The names of the feven good angels or {pirits are, 1. “fubanladace, diftin~
guifhed in the dominion of thrones as the appointed guardian of all public

and national enterprizes, where the good of fociety and the honour of
God are unitedly concerned. He is delineated in all the brightnefs of a

celeftial meflenger, bearing a flaming fword, girded about the loins, wita

an helmet on his head; and this.is the magical character by which he is’
diftinguifhed, and which is worn by many as a lamin round the neck,

for a prefervative again{t putrid infection and fudden death,


The fecond is Pab-/-Pab, one of the celeftial powers, whofe. peculiar
office it is to guard and forewarn fuch as are virgins and uncontaminated
youth againft all the evils of debauchery and proftitution; and to elevate
the mind toa love of virtue, honour, and revealed religion. He perfoni-
fies the character of an illuftrious angel, of a bright but moft compla~
cent countenance; and is known by the following magical fymbo},

3 3 : which.


-FOG4 ANAL Las FR AST POON
which is worn about the neck of virgins as a proteftion from all the af.


faults. of evil demons, and.is faid to be infallible againft the powers of
eduction. |


The third is Na/-gah, devoted to the protection of thofe who “are af-
faulted by evil fpirits or witches, and whofe minds are funk in fearfxl
and melancholy apprehenfions of the affaults of the devil, and the power
of death. His proper office is to fortify the mind, and to lead the fenfes
to a contemplation of the attributes of God, and the joys of heaven, the
reward of all good works. His appearance is reprefented as perfectly ce~
Jeftial, having a crown of gold. upon his head, with a fhield and {pear in
his hands, for the protection of thofe over whom he prefides: The fol-
owing is his magical charaéter, which is worn round the neck as a pre«
fervation againit witchcraft and fuicide.


‘The fourth is Maynom, one of the Powers who hath the ability of fub-
fervient adminiftration and protection; that is, at one and the fame time to’
‘be prefent with many. His prefence muft be fought by humility and
-prayer.—The fifth:good Genius is Gaonim, an angel of celeftial bright-
nefs, who hath the peculiar ability of rendering his pupil invifible to
any evil fpirits whatfoever, as often as attacked by them.—The fixth is
Halanu, the guardian and promoter of all good and great ideas, by whom
Bezaliah and Aboliab were divinely infpired for the firu@ure of the taber-
nacle.—The feventh is Ramabh-umi, the genius of geometrical propor-
tion, and the power of numbers; the fecrets and extent of which are


not yet half known, even to the,moft favoured of thofe whofe capacities .
are enlightened by his fuperigr aid.


Now the office of the feven evil’demons or fpirits is to counteraét and
deftroy the effect of the good; for, as the power and capacity of the
good proceeds from the omnipotence of God in the quality of heaven, fo
is the force of the evé/ Geniz, in the infernal quality, made correfpondent
thereto, from a principle of contraries; for, itis to.be noted, that thefe .
feven evi/ angels, before their fall, enjoyed the fame places and degrees of
glory that now belong to the feven good angels or Genii; fo that, as


their


TOPE SAYS OF AR SOUL TOAG" Y. 1095
their office is to inftruéct and allure mankind to the purfuit of every thing
that is good, great, virtuous, and honourable, it is the bufinefs of the
other’, to tempt and feduce the mind to a purfuit of whatever is vile,
vicious, and abominable, and that may be inftrumental in extending the
kingdom of darknefs and the power of the devil. The names of ‘thefe
feven evil {pirits or Genii ftand upon record as follow; 1. Panalcarp, in
the hikenefs of a crocodile with two heads. 2. Baratron, appearing like
a magician in a folemn prieftly habit. 3. Sondennab, in the -caparifon
and fimilitude of an Indian hunt{man. 4. Grezzmedal, in the fawning
fhape of a large fpaniel dog. 5. Ballifargon, in the fimilitude of a cove-
tous mifer, luiting after gold; he is the grand enticer to thieving and
robbery, and ufually brings his followers to an ignominious and deftruc-
tive’end. 6. Morborgran, who, under various likenefles of a friendly
ferving man, induces the worft examples of hypocrify and deceit. —This
deemon, itis faid, was the conftant attendant of Judas Ifcariot. The 7th
is Barman, ready to enter into league with any conjuror, witch, or wiz-
zard; but who moft commonly pofleffes the foul of whomfoever he is in
league with. Thefe good and evil {pirits, it feems, are the moft eafy to
be invoked or called up, agreeable to the defires and fituation of the ma-
gician’s mind and inclination, becaufe they are moft near and familiar to
the actions and purfuits of men, and officially attendant upon them.


Different from every fpecies of all the foregoing orders of {pirits, are
the ghofts and apparitions of deceafed perfons, which have been known
for many years to furvive and continue; particularly where the deceafed
yerfon hath departed this life in difcontent, melancholy, or unquiet mind;


for in thefe cafes they have been often known to return again, and with-_


out a defire of caufing terror and alarm to houfes and families, feek only
for an opportunity of difburthening themfelves, that at length they may
come into’their defired reft. Such perfons as are fecretly murdered, or
that fecretly murder themfelves, are mof apt to appear again, wandering
near the place where the cataftrophe happened, till the radical moifture
of the body be totally confumed.. After which, according to the opinion
ef Parcelfus, and many other Jearned writers, they can appear no more,
but are refolved into their firft being or afrum, after a certain term of
years, when the bymidum radicale becomesexficcate and dried up, according
to the vigour or force of that firft attraction, which was the only caufe of
their returning. And hence was derived the cuftom of urns and funeral
piles amongft the Romans, who ufed to reduce the corpfes of their deceaf-
ed friends into afhes, left their ghofts fhould return and wander; which
it was fuppofed they could not do when the body was burnt, and all
moifture totally exterminated and confumed thereby.


No. 538. i12R The


+


.


a


A:


« >


1096 AN DAL Us TOR AAT ON


The manner and feafons wherein apparitions or ghofts appear are ag
yarious as they are uncertain. Sometimes, before the perfon to whom: «
they properly belong departs this life, they will by external vifible prefen-
tation of themfelves, forewarn him of the time or day wherein death fhall
approach him. Sometimes the apparition of a perfon will appear to its
beloved friend, hufband, wife, or relation, at many thoufand miles dif- |
tance, to acquaint them of its departure from this life, whilft otherwife
the party would be/totally ignorant of the event. And it has often been
known, that when no one individual of the kindred or family of the
deceafed perfon has been vifited or difturbed by it, or even made fenfible
of its appearing, yet to fome of its moft intimate or beloved acquaintance
it difcovers itfelf, and importunes them to perform fome ceremony or,
promife, that it may be admitted into reft. At other times it difcovers
fome treafure which was hidden by the deceafed party; or elfe fome
mutder which it had committed. But the moft frequent caufe of their
returning, is when the party himfelf hath been privately murdered; for
fuch is the poifonous malice and rancorous {pirit of murderers, that in-
nocent blood, thus inhumanly fpilt, crieth up to heaven, and the departed
fpirit cannot reft till the murder be made manifeft to the world, after
which difcovery it is received into reft. This is the reafon why, for
many years together, ghofts continue to be feen in one particular place,
ever watching for fit opportunity to difcover or make known the caufe
of its appearing ; but which is often attended with great difficulty and
delay, as well on account of the natural timidity of human beings, as for
want of the proper organs of corporeal voice and touch in. the {pirit,
which, being no part of their quality or effence, is procured with great
difficulty, and at beft but inarticulate, doleful, and in broken accents.
That this is true, the ufual manner of their appearance in a great mea-
fure proves; for all that they are able to effect, if they have been mur-
dered, .is to appear near the place where the body lies, and to-feem as if
they funk down or vanifhed in the fame; or elfe to appear in the form
of a murdered corpfe, with mangled body, and bleeding wounds, difhe~
velled hair, and convulfive countenance; but it is rarely known that
fach apparitions have plainly fpoken, or uttered, by words, either the
time and place of their murder, or the caufe, manner, or perfon’s name ;
unlefs the perpetration of the deed be marked with circumftances uncom-
monly horrid and execrable, in which cafes, lam told, the remembrance
of the fame doth fo much more powerfully operate upon the faculties of
the apparition, as to enable it to frame the fimilitude of a voice, fo as to
difcover the fact, and give fome leading clue to detect and punith the
wicked perpetrator.


But


QF PAGS ROL OIGPY IN Caden


But, to givea reafon why apparitions are fo feldom feen, and why thofe
which do appear cannot without man’s affiftance accomplith their defign,.
it may eafily be conceived, that all {pirits, or {piritual fubftances, of what
denomination foever, have their life, breath, and vital motion, in another


fource, very different from the elements of this external world; and con- :


fequently, that their manifeftation and continuance in this fource, when-
ever they appear, muft be both painful and irkfome ; as it would be for
aman to continue with his head under water, or for the inhabitants of
the watery element to be placed upondryland. But it is only the appari-
tions of perfons thus fuddenly taken off in their fins, or of fuch as die in
confirmed and habitual wickednefs, that, in the natural courfe of things,
are fubject to return into the terreftrial fource, and manifeft themfelves to
humaneyes. For if thofe who die in perfect peace, with minds divefted
by true repentence of every turbulent and{inful defire, enter at once into
their defired reft, without the poflibility of returning to this fublunary
world again, but in the capacity of angels of light, to execute the divine
miffions of the Deity.


In the writings of Plato, there are many ftrange and fingular reprefen-


tations of the apparitions or departed fouls of men, with accounts of their
torments and purgations, the caufe of their returning, what their na-
tureand employment are, their fubftance and property, food and nourifh-
ment; from all which that great philofopher and hiftorian was induced.
to believe, that, when the {pirits of good and exemplary men returned, it
was to perfons of a like habit and difpofition with themfelves, warning
them in their fleep of certain dangers or malevolent defigns forming
againft them; or elfe conveying heavenly doctrines, or ingenious inven-
tions to their mind, for the honour of religion or the good of focicty.
And in like manner, if the ghoft of a wicked and execrable character re-
turned, it was to thofe of a profligate and abandoned courfe of life, whom
it initigates, “afleep or awake, to the invention and exercife of notorious
villanies, to blafphemies againft.God, and to fedition, rapine, and mur-
der, amongft men. The.difciples of Pythagoras eftablifhed an opinion
not very different from this. They heid that there was .a continual
traduction and tran{migration,of fouls -from one -ftate to another, till
they became deified at laft; and that they frequently appeared ‘to’ per-
fons of the fame bent of mind.and inclination, to inftruct and forewarn
them. It was alfo the opinion of many great and wife philofophers, that
the Oracles of old proceeded,from fuch-{pirits as had been the ghofts or


departed fouls of wife and excellent men.; as.the oracle of Apollo, the.


oracle of Pallas, or Minerva, and the like. And, upon the whole, the


variety of examples throughout the writings of wife and learned men, in |


ald


096 AN MOLEL Ch TOR er OW


allages of the world, in all countries, and jn the facred as well ag the ss
profane hiftory, of the various appearances of ghofts and apparitions of


departed men, as well as of fpirits ef other kinds and properties, aftord’
the ftrongeft inducement to our belief of their exiftence and agency in
this fublunary world, than we fhould, in this more learned and enlight-
ened age, be otherwife fo willing to admit as an article 6f our belief.
But, feeing thefe things are abfolutely fo, we will now give fome particu-
jars of the mode and manner in which magicians and other profeffors of
the Black Art obtain an intercourfe.with them ; from which it will ap-
pear, that the Science of Aftrology is an art founded in philofophy and
mathematical demontftration, and totally unconnected with any agency,


bat what proceeds from fecond caufes under God and Nature; whereas ~


the other is a wicked confederation with evil fpirits, which ought to be


difcouraged and {upprefied by the utmoft exertions of the iron arm of the
law. ;


—


To the honour of the prefent century, we have had but few inftances
of perfons openly and publicly entering into compaét with {pirits, or of
profefiing to refolve queftions in futurity by means.of their agency; but,
prior to that era, it. was no uncommon thing ; and thofe, who had an op-
portunity of blending claflical learning and {cientifie {peculation with it,
were efteemed the moft elevated characters of their day, and were fre-.
quently bonoured with the protection and confidence of princes and other
men of rank and fortune. I fhall here mention a few of thofe charac-
ters who were eftecmed the moft conliderable magicians of their time,


Appollonius Tayaneus, in the time of the Emperor Domitian, from the
wonderful and miraculous things he did through the agency of fpirits,
added to fo great an appearance of fanctity and fimplicity, with which his
exterior was endowed by nature, occafioned all ranks of people to regard
him with a mixture of reverential awe and refpeét, Even the Chriftians,
who lived within the circle of his fame, thought him fomething more
than human, and looked up to him with confidence and efteem. From
a variety of circumitances, and accounts in different authors, it appears
that this fingular character had not only the faculty of knowing what
was tranfacting at many hundred miles diftance, but had the means alfo
of being conveyed almoft inftantaneoufly from one place to another,


where he was feen, known, and converfed with many of his acquain=
tance. Itis alfo recorded of him, that, at the inftant the Emperor Dow —


mitian was aflaflinated at Rome, he {poke of it ina public affembly at
Ephefus, and declared the mode and manner of his death ; which, upon
enquiry, was found to happen at the precife moment of time he {poke of
it, and in the exact manner he had defcribed.


Doster


aor


~ SS SS Ss SS —— i — se —a— aa


The Order Sf he LYypurad.


“AP parvo


ey


D DEE aoucheth his Srovn ts brought by Angelrcal .
Iinistry.


Ames, frup Brifiol.
4


PARACELSUS Receits fiom the Infpivation of Sparvis.


tap mas


OF ASTRGL OG Y. 1699


Doéflor Dee was another very extraordinary character of the fame clafs,
and a native of this ifland, He was not Only a famous magician, but a
‘great author, having written upwards of forty-eight different volumes,
the firft of which was publithed in 1594. A full account of his con-
yerfation and intercourfeawith. {pirits 1s now extant, written with his
~ own hand, and efleemed a very curious and fingular performance. His
‘company and acquaintance was much fought by the Emperor Charles V.
and by Ferdinand his brother; and, during his travels over the conti-
nent, he had not only every refpect and attention paid him, but his com-
pany was courted by all the learned and religious people wherever he
‘went. He was certainly one of the moft learned men of the age in
which he lived, and had collected a library of upwards of 4,000 volumes
~of curious and valuable writings, moftly upon phyfical, theological, and
occult, fubjeéts, which he had the misfortune to fee burnt by the fury of
a mob, who affailed his houfe, and confpired againft his life, under an
idea that by magical fpells and incantations he had altered the natural
courfe of the weather, and brought on ftorms, hurricanes, tempetts, and.
continual rain, in order to ruin the harveft, and deftroy the fruits of the
earth. Yet he bore the torrent and fury of this infatuated multitude |
with the greateft compofure, faying, ‘* They would fee their error fron
enough to treat him with greater kindnefs hereafter than their perfecution was
now cruel.” And fo ithappened ; for, having by means of his confederacy
with fpirits foretold and detected a fatal con{piracy againft his country,
he was then as much honoured and careffed as he had before been ftig-
matized and abufed by the hafty multitude. He wrote the mathematical
preface to Euclid’s Elements, and has left tables of the harmony and ex-
tent of numbers infinitely beyond the capacity of the prefent times, though
fo much more learnedand refined.


Edward Kelly was alfoa famous magician, and the companion and affo-
ciate of Dr. Dee, in. moft of his magical operations and exploits ; having
been brought in unifon with him (as the Doctor himfelf declares, in the
preface to his work upon the miniftration of {pirits) by mediation of the
angel Uriel. But Dr. Dee was undoubtedly deceived in his opinion,
that the {pirits which miniftered to him were executing the divine will,
and were the meflengers and fervants of the Deity. ‘Throughout his
Writings on the fubject, he evidently confiders them in this light, which
is {till more indifputably confirmed by the piety and devotion he invaria-
bly obferved at all times when thefe fpirits had intercourfe with him.
And further, when he found his coadjutor Kelly was degenerating into
the loweft and wortt {pecies of the magic art, for the purpofes of fraud
_ and avaricious gain, he broke off all manner of connexion with him, and
No. 59. i2/f4 would


TI0O AN LELUS TRATION


would never after be feen in his company. But it is believed, that the-
doctor, a little before his death, became fenfible that he had been im-=
pofed upon by thefeinvifible agents, and thatall their pretences of acting
under the aufpices of the angel Uriel, and for the honour and glory of —
God, was but. mere hypocrify, and the delufions of: the devil. Kelly, -
being thus rejected and difcountenanced, by the doctor, betook: himfelf
to the meaneft and moft vile practices of the magie art; in all which pur
fuits, money and the works of the devil appear to have been his chief
aim. Many wicked and abominable tranfactions are recorded of hém,.
which were performed by witchcraft, and the mediation of infernal {pi-.
rits ; but nothing more curious, or more apropos to the prefent fubject;.
than what is mentioned by Weaver, in his Funeral Monuments. He
there records, that Edward Kelly the magician, with one Paul Waring,.
who atted in capacity of companion and affociate in all his conjurations,.
went together to the Church-yard of Walton Ledale, in the country of |
Lancafter, where they, had information of a perfon being:interred;) who
was fuppofed to have hidden or buried a confiderable fum: of money, and
to have died without difclofing to any perfon where it was depofited.
They entered the church-yard exactly at twelve o'clock at night; and,.
having had the grave pointed out to them the preceding day, they ’exor-
cifed the fpirit of the deceafed by magical fpells and incantations, till it
appeared before them, and not only fatished their wicked defires.and en«
quiries, but delivered feveral ftrange prediétions concerning: perfons in:
that. neighbourhood, which were literally and exactly fulfilled. It was.
vulgarly reported of Kelly, that he outlived the time of his compact: with:
the devil, and was.feized at-midnight, by fome infernal {pirits, who car=: .
ried him off in the fight of his own wife and children, at. the inftant he
was meditating a mifchievous fcheme againft. the minifter of his parithy.
with whom he was greatly-at-enmity.


The character of Mahomet is too well known throughout all the world,:
as the inftitutor of the Turkifh Alcoran, to need. much comment from
mein this place. It is fufficient if I only remark, that all his wonderful
miracles were wrought by the aid and confederacy of familiar. {pirits,
which -he called the miniftration of angels from heaven, from whence he:
pretended to have been fent, to perform the commands.of the Deity, and.
to correct and reform the manners and religion of mankind. .He had: |
the peculiar addrefs to eftablith this idea amongtt his cotemporaries, and:
to lay the foundation of the prefent faith at Conftantinople, and through-.
out the vaft extent of the Turkith territory. rf


Roger Bacon was another very famous affociate.with familiar fpirits, and. -
performed many aftonifhing exploits through their means. He was born
ag:


| OF CASTOR OL O: G Y.°: 1101
at:Ilchefter, in Somerfetfhire, where he ftudied philofophy, alchemy, and


aftrology ; and wrote feveral learned and ingenious books, the manu-
{cripts of which are now preferved as valuable curiofities in the Britith
' Mufeum: JI attempted to make fome interefting extracts from them, for
. the further amufement and information of my readers in this part of my
work ;. but Iwas: prevented from going on with my plan, under an idea
that the information it would convey might be productive of mifchiev-
ous-confequences to fociety, by putting too much in the power of evil-
minded and vindictive men. -


Paracelfiuis was.a great cabalift, phyfician, aftrologer, and magician, and
appears to have been intimately acquainted with all the fecret and occult
properties of nature. He was the firft we know of whoever treated upon
animal magnetijm; and his performances in that line were fuch as to
aftonith the world, and to draw upon him the united gratulations of the
difeafed.and infirm, His method, notwithftanding it is fo-clearly laid
down by himfelf,. and demonftrated by a variety of pleafing examples in
his works, has lain dormant till the prefent time; and now it begins
again, under the fuccefsful endeavours of a few perfevering individuals,
to convince mankind that the fecret and occult properties of nature are
not yet half known or underftood ; nor their advantages received with
that thankfulnefs-and regard, which ought inceffantly to be poured forth
to the great Author of our being, for the bleflings that may fo eafily be
derived from them. This was the opinion and nearly the words of Para-
celfus himfelf, who hath been recorded by all our biographers as a
learned, judicious, and ingenious, philofopher. Yet his having been fo
much addicted to magical rites and ceremonies, and having had familia-.
rity with fpirits.and devils, and performed. fo many. wonderful conjura-
tions through their means, caufed. him to have been ever {uppofed to |
have done by the agency of fpirits what was really. the true-and- genuine
effects.of nature only. iW. :


As to the particular forms, manner, method, rites, ceremonies; confe-:
crations, time, place,.and ability, requifite to call up and enter into com-
pact or familiarity with fpirits, it is neither fafe nor prudent, nor con- |
fiftent with the well-being of fociety in: general,. that I fhould dwell fo
extenfively upon it, or give fuch explanations, as to puta weapon into the
hands of the blood-thirfty or revengeful, to defpite their enemies or neigh-
bours, or to enable thofe, who are prone to fuch dealings from idle curio-
fity, completely to put in execution this fpecies of league with the devil
or his fubordinate agents; which is as ftrittly forbidden by the word of
God as by the laws of the land, Let it fuffice, therefore, that I only

2 give |


1402 AN ILLUSTRATION


give fuch an outline of it, as may enable the inquifitive reader fufficiently
to judge of its merits, without enabling the vicioufly~inclined to adopt.
its practice.


Magicians and conjurors, who have written upon and followed the Black
Art, contend, that it is poffible to raife up and hold an intercourfe with
{pirits, and make them fubfervient to their commands, without any abfo-
lute compact or bargain with the devil, either for body, foul, or works;
though they are ready to admit, that fuch a. fnare is eventually intended
for them, by their officioufnefs upon every occafion, and they are as
willing to believe that it has induced many of its practitioners to form fuch
aleague. Many inftances.indeed have been adduced in proof of this,
where, at the expiration of a certain term, the devoted wretch has been
carried off in the height of his fins and wickednefs, by fome of the in--
fernal meflengers. Such is recorded to have been the cafe with feveral
in this ifland; fuch alfo was the cafe with Lewis Gaufridi, a French prieft,
who, to be revenged of fome of his fuperiors for not promoting him to
the extent of his ambition, compacted with the devil for fourteen years
power, to commit whatever deteftable works he pleafed, without detec-
tion or difcovery. So likewife, a certain execrable character, who a few
centuries back over-ran this country, was at length publicly taken off in
fire and flame, before the eyes of a vaft multitude, having covenanted for
body, foul, and works. It is to be noted, that, where a compact is form-
ed, the devil, or familiar fpirit, is ever at hand, and ready to obey the
magician’s will, without ceremony or trouble ; but, where no fuch league
or compact exifts, and the magician is defirous of bringing up or con-
Jiraining {ome particular f{pirit or ghoft to appear before him, there are
many rites and ceremonies to be performed. In the firft place they are
to fix upon a fpot proper for fuch a purpofe; which muit be either ina
fubterraneous vault, hung round with black, and lighted by a magical
_ torch; or elfe in the centre of fome thick wood or defert, or upon fome

extenfive unfrequented plain, where feveral roads meet; or amidit the
' ruins of ancient caftles, abbies, monafteries, &c. or amongft the rocks on

the fea-fhore; in fome private detached church-yard, or any other fo-
lemn melancholy place, between the hours of twelve and one in the
night, either when the moon fhines very bright, or elfe when the ele-
ments are difturbed with ftorms of thunder, lightning, wind, and rain;
for, in thefe places, times, and feafons, it is contended, fhat fpirits can
with lefs difficulty manifeft themfelyes to mortal eyes, and continue
vifible with the leaft pain, in this elemental external world.


_ When the proper time and place is fixed on, a magic circle is to
be formed, within which, the matter and his aflociate, (for in all thefe


Bt cafes


D4 mgr _ wibleyus frology- ps A 9.


iJ “7g nS: haracters,a nd Mayrcal Lirufe ae |


A. Bpe or Ligure of the ¢ rel e AES cage? and birlellows Who cue Trascvdd th ign f
to fit i peming bow,and after wh at fafhvon it foould bemade i al Spirits wilt do


him homage :


Whofoev er beareth tisSrgn
oy nead fear no Foe —


Ths os tee Citrate d( C2U& (Ro


LLomMOS ACAT Us

Nhs LE clomeas
nak

Cherubafea


Thetivo JScals of thceh arth withoudl whch
not prrits vill appear


Libl fh a. ‘portbel’ roprietors by A Stab feor VY Stubioneies flour?
be Le ag, ; ioe


X . a ey bie e *


OF ASTROLOGY. 1103


cafes there muft be two perfons). are carefully to retire. The dimenfions
of the circle is as follows: a piece of ground is ufually chofen nine feet
{quare, at the full extent of which parallel lines are drawn one within
another, having fundry croffes and triangles defcribed between them,
clofe to which is formed the firftor outer-circle ; then, about half a foot
within the fame, a fecond circle is defcribed ; and within that another
{quare corref{pondent to the firft, the centre of which is the feat or {pot
where the mafter and affociate are to be placed. The vacancies formed
by the various, lines'and angles of the figure, are filled up with all the
holy names of God, having croffes and triangles defcribed betwixt them,
agreeable toa fketch I have given in the annexed plate, where likewife I
have projected the form of magic feals, pentacles, &c. &c. juft to give
the reader an idea of what is meant, whenever we have occafion to {peak of °
them in the following difcourfe. The reafons afligned by magicians and
others for the inftitution and ufe of circles, is, that fo much ground being
bleffed and confecrated by fuch holy words and ceremonies as they make
ufe of in forming it, hath a fecret force to-expel all evil {pirits from the
bounds thereof; and, being fprinkled with pure fanCtified water, the
ground is purified from all uncleannefs ; befides, the holy names of God
being written over every part of it, its force becomes fo powerful, that no
evil fpirit hath ability to break through it, or to get at the magician or
-his companion, by reafon of the antipathy in nature they’ bear to thefe
facred names. And the reafon’ given for the triangles ‘is, that if the
fpirit be not eafily brought to fpeak the truth, they may by the Exorcitt
be conjured to enter the fame, where, by virtue of the names of the Effence
and Divinity of God, they can {peak nothing but what is true and right.
The circle therefore, according to this account of it, .is the principal fort
and fhield of the magician, from which ‘he is not, at the peril of his life,
to depart, till he has completely difmifled the {pirit, particularly if he be
of a fiery or infernal natare. Inftances are recorded of many who perithed
by this means ; particularly: Chrancungi, the famous Egyptian fortune-
‘teller, who in the laft ‘century was fo famousin England. He under-
took for a wager, to raife up the fpirit Bokim, and, having defcribed the
circle, he feated his fifter Napale by him as his aflociate. After fre-
quently repeating the forms of exorcifm, and calling upon the fpirit to
appear, and nothing as yet anfwering his demand, they grew impatient
of the bufinefs, and quitted the circle, but it coft them their lives ; for
they were inftantaneoufly feized and crufhed to death, by that infernal®
fpirit, who happened not to be fufficiently conftrained till that moment,
to manifeft himfelf to human eyés.——-The ufual form of confecrating the _
circle is as follows: WA


No. 59. 12 T me I, who


“Hop OA NO POL Westra FON


I, who am the fervant of the Higheft, do, by the virtue of his Holy Name Im-
manuel, fanéify unto myfelf the circumference of nine feet round about. me, —
— Makenke frim the eafl, Glaurah ; from the wef, Garron ; from the north,
Cabon ; from the fouth, Berith; which. ground I take for my proper defence
from all inalignant fpirits, that they may have no power over ny foul or body,
nor come beyond thefe limitations, but anfwer truly, being fummoned, without
daring to tranferefs their bounds. Worrh. worrab. harcot. Gambalon. Kayne.


The proper attire or pontificalibus of a magician, is an ephod made of
fine white linen, over that a prieftly robe of black bombazine, reaching
to the ground, with the two feals of the earth, drawn correctly upon vir-
gin parchment, and affixed to the breaft of his outer veftment. Round

‘his wafte is tied a broad confecrated girdic, with the names Ya, Ya, ve
4ie, Aaie, a Ekbra es Elchim Wye Sadat Ya Pah Adonai vs tuo robore
Cinétus fum Wa. Upon his fhoes muft be written Tetragrammaton, with
croffes round about ; upon his head a high-crown cap of fable filk; and
in his hands an holy Bible, printed or written in pure Hebrew. When
all thefe things are prepared, the circle drawn, the ground confecrated, |
and the exorcift fecurely placed within the circle, he proceeds to call up ©
or conjure the fpirit by his proper name, under a form fomewhat fimilar
to the following :


Texercife and conjure the, thou fpirit of (here naming the fpirit), dy the
holy and wonderful names of the Almighty ‘febovah, Athanato Ya Aionos
Dominus fempiternus Ye Alethetos We Sadat a Febovah, Kedefh, El gabor
% Deus fortifimus %« Anapheraton, Amorule, Ameron faryye Panthon Ye
Craton Wa Muridon Wa “fab, fFebovah, Elohim pentafferon Rave trinus et unus
Me kerk @ I exorcife and conjure, I invocate and command, thee, thou afore-

faid fpirit, by the power of angels and archangels, cherubim and feraphim, by
the mighty Prince Coronzon, by the blood of Abel, by the righteoufne/s of Seth, —
and the prayers of Noah, by the voices of thunder and dreadful day of judg-
ment ; by all thefe powerful and royal words abovefaid, that, without delay or
malicious tntent, thou do come before me here at the circumference of this confe-

. erated circle, to anfwer my propofals and defires, without any manner of terrible
jorm, either of thyfelf or attendants; but only obediently, fairly, and with good
intent, to prefent thyfelf before me, this circle being my defence, through his

g beer whois Almighty, and bath fanétified the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghoft. Amen. ‘


\ After thefe forms of conjuration, and juft before appearances are expect-.
ed, the infernal fpirits make ftrange and frightful noifes, howlings, trem-
blings, flafhes, and moft dreadful fhrieks and yells, as forerunners of


1 their


Y OFF ASB PTR OrL OlG YH 4} tree


their prefently becoming vifible.. Their firft appearance is generally in
the form of fierce and terrible lions or tygers, vomiting forth fire, and
roaring hideoufly about the circle; all which time the Exorcift’muft not
fuffer any tremor or difmay; for, in that cafe, they will gain the afcen-
dency, and the confequences may touch his life. On the contrary, he
muft fummon up a fhare of refolution, and continue repeating all the
forms of conftriction and confinement, until they are drawn nearer to the
influence of the triangle, when their forms will change to appearances lefs


ferocious and frightful, and become more fubmiffive and tractable. When.


the forms of conjuration have in this manner been fufficiently repeated,
the fpirits forfake their beaftial fhapes, and endow the human form, ap-
pearing like naked men of gentle countenance and behaviour. Yet is the
magician to be warily on his guard that they deceive ‘him not by fuch
mild geftures; for they are exceedingly fraudulent and deceitful in their
dealings with thofe who conftrain them to appear without compact ; hav~
ing nothing in view but to fubora his mind, or accomplith his deftruc-
tion. But with fuch as they have entered into agreement with they are
frequent and officious; yet they more or lefs require certain oblations,
which are frequently made to them, fuch as fumigations, odours, of-
ferings or facrifices of blood, fire, wine, ointments, incenfe, fruits, ex-
crements, herbs, gums, minerals, and other ingredients ; by which, from


a magical caufe, they have more influence and authority over the de--


generated fouls of men, and can infinuate into their inmoft fource and
affection, piercing even through their bones and marrow, till they have
fo habituated them to their fervice, that it becomes their daily and fole
delight to accomplith every villainy and abomination which the malicious
and fubtle inftigations of Satan might purpofe to lead them. So that
the Exorcift muft be greatly upon his guard, and when he has com-
pleated the exorcifm, and made fuch enquiries as he wifhed to obtain
from the fpirit, he muft carefully difcharge him by fome form or cere«


mony like the following :


Becaufe.thou haft diligently anfwered my demands, and been ready to come


at my firft call, I do bere licence thee to depart unto thy proper place, without
injury or danger to man or beaft; depart, I fay, and be ever ready at my call,
being duly exorcifed and conjured by facred rites of magic; I charge thee to
withdraw with quiet and peace; and peace be continued betwixt me and thee,
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghoft. Amen, |


After this ceremony is finifhed, the fpirit will begin to depart, refum-
ing again the fhrieks and noifes, with flathes of fire, fulphur, and {moke,
which the magician is to endure.with patience, until it is entirely gone off,


and


‘Ys


1106 A Nes fbLoL U4S Tr R+ALT b ON


and no figns whatever of fuch a procedure left. ‘Then he may venture
to withdraw from the circle, repeating the Lord's Prayer, after which.
he may take up the various utenfils, and, having deftroyed all traces of
the circle, may return in fafety to his proper home. _ |


- . But if, inftead of infernal or familiar fpirits, the ghoft or apparition of


2 Jee


XG


a departed perfon is to be exorcifed, the procefs is materially different. —
The perfon being fixed on, whofe apparition is to be brought up, the
magician, with his afliftant, muft repair to the church-yard or tomb
where the deceafed was buried, exattly at midnight; as the ceremony
can only be performed in the night, between the hours of twelve and
one. The grave is firft.to be opened, or an aperture made, by which


accefs may be had to the naked body. The magician having defcribed


the circle, and holding a magic wand in his right hand, while his com~


panion or affiftant beareth a confecrated torch, he turns himfelf to all the

four winds, and, touching the dead body three times with the magical
g y &

wand, repeats as follows: |


By the virtue of the boly refurrection, and the torments of the damned, I


conjure and exorcife thee, fpirit of N. deceafed, to anfwer my hege demands, -


being obedient unto thefe facred ceremonies, on pain of everlajiing torment and
diftrefs: Then let him tay, Berald, Beroald, Balbin gab gabor agaba; arife,


4arife, I charge and command thee.


After which forms and ceremonies, the ghoft or apparition will be-
come vilible, and will anfwer to any queftions put to it by the Exorcift.


But, if it be defired to put interrogatories to the fpirit.of any corpfe that
hath hanged, drowned, or otherwife made away with itfelf, the conjura-
tion muft be performed while the body hangs, or on the {pot where it is
firft found after the fuicide hath been committed, and before it is touched -
or removed by the coroner’s jury. The ceremony is as follows: the
Exorcitt binds upon the top of his wanda bundle of St, John’s wort, or -
millies perforatum, with the head of an ow]; and, having repaired to the
{pot.where the corpfe lies, at twelve o’clock at night, he draws the cir-
cle, and folemnly repeats the following words: é;


By the myfteries of the deep, by the flames of Banal, by the power of the eafts
and the filence of the night, by the boly rites of Hecate, I conjure and exorcife
thee, thou diftrefed fpirit, to prefent.thyfelf here, and reveal unto me the caufe.
of thy calamity, why thou didft offer violence to thy own lege life, where thou


art now in being, and where thou wilt hereafter be. He then, gently {mit-
ing Ber


par eas


mui Det — 4 M ‘ _ 7 ; . val ‘ " ' ena vi ? - : am EG
fF pw? KELLX, A. MAGicraAN. 7"
wn te el vA rework //s pi , ae censor Z Dey


*


OF ASTROLOGY (Hoy


ing the carcafe nine times with the rod, he fays, I conjure thee, thou foirit
of this N. dectafed, to anfwer my demands that F am to propound unto thee, as
thou ever bopeft for the reft of the holy ones, and eafe of all thy mifery; by the
blood of Fefu which be fhed for thy foul, I conjure and bind thee to utter ~
unto me what I fhall afe thee. — :


Then, cutting down the carcafe from the tree, they lay his head towards
the eaft; and, in the fpace that this following conjuration is repeating, —
they fet a chaffing-dith of fire at his right hand, into which they pour a’
little wine, fome maftic, and gum-aromatic, and laftly, a viol full of the
fweeteft oi], having alfo a pair of bellows, and fome unkindled charcoal
to make the fire burn bright at the inftant of the carcafe’s rifing, The
conjuration ig thus; atte ba

F conjure thee, thou fpirit of . that thou do immediately enter into thy
ancient bedy again, and anfwer to my demands, by the virtue of the holy re-
furrection, and by the pofture of the. body of the Saviour of the world, I
charge thee, I conjure thee, E command thee on pain of the torments and wana
dering of thrice feven years, which I, by the force of facred magic rites, have
power to inflict upon thee; by thy fighs and groans, I conjure thee to utter thy —
voice; fo help thee Ged and the prayers of the holy church. Amen. |


Which ceremony being thrice repeated, while the fire is burning with
matftic and: gum-aromatic, the body will begin to rife, and at laft will ftand
upright before the Exorcift, anfwering with a faint and hollow voice,
* the queftions propounded unto it:* why it deftroyed itfelf, where its
dwelling is, what its food and life is, how long it will be ’ere it enter into
reft, and by what means the magician may aflift it to come to reft; alfo,
wf the treafures of this world, where they are hid; moreover, it can an-.
{wer very punctually of the places where ghofts refide, and how to come
municate with them; teaching the nature of aftral {pirits and hellith
beings,’ fo far as its tapacity reacheth. All which when the ghoft hath
fully anfwered, the magician ought, out of commiferation and reve-
rence to the deceafed, to ufe what means can poflibly be ufed for the
procuring reft unto the fpirit. To which effect he muft dig a grave,
and filling the fame half full of iH: lime, and a little falt and com-
mon fulphur, put the carcafe naked into it; which experiment, next
to the burning of the body into-athes, is of great force to quiet and end ©
the diflurbance of the aftral {pirit. Ward


But in this, and in all cafes where the ghofts or apparitions of deceafed
erfons are raifed up and confulted, great caution is to be obferved by the
No. 59. GS ad, wine magician


|


prof AN Date Ue ser Re AT PO) WN:

magician to keep clofe within the circle; for, if the magician, by the
conftellation and pofition of the flars at his nativity, be in the predica~-
ment of thofe who follow the Black. Art for iniquitous purpofes, and.
are fo diftinguifhed by the pofitions of their radical igure of birth, it is.
very dangerous for fuch men to conjure any fpirits without deftribing
the circle after the form already given, and wearing upon their breaft,
er holding in their hand, the Pentacle of Solomon. For the ghofts of men.
deceafed can eafily effect fudden death to the magician born under fuch a.
conformation of the planets, even whilft in the act of being-exorcifed ;
and, it is yet more remarkable, that the genethliacal figures of all perfons
who are naturally addi¢ted to the purfuit of magical incantations and fa-
miliarity with fpirits, do almoft without exception:portend fudden death,
@r an infamous termination of their exiftence,.


Such are the rites, ceremonies, and modes, by which Exorcifts and:
Magicians obtain familiarity with {pirits, and carry on a vifible and pal>
pable correfpondence with the devil. But, befides thefe means of work-.
ing wonders,. they have others of an invifible or occult property, as
charms, fpells, periapts, and the like, which operate both on the body
and mind, by the agency of fome fecret power, which the patient can
neither feel. nor comprehend. They are of various names, forms, and
qualities, according to the ufe for which they are intended: firft, Amu-
Jets, which are moulded and:engraved. inthe form:of money or coin, un-
der certain forms of confecration;: and are hung about the neck in cers
tain planetary hours, for the purpofe of provoking to love and familiarity
with fome certain perfon defired. Secondly, Spells or Charms, confifting
of various forms of words, and magical characlers, written on virgin.
parchment, either with human blood, or ink of a particular quality, and
confecrated under certain magical forms and ceremonies, to be worn as
periapts to cure difeafes, to drive away evil {pirits, to preferve from peiti+
lence and infection, to make the party valiant. and intrepid, and for a:
thoufand other purpofes.. ‘Thirdly, Corfelets, which are the ancient
Danifh charm, being a kind of necklaces. compofed of thunder-ftones,
upon which are engraven certain magical.charaCters, which refift all noxi+
ous influences,. and all danger from: thunder and lightning. Pentacles
are a fourth fort of appendix, which conjurors and magicians ufe, being
made with five corners, correfponding to. the five fenfes of man, with
their virtue and operation infcribed upon the five corners refpectively.

They are compofed of fine linen doubled up,. and done with cerecloth
between. This figure the magician holds in his hand, lifting it up from
the fkirt of his garment to which it is annexed, whenever fpirits that are

_saifed become ftubborn and rebellious, refufing to conform to the rites


and
&


OF AST ROLO-G YY). 110g


and requilitions of exorcifm, and offering menacing looks and ations to the
magician; but, when thefe Pentacles are held out to the fpirits, with the
eed Glauron, Amor, Amorula, Beor, Beorka, Beroa/ld, Anepher aton, in-
f{eribed upon them, they become exceedingly tortured and amazed, and
are more mild and tractable, There is likewife another fort of charm
called Telefins, which is ufed by magicians when they perfornr any con-
juration or exorci{m by moon-light in the mountains or valleys; upon
which occafions they ufually bury them towards the north, eaft, weft,

and fouth, within a hundred yards of the place where the circle is. de-
{cribed ; for thefe Telefins have the occult power of preventing any liv-
ing creature coming near them until the incantation be performed, except
the fpirit itfelf whofe prefence they ardently defire, and are preparing to
fummon before them.


But, to make fiery and infernal fpirits. more familiar, magicians have
elafled them into feven diftinct orders, anfwerable to the nature and qua-
lities of the feven planets; under which they re{pectively make offerings
to them of aromatic fumigations, previous to invoking or calling them.
up; Whereby they conceive the information or affiftance required from
‘them will be more eafily and expeditioufly obtained. Thus the fumiga-
_ tions for fpirits under Saturn,.are made of frankincenfe-tree, pepper- wort
roots, {torax,.and galbanums ‘by. thefe the {pirits Marbas, Corban, Stilkon,
Idas, &ce. and all of the firft ‘order i in the aftringency, are appeafed and pro-
voked, when the fumes are put upon a’Tripod in the hour of Saturn ac-
cording to the planetary divifion. For Spirits under Jupiter, they take
lignum aloes, afhtree- keys, benjamin, ftorax, peacocks-feathers, and /apis
lazuli, mixing the fame with the blood of a fare a {wallow, ora hart;
the brains being alfo added: the fumes are kindled in Jupiter’s hour,
and in a place appropriate to his nature. They make fumigations unto
fuch fpirits of the order of powers. as are under Mars, in. the planetary
divifion, with aromatic gum, bdellium, euphorbium, load -{tone, hellebore
white and black, and an addition of fulphur to make them into an amal-
gama, with man’s blood, and the blood of a black cat; which mixtures
are faid to be fo exceeding magical, that, without any other addition, they
fay, this fumigation is able of itfelf to make f{pirits under Mars appear
before the Exorcift. To the fpirits under Sol, being of the order of
thrones, they likewife fuffumigate faffron, mufk, laurel, cinnamon, am-
bergrife, cloves, myrrh, and frankincenfe, ithe and the balfamic tree
mixed up together with the brains of an eagle, and the blood of a white
cock, being made up like pills, or little balls, and put upon the Tripod.
The fumigations appropriate to fpirits under Venus, are rofes, coral,
lignum aloes, and {permaceti, eens up with {parrows brains; and bloed :

3 of.


b


ps AN LELUSTRA TION


of pigeons, ‘To thofe under Mercury, they fumigate frankineenfe, maf.
tic, cinquefoil, incorporated with the brains of a fox and the blood’ of 4
magpye. To fpirits under Luna, fumigations are offered of frogs dried,
white poppy-feed, bull’s eyes, camphire, and frankincenfe, incorporated
with goote’s blood and fluxus multebris. Thefe are the divifions of {pirits
under the feven planets, with their fumigations; neither can it be denied,
but that, in many ceremonies of this kind, there is great inherent virtue,
according to the do@rine of fympathy and antipathy, whereby every |
thing is drawn by.its like in the idea, whether by words or actions, ac-

cording to the faying, In verbis, berbis, & lapidibus, latet virtus; fo that

the ceremonies and charms, with other circumftances ufed by magicians,

are doubtlefs prevalent to the accomplifhment of that work which they

. undertake; to wit, the calling up and exorcifing of infernal {pirits by
conjurations. |


And as by natural reafon every magical charm or receipt had its firft
inftitution; in like manner have magicians difpofed the matter and manner
together with the times of their utenfils and inflruments, according to the
principles of nature: as the hour wherein they compofe their garments,
mu({t either be in the hour of Luna, or elfe of Saturn in the Moon’s in-
creafe. Their garments-they compofe of white linen, black cloth, black
cat-fkins; wolvesj:bears, or {wine’s, fkins.. The linen, becaufe of its abe
ftracted quality for magic, delights not to have any utenfils that are put to
common ules. The {kins of the aforefaid animals are by reafon of the
Saturnine and magical qualities in. the particles of thefe beafts: their .
fowing thread is of filk, cat’s gut, man’s nerves, afles hair, thongs of {kins
from men, cats, bats, owls, and moles, all which are enjoined from the
like magical caufe. Their needles are made of hedge-hog prickles; or
bones of any of the above-mentioned animals ; their writing-pens are of.
owls or ravens, their ink of man’s blood: their ointment is man’s fat, blood,
ufnea, hog’s greafe, or oil of whales. ‘Their charaéters are ancient. Hebrew
or Samaritan: their fpeech is Hebrew or-Latin. Their paper mutt be of
the.membranes of infants, which they call virgin parchment, or of the
tkins, of cats or kids. They compofe their fires of {weet wood, oil, or
rofin; and their candles of the fat or marrow of men or children: their:
vellels are earthern, their candlefticks with three feet, of dead men’s bones:
their {words are {teel, without guards, the points being reverfed. Thefe
are their materials, which they particularly choofe from the magical qua-

_lities whereof they are compofed. Neither are the peculiar fhapes with- —
out a natural caufe. Their caps are oval, or like pyramids with lappets
on each fide, and fur within; their gowns reach to the ground, being
furred with white fox-{kins, under which they havea linen garment reach-_


ing -


OF TAASST AR ZO L.:O:G, ¥Y: A111


ing to their knee... Their girdles are three inches broad, and have, ac-
cording to its ufe, many caballiftical names, with croffes, trines, and cir-’.
cles, infcribed thereon. Their knives are dagger-fafhion : and the circles .
by which they defend. themfelves are commonly nine feet in breadth,
though the eaftern magicians allow but feven ; for both of which a na-
tural caufe is pretended, in the force and fympathy of numbers.


Such fpells or charms as are compounded of fome edib/e matter, with |
magical characters engraven upon them, are fuccefsfully given for agues, .
head-achs, epilepfy, fits of the mother, and the like ; and it is remarkable
that they operate with moft effect on thofe patients who are ignorant of ,
the charm, or its properties. There are alfo particular magical charac-
ters attributed to the planets, whereof Telefins, Periapts, Amulets, and
Philtres, are compofed by buryings under ground, writings, bindings, en-
gravings, allegations, &c. which done in certain aftrological hours are to
conquer enemies, cure difeafes, remove obftructions, provoke love, and

referve from evil both the body and the foul, which they contend. are
effected by the mediums of this kind, affifted by the force of imagination.
But as for philtres, potions, love-cups, and the like, they unqueftionably
proceed from a natural caufe, and ought not to be clafled with the oc~
cult properties of charms. There are many natural compofitions of
herbs and minerals, which have a furprifing effect in themfelves, with-
out the leaft affiftance from fuperftitious impreffions, or the affiftance of
fupernatural agency. For, in the commixture of bodies of a fimilar na-
ture, there is a two-fold power and virtue ; firft, when the celeftial pro-
perties are duly difpofed in any natural fubftance, then under one form di-
vers influences of fuperior powers are combined; and fecondly, when
from artificial mixtures and compofitions of natural things, combined
amongft themfelves in a due and harmonical proportion, they agree with
the quality and force of the heavens, under certain correfpondent conttel-
lations. This proceeds from the occult affinity of natural things amongtt
themfelves, by the force and fympathy of which many aftonifhing effects
are produced, :

In the writings of Paracelfus we find many furprifing examples of the
power of fympathy and antipathy, by, means of images, tele{ms, and
amulets, compounded of nothing more than natural ingredients. And
he ‘particularly defcribes an infalliblemethod, by the image of any bird or
beaft, to deftroy it, or to effe€t its death, though at a diftance. So like-
wife, by the hair, fat, blood, excrements, or excrefcences, of any animal,
the difeafes of that animal might be cured, and its life preferved or de-
ftroyed. This is feen inthe armaryunguent, and fympathetical powder ; and
HINGs 59-2. | 12.X puter i there


1112 AON. JOLCTUS [7 ReART FO a


there are multiplied inftances and hiftories, both at home and abroad, of
thofe who have been burnt, hanged, or otherwife punifhed, for the ufe of
waxen images, Which they compofe in divers poftures, under certain con-
ftellations, whereby the perfons they are made to reprefent have been
feverely tormented, or macerated to death. For, according to the tor-
ment or punifhment the magician, witch, or wizzard, may intend to in- ’.
flict upon the object of their refentment, fo they difpofe the hour of the

conftellation, the quality of the compound, and the pofture or femblance

of the image; for, if they intend to confume and pine away'the health
and life of any perfon they are offended with, they mould his image in wax,

of fuch an ominous form and afpe& as may conduce to the extent of their

defign, making feveral magica] chara€ters upon the fides of the head, de-

f{cribing the character of the planetary hour upon the breaft of the image ;

the name of the perfecuted perfon on its forehead 5. and the intended

effet to be wrought upon him on its back. If they mean to produce.
violent pains and tortures in the flefh or finews, they {tick pins or thorns

in divers places of the arms, legs, or breaft, of the image. If to caft them |
into violent fevers and confumptions, they fpend a certain hour every day

to warm and turn the image before a doleful and lingering fire, compofed

of divers exotic gums and magical ingredients of {weet odours, and roots

of particular fhrubs, efficient and conducive to their purpofe’; and, when

the whole operation has been performed, and the image is completed, it

is aftonifhing to human comprehenfion what furprifing effects they are

capable of producing upon the body they are intended to reprefent; and.
the reader can only attain a competent idea of it, but by reading the ac:
counts of the trials and confeffions of ‘many witches and wizzards, who

fuffered the law, in the laft and commencement of the prefent century,

for tranfaQions of this kind ; an incredible number of which are not

only recorded in the notes and memorandums of the judges, but attefted

by a great variety of noblemen, gentlemen, clergy, phyficians, apothe-

caries, and others, who have been eye-witnefs of thefe diabolical proceed-

ings, and for which reafonI fhall on no account mention the moft perfect

and effectual part of the compofition and preparation of thefe magical

images, left the evil-minded and malicious part of my readers fhould at-

tempt to work abominable {pecies of revenge upon the perfonsor property —
of their unfufpecting neighbours. ° ya i (b:40 os


Thoufands of other ftrange and uncouth inventions might be here de-
fcribed, according to the exact form in which tradition hath left them ;
but for the reafon above affigned, the reader muft be content with. the
general outline only. “And, as the Europeans have the ability of effeting
fuch aftonifhing things by the medium of images, telefms, periapts, &c..

. I ; Ya £0,“


OOF ER 5.8 R OL..0.Gry. 1113


fo the Tartars have a faculty of producing fimilar effects by dottles, wolves-
fRins, rods, bafins, letters, or mifives, unto certain familiar {pirits, who are
the agents in their magic rites. As to the old and favourite trick of
witches in the laft century, that of tyzmg of the point, we have reafon to
hope it has long fince died away; for, it is a charm which produces fo
{trong an impediment to conjugal embraces, as totally to reftrain the act
of confummation betwixt married people; and the tying of this knot or
ligament, under certain magical ceremonies or incantations, was fo no-
torious, both in practice and effet, throughout England, France, Spain,
Italy, and the eaftern countries, that laws were enacted by the legiflature
in each of thofe kingdoms exprefily to prohibit the performance of it,-on
pain of death. The form and manner of it is in part mentioned in the
ftatutes, though by no means fit to be openly defcribed here. The art
of Tranfplantation is alfo reckoned amongit charms and fygils; and in-
deed, one part of it, viz. the transferring of difcafes, is really magical, and
was much in practice among{t witches and wizzards; and, I am confi-
dently informed, is now frequently done in the more remote and unpo-
lithed parts of this ifland. The method is, by giving certain baits or pre-
parations to any domeftic animal, they remove fevers, agues, coughs, con-
{umptions, afthmas, 8c. from any perfon, applying to them for that pur-
pofe ; or, they can tranfplant or remove them from one perfon to another,
by. burying certain images in their ground, or againft their houfes, with
certain ominous infcriptions and Hebrew words; yet, though thefe things
- are fuppofed to be done by magic, yet the effects are derived more from
the fympathies and antipathies in nature than from magical characters
and conjurations; for many perfons, without knowing any thing of the
caufe, how or why it is effected, more than the external form of words or
touch, which is moft fimple, can remove difeafes, take off warts and
other excrefcences, and perform many furprifing cures at a diftance from
the patient, and even without feeing or knowing him; fo, by a fimilar
property in the fympathy and antipathy of nature, certain leaves, roots,
or juices, rubbed upon warts, or carnuous {ubftances, or upon the hands,
-breaft, legs, or other difeafed part of the body, and buried under ground,
remove or cure the fame; which experiments take effect according to the
‘mediums, and their confumption and putrefaction in the mother earth, of
which the human fource is principally compounded. Nor is it to be
wondered that natural things, being fitted to the times and conftellations,
and compounded of correfpondent, or fympathetic ingredients, fhould
produce fuch effects, without fupernatural aid, or the agency of fpirits.
This is. perfe€tly exemplified in that extraordinary preparation, called a
magical candle, which, being lighted, foretels the death of the party, of
whofe. blood it was prepared. It is compounded after the following

Manne? :


1114 AND Ss TRA Ta06m


manner: they take.a good quantity of the venal blood luke-warm as it
came out of the vein, which, being chemically prepared with {pirits of |
wine and other ingredients, is at laft made up intoa candle, which, being
once kindled, never. goes out till the death of the party whofe blood it is
compofed of ; for, when he is fick, or in danger, it burns dim and trou-~
bled ; and, when he is dead, it is quite extinguifhed; of which compofi-
tion a learned philofopher hath written an entire tract, viz. De Buolychnio,
or, the Lamp of Life.


In the fimple operations of nature many wonderful things are wrought,
which, upon a fuperficial view appear impoffible, or elfe to be the work of
the devil. Thefe certainly ought to be confidered in a far different light
from magical performances, and fhould be claffed among the furprifing
phenomenz of nature. Thus lamps or torches made of ferpents’ fkins,
and compounded of the fat and {pirit of vipers, when lighted in a dark:
room, will bring the fimilitude of {nakes or ferpents writhing and twift-
ing upon the walls. So oil compounded of grapes, being put into a’
lamp, and lighted, will make the room appear to be full of grapes,
though in reality it is nothing more than the idea or fimilitude.—The
fame thing is to be done with all the plants and flowers throughout the
vegetable fyftem, by means of a chemical analyfis, whereby a fimple {pi-
rit is produced, which will reprefent the herb or flower from which it is
extracted, in full bloom. And, as the procefs is eafy, fimple, pleafing,
and curious, I will here ftate it in fuch a manner as might enable any
perfon to.put it in practice at pleafure.


Take any whole herb, or flower, with its root, make it very clean, and
bruife it in a {tone mortar quite {mall; then put it into a glafs veffel her-
metically fealed; but be fure the veffel be two parts in three empty:
then place it for putrefaction in a gentle heat in balneo, not more than
blood warm, for fix months, by which it will be all refolved into water.
Take this water, and pour it into a glafs retort, and place a receiver
thereunto, the joints of which muft be well clofed; diftil it in a fand
“heat until there comes forth a water and an oil; and in the upper part of the
veffel will hang a volatile falt. Separate the oil from the water, and kee
it by itfelf, but with the water purify the volatile falt by diffolving,
filtering, and coagulating. When the falt is thus purified, imbibe with
it the faid oil, until it is well combined. Then digeft them well to-
gether for a month in a veflel hermetically fealed; and by this means
will be obtained a moft fubtil effence, which, being held over a gentle
heat of a candle, the fpirit will fly up into the glafs where it is confined,
and reprefent the perfect idea or fimilitude of that vegetable whereof it


1S


W239


qi


it


nn


I


<a My


xr
°


LABORATORY


a Simple s, verel may be catracte


ato represent


Herbs, wri Pull Bloom


RS)

SS

7

N

=
g
~
So
<


OF 'a's 4 R -OULO'G! Y. Thi


8 thé effenée : nd in this'maanér will that thin fabftance, which is like
-gmpalpable athes or falt, fend forth from-‘the bottom of the glafs the ©
‘manifeft form ‘of whatever herb itis thé men/fraum, in perfect vegetation,
‘growing by little and little, and ‘putting on fo fully the form of {tilks,
leaves, and flowers, in full and perfe2 appearance, that any one would
believe the fame to be natural and corporeal : though at the fame timeit
is nothing more than the fpiritaal idea endued with a {piritual effence.
This fhadowed figure as foon as the veffel is taken from the heat or candle
returns to its caput mortutim, or afhes again, and vanifhes away like an
‘apparition, becoming a chaos or confufed matter. For more on the mé-
‘dicinal virtues of decoction of falt, or'effence of herbs, flowers, roots,
of feeds, fee my hew edition of Culpeper’s‘'Complete Herbal, juft publith-
~ ‘éd, with notes, additions, and illuftrations, in quarto, with upwards of ~
400 elegant engravings of Britifh herbs, plants, and flowers, coloured to
nature.


= To make a vegetable more quickly yield its fpirit, take of what vege-
‘table you pleafe, whether ‘it be the feed, flowers, roots, fruit, or leaves, —
‘cut or bruife them fmall, put them into warm water, put upon them
‘yeatt or barm, and cover then up warm, and let them work three days,
‘in the fame manner as beer; then diftil them, and they will yield their
{pirit very eafily. Orelfe take of what herbs, flowers, feeds, &c. you
pleafe; fill the head of a ftill therewith, then cover the mouth with
coarfe canvas, and fet on the ftill, having firft put into it a proportionable
‘quantity of fack or low wine ; then give it fire, and it will quickly yield
its {pirit ; but obferve, that, if the colour ofthe vegetable is wanted, you- ~
mutt take fome of its dried flowers, ‘and fill the nofe of the ftili therewith,
and you will have the exact colour of the herb. .


'To elucidate this procefs with better effe@, I have fubjoined a plate
of the elaboratory, where a perfon is tn the act of producing thefe flowery
‘apparitions, in which fig. 1. reprefents a ftone peftle and mortar, where-
in the herbs, &c. ‘are to be bruifed before they are placed for putrefaction.
Pipe.’ 2. are “plafs vefiels hermetically fealed, containing the bruifed
herbs for putrefaction. Fig. 3. an empty glafs retort. Fig. 4. a retort
‘filled with the effence ofan herb, and put intoa fand heat for diftillation.
Pig. 5. a glafs Teceiver joined to the retort, to’rective’the oil and {pirit.
Fig. 6, a ftool on which refts the receiver. Fig. 7. the furnance-made
‘with different conveniences cither for fand heat, or balnea. Fig. 8.the
furnace holes wherein the fire is “placed. Pig. gvatable whereon are plas
ced the glafs veflels hermetically fealed. Fig. 10. a veflel containing the
reprefentation or fimilitude of a pink in full bloom.

No. 60. ea hall Fig,


1116 A Nor BsLAL Us TR cACT. F Oy N


_ Fig. rr. the reprefentation of a fprig of rofemary. Fig. 12. the repre~
fentation of a fprig of baum. Fig. 13. a candleftick with a candle light-
ed for the purpofe of heating the fpirit. Fig. 14. a chemift in the act
of holding the glafs veffel over the lighted candle, whereby fig. 15.
reprefents the idea of a rofe in full bloom. Sua


Now this effect, though very furprifing, will not appear fo much a
fubject of our aftonifhment, if we do but confider the wonderful power
of fympathy, which exifts throughout the whole fyftem of nature, where
every thing is excited to beget or love its like, and is drawn after it, as
the loadftone draws iron; the male after the female; the evil after the
evil; the good after the good; which is alfo feen in wicked men and
their purfuits, and in birds and bea{ts of prey ; where the lamb delights
not with the lion, nor the theep in the fociety of the wolf; neither doth
men, whofe minds are totally depraved and eftranged from God, care to
adopt the oppofite qualities, which are virtuous, innocent, and juft,
Without contemplating thefe principles, we fhould think it incredible
that the grunting or fqueaking of a little pig, or the fight of a imple
fheep, fhould terrify a mighty elephant! and yet by that means the Ro-
mans put to flight Pyrrhus and all his hoft, One would hardly fuppofe
that the crowing of acock, or the fight of his comb, fhould abath a
puiffant lion ; but experience has proved the truth of it to all the world.
Who would imagine that a poifonous ferpent could not live under the
fhade of an afh-tree; or that fome men, neither deficient in courage,
ftrength, or conftitution, fhould not be able to endure the fight of a
cat? and yet thefe things are feen and known to be fo, by frequent obfer-
vation and experience. The friendly intercourfe betwixt a fox and a fer-
pent is almoft incredible; and how fond and loving the lizard is to
man we read in every treatife on natural hiftory; which is not far, if
any thing, behind the fidelity of a {paniel, and many other f{pecies of dogs,
whofe fagacity and attention to their mafter is celebrated in an infinite
variety of well-founded though incredible ftories. ‘The amity betwixt
a caftrel and a pigeon is remarked by many authors; particularly how
furioufly the caftrel will defend a pigeon from the fparrow-hawk, and
other inimical birds. In the vegetable fyftem, the operation and virtue of
herbs is at once a fubject of admiration and gratitude, and which it were
almoft endlefs to repeat *. There is among them fuch natural accord and


_* For the wonderful virtues and properties of herbs and plants, with their alimentary and me-
dicinal qualities ; and how to prevent or cure all difeafes incident to the human body, at the leaft


expencey and at the greate/t certainty, fee alfo my new edition of Culpeper’s Britith Herbal, and
Domeftic Phyfician.
difcord,


OF AVS HR OL 0 .G Me 1117


difcord, that fome will profper more luxuriantly in another’s company ;
while fome, again, will droop and die away, being planted near each other.
The lily and the rofe rejoice by each,other’s fide; -whilft the flag and the
fern abhor one another, and will not live together. The cucumber loveth
water, but hateth oil; and fruits will neither ripen nor grow in af-
pects that are inimical to them. In {tones likewife, in minerals, and in
earth or mould, the fame fympathies and antipathies are preferved. Ani-
mated nature, in every clime, in every corner of the globe, is alfo preg-
nant with fimilar qualities; and that in a moft wonderful and admirable
degree. Thus we find that one particular bone taken out of a carp’s
head will ftop an hemorrhage of blood, when no other part or thing in
the fame creature hath any fimilar effect. The bone alfo in a hare’s foot
‘inftantly. mitigates the moft excruciating tortures of the cramp; yet no
other bone nor part of that animal can do the like. I might alfo recite
‘infinite properties with which it has pleafed God to endue the form and
body of man, which are no lefs worthy of admiration, and fit for this
place, had we but limits to recount them. Indeed I do not know: a much


more remarkable thing, (were it as rare as it is now fhamefully prevalent,) |


or that would more puzzle our fenfes, than the effects of intoxication,
by which we fee a man fo totally overthrown, that not a fingle part or
member of his body can perform its function or office, and his under-
ftanding, memory, and judgment, fo arrefted or depraved, that in every
thing, except the fhape, he becomes a very beaft! But we find, from
obfervation, that however important, however wonderful, how inexpli-
cable or miraculous, foever any thing may be; yet if it is common, or fa-
miliar to our fenfes, the wonder ceafes, and our enquiries end. And
‘hence it is, that we look not with half the admiration upon the fun,
moon, and ftars, that we do upon the mechanifm of a globe, which
does but counterfeit their order, and is a mere bauble, the work of men’s
hands! whence I might almoft be juftified in remarking, that, if Chrift
himfelf had’ continued long in the habit of working miracles, and had
left that power permanent and hereditary in the church, they would have
long fince grown into contempt, and not have been regarded as events
worthy of our attention.


From what has been premifed, we may readily conclude that there are
two diftin&t fpecies of magic ; one whereof, being inherent in the occult
properties of nature, is called natural magic; and the other, being ob-
noxious and contrary to nature, is termed ifernal magic, becaufe it is
aecomplifhed by infernal agency or compact with the devil. Each of
thefe we will confider feparately, with the good and evil confequences
likely to refult from them. 3

, ee Under


ag


cee


1118 an UU ST RMT LO Ne


: : ; aay Che avers. 41 ue eee hong a nent

Under thé veil of natural magic, it hath pleafed the Almighty to con-~
ceal many valuable and excéllent gifts, which common people either
think miraculous, or next toimpoftible. And yet in truth, natural ma-
gic is nothing more than the workmanfhip of. nature, made manifeft by
art; for, in tillage, as nature produceth corn and herbs, fo art, being
nature’s handmaid, prepareth and helpeth it forward; in. which times
and feafons are materially to be confidered ; for annus, nou arvus, producit
arifias. And, though thefe things, while they lie hid in mature, do many


of them feem impoffible and miraculous, yet, when they are known,


and their fimplicity revealed, our difficulty of apprehenfion,ceafes, and the
wonder is at an end; for that only is wonderful to the beholder whereof
he can conceive no caufe nor reafon, according to the faying of Ephefius,


“miraculum folvitur unde videtur efe miraculum; yet we often {ee perfons


take great pains, and put themfelves to-vaft expence, to difcover thefe
impalpable tracks of nature, from whence pecuniary advantages feldom


refult; fo that a man muft not learn philofophy to grow rich; but muft


get riches to learn philofophy. There. is unqueftionably much _ praife
due, and great induftry required, for obtaining a competent knowledge, of
natural magic ; for to fluggards, niggards, and narrow-minded men, the
fecrets of nature are never opened, though the ftudy of them is certainly
conducive to the glory of God, and to the good of fociety, by more vifi-
bly manifefting the omnipotency of his works, and by fkilfully applying
them to man’s ufe and benefit. Many philofophers of the firft eminence,
as Plato, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, &c. travelled through


every region of the known world for the accomplifhment of this kind of -


knowledge; and, at their return, they publicly preached.and taught it.
But above all, we learn from facred and profane hiftory, that Solomon was
the greateft proficient.in this art of any either before or fince his time ;
as he himfelf hath declared in Ecclefiattes and the book of Wifdom, where
he faith, ‘* God hath given me the true {cience of things, fo as to know
«how the world was made, and the power of the elements, the begin-

ning, and the'end, and the midft of times, the change of feafons, the
courfes of the year, and the fituation of the ftars, the nature of human
beings, and the quality of beafts, the power of winds, and the ima-
ginations of the mind; the diverfities -of plants, the virtues of roots,
and all things whatfoever, whether fecret or known, manifeft or in-
vifible.” “And hence it was that the magi, or followers of natural
magic, were accounted wife, and the {tudy honourable; becaufe,it con-
fifts in nothing more than the moft profound and perfect part of natural
philofophy, which defines the nature, caufes, and effects, of things.


c¢


‘How


“


OF UrAr Sarre Oly. O, GY I11Q


How far fuch inventions as are called charms, amulets, periapts,
and the like, have any foundation in natural magic, may be worth our
enquiry ; becaufe, if cures are to be effected through their medium, and
that without any thing derogatory to the attributes of the Deity, or the
principles of religion, I fee no reafon why they fhould be rejeCted with
‘that inexorable contempt which levels the works of God with the folly
and weaknefs of men. Not that I would encourage fuperftition, or be-
come an advocate for a ferrago of abfurdities; but, when the fimplicity
of natural things, and their effects, are rejetted merely-to encourage’ pro-
feffional artifice and emolument, it is prudent for us to diftinguith be-
tween the extremes of bigoted fuperftition and total unbelicf.


It was the opinion of many eminent phyficians, of the firft ability and
Jearning, that fuch kind of charms or periapts as confifted of certain odo-
riferous herbs, balfamic roots, mineral concretions, and metallic fub-«
ftances, might have, and moft probably poffeffed, by means of their
ftrong medicinal properties, the virtue of curing or removing fuch com-
plaints as external applications might effect, and which are often ufed
with fuccefs, though without the leaft furprife or admiration; becaufe
the one appears in a great meafure to be the confequence of manual ope-
ration, which is perceptible and vifible to the fenfes, whilft the other
afts by an innate or occult power, which the eye cannot fee, nor the
mind fo readily comprehend; yet, in both cafes, perhaps, the effect is
produced by a fimilar caufe ; and confequently all fuch remedies, let them
be applied under what form or ftile they may, are worthy of our regard,
and ought to excite in us not only a veneration for the fimple practice of
the ancients in their medical experiments, but a due fenfe of gratitude


to the wife Author of our being, who enables us, by fuch eafy means, to |


remove the infirmities incident to mankind. Many reputable authors,

articularly A. Ferrarius, Alexander Trallianus, Aitius, OGtavianus, Mar-
cellus, Philodotus, Archigines, Philoftratus, Pliny, and Diofcorides, con-
tend that not only fuch phyfical alligations, appenfions, periapts, amulets,
charms, é&cc. which, from their materials appear to imbibe and to diffufe
the medical properties above defcribed, ought in certain obftinate and
equivocal diforders to be applied, but thofe likewife which from their
external form and compofition have no fuch inherent virtues to recom-
mend them; for harm they can do none, and good they might do,


either by accideat or through the force of imagination. And it is af-'


ferted, with very great truth, that through the medium of hope and
fear, fufliciently imprefled upon the mind or imagination; whether by
charms, or any other Homerical contrivance or device, the moft wonder-
ful and inftantaneous cures are fometimes wrought. They are called

No. 60. t2ne Homie-


1120’ A NOD LU s Sv eR Ay TALON


Homerical devices, or Homerica medicatio, becaufe Homer was the firft

who difcovered the blood to be fupprefled, or its motion accelerated, by

the force of imagination; and, that difeafes were to be removed or ter-

minated thereby. Of the truth of this we have the ftrongeft and moft

infallible evidence in the hiccough, which is inftantancoufly cured by

any fudden effect of fear or furprife; fo likewife agues and many other ma- .
ladies are removed; and to the fame caufe we might attribute the only cer-

tain cure known for the bite of a mad dog, which is the effect of fear and

ftagnation wrought upon the mafs of blood by emerging the body in the

fea. Nor are the inftances few, where perfons lying bed-ridden, and

unable to move either hand or foot, have, through the fudden fright of
fire, or the houfe falling in upon them, forgot their infirmity, and run

away with as much activity as though no fuch malady had exifted. See-

ing, therefore, that fuch virtues lie hid in the occult properties of na-

ture, united with the fenfe or imagination of man, where one is the

agent, and the other the patient; where the one is active, and the other

paflive, without any compact with fpirits, or dealings with the devil; we

furely ought to receive them into our practice, and to adopt them as

often as occafion ferioufly requires, although profeflional emolument and

pecuniary advantage might in fome inftances be narrowed by it.


But, though I might be an advocate for fuch charms or occult reme-
dies as are in themfelves perfectly innocent and fimple, I by no means _
wifh to be underftood, that I either approve or recommend any thing
bordering upon fuch inventions as are obvioufly founded in magical
confederacy, and act by the medium of aerial or infernal f{pirits. ‘To that
mind, which has but flightly contemplated the works of nature, it mutt.
be abundantly evident, that the great and good God, which fuftains and
governs the univerfe, hath in the works of creation mercifully afforded
us a natural remedy for all our infirmities; and it is repugnant to common
fenfe, and incompatible with religion and morality, nay, it would im-
ply a deficiency either in the goodnefs or power of the Deity, were we.
for a moment to admit the neceflity of charms, amulets, or any other
inventive cures or benefits to men, refulting from a compact with, fpi-
rits, in which all the powers and performances of witchcraft had their -
beginning; and therefore we may without the fmalleft hefitation. con-
clude, that whatever hath its foundation in fuch confederacy, let
the external object or pretence be what it may, it is not only con-'
trary to nature, but highly offenfive to the Deity, and nearly allied


to the fhocking fin of idolatry, by applying the works of God to


the power of the devil: For this reafon, it is impoflible to be too cau- .
tious how the ufe of fuch defcription of charms or lamins.are adopted,
where


s


Of Fe (AVS Ae ROVE .O0G+ ¥. 112°


where (inftead of natural medicaments) magical characters, incantations,
and notturnal ceremonies, conftitute the component parts. A very wife.
and learned author, who has written largely upon this fubject,. afferts,
that in thofe very charms and fignatures compatts themfelves are virtually
contained, which evil fpirits at firft fubtilly devifed or invented to blind.

men’s eyes, that thereby they might lead them lefs fcrupuloufly into the
{nares of the devil. And hence we have good ground to believe, that


none are able abfolutely, and bona fide, to call up any fpirits, without


forne fuch compat firft formed; and, that whofoever has fo far ventured
in the art of magic or conjuration, hath, though to himfelf, perbaps,
unknown, compacted with and worfhipped the devil, under fome fuch .
form of myftical words and characters, wherewith infernal charms and
amulets are compofed ; neither is it to be thought a matter of furprife, —
that fuch a compact fhould unwittingly be made through the medium of
thofe myftical characters, which, with the devil’s aid, have in themfelves -
a power to enchant, infect, allure, preferve, or deftroy. And, to thew.
in ftriking colours the danger of being drawn away by fuch allurements,
I fhall inftance the extraordinary cafe of a very harmlefs and well-mean-
ing young man, which was publifhed to the world at the commencement ; |
of the prefent century, by the Bifhop of Gloucefter, in the following.
well-authenticated letter to that prelate.


AuTHENTICc Copy of a LETTER fent to the Bifhop of Gloucefter, by the
Reverend Mr. Arthur Bedford, Minifier of Temple Church, in Briftol.


My Lorp, ; Briftol, Auguft 2d, 1703. -
Being informed by Mr. Shute of your Lordthip’s defire that I fhould


communicate to you what I had known concerning a certain perfon who


was acquainted with {pirits to his own deftruction, I have made bold to :


give you the trouble of this letter, hoping my defire to gratify your
lordfhip in every particular may be an apology for the length thereof. I
had formerly given an account to the late Bithop of Hereford, in which


there are probably fome things contained, which I do not now remem-


ber, which, if your lordfhip could procure from his lady, (who now
lives near Gloucefter,) would be more authentic.


About thirteen years ago, whilft I was a curate to Dr. Read, rector of |
St. Nicholas in this city, I began to be acquainted with one Thomas
Perks, a man about twenty years of age, who lived with his father at
Mongatsfield, a.gun{mith ; and contracted an. intimacy with him, he
being not only a very good-natured man, but extremely fkilled in mathe-
matical ftudies, which were his conftant delight, viz. arithmetic, geo-

metry,


it ANY EG © RT Og


metry, gauging, furveying, aitronomy, and algebra ; be had a notion
of the perpetual motion much like that. wheel in Archimedes's Mathe-
matical Magic, in which he had made feme improvements, and which
he bas held was demontftrable from mathematical principles, though I]
could never believe it. J have feen an iron wheel, to which he intended
to add feveral things of his own invention, in order to finifh the fame ;
but, thinking itof no ufe, and being otherwife unfortunately engaged,
it was never perfected. He gave himfelf fo much to aftronomy, that he
could not only calculate the motions of the planets, but an eclipfe alfo, —
and demonftrate any problem in fpherical trigonometry from mathema-

tical principles, in which he difcovered a clear force of reafon, When |
one Mr. Bayley, minifter of St. James’s in this city, endeavoured to fet
up a mathematical fchool, Ladvifed him to this. Thomas Perks, for an
acquaintance, in whom, as he told me, he found a greater proficiency
in thofe ftudies than he expetted or could have imagined, After this he
applied himfelf to aftrology, and would fometimes calculate nativities and.
-sefolve horary queftions. When, by providence of God, I was fettled
in Temple parifh, and not having feen him for fome time, he came to
me, and, we being in private, he afked my opinion very ferioufly con-
cerning the lawfulnefs of converfing with fpirits; and, after I had given
ny thoughts in the negative, and confirmed them with the beft reafon
I could, hetold me, he had confidered all thefe arguments, and believed
they only related to conjurations, but there was an innocent fociety with
them which a man might ufe, if he made no compacts with them, did
‘no harm by their means, and were not curious in prying into hidden ©
‘things, and that he himfelf had difcourfed with them, and heard them
fing to his great fatisfaction ; and gave an offer to me and Mr. Bayley. at
another time, that, if we would go with him one night to Kingfwood,
we fhould fee them and hear them both talk and fing, and talk with them
whenever we had a mind, and we fhould return very fafe; but neither
of us had the courage to venture. I told him the fubtility of the devil
to delude mankind, and to transform him({elf into an angel of light; but
he would not believe it was the devil. I had feveral conferences with
him upon this fubject, but could never convince him; in all which I
.could never obferve the leaft diforder of mind, his difeourfe being very
tational, and I propofed (to try him) a queftion in aftronomy relating
to the projection of the fpheres, which he projected and refolved, and
did afterwards demonftrate from the mathematics, fo as to demonftrate at
ithe fame time that his brain was free from the leaft tin@ture of madnefs
.and diftraction. Having this opportunity of afking him feveral particu-
Jars, concerning the methods he ufed, and the difcourfes he had with
them, he told me had a book whofe direétions he followed, and ac-


i cordingly,


*


OF ASTROLOGY. 4193


cordingly in the dead time of the night, he went out:to a -crofs way, with ~


a lanthorn and candle confecrated for this purpofe with feveral incanta-
tions. He had alfo confecrated chalk, confifting of feveral mixtures, with


which he made a circle at what diftance he thought fit, within which no


{pirit had power.to enter. After this. he invoked*the f{pirit by feveral
forms of words, (fome of which he told me were taken out of the holy
Scriptures, and therefore he thought them lawful, without confidering
how they might be wrefted to his deftruCtion ;) accordingly the {pirits ap-
peared to him which he called for, in the fhape of little maidens, about
a foot and ahalf high, and played about a circle. At firft he was fome-
what affrighted, but, after fome {mall acquaintance, this antipathy in
nature wore off, and he became pleafed with their company. He told
me they {poke with a very fhrill voice, like an ancient woman: he afked
them if there was a heaven or hell; they fatd there was. He afked them
what place heaven was, which they defcribed as a place of great glory
and happinefs; and he afked them what hell was, and they bade him afk
no queftions of that nature, for it was a dreadful thing to relate, and the


devils believe and tremble. He farther afked them what method or order.


they had among themfelves; they told him they were divided into three


orders ; that they had a chief whofe refidence was in theair; that he had -


feveral counfellors which were placed by him in form of a globe, and he
in the centre, which was the chiefeft order; another order was employed
in going to and from thence to the earth, to carry intelligence from thofe
lower {pirits; and their own order was on the earth, according to the
direCtions they fhould receive from thofe in the air. )


_ This defcription was very furprifing, but, being contrary to the account
we have in dcripture of the hierarchy of the. bleffed angels, made me con-


clude they were devils, buc I could not convince him of it. Hetold me -


he had bade them fing, and they went to fome diftance behind a buth,
from whence he could hear a perfect concert of fuch exquifite mufic as
he never before heard; and in the upper part he heard fomething very
harth and fhrill like a reed, but as it was. managed, did give a particular
grace to the reft. . .


- About a quarter of a year after. he came again tome, and withed he had
taken my advice, for he thought he had dene that which would coft him
his life, and which he did heartily repent of ;. and indeed his eyes and
countenance fhewed a $reat alteration. f afked him what he had-done:
He told me that, being bewitched to his acquaintance, he refolved to pro-
ceed farther in this art, and to-have fome familiar {pirit at his command,
according to the directions of his book, which were as follows:


No. 60. 13A . He


— .


124 AN LTLLUSTRATION


He was to havea book made of virgin parchment confecrated with feveral
incantations, likewife a particular ink-horn, ink, &c. for his purpofe ;
with thefe he was to go out as ufual to a crofs way, and-call up a-fpirit,
and afk him his name, which he was to put in the firft page of his book,
and this was to be his familiar. Thus he was to do by as many as he
pleafed, writing their names in diftinét pages, only one in a leaf, and then,
whenever he took the book and opened it, the fpirit whofe name appear-
ed fhould appear alfo; and putting this in practice, the familiar he had
was called Malchi, (be my king,) a word in Hebrew of an unknown fig-
nification. After this they appeared fafter than he defired, and in moft
difmal fhapes, like ferpents, lions, bears, &c. hiffing at him, and attempt-
ing to throw {pears and balls of fire, which did very much affright him,
and the more when he found it not in his power to ftay them, infomuch
that his hair (as he told me) ftood upright, and he expected every moment
to be torn in pieces; this happened in December about midnight, when he
continued there in a fweat till break of day, and then they left him, and
from that time he was never well as long as he lived. In his ficknefs he
came frequently to Briftol, to confult with Mr. Jacob, an apothecary in
Broad-ftreet, concerning a cure, but I know not whether he told him
the origin of his ficknefs or not; he alfo came to me at the fame time, |
and owned every matter of fact, until the laft, and infifted that, when he
did any thing of this nature, he was deluded in his confcience to think it


lawful, but he was fince convinced to the contrary. Hedeclared he made


no compacts with any of thofe fpirits, and never did any harm by their
means, nor ever pryed into the future fortune of himfelf or others, and
exprefied a hearty repentance and deteftation of. his fins; fo that, though
thofe methods coft him his life in this world, yet I have great reafon to
believe him happy inthe other. Iam not certain that he gave this account
to any other perfon but myfelf, though he communicated fomething of it
to Mr. Bayley, minifter of St. James’s, in this city; perhaps your Lord-
fhip may be further informed by his relations and neighbours of Man-
era which lies in Gloucefterfhire, not above a mile out of the road
to Bath. |


I have frequently told this ftory, but never mentioned his name before,
and therefore, if your Lordthip hath any defign of printing fuch accounts as
thefe, I defire it may be with fuch tendernefs to his memory as he deferv-
ed, and fo as may not be the leaft prejudice to his relations, who have the
deferved character of honeft and fober people.. Lam

P Your Lordfhip’s dutiful
et Son and fervant,
ARTHUR BEDFORD.
2 Meet ; This


OF ) A. STTER: OF LOGY.) 90 (1125


This poer deluded young man, it is very apparent, had no evil defign,
but entered into this infernal affociation. for no other motive than to gra-
tify an idle curiofity ; the confequence of which was, that he underwent
the moft undefcribable terror and fright, which at firft deprived him
of his health, and eventually of his life. .I have no doubt but the cir-
circcumitance of difbelieving the exiftence of f{pirits, (which I appre- ,
-hend is‘ more or lefs the cafe with moft people), was the firft, if not
the only, inducement that urged him to make the experiment. There
are many inftances of a fimilar kind, equally well founded, and as fatal
in their confequences, which might be here adduced, to fhew the dread-
ful effects of being led away by a prefumptuous or hardened mind, to
difbelieve the word of God revealed in a thoufand paffages of {cripture,
where this infernal intercourfe is ferioufly forbidden ; but I fincerely hope,
_ and have reafon to believe, that this example will operate as a fufficient
bar againft all fimilar enquiries, where it is once read, and the melan-
choly confequences duly confidered. Wherefore let me entreat all my .
readers to ftifle every inordinate defire, which might unguardedly prompt
them to folicit an intercourfe with fuch dangerous company ; nor to at-
tempt the conjuration of f{pirits of any defcription or order; no, not even
out of joke or bravado, or for fun or frolic; for the devils are continu-
ally going about ‘* /eeking whom they may devour ;? they are ever on the
watch, and ready at hand to catch at every thought that might be turned
to their purpofe ; and, when they have once fo far fucceeded as to occupy
the {malleft place in the mind, I fear it will prove no eafy tafk to difpof-
fefs them. ;


Let it ever be remembered, that the firft affaults of wicked fpirits are
are ufually made upon our fenfual defires, whereby they infinuate them-
felves into our very appetites, enticing our inclinations, and depraving _
the moral faculties of the mind; until they become, as it were, incorpo-
rated with our nature, leading us infenfibly from folly to vice, until a
depravity of heart, and an obftinate will, betrays us into acorporal as well
as fpiritual compact with the devil. Thefe confiderations, feconded by
an anxious wifh to refcue the aftral {cience from the imputation of
magical and diabolical connexion, and which, I truft, I have fully and
effectually accomplifhed, were the grand inducements that led: me to ex-
plore the fpiritual and infernal kingdoms, and to expofe the iniquity, as
well as to explain the theory, of familiarity. or compact with them. And |
in doing this, I have {crupuloufly avoided giving the effential forms and
particular confecrations adapted to myftical performances, left the unwary
{peculator might carry his experiments too far, and, as in the example

before us, unwittingly feck his own deftruction, Yet I-have, as far as
| . fafety


11265 AN ILLUSTRATION “FF


fafety or conveniency would permit, explained the fpeculative part; re-
ferving only thofe efpecial forms and incantations, which, being not only
very facil, but of wonderful occult power, would be dangerous .to dif-
clofe ; and at beft could only ferve to ftrengthen the hands of the mali-
cious and evil-minded, or to extend more widely the infernal empire ;
againft which we ought to put on ‘* the whole armour of God; for we
‘© wrefile not againfi flefh and blood, but againft principalities and powers ; for
© which caufe we should refolutely withftand the affaults of the devil, our loins
“¢ being girt about with verity, and having on the breaft-plate of righteouf-
«© nefs.” Nor let us vainly feek to know the myfteries of the other world,
farther than it hath pleafed God to reveal them to us by his divine word ;
for infinitt ad finitum nulla eft .proportio, necque loci poteft circumfcribi—of
that which is “finite, to that which is infinite, there is no proportion ;
neither can that which is immeafurable be contained within the limits of
fpace, or be defined by human comprehention !


it


; A Page

A. STROLOGY implanted in the frame
‘of nature 13
Agents of the world are angels and men 15


Aphorifins for guiding the judgment upon

nativities and horary queftions 251
Art-of refolving horary queftions 297
Abfent fon whether dead or alive 342
Art of calculating nativities made plain and


eafy 3390
Apheta, Hyleg, or fignificator of life, and

the places proper thereto _ sd
Anaretical, or killing planet, of the quality


of death 464.
Afpects of the planets operating on the

weather, from March f7, to June 29, in

the year 1789 1037
Bent and quality of the mind, as fixed by

nature 438
Characters reprefenting the figns, planets,

&c. ih wipe 154
Caufe of blemifhes and bodily difeafes 435


Climacterical years of a nativity 692
Confiderations refulting from the firft houfe: 695
Conceptional figure 696
Confiderations refulting from the fecond
houfe : 706
- refulting from the third houfe 710
— arifing from the fourth houfe 711
—_——— —— refulting from the fifth houfe 713
—_—— refulting from the fixth houfe 718
—————— arifing from the feventh houfe 737
— refulting from the eighth


houfe


houfe 4 743
+. refulting from the tenth houfe 747


refulting from the eleventh


houfe :
——-——— refulting from the twelfth


houfe


—


7
—— refulting from the ninth.


; . 754
ona queftion of marriage 842
———— of comets 930
Comets, Halley’s table of, and fupplement
to Halley’s table |
No. 60.


944


13 B


; Page

Dragon’s head and ‘tail, their fituation and
influence ;

Dire€tions for erecting the figure of heaven

and placing the planets in the horofcope 171


12


Difeafes incident to the mind by nature 448
Dignities and honours 44F
Directions zodiacal . 467
of the fun being near the-horo-
{cope on the feventh houfe 468
of the fun above the earth 468
under the pole of pofition, or cir-
cle of pofition of the fun - 469
——-—— of the fun to any afpedt, being
under the earth fe)
——— of the fun being found beyond the
parallel of twilight under the earth
of the {un to zodiacal parallels
being in any part of the heavens 472.
fignificator having latitude to any
conjunction or afpect ibid.
- of a fignificator having latitude
to parallels 473
ef a fignificator to his own pro-
per afpects ibid.
mundane


of the midheaven, or the afcen-
dant to the fextile, quartile, or trine, of
any ftar ibid.
the afcendant, or medium cceli
4 the conjunction er oppofition of any

ar


the medium coeli to-a fextile,


quartile, or trine 476
the afcendant 477
to a quartile afpet ibids
the afcendant or medium ‘cceli to

femiquartile, quintile, fefquiquadrate, or

biquintile, afpeéct 477


of a fignificator to“any-afpect or
promittor, either direct or converfe 478
of a fignificator being above
three degrees diitant -frem the cufp of
any houfe 479
~—-— of a fignificator’ite his own af. ~~
pe& -


meneame ol


‘ E 480
fignificatorto ‘parallels in the world ib.


4


Directions


a! Ny Wy


rie + Page
Directions another way of the fame 48
of the fun, being under the earth, _
to any afpect © ‘ _ ibid.
the fun out of the fpace of twi-

light 483
-— of a fignificator to all -afpects _
' converfe that are made in the world ibid.
-—————— how to equate the arches, where-

by to afcertain the length of time in

which the events denoted by them will

be in coming to pafs 484
————- fecondary ibid.
to'the angles: of the figure in the

horofcope 656
=——— of the afcendant to the various af-

pects. of the planets ibid.
Directions of all the planets to their afpects

in. mundo ; 631 to 663
~—— of all the planets to their afpects in

the-zodiae 669.to.680
Dignities and debilities of the planets: ina

nativity _ 691
Difeafes produced by the part of fortune,

when Hileg or giver of life, and afflicted

by the anareta, or killing planet 730
Difeafes produced by the afcendant, when

Hileg or giver of life, and/afflicted by the

anareta, or deftroying planet “731
Deluge, accounted for 973


Explanation of the technical words and
terms of art ufed in aftrology 147

Explanation of the-twelye houles of heaven,
with directions for erecting the horofcope 155

Effects (general) of the planets, in each of


the 12 figns of the zodiac 212
——-~- from the pofition of the Lords of the
houfes 21
(general) produced by the afpects
of the conjunction 217
»———— of the houfes of children A57
FleCtions 913
Eclipfes, the theory of 947
—— of the fun 951


=—— of the moon . 957
ve—— vilible which will happen from this
time to the endof the prefent century 964


Figure of the horofcepe, or 12 houfes of
heaven 156
Form and temperature of the body 434
Friends and enemies 459
Fortune, part of, direéted to promittors 680
———— directed to the oppofition of Saturn ibid.
-——— directed to the conjunction of Cor
Leonis ; 684


Bok xe


Page
Dire€tions to the conjunction of Mars 682
to the quartile of Jupiter in the
zodiac, viz. 29 degrees 55 minutes of
Leo ibid.
dire&ted to the oppofition of Venus 683
—— directed to the conjunétion of the

dragon’s tail or moon’s fouth node 68

directed as Hileg to the fun, which
in this nativity is anareta, or the direc-
tion of death 684


G ~
General judgments to be inferred from dis
rections 236
Ghoft, to raife 1106


Horofcope, what, and how erected


Lys, 169
171; todirectits angles 18 646


Hileg, or deftroying planet 73%
Jupiter, his fituation, appearance, and in-
fluence : 110
—— difeafes under him III
———— herbs.and plants ditto ibid.
———— ftones, metals, and minerals ibid.
——— animals, weather, and wind ibid.


——— countries and colours under him Ii2
Judgments to be inferred from his revolu-


tions ; 243
-——— ‘to be inferred from his tranfits


240

to be inferred from revolutions in

general ap. 248.
proper for the firft houfe 290
proper for the fecond houfe 297
————— proper to the third houte 300
——— proper to the fourth houfe _ 304.
-~———— proper to the fifth houfe 309
—— proper to the fixth houfe 313
proper to the feventh houfe 317
———.~ proper to the eighth houfe 325
proper to the ninth houfe 328
proper to the tenth houfe 331
proper to the eleventh houfe 333
——— proper to the twelfth houfe . 335
Inclinations, natural or profeffional 448
natural for travelling 4.63
es bd :
Loadftone, its virtues. 38
Logiftical logarithms


611
Letter from the Reverend Mr. Arthur Bed- .
ford, minifter of Temple church, in Brif-
tol, to.the Bifhop of Gloucefter, on the
fubjeG&t of converling with fpirits


M
Moon’s influence on tides; animals; vege-
tables, &c.


II21


Nei aD


Mars, his place and orbit.
Mars; his difeafes, herbs, plants, tones, mes
_ tals, minerals, animals, weather, winds,


113


andregions: — eo? r14,
Moon, its fituation and defcription IIs
Moon, difeafes under it 116


——— herbs, plants, ftones, metals, and ani-


mals, under it 117
— winds, weather, and regions ibid.
Mercury, his fituation and orbit 120
———— difeafes, herbs, and plants, under 121


~~ ftones, metals, animals, weather,
and winds

regions governed by

Meteors, their nature, fubftance, form, and
caule 9

Magic, and the doftrine of exorcifm, 1098
1120


122


ibid.


iy,
to


N
_ Nativities, judgments thereupon, 251.. Art of
calculating 390
Nativities—Of John Collons, 813. Mrs. Keiza
Lampard, 817.. Baron anuel Sweden-
bourg, 821. Pout twins, 829,' “Fhomas Bel-
lisford, a giant, 834. A dwarf, 837. A fhort
life, or embryo, 839, . Alexander the Great,
847. Nero Cefar, 848. Pope Sextus, 849.
Philip II. King of Spain, 849. Henry IV.
- King of England, 851... Edward VI. 853.
“Queen Mary, 854. Queen Elizabeth, 85'5.
The Earl of Effex, 855. James 1ft, King of
England, 857. Charles 1ft, King of England,
88. Oliver Cromwell, 859. Charles 2d,
Ringe of England, 862. James 2d,.Kitg’ of .
England, 864. George Duke of Albemarle,
866. James Duke of Hamilton, 867. The
Earl of Strafford, 868. George Villers, Duke
of Buckingham, 870. William Latd, Arch-
bifhop of Canterbury, 87z. Cornelius. Agrip-
pa, $73. Nicholas‘Culpeper, ffudent in phy-
fic and aftrology, 875.. William Lilly, ftudent
in aftrology, 879. Johtt Headon, chymift
and aftrologer, 886. John Gadbury, ftudent
in aftrology, 881. Vincent Wing, ftudent in
ditto, 882. Henry Colley, mathematician and
aftrologer, $83. John Partridge, profeffor of
aftrology, 885. George Parker, profeffor of
ditto, 8386. James Ufher, Bifhop of Armagh,
in'Ireland, 887. Nafc Erafmus, of Rottér-
dam, in Holland, $89. Martin Luther, 889.
Bifhop Hall, 889. ‘Philip Melancthon, 889.
George 3d, King of Great Britain, 891. Our
blefled Lord and Saviour Jefus Chrift, 892.
The Rev. George Whitheld, A. M. 792.
The Rev. John Henderfon, A. B. of Pem-
broke College, Oxford, 798. Mr. James
Gilbert, 800. Mr. T. Chatterton, 807
2


Page —


E f Xe :


Page


Part of fortune, what, 123. Its fituation and in-


fluence, 123. £53

Perfons, how to defcribe their fhape, form, fize;
complexion, conftitution, &c. by the planets,
31g to 387 — & .

Planets, their influences and effects, 107: Their
terms, triplicities, exaltations, orbs, motions,

. and all their natural and effential qualities, 132

to P45 ea ; Ba

ie of the different Planets; how to find, 626:
to 629) ° op ;

Power of magical charms, 141


Queftions proper to the twelve houfes of heaven,
290to297  & ;
—— horary, on the length of life, 337. On
the fate of a thip at fea, 339. An abient fon,
whether dead or alive, 341. On the profpect
of riches, 343. On the fuccefs of a journey,
345. On paternal inheritance, 347. Ona
change of fituation, 349. On child-bearing,
350. On hiring fervants, 354. On courtthip-
and marriage, 356. On war and battle, 358.
On theft, 361. On legacies, 364. On the
‘fuccefs of a-fleet, 366. On places of prefer-
ment, 369. On imprifonment, 371


R
Rudiments of the doctrine of horary queftions,


267°
Revolutions of kingdoms and ftates, 1044


Stars fixed, their influence, 26,’ and fignification

* in nativities, 244 fh

Saturn, his defcription and fituation, 107. Dif-
eafes under. him, 108. Herbs, plants, ftones,
metals, minerals, animals, weather, wind, and
regions, under him, 10g

Sun, his fituation, dimentions, and motion, 122.
Difeafes, herbs, and plants, governed by him,
123. Stones, metals,animals, weather, winds,,

and regions, 124

Scheme of the folar ingrefs, governing the year’
1766, 1052. Of the fun’s ingrefs governing
the year 1789, 1036 -

Spirits, their different orders, natures, and power,
fog7. To raife up and exorcife, i110


Table of the ancient conftellations, gr. Of the
unformed ftars, by Helvetius, 93. Exhibit- _
ing the affections and fignifications of thé’de-
grees in each fign of the zodiac, from 98 to
106. Of the periods, revolutions, magnitude,
&c. of the planets, 126, Of the effential dig-
nities-of the planets, 128. Of the et

and »


vi {
»


&


=


Zh


al


\


Tx Nets Da


. Page
and. debilities of the planets, 130. Of the for-
titudes and debilities of the part of fortune,
131. Of the planetary hours for every day of
-the week, beginning at fun-rifing, 172.

the planetary hours for every day and night
in the week, 175. To reduce the motion of
planets to any hour of the day or night, 176.
Of houfes calculated for the latitude of 51 de-
grees 32 minutes, for double horary times,
180 to Ig!. Of the principal fixed {tars near
the ecliptic, fhewing their true longitude, la-
titude, and nature, 198. Shewing the places
of the fixed ftars, at any time paft or to come,
201. Of the circles of pofitions of the 11th,
third, twelfth, and fecond, houfes, from 31 to
Go degrees of latitude, 202. For converting
mean folar time into degreestand parts of the
terreftrial equator, and alfo, for converting
degrees and parts of the equator into mean
folar time, 206. Of the latitude and longitude
of the principal cities and towns in Prsiad,
208. Roi calculating nativities, 422. Of fe-
midiurnal and feminocturnal arches, 4gt. Of
twilight, 492. Of mundane afpects, ib, Of
right afcenfions, 493. Of declinations, ib. OF.
the afcenfiona! differences of the planets, 494.
Of oblique afcenfions for the latitude of Lon-
don, 495. Of fernidiurnal and feminocturnal
arches, from 497 to 499. Shewing the femi-
diurnal arch to every degree of the ecliptic,
calculated for the latitude of 51 degrees 32


LIST of the PEA TES;


RONTISPIECE to face the Title
“Harmony of the world 70
‘Table, exhibiting the nature, dignities, tri-
plicities, and affections, of the figns and


planets 2 Io

Flead of the Author © a

Mr. Witchell ; 619
Speculum Phenomenorum of G. Witchell 756
Fiead of the Rev. Mr. Whitfield 792
——— the Rev. Mr. J. Henderfon 798
Kour twins 829
Marriage of Benjamin Brownfel “844
Head of Alexander the Great, &c. 847

Henry VIII. &c. «=... B52
——-— james I. &c. $57


o—e-—— James Duke of Hamilton, Sc. 867


EV Xd


: : 3 . _ Page
minutes, soo. Shewing the feminocturnal
arch to every degree of the ecliptic for the la-


titude of 51° 32minutes, gor, OF twilight,
.from latitude 44 to 56,. 502 to sto. Of mun.-
dane afpects, 511. Of ditto, 512. Of right af-
cenfions, 513 to 550. Of afcenfional differen.


ces, from page 553, to 562. Of the oblique af...


cenfion of the planets for the latitude of Lon-
don, from 565 to 588. Of logiftical loga-
rithms, 595 to 612.
nativity of Mr, Witchell, from 686 to 6go.
A revolutional one, 787. Collecting the af-
pects of all the days of the year, 788.

Tides, their theory and caufe, 987


Ww
Weather, how to calculate, 102 .
Witchell George, his nativity, 624
Winds, their theory and caufe, loot. Table of
their different force and velocity, too7. Their
names, and points from the compafs, 1015.


Vy
Venus, her fituggagmp and orbit, 118. Difeafes
under Venus, 11g. Herbs, plants, and ani-
mals, ibid, Stones, metals, weather, and
wind, 120


Zodiac, its twelve figns confidered and explain-
ed, 95


and Directions to place them.


Head of @icero, &c. =) 873
——-— Vincent Wing, &c. 882
——— Martin Luther, &c. 889
— George III. ’ 891
Nativity of Jefus Chrift 892.
Scheme of the heavens at the crucifixion glo
Plate of Eclipfes gst
Armillary fphere 905
Angual motion of theearth = - |. 96g
Solar Ingrefles governing the year 1776 1052
Revolution of America Re, 1054


Four figures of man 5 1c61


Six heads of the infpirati 1098
Magical circle, feals, and characters _ 1103
Edward Kelly raifing up fpirit L106
Plate of the elaboratory Ills


Of directions. in the .


eee aa ae :
